



THE FIRST Sermon.

PSALME 123.

 Lord remember Dauid with all his affliction. 
 Who sware vnto the Lord and vowed vnto the mightie God of Iacob, saying, 
 I wil not come within the Tabernacle of mine house, nor clymbe vp into my bedde. 
 I will not suffer mine eyes to sleepe, nor mine eye-liddes to slumber, vntill I finde out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mightie God of Iacob.


THE people (as you may here see) are pas^ionate for their King, and they pray for him Againe, the King is carefull ouer his people and he prepareth for them. The people pray that their King might ^e remembred of God in al his affliction (...)

King prepareth, that the people may haue the Lord propitious in all their deuotio^s.
And such is, or ought to bee, the entercourse of loue and loyaltie betwixt prince and people; happie Prince so praied for, blessed people so prouided for, and Israels Iuda was blessed in both.
Now the matter of their praier was, that God would establish his promise made to Dauid their King, concerning his church: that he might build a place for his aboade in Sion, the mountaine of his holinesse. ItPsal. 93. was his care, it was his affliction. I say affliction much affecting his royall heart, that himselfe with the nobles of Iuda and Israel, should haue their solace in seeled houses, whilest the Arke of God was couered with2. Sam. 7. 2. skinnes, dwelt in tents, and had neuer a cottage to shroude in.
Birds had their neastes, foxes had theirMat. 8. 20 holes; but neither poore CHRIST, nor his afflicted Church, coulde euer finde rest or repose in this miserable world, destitute, afflicted, and tormented, whom the world was not worthie of, they wandredHeb. 11. 38. in wildernesse, and mountaines, and caues of the earth. Neuer pilgrim^lesse pitied,

neuer shippe more tossed, neuer Tabernacle oftener shifted, then that of the Arke, and presence of the Lord.
Witnesse these two, and fortie remouealsNumb. 3^ in the wildernesse ere Israel came to Canaan; besides the small rest it hadde at Shilo in Eli his house, at Ashdod with the1. Sam. 4. 5. 1. Sam. 6. 7. Philistines, at Bethshemesh, Kiriath-i^arim, Abinadabs house; Obed Edoms, and neuer at quiet till it came to Sion, nor that a Sanctuarie for euer to dwell in, but a Sacrament of a better being and TabernacleHeb. 8. 2. in heauen, which the Lord hath pight, and not man.
For euen now the stones of Sion lye in the dust, and her ruines are vnrepaired,Lament. 1 4. the holy people are helplesse, piety is a pilgrim vpon the earth, and the little flocke findeth poore pasture to feed vpo^, euerin motion neuer at quiet til it come, and retyre into the bosom of it best beloued, like the doue in the deluge who fou^d no rest for the soaleGen. 8. 9. of her foote, till shee returned againe vnto the Arke.
This Arke thus tossed in the deluge, and tyred in the wildernes, despised of the heathen, and much neglected of the true borne

Iewe, together with Labans much lowring at home, when in Iacob it was consumed abroadeGen. 31. 40. with heate in the day, and with frost in the night, weather beaten and weary, till Dauid a Type of Christ gaue it rest, who eatenActs 13. 22. Psal. 49. 9. vp with the zeale of Gods house deuoured all difficulties for the accomplishment, who thought vpon nothing more then of a place, and habitation for his holinesse to dwell in, his meate went from him, so did his sleepe, and hee charged his soule with an oath to God for the performance.
These holy thoughts thus affecting his heart, and afflicting his soule, made the people sensible of his sorrowes, and therefore pierced their hearts to prouoke their prayer thus, Lord remember Dauid in all his Afflictions.
Wherein I doe obserue two things of1 speciall note, the first is, the peoples passion for their King, they are afflicted with him* and therfore they pray for him, the second is Dauids preparation for the people, hee is2 carefull of them, and therefore he prouides for them a place: an habitation for the Lord to dwell in. So as their feete might now wander

no more, but stand in the great congregation they loued so wel, and by the Altars of their God they held so deare.
And for the first: I meane the peoples passio^ for their King, ye know the saying of old, Componitur orbis Regis ad exemplu^. AndClaudian: it hath it extent from Court to Country, for peoples passions are framed to their Princes affections, like Hippocrates twins they weepe together, and they laugh together, they liue together, and they dye together, witnesse their ioynt sorrowes after Abners herse; the King wept, and the people wept, and though the people would feast; yet when2. Sam. 3. they sawe the King would fast, it pleased them, for as the text saith, whatsoeuer the King did pleased the people. His passions were theirs, his afflictions were theirs, to teach vs that peoples actions doe Sympathize with Princes affections, the Court is dead if the King bee not cheerefull, and subiects sorrowe, when their soueraignes are sadde, Princes smyles, are peoples ioyes like the lustre of the same, so are the countenance of Kings: with their shine they carie comforts, but neuer so little shadowed with clowdes of griefe, (good

Lord) how the subiect then mourneth, deare is the loue of God in the soules of his Saints, but next to that is the sacred band of loue and loyaltie to Princes, fathers, friendes and families are further off, soueraignes are the highest in the rancke.
If leasure would serue to turne ouer some fewe leaues of sorrowe, and search into the records of griefe, easily might I finde that peoples passions, for their Princes haue beene most piercing, great was their care ouer Dauid, when they stayed him from the battel, least the light of Israel should be extinguished. So was it ouer Saul when2. Sam. 21 17. they mourned his funerals with this dolefull dittie; Yee mountaines of Gilboah, vpon you bee neither dewe, nor rayne, nor fieldes of offering for then the shield of the mightie is cast2. Sam. 1. 21. downe. The shield of Saul, as though he had not beene annointed with oyle.
The mourning of Hadadrimmon in theZachar. 12. 11. 12. valley of Megiddo, where Iosias was slaine, wil neuer bee forgotten, where euery familie mourned a part, etc. and vttered their passions with this pitifull plaint, the Crowne ofLament. ^5. 16. our head is falle^: woe vnto vs that euer we sinned.
Lastly, that one may stand for all, I appeale to your owne passions, who haue at any time seene your own soueraigne, whether your teares of ioy haue not expressed your feare of griefe, mourning like the Turtle-Doue, whose sweetest song is in her sorrowe; least hauing lost her mate shee should not finde him: and hauing found her mate, least shee might loose him, thousands within the kingdome doe thus blend in their moyst and mixt teares vpon the sight and thoughts of their soueraigne.
And here leaue we the peoples passions, and come wee to their praier, the sweete perfume of their deuotion in these wordes. LORD remember Dauid in all his affliction.
Wherein first I doe obserue, in that the people flye to GOD for their King with no lesse loue, then loyaltie theyRom. 13. Prou. 8. 15. 16. Psal. 77. hold that the powers that are ordained of God, they hold that he looseth the collar of kings, and girdeth their loynes with a girdle, they hold that he sitteth in the middest of magistrats, and demandeth an accou^t of their gouernment, I say they hold that it is hee,

and hee alone that setteth vp, and pulleth(...). 12. 18 ^^^l. 82. 1. downe; that leadeth his people along by the hands of Moses and Aaron.
Wee say then with him who saide well, Abrahamum non invenit dominus, sed fecit patrem multarum gentium, the Lord did not finde Abraham, but hee made him a father^en. 12. 1. Exod. 3. 2. of many nations, hee called him from Hur of the Chaldeans, Moses* from the sedges, and Dauid fro^ the Ewes great with la^be, to feede^sal. 78. ^1. Iacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.
Nay, Christ Iesus king of kings, and Lord of lords, not by intrusion, but by inauguration from his father, thus; I will set my kingPsal. 2. 6. vpon my holy hill of Sion. Aske of mee and I will giue thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the vttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
Antichristian then, miserable and damnable, is the doctrine of all such as dare say, that Popes may either set vp, or pull down Princes, discharge the subiect of his obedience, put a knife in the ha^d of any to sheath it in the bowels of their soueraignes. Antichristian was the practise of that proude Pope, who trod vpon the neck of Kings and Emperours, and made them to hold his stirrop,

and because they held not steddily, tripped the crownes fro^ their heads. Ego et r^x meus argued neither faith nor frailty in Cardinal Wolfey, and I may fastly say, it was disloyaltie in Warwicke to giue out, that he had rather make a King, then be a King, nay nay prowd peare, it was neuer in thy power to make a King, for the making of a King, is the worke of a God, and if it be true of allIob. 1. 21. things, much more of a Kings. The Lord giueth, and the Lord taketh away, as it pleaseth the Lord, so come things to passe.
Then cease your malice you miscreants of states, for you can neuer preuaile against the Lord, the powers that be, are ordainedRom. 13: 1. 2. Prou. 21. 30. of God, and who resisteth them, resisteth the ordinance of God.
Is it possible to back the Sun, Moone or Stars, in their speedy course; can ye hush the harmonie of the heauens? or stil the raging of the sea? ca^ ye alter the course of the yeare of seede time, and haruest, of winter, and so^mer? of the day, and of the night, can ye either giue ^ife, or deliuer fro death? can ye create a new world with another gouernme^t? then may ^ye resist the Lords ordinance in this. Alter states, and pluck away all power from a powerfull God.
But it is not in you, or your Romane God (o yee popish repiners) its not your boysterous bull can push downe a Prince, itsReuel. 9. 3. not the croaking of your frogges, and Locusts, your Iesuited crew and Seminarie broode, can blast our doctrine, blemish our state, or bereaue vs of our Soueraigne, disquiet you may, destroy you may not: forProuerb. ^8. 2. the offences of the people, there be many Princes, and if our sins sacke vs not, wee shall neuer fall, if the Lord say prosper, how can our branch wither? and if he say from heauen ride on, because of the word of truth, of meekenes, and of righteousnes, who dare say from the earth, light off, ride, rule, andPsal. 45. 4. raigne no more, trayterous is the hart that thinkes it, trayterous is the mouth that speakes it, trayterous is the hand that works it, trayterous is the pen that writes it.
And yet woe is me to tell: this our age and climate is pestered with men of such poysoned breathes, who dare both thinke, say, doe, and write that a mortall man may manage kingdomes, and authorise subiects to depriue their Princes, as if the powers that be, were not ordained of God: their faculties are of force, their bulles are divulged,

their antichristian doctrine is traduced by Symancha, Costerus and Dolman, who haue blackened the aire with their derne diuinitie, whilest they auerre that subiects may rise, rebell, and kill their kings, if they be not pleasing to their deuotion.
Augustine mourned much, for that heeAugustinus in confession. had euer read against the true God Tonantem Iouem and adulterantem, of a thundering God, and of an adulterous God, for so deemed the Pagans of their Iupiter Capitolinus: Much more may Papists grieue, that euer they either read or reuerenced in the place of God their capital Pope, tonantem and adulterantem, a cursing God, and a carnall God, adulterating states, and cursing Kings, and yet to God be the praise, his Bul bolts are but birdboults, blunted by a better God, witnes the flourishing and blessed estate both of our Church and kingdome, vnder the happie gouernment of our dread Soueraigne, by whom the Lord hath multiplied our nation, and increased our ioy, and neuer with no blessings powred vpon her from heauen, then since Impius Quintus cursed her from the earth, for she liueth a blessed Prince, and he is dead, a cursed Pope, and if any trayterous Bechry, the sonne of

rebellious Iemini haue in his heart so bad a thought, or in his mouth so foule a word, (kindled with heate of that bull) as to say A precibus ad praelium, fro^ prayers to your pikes and to your tents (o Israel) we haue no part in Queene Elizabeth: let the iudgement of Bechry fall vpon him, and let all the people say, Amen.
And let this suffice for the second obseruation, teaching vs by the example of this religious, and passionate people, praying for their king, that who plead or practise the contrarie, doe violate the Lords holy ordinance, and lay violent hands vpon his annoynted, whom to obey by rule of reason, and all true religion, not our actions onely are tyed with our words, but our very thoughts must be chaste that way, according to that.

Detract not from the king, no not in thy
Eccles. 10. 20.
thought, for the foules of the ayre shall carie the voyce.

Nay were our Prince as euill as she is good, and were she set ouer vs in iudgement to plague vs, as she is in mercy to saue vs, I meane to shelter vs as the shadowe of aEsay. 32. 2. great rocke in a weary land, were shee as

bloudie in persecuting, as she is carefull in cherishing, finally were shee as great a Pagan: as she is a christian, yet stands it with religion, pietie and godlines not to touch her life, but to pray for her safetie: so were the people of the Captiuitie enioyned to doe by Ieremie, Seeke the prosperitie of the Citie,Ieremie. 29. 7. whither I haue caused you to be caried away captiue, and pray vnto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof shall you haue peace.
And Baruck. 1. 11. saith, pray for the life of Nabuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and for the life of Baltasher his sonne, that their daies may be vpon earth as the daies of heauen.
What should I say more? Vnder AugustusLuk. 2. 1* Caesar all the world was taxed, and vnder Tiberius Caesar the Lord was crucified, and yet said hee of both, Giue toMatt. 22* 21. Caesar the things that are Caesars, and to God the things that are Gods. Though Nero was cruell, and Domitian was bloudie, yet Pauls diuinitie was, that euery soule should be subiect to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, exhorting with all, that first of all prayers, intercessions, and1. Tim. ^* 1. 2. 1. Pet. 2* 13. 14* giuing of thankes should be made for all men, but especially for kings* fro^ the same spirit spake Peter, when hee enioyned submission*

to all publike gouernment for the Lords sake, whether vnto the King as Supreme, or to others as subordinate.
Where the Apostolike doctrine is, as you may see that Popes are inferior to Kings, who^ they must obey, as their Superiours, so farre from all primacy, as they may not challenge a parity, by the word of God, but must yeeld a precedencie to their Kings, as to their Soueraignes, and next vnto God supreme gouernours vpon earth, whereunto both popes and al papists, if they haue soules must be subiect. Nec attendat verus Obediens quale sit quod praecepit: hoc solum contentus quod praecipitur, sincere obedie^ce neuer reasons with the meanes, but quiets it self with the command, and quits the conscience with the precept of his God, who presseth nothing1. Pet. 2. 17. more then homage to himselfe, and honour to his annoynted. Qua Obedientia vnicimus daemones, Caeteris virtutibus oppugnamus, by which obedience to God, and the King, (as one saith well) we subdue diuels, by other vertues we do but oppugne them. Sathan and sinners are neuer seene more shrinking then in our obedience, it daunts men and dammes diuels.
Now the subiect of the peoples praier (...) passio^ for their King was

that the Lord Would reme^ber him with all his afflictions. Where first obserue: that Kings, euen Kings, haue their trials, troubles, and crosses in this world, and may say in the height of all their honour, as Paul did, in his persecutio^s. Idy dayly, for besides the things2. Cor. 11. 28. that are outward I am cumbred daily, and haue the care of all the Churches, warres without, treasons within, Councellors perfidious, subiects seditious, and are not these afflictions? O well said Alexander, Regum est benefacere and male audire, Its incident to Kings well to do, and euil to heare, and euilly to be intreated: and that Embleme is for Princes which one of that ranke set vpon his herse, to wit a lampe burning with this Empresse, Alijs micans meipsum consumo, whiles I shine to others, I consume my selfe.
It would bee tedious to tell of Princes thoughts euen in the bed of their rest, as it was with Ahashuerus the King, when in the sile^ce of th^ night he could not sleepe, butEster. ^. ^. etc. commanded to bring the booke of the Records, and Chronicles, that he might solace his soule in seeking to succour them, who had saued him. Baltassers Emblem was fearfull euen in the height of the feast, and it may be a Motto to all the mightie; that they neither presume (...) their (...)

nor boles, least a fearefull hand-writing vpon the wal, warne them both of their sin*(...). ^. and of their shame, that they haue praised the Gods of gold, and of siluer, of brasse, and of Iron, of wood, and of stone, but the God in whose hands their breath is, and all their waies* him haue they not glorified. GiueVerse. 23. eare therfore you that rule the multitudes, and glory in the multitudes of people, for the rule is giuen you of the Lord, and power by the most high, which will try your works, and search out your imaginations, because that you being officers of his kingdome haue not iudged aright, nor kept the law, nor walked after the will of God, horribly and suddenly will he appeare vnto you (saith the wise man) for an hard iudgeme^t shall they haue that beare rule, hee that is most lowe, is worthy mercy, but the mightie shall be mightily tormented. Wisd. 6. 6.
But it may be to flatter Princes, Sicophants will say: these trayals are for tyrants, they touch not the godly; good, and religious kings may keepe and carry their crownes without cober, passe their time in pleasure, wallow vpo^ their beds of delight, ^^t downe their diade^nes without danger, ^^d bid all doubts adewe. I answere no:

For if there were no care to gette a Kingdom for that they haue it, yet is there care to keepe it, for that they may loose it; nor is the care of conscie^ce least, or last of the three in a godly King, which laboureth to quit it, whe^ the great Iudge of all the world shall demaund an account of their Gouernement. Psal. 58.
The good Kings of Israel and Iudah, haue euer caried this conscience with their Crownes, and haue carefully studied they might bee bossed with blessing from God, both vpon themselues, and vpon their people, neuer failing them in the field, to fight their battailes, nor in their Oratories, to further their Deuotions, with a care of their Leuites to serue at the Altar, and aboundance of sacrifice for the holy offering, yea and more then all this, so carefull of their God, and good of his Church, as they neuer failed to honour it with their presence, andPs^^ to sanctifie it with their prayer; Now, h^^ all this could passe them, without passion, trouble, and affliction, I leaue it to the feeling consc^^^^^ of faithfull Kings, whose wrought Crownes of gold often are worne, with the wreathed crowne of Christ, pricking

in their hearts with like passionate speech,Lament. ^. 19. as when he said, Remember mine affliction and my mourning, the wormewood and the gall, he was a King that said it, you may beleeue it,Psal. 38. 2. Lord thou hast made mee a very butt for thine arrowes, being tipped with gall and sorrow.
But of these troubles and firie trials of Kings, I haue said sufficient, and it may be haue dwelt vpon the generall too long, pardon me to come a litle nearer home eue^ to Dauids passions, and particuler affliction, which more nerely grieued him, to wit the care he had together with the house of his God, to build vp the hearts of his people, true religion, pietie and godlines, the continuall care whereof hath so troubled theGen* 5. 2. 2. thoughts of the godly from the daies of Enoch, who then walked with God, to the daies of Queene Elizabeth who ruleth for God, as they could neuer sway the Scepters of their rule, but with rent of their harts, to(...) 5. 18. see Sio^ desolate, and her stones ly in the dust.
Kaine began the ruines, and Esau made the breach, nor ca^ the rubbish be remoued till time be no more: Kings may be nursing^say. 49. 23. fathers, and Queenes may be nursing mothers

to foster, and cherish the Church, wel may they prouide, pray and fight for it, yet neuer preuaile, but with the perill of their liues, nor euer to build but with blood according to that of old, Sanguine fundata est ecclesia sanguine caepit, sanguine succreuit sanguine finis erit, the Church in blood first founded was: in blood it did begin, by blood it shall increase and so at last by blood shall end.
The blood of Abell began the broyle,Reuel. 12* and the blood of the lambe ended the battel, and euer since Michaelis praelium adduxitDan. 12. periculum, the great Prince that standeth for the children of the people hath fought the field in a time of trouble, such as neuer was since there began to be a nation, yetReuel. 1^* 11. with a glorious conquest, for they ouercame by the blood of the lambe, and the word of their testimonie, and they loued not their liues vnto the death, the blood of the lambe: there is their sacrifice, the word of their testimonie, there is their couenant, and they loued not their liue^ vnto death, there's their martyrdome. Therefore rejoyce ye heauens: and ye that dwell in them but woe to the

inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea, for the diuell is come downe vnto you: which hath great wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time, he persecuteth the woma^ which hath brought forth the Manchilde* driues her into the wildernesse, casteth out of his mouth after her, floods of water, which whe^ the earth hath swallowed vp in her reliefe, then was the Dragon wroth with the woman, and went and made Warre with the remnant of her seede, which kept the commandements of God, and haue the Testimonie of Iesus Christ.
So as I may well say, It hath bene euer, is, and will bee, the woe of the Church in this worlde, to fight in blood, to haue the stones of her building symonted with such morter, Night by night to heare Alarme vppon Alarme, and all in the Crie of Edome:Psal. 137. 7. Downe with it, Downe with it, euen to the ground.
Inter flagella dat Filium; So the Father gaue his Sonne. Caedebantur, vrebantur, torquebantur, tamen multiplicabantur; They were beaten, they were burned, they were racked, yet euer they increased; So the Sonne sent his Saints into a senseles world,

voyde of Faith, and without feeling, pittie,Psal. 105. 18. or compassion of Iosephs affliction, the Iron entred into his soule, and men were senselesse.
This Dauid sawe in the sorrowe and silence of his soule, when vpon the sight of the ruines, hee thought vpon a repaire, how the tyred Tabernacle might rest, and the Arke of GODS Presence tossed from place to place, in the waste and Roaring wildernesse of this worlde, might once repose in the Bosome of it CHRIST, as in a retyring Campe after the day of battaile; And yet (God wote,) with no world of continuance. For that verie Temple hee thought vppon, vanished with his thoughts, and is nowe gone, both sticke and stone; Ne Populus rediret in Iudaismum; Least the People might returne againe to Iudaisme.
All to teach vs, that Pietie is but a Pilgrim vpon Earth, Towers, Temples, Et* delubra Deorum, haue their dismall dayes; The beautifull Gate of the Temple became a Stable for Pompeyes horses, and where is nowe that faire Fabricke? How is the Golde become so dimme? The most

fine Goulde is chaunged, and the stones of the Sanctuarie lye scattered in the corner of euery streete.
To teach vs againe, that dust will deuoure dust, when Time shall bee no more, and that all Saintes with their Sanctuaries, shall Simbolize to a better state and being, euen eternallie to rest in a Tabernacle, not made with handes, but pight in the high^el. 21. 22. Heauens. The LORD GOD Almightie, and the LAMBE, are the Temple of it, and there shall be no more Affliction, no more curfe or grieuance, but the Throne of God, and of the Lambe shall bee in it, and his seruants shall serue him, they shall see his face, and his Name shall be in their fore-heads.
Till which ioyfull Sabaoth, and Eternall rest, layed vp in the bosome of our Christ, Princes must build in grace, that they may be blessed in glorie: They must bee religious on Earth, that they may raigne in Heauen, they must carie care in their hearts for the Church of God, that they may weare crownes vpon their heads in signe of victorie:^uel. 7. 9. In a word, hee that feeles with Dauid, will bee afflicted with Dauid, and seeke ^y all meanes possible, in his Princely power,

how to builde vp a people for his God, how to prepare a place for his Presence, how to perfect and polish the worke, that it may bee to the glorie of God, to the discharge of his dutie, and the saluation of that people, ouer which the Lorde hath placed him.
And heere next in place seasonablie, and from my Text, it is yet further to bee considered, how Dauid aggrauateth his affliction, by the a^iuncts of his griefe, all signes of sorrowe, and companions of care when the soule is troubled, hee had no delight, either in his meat, drinke, sleepe, rest, Palate, Palace of pleasure; but bids them all bee gone, till hee had done his indeuour to finde out a place, an Habitation for the mightie God of Iacob.
When CHRIST should redeeme Lazarus from the Graue, and repaire his ruines,Iohn. 1^ it is saide: Quod fremuit, Turbatus est; and Fleuit, that his soule was sadde, that his spirites were troubled, and that hee sent out Teares from a pensiue soule, for his dead Friend.
Like Troubles afflicted Dauid here, when hee should raise a Temple out

of the dust of Sion, it toke away his sleepe, his meate, and his minde, from all earthly solace: and tyed him to the Temple hee so thought vppon. It followed him sleeping, and it left him not awaking, either in bed or at boord. Where when hee sate in solace, and sawe his seeled Houses, with the Rich hangings of his Court, embroydered with gold, Lord how his blubbering teares did bedeaw his Trencher, to thinke how the Arke of his God lay in the open fielde, tyred in Tents, weather-beaten, and wearie, without shelter to shrowde it, other then those worne Curtaines of skinnes and Canuas.
The vse is good, like affliction hath followed the godlie of all Ages, in the care and conscience they haue euer had to build vp a Church, in the hearts and soules of Gods Sai^ts, and I am verily perswaded, that if all the cares in the world besides might blend in one, they could neuer be found so piercing, so bleeding, so deare, so desperate in designes, as is, and hath beene the care and conscience of our soules, in tender whereof, good and godlie men haue neither cared for meate, drinke, sleepe, friends,

life, death, nor the hazard of their owneRom. 9. 3. solues, if I may say so, And why may I not, when Paule wished himselfe to bee separated from CHRIST, for his brethrens sake?
This affliction cut the heart of AbrahamGen. 22. 9. 10. Gen. 7. 33. asunder, when hee (the Father of all the Faithfull) should at one blowe cut off all hope in Sacrifycing Isaack his sonne, his onely sonne, whome hee loued, this Affliction battered the heart of Iacob, when hee saw the bloody coate of Ioseph, and saide with a sorrowfull soule, Fera pessima deuorauit eum; a cruell Beast hath deuoured him.Psal. 10* 18. This Affliction rent the heart of Ioseph, when the Iron entred into his soule, and none was sorrie for his affliction.
This was the affliction that moulded the hart of milde Moses, to such compassion ouer Israel, for their Idolatry, whe^ the LordExod. 3^ 32. was angrie with them, as hee wished himselfe raced out of the booke of Life, that Israel might be saued.
This Affliction (like a sworde,) pierced through the soule of MARIE, that the thoughts of manie hearts might bee opened.
This Affliction, like a dampe, stroke the heart of Paule, when hee saide, I die daylie,1. Cor. 11. 29. who is weake, and I am not weake? who is offended, and I burne not?
This, this was the Affliction that melted the heart of CHRIST, when as a suter, hee stood at the dore, and knocked, saying. Open vnto mee, my Loue, my Doue, myne vndefiled:Cant. 5. 2. for my Head is full of deaw, and my Lockes with the droppes of the Night, and yet can haue no entrance.
Finallie, that others might haue a Fellow feeling of the Afflictions and miseries Christ suffered vpon the Crosse for vs, his Church, hee calleth vpon the Passengers that goe by; that they should looke vpon him, and pittie him in this paines.
Haue yee no regard at all, ye that passe by thisLum. 112.way? Beholde and see, if there bee any sorrowe like vnto my sorrowe, which is done vnto mee, and wherewith the Lord hath afflicted mee in his fierce wrath. O remember mine Afflictions, and my mourning, the wormewood and the gail.
Well, I say no more, because I see you passionate, these are gone before, and are all heires, euen heires of God, and heires

annexed with IESVS CHRIST, and so shall you be, if you suffer with him, as they did, that yee may bee glorified with him as they are.
And so againe to Dauid, the Seas of whose Afflictions to sounde, were to beate backe a Iorden, to reckon vp his cares with1. Chron. 22. his cost, for the prouision of that Worke, which another should perfect, were an endles account, to expresse with pen, or speech, the passions hee felt in following the businesse, were for a more powerfull spirit then I feele in my selfe, I cannot come neere the depth thereof.
Yet this dare I say (as I haue saide) that all the ioyes hee had in this worlde, either of pleasure or profite, hee passed by them, with an Abrenuncio, leauing off all Princely sportes, and Kingly delights, till hee had done with the deuotion of his GOD, his meate, drinke, and sleepe, his house, bed, and Palate, his Courte, Crowne, and Kingdome. These were least and last in his thoughts, hee neuer deemed them deere, but in the denyall, binding his soule to God by vowe and oathe, neuer to delight in earthlie solace, till hee had fulfilled

his heauenly ioyes, and found out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mightie God of Iacob.
The beautie of which house though he might not see, for that hee was a man of1. Chron. 22. 8. blood, and Salomon his Son must perfect the worke, yet as Moses from Morijah, though hee might not enter that earthly Canaan,Deut. 34. ioyed in the sight of Canaa^, as a type of that heauenly being, hee was to enioy vpon his death: so Dauid though he might not finish the worke hee had in hand, yet exceedingly ioyed that hee might prouide for the temple belowe, a pregnant type of that heauenly Hierusalem, which is aboue.Gal. ^. 26.
Now the building of this house here on earth where his people might more safely rest, and render vp their vowes to God in heauen, was Dauids holy care, and greatest part of his affliction, with which if you marke well, you shall finde he beganne his raigne, continued his rule, and ended his princely life: for vppon his entrance, it is2. Sam. 5. saide that Dauid tooke first the fort of Sion, and with thirtie thousand of the chosen men of Israel, rose and went from Baal of

Iudah, which is Kiarathiearim to bring from thence the arke of God to Abinadabs house that was in Gibeah. Thence to Nachans threshing Floore, and so to the house of Obed-Edom, the Gittyte, where after it had continued three monethes, with a blessing to himselfe, and all that hee had, then Dauid2. Sam. 6. with gladnesse brought it into his owne citie, and set it in his place in the midst of the Tabernacle that Dauid hadde pitched for it: where after hee had offered burnt offerings, and peace offerings before the Lord, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hoasts.
How this care continued his rule, it may appeare by the princely preparation hee made, as of the place to build vpon, so of things necessarie for the building, of Algunum wood, fyr-trees, and Caedars from Tyre, Sidon and Lebanon, of gold from Ophyr, of pearle from the Iles, of siluer, brasse, and Iron, from all about his kingdome, all totalled by Dauid himselfe, when he bequeathed it to God as a legacie for Salomon his sonne, to bestowe vppon the Temple. In these wordes, Behold my sonne, according to1. Chron. 22* 14. my pouertie, haue I prepared for the house of

the Lorde, an hundred thousand Talents of Golde, and a thousand Talents of Siluer, and of Brasse, and of Iron, passing weight, I haue also prepared Tymber and Stone, and thou mayest prouide more thereunto; vp therfore* and be doing, and the Lord be with thee.
According to my pouertie, that may bee thought straunge, I say straunge, that there should seeme to be penurie in such plentie, want in so much wealth, and pouertie in so great aboundance: but what is Gold to Grace? I tell it from my God, and speake it from my soule, that who will bee rich in Heauen, must be a begger on earth, though not in reputation of this world, yet in estimation of a better, accou^ting all things but dung for that excellent Knowledge, whichPhil. 3. 8. is in Iesus Christ: CHRIST is a costly guest, and to giue him entertainement, will cost Kings their Crownes, Scepters, and Diadems, all to be throwne down at the feete of Christ, Lands, lordships, and possessio^s to be sold, and distributed to euery man as he hath neede, the half we haue to the poore, and restitution fourefold of all we haue wrongfully taken, which done, the liuelyhood will be small in pede Computi, if thou burie him in thy hart,^^^k. 19. 8*

it must be broken, and he will lye alone, and in such a Tombe (as neuer man lay in butLuk, 23. 52. himselfe, what should I say more? Christ his Crosse, and Crowne, his Faith, and Religion, will cost you Father, Mother, Sister, Brother, Life, and all, according to that,Lu. 14. 26* he that loues any of these better then me, is not worthie of me.
Finallie, Marie her Teares, Hayres, Perfume, Boxe and all must out, ere CHRIST come in, either to lodge in her house, or lieLuk. 7. 3^* in her hart; Largiter demus Christo quae demus; Spare no cost, to spend it vpon thy Christ. Ad quid perditio haec? what needs this waste? so said Iudas in his sinne, that son of perdition,Matt. 26. 8. who purchased a field with the teward of his iniquiitie. Rather say with Dauid, God forbid I should builde him an house of that which costAct. 1. 1^ me nothing.
Pardon mee in your patience yet a while, if I further presse this point of ple^tifull prouision towards the Lord and his Religion, in these chilling and colde dayes of decayedPhil. 2. 2* Deuotion; wherein both Princes and people are prodigall to spe^d vpo^ the^selues, but too sparing (God wot) to maintain the religio^ of God, and of his Christ, and I feare one day*

Moses will stand vp in iudgeme^t against vs, with a readie and a willing people, to condemne vs in this, that they haue bene more carefull of the type, then wee of the truth; they to build a Tabernacle, then we a temple: they of the Sacrifice, then we of the Sacrament: they of the lawe, then we of the Gospell: they of Moses, then wee of Christ: yea they of Agar of mount Sina, which genderethGal. 4. 26. vnto bondage, then wee of Ierusalem, which is aboue, and free, and the mother of vs all.Exod. 25. 1. etc.
It is memorable, and of due regard, what the Lord commaunded Moses for the Fabricke of the Tabernacle, how all such, whose hearts gaue it freely, should offer towards the building, for forced obedience fashioneth not with God, hee loueth the cheerfull giuer, and faithfull receiuer. A2. Cor. 9. 7 free offering will I giue vnto the Lord, and praise thy name, because it is so comfortable,Ps. 54. 6. so saith Dauid to his sauing God.
Now in this their alacritie, cheerfulnes,Exod. 35. ^1. etc. and diligence, they set vpon the worke, 1. in their ioynt vnitie without distraction 2. in their great cost without grudging 3. in their much labour without wearines, 4. and (...)
The people were of one heart in one worke, for one God, their number wasExod. 38 26. great, euen six hundred thousand, three thousand fiue hundred and fiftie men that offered from tweentie yeares old and aboue, euery one at the least halfe a sicle of siluer, the gold was much that was occupied in all the worke, wrought for the holy place, and freely offered euen twentie nine talents, seauen hundred, and thirtie sicles,Exod. 38* 24. 25. according to the sicle of the sanctuarie, the siluer was aboue an hundred talents, the brasse of the offering seauentie talents, and euery man which had blue silke, purple and scarlet, and fine linnen, and goats haire, and rams skinnes, dyed red, and badgers skins, brought them; wome^ brought their taches, and ear-rings, and rings, and bracelets, and Iewels of gold, and offered a free wil offeringExod. 38. 8* vnto the Lord, nay they spared not their looking glasses of brasse, but cast them in for the lauer, the Princes and rulers brought Onix stones, and pearles of price to set inExod. 35* 26. the Ephod* and in the brest-plate, as also spice, oyle and sweete perfume.
The vse is good, they robbed themselues to inrich their God. Now wee robbe*

our God to inrich our selues.
Then Bezaliel and Aholiab left their worke to tell Moses, that the people hadExod. 36. 4. 5. brought too much, and more then enough.
The Bezaliels of these our dayes may leaue their preaching, and tell Moses the people bring too little, and lesse then nothing. Will a man spoile his goods (saith God by the Prophet Malachie?) yet haueMal. 3. 8. yee spoyled mee, and if yee say wherein? I answere in Tithes and Offerings, yee are religiously wise, I will presse it no further, but proceede with the rest.
And now as Dauids care to builde God an house did begin his raigne, so did it ende his life: Hee could not die till he had determined of that businesse with Salomon his Sonne to perfect the worke, and with the Nobles of Israel and Iudah, to be his assista^ts.
Dauid commaunded all the Princes of Israel to helpe Salomon his Sonne, saying:

Is not the Lord your God with you? and hath giuen you rest on euery side, for he hath giuen the
1. Chroni. ^2. 17. 18. etc.
Land into my handes, and the Land is subdued before the Lord, and before his people, n^w-set

your hearts and your soules to seeke the Lorde your God, and arise, and builde the Sanctuarie of the LORDE GOD, to bring the Arke of the Couenant of the Lorde, and the vessels of GOD, into the House built for the Name of the Lorde.

See the passage of his passions, and* how hee aggrauates his Afflictions, for the Church, with his Affections towardes the Church, both in his life, and at his death: as if hee should haue saide; Now must* I die, yet burie these my last words in your dearest Thoughts, and thinke vpon them, when I am gone.
I haue liued to fight your battels, and haue quieted the Land before your eyes, I haue beene your King in warre, that peace might bee within your borders, and by my hand the Lord hath giuen you rest on euery side. Now therefore, see to his rest who hath thus repaired your ruines, builde God an House, with an habitation to dwell in: Bring in the ARKE of the COVENANT, and the Vessels, couer it with a vaile: Turne your tossed Tentes into a* steaddie Temple. Wander no more in the wildernesse of Shinai, (which is shaken)

but come to mount Sion, and there abide by his holinesse.
You may build, so may not I, for that I haue beene a man of blood, yet haue I1. Chron. 28. 2. thought it a duty wel beseeming my place, to leaue nothing vndone that may further the worke, and helpe my successor, looke into my store when I am dead, and see my prouision that I haue made for the house of my God.
I haue prepared Caedars from Sidon, and Algunum wood from Tire, an hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of siluer, of brasse, and of1. Chron. 29. 2. etc. Iron passing weight, I haue prepared maso^s to hew, and polish the stones, carpenters to fashion, and frame the timber, and all men expert in euery worke.
But whats all this wealth if it bee not bestowed, and what is all this matter if it want forme? and what of all this prouision if it come to no perfection? when it falleth into the worke, then it is fashionable; but lying vpon an heape it hath no honour.
In regard whereof the good King was carefull euen at his death to charge both suruiuing Prince, and Peere by a double

bond of a double dutie; one of faith to God, another of fealtie towards their King, that they should be carefull of the worke: Salomon to builde, and his Princes to be ayding.
Whereby wee are taught, if wee list to learne, that as matter is nothing without forme, and prouision is lesse, if it fall into no worke, so Princes (though potentates in themselues) yet are farre vnable to performe much: either for the good of the Church, or common-wealth, but as they are aided by Peere and people.
In that honourable expedition againstIud. ^. 1^ etc. Iabin King of Canaan, the Princes of Isachar were with Deborah, and Isachar, and also Barach, hee was set on his feete in the valley, it was in the day of battell, and they fought for Deborah: but the diuisions of Reuben were great thoughts of heart, and Meros with her inhabitants were cursed of GOD, for that they came not to helpe the LORD, against the mightie.
I am not able to beare you my selfe alone,Deut. 1. so saide Moses in the day of his gouernement,

how can I alone beare your cumbrances, and your charge, and your strife, bring you men of wisdom and vndersta^ding, and knowne among your Tribes, and I will make them Rulers ouer you, if in the day of battel, gouernement, and grieuances, Prince and people were aiding vnto their King? why not in the dayes of their Afflictions, while they builde the Church, should not Peere and people helpe to further the worke.
Surely, surely, this mutuall helpe twixt Prince, Peere, and People, is the maine Buttresse of States and Kingdoms. Kings may commannd, Peere, and People must obey, and all must lay their handes to the worke: if either they looke to builde anewe, holde vp that which is built, or repaire the ruines of that which is decayed.
What maruell then, if Dauid for a Legacie of his loue to build God an house, layed his co^mand vpon the Princes of Israel, that they should remember him in this, when he was gone, and looke vpon him in his louing Sonne, liue to aide him in the worke he had begun, and neuer leaue him till hee perfected the worke, obliged thereunto by

double band of a double debte, one to God, whose worke it was, another to the King, whose Subiects they were: Not doubting but their Religious loue to the King of Heauen, and like loyaltie to their King on earth, would tye them by sacred vowe and Oath to God, as it had done him, neuer to take good rest, or sweete repose till they had built God an house, an habitatio^ to dwell in.
And so for Conclusion to you, mightie Kings and Potentates of the worlde, search the sacred Register, and yee shall neuer rue the reading, how Dauid, with the care of Gods house, and Religion, hee began his dayes, continued his Raigne, and honoured his death. Hee fought for it, he prayed for it, hee prepared for it, hee cast for it all the dayes of his life, and hee cared for it at the houre of his death, deeming it a dismall dissolution, for a King to passe out of this world without an holy resolution of a better, together, with paine and passion of the posteritie, how to build God, his Christ, and Church in their dearest Thoughts.
But it may bee demaunded, where is Abiathar, in all this businesse? Where are the Priests and Leuites, and why doe they

neither build nor prepare for the worke; Is the King afflicted, and are they without passion? doth the King take no rest, and are they at ease in Sion? surely it seemed expedient there should bee neither mention, nor memory made of them in this place, least happely they might seeme to take precedencie from Princes in manageing the affaires of the Church, practise they may in it, but neither may they prepare with Dauid, build with Salomon, pray, sing, and sacrifice they may; order they may not, for the Corites must be ordered by Dauid, preach they may, rule they mayPope with prince hath neither pre ^edency nor parity. not, but as they are subordinate, for gouernment is for the King: conuince they may, conuent they may not, processes are for Princes. In a word, the day of Dedication is for Salomon, counsels, proclamations, punishment of delinquents all, (except the censure of excommunication) are for Kings, and except they bee subordinate, and vnder them they haue no power in gouernment, wel may they beare the arke, but they may not commaund it from Abinadabs house, or transport it but^. Sam. 6. ^3. as the King will.
The doctrine is good to pull downe the pride of popish primacie, aduancing2. Thes. 2 4. it selfe aboue that is called God, or that is worshipped, robbing GOD of his honour, and Kings of their homage, but I knowe you will say as the wicked did in the dayes of Malachy: wherein haue wee robbed thee, O GOD? wherein haue we robbed you O Kings? I answere in taking from the LORD his owne ordinance, and in taking from Kings their lawfull authoritie, GOD hath ordained the King as supreme both in Church and commonwealth, yee haue limited his power in ciuil obedience, ye haue taken away his power in ecclesiasticall iurisdiction, yee say crownes, and kingdomes are yours to dispose, and Church gouernment is a part of Peters patrimonie, but I say no: Pasce,Iohn 21. 15. 16. etc pasce, pasce, is his, and your portion, and whatsoeuer is more then this commeth of euill.
It is euill to feede vppon the fleshe of Kings, and to treade vppon the neckes of Emperours, it is euill to demolishe states, and to confound order, it is euill to take to your selues vpon a forged

Donation, the Imperiall Citie of Rome, the Pallace of Lateran, the Kingdome of Sicily, Apulia, and Capua, the Dukedome of Ferraria, Canellam, and Commodam, with Matilda her portion.
It is euill to take to your selues, and tye to your gyrdle, all the keyes of Heauen, Earth, and Hell.
Was there euer Pride like this? was there euer Auarice like this? Was there euer Blasphemie like this? To take glorie from God, homage from Princes, honor from Angels, as more excellent then they, in iurisdiction, administration, knowledge, and reward. For so saith Antonius.Intertia parte summ^ maiorit, lib. ter. Dist. 19.
In briefe, was there euer Creature subiect to no power? no, not to himselfe? As Biel saith, if hee list to appeale from himselfe. O heauens be astonished, and thou earth tremble at this tyrannie.
So auerse from God, and so opposite to the mildnesse of Christ, as hee may well be called that Antichrist, and man of Rome, the ruine of all Religion. For Christ was poore, hee is rich, Christ was Crowned with golde, and Diamonds. Christ was lowely, riding vpon an Asse. Hee exalted vppon

the shoulders of men. Christ his Kingdome not of this world, his altogether of this world, both in power and pompe.
In a word, Christ gaue all, hee taketh all, and giueth nothing, vnlesse it bee, in giuing that, which is not his owne: As Absolution from sinnes, Pardon from paine, Kingdomes from Princes, as hee did this kingdome of England.
But all the cunning is in catching, and in the meane time, wee blesse our God in heauen, and leaue this earthlie God, to sporte himselfe, with his vsurped power, in giuing Pardon to those that neede it not, Blessing to those that desire it not, Cursing to those that care not for it, and Crownes, to such as by the grace of God, shall neuer weare them.
What should I say more, but make way to the rest? and assure you of this, That this mysterie of iniquitie, of Popes power ouer Kinges, was first reuealed, and broken forth then, when Boniface the third obtained of Phocas, to bee called vniuersall Bishop, and since that time.
Perijt virtus Imperatorum, and Pietas Pontificum. The Emperours waxed

weake, and the Bishops wicked, whereas before they were of a milder spirit, moulded to greater obedience, more subiect to their Soueraigne, and yeelding to Princes that which was their due.
You are religiously wise, and by this little which I haue said you haue seene enough, I will therefore say no more but rest my selfe, and I hope you vpon this loyall resolution, that Dauid is set before al in the Genealogie of Christ, for that the dignity of aMatth. 1. 1. King is chiefe and greatest in power, so great in care, not as a priuate man, but as a publike Magistrate to answere for the sins of many and the good of all, ordained of God to be their King, and as Cyrill saith, the knitting together or Iuncture of godlines in the prosperitie of his people.
Which to effect as you haue heard, was Dauids care both in his life and at his death, leauing it as a legacie to Salomon his sonne, and successe together with his Peares, and Princes that as Simon in the Machabees^. Mach. ^6. 2. etc. did for fighting, so should they for building, when calling his sonnes Iudas and Iohn hee said with good courage now I am old and ye are of a sufficient age, be ye

therefore in stead of me, and goe forth and fight for your nation, and the helpe of the heauens be with you. So Dauid, go forth and build for your God, and the helpe of heauen be with you.
As and if he should say, yet further, I am wearied with warres abroade, and worne with mine afflictions at home, I am old, weake and withered, but ye are young, strong and flourishing, out of my pouertie I haue afforded you some store, let it be speedily bestowed vpon the worke, and build for your nation, be ye therefore in stead of me, and the helpe of heauen be with you.
And now mee thinkes it is with me as itAbacuck. 2. 2. was with the Prophet Abacuck when the Lord answered him, and said write the vision, and make it plaine vpon tables, that he may run that readeth it, for the vision is for an appointed time, and now is the time, at last it shall speake, and now it speaketh.
Paralell the passions of Princes, Queene Elizabeth, with King Dauids in their grieuances, for the maintena^ce of the religion of their God, and see whether our English

Iudah haue not as great cause to pray as euer Israels Iudah had, Lord remember Elizabeth in all her afflictions.
Afflictions, I say afflictions before her raigne, and since her raigne piercing her sacred brest, like a continuall Archers shot, whose arrowes are tipped with gall and sorrow, and now be strong my spirit, and fly out my voyce to compare them in their afflictions.
Dauid was the least and last of his fathers1. Sam. 16 11. Psal. 129. Psal. 69. 8. 1. Sam. 17 28. 1. Sam. 18. 1. Sam. 20 1. 1. Sam. 22* 9. house, so was Elizabeth of her fathers familie.
Dauid persecuted from his youth, so was Elizabeth.
Dauid contemned of his brethren, Elizabeth of her sister, Saul a King persecuted Dauid, Marie a Queene was wroth with Elizabeth.
Dauid an exile in the holdes of Engeddi, she close prisoner in the holds of Wodstocke.
Doeg reuiled Dauid vnto Saul, so did Gardiner Elizabeth vnto Mary,
Dauid declared his innocencie vnto1. Sam. 24 4. Saul, so did Elizabeth vnto her sister, Much was suspected by Dauid which they laid

vnto his charge, things which he neuerPsa. 35. 11 12. thought, and they euer failed in the proofe.
So was it with Elizabeth, her hand yet witnesseth to the innocencie of her soule, which she left as a constat of her loyall hart, in these lines, and letters neuer to be blotted out, Much suspected by me: nothing proued can be, quoth Elizabeth prisoner.
Saul in his spirit of furie purposed to1. Sam. 18. 10. 11. haue killed Dauid playing vpon his harpe.
Winchester in his spirit of poperie purposed to haue murthered Elizabeth at her deuotions by Paul Peny and Iames Basset.
Dauid relieued and pitied by Achish King1. Sam. 27. 1. of Gath; a stranger to his person, and an enemie to his religion.
Elizabeth pitied by Phillip of Spaine, a friend to her person, yet no friend to her profession, let the bedde curtaines, and arrasse witnes, Philips parlience with the Queene for Elizabeths preseruation.
Dauid was spoiled of his wiues by the1. Sam. 30 5. 6. Amalekites at Ziglack Lady Elizabeth robbed of her sworne seruants at the Tower of London, when left alone, and forsaken of all, shee went on wearily with a woful heart, and said in the silence of her soule. Tanquam Ouis, as a sheepe to the slaughter, so am I sent.
Dauid had many Doegs in Court, and1. Sam. 22 9. 1. Sam. 25 3. 1. Sam. 20 11. etc. Nabals in the country, to wrong him with the King, and pinch him in his prouision, and not a friend durst speake for him but Ionathan, and he aloofe with arrowes, when hee sawe the Kings wrath implacable, shee poore Lady had many Stories in Court to wrong her with the Queene* and to perswade her to strike at the roote, and the branches would wither, many Nabals in cou^try, who pined at her prouision, and not at Ionathan to speake or shoute for her safetie, for that the Queenes heart was implacable.
But see a wonderfull prouidence of God in her preseruation, Gardiner hoped to liue to see her dead, but she hath liued to see him buried, his flesh turned into dust, and his bones to rottennes. Story repented that he had not stroke at the roote: whilest he cut

off the branches* ^u^ God hath so ordained that the root should liue, to ha^g vp that blasted bowe. The time was whe^ a poore child foure years old might not bring her a nosegay without suspition, and churlish checke of her cruell keeper, but now God hath so ordained, as both young and olde, high and low, Rich and poore, doe hang vp a garland in her praise, with a praier to his prouide^ce, for her preseruation, euer to liue, with this resounding Eccho, liue, liue,
The time was, when passing a prisoner from Windsor to Woodstocke, the poore people ioy ful of her presence, ra^g the bells in a village or two, whereat her keeper raged, and railed vpon them as Rebels, clapt the Ringers in the stockes, and so stayed the bells, but now Benefielde hath his passing peale, and to God bee the praise, I hope there is not a bell in England that rings not, a tongue in England that prayes not, an hart in England that ioyeth not in, and for the life of their soueraigne; if any Meroits there be, who will not do as we do, let the curse ofIudg. 5. ^^ Meros light vpo^ them, for that they come not to help the Lorde, against the mightie, and let the Israel of God ^ay Amen.
To passe by her afflictions, sithenc^ her raigne I may not, euen since shee came to the royall diademe of her crowne, and dignitie no sooner set vpon her head, but the care of her people was in her heart pressing out this passionate speech. I care not for my selfe, my life is not deare vnto mee, they which might knowe what cares I beare with this burthen, would neuer thinke I take no great ioy in wearing the Crowne.
Ballance them with Dauids afflictions, and if yee bee not partiall of her perils, you shall finde them such as may pierce your hearts to prouoke your speech, and pray, Lord remember Elizabeth in all her afflictions^. Sam. 5. 17. and 8. 1 vpon Dauids entrance, the Philistines were against him, the Aramites against him, Edom and Ammon with the Moabites, and Hagarens, the Grecians, Sirogrecians, these are forraine foes, manie in number, mightie in power, malitious in heart, bloody in hand and practises, how many and mighty were they who cast their headsPsal. 83. 6. 7. together with one consent, and as it is in the Psalme, were confederate, these were enemies of state, forraine and abroade.
And were they lesse dangerous at home.2. Sam. 15 1. 2. Sam. 20 1. 2. Sam. 6. 16. 2. Sam. 16 5. 2. Sam. 16 21. 2. Sam. 3. 27. 39.Absolon his owne sonne, Absolon by name, the fathers peace, became the fathers bane, and sought his death, who gaue him life. Seba the sonne of Bechry a man of Gemini with his wicked roote, disclaimed that hee had any part in the sonne of Iesse, Michol mocked him, and despised his deuotions. Shemey curseth, Achitophel plotteth, Abner dieth, and the sons of Zerniah are too hard for Dauid.
Forraine power were against our Elizabeth, and are confederate; Balaam, and Balack, Turke, and Pope, with all their vnited forces, and for our home treasons they are greater then they can be expressed with tears, they breake the heart, ere they can bedewe the cheekes; mightie Absolons, and base borne Sebaes, many Achito^hels, I meane plotting Iesuits, and Seminaries, with their whining Cardinall Allen, in their bloody designes, haue disclaimed their Elizabeth, Shemey curseth, Pope Pius is become Impious, and the cursse is turned vpon himselfe, for Elizabeth liueth a blessed Prince, and hee is dead a cursed Pope, Lord remember Elizabeth, etc.
Nay more, to make ful the measure of her

afflictions, the Michols of this land are manie,2. Sam. 6 16. who disdaine our Dauid, dauncing before the Arke, scorne her deuotions, and mocke her religion, tra^ple vnder foote the bloud of the couenant as an vnholy thing,Heb. 10. 29. and is not this an affliction? yes no doubt, and an afflicting affliction, and therefore we had need to pray, Lord remeber Elizab: etc.
Lastly our sinnes, euen our loude crying sinnes, hazard the life of our Prince, our vnthankfulnes to God for her, our colde deuotion, and chilling zeale, being fallenReuel. 1. 4 from our first loue, our neglect of the word, Sacraments, and Sabaoths, our generall Apostasie from the Faith, our lacke of loue, our great oppression, and gnawing vsurie, our extrauagant lusts of the flesh, our excessiue Pride, and hellish heate of Ambition, (I say) anie of these hazard a Prince, all these together, shake the State, and therefore wee had need to pray, Lorde remember Elizabeth, etc.
In tender of whose deliuerance, long life, and happie raigne, there remaineth a dutie to bee performed, this day, on our behalfe, eue^ with our good God, to plead her cause, and pray for her person, Lux haec venerabilis

Anglis. This day is deare to England, and of all the mercies of our GOD, registred in the Kalender of his Loue, next to that of his Sonne CHRIST, Albo signanda lapillo, to bee of blessed memorie, wherein wee haue found to our vnspeakable ioy, and doe feele to the gladnes of our hearts, that the people that walked in darknesse, haueEsay. 9. 23 seene a great Light, and wee that earst dwelt in the Land of the shadowe of death, I meane of poperie, and grosse Idolatrie, vpon vs hath this Light shined, God in mercie, hath increased our ioye in the life, light, and gouernment of our dread soueraigne, in whose fun-shine now we walke, and pray that her day may euer dawne.
The allusion is good: from our Christ* to our Queene, for by him and her, the yoke of our burthen, the staffe of our shoulder, and the rodde of our oppressor* hath bene broken, as in the day of Midian,Esay. 9. 47 and surely till these her Al^ion dayes, euery battel of the warrier hath bin with noise,Psal. 72. 6 and tumbling of garments in bloud, but hers hath bene in softnes, and in silence like a showre of Raine vppon a fleece of wooll,Esay. 8* ^* like vnto Siloah, that runneth softly by Sion,

like vnto the battell of Salmos, hath fought our Salem Queene, Sine Sudore, and sanguine, without sweat or blood, and like her Christ, patiendo potius quam agendo auxit imperium, her conquest hath beene without blood, or broyle, rather by sufferance, and succouring of others at home, then by seasures abroad hath she inlarged the bonds of her Empire.
And here seasonably, and for conclusion1. Sam. 17 45. etc. of all, spare me in a word to Paralell the two Princes, as in their afflictions, so in successe of blessings, to make the yoke of their heauie gouernment more supportable.
Dauid killed Goliah in his weake strength, with prayer in his mouth, and a peeble stone in his hand; he stroke him on the forehead, for that hee did confront his God, Etibi percutitur vbi deerat Christus. There hee felled him, where Christ was fayling. Queene Elizabeth in her weake, and femimine sex, to giue God the glorie, hath subdued that great Giant at Gath, I meane that man of Rome, with the sweete perfume of prayer in her mouth, and the power of the word of God in her blessed hand, a stone hewen out of the mountaine without

hands, as Daniel saith, dashing in peecesDan. 2. 45. all the marbles of this world, in the spirit and speech of Dauid hath beene her royall martch. Thou commest to me with a sword, with a speare, and with a shield, but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of Hostes, that God of the Hoste of Israel, whom thou hast railed vpon, this day shall the Lord close thee in my ha^d, that all1. Sam* ^ 45. 4. 6. 2. Sam. ^ the world may know that engla^d hath a God
Dauid brought the Arke into his Citie by the hands of the Leuites. So doth Queen Elizabeth the Religion of her Christ, into the bowels of al her kingdomes, by a beautifull2. Sam. ^ 10. 11. ^^ ministery. Dauid dedicated the vessels gotten of the Gentiles to the vse of the temple, so doth she the spoiles of the Papists to the maintenance of the Church, Dauid put Garisons in Edom, and made Siria tributary, and the Lord kept Dauid whithersoeuer2. Sam. 8. 14. he went.
Ireland, France, and Flaunders haue bin garded with her Garisons, paied her tribute, and done her homage by land, and by* sea^, haue her colours displayed in their defence to keepe them from the spoile of Popery, Dauid with these heauenly had the*

successe of earthly blessings, for he was rich and his kingdome was populous, hee was needing to none, and yet most of his neighbour-nations had neede of him.
Queene Elizabeth is blessed of God in her bountie toward all her shipping, shot, men, and munition are a wall of defence to her selfe, a guard of comfort to her neighbour-bordering friendes, and a terror to her frowning enemies.
What should I say more, Dauid is dilectus domini, the beloued of God, she is Elizabeth Gods rest, whose quiet rule and peaceable gouernment in and for her Christ is to all her louing and loyall subiectes as it were a retyring campe after the day of battell.^. King. 2. ^1.
Finally Dauids raigne was with the longest, and neare the highest of his rancke, the dayes of our Elizabeth are faire, and full, and the Lord lengthen them as the dayes of Iosua, which had the fairest creatures at commaund, till the battell was ended, and the fight finished, and thou GOD of time and of all eternitie so determine her dayes as may bee most to thy glory, best for the poore Church, for

Englands good, and the saluation of her princely soule. Amen, Amen,Deut. 33. vers. 26. and the helpe of heauen be with her.



THE SECOND Sermon.

IOSVA 10. 12.
Then spake Iosua vnto the Lord, in the day when the Lord gaue the Amorites before the children of Israel, and saide in the sight of Israel, Sunne stand thou in Gibeon, and thou Moone, in the valley of Aialon.

TWo mightie nations did(...). contend in the wombe of Rebecca, the one in Esau, the other in Iacob, but by the prouidence of God the younger preuailed against the elder, and gained the birthright with the blessing.
Such wofull contentions haue euer bin in the wombe of the Church, betwixt the Israel of God, and Esau his brood, and pro^eni^,(...) 29. yet hath not the Lord failed in mercy

to deliuer his Turtle-doue from the violence of the assaulter.
As we here find in Iosua, and feele in our ioyfull experience this day: who maugre the spite of Esau, Ismael, and all the Amorites of our State, Church, and Kingdome hath graced our nation with a birth-right, and a blessing, a birth-right in our Christ, a blessing in our Prince, both such as Esau withHeb. 12. 17. all his Romish Edomites shall neuer obtaine at Isaacks hands, though he begge and seeke it with plaints and teares.
For so good a God, so gracious a Prince, so happie and desired a peace, so great plenty, with such aboundance of all things, and a time of continuance, so long and so bright, of all Gods blessings, both heauenly and earthly is not for Moab, Ammon, orHeb. 12. 22. etc. mount Seir, but for the hill of Gods holinesse, Israel, England, and mount Sion.
Nor doe I doubt, but this blessed day will yet dawn and lengthen like the day of Iosua, Gods mercies will yet abound, his graces flowe ouer, the enemies of our State bee discomfited, and the helpe of heauen shall prosper our Prince* ^^ it did Iosua: if wee practise and pray

for her preseruation. Yea the Lord shallEsay 28. ^1. stand for England, as hee did for Israel in mount Perazim, hee shall bee wrath as in the valley of Gibeon, that hee may doe his worke, his strange worke, and bring to passe his acte, his strange acte, euen to match the power of Elizabeth, with the might of Iosua, her prowesse, with his puissance, a maiden Queene, with a manly king, to deliuer his Church from the disastrous designes of Adoni-zedeck and all his Romish retinue.
And first of Iosua, as I am guided by my text, whose puissance was such as
First preuailed with God.1
Secondly, with his fairest creatures.2
And lastly, with his greatest enemies.3
Hee preuailed with God in the highest heauens.
He preuailed with his creatures, in the firmament of his power.
He preuailed against his enemies in the vaste valley of Aialon.
Tendit ad ardua virtus. There was neuer King aduentured vpon greater dangers, theHeb. 12. God with whom he dealt was a consuming fire.
The creatures hee encountred before that time were neuer backed, and the enemies be subdued, were fiue mightie Kings of the Amorites, with all their retinue, like grasse-hoppers vpon the ground for multitude, and thus with his heroicall spirit, as Siracides saith, hee rushed in vpon the nations in battell, and in going downe of BetheronEccles. 4^ 6. hee destroyed the aduersaries, that they might knowe his weapons, and that he fought in the sight of the Lord that gaue him might, and in the shine of the Sun that gaue him light, intreating the one, and commaunding the other to bee propitious.
Now for the weapons of this his warfare2. Cor. ^^ 4. 5. etc. (as you here see) they were not carnall, but spirituall, and mightie in operation to cast downe holds, for he sent to God the arrowe of his deliuerance which was his prayer when hee saide, Then spake Iosua vnto the Lord, hee sacked both Sunne and Moone with the word of his commaunde, when he saide. Sun, stay thou in Gibeon, and thou Moone in the valley of Aialon, and then hee drewe out his sword to take vengeance of his enemies that rose vp against him, when hee

set Israel in their possessions.
Thus honourable Iosua, managed the battell like renowned Dauid, when he marshalled the field, and said. Let the praise of GodPsal. 149. 6. be in your mouthes* and a sharpe two edged sword in your handes to be auenged of the heathen, and to rebuke the people.
Iacob wept and prayed, and found God atOse. 12. 4. Bethel, Iosua fought and prayed, and found God at Gibeon, the Sunne and Moone obeyed the word of Iosua, because the God of heauen heard the prayer of Iosua, O piercing word and powerfull prayer, so to preuaile, when all other succours failed, for the day was welneare spent, the battel was scarce begun, the passages were da^gerous, dark night approached, Israel knew no way; the Amorites were acquainted with euery winding, bogges, bushes, and shady groues, rockes, hils, and derne dales, might haue broken the battell, and disordered the campe, in the darknes, and silence of the night, if God had not lengthened the day, and therfore Iosua his issue was but one, and it was a strange one, to dismisse the night and bid it be gone, to stay the passage of the Sun, to bid it stand, and spare no light, till the fight were finished,

that God and Israel might haue the honour of the day, by that most miraculous and heauenly station. Now tell mee who was there before him, like to him that thus fought the battels of the Lord, for theIosua 10. 14. Sunne stood still at his command, and one day was as long as two.
Here to determine the certaine howers of that day, and minutes of that heauenly station I dare not, for that the Scripture seemes silent of that secret, although the authors of the Hebrewe Homilies induced with sharpe and subtile reasons haue written of threescore and six houres standing,Midra^ Iosua. others of a naturall day, which is foure and twentie houres, others of an artificiall, or diurnall day which is twelue houres, mentioned by our Sauiour Christ,Iohn. 11. 9* when he saide, are there not twelue houres in the day? if a man walke in the day hee stumbleth not, etc.
But in answere to all: it shall bee sufficient for vs to knowe that the Sunne stirred not, till the battell was ended, and Israel had auenged himselfe vppon the heathen, the Lord was mercifull to giue them light, that they might walke and fight in the day, and

not stumble by night in the desert; one day was as long as two, and it is sufficient for vs to knowe that such a day did neuer dawne, such a battell was neuer fought, that there was neuer day like that before it, nor after it* ^herein the Lord heard the voyce of a man, and so fought for Israel.
And here see the power of prayer, hee heard the voyce of a man, and fought for Israel, but the Lord fought not, while Iosua prayed not, nor was it the voyce of an Angell, but the voyce of a man that preuailed with God for Israel, nor was it any volly of shot, no speare or pike, no warlicke stratagem, horse, or sword, could pierce the enemie, till the voyce of Iosua had pierced the heauens, that shoot of prayer that shiueredIosua 6. 20. the walles of Iericho, amazed the hearts of the Amorites, weakened their hands, and subdued their power in the valley of Aialon, Iosua was neuer so puissant in his fight, as in his prayer, for in his fight he preuailed but with men, but in his prayer he preuailed with God, his faith, his prayer, and his loue conquered him that comandeth all, according to that Solus amor triumphat a Deo, onely loue conquereth God.
God by the Prophet shewes vs a Sentinel set vpon the walles of Ierusalem, a watchman in his tower, that wardeth and warneth onely by his praier, which all the day and all the night continually should not cease, keepe silence, or giue God any rest, till heEsay. 62. 6. 7. should repaire, and set vp Ierusalem, the praise of the world. Its true, Its true Orationes and Lachrimae sunt arma Ecclesiae, praiers and teares are church weapons, Oratio deum lenit, lachrima cogit; haec vngit, illa pungit, praier softeneth teares in force, this melteth, that pearceth the sweet soule of thy Sauiour to pittie thy plaints, in the daies of thine affliction as in the day of Iosua.
And hereby the example of Iosua, ye that are potentates of the world, mightie men, and Princes of the people, spare me a little to prouoke your praier as more preuailing with God: by priuiledge of your spirits, then others of lower rancke, Are the Amorites abroad? are your states indangered? is the Church grieued? and are your soules afflicted for your selues, and for your people? ye may be bolde with God for ye haue precedencie, as Iosua here had euen

by the power of your prayer, to make him propitious. Spare mee while I spare no Creature, in Heauen, Earth, or Hell, priuiledgedExod. 14. 1, Num. 20. 1. fro^ the power of your prayer, by which they are inforced to yeeld to the necessity of the Saints. Moses prayed, preuailed with God, and had precedencie of the people, when hee deuided the red Sea, and put backe Iordane, when he stroke the Rocke, and inforced softe, and sweete water to gush out.
In the height of his hands was the health of Israel, for when they were lifted vp, AmalekExod. 17. 11. 12. fell, but when they shrunke, Israe fainted, when Eliah prayed, the Heauens were as brasse, and when he prayed againe, the Clowdes dropped downe Fatnes, LyousIam. 5. 17 mouthes were stopped at the prayer of Daniel, and the childrens prayer beatteDan. 6. 22 backe the Flame.
By the wrestling of prayer, the AngellDan. 3. 23 yeelded: and at the commaund of prayer, Diuels were daunted.Luk. 10. 17.
What should I say more? By the power of prayer, Sheol is shaken, Hell is in horror, sicknes ceaseth, yeares are added, winde and Seas obey.Mark. 4. 41.
Such priuiledge prayer hath, especiallie

in Men of might, Princes, Patriarches, and Prophets, which made the Israel of God, when carefull of their king, to pray that the Lord would be attent vnto his proper praier, as more preuailing then theirs, when they saide, The Lorde heare thee in the day ofPsal. 21. ^ Trouble, the Name of the God of Iacob defende thee; beeing well assured of this, that the prayers of godly Princes are, and euer haue bene powerful with God, and profitable for his people. Salomon prayed, and the Temple1. King. 8* 10. etc. was filled with the Clowde, and the glorie of the Lord. Dauid prayed, and doubly preuailed with God: First, that himselfe2. Sam. ^* 17. 17. might fall into the handes of God, rather then of men: Secondly, that the people might be spared, and himselfe plagued.
Ezechia prayed, and God restored him2. Kings. 20. 2. to health, with increase of dayes, euen fifteene yeare of the surplusage of his loue, assured vnto him, by the shadow of Ahaz his dyall, vpon the wall, brought backe ten degrees,Esai. 38. 1. to make good the Lords promise vppon his prayer. And why might not Iosuah, a prince and Sauiour of his people, by prayer to God, commaund the creature, euen the faire Fabricke of Sunne and

Moone to none no more till Israel were auenged vpon their enemies?
Pardon me in your patience a while, If to parallel these Princes praiers, in their precedencie with God, I leaue not out our owne Princes at home, the perfume of whose praiers are yet sweete in this our English Eden, and like the smell of a fieldGen. 27. 27. which the Lord hath blessed, that powerfull praier of Edward the sixt made at his death and in the houre of his dissolution shall neuer die while the state standethHolinshed in Chron. but euer be blessed by it, O my God defend this Realme from papistry, and maintaine thy true religion, that I and thy people may praise thy holy name: and therewith all he said, I am faint Lord haue mercy vpon me and take my spirit.
Let me neuer liue to pray more, or pray to liue longer, if I be not perswaded in my soule, and from my God that euen yet the blessing of that prayer is vpon this people, as a wall of brasse, to beate backe poperie as Iosuas day lengthened til the Amorites were vanquished, and as pure mirrhe dropping still vpon the barres and handles of ourCant. 5. 5. doores to sweeten England in the maintenance

of true religion and pietie.
Againe at the birth and baptisme of hisHollinshead in Chronic. deare sister Queen Elizabeth: our dread Soueraigne who now liueth, and long may we say Liue, liue, the King of Herauldes, when the christening and ceremonies were ended, proclaimed this praier, and with what effect iudge yee.

God of his infinite goodnes send prosperous life, and long, to the high and mightie Princesse of England Elizabeth.

Surely, surely, a Prince so high in the fauour of God, and so mightie with men, so blessed with daies, and prosperous in her raigne, so beloued at home, and so dread abroade, so absolute for blessings, and so admired for gouernment was neuer seene in England. Herauld thy praier was powerfull and preuailed with God, for thy proclamation hath wrought heaue^ and filled the earth with the cloude, and glory of her happie raigne. I might here speake to make good the doctrine I aime at of that disastrous disease of our nation, the Kings euill, cured by no hand, but of the Lords annoynted, vpon whose sacred touch and prayer, thousands within the kingdome haue beene deliuered

from that wofull maladie the humour being beaten backe, the veines purged, and the canker killed, when neither surgions skill, nor Physicions cunning could helpe, the^ had the Prince precedencie by praier, Null^s adhibitis pharmacis to relieue the patient, it may be the cause is secret in nature but not in grace, which vsually helpeth when all other succours faile.
And thus you see: how Princes praiers, and pleadings with God haue much preuailed,Rom. 8. 23 being graced with faith, not a creature of God but it stands at their checke, if they grieue, the creatures groane after a deliuerance, God in heauen, and his Gods on earth doe sympathise, they soare high whoNumb. 27. 16. came from an high, and their generous spirits beg much at the ha^ds of the Lord God of spirits, there was neuer yet any truly noble, or of an honorable descent, but from an heaue^ly asce^t. Its not your royall blood, but the honour of your God that makes you noble: your greatnes is in the breath of his being according to that, Nemo vir magnus vnqua^ extitit sine diuino aliquo afflatu and numine, there was neuer yet any great

man moulded on earth, but had his minde inspired with some diuine influence from heauen.
And now from the combate Iosua had with his God by praier, come we to the command he had ouer the creature by the word, wherein spare me a while to speake, and it shall be as I hope a seasonable instructio^ lessoning vs how to demeane our selues toward God, as the whole hoste of his creatures may stand either for vs, if we doe wel, or against vs, if we doe euill, the lesson is short and soone taken out.
For if we be at enmitie with God, then all his creatures wil be at enmitie with vs, The earth will swallow vs, the water will drowne vs, the aire will infect vs, and the fire will consume vs, Yea the basest creatures vpon the earth will bandie our destruction, wormes will eate our entrals, Lice will consume our faire flesh, flies will fright vs, and frogges will leape into our Kings chambers, monstrous visions will trouble vs, and make vs swoone, as though our owne soules shouldWisdom. 17. 9. 10. etc. betray vs, the darkenes of the night will be intollerable, and the thoughts of the graue insupportable, What should I say more?

the whistling of the windes, chierping of birds, amongst the thicke branches, the water falls, the skipping and roaring of wild beasts, with the sound that answereth againe in the hollow mountaines, these fearefull things (as Salomon saith) will make vs appalled for the lesse, that the hope is whithin, the more is our torment without.
Nay which is more then all I haue said, and I yearne to speake it, if we be at enmitie with God, his word, and Sacraments, wil be our enemies, the law will fright vs, and the Gospell will flatter vs to our destruction, the blessed Sacraments, seales of our assurance wil rubbe off, if vnreuere^tly we rubbe vpon him, Psalmes, Hymnes and spirituall songs will turne to dolefull ditties, and our melancholy will marre our melodie, Songs of Sion to vs will be but songs of sorrow with a woe and welladaie, that euer we were at enmitie with our God and Christ.
But e regione altera, if we be in amitie, and friends with God, as Iosua was, then all his creatures will fawne vpon vs, the earth will support vs, and the aire will cheare vs, the water will coole vs, and the fire will comfort

vs, our meate will feede vs, and our clothes will warme vs, our houses will shroude vs, and our beds will ease vs, yea and God will make our greatest enemies, either our friends or our footestoole.
What should I say more? if God be thy friend, the beast that beares thee, will bid thee beware as he did Balaam, and Ionathans arrow will bid thee be gone as he did Dauid, thy weake sling and peeble stone shall quell a Giant, and with the iawe bone of an asse thou shalt kill a thousand, Starres shall fight for thee as they did for Deborah, and the riuer Kison shall sweepe them away. Rauens shall feede thee as they did the Prophet, and the Cocke shall crowe thee to repentance as he did Peter.
Nay if thou be in amitie with God, the night will be short and thy sleepe sweete, the graue will be to thee as a bed of downe, there to rest till the day of thy resurrection, word, Sacraments and Sabaothes will be thy solace, till thou come to that Sabaoth of rest, thy prayers will sent sweete as perfume, and thy praises sound in thy soule like harmonie of the heauens.
In a word, and so to conclude with my text, and close with your religious eares, and hearts, ye may not maruell if Iosua hauing God his friend, had also the co^maund of his fairest creatures, and bad them stand still who neuer stood before, for the prayer of a righteous man auaileth much, if it be feruent. Elias was a man subiect to like passions as we are, and hee praied earnestly that it might not raine, and it rained not on the earth for three yeares, and sixe monthes, and he praied againe, and the heauens gaue raine, and the earth brought forth her fruite.
The vse is good and much to our comfort, if we be feruent in praier, for we haue a greater commaund then either Iosua or Elias had, they commaunded but the creatures, we commaund the creator, euen the Lords Christ, we bring him down, we must make him ours, with all the benefits of his passion euen remission of sinnes, and euerlasting life to the which God bring vs.
And let this suffice to satisfie you of Iosua his great puisance, as preuailing with God by prayer, and with his creatures by

command. All the Hoast of heauen, earth and hell being (as I haue told you) mans Hostes from the Lord of Hoasts, whilest we be friends with God, and fetch them off by faith, either to defend our selues, or offend our enemies in the day of battel, otherwise if we be at enmitie with God, as likewise I haue said the basest of his creatures, as lice, flies and frogs are big enoughExod. 8. 3. etc. to beate downe Pharao in his pride, or the greatest monarke in this world in his presumption against the Lord.
And now come we from the praier and word of Iosua, to the arme and sword of Iosua, which likewise preuailed against theIosua. 10. 19. etc. fiue Kings of the Amorites, and subdued them in the valley of Aialon.
Where first obserue, that he did not neglect the meanes because of the miracles, or left to fight on earth because the sonne stood still in heauen, but hee whetted hisDeut. 3^. 41. sword vpon the promise of his God, and vsed but the creature as a glorious light onely to giue him light, till the battel was ended, to teach vs that though it please almighty God often whe^the fight is no lesse dangerous then desperate to relieue vs by

miracle, yet may we not cast off the means.
For when Dauid (that sweete singer of2. Sam. 23 1. Psal. 147. 12. etc. Israel) would stir vp Hierusalem to praise the Lord for the blessings of the land amongst many blessings there mentioned, first in the ranke hee marshals this. Hee hath made the barres of thy gates strong, hee doth not say, hee hath made thee strong, but hee hath made sure the barres of thy gates. Wee are his, but the bars are ours, nor may wee so depend vppon the helpe of our God, as wee may cast away the meanes of our defence, for Non aufert portas diuina prouidentia, sed corroborat, the Lordes prouidence takes away no gates, but makes them strong, the gates are ours, but the prouidence is his. Hee takes away no Kinges, no garrisons, no golde, no shippes, no shotte, no men, or munition, all these are barres of our defence, and they are ours, but the prouide^ce is his: he takes away no lawes, no liberties, no customes, no toll, or tribute, all these are bars, and all are ours, but the prouidence is his, hee takes away no counsell of state, no nobilitie, no gentrie or commons of the land, but hee makes them all

sure barres of thy gates O England, and these are ours, but the prouidence is his.
In fine, and for conclusion of all, England hath her barres of yron, and gates of brasse, and her wall is impregnable, invironed with rocks, shelues and seas, and by them we are fortified Ad miraculum vsque: yet what of all this, if wee fall from God and faile of his prouidence?
Surely all is nothing, and God by theNa^m. ^ 8. 9. etc. Prophet will correct our securitie as he did Niniueh, when hee saide, Art thou better then Alexandria the great, which was full of people; that lay in the riuers, and had the waters round about her, whose ditch was the sea, and had her walles from sea to sea, Aethiopia and Aegypt were her strength, Put and Lubyn were her helpers, yet was shee caried away, and went into Captiuitie, her young children were dashed in peeces at the head of all the streetes, and they cast lots for her noble men, and all her mightie men were bound in chaines.
So then sinne within, crieth vengeanceGen. 1^ 20. etc. without, and there is no prouidence of God either can or will preuent deserued iudgements,

If our barres be neuer so strong, wickednes will burst them. Its not our situation in the seaes, nor association with Put and Lubin, the greatest of our neighbour kingdomes can keepe vs from captiuitie, if either we presume vpon our might, or neglect the meanes of our saluation, by the word, or preseruation by the sword. Iosua was a Sauiour of his people, and by meanes of both, he wrought their deliuerance, and in the right of both hee held his inheritance.
But it may be demanded what it was that put such spirit into Iosua, and made him to aduenture vpon all these so great difficulties, surely search and you shall find that the match that kindled the fire burned in the breast of Iosua, and inflamed his royall hart with courage to contend with God his fairest creatures, and cruell Kings, was the promise and assurance God gaue him of the victorie, as you may see in the precedent verses of my text, when the Lord said vnto Iosua: feare them not, for I haue giuen them intoVerse. 44. ^^^se. 8. thine hand. None of them shall stand against thee.
Now in this promise was the might of his power, his prowesse, and all his puisance, his thought of the promise so eleuated his soule aboue, with assurance of deliuerance, that he neuer doubted daunger belowe, it may be hee thought vpon the promise that made the barren wombeGen. 17. 15. etc. of Sarah fruitfull, it may be hee thought vpon the promise God made to Iacob in his daungerous peregrination to Bethel, Ero tecum. It may be hee thought vponGen. 28. 15. the promise of Israels deliuerance out of Aegipt: and how the Lord made it good with an high and mightie hand, hee knewExod. 3. 20. that arme was not weakened, nor his hand shortened, nor his power limited to binde the heauens to obey his will, and makeEsay. 59. good his promise of Israels safetie, and the Amorites confusion.
Thus armed with the promise, hee fell vpon the enemie pell mell, hee feared neither might, nor multitude, hee slewe them with a great slaughter at Gideon, and chased them a long the way that goeth to Beth horon, he smote

then to Azecha and to Machedah, but see vppon the sudden, how the spirits of the mightie were daunted, how the army was discomfited, and Israel endaungered, their glorious day begunne to bee darkened with a gloomie night, and when the fight was at the fairest, they had lost the fielde if Iosua his prayer hadde not preuailed with his GOD, for a longer day, that the sunne in Gibeon, and the Moone in Aialon might yeelde their shine; till their swordes were sated with the blood of the heathen.
And it is a secret in the Lordes promises, that for the most part they are in the generall without mention of particular meanes, I haue giuen them into thy hands, but by what meanes? It is not mentioned, to teachIosua 10. 8. vs that the LORD is a free Agent, and is tyed to no particular, all the creatures of GOD are his: to make good his glorie, and protect his Church: where hee will, when hee will, and as hee will, hee that put into the hand of Sampson the Iawe bone of an asse to beate downe the Philistines,Iudg. 15. ^5. etc. hee puts into the power of Iosua two glorious lights to vanquish the Amorites, who

might say with greater maiestie then Sampson might, with the jawe-bone of an Asse, are heapes vppon heapes, with the jawebone of an Asse haue I killed a thousand: Nay rather, with the brightnesse of the Sunne are heapes vppon heapes, and with the bodie of the Sunne haue I killed a thousand, supported with the promise made vnto me from the height of all sublimitie.
I haue now power ouer the glorious creature, to commaund it light, and to double the day for our deliuerance.
It may bee (my brethren,) that when Iosuah sawe by the approach of the blacke night, that all other succours failed. It may bee the promise had a checke in his heart, and for a while his faith fought with frailtie.
Yet true it is, and made good, as yee may here see, by his experience, that th^ righteousPs. 3^. 25. shall neuer finally fall, nor shall there euer be temptation laid vpon them greater1. Cor. 10. 13. then they are able to beare, but in the midst of the temptation, God will giue a gracious issue: for if the earth wil not, the heaues shal^ and rather then dark night shall endanger the

Campe, by the station of the Sunne, the day shall bee doubled, for Israels deliuerance.
The vse of this Doctrine, concerningHeb. 4. 1. etc. the promise of our God, is good, as in temporall, so in spirituall deliuerances: and therefore I say, with the blessed Apostle. Let vs feare, least at any time, by forsaking the promise of entering into his rest, any of you should seeme to be depriued.
Dauid saide, my foote had welneare slipped,Psal. 73. 2 etc. but hee recouered himselfe, by laying hold vpon the promise. All falls are fearefull,Prou. 24. 16. but yet recouerable, if wee forsake not the promise. But so long as wee leaue the promise, we faile of grace, and thats a fearfull fall, to fall from Moses, and to light vpon Christ, is no danger; to fall from the Lawe and to hit the Gospell, is no perill. To fallHeb. 3. 12 through sinne, and to hit a Sauiour, is recouerable, but if we misse a Sauiour and fall vpon sinne: if we forsake the Gospel and light vpon the law, if wee leaue Christ, and followGal. 3, 24. Moses, if we forsake the promise of his sauing grace, we shall both feele, and find that our case is dangerous, deadly, and desperate. Besides; the perill of being depriued for euer

entering into his Rest.
The Angels fell, Caine fell, Iudas fell, Achitophel fell; Had any of these fallen vpon their CHRIST, they had neuer fallen so farre: but all mist the promise, and for that they are gone, their fall is irrecouerable.
Howbeit, when anie of the Patriarches fell, Kings, or Prophets; when Peter, Paul, fell, or the dearest Disciple of Christ fell, all recouered their Falles, by feeling the Promise, which was the holde of their inheritance, and so with speedie passage, they flew vp in all their Afflictions, into the bosome of the Promise, as it were, euen fromHeb. 10. 22. 23. the nethermost hell, to the highest heaue^s.
What should we then doe, but hold fast our profession, and rest vpon his promise, as Iosuah did? and so goe boldely to the Throne of Grace, that wee may receiue mercie, and finde Grace, to helpe in timeHeb. 4. 1^ of neede, whereunto all the godlie haue had their recourse: as had the Doue toGen. 8. 9. Noahes Arke, when else-where shee could finde no footing; or as the Riuers haue to the great Ocean: and bloud to the heart vpon a suddaine feare, for as (...) care, when all

other succours faile, the bloud hath it current through all the veines, and runneth to the heart, to comfort it. So likewise in the manifolde distresses of this life, and greatRom. 1. ^6. feare of future falles by sinne, death, and d^mnation, there's no comfort to the current of the word, which caryeth with it the promises of eternall life.
So saide Dauid in the day of his Afflictions, It is my comfort in my Trouble, forPsal. 119. 50. thy promise hath quickened me.
And againe, I haue hid thy promises in my heart, that I might not sinne againstverse. 11. thee. Say soule, say Sainct, I will walke in confidence of my cause, and calling, garded with the promise of my GOD and CHRIST, I will walke euen to the gates of death and Hell, and say as Hester did to Ahashuerus, in the day of her distresse. I willHester. 4, 16. goe on, and if I die, I die. But how can I euer die, hauing my portion in that promisedPs. 27. 13. 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19. seede, who hath rede^med my soule? hauing the Gospell of promise to instruct my soule, his holie spirit of promise to applyeRom. 4. 11 Ro. 14. 16. my soule, the Sacraments, seales of his promises to assure my soule, with that heauenlie Canaan, and ^^nd of promise, to receiue

my soule.
It cannot bee that a soule thus blessed, should euer perish, and therefore say, with a godly Oration, as Deborah did, in herIudg* 5. 21. 13. triumphant song, after her honourable expedition against Iabin king of Canaan, O my soule thou hast marched valiantlie, and the Lorde hath giuen mee dominion ouer the strong*
But to the rest, and now a while to solace our selues in the garden of our delight* there to repose among the flowers of our Roses.
Paralel the two Princes of Israel and Englands Iudahes, compare them in their puissance, and Ballance them alike, vpon the scales of true Nobilitie, Religion, and* pietie, and then tell mee whether Queene Elizabeth may not helpe with Iosuah* to perfect the Register of the blessed.
Blessed Kings, and blessed Queenes, renowmed for their power, and by whome the Lord hath gotten great glorie.
Iosuah was a Sauiour vnto his people of Israel: Queene Elizabeth is, and hathEccl. 46. 1 beene long, a sweete repose vnto her people of England.
Iosua and Caleb were appointed for the search of Chanaan, the place of Gods behestNumb. 13 ^. 9. Numb. 14 6. etc. where hee would plant religion, and establish a Church, as a type of our heauenly being, and onely they were found faithfull in the search, whom the people would haue stoned, for commending the land.
Now of all the Kings and Queenes of England, who haue beene more faithfull in the search of true Religion, went to it with better courage, and haue so well reported of it as her brother? that blossome of blessed memorie, and she without feare of any of the sonnes of Anakim, Giants of Popery, with whom not onely this our Hebron but all the world was pestered, Mose^Iosua 14. 15. being dead, God magnified Iosua in the sight of Israel by a miraculous mercy in bringing the Arke of God through the swellings of Iordan, where it stood bothIosua 3. 17 still, and dry euen in the depth and channell of it, her sisters dayes were seas of persecution, and therefore are rightly called, and euer so will be, Mariana tempora, swelling aboue the height of Iorden, with fire, and faggot,

against the Saints of God, and whose (I pray you) stopped the streame of that blood, and quenched the fire of that popish furie, but Queene Elizabeth, whom the Lord magnified in the sight of all England, to backe that Iorden, and bring her people with the Arke of her God to this our rest, and sweete repose.
Iosua hauing passed Iorden, he set vp CircumcisionIosua 5. 2 againe the second time, which for fortie yeares space had beene left off in the wildernesse. Queene Elizabeth purged the Sacraments of her Christ, and reduced them to their right forme, left off, if not welneare lost in the vaste wildernesse of popish impietie, for more then fortie yeares ten times told.
Iosua was directed in all his wayes byIosua 1. 8 the booke of the Lawe, and what other starre hath guided the heart of Queene Elizabeth, there was not a word of all that GOD commanded, which Iosua caused not to bee read openly. So shee the euerlastingIosua 8. 34. 35. Gospell to bee preached and published throughout all her Realmes and Dominions.
Iosuah maketh a Couenant, with a double vocuher, for himselfe and all his familie, in these wordes, I and my house will serue the Lord.Iosuah, 24 ^4. 15. etc.
Queene Elizabeth hath bound her people by statutes and lawes, to the worship of God, her selfe not second to anie, in rendering her vowes.
There was none able to withstand Iosuah all his life, for the Lorde was with him,Iosua. 1. 5. and hee was famous throughout all the worlde.
Queene Elizabeth hath beaten backe all her enemies, and who hath resisted her power? for which her prayers is with God, and her fame with men.
At the sounde of the Trumpet, theIosua. 6. 1. walles of Iericho fell, after Iosuah had compassed it about seuen times, with the shower, and shoute of his deuotion.
Not seuen times, but seuentie times seuen times, hath Qu. Elizabeth by prayer to God, and prophecying with men, sacked that Romish Iericho, whose walles (to God be the praise) by her princely power, and prayer, are well shiuered at home, and shaken abroad, with Iosuah his curse, to all such as shall repaire

the ruines, cursed bee the man before the Lorde, that raiseth vp, and builds vp this Romish Iericho.
Let him lay the first stone thereof in his eldest sonne, and in his youngest sonne set vp the gates, that is, let him build to the destructio^1. King. 16. 24. of all his stock, as Hiel did in Bethel
Ai could not be wonne till the execrable thing was out: Iosuah could not sacke it tillIosu. 7. 12 sinne was punished, and the Hoast purged, and purified of Achan his stealth. Achans rebellion is discouered in Ireland, in the north of England, and in the south themselues, with their Babilonish garment. Sicles of siluer, and wedges of golde, execrable things in the Hoast, to steale away the hearts of subiects, from their allegiance, haue beene brought by our Iosuah, into the valley of Achor, there to suffer condigne punishme^t, some by execution, some by banishment, some by confiscation of goods, with this iust sentence from Iosuah, of their death and doome.
This place where yee die, shall bee calledIosu. 7. 25. etc. Achor: which is trouble, for in as much as you haue troubled vs, the Lorde shall trouble you, and turne his fierce wrath from our nation.
The craft of the Gibeonites procuredIosua. 9. 4. etc. them peace with Iosuah, they beguiled their Prince, with the presence of an Embassage from farre, and with an argument of their loue to God, and loyaltie to him, for they say, wee came from farre, we are thy seruants, we seeke the Lord thy God, and haue heard his fame: Now therfore make a league with vs, looke vpon vs, we come from far, our sacks are patched, our shooes are clouted, our bottles are rent, and bound vp, our bread is mouled, our drink is sowred, and we are all of the olde. Loue is not suspitious, it beleeueth1. Cor. 13. 7. all things, it hopeth all things. It endureth all things, it knoweth not it owne. The Gibeonites of this Lande haue beguiled Queene Elizabeth with a faire presence of loue to God, and loyaltie to her person, and with their patched cloake of Antiquitie, Clouted shooes, and Bottles, mouled bread, and baggage of popish trash, they would beguile, and still beare the worlde in hand, that they are all of the oulde, and so they are in rottennesse, rotten hearts to God, rotten hearts to their Prince, as may appeare vpon the breach of couenant with our Iosuah: Euen this day they

should hew wood for the sacrifice, but their Axes are dull: they should drawe water for the house of the Lorde, but their buckets are broken: they should attend the Altar of the Lord, but they haue digged it vp: Our Iosuah hath giuen them life vpon the contracte, and put them neare, and about the holie things, and is it not strange, vppon fourtie yeares kinde vsage, they should haue no greater familiaritie with their God and Prince? no wood, no water, no Altar, no prayer to God, of all this long day of Iosuah, so continued, and so blessed for her preseruation? what none? why then: Hee that is filthie? let him bee filthie still: Hee that is Popish, let him bee Popish still; and whiles yee would seeme to beguile vsReuel. 22. 11. with your Antichristian Antiquitie, wee will rest vpon our New-Religion, and say, Antiquitas nostra Christus; ours is not new, but renewed, like the booke of God, for a long time lost, but found at last, by the good King Iosias, and wee sing, as it were*2. Chron. 34. 15. etc. Iosua. 2* 25. etc. a new song: Reuelat. 14. 3. Aliud est nouare, aliud est renouare.
Iosuah not knowing his successor, recommended the people ouer to God at Sichem,

and tyed them by couena^t to serue the Lord, and for an heire apparant erected a stone there to witnes against them, if they should at any time denie their God.
Albeit (saith Queene Elizabeth) it dothHolinshead in Chron. A pregna^t prophecie of this our ioyfull day* blessed with no lesse happie then hopefull succession. please almightie God to continue mee still in this minde, to liue out of the state of mariage, yet is it not to be feared, but he will so worke in my heart, and your wisedomes, that as good prouision may be made in conuenie^t time, whereby the Realme shall not remaine destitute of an heire, that may be a fit gouernour, and peraduenture more beneficiall to the Realme, then such of* spring as may come of me, for though I be neuer so carefull of your weldoing, and minde euer so to be, yet may mine issue growe out of kinde. And for me it shall be sufficie^t, that a Queene hauing raigned such a time liued and died a virgin. The LordNumb. ^7. 16. 17. God of Gods, the Lord God of Gods will prouide you a Prince of wisedome, to goe out before you, and to bring you in againe.
Lastly, and to make good my text, Iosua, as I haue said, was thrise noble, in that hee preuailed with God, to cammaund the

creatures, till the field was foughten, and their enemies were subdued. That Mirabilis annus of 88. will neuer be forgotten, so long as the sunne, and moone endureth, When the starres fought for our Deborah,Iudg. 5. 20. etc. as the sunne and moone did then for Iosua. Nay more, the riuer Kison swept them away from Callis in France, to Dingle-Cushe in Ireland, Seas, Rockes, and shelues fought for England, shee armed her selfe with praiers to God against that great Armado, and preuailed, that the enemiesEsay. 31. 3. etc. might know they were men, and not God: and their horses flesh and not spirit; That the shippes were but wood, the tacklings but hempe; Their Oares but reeds, and their powder but dust, nay their topgallant must stoope at the maiestie of a greater God, and vaile at the puissance of Queene Elizabeth.
Let Tilberie Campe speake to the praise of her presence, and powerfull praier there, when with God in her heart, and a commaunding staffe in her hand, she vttered these, or the like words in her Princely march.

Come on now my companions at armes, and

fellow Souldiers, in the field, now for the Lord, for your Queene, and for the kingdome, for what are these proud Philistines, that they should reuile the Hoast of the liuing God? I haue beene your Prince in peace, so will I be in warre, neither will I bid you goe and fight, but come and let vs fight the battell of the Lord, the enemie perhaps may challenge my sexe for that I am a woman, so may I likewise charge their mould for that they are but men, whose breath is in their nostrels, and if God doe not charge England with the sinnes of England, little doe I feare their force, we commend your prayers, for they will moue the heauens, so doe wee your powerfull preaching, for that will shake the earth of our earthly hearts, and call vs to repentance, whereby our good God may relieue vs, and roote vp in mercy his deserued Iudgements intended against vs, onely be faithfull and feare not. Si deus nobiscum quis contra nos?

And thus shee went on in her holy march, with her Princely power, spirit, and praier against that inuincible Nauie for preparation, might, and bloodie designes, the greatest and most fearefull that euer

was intended any nation.
For as Emanuel van Meteran reporteth, their shippes were an hundred and fiftie, furnished with eight thousand mariners, besides of slaues for the Gallies, two thousa^d, eightie eight, of Souldiers twentie thousand, besides noble men, and gentlemen, voluntaries, they had great cast peeces 2650. peeces of brasen ordinance 1600. of Iron 1000. bullets 120000. gunpowder 5600. quitals, of match 1200. quintals, Muskets and Calliuers ^000. Halbarts and Partisanes 100^0.
This Nauie, as Diego Pimentello afterward confessed, was esteemed by the King himselfe to containe two and thirtie thousand persons, and to cost euery day thirtie thousand Duckets.
Adde to all this Parma his forces, in the Lowe Country thought to be fortie thousand strong, Dukes, Princes, and Potentates, from Italie, Spaine, Sauoy, Hungary, Hesse, with many Turkish captaines; all hasted*(...) luyt of the Spanish Armado. thither to the seruice, and were had in Parma his court and campe. The Pope Sixtus Quintus placed his part,

with sixe cinque, for all he published a Cr^sadoe, as against Turkes and Infidels, with ample Indulgences, he bestowed the Realme of England vppon the Conquerour, and proffered a million of golde towardes the seruice: and if all reports be true, hee dispatched out D. Allen the great Apostle of our English Catholiques, to lye alooffe, with a Frye of Seminaries and Iesuites, vermine of our Church, to poyson within, and corrode the very bowels of their dearest countrey.
But theres no counsell against the Lord, No might can marche with his Maiestie:Prouerb. ^ 1. 30. Mans wisedome is but foolishnes, his greatest strength but weakenesse, his life, but a breath, and all his honour but a blast, for the Lorde had no sooner blowne vppon all this their pompe and pride, but their spirits were daunted, their Armies were discomfited, the great Armada was scattered, beaten, and broken, with it owne burthen, and as they say, only fiftie three poore shippes returned home, to carie tidings of all the test.
Thus England had the honor of the day, day* like that of Iosuah, bright shining from heaue^, wherin the black night of our throu^^^^ destruction was beaten backe by the

puissance of our Prince praying, our Armies fighting, and the creatures of God relieuing, to make vs glorious by deliuerance.
And now to close with your religious cares and hearts, which heare me this day, our care is for our Prince, to keepe her in life, the crowne of our head, the breath ofLament. 5. 16. Lament. ^^ 20. our nostrels, and the annointed of the Lord, vnder whose shadow we haue bin thus preserued aliue amongst the heathen. Where must wee then begin to beg that the line of her life may be lengthened, but at the AuthorHeb. 12. ^^ Dan. (...) of life? that her dayes may bee multiplied on earth, but at the auncient of dayes in heauen. Iosua could not stir a creature till he had moued the creator, nor stay the Sun till he had communed with his God, as it is here. Then spake Iosua vnto the Lord, etc.
For it was as in the day of famine, whenHose. 2. ^^ 22. God by the Prophet promised plentie, saying, in that day I will heare (saith the Lord) I will euen heare the heauens, and they shal heare the earth, and the earth shall hearethe corne, and the wine, and the oyle, and they shall heare Israel, yet all as it (...) this caution I will not heare the (...)

till the heauens heare the earth, I will not heare the earth, till the earth heare the corne, the wine and the oile, nor will I heare the cry of these: till these heare the cry of Israel, so as Israel must be the Primu^ mobile, to moue the Lord to mercy, No corne, wine or oile, no earth, sunne or heauen, could preuaile with the God of heauen, till the praiers, plaints and cries of Israel, there and Iosua here at Aialon were out, and piercing to make him propitious.
Therefore you that stand this day for the Lords annoynted, and keepe it solemne^. Chron. ^. 13. 14. like one of the feasts of Iudah, I exhort with the Apostle, that first of all supplications, praiers, intercessions, and giuing1. Tim. 2. 1. etc. of thankes be made for all, and especially for Queene Elizabeth, that wee may leade a quiet and peaceable life vnder her, in all godlines and honestie, without which praier to God, all other succours are but vaine. For her counsell may aduise, her officers may care, her guard may keepe watch, her Souldiers may fight, her Ladies may loue her, and her handmaides may attend her, her Physitions may apply

her person, her Cookes her diet, yea and her Reuels may solace, and refresh her wearied spirits, all these with all the subiects of the land may wish and worke her good: yet all nothing without the SoueraignePsal. 127. 2. good, for except the Lord build the house, they labour but in vaine that build it.
Come then ye Counsellers of state, and aduise with your God, come yee officers in Court: resigne your staues, and be instant with your God, come yee Souldiers out of the field, let fall your weapons, and yeeld to your God, Ye Ladies and maides of honour leaue your closets, and attend your God* Physitions lay by your Cordials, and apply your God. You reuerent fathers of the Church slide from your Consistories: and pray to your God, you preachers, people, and all, contend with your God for a blessing this day, that it may yet dawne, a bright blessing to this English nation.
Iosua preuailed, as I haue told you, and was encouraged to commaund the creatures, because of the promise, wee haue a more precious promise from God, and a

greater commaund euen to still the heauens till our prayers bee offered vp, there was silence in heauen for the space of halfeReuel. 8. 1. 2. 3* an houre, till the Saints prayers were offered vp, and now tel me whether is the greater command to stay the Sun in Gibeon till the Amorites be va^quished? or to silence the heauens till the Saints prayers bee answered?
Againe, the rather to embolden vs to pray with confidence, wee haue as good a God to goe to, as euer Iosua had, euen the Lord Iehoua, wee haue as good a meane to goe by, as euer Iosua had, euen Iesus Christ the righteous, we haue had as good a cause in hand as euer Iosua had, euen the life of our Queene, the safety of her state, and the preseruation of Gods Church, wee haue as stable and certaine promises to assure vs, as euer Iosua had. Aske and you shall haue, seeke, and yee shall finde, knocke and it shall be opened vnto you, why then should wee doubt of like successe? but be well assured that the Lord will make this glorious day of her highnesse raigne, like the day of Iosua still shining ouer this our English Iudah, as hee did the Sunne and Moone

ouer Gibeon, and Aialon, which hee grant for his sonnes sake, to whom be praise, and glory both now and euer.
Amen. Amen.



THE THIRD Sermon.

2. KINGS 18. 5. 6.
 He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him was none like him among all the Kings of Iudah, neither were there any such before him.  For he claue to the Lord, and departed not from him* but kept his commandements,Standish Church twise ruina ted, was built again in the happy raigne of Queene Eliz: begun anno 8 and finished 31. which the Lord commanded Moses.

I If I should bee silent and say nothing in honour of the day, we now solemnize surely these stones might speak to the praise of their soueraigne, vnder whose happie gouernment, they haue bin reared, and made beautifull (as you may see) like the polished corner stones of the Temple,

and not these stones onely: but the aboundance of all your grasse, corne and cattell, vpon a thousand hilles: together with the comforts of your wiues, children and seruants, yea and which is more then all the1. Pet. 1. 9. rest, the solace of our saued soules, filled with the fatnes of all Gods blessings, wouldEsay 32. ^ say of their Elizabeth: as did the Prophet of good Ezechias, shee hath bin to vs as an hiding place from the winde, and as a refuge from the tempests, as riuers of waters in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rock in a wearie land. Nay more, if Dauid vpon2. Sam. 1. 24. the death of Saule, might thus mourne his funerals* and say, ye daughters of Israel weepe for Saule, who clothed you in scarlet, with1. Sam. 2. 24. pleasures, and hanged ornaments of gold vpon your apparell, how much rather may wee ioy in the day of the gladnesse of our hearts, for the life of our Queene, and say you daughters of England, ioy for Elizabeth, who clothed you in scarlet, rich garments, and costly iewels, feedeth you with the finest flower of wheate, with hony out of the rock, and setteth peace in all your borders. Surely he hath not dealt so with euery nation, and therefore O England, clappe your

hands, sing and say In nablio decachordo, PsallamPsal. 92. 2. 3. tibi, I will praise the Lord vpon an instrume^t of ten strings, yea as long as I haue any being will I praise the Lord.
For truly if wee doe not beate backe theEsay 59. 2 riuer of Gods mercies with the seas of our ingratitude, if wee doe not checke the Lord in the meanes of all his mercies toward vs, with our impietie, if wee doe not preiudice the Crowne and diademe of his annointed: wee cannot but say by her as by a Conduite, all the waters of life is conueyed vnto vs, and not conueyed onely but continued; not for a yeare, twaine, or twentie, which is much in the raigne of Princes, but for fortie foure faire yeares: now past and gone, the Lord of heauen, with the line of her life, hath drawne out the happinesse of our dayes, in multiplying our nation, and increasing ourioies. Who maugre the rage of al rebels, the maliceEsay 9. 3. of al wickednes, and the spite of al popery may say yet, God is good vnto England, eue^ to those that are pure in heart, yet are his blessings vpon his annointed, yet he is her strength and her saluation therefore. Wee shall not much bee moued* fremat orbis, and

Orcus, illa erit secura. God spake once or twice haue I heard it saith Dauid* That power belongeth vnto God, and to thee o Lord mercy, for thou rewardest euery one according to his works.Psal 62. 11.
And now the rather to prouoke the Lord that hee would continue still the blessings we enioy for Englands saftie, and his owne glory, you haue done well to honour this day with your presence, and to sanctifie yet with your prayer the day, that it might still dawne, the Prince that shee might still liue, and your selues be euer blessed vnder so happie a raigne, and gouernment.
With whose bright beautie, that youCant. 4. 9. might be enamoured the more, and as it were wounded in loue with one of her eyes: and with a chaine of her necke, I haue thought good to match her in her princely pietie, with good Ezechia, one of the best Kings of Israels Iuda.
His princely heart was replenished with foure religious vertues, more precious the^ the Carbuncle, ^opas, or the ^risolyte, which like a coller of Esses, and a Chiane about his necke, so wounded his subiects with loue, and Lam. 4 20. loyalty, as when they called him the breath of their nostrils, they deemed their life lapped in his loue.
Now the chaine of his gouernment held by these foure lincks, all religious vertues fit for a Prince, and as it were, synewes of a sanctified state.
The first was his faith, and kingly1 confide^ce in his God, for so saith the text. Hee trusted in the LORD GOD of Israel.
The second was his princely magnanimitie,2 euer contending with the best of his rancke, for after him there was none like him, neither were there any such before him.
The third was his constancie, for hee3 claue to the Lord, and departed not from him.
The fourth and last was the patterne of4 all his pietie, for he kept the commaundements which the Lord God commanded Moses.
And all these vertues flowed from him like the riuers of Eden out of the Paradise of God, to water and refresh the dying; and declining plants of Iudah, which Ahaz his father had shaken with a dangerous2. Kings 16. 2. 3. 4. and Idolatrous rule.
Now for his faith, here first in the ranck

and the fairest of all the rest, and as it wereLeuitic. ^ 13. the salt of the sacrifice: seasoning the soule of this religious King; yee fee it was right, for it pitched vpo^ the soueragine good: eue^ vpon the Lord God of Israel, in whom hee trusted.
I say he trusted in one God, not in manyIudg. 6. 1* Gods, in the God of Israel* not in the Gods of the nations, as it were speaking with Moses in the silence of his soule, our God is notDeut. 32 31. like other Gods, our very enemies being Iudges, so soueraigne a faith in a soueraigne Prince, pitched vpon so soueraigne a God, is more precious then a diademe vpon his head, or the diamonde vppon his right hand.
For he knewe with Dauid, and found it true in his owne experience, that no King is saued by the multitude of an hoaste, neither is the mightie man deliuered by his great strength, hee knewe tha^ an horse was but a vaine thing to saue a man, howbeitPsal. 33. 16. 17. hee knewe that the eye of the Lord is alwayes vpon them that feare him, and vpon them that trust in his mercie, he knewePsal. 74. 12. that God was his King of olde, and the helpe that is done vpon the earth he doth

it himselfe, and therefore I will goe forwardPsal. 71. 16, in the strength of the Lord God: and will make mention of thy righteousnesse, euen of thine onely.
In this co^fide^ce, he beat back the rage of2. King. 18. 17. rayling Rabsecha in the day of battel, saying vnto his people, bee strong and couragious, feare not, neither bee affraide, for the King of Assur, neither for all the multitude2. Chron. ^2. 7. 8. that is with him, for there be more with vs, with him is an arme of flesh, but with vs is the Lord our God for to helpe vs and to fight our battels.
Surely it was an argument of a soueraigne faith in the day of his affliction to runne to GOD, when most men runne from GOD, some to the Diuel, some to their Idols, some to the creatures, and some to their owne workes, vnwisely wrought. Dolefull was the song of MosesDeut. 32. ^7. euen in that particular; when hee saide of Israel the LORDS peculiar, they offered vnto Diuels, and not to God, but to Gods whom they knewe not, new Gods that came newly vp, whom their fathers knewe not.
Ahaziah being sicke vppon his fall,

fell from his GOD, whenhe^ s^nt to Baal-zebub, the GOD of Ekron to enquire of his recouery, whom the Prophet iustly taxed, both of his diffidence, and of his death, when hee saide. Is it for2. Kings 1* 3. etc. that there is not a GOD in Israel? that yee goe to Baal-zebub the God of Ekron? tell the Kings hee shall neuer come off his bed, but dye the death.
Saule in his extremitie sought to the1. Sam. 28 7. etc. witch at Endor, and left the LORD, it made a rent in the Kingdome, and brought a ruine to himselfe, with an vtter subuersion to his house and familie, while Israel trusted in their GOD, they failed of no blessings, but when they ioyned themseluesPsal. 106. 28. vnto Baal Peor, and did eate the offerings of the dead: then they prouoked him vnto anger with their owne inuentions, and the plague brake in vpon them, Bala^ sought to Balaam, and was cast awayNumb. 22 2. etc. Iude. 11. 1. Kings* 20. 23. by the deceite of Baalams wages, and the Aramites shifted from the GODS of the hilles, to the Gods of the valleys, and because they left the true God, they were relieued with no God.
Ahab and Asa ioyned with Benada^,

a professed enemie of GOD, and in the day of their distresse* had they trusted in the LORD GOD of Israel: Hanany the2. Chron. ^ 6. 7. Seer had neuer so sharpely reproued the sinne with the iudgement, because thou hast rested vppon the King of Aram, and not rested in the Lord thy God, therefore is the hoast of the King of Aram escaped out of thine handes, and because thou hast let goe a man whom I appointed to dye, thy life shall goe for his life; and thy people for his people.
Good Iehosaphat is reproued by the same Prophet, for leauing the Lord, and loyning with Ahab in the seege at Ramath Gilead: wouldest thou helpe the wicked,^. Chron. 19. 2. and loue them that hate the Lord, therefore for this thing the wrath of the Lord is vpon thee. A good caution for Princes to beware with whom they enter league, whom they helpe, whom they loue: that the wrath of GOD bee not vppon them.
What should I say more? but conclude with this aduertisement, cursed is the manIer. 175. that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arme, and withdraweth his heart from the

Lord, but blessed is the man (with goodPsal. 34. 22. Ezechia) that maketh the Lord God of Israel his soules support, with this no lesse Christian then Kingly confidence, the Lord redeemeth the soules of his seruants, and none that trust in him shall euer perish.
Againe, it is of due regard in this good King to perfect his praise in the full affiance he euer had in his God, that he did acknowledge him both God, and Lord, for so it is here saide, hee trusted in the Lord GodIo. 20. 28. of Israel, Lord of heauen, and Lord of the earth, Lord of life, and Lord of death, Lord of Israel, where hee was King and Lord of the nations, hee was to subdue; yea and his Lord too (though hee were a King) as to whom he ought both faith and fealtie, with a limited subiection of all his power, to his blessed will, and soueraigne command, and therefore it was not without cause Dauid ended his Psalme with this beatitude. Blessed are the people, whose GOD is theirPsal. 144. 15. LORD, for Multi habent eum in Deum, pauci in dominum. Manie take GOD to be their creator, but fewe make him their Lord, and gouernour, many will bee graced with his stampe as he is God: but few will be guided

by his rule, as hee is Lord, that hand th^^ made them must not direct them, and euen in that they disclaime their subiectio^, therfore they make him their God, but not the Lord.
Sound it in a true sense, and with a sanctified soule, and you shall finde that lacke of consideration in this very point of pietie, is, and hath beene, the breeder of all Atheisme, mischiefe, and wickednesse in this woful world, the Angels had kept theirIud. 6. first estate, if they had made their God their Lord, Adam and Eue his fairest creatures had neuer fallen so farre, had they not failed in their obedience to that Lord, that was their God, Israel played the harlot vnderEsay 5. 7. 15. euery greene tree, shee was disloyall to her Lord, and therefore no maruell if they went into Captiuitie, when their God was not their Lord.
I might tell of Sodom, and Gomer, Shilo, and Sion, of Niniueh, Carthage, Babylon. Corinthe, and Thessalonica, with all the Cities of Asia, where once the Gospell flourished, like a greene tree in the middest of the Paradise of GOD, and whats the reason of all their ruines?

and no other cause of their wofull supplantation? but that God was not their Lord? they failed in fealtie to God both in matter ofIerem. 5. faith, and fact, they were misled through misbeliefe, they burst the ba^ds of all obedience, they rebelled against their God, in that they did not vse him as their Lord.
They would liue by him, but they would not be led by him, and so hee was their God of destruction, but not their Lord of protection.
Finally I am prswaded that sin was neuer more sinfull, and deserued Iudgemnts neuer more doubtfull, and the breeder of both is nothing else but this: euen our rebellion against the Lord, wee dare not but say he is our God, and yet wee denie him, homage, and how is hee then our Lord? Our secret Idolatries, and open stealth, our gnawing vsuries, and extrauagant lusts of the flesh, our excessiue auarice, and grieuous oppressions, our contempt of the word, Sacraments, and Sabaoths, our generall Apostasie from all good, and godlines, with our lewde liues led by no rule, shew that wee are irregular, dead to God, and fallen from all obedience to our Lord,

wee doe not trust in the Lord God of Israel
And so to conclude, and close with your religious eares and hearts, who heard mee this day, place your confidence in the brest-plate of your Lord God, and when all other helps and succours faile, with this good K. Ezechia, trust in the Lorde God of Israel.
Trust not in friendes, for they will faile you: Trust not in this world, for it will forsakeMicha. 7. 5. 6. etc. you: trust not in pleasure, for it will flatter you; trust not in wealth, for it will Ieaue you, trust not in strength, it will weaken like water; trust not in beautie, it will vade like a flower; trust not in witte, its often wauering; trust not in Learning, its alwayes doubting; trust not in Honour, its still a sliding: trust not in Princes fauour, its often fleeting; trust in no societie, in marr'd with factions; trust in no earthlie1. Ioh. ^. 4. ioyes, they are but borrowed passions; All these Trusts are but transitorie: worne out with Time, but that transcendent confidence, of thy GOD, and LORD, neither vadeth nor vanisheth, out abideth for euer.
It effecteth wonders where it worketh, and it tyeth the prouidence of the Almightie

to thy particular; it hales on the Heauens to helpe the Earth, and like aHos. 2. 21* 22. threefold Cable from the Kings heart, to the Lords eare; it pulled him downe to be propitious: when tyed to the Sunne, it drewEsai. 38. ^ it backe ten degrees; tyed to Time, it put it on fifteene yeares, as an Addition to his2. Chron. 32. 20. 2^ dayes, and tyed to the Angels, it brought them downe to scatter and kill the Hoast of Assur.
And now tell mee (yee Atheists of the world) Artists and Polititians, in whom Nature euer abridgeth Grace? tell mee, what starrie influence, wit of man, might, or abilitie, could euer haue effected so admirable wonders? had they not beene haled on rather by tye of Religion, then by touch of reason? for Fides non habet meritum, vbi humana ratio praebet experimentum: Faith hath no prehemine^ce, where reason maketh experiment; well may it here houer belowe, but it can neuer reache the height of the Heauens; well may it make men famous on earth, but it can neuer make them glorious in heauen.
O Religion, beautifull is thy band, it chameth man to God in his obedience, and

God to man in his deliuerance, but where it is not: Princes powers are but cordes of^ofe. 6. 4. sand, their glory but a morning dewe, their speares but Reeds to pearce their owne entrals, and with all their wit they doe but weaue vnto themselues spiders webs, vneth able to keepe out a flie: much lesse the fire of Gods heauie wrathEsay. 59. 5. 6. and indignation against delinquents.
Nay oftentimes it falleth out, that where there is a trust and confidence in the creature, more then in the creator, that very creature turnes to their destruction, who trust to it, Sampson twice trustedIudg. 6. 16 18. in his strength: and it was first cut off by the weake and feeble hand of Dalila* againe hee trusted in his strength, and it pulled downe the house, aswell vpon himselfe: as vpon the Philistines, Abso^on trusted in his faire face, feature, and2. Sam. 18 9. beautie, and his golden locks tyed him to the tree, till Abner had pierced his heart with a speare.
That very sword wherein Goliah trusted,^. Sam. 17. ^0. 51. cut off his owne head, and the speare he tossed at Dauid before the comb^te, aduanced his head in the sight of all Israel

What should I say more of that multitude of men wherein Dauid so trusted? thousandsPsal 9. 7. fell vppon his right hand, and ten thousands vppon his left, and this good King when hee shrunko but a litle from his God, and in some princely ambition shewed his treasures, wherein hee-trusted*2. Kings. 20. 12. 13. to Baladen King of Egypt, it was the ruine of his house and cause of Israels captiuitie.
The vse is good, and seasonable for the day on solemnize, I shall neuer thinke so long as I haue a thought in my heart, that euer Queene Elizabeth I could haue rained, and ruled so happily* to the honour of her God, preseruation of her state safetie of her people; and wonder of all the world, but that shee onely trusted in the Lord God of Israel. It was her faith, and full affiance in her God, that made her so glorious by deliuerance.
For was it reason or faith that put (...) the stabbe of Parry, and poysoned the Bill of Lopus? was it reason or faith that scattered the great Arm^^^ of Spainee? when the sturtes fought for England, and the Riuer Kison swept them away, sinke theirIudg. 5. 2.

ships, wherein they trusted, and cast the cark^sses welneere vpon euery coaste from Portesmouth in England, to Dingle Cushe in Ireland.
Was it reason or religion, when in the day of her afflictions shee went towards the tower Tanquam Ouis, a poore persecuted prisoner, that brought her backe againe not long after, to her pallace of Westminster? a free borne Prince, and that I onely say no more, but haste to the rest, Is it reason or religion, that with the lin^ of her sacred life still draweth on the mercies of our blessed God? Sweete as perfume,Gen. 27. 27. and like the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed: surely, surely if I should ascribe these our blessings by her gratious gouernment rather to pollicie, then pietie, to reason, then religion, to the puisance of her power, then to her trust and confidence in her God, I should preiudice the right of faith, and the Princely vertues of her heauenly minde.
And so to the second vertue wherewith the religious heart of this good King (...) replenished, which was his magnanimitie, to wit a generous minde, and spirit, soaring

high, and seldome ayming at mediocrities, neuer content to sit downe with the worst, but euer striuing to contend with the best of his ranke, and therefore it is said, that after him was none like him, amongst all the Kings of Iuda, neither were there any such before him, for hee did emulate the vertues of all the ancient Kings of Israel and Iudah, that went before him, and matched them, he did animate the succeeding Kings of Iudah, and made himselfe a patternePhillip. 3* 17. for them, so walke (saith the Apostle) euen as you haue vs for an example, so rule (saith this good Prince) euen as you haue vs, for a president.
Like the sunne amongst the planets, so are eminent Princes amiddest their peeres, they lighten all aboue and all belowe, precedent Kings are honoured, succeeding Kings are bettered by them.
Yet so as this heroicall vertue of Magnanimitie euer springs out of the fountaine of faith, her first and fairest in the ranke of all religious vertues, for faith is euer operatiue: it will worke, it will striue, wrastle, and contend with the best by the best meanes, and for the best blessing.
Out of this vertue it was, that Samps^^Iudg. 14. 12. contended with the Philistines, and not in strength only, but in wit had excelled them all, if they had not plowed with his heiffer, out of this vertue Iob conetnded for vprightnesse with all the land of Hus, whenIob. 1. 8. the Lord saide of him, that there was none like him in the earth, for an vpright and iust man, one that feared God, and eschewed euill. Out of this vertue Dauid played with Lions, as with Kids, and with Beares, as with Lambes. Out of this vertue Salomon contended, when for wisedome hee excelled al the children of the East, and all the wisedome of Aegypt, for so saith the text, hee was wiser then any man, yea then^. King 4. ^0. 31. were Etham the Ezrahite then Heman, then Calcal. then Darda, the sonnes of Mahol: nay he was famous throughout all nations round about.
What should I say more? out of this vertueGen. 32. 28. Iacob contended with God for a blessing at Peniel, his generous spirit failed him not, till hee hadde wonne the prize, and was stiled with that most renowned name of Israel: as preuailing with God.
Lastly, thus animated, Paule challengedRom. 8. 38 39. all the creatures of God to combate for the honour of his CHRIST, I say all aboue, and all belowe, either firy, earthy diuels, and damned, when hee saide, what shall seperate vs from the loue of Christ^ shall tribulation, or anguish? shall persecution, or famine, shall nakednesse, on colde, shall perill, or sword, shall death, or life, shall Angels, principalities, or powers, shall thinges present, or thinges to come, shall height, or depth, shall any creature be able to seperate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesus our Lord?
I may say then, as of all these, so of good Ezechia, Nihil habuit vulgare, hee had no base minde, hee contended for no trifles, but for the honour of his God, and good of his Church, his generous spirit caried him aboue the pitch of vulgar conceit, which houereth belowe, and ay^eth at mediocrities, and therefore Hesiodus speaking of such high hearts, calleth them not without cause Kera epam^^^i. Whom minds soare on high, without commerce of earth, or earthly things.
I may be sparing of this Paralel, for that her Maj. hath put me from it, as she did herselfe, when from that Climate of her much modestie, shee did recommend vnto her Councell the care of her people, that they might bee ruled with like iustice and temperance, shee euer affected in her Princely heart, and contended with the best that they might euer enioy that blessing.
A Prince (saith shee) is scant well furnished, if either hee lacke Iustice, Temperance, Magnanimitie, or Iudgement: As for the two latter, I will not boast, my Sexe doth not permit it, but for the two first, this dare I say:

1 Amongst mo Subiects, I neuer knewe a difference of person, where right was one.
2 Nor euer to my knowledge preferredHolinshed Chron. for fauour, whom I thoght not fit for worth.
3 I neuer lent mine eares to credite a tale, that was first tolde me.
4 Nor was so rash to corrupt my iudgement with my censure, before I heard the cause.
5 If others whome I put in trust to heare the cause* marr'd it with partialitie, it was not my fault.
6 This dare, I boldely affirme, my verdict went euer with the trueth of my knowledge.
7 And I neuer vsed ouer sudde^ resolutions in matters that haue touched me full neare.
8 I euer haue, and do contend for the truth with all good conscience.
9 And let mee liue no longer, then I may liue to dare the enimies of my God, with an vndaunted spirit, warra^d d^^re* Lord all this with thy commaund.

These were the Poesies of her rule, these are the perfumes of her life, such is her government, graced with no lesse magnanimitie and iudgement, (which in her Princely modestie shee would put off) then of iustice and temperance, wherein she may contend with the highest of her ranke, and so to the rest.
A third vertue, replenishing the heart of Ezechiah, was his constancie in the Faith, where it is said, he claue vnto the Lord, and departed not from him, implying a threefold passage in pietie, fit both for prince and people, (1) a seeking of God, (2) a findi^g of God, (3) with an abiding by him, for wee cannotEsay, ^1* cleaue vnto him, till we haue fou^d him, nor

can wee finde him, till wee haue soughtEsay 5 5* 6. 7. 8. him, and when we haue sought, and found, then to abide by him, and not to depart from him, is no lesse Christian then Kingly constancie*
In our seeking the soule is exercised, in our finding the soule is satisfied* and in ou^ abiding by him, our soule is incorporated into our God.
And thus are we not onely infran^hised into that heauenly inheritance, made free(...). 8. 32. ^^. and familiar with God, but as it were glued vnto him, by an inseperable ^nion, and so the originall in this place will beare i^, for like as with glue two table^ th^y be ioy^ned and bound together, as and if they were both one. So by a true and liuely faith, may God and man bee (...) together Quasi vnum quiddam fiant. For he that sanctifieth,Heb. 2. 11. and they that are sanctified, are both one. And againe, Amor non sinis ^ma^tem esse ^uispsius, sed ama^i.
It is no^then our seeking of God, but it is our finding of God, nor ^^ is our finding of God, but it is our abiding by God, that makes ^^ blessed. It we^e better wee neuer felt God, then to fall off after wee haue ^^lt

his sweetnes, the backsliding Israelite is theHeb. 6. 4* 5. etc. Psal. 78. 9* 2. Tim. ^* 10. Acts 1. 16* worst Israelite, and to slide from pietie, is as the sinne of Apostacie, it was the greatest dishonour that euer Ephraim hadde, to start backe in day of battell, nor will neuer bee forgotten in Demas, or forgiuen in Iudas, their falling off by a wofull seperation, the one from Paul, and the other from Christ, etc.
And euen in this hold of a constant faith, religion, rule and gouernment did Ezechia excell Salomon, ^ohas, Valerian, Commodus, and other Princes of the world, who at the first were religious, but in the end went backe, and fell away, some to this God, and some to that, all fro^ the God of heauen, whose deserued iudgeme^t was for that they left off their familiarity with their God1. Kings 11. 4. 5. 6. 1. Kings ^1. 30. 3^. and Lord, and had no recourse to the holy Oracles, sacrifice, and Sabbathes, the Lord made a rent in their kingdomes, and estranged the hearts of their people from their due obedience.
For surely this is true, Princes shal neuer strike an impression of maiesty from themselues in the hearts of their subiects, but by an impression of maiestie from their God, with who^ if there were no pietie, yet it sta^ds

with pollicie they should bee familiar, of much commerce, conference, and counsell.
Had it not beene knowne to all the people,Exod. 24. ^18. that the Lord did commune with Moses by the space of fortie daies, and fortie nights vpon the holy mountaine, in greatExod. 34. 28. Exod. 33. 11. Exod. 34. 29. 1. Thess. 2. 13. Exod. 31. 18. Exod. 19. 16. Deutro. 32. ^0. familiaritie? Had they not seene the brightnes of Gods glory shining in his face* which they could not behold without a vaile, had they not heard his word, not as the word of man, but as it was indeed the word of God? Had they not read the tables he brought written with the finger of God, had they not heard the thunder, seene the fire, and lightening with an astonishment of the maiestie of God in his minister Moses, their guide, and gouernour through that waste and roaring wildernes to Canaan, I say, had they not seene this his familiaritie with God: the God of his command, would they (trowe you) euer haue beene kept in their obedience, being a people soDeutro. 9. 24. rebellious and mutinous?
I might say the same of Iosua, Gedeon, Dauid, and of all the Kings of Israel, and Iudah,2. Sam. 3. 36. their familiaritie with their God made

them gracious with their people, may the very Pagan Princes of tho world, that they might the rather confirme their lawes, and make their decrees of more acceptance with their people, they fained a familiaritie with their Gods, secret confere^ce, and much co^merce, as Numa Pompilius with Aegeria the Nimphe, Scipio Africanus with Iupiter Capitolinus, Pisistratus with Minerua, Lycurgu^ with Apollo, and Mahomet when he first laide the fou^datio^s of Turcisme by a taught pigeon, pidling in his eares, as it had beene the holy ghost, there whispering secret reuelations, yea and all the Muncks from the hollow vaults of their derne Celles are bolde to make good their derne diuinitie by vaunt of more speciall reuelations.
The proiect is for religious Kings euen from the grace and familiaritie they haue with God, to make them gratious with the people, for if as you haue heard to credit the lawes of men with man, as Tully saith, T^nt^legis vis est, vt ea non homini, sed deo Delphi contribueretur, how much more toProuerb. 8. 15. 16. credit the diuine lawes of God, by which Kings rule may we say, Tantalegis vi^ est, vt ea non homini, sed deo Israelitico tribueretur.
Such is the power of that lawe by which we gouerne, as wee dare not asoribe yet^^^*Iosua. 3. 10. ^y Delphick God, but to the liuing God of Israel, and say, populus dei non acquies^at in vlla doctrina: priusquam audiat hanc vocem. Sic dicit dominus. We will that our people being the people of God, rest and reposePsal. 3. 8. Esay. 56. 1. then saluation vpon no Oracle, till they heare this voyce Thus saith the Lord Iehouah.
It may goe for a Lamentation to see how mightie men and Princes of the world estrange themselues from God, cast off his yoke, burst the bands of all obedience,^er. 5. 5. flie religion, and are as it were affraide to be familiar with their Christ, least happily they might s^eme to be strange to their earthly passions, pleasures and Parasites, who in force no^hing more then this, that it stands not with the greatnes of man to be too familiar with God, or with the Kings crowne, to be cast downe at the feete of poore Christ, Religion is for Regulars, Princes are free and subiect to no rule.
Thus they measure their right by their2. Esdras 15. 16. might, and frame their conscience to their gre^^

commaund, so they may close with this world, they shake hands with the other, and sue out that proud partition in their hearts, Diuisum imperium cum Ioue Caesar habet; so wee may raigne on earth, let God rule in heauen.
The vse is good: I feare it is with many both mightie and meane men in these worst and last daies of the world, who think if they bee gratious with God, they cannot be gratious with men, and therefore doe often faine impietie for feare they should not seeme prophane. It was Augustine^ sinne2. Confess cap. 3. before his conuersion, when he saide ^ingebam me fecisse, quae non fecoram, ne vider^^ abiectior quo eram innocentior, and ne vilior haberer, quo eram castior. Oftentimes I fained my selfe to haue done the sinne I neuer did* least I might seeme lesse honoured, for being more honest, or lesse prophane* for being more pure. Alas with what compari^ons did I walke (saith he) the streets of ^^bilo^ and wallowed in the fil^h there of as in a bed of Cynamon and pure perfume, for (...) flesh and blood senteth sinne to be sweete, but the sanctified soule deemes it perfumed poison.
Well, it was not so with this good king Ezechiah, when hee claue vnto the Lord, and^. King. 8. 6. departed not from him, nor is it so with our dread soueraigne, whose right hath bin her might, I meane her religion with God, herEccles. 8. 23. might with men, and her constancie in his faith, hath made her more honorable then the hils of robbing Rome, Semper eadem, isPsalm. 6. 4. her princely poesie, a Constat to the worlde, of a constant Prince, and steddie rule.
And so to the last vertue and Diamond, in the hand, and heart of good Ezechiah, to2. Kin. 18. 6. wit, the heauenly patterne of all his pietie, in these words, he kept his co^mandements, which the Lord commanded Moses, where you may first see, that in the law of the Lord was his delight, and by that holy booke, heePsalm. 1. 2 directed in all his wayes, whether Theoricke or Practicke, it was the rule of his Faith, it was the rule of his Life; and not of his onelie,Phil. 3. 16 as a priuate man, but as a publike Magistrate, hee layed that Line and Leuell of1. Chroni. 30. 2 Chron. 34. 23. 1. King. 12. 25. the Lawe, to the soules of the Subiectes, thereby to be guided in all their wayes, hee did not deuise vnto himselfe any other gouernment then that of Moses, which he had receiued from the holy mount, hee did not

with Ieroboam, deuise a calfe at Dan, and a calfe at Bethel, with an holie-day to the Lorde.
Hee did not forsake the fountaine of liuing-waters, and digge vnto himselfe Cesternes,Ier. 2. 3 euen broken Cesternes, which could hold no water.
Finally, in all the Seas of his tossed gouernment, hee neuer lost the Pole, I meane the worde of his God, but euer had it in hisExo. 32. eye, and so directed the sterne of all his religious raigne, to the honour of God, and good of his people, with such a blessing to himselfe, as neither Time nor eternitie shall euer blot out.
But wo is me to tell: the lacke of this line, leuell, booke, and starre, as in the hearts of Princes, so of their people, hath bene, is, and will be, the subuersion of States, and destruction of soules in all Ages, the missing of Moses, hath bene the breeder of much mischief in the church of God, it hath cost bloud and lost faith, yee ca^not misse the good, but yee shal hit the euill, ye cannot fa^le of faith, but ye shall fall fro^ grace, and if ye be we^ry ofH^b. 3. 1^ 2. Thess. 2. (...) 4. 4 the word of God, ye shall be tyred with the traditio^s of men, the time was, whe^ Scriptum est, did beat back diuels, and they haue Moses and

the Prophets did choke the damned, the^^k. 16. time was when Search the Scriptures was in the command of Christ, and men thought(...). 5. 39. that in them they had euerlasting life, the time was when Angels were cursed, if they^^l. 1. 8. 9 preached any other Gospell then that which was deliuered by Moses, and Christ. But now diuels, damned men, and Angels are let loose, ^et at libertie, and free to Preach what they will; so they misse the Scriptures.
Moses and the Prophets are beaten back with Romish Institutions, decretals Apostaticall, lying Oracles, illusions, and flattering diuinations, with vnwritten vanities, neuer sawe this sinne, so soare a sight next to the sorrowes of a Sauiour, as the razing of Scripture in the hearts of Kings, and soules of subiects, which hath brought vpon a great part of Christendome, seas of error, heresies, and Idolatrie.
Nor are our aduersaries the Papists, least in this conspiracie against Moses, and the Prophets, whose bookes with their bones2. Chr. 13 ^1. they haue both buried, and burned, shut the doores of the Temple, quenched the holy lampes, ouerthrowne the Altars, killed the

Prophets, disordered the bread vppon the pure table, subuerted all, as Ierobo^m did, and yet say: we are the true Church, away from vs. I am holier then thou, vnder which faire pretence of holinesse and humblenesseCol. 18 of minde, (as the Apostle saith) they beguile the soules of the simple: and at their pleasure beare rule ouer the consciences of men, aduancing themselues in those things which they neuer saw, rashly pu^t vp with their fleshly mindes, and hold not the head, wherof al the body furnished and knit together by iovnts, and bands, increaseth with the increasing of God.
Now to dimme the brightnesse of this Sun, and to dearne the Doctrine of Christ, sealed with his precious blood, they haue cast a mist in our eyes, and would couer their wickednesse with a cloud of faire pretence:Matt. 15. 9. vrging for doctrines mens traditions, and saying of the Scriptures and word of God as Iudas saide of Mary when shee powred outMat. 26. ^ her ointment vppon Christ his head, Ad quid perditio haec? what needes this wast, ye haue Fathers, Councels, Popes, Cardinals, Doctors, Angelicall, and Seraphicall, yee haue Sorbonists, Canonists, Friers, Muncks,

and Iesuites, these are yours to conquer the field, ye need none other forces, the Scripture is but a dull, dead, and a dumbe letter, it hath no life in it, but these haue both light, and life.
When I think vpon this their bare brag, without blowes, they seeme to mee much like that vaunting Embassadour ful of foolish babble, sent from the Aetolians to F. Quintius then chieftaine in Achaia: who (as Liuie reporteth the story) after he had bragged much of the Aetolian forces both by sea and by land, and their point blanck-shot, fierce horses, and puissant infantry, at last hee came to terrifie with naming a sort of stra^ge Nations, their assistance that scarcely had beeno heard of before, to wit, the Dakes* the Medians, the Cadusians, the Aelimenans.
Wherunto Quintius answered, now in good sooth (saith he) this is mine Hoast of Chalcis vp and downe, who when we wondered vpon a time how hee met with that plentie of Venison, wee had and such varietie withall, the man nothing so glorious as these fellowes heere: smiled pleasantly vpon vs, and saide, wee were very welcome to a

feast of good tame swine, and no better, but well-fare a good Cooke, my maisters, (quoth hee) who by his cunning hand, what with seasoning it, and what with seruing it vp with diuers sauces, hath made all this faire shew of wilde flesh, and the same of sundry sorts. Euen so saith Quintius, this great boaste of little roste, these diuers kindes of Armies, these many names of Nations, neuer heard of before, to witte, the Dakes, the Medes, the Cadusians, the Aelimeians, they are but Syrians, when all is done.
Quidrides papista, de te narratur fabula. Why smilest thou O Papist, the tale is true of thee, your popish prouision is cooked with a curious hand, like the feast of Chalcis, and yet it is no Venison, but plaine porcke and no better, and for your glorious titles of Romaneforces, as Popes, Cardinals, Canonists, Friers, Monkes, Iesuits, and Sorbonistes neuer had before; they are but Syrians when al is done, Sectaries, Schismatikes and Symonistes, which if you please to ballance with the gold of the sanctuarie, and lay them with the bodie and soule of all your religion vppon the scales: with

the scriptures of God, ye shall finde them lighter then vanitie it selfe, for as the Prophet^eremie. ^3. 28. saith, Let him speake my wordes faithfully, for what is chaffe to wheate?
I know it will be opposed that they are learned, wise and wittie, I neuer denied it, and so were the Scribes and Pharisies in the daies of Christ, as also Iulian, Porphiry, and Arius, with all the heretikes that haue beene sithence, as Gangrenes in the Church of God, and therefore I may well apply to our learned papists, that which of old Tully said of the Grecians. TribusProflacco. illis literas, do multarum artium disciplinam, non adimo sermonis ieporem, ingeniorum d^umon, dicendi copiam, and ^. Wee yeeld them to be learned, we grant that they are skilfull in many arts, wee take from them no elegancie of speech, no sharpenes of wit, no copie of words, to be briefe, if they assume any thing more, wee enuy it not. At religionem illi nunquam hab^erunt: they were neuer religious saith Tully, and he giues the reason, Quippe quibus insiurandum iocus est, testimoniam Ladus, they neuer cared either for an Oath, or for the holy Oracles, but made a l^ll^

of the one, and a sport of the other. Now of what esteeme, Oathes, and Scriptures are with Papists, I leaue it to a further search and examination, onely this for the time being far spent: religion and faith they neuer had it, as vnto whom Oathes are but lests, and the sacred Scriptures sports and plaies, nay rather their praier is with the Pagan Poet, Da fallere, da iustum, sanctumque videri. Giue me the gift to decoiue, and yet giue me to seeme both iust, and holy.
Well I say no more, but leaue them to Gods mercy, further to enlighten their hearts, when his good pleasure shall be.
And so passe to paralell* the Princes, I haue in hand in the successe of their gouernment, and how God blessed them alike in their religious endeuours, Fzekia2. Kings. 18. 6. Matth. 2. 2. Luk. 16. 29. kept the commandements which the Lord had commaunded Moses. And what other starre hath guided the heart of Queene Elizabeth? but Moses, and the Prophets, with this booke of life here in my hand which vpon her entrance she layed in her lap, and euer sithence she hath kept in her (...) London witnesse who gaue it,

with how ioyfull an affection shee receiued it, and let the applause of all the people as then so still marshall her Princely progresse in the silence of their soules, and say Prosper with thy glory, ride on, because ofPsal. 45. 4. the word of truth, of meekenes, and righteousnes, and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.
Ezekia succeeded Ahaz, a good sonne2. King. ^8. 1. to a bad father, So did Queene Elizabeth Mary, a Religious Prince, a superstitious sister.
Ezekia began to raigne when hee wasVerse. 2. fiue and twentie yeares old. Calculate her maiesties yeares when shee began her blessed raigne, and ye shall finde her thereabouts and not much vnder.
Ezekia opened the doores of the house of the Lord, which Ahaz his father had2. Chron. 29. 3. 2. Chro. 28. 24. shut vp, he opened them in the first yeare, and in the first moneth of his raigne, and repaired them. Queene Elizabeth deferred no time, to establish Religion, but opened the doores of the Lords house, euen in the first yeare, first moneth, and first day of her raigne, procuring the Lord to be honoured aright with the pure Religion of

her God, and a parliament Royall to establish the same.
Ezekiah brought in the Priests and the2. Chron. 29. 5. Leuites, and gathered them into the east streete to sanctifie the house of the Lord God, and to cary forth the filthines out of the sanctuarie, Queene Elizabeth called home her exiled ministers, and Leuites from Geneua, Frankeford, Zuricke, and most parts of Germany, to purge the sanctuarie of it pollutions: and to cast forth the filthines thereof. Ezekia at the very first tooke away2. Kings. 18. 4. the high places, and defaced the Images, and cut downe the groaues, hee brake in peeces the brasen serpent, that Moses had made (for vnto those daies the children of Israel did burne incense to it) and called it in contempt of that their Idolatry no more a Serpent, but Nehushtan, a peece of brasse. What were your Altars of stone but high places? And what were your Roode loftes, Celles, and shrines of Saints, but groaues of superstition? what was all your Imagetie, with lights, lampes, Pax, and palmes, but grosse Idolatrie? and whereunto England burned incense

to the Queene of heauen till Elizabeth came, but then euen at the first downe they went: and broke they were by her princely power, and warrantie, the careasses whereof lye at this day, monuments of popissi Idolatry, and of her maiesties blessed reformation with this disdaine, what are they now but stick and stone, and worse then Nehushtan, brused brasse?
The Temple being purged, and Imagery2. Chron. 2^. 28. defaced: the King with his Princes prepared for the sacrifice, euen a sinne offering for the Kingdome, and for the sanctuarie, and for Iuda, with a burnt sacrifice and an offering of praise vnto the Lord, in the words of Dauid and Asaph the Seer, they sung Psalmes, they blewe the Trumpets, and so they praised the Lord with ioy, bowed themselues, and worshipped, whereat Ezechia reioyced, andVers. 36. all the people that GOD hadde made them so readie, for the thing was done suddenly.
Queene Elizabeth hauing purged the Church of England of that pregnant Idoll, the Masse* what hath shee lesse done, then prepared for the holy Sacrament of*

the blessed death, and passion of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ? a sinne offering in deede for the Kingdome, for the sanctuarie, and for this our English Iuda. And how often sithence hath shee sanctified it with her praier, and honoured it with her presence? her Virgines, Peeres, and people bearing her companie, with Trumpet, Organ, Voyce and V^all, that GOD hadde made here her people so religious, for the thing was done suddenly, and I pray GodReuel. 2. 4 Numb. 11 6. wee haue not lost a part of that our first loue, that our Manna growe not lothsome, that wee bee not colder now, then wee were then, and that the first tenne yeares doe not blemish the last twentie of her gratious raigne, what euer it is? mee thinkes, there is a want both of faith to God, and fealtie towardes the Prince.Reuel. 3. 19. Graunt Lord wee may bee zealous and amend.
Ezechia came to his raigne in desperate times, when Ahaz his father had peruerted the state both of Church and common-weale, fetched Altars from Damascus, and sacrificed his sonnes to the fire,1. Kings 6. 34. became tributarie vnto Assur, exiled the

godly of Iudah, and had brought in the abhominations of Babel, and subscribed to Tiglath Pilesar, King of Assur, saying, I am thy seruant and thy Sonne.
Euen so, Queene Elizabeth beganne her raigne in desperate times, when her Sister had shaken the State, with no lesse fearefull then fiery designes, fetched Altars from Rome, and sacrificed her chiefest subiects to the fire, exiled the godlie of the land, brought in Straungers, because a vassall to the Pope, and subscribed to his power, saying: I am thy Seruant, I am thy Hand-mayde.
Ezechiah withstood Assur, payed him2. Kings* 18. and 89. no tribute, yeelded him no homage, resisted Rabsechah, and endured his rayling, with a Princely patience, committting the successe to God, who made him glorious by deliuerance.
And did not our gratious soueraigne withstand the Pope, and all his vassall Kings? Did she not discharge herselfe and people of all Tribute, Toll, and Taxe, that way?
Hath shee not endured the raylings of many Romish Rabsecahes, with a Princelie patience? and hauing committed the

successe of all her affaires to God, is sheePs. 149. 4. not made glorious by deliuerance, whiles they are a dead, accursed, and cursing crue, and yet she liueth a blessed Queene, long may we say to our solace, and their sorrow,Dan. 6. 21 liue, liue.
It is said of Ezechia, that the Lord saued2. Chron. 32. 22. him, and the inhabitants of Hierusalem, from the hand of Zenacharib, King of Assur: and from the handes of all other, and maintained them on euery side, good LORD how haue the Leaguers cast their hands together with one consent, and consederate against thine annointed, thy ChurchPsal. 83. 3 and people in England, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalecke, the Philistimes, with them that dwell at Tyre, I meane the Tabernacles of Romish Edomites, whose crie was downePs. 137. 7. with it, downe with it, euen to the ground, let vs take to our selues the house of God in possession. But (good Lord) how oftenPs. 83. 12. haue we beene saued, both Prince and people, from this ill kinde of men, how hast thou maintained vs on euery side, thine Angell fought for Ezechia, thy StarresPsal. 12. 7 2. Kings, 19. 35. haue fought for Debora, and the riuer Kison hath swept them away, O my God make

them still like vnto a wheele. And as theIudg 5. 20 21. stubble before the winde.
In the daies of Hezechia it is saide, that many brought offerings vnto the LORD ^^ Hierusalem, and presents to Hezechia,2. Chron. 32. 23. King of Iuda, so that hee was magnified in the sight of all nations from thenceforth, they persecuted Churches of other Kingdomes, and poore exiled Christians, let them speake to the comfort of their soules, with how great ioy and gladnesse, their offerings here in England haue beene tendered by them, and receiued by vs, let them speake to the honour of our Queene and countrey, how liberally they haue bin maintained, when they hadde nothing to feede vpon, but winde and aire, yea and what nation is there, in whose sight Queene Elizabeth is not magnified, and either dread for her puissance, loued for her vertue, or admired for her gouernment?
To bee briefe, Ezechia had exceeding2. Chron. 32. 27. 28 much riches, and honour, treasures, of siluer and gold, of precious stones, of sweet odors, and of shields, and of al pleasant vessels, storehouses for the increase of wheate, wine, and oyle, stals for all beasts, and ranges for the stables.
The Lord hath blessed our Queene with his hidden treasures here on earth, and her honor is great in her aboundance, her Garrisons are full in Ireland, Flaunders, and Barwick, and yet her treasures are not exh^^^sted, and for her store of shields, shot, and munition, wheate, wine, and oile, stalles for beastes, and ranges for stables, let her officers speake both in Court and Countrie, sure I am we feele no lacke, her exactions are not grieuous.
Lastly, and so an ende of her praise, but neuer of our praier to GOD for her. EzechiaEsay 38. 1 was sicke vnto the death, hee prayed vnto the Lord, and hee heard his prayers, and pitied his teares, and the Lord spake comfortably vnto him, and gaue him a signe of his recouerie, by the going backe of the shadowe of Asa his diall tenne degrees vpon the wall. A sure symboll or Sacrament of fifteene yeares moe to bee added vnto his daies.
Where note first I pray you, that the promise from God was fifteene: and the degrees were but tenne, to teach vs (as one hath truely obserued) that the Lord euer

giueth moe graces vnto his word, then to his Sacraments, that begettting, these but confirming the faith, which the word hath formerly be gotten.
But to the comparison in hand and proiect I ay me at, wee knowe that PrincesPs. 82. 6. 7 are GODS: yet must they dye like men, there's no difference in the moulde: from the rich Crowne of Kings, to the poore beggars crutch, all must grinde to greete, and to determine of the life of Kings, and period of Kingdomes, is not the least of Gods secretes onely reserued to himselfe, yet if when it shall please the Lord to touch our dread soueraigne with sicknesse, the harbenger of death, it would likewise please him to pull backe the diall of her dayes some fewe degrees, and adde more yeares vnto her dayes, it were, and would be as great a blessing to vs of England, as euer Hezechia his life was to Israels Iuda: which and if it may not by reason our manyProu. 28. 2. sins, then Lord take her to eternitie neuer to dye.
And in the meane time, whilest wee may enioy her blessed raigne, with her life,

let vs foster and cherish Elizabeth: as chaste Abishagge, with the worthies of Israel, did their Dauid, of whom it is written1. Kings. 1. 1. that when he was old and stricken in yeares, they couered him with clothes, but no heate came vnto him, The counsell was to finde out a fairer virgin to stand before the King, to chearish him, and lie in his bosome, that the King might get beate, so they found one Abyshag a Sunamite, and brought her to the King, the maide was exceeding faire, and cherished the King and ministred vnto him, but the King knew her not.
The vse is good, for in the person of Dauid, you may behold (as in a mirrour) the state and condition of Princes, what it is: Princes are old, cold and chillery, PrincesPsal. 82. 6. 7. must decay, and weare away.
In the person of Dauids seruants, and faire Abishage, is to be seene the loue and loyaltie towards their Soueraignes, what it ought to be, they stretch their wits to aduise and practise with all their power, how to preserue the Lords annoynted, subiects must be carefull of their King.
The publike and priuate praier of all the

land, who owe faith to God, and fealtie to their Prince, all praise, and prophecie this day, what is it but chaste and faire Abishage, found out to foster their liege Lady, the Queene, to stand before her, chearish, and lie in her bosome, to get her heate, and lengthen her life, but oh that our praiers were more powerfull, yet to preuaile with the Lord of life, that she might liue to his glory, and our comfort, sweete Sunamyte let thy virginall vigor pierce her vaines, warme her blood, refresh her spirits, Lord let the powerfull praier of priest, Peere and people preuaile with their God, for the safetie of his annoynted.
Without which it is to small purpose what euer we can say, doe, or deuise, for whats pollicie without pietie, except thePsal. 127. 12. Lord keepe the citie, the watchman watcheth but in vaine, and except the Lord be her guard great is her danger, for all humane succours faile in their greatnes, no gold of Ophir, no Orient pearle of Peru, orIer. 17. 5. Mexico, no arme of flesh, no horse, ship or shower of shot, no watch, guard, or counsel, no Physicke, drink, or diet, no furs of spotted Ermynes, or sweet Sables, can preserue

your Elizabeth, giue her life or length of daies, faire Abishage must giue her heate. It is the perfume of our praier to God in heauen: that must preserue our Prince on earth. And so let vs pray, O Lord God almightie, etc.
FINIS.



