a treatise tend to unity i. TIM. 2 v. for there be one God and one mediator between God and man the man Christ jesus under the old testament they observe the feast of Pentecost in remembrance of the law give at Sinai so it have be the practice of the church under the new testament to keep the like feast at the same time in remembrance of the gospel which come from jerusalem for if the law shall be thus honour which be the ministration of death 2. cor. 3.7 how much more the gospel which be the ministration of life and that not write in table of stone as be the law but in the table of our heart by the holy spirit for this spirit do descend upon the apostle in a visible shape on the day of Pentecost act. 2 according to Christ promise that he will send unto they another comforter joh. 14.16 17 26. even the spirit of truth joh. 16.13 1. cor. 2.10 to lead they into all truth to teach they all thing even the deep thing of God so that those great and secret mystery which under the old testament be shut up from the people like unto the sanctuary into which entrance be seldom make be now make open to the understanding of all the faithful for this spirit have reveal they unto the apostle and the apostle in their writing have clear teach they unto we even in these few word which I have read behold a bundle of these mystery but obscure know in former time now plain set forth unto we as the mystery of the godhead of our reconciliation to God of Christ mediation and of his incarnation there be one God and one mediator between God and man the man Christ jesus the word contain the sum of the gospel and chief head of our christian faith catechise we plain in six main ground and principle of religion i. that there be a god else how shall he be one 2 that this god be one there be one God 3 that this one God be reconcile and make one with we by a mediator for there be a mediator between God and man 4 that this mediator be one and one mediator v. that Christ jesus be this one mediator 5 that Christ jesus be a man the man Christ jesus there be one God and one mediator between God and man the man Christ jesus thus he lead we by the hand from those thing which be most common know and receive to these that be less manifest every one of these principle reveal unto we a great mystery and further degree of knowledge for the first that there be a God be acknowledge by all man the second that this god be one be not so common know as the former for the gentile worship a multitude of god yet be it general confess not only by the church but also by the wise of the heathen the three that this god be reconcile to we by a mediator exceed the knowledge of all gentile whatsoever who have nothing but the light of nature for it be not know by nature but by revelation from God yet be it grant by many false teacher papist jew and also other who receive but a parcel of God word but the four that this mediator be one be less manifest yet for it be refuse by the papist yet receive by the jew but the five that Christ jesus be this one mediator do exceed their faith also yet be it acknowledge by many heretic who notwithstanding deny the human nature of Christ so that the six and last that Christ jesus be a man be most hide and privy as be the proper faith of the true church as every one of these principle reveal a further degree of knowledge so also a great measure of comfort the first that there be a god to who we may have recourse in the day of trouble be a great comfort to we but if there be many god so that we know not to which of they we shall run for help our comfort be but small therefore the second principle show that this god be only one but albeit there be a God and only one god yet if we be at enmity with he we have great cause to fear than to rejoice in the three place therefore he remove this fear show that there be a mediator by who man be reconcile unto God but yet if there be not one but many mediator and we know not to who rather to betake we what better shall we be therefore in the four he take away this doubt also affirm that there be one mediator but though there be but one mediator yet what if he be unknown to we we be still as before therefore the five position lead we by the hand unto the particular person Christ jesus who be this one mediator but what of all this if Christ jesus be only God and so as strange to we as the pattic itself with who we be at enmity therefore to make our joy full the six principle tell we that he be a man a man and so near unto we not in place for he be contain within the heaven according to his manhood but near unto we in blood for he be a brother of we bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh and near unto we in affection for he have compassionate bowel he be touch with a feel of our infirmity heb. 4.15 and be in all sort tempt in like sort as we be yet without sin and so forasmuch as Christ jesus be a man we may go bold unto he and by he have access unto the one God he be the only mediator between God and man this be the fullness of all comfort so this text be like jacobs ladder arise step by step till it bring we to comfort my speech then at this time shall as it be climb up by these six stair 1. that there be a god 2. that this god be one 3. that he be make one with we by a mediator 4. that the mediator be one 5. that this one mediator be Christ 6. that Christ jesus be a man in handle whereof you will perceive i to omit many point that be incident for I must attend upon the time and aim at the occasion as to the first that there be a god I shall spend my breath in vain if I shall labour to prove it for it be ingraft into every man heart by nature and plain teach by all the dumb and senseless creature so that never man deny it but a fool the fool say in his heart psal 19.1 rom. 1.20 there be no god psal 14.1 therefore as it be presuppose in my text so shall it be in my speech the second be that this god be one whereby three thing be signify of God that he be indivisible one only not many that he be immutable and unchangeable one and the same yesterday and to day and for ever and that he be without all respect of person one and alike to all sort of man first God be one that be indivisible one only and not many according to that 1. cor. 8.6 unto we there be but one God so do the Nicen creed acknowledge I believe in one God for God as Bernard say be most one say Tertullian either one or none here we must take heed of sundry wicked error and heresy on each side on the right hand we have those who acknowledge many god on the left hand we have those who do so far maintain God to be one that they fall upon the other extremity to deny that there be three person subsist in this one God or divine nature and of either side there be several sort differ one from another as they do all from the truth all which I forbear to remember as unworthy to be name at all unfit to be mention in the pulpit it be enough for you to know that amid those rock on every side our safe course be to hold the middle way so acknowledge God to be one that we deny he not also to be three one in essence but three in person the father son and holy ghost distinct each from other by their personal propriety the father be from none the son from the father the holy ghost from they both yet not divide one from another because there be but one divine essence which be infinite be all and whole in the father all and whole in the son all and whole in the holy ghost therefore say athanasius in his creed for say he as we be compel by the christian verity to acknowledge every person by himself to be God so be we forbid by the catholic religion to say there be three god so that in all thing unity in trinity and trinity in unity be to be worship I can stand here to confirm the truth of this by testimony out of scripture only to say something in a word for the unity of God nature take my text for a sufficient proof there be one God and for the trinity and distinction of the person I will only allege one instance which I be occasion by this present feast to remember when the holy ghost do descend upon the apostle on this day there you have a distinction of all the three person the three person he be send and appear in a visible shape of cleave tongue the first person he send he and the second by intercede with the first person procure the three person to be send so do our saviour distinguish they joh. 14.16 I will pray the father and he shall give you another comforter there be the son pray to the father that the comforter which be the holy spirit may be give unto the disciple and therefore those three must be distinct person forasmuch as several action be ascribe to every one of they in the same work that be do on this day the father to express this incomprehensible mystery have use sundry similitude take from thing natural as the similitude of the soul of man wherein there be three distinct faculty and yet but one essence of they all the similitude of the fountain the stream flow from it and the river flow from they both which be three distinct thing yet for substance be but one water the similitude of a tree wherein there be three distinct thing the root the stock and the branch the root depend from none the stock from the root and the branch from they both yet all be but one tree final the light of the sun the light of the moon and the light of the air be three distinct light the light of the sun be from none the light of the moon be from the sun and the light of the air from they both and yet for substance they be but one and the same light even so the father the son the holy ghost be three distinct person the father from none the son from the father the holy ghost from they both and yet all three be but one God but for all these similitude we must acknowledge with as there be no creature such as be the creator so there be no example can express either the essence or the majesty of god. for this be a mystery of mystery far surpass the reach of the understanding of any creature which the seraphim profess Esai 6.2 when at the presence of this one God they cover their face with their wing acknowledge their inability to behold much less to comprehend so glorious a majesty second by this that God be one be signify that he be immutable and unchangeable heb. 13.8 one and the same as say the apostle yesterday and to day and the same for ever in this sense it may be God be call one gal. 3.20 but God be one he be one or immutable in his nature in his decree in his action his nature or essence be one and the same immutable and unchangeable because he be void of all kind of composition both physical and metaphysical and as we speak in the school so that he be not subject unto any change whether we consider his be or his attribute for if we respect his be he be eternal that be without beginning without end and always the same for as time be as the philosopher define it have in it three thing there be even so eternity which be contrary to time must be free of all these free from beginning from end and from all change or succession so phavorinus have observe that the word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) signify one and this word be use of God rom. 1.20 so that as I say he be not only without beginning and without end but also while he be he be ever the same as David say psal 102.25 thou have lay the foundation of the earth and the heaven be the work of thy hand they shall perish but thou shall endure yea all of they shall wax old like a garment as a vesture shall thou change they and they shall be change but thou be the same and thy year shall have no end and as his be so also his attribute be eternal not subject to any change his justice his mercy his wisdom his power all be immutable and unchangeable for they be his very nature whatsoever be in God be God himself again he be one and the same in his will his council and his decree for God be not as man that he shall lie neither as the son of man that he shall repent have he say and shall he not do it have he speak and shall he not accomplish it numb 23.19 I be the lord and change not mal. 3.6 my counsel shall stand and my will shall be do Isai. 46.10 for when one change his purpose it be either because he see that his purpose be not good at least that he may have purpose better than he do or else it be because he perceive that he can bring to pass his former purpose and so the change of his counsel do argue either want of wisdom or want of power but God want neither of they he be and always be the same most wise God and so can not have take any better counsel than that which he take from all eternity and as he be most wise so also omnipotent able to effect all his counsel he do whatsoever he will psal 115.3 yea who have resist his will rom. 9.19 and therefore that doctrine of the mutability of God predestination as it be contrary to the scripture which teach that god purpose according to election must stand rom. 9.11 so it be most blasphemous against God for to say that god predestination may be change that the elect may become reprobate and so damn and on the contrary the reprobate become elect and so save be as much as to say that god absolute will which be himself may be change that his prescience or knowledge may be deceive that his omnipotent power may be weaken that his action may be impede and so that God may become no God final he be one and the same in his action which may be declare three manner of way 1. where the occasion be the same God action be of the same kind for example do God in former time execute his judgement against rebellious sinner you may be sure that he will do the like now upon this ground the apostle reason rom. 11.21 for if God spare not the natural branch take heed lest he also spare not thou as if he shall say they be cast off because of unbelief and if thou fall into the same sin thou may be sure to taste of the same punishment forasmuch as where the occasion be the same God action be always the same so the apostle 1. cor. 10. allege god judgement upon the jew in the wilderness and the apostle Peter the great judgement upon the angel that sin upon the old world and upon Sodom and gomorrhe 2 pet. 2. conclude from thence that if he spare not they so neither will he spare we if we do as they do for the wrath of God be reveal from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of man rom. 1.18 again have God in former time perform mercy and deliverance to his own people you may be sure that he will do the same still upon this ground David build his assurance the lord that deliver i out of the paw of the lion and out of the paw of the bear he will deliver i out of the hand of this philistim 1. sam. 17.37 and so in many place of the psalm where he lament the misery of the church he reckon up God former benefit bestow upon she that by the experience of God former favour both himself and other may be assure of a future deliverance forasmuch as God be always the same visit the iniquity of the father upon the child to the three and four generation of they that hate he and show mercy unto thousand of they that love he and keep his commandment second God be one and the same in his action as be the same mean to bring man to the same end there be not one way for the jew to be save another for the gentile but it be one god which shall justify circumcision by faith and uncircumcision through faith rom. 3.30 there be for all the same saviour Christ the same instrument faith the same degree of salvation interveen between God decree and the execution thereof namely vocation justification santification and the same outward mean God word and sacrament but here we must remember that albeit God work the same thing in all the faithful yet not in the same measure and degree he do illuminate his saint under the old testament but not in that measure that he do his people under the gospel the disciple receive the holy spirit when they be first call and after when Christ breathe on they and say receive the holy ghost joh. 20.22 but not in that measure that they do in the day of Pentecost when the spirit come down upon they in a visible shape before they have only taste of the spirit act. 2.4 but then they be say to be say Leo the day of Pentecost be not the first time they have receive the holy ghost say the same Leo but yet in respect of the abundance of the spirit which be pour out on this day they be former say not to have receive the spirit and well may this day be call the feast of the descend of the holy ghost because the holy ghost do never come down in such a measure nor in such a manner as upon this day three God be say to be unchangeable in his action because when he begin a good work he never leave it till he bring it to a end who he elect they he call who he call they he justify who he justify they he sanctify who he sanctify they he glorify for the gift and call of God be without repentance rom. 11.29 this serve mighty to confirm we in the certainty of our salvation for howsoever we be changeable and ready to fall away from God at every occasion yet God be one and the same and do always perfect the good work which he have begin and we keep not he but he keep we because I be not change therefore you be not consume o you son of jacob mal. 3.6 so you see that whether you consider God in his nature or in his decree or in his action it be always true that the apostle james say with he there be no variableness neither shadow of turn jam. 1.17 three by this that God be one he will signify that he be without all respect of person one and alike to all in this sense God be call one rom. 3.29.30 God be he the god of the jew only and not of the gentile also yes even of the gentile also for it be one God who shall justify circumcision of faith and uncircumcision through faith and this be the intent of the apostle in this place for these word be a argument to confirm his exhortation set down in the begin of the chapter where the apostle require that without limitation we pray and give thanks for all man to stir we up to the practice hereof he propound unto we the pleasure and will of God vers. 3.4 and next the deal of God and of Christ and their equal respect unto all vers. 5. there be one God and one mediator as if he shall say God be one to all both to jew and gentile and all sort of man so be the mediator one and alike to all man and therefore shall we carry ourselves equal towards all seclude none from the benefit of our prayer now that you may perceive how God be one and alike to all we will consider he in a fourfold respect according to the diverse person which he carry and according to which he work some thing he do as a free lord have power over all some thing as God creator and conserver of all thing and some thing he work as the god of his own people only the father of his child and other thing as he be the judge of the whole world as lord of all when all be sinner guilty before he he ordain some for life other for destruction he love jacob he hate Esau he have mercy on who he will and who he will he harden some he make vessel of mercy and other vessel of wrath some he call but draw not other he both call and draw and other he neither call nor draw and yet in so do he be without all respect of person one and alike to all for he be a respecter of person who in judgement contrary to law distribute unto equal unequal that which be equal due unto they or he who give not alike unto equal when of right he be bind to give they alike but so gratify the one that he wrong the other and that for some outward condition in the party beside the justice of his cause as either for his kindred or his country or carnal propinquity or his dignity or his riches or some other office he have do and such like external quality by which man in judgement be move to favour one party more than another now God elect one reject another while all be alike even sinner in Adam can be say to be guilty of this first because the mercy he show unto some be not debt but a gift of his free grace and it be Augustine rule but where the thing give be not due but free gift there albeit there be not a equal distribution towards they who in themselves be equal yet it be no respect of person nor any injustice at all s. Austin clear this reason by two example the first be of a man that have two debtor and forgive the one but exact it of the other this be not respect of person because he be not bind to forgive either of they and forgive the one out of his own good will he wrong not the other for he be free to dispense his own gift as he will hear s. Austin in his own word epist Pelagian l. 2. cap 7. his second instance be of the Housholder in the gospel who pay labourer who have wrought in his vineyard matth. 20. give as much unto they that have wrought but one hour as unto they that have bear the burden and heat of the day and when they murmur against he for his partiality he answer and say friend I do thou no wrong do thou not agree with i for a penny verse 3 14 15. take that thou be and go thy way I will give unto this last even as unto thou be it not lawful for i to do what I will with my own on which word s. Austin do paraphrase after this manner the sum be he free himself from injustice for that unto they all he have give as much as he be bind to give and to some he have give more than he be bind wherein he be gracious unto they but not unjust towards the other for that it be lawful for he to do what he will with his own hence s. Austin infer that as there be no acception of person in this man distribute his own favour unequal so neither in God elect one reject another while all be alike for his election be no debt but a gift of his free grace which he may bestow as he please either on all or on none or on some and not on other as the one have cause to extol his mercy so the other can accuse his justice for he may have pass by they all and appoint they for damnation all be guilty and therefore that he have mercy on some he be free good because he give that which he be not bind to give that he pass by other he be not unjust because he owe they nothing final that he condemn those who he reject for their sin he be just because he pay they that which he owe this be the first reason why God elect one reject another while all be alike can be say to be a respecter of person second for further clear of God justice let we consider that God elect some reject other for as s. Austin say though some be bountiful reward yet other be not wrong indeed a judge in judgement favour one more than his cause deserve by how much he gratify the one party by as much he damnifi the other and therefore he be a respecter of person but though God favour some so far that whereas they deserve damnation he call they unto salvation yet the rest fare not the worse for this the glory of the elect add nothing to the pain of the reprobate the wicked receive their own measure neither more no less than they shall have do though none have be save final God elect some and reject other be free from respect of person because he be not move to favour the one more than the other by any cause or condition in themselves but mere by his own good will and pleasure and it be well observe by some that when it be say in scripture that God be no respecter of person the word signify not the man himself but some external quality which be consider may procure unto he either favour or hatred as beauty or deformity nobility or baseness riches or poverty and such like these outward quality God do no way respect in man he regard not man riches more than their poverty jam. 2. nor their freedom more than their bondage col. 3.11 neither do he so distinguish between the jew and the grecian that only for respect of the nation he embrace the one and reject the other act. 10.34 but of every nation of all sort and condition of man he choose some so that if you consider God even in this respect as a absolute lord use his liberty over his creature wherein he seem most partial unto carnal mind man yet you see that he be without all respect of person one and alike unto all next God may be consider as the god of all in which respect he create all thing conserve all thing do good unto all but with great difference and inequality for though he have make all thing good yet their essential goodness do not exclude a inequality of degree which be so requisite for the perfection and ornament of this universe for in a great house be not only vessel of gold and silver but also of wood and of earth 2. tim. 2.20 the potter albeit of the same lump of clay yet must not make all his vessel the same but some for honest use some for base employment because man stand in need of both so God albeit he have make all thing good and give unto they all power fit the condition of their nature and sufficient for their own end and operation yet he have make some of a far more noble condition than other for unto some thing he have give only be unto other thing be and life unto other be life and sense and unto other be life sense and reason yea and a supernatural light to see many thing that can be understand by natural reason so that there be great difference and angelos in and as there be inequality to be see in the creation so also in the preservation for though God providence be extend unto all thing even unto the fowl of the heaven matth. 6.26 to the grass of the field ver. 30. to the hair of our head matth. 10.30 yet he have great care of some thing than of other by how much the creature come near unto God by so much the high place it have in the order of his providence so say Christ that God have a great care of man than of fowl matt. 6.26 etc. or of lily and there be good reason for it for it be only for man sake that God have care of these thing for his sake they be make for his sake it be that they be continue and therefore god much more must have a care of man himself but albeit god goodness be not extend in like measure to all his creature yet be he not a respecter of person because as I say before his gift be no debt but free grace and he do not wrong any of his creature and last he be not move to be more bountiful to some than to other by any cause and condition in themselves but mere by his own good will and pleasure there be a three consideration of God as he be the god of his own people the father of his child the saviour of his body the head and husband of his church and in this respect God action do respect only those that be of his own family he have not do so unto every nation as he have do unto they for he beget they he save they he rule they he quicken they but howsoever God special love and favour be extend unto they all yet here also we must acknowledge a inequality it be true that God communicate spiritual life to all his member indifferent insomuch as the least be a member of his body so well as the great and in this respect all part be peer but yet there be diverse function diverse gift diverse measure of gift and so by consequence for fashion and function and imparity first I say there be diverse function for as we have many member in one body and all member have not the same office rom. 12.4 so it be with the mystical body of Christ there be many member and all have not the same office but some be as the head some as the eye other as the hand 1. cor. 12.21 other as the foot Christ ascend on high give some apostle and some prophet and some evangelist and some pastor and teacher ephes 4.11 again there be diverse gift namely extraordinary gift which be not necessary require in every one to salvation as the gift of prophecy and discern of spirit the gift of miracle of tongue and of interpretation of tongue of these and such like say the apostle 1. cor. 12 ver. 4.8.9.10 there be diversity of gift but the same spirit to one be give by the spirit the word of wisdom to another the word of knowledge to another the gift of heal etc. the like be rom. 12.6 final there be diverse measure of save grace and of such gift as be absolute necessary to salvation for all have not the same measure of knowledge but some be babe and some be man of full age all have not the same measure of faith for Christ mention a great faith and a little faith all have not the same measure of sanctification for some be term perfect in respect of other last neither shall all have the same measure of glory but some shall shine as the sun and other as the star in the firmament but notwithstanding this diversity of gift that God bestow upon his child he can be say to be a respecter of person for the same reason that be former allege and beside it be fit it shall be so for many reason as that every one may stand in need of another help the eye can say unto the hand I have no need of thou nor again the head to the foot I have no need of you 1. cor. 12.21 and especial that by this diversity the beauty of the whole body may be set forth Tota Christ mystical body be all fair can 4.7 now beauty consist in variety of colour and in a concine disposition of sundry different part if all the whole body be a eye where be the hear if the whole be hear where be the smell 1. cor. 12.17 final if you consider God as the judge of the whole world his action be to give sentence and judgement upon his creature not the same sentence upon all but the sentence of absolution unto some the sentence of condemnation against other between which two there be as great difference as betwixt life and death and yet no inequality far less any respect of person in the three former consideration God do not always give alike to they who in themselves be equal but here there be ever a equal distribution towards they who in themselves be alike neither be any distinguish in their recompense that be not different in their life he observe the rule of distributive justice which be for as the scripture say in many place jer. 17.10 psal 62.18 matth. 16.27 rom 2 6. rev. 22.12 he reward every man according to his work (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) not (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the particle (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) signify not the merit but the measure and the rule by which the undeserved reward shall be distribute and the deserve punishment shall be inflict so it signify in other place as matth. 9.29 according to your faith be it unto you and matth. 23.3 after their work or according to their work do not and so it must signify in these place where it be say that God will reward every man according to his work for Revel. 22.12 this phrase (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be expound to be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) my reward be with i to give every man according as his work shall be that be according as the quality of it shall be whether good or bad and also according as the quantity of it shall be both for weight and number whether great or small many or few for God be so just and unpartial in his judgement that he have respect both to the quality and to the quantity of our work and according do apportion a proportionable reward unto they first the quality of every man work shall be try whether they be good or bad and their reward will be divide according it shall be well with the just for they shall eat the fruit of their work and woe to the wicked it shall be evil with he for the reward of his hand shall be give he Esai 3.10 he will render to every man according to his deed tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that do evil of the lieu first and also of the gentile but glory honour and peace to every man that work good etc. rom. 2.6.9.10.11 for we must all appear before the judgement seat of Christ that every man may receive the thing do in his body according to that he have do whether it be good or bad 2. cor. 5.10 they shall come forth that have do good unto the resurrection of life but they that have do evil unto the resurrection of condemnation joh. 5.29 again the quantity of every man work shall be try both their number and their weight and the measure of reward proportion thereunto for the number he keep a exact record and inventory of all our work he have a bottle for our tear psal 56.8 a bag for our alm luk. 12.33 and a book for our good work as also for the sin of the wicked dan. 7.10 the judgement be set and the book open Revel. 20.12 the book be open and the dead be judge of those thing which be write in the book these book be two and the lieger book of God knowledge and the count book of our own conscience wherein both the good work of the godly and the sin of the wicked be so particular write that not any of our good work shall be forget heb. 6.10 nor yet any of the sin of the wicked not so much as a idle word but they shall give account thereof in the day of judgement matth. 12.36 and as the number of our work so also the weight shall be scan for he come with a balance in his hand and in this balance of justice will he poise both the goodness of man work and the grievousness of their sin now from this difference both of the sin of the wicked and of the good work of the godly in their number and weight shall arise different degree both of punishment in hell and of joy in heaven according to the number of man sin shall be the number of their pain Revel. 18.7 as much as she live in pleasure so much give you to her torment and sorrow and according to the grievousness of their sin shall be the greatness of their punishment it shall be easy for Tyrus and Sidon than for Corazin and Bethsaida luk. 10.14 he that sin of ignorance shall be beat with few stripe than he who sin of knowledge luk. 12.47.48 the like may be say of the joy of heaven though all shall receive fullness of joy yet there shall be several degree of joy according to the several degree of present grace by which they be diverse capable of future glory he that have do many good work shall receive many reward for God be not unrighteous that he shall forget any of our good work heb. 6.10 no not a cup of cold water shall slip unrewarded matth. 10.42 he that sow plenteous shall reap plenteous 2. cor. 9.6 and a weighty good do have a weighty reward give thou shall rest and stand up in thy lot at the end of the day say the angel to Daniel dan. 12.13 there be one general lot for all they that be wise to shine as the brightness of the firmament but they that turn many to righteousness have a special lot to shine as the star for ever and ever dan. 12.3 so that albeit eternal happiness be due only by promise as a portion of grace yet it be due perform by proportion of justice God use a equal inequality for every one shall receive his own reward according to his own labour 1. cor. 3.8 so that God every way be both just and unpartial thus have I show that in what respect soever we consider God he be without all respect of person one and alike to all there be one God the three thing we have to speak of be that God be make one with we by a mediator for there be a mediator between God and man a mediator be a middle person that come between two party that be at variance to be a mean of atonement and peace who deal with each party until he bring they under some contract and covenant now it be plain that God and man be at enmity man the party offend God the party offend a middle person come in between and labour a reconciliation bind up a covenant between they that man shall satisfy for the wrong he have do and perform obedience in time come as also on the other part that God shall remit his wrath receive man into his favour and give unto he eternal life but because man be unable to perform his part of the covenant this same mediator become his surety and undertake for he both to satisfy the law and justice of God for man sin and also to make he perform obedience in time follow by renew he again unto the image which he have lose in Adam that he may perform the first he behove to be a priest to offer up himself in a expiatory sacrifice and that he may perform the second it be needful that he shall be a prophet and a King for the corruption of man which he be to take away that man may perform obedience to God have two part ignorance in the mind and enormity or rebellion in the will and affection to cure our ignorance he behove to be a prophet to instruct we to take away our enormity and rebellion he must be a king powerful to convert our heart and to rule the same by his spirit that so he may make we to obey God all the rest of our life we be once make partaker of his satisfaction so our mediator be our surety be both a priest a prophet and a king a priest after the order of Melchizedeck psal 110.4 a prophet to be hear when Moses shall hold his peace deut. 18.18 a king to save his people who name shall be the lord our righteousness jer. 23.6 David priest Moses his prophet Jeremy King and these former have meet double two of they in some other Melchizedeck king and priest Samuel priest and prophet David prophet and king never all three but in he alone as he who be mediator between God and man be surety for man perform his part so also do he perform God part to man he who as mediator or rather surety satisfy for sin do as he be God remit that sin which he satisfy for receive man into his favour give he grace in this life and glory in the life to come and in a word perform all god part of the covenant for this cause the apostle to the hebrew call the covenant in respect of God part Christ testament because Christ have bequeath those thing unto we in his legacy namely remission of sin justification and eternal life so that we have a double benefit by the death of our mediator one that thereby he have satisfy for our sin as he be our surety another that thereby he have confirm his testament contain a disposition of these thing which God have bind himself by covenant to give we for a testament be of no strength while the testator live heb. 9.16 thus after a wonderful manner one be both mediator to draw on a agreement between these two party and surety for man part of the bargain and also he perform God part of the covenant bequeath unto we in legacy these thing which God have promise to give we and as a faithful testator confirm the same by his death then God be reconcile to man by a mediator but have the angel no benefit by his mediation see the apostle only say that there be a mediator between God and man I answer that they have though not so great as man 1. they have this benefit that they be gather and unite under one head together with the rest of the church for all thing both which be in heaven and which be in earth be gather together in one in Christ ephes 1.10 2. they have this benefit also that their friendship with man be renew he be reconcile to God 3. by this mediator their ruin be repair and their number fill because man that be reconcile succeed in the place of angel that fall say s. Austin 4. he furnish unto they matter of joy for they rejoice at the conversion of a sinner 5. by he they get great knowledge of the mystery of God reveal unto they 6. by he they be confirm so in grace that they can fall they be changeable of themselves therefore we say in the school that though they have not a mediator of redemption yet they have a mediator of confirmation according to that of final some say they have this benefit also that their obedience be not perfect enough of itself nor able to stand before God for he find iniquity in the angel be accept as most perfect for this mediator sake and therefore they be say even to be reconcile to God by this mediator col. 1.20 other go further say that the angel as also all other creature beside man have decline somewhat from their first beginning but be restore again to their integrity by this mediator and so they understand the word eph. 1.10 for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) signify to call a thing back to the first beginning as well as to gather in one head as the word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) signify both the head and beginning of a thing the four point set down here be that this mediator be one there be one mediator whereby as I say before of the one God three thing be signify that he be indivisible immutable and alike to all 1. he be one that be indivisible one only not many and that both in respect of his person and in respect of his office his person be indivisible and only one for albeit he be God and man yet he be not two but one as be conclude against the wicked heresy of Nestorius bishop of Constantinople who divide the two nature of our mediator make they two person he be condemn in the three general council at Ephesus where it be decree that the bless virgin be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the mother of God because there be but one person that be both god beget of the father and man bear of his mother and in the council of chalcedon which be the four general to show that his person be but one against Nestorius they use two adverbe say that his nature be unite (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) without division without separation which the father express by sundry similitude justin use the similitude of the soul and the body which be so unite that they make but one person Damascen the similitude of a hot iron which be but one thing subsist have in it two distinct nature the fire and the iron every one whereof have his several action concur to one work the heat burn the iron cut even so the mediator be one person have two distinct nature every one whereof have his several action concur to the work of mediation but the most significant similitude be that of a vine tree and a bough graff into the vine for even as that bough have no be or subsistence of itself but both grow and live in the stock of the vine so the human nature of our mediator have no subsistence of itself be as it be ingraff into the person of the son who be the true vine and be whole support and sustain by it therefore there be not two person but one the human nature be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) void of all personality or subsistence and assume by the son of God who be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a person subsist of himself and by himself again as his person so likewise his office be indivisible for he receive a unchangeable priesthood which can pass from he unto any other heb. 7.24 so that beside he there be no other mediator neither can be for in a true and sufficient mediator there must be four property which be not to be find in any but he 1. the word of God must reveal and propound he to the church that in conscience we may be assure that pray to God in his name we shall be hear but there be no scripture that mention any other mediator but only one 2. he that be mediator between God and man must partake of both nature for a mediator be not of one gal. 3.20 so then he that be mediator between God and man must not be of one nature he must be both God and man he must be God that he may speak to God for we he must be man that he may speak from God to man say s. Austin but there be only one that be both God and man 3. a mediator must be perfect just for such a high priest become we who be holy blameless undefiled separate from sinner and make high than the heaven heb. 7.26 as the apostle show that they can not be high priest who have need to offer for their own sin as well as for the sin of the people heb. 7.27 so they can be mediator who have need of a mediator for themselves now none be perfect just but only one the saint in heaven howsoever they be full justify sanctify glorify yet in themselves they be sinner and therefore must needs stand before God by the mediation of another so that s. Austin reason well that he be the only true mediator 4. a mediator must be a propitiator that be bring something to God that may satisfy his justice for our sin therefore s. John have tell we that we have a advocate with the father he add and he be a propitiation for our sin 1. joh. 2.2 but there be none other that be a propitiation for our sin therefore but one mediator but the papist think to escape this by a rot distinction of mediator of redemption and intercession there be but one mediator of redemption say they but many mediator of intercession even all the saint in heaven whereunto I say 1. that these four property be especial require in a advocate and mediator of intercession rather than in a redeemer but they be not to be find in any but in one 2. the apostle here affirm that there be one mediator mean rather a mediator of intercession for throughout this whole chapter he be speak of prayer and intercession 3. and this distinction be idle because none can be a advocate or mediator of intercession but he that be our redeemer for the word advocate be borrow of lawyer and signify he only that do plead the justice of his client cause a stranger in the court may become a petitioner to the judge and entreat favour for the guilty person but advocate be proctor and patron of their client therefore he alone be our advocate who be our redeemer can plead his justice bestow upon we and saint though they be petitioner to God in our behalf yet because they redeem we not they can be our advocate to plead the justice of our cause it be sure that minister pray for the people and that yet s. augustin reprove parmonian lib. 2. cont. ep. parm. c. 8. for place the bishop mediator between God and the people 4. the saint do not so much as intercede for we namely particular for it be as impossible for they to be intercessor as redeemer for he who be a intercessor for we must hear our prayer know what thing we stand in need of and understand our very secret want and groan but this none but God can do as Solomon confess 1. King 8.39 thou only know the heart and Eccles. 9.5 the dead know nothing at all therefore be it say of josiah that he be take away by death that he may not see the evil that be to come which can be true if so be that josiah be a saint in heaven do see and know the particular that be do upon the earth final this the church do acknowledge unto God Esa. 03.16 Abraham be ignorant of we and jacob know we not upon which place s. Austin reason very well if so great patriarch be ignorant what become of the people which be bear of their loin how be it like that other dead can be present to understand man affair last this distinction be overthrow by themselves for they make saint mediator of redemption as well as of intercession Aquinas do avow a. 2^^ q 83. ar. 4. that our prayer be effectual by the merit of saint and you know what be the doctrine of their whole church for human satisfaction namely as Bellarmine say Bellar indulgen l. 1. c. 2. which be a blasphemy worthy the tear of garment thus they sometime make saint mediator of redemption sometime they deny it and so contradict both themselves and the apostle here affirm that our mediator be one as hereby hesignifi that the mediator be one only not many so likewise that he be immutable and unchangeable one and the same yesterday to day and for ever so say the author of the book of wisdom speak of this mediator that uncreated wisdom be one she can do all thing and the apostle heb. 1.12 apply that place of the psalm to he thou be the same and thy year shall not fail he be one and the same the same in his word for he who yesterday be shadow in the law be to day show in the gospel the same in his person and in his attribute and office in his person the same before and after his incarnation for take upon he our nature he be no more change thereby than a man be by put on a vesture as the divine poet very sweet he do not leave off to be what he be but he begin to be what he be not again he be the same in his attribute in his power in his office be always the lord of his people the shepherd of his flock the head of his church the mediator between God and man final he be the same in his work in his goodness in his grace he who yesterday be a mediator for Abraham Izaac and jacob be to day a mediator for we he be as well now the light of the gentile as he be before the glory of his people Israel last of all by this that he be one be signify that he be without all respect of person one and alike to all not the mediator of the jew only but of the gentile also there be neither jew nor greek there be neither bond nor free there be neither male nor female for all be one in Christ gal. 3.28 he be peace to he that be near and peace to he that be far off Esa. 57.19 that be as the father expound it peace to the jew that be near and peace to the gentile that be far off this one bless peacemaker have make atonement for both and appear daily in the sight of God to plead our pardon as a faithful advocate and high priest s. Augustine say that his arm be stretch out upon the cross to signify this that he be now to embrace not a handful of people as he do before the nation of the jew but as many as his arm be able to contain that now he be to break down that partition wall which for a long time have be between jew and gentile and become one to all there be one mediator but as yet we know not who be this one mediator therefore lest the jew shall say that it be their long look for Messiah or the turk their Mahomet or the friar that it be s. Francis or s. dominick or final all papist who construe it of the virgin Mary for there be more mention of she in their prayer than of Christ and the prophetical psalm of Christ be transfer unto Mary and what else be magnifical speak of he in scripture even the first promise that be make of this mediator gen. 3.15 translate as speak of she in their most approve bible although as their own jesuite ribera confess the hebrew text the Chaldee paraphrase the septuagint translation and all good latin copy read for this cause the apostle in the five place lead we as it be by the hand to the very person describe he by his proper name and surname jesus Christ he be this one mediator who therefore be call the angel of the covenant mal. 3.1 and the covenant of the people Esa. 49.8 the mediator of the new covenant who blood speak better thing than the blood of Abel heb. 12.24 our peace eph. ^ 14 the way and the door by which we have access unto the father joh. 14.6 the way into the holy of all heb. 9.8 final a high priest who come by a more perfect tabernacle not make with hand and who not by the blood of goat and calf but by his own blood enter in once into the holy place have obtain eternal redemption for we heb. 9.11 I come to the last head that Christ jesus be a man the man Christ jesus but not he be a true man as have 1. the substance of a true body and soul 2. the essential and natural property of soul and body 3. the infirmity also and such defect as be natural I say such as be natural to exclude two sort of infirmity 1. these which do not universal follow the nature of man but be only personal appertain to some particular man and arise from private cause and particular judgement as to be bear a fool to be sick of a ague consumption leprosy and such like disease 2. sin which be infirmity indeed but not natural but rather contrary to nature because they belong not to nature as it be whole but as it be corrupt neither of these Christ take upon he because it behove he to be like man in general not like to this or that man in particular again like unto man in general in all thing except sin heb. 4.15 it behove Christ to be like unto we a man as we be whether we consider he as he be our surety or as our high priest or as our ransom or as our redeemer or as our mediator or final as he be our physician in all these respect it behove he to be a man 1. because he be our surety to make satisfaction to God for our debt and the justice of God require that satisfaction be make in the same nature that finned 2. because our high priest for every high priest be ordain to offer gift and sacrifice wherefore it be of necessity that this man also have somewhat to offer heb. 8.3 now if he have remain God only he shall not have have any thing to offer 3. because our ransom for as he be the high priest so he be the sacrifice he must offer up himself for we he be our surety to satisfy for we and his satisfaction behove to be passive and penal yea it must extend itself unto death for without shed of blood there be no remission heb. 9.22 but remain God only he can not have die 4. because our redeemer for by the law he that redeem another must be his brother or kinsman one that have the right of propinquity unto he 25.48 and therefore the Hebrew word Goel which signify a redeemer do also signify a kinsman 5. because our mediator and advocate for as I say before a mediator be not of one gal. 3.20 that be he be not of one nature but he that be mediator between God and man must be both God and man God that he may speak to God for we man that he may speak to we from God final he must be man because our physician for it be fit that our physician shall be acquaint with our condition and shall have experience in his own person of our infirmity that be tempt in like sort as we be he may be able to succour we that be tempt heb. 2.17 so that Christ both be and must have be a man the consideration hereof serve we for consolation it be the key of all comfort for all true comfort stand in happiness all happiness be in fellowship with God and never can there be so great fellowship with God as this for God have enter in alliance with we send his son to be make of a woman to become a man and so our brother even Emanuel God with we or in our flesh hereby God comfort our first parent when they be cast down with a sight of their sin and a fear of punishment gen. 3.15 hereby he comfort jacob gen. 28.12 by the vision of a ladder reach from heaven to earth this ladder be the son of God make man job 19 2d job comfort himself with this that he have a redeemer in his own flesh by this do Gabriel the angel comfort Daniel dan. 9.21 etc. and final by this do the angel comfort the shepherd behold I bring you good tiding of great joy which shall be to all people for unto you be bear this day in the city of David a saviour which be Christ the lord luk. 2.10 yea this be that wherewith we must all be comfort for if Christ jesus be a man then be you well assure that he will be a merciful high priest a favourable judge a homely mediator to who we may go bold as unto a brother of we this we be to hold fast it be the great ground of all comfort and the rather also because the devil in all age have oppugn this doctrine and either in whole or in part labour to obscure the verity of Christ human nature and to bereave we of this comfort that Christ jesus be a man first he raise up some immediate after the apostle day who teach that Christ be not a true man but only in show have a fantastical body against who Ignatius do write these be first one Cerdon after he Martion who polycarpus call Satanae the devil elder son but since he have have many brother for a short while after come the manichee maintain the same second but because this be so notorious false that it can not take place Satan raise up other to mince and mitigate this blasphemy say that he have a human body indeed yet not like unto we not of the substance of the virgin but either of the substance of God himself or of the matter of the heaven or of the star or final make of the element which pass through the womb of the virgin as water through a conduit-pipe these be the valentinian who heresy be renew of late by the anabaptist three because these can not prevail he raise up other who teach that howsoever he have a true body yet he lack a soul these be the arrian these be condemn in the council of nice four and therefore Satan raise up other to fine this heresy better say that he have the vegetative and sensitive part of the soul but want the reasonable part this be Apolinaris bishop of Laodicea he be condemn in a synod hold at Rome under pope damasus five arise eutyches abbot of Constantinople and teach that howsoever before the union he have a perfect human nature yet after the union this human nature be convert consume and swallow up by his godhead he be condemn in the council of chalcedon where it be decree that the nature of Christ be unite (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) without change and confusion six but albeit he be condemn Satan leave it not so but raise up other who propound this heresy in other term namely dioscorus who maintain that although his manhood be not consume of his godhead by the union yet of both mix together there be compound a three nature and to make the same heresy more plausible yet Satan send forth other to fine and polish it better to wit the Acephali so call because it be not know who be their head affirm that at least the property of both nature be confound the property of the manhood communicate to the godhead and the property of the godhead transfuse into the manhood this heresy have be renew in our age first by Hoffmannus a Anabaptist then after by Schwencfeldius and last by the ubiquitaty who false boast themselves of the name of Luther seven because this way succeed not Satan go about another way to bereave we of Christ manhood he send out Macarius patriarch of Antiochia and honorius bishop of Rome who teach that Christ as he be man want some part of his reasonable soul namely a will who for this cause be call Monotheletae they be condemn in the six general council which be the three hold at Constantinople eight he stir up other who doctrine be more plausible teach that he have a perfect human nature yet can not proper be call a man for the human nature be assume by he only as a man do a vesture by a accidental not by a essential union against who Damascen do prove that Christ nature be unite (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) essential nine because all these heresy do oppugn the substance of Christ humanity in whole or in part or else the property thereof and so can not take place in the church therefore the devil stir up other at least to take away the infirmity of his manhood these be the Aphthardokitae teach that Christ body be not subject to any passion and albeit this be resist when it come by they yet Satan advance his purpose mighty by some other be otherwise good man and orthodox who teach that Christ have final the last who have fight in this quarrel under the devil banner be the papist and they be most dangerous because they do not direct deny his manhood for then few will believe they but by way of consequence deprive his body of the essential property of a true body while they teach that his body be not visible nor sensible nor circumscribe in one place but a invisible insensible uncircumscribed body which be present with all dimension in ten thousand place at once this be as much as to say that it be no body nor Christ himself a true man against all these heresy the very name of my text be a sufficient refutation that Christ jesus be a man there be other heresy on the other hand which seem to accord better with my text as first that Christ be not God but only man which be the blasphemy of ebion cerinthus Carpocrates Photinus and the rest of that damnable crew 2. that though he both be God and man yet he be mediator only as man which be the doctrine of the papist both claim this text for a warrant and ground of their opinion but in vain for the apostle call he not a man to signify that he be a mere man for that be contrary to his own doctrine nor yet do he call he man to show that he be mediator only as man for that be as contrary to the truth it be plain that Christ wrought the work of mediation according to both nature by a different act and operation and therefore Damascen learned distinguish four thing in the mediator 1. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the agent or worker which be the person of Christ 2. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the beginning from which the action do proceed which be twofold his divine and his human nature 3. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the action itself 4. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the external work of our redemption call by Dyonisius Areopagit (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) because it do proceed from he who be both God and man and to the effect of it both the nature with their distinct action in one and the same person do concur according to that of Leo approve by the whole council of chalcedon this he manifest by example in his human nature say he he wrought our salvation by keep of the law suffer and die in his divine nature by give strength unto his manhood to endure death and worth to his blood to be a sufficient satisfaction therefore s. Austin conclude well it be the divine humanity and human divinity that be our mediator but why then be he call a man I answer for many reason 1. to insinuate unto we a reason why he be one and alike to all because he take upon he the common nature of man he be a man alike near to all that be man 2. to express the perfection of his mediatorship he be our mediator from the beginning but never a complete mediator till he become man for there be many work of his mediatorship which can not be perform but in our nature 3. to signify the order by which we be conjoin with God we be join to God by a mediator and forasmuch as this mediator be both God and man we be unite first into his manhood and thereby unto his godhead we must fasten the eye of our faith first of all upon the flesh of Christ as it be upon the veil by which the entrance be into the where the glory of God shine and then after that enter as it be into the sanctuary itself to behold his godhead 4. he call he a man for our comfort there be a certain baseness of a abject mind and slavish fear which the devil work in man persuade they that it be great boldness to go direct unto Christ as if he be of that austerity and stateliness that earthly prince be and therefore we must send the saint unto he to solicit he in our behalf this be all the ground the papist have for their invocation of saint but the apostle call it voluntary or slavish humility col. 1.18 and here he meet with it direct call Christ a man he be a man and therefore as near unto we and have as compassionate bowel as any saint indeed if we consider Christ as he be God dwell in light unaccessible I know not what confidence we can have to go unto he but when we cast our eye below upon his manhood how that he be like unto we in all thing except sin tempt in all sort as we be that he may be able to succour we when we be tempt heb. 2.17 18. and such a one as can be touch with the sense of our infirmity and 4.15 16. then as say the apostle we may go bold unto the throne of grace we may cast the anchor of our hope within the veil and 6.19 20. then may we be bold to enter into the holy of all and 10.19 20. through his blood by the new and live way which he have prepare for we through the veil that be his flesh I doubt not now but that these thing have be sufficient clear by way of explication that there be a god that this god be one that he be make one with we by a mediator that the mediator be one that this one mediator be Christ jesus that Christ jesus be a man but as these thing be sufficient clear so I beseech you suffer they to be effectual enforce the point which I will press for use and application be that which be both the scope and the thread of this text namely the unity of God and of the mediator the use we shall make hereof be for instruction and imitation and it be twofold special for magistrate general for all christian first I say for magistrate God be say to be one to all that be without all respect of person and therefore forasmuch as prince magistrate and judge be style god in scripture psal 82.6 as be the lieutenant of God upon earth and as it be the finger of that hand that rule the whole world they shall imitate he be one to all as he be one be no respecter of person as there be no respect of person with he as they stand in God place so shall they walk in God path ephes 5.1 be follower of he as dear child to this purpose there be many precept in the law deut. 1.17 you shall hear the small as well as the great deut. 16.9 wrest not the law nor respect any man person neither take reward 19.15 thou shall not favour the person of the poor nor honour the person of the mighty but thou shall judge thy neighbour upright for it be not good to have respect of any person in judgement prov. 24.23 the theban hereupon porture their judge blind with eat and without hand blind that he may not distinguish person friend from foe with ear that he may hear both party indifferent without hand that he may not receive gift to corrupt justice for the gift blind the wise and pervert the word of the righteous exod. 23.8 to conclude this point I can wish that all who be in authority will always have before their eye that charge which jehoshaphat give unto his judge 2. chron. 19.6 and he say to the judge take heed what you do for you execute not the judgement of man but of the lord wherefore now let the fear of the lord be with you take heed and do it for there be no iniquity with the lord our god neither respect of person nor receive of reward the scond use be general for all christian if God be one the mediator one then shall we likewise be one so the apostle reason eph. 4.4 there be one body one spirit one hope one lord one faith one baptism one God and father of all whereupon follow the conclusion set down vers. 3. that we shall endeavour to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace so say I there be one God and one mediator and therefore shall we who worship this one God through this one mediator be one as they be one but how shall we be one one in opinion one in affection first I say one in opinion all hold the same thing believe the same thing teach the same thing worship God after the same manner for look how commendable variety be in all other thing it be as much to be abhor in religion even those who have hold the great falsehood hold that there be but one truth I never read of more than one heretic that hold all heresy true Philastrius relate the opinion of one Rhetorius who say that all religion do well and which be much like unto this there be in the same age a foolish frantic fellow name write a (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) wherein he take upon he to reconcile all the religion of all nation and call it yea and little better be those who will make a reconciliation between the papist and we be altogether indifferent in thing most different they be kind-hearted Philistine that will bring the ark of God and Dagon under one roof they be of his mind that Turonensis write of who say it be best of all they be as one say the ghost of that heretic Apelles who speech it be that it be sufficient to believe in Christ crucify and that there shall be no discuss of the particular warrant and reason of our faith or the brood of Leonas one of the courtier of Constantius and his deputy in the Seleucian council who when the father hot contend as there be good cause for the consubstantiality of the son get you home say be and trouble not the church with these trifle these thing seem but trifle unto carnal man yet be they matter of great importance and so be the difference between we and the papist of such weight as thereupon depend the truth of God worship the life of his church the salvation of our soul and therefore no hope of peace but though many mean of reconciliation have be use yet never any can prevail the emperor Ferdinand and Maximilian travel painful herein and by their appointment Cassander a great and learned Papist draw a project to show his judgement so do Fricius and the interimist but all be in vain for Babylon can not be cure her grape be become as the grape of Admah and her vine as the vine of Tseboim and as she can not be reform so we can not admit of any agreement by meeting in a middle course for the truth it be on high say Leo they may ascend to we but for we to go down to they it be neither safe nor honest now it be no more plain that the city of Rome have descend from the seven hill on which it be seat in old time unto the martian plain that lie below than it be that the church of Rome have fall away from that faith which once be commend in she bethel be become bethaven the faithful city be become a harlot her silver be turn into dross so that unless we will betray the truth we we can yield to they in any thing wherein they dissent from we but if there be any agreement among we they must come out of Babel that be whole renounce their own part and join hand with we whereof there be but little hope when we consider what small effect reformation have take in this kingdom these year past as king joash ask jehoiada the high priest 2. King 12.7 and the other priest why they do not repair the ruin of the temple so may our true religion king question we that be the priest why the temple of the lord be so long in repair in this land nay what be the cause that the ruin of the temple grow great every day more fall away from the truth than that be reclaim from error sure the cause hereof be manifest give i leave to observe unto you such as I hold to be the chief thing that continue this people in their blindness and hinder reformation the first be their custom and long continuance in error there be nothing hard than to break a ignorant man of his custom Christ l. 4. c. 24. s. Augustine come to Caesarea where the people have a ancient custom once a year for certain day together to divide themselves into part and throw stone one at another whereby many be slay find it a exceed hard matter to dissuade they from it this be note by that father to have hinder the reformation of the donatist some be bind not by truth but by a hard knot of obdurate custom epist 48. etc. and sure this be a people of all other most zealous of their ancient custom second the society and alliance whereby they be link one to another restrain they be ashamed and afraid to part with their acquaintance this be note by s. Basil to be the thing that hinder the conversion of the arrian in his time epist 70. there be say he small hope of reduce they to the truth who be link to heretic with the band of long amity and s. Austin yield the same reason why the donatist in his age can not be reclaim epist 48 Vincent how many say he be move with the truth will have be good catholic and yet defer it fear the offence of their friend so have I hear many say in this kingdom if such and such man will go to church I will go also but if I shall begin I shall have the ill will of all the country three the busy traffic of priest and jesuite for the maintenance of their great goddess Diana by who they have their live what skilful workman they be and how cunning they keep they in blindness be long to relate this I hope be sufficient know unto our state that they have be the chief cause not only of the people unconformitie in religion but also of all their treason and rebellion the people be like the sea and the priest be like the wind the sea of itself will be calm if the wind do not set it in agitation so will the people but for the priest the four cause be the want of a sufficient ministry in many place there be no minister at all in many place a minister as good as none even a dumb dog that can bark a idol shepherd who be not apt to teach not able to confute in other place a lewd and scandalous minister who not gospellike behaviour be a stumble block to they that be without even as the prince of Cuba in India say he will not go to heaven span. p. 1^ if the spaniard go thither because he think that can be no good place where such cruel tyrant be so many of this country will not be of our religion because they think that can be no true religion which have so unconscionable professor and minister and the chief cause of this want of a sufficient ministry be lack of maintenance for as there can be no physician in Lacedaemon because there be no reward so neither can there be sufficient minister here for want of maintenance for our great nebuchadnezzer will not allow we so much maintenance as to keep life and soul together we will be content with David order albeit a very unrighteous one to divide with ziba but covetous ziba take all away both small and great both tithe and offering he will be both lord and parson and vicar and it be pity that he be not bring to be curate too the last thing I will observe that hinder the reformation of this land be the miseducation of our youth all of they be bring up beyond the sea or else teach at home by popish schoolmaster who be no more careful to teach they the roman tongue than they be to instruct they in the romish faith thus have I discover the cause of our sickness hope that we shall receive some help and comfort by your mean for I doubt not right honourable but what be the intent of jehoshaphat in send his commissioner 2. chron. 17. the same be the purpose of our gracious sovereign in send you namely for the repair of the temple and that the people may be teach in the law of the lord for the like choice of commissioner have be make some noble some priest and levite some learned scribe and the like charge have be give unto you that you look to the good of the church and therefore though I may not seem to prescribe yet give i leave to entreat you that you will take into your chief care the miserable estate of this church and as you have hear the cause of her ruin so you will labour to remove they by apply of fit remedy which in my weak judgement be these whereas custom and continuance in error be a main hindrance unto reformation the remedy against this be that some compulsion be use for old sore be not cure without cut and lance and fear be that which will overcome custom as may appear by the antiochian who though they have a custom to wash themselves in the bath yet the king forbid they they all leave for fear of his displeasure whereupon s. Chrysostome do conclude after this manner hom. 14. pop. Antioch loe you may see that where fear be there our wont custom be leave present fear easy overmaster custom though it be never so ancient the same father in another place make mention of one hom 7. add pop. ant. who have get a ill-favoured fashion of move his right shoulder when he go which yet he correct by lay a sword over it in such manner that it shall be in danger of cut if so it move and so by fear of incision he teach his shoulder better manner and motion in like manner shall you who have authority deal with those who be blind with long custom in error for say s. Austin you be the second servant of our lord send forth with this commission compel they to come in that my house may be full you must compel they by law and punishment as Artaxerxes write unto esdras whosoever will not do the law of thy god and the king law let he have judgement without delay whether it be unto death or to banishment or to confiscation of good or to imprisonment thus king asa enact that if any will not seek the lord God of Israel he shall be slay 2. chron. 15.13 so josiah compel all that be find in Israel to serve the lord their god 2. chron. 34.33 epist 48. Constantine the great as s Augustine witness decree against the sacrifice of pagan upon pain of death against wilful heretic upon confiscation of their good the godly emperor Theodosius aug. ep. 50. be move thereunto by the zealous bishop amphilochius banish all the arrian out of his dominion and Theodosius the young set a fine of ten pound of gold upon the donatist who be the recusant of that age which as s. Augustine witness have a very good success for say he thereby many of they be move to profess religion and though at first they do profess it mere by compulsion yet afterward they profess only for devotion these be the proceed of godly king and emperor against such as will not conform themselves to the true worship of God establish by the law of the land in allege whereof let no man think that I will seem to prescribe rule to authority far be that from i or that I will persivade extraordinary severe course to be take with a blind and mislead people God be my witness I seek not they but they my only purpose be to justify the law of this land and practice of our church and that our people may see what a mild government they live under if they will but consider how their fine beside that they be so neglect in the execution that the hundred man be not charge with they be even in themselves a great deal light than those punishment which former have be inflict by godly magistrate upon offender of the like nature but especial they must confess that they be gentle entreat if they will remember what be the proceed of their church against we for in former age they proceed against the waldense and the first reformer of our church and even at this time they do proceed against protestant in other country not with mulct and imprisonment but with sword fire and faggot they fine they indeed but it be with fire as witness their house of inquisition in Spain and Italy and their bloody war in France and Germany for the cause of religion but the time of retribution will come and God will move king and magistrate to harken to that exhortation rev. 18.6 which be direct unto they and direct respect these time of we reward she even as she have reward you give she double according to her work and in the cup that she have fill to you fill she the double psal 137.8 o daughter of Babel worthy to be destroy bless shall he be that reward thou as thou have serve we bless shall he be that take and dash thy child against the stone 2. whereas fear of man restrain many from join with we the remedy to be use against this be to press and urge first and chief the great one for they can plead this that they dare not for their friend for the eye of the people be upon they and all be ready to follow they not to lead they 3 whereas priest and jesuite be a great let unto reformation for remedy against this let a severe course be take with they for they be the seducer of the people instrument of idolatry author of rebellion bellows and brand of sedition you shall scarce ever read in the old testament of any reformation of religion and abolish of idolatry but the priest be cut off elijah slay all the priest of Baal 1. King 18.40 so do jehu 2. King 10.25 joash the king and jehoiada the priest with all the people slay Mattan the priest of Baal before the altar 2. chron. 23.17 and josiah burn the bone of the priest upon their altar 2. chron. 34.5 and though our priest deserve no less yet I desire not their blood but only that they may be remove and restrain from seduce of the people for in this question of put heretic to death as in all other I submit myself to the judgement of our church and practice of our country which never put any to death torture tor^ p 133. and side in the four cause of their blindness and error be want of a sufficient ministry cause through the want of maintenance for remedy against this great care will be take for to plant able and painful minister and to provide a sufficient maintenance for they thus hezekiah appoint priest and levite and provide for their live for he command the people to give the portion of the priest and levite that they may be encourage in the law of the lord 2. chron. 31.4 there be a good precedent for you we have such a hezekiah to command but we lack such subject to obey for our church-robber albeit command by the king yet will not give the priest their own portion nor any part of their portion not the mean offering all be too little to buy and maintain their sacrilegious honour but sure if they be not compel to allow some competent maintenance for a minister but their impropriation be allow it be but in vain to look for any reformation I will say that the old say be like to prove a true prophecy the last thing I name that hinder a reformation be the miseducation of their youth for remedy against this a course will be take that none be suffer to go beyond sea for to study that no popish schoolmaster be permit at home and that all who be of ability be compel to send their child to be bring up in our school there have be direction give to this purpose but there be no such thing perform that evil be not cure but increase now if these thing be do severe punishment inflict the great one chief urge the priest remove able minister plant popish school and school master restrain there be some hope that they will join with we and all of we become one church and one sheepfold as there be one God and one mediator but what shall I speak of a unity with papist while we be not all one among ourselves but still contest about trifle 5 King 2.5 and as it be say of joah shed the blood of war in peace which give occasion to the papist to insult over we cry out that we be not the true church because divide in sundry sect and opinion which be the rot argument of profane here I can answer first that unity be no property of the church be not always inseparable and incommunicable find therein second that many false church have a agreement among themselves three that the true church be never without division four that our difference be not so great nor so many as our adversary will make man believe but a great part of they be invent by our adversary another part concern not we nor any of our church but be the doctrine of certain sect and heretic which have spring up with the revive light of the gospel and be go out of the reform church some of they be only quatrel between some particular man not any difference between church and the great part of they all be not real but verbal not in matter of faith but about ceremony and matter of no importance final that there be great discord in the church of Rome for there be not one point in all divinity except those wherein we accord with they wherein they all speak the same but albert these thing be all true as be easy to prove be sufficient to stop the mouth of the adversary yet I can rather wish that we do not need to use this apology for certain this earth have nothing more lamentable than the civil jar of one faith Constantine the emperor say unto the bishop of the council of nice Zozom. l. 1. c. 17. that he think this worse than all the evil to be utrer that he see the church of God dissent by contention and contrary opinion for first division in faith have ever be a mother of atheism Sozomen say (@) 1. cap. 16. the contrariety of opinion among the learned at that time be so scandalous that it turn many away from embrace the christian religion and so at this time there be many who will be of no religion till they see the difference among the learned reconcile yea contention do extinguish the very life of religion which be brotherly love and therefore they who make so much ado about ceremony have need to take heed that in the mean time they lose not that which be more precious even christian charity itself they be like unto a man who come to a physician to desire a cure for the Whitlay in his finger and while the physician look upon he he perceive death in his face second by our contention our adversary get advantage it be a true speech cite from that father s Hilary by but our experience do invert it upon we our discord be their music our ruin their glory they laugh and scorn and clap their hand at our bicker three it be a most grievous oftence against God to rend the church which be his body with schism and contention it be no less than sacrilege no better than idolatry for as a ancient father say Dyonis Niceph. s. cyprian think that God send the persecution of his time lib. 4. epist. 4. for no other cause than their contention and Eusebius beginning to entreat of the bloody persecution which the church suffer under Dioclesian lib. 1. hift c. 2. say the contention of the learned therein be the cause and why may not I say that it be for this same cause that God at this time suffer our neighbour church to be under so cruel persecution and threaten the like judgement against we he will try if affliction can humble we and the rage of the common enemy make we friend for so do man use say a old history speak of this matter as long as stranger wrong they to hold together Zozom. l. 6. c. 4. but when they be deliver from outward trouble than they fall out among themselves these be the hurt we sustain by our dissension and therefore if ever we will see the good day of the gospel the flourish of religion the unhorse and confusion of the strumpet Rome if we desire to escape the judgement of God which do fall upon the primitive church for their contention let we labour to reconcile ourselves and at length to embrace unity let we all compose ourselves to peace and love oh pray for the peace of jerusalem but thanks be to God the church of this land be not much trouble with such jar and therefore I come to the other sort of unity as we be one in opinion so must we be one in affection you that be of one church and profess one faith be like mind have the same love be of one accord and of one judgement philip. 2.2 that nothing be do through contention and vainglory etc. let we dwell together as brother psal 13 3.1 which be a good and comely thing let we love one another as God have love we joh. 13.35 for hereby shall it be know that we be Christ disciple if we love one another this be indeed the mark of a christian the commandment of God the fulfil of the law and especial at this time when we celebrate this feast of Pentecost shall our heart be unite together through love for it be say when the apostle be wait for the come of the holy ghost on the day of Pentecost that they be all (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) act. 2.1 with one accord in one place and then do the spirit come down upon they in a visible shape so if we will have the holy ghost to descend on we this day and every day though not in a visible shape yet in invisible favour lead we into all truth and make our whole life a merry Whitsuntide we must be as the apostle be unanime with one accord in one place for he be the spirit of love and will not rest in a contentious heart but where there be unity of spirit there do rest this spirit of unity and the fruit of this spirit be love joy peace long suffer gentleness gal. 5.22 etc. but on the other part hatred variance emulation gal. 5.19.20 wrath strife sedition be not the fruit of the spirit but the work of the flesh wherefore since it be so I beseech you man brother and father let i speak to you in the word of the apostle s Paul put on as the elect of God holy and belove bowel of mercy col. 3.12 13 14. kindness humbleness of mind meekness long suffer forbear one another and forgive one another if any man have a quarrel against any even as Christ forgive you so also do you and above all these thing put on charity which be the bond of perfectness and let the peace of God rule in your heart so shall we be one as God be one and the mediator one joh. 17 2d in this life one among ourselves and the life to come one with God in glory to this one God etc. amen