


THE SCEPTER OF RIGHTEOVSNES.
A sermon preached at Pauls Crosse the twentieth day of December, 1618. being the fourth Sunday in Aduent.


1. Corinthians 15. vers. 24, 25.

Then commeth the end, when he shall haue deliuered vp the kingdome to God euen the Father, when he shall haue put downe all rule, and all authoritie and power. For he must reigne till he hath put all enemies vnder his feete.


ALL Scripture is profitable and maketh the man of God perfect saith S. Paul, and therefore the Law of God is called a perfect Law in the nineteenth Psalme. Not that euery matter concerning this life and the common affaires of this world must bee brought from thence as some vpstart Doctours in our kingdome once did teach: For these men not
knowing how to keepe within compasse, haue giuen more then it is capable of. For as one did well obserue against them, euery part of Scripture may be called perfect, as well as the whole entire body of Scripture: as euery part of a man is perfect for the end it was intended; although it be not the whole man: Among those I haue here propounded a perfect part, like vnto the head which conteineth in it all the sences, and from which the sinewes doe spread themselues to giue life and motion to the body. The state of heauen: The state of earth: The state of hell in some sort being here described, The end of this life being set downe, and another without end.
A gouernment here, by men, there by God: vpon which causes is built the frame of our obedience and our due reuerence to the diuine Maiestie most surely confirmed. So then you see perfection in the text, concerning a perfect expounder; that care concerneth me, whome although I finde not of worth sufficient to manage so great a prouince: I ground vpon his words that said my strength is made perfect in weakenesse. Concerning a perfect auditour that concerneth you: See then how Cyprian describes him in the second Epistle to Donatus. Tam ore, quam mente, totus auditores, and hoc amore quo diligis. An absolute hearer shewes it by a fixed countenance and stedfast gesture. Secondly, by a minde willing to be taught and to goe away better when the sermon is done, and thirdly, by a louing minde, to accept well that which is spoken, and kindely to censure. If we can thus frame to the text, then may we also bring our businesse to some perfection.
I shall with prosperous speede be at my end, and if our life be but a spanne long as the Psalmist speakes, your life is like the sermon and our time vsually figured by the houre-glasse: your end shall shortly follow mine, as it is in the (...) Psalme. Thou bringest our yeares to an end as it were a tale that is told. Let our endeauors then concurre, that we may profit by the worke, and enioy that end in the beginning of the text. Then commeth the end, etc. So may the word of God appeare perfect, for the law of God is a perfect law conuerting the soule in the seauenth verse of the forenamed Psalme, that which is perfect may make perfect: shewing in it selfe a sound perfection, because it workes in vs a sincere conuersion. These words may be taken as an argument of the resurrection, (among sundry other reasons that I omit because of abundance of matter herein conteined.) For Christ must be an absolute king, to honour and aduance his subiects into glory by raising them vp into life eternall, and confounding his aduersaries the last whereof is death. And as it augmenteth the glory of a king to reigne a long time, to make a manifest and a large declaration of his power, in sundry ages, and much variety: so Christ doth not on the suddaine end the world, but deferres his accomplishment thereof til he hath raigned a certaine time, To put all his enemies vnder his feete. Secondly, these words are for comfort. If any should be ouer hasty to leaue this life, to come to that better kingdome, here S. Paul seemeth to giue a reason of Christs long tarrying: we must not expect our end before our
Lord appoints it, but continue in the field and keepe our rankes against the enemies vnder our captaine, till he end the warre and bring vs to a place of rest. Because as Caluin saith, Non est consentaneum medio stadio nos coronari, We must not enioy our crowne before we runne our race, but as constant runners hold out till we come at the iournies end.
We may deuide these two verses in the words of Aquinus, here is first adaptio boni, the performing of good, and remotio mali, the remoouing of euill. Both here by Christ are wrought as a patterne to all rulers, that for the time they are in office their conscience may tell them, this good haue I done, and this euill haue I represt. For he that will hurt none, and doe good to none, but thinkes it good sleeping in a whole skin, and the safest course not to meddle, carrieth a resolution not worthy the minde of a superiour, but by our Sauiours example hee must hazard and put forth himselfe. So in the 24. verse hee sets by the good; Then shall be the end when he shall haue deliuered vp the kingdome to the Father. And in the 15. verse expels the bad. He must reigne till he hath put all his enemies vnder his seete. And as Anchises gaue counsell to his sonne in the which the Romans seemed to bragge for executing the precept.
Parcere subiectis and debellare superbos.
Aenec. 6.
To spare the subiects and to pull downe the proude, The first is practised here in the 24. verse, parcere subiectis, To spare or rather to honour the subiects, Then shall be the end when he shall haue deliuered the kingdome to the Father; and the second is expressed in the 25. verse,
there he pulls downe the proude. He must reigne till hee hath put all his enemies vnder his feete. Concerning the verses in themselues seuerally considered; In the 24. verse consider first an end of the old world* Then shall be the end, the estate of the new world he shall haue deliuered vp the kingdome to the Father, and the manner of gouernment without degrees of secular power by God immediately, He shall put downe all rul, and all authority and power. In the 25. consider. The kingdome, and the conquest, the kingdome, he must reigne, the Conquest, till he hath put all enemies vnder his feete. In the last consider the parties vanquished, his enemies, and their miserable ouerthrow and discomfiture vnder his feete. They are put vnder feete. In the first place we haue the last estate of all the world to consider, Then commeth the end. In euery businesse the last issue must bee first concluded, as in running a race we first agree of the end to which the swift motion of the course must aime, and approach. In shooting, the marke and scope it first set vp. Therefore it is obserued that practicall sciences must be handled per methodum analiticam ^ fine admedia. We first set downe the end, and then the meanes that leadeth to the end. Of ends there are two sorts, first an end of destruction; and secondly an end of accomplishment when a thing is finished. The one is a bad end, the other a good, by the one a thing is ended, that is, to say consumed: by the other a businesse or worke is ended, that is, it is perfected. In this place Beza vnderstands the latter, the world shall be ended, that is it shall be perfected. But to speake properly, we may vnderstand both. For an accomplishment
cannot bee without the destruction of some thing. Generatio vnius est corruptio alterius, when a new thing is formed, the old thing must be altered, according to the 36. verse of this chapter. That which thou sowest is not quickned except it die.
Briefely then of these two ends in order. First, the world, and the inhabitants, and all things that we enioy, must haue an end: they must be destroyed and consumed. Euery thing that seemeth most strong and beautifull, must in the end vanish and fall away. The cause of this is sinne for when things are in their height, they abuse their time, they beare not themselues aright in the middest of their glory, the gifts of God are abused, and therefore he plagues the earth and destroyes the world: men are the abusers, and therefore that time which giueth them leaue to sin, bringeth them likewise to an end, and burieth them in a common destruction. This is the nature of sinne, it is still a destroyer. God did threaten Adam in paradise at the first with moriendo morieris, in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt die the death. And euer since where sinne hath bin committed with a stubborne hand, God hath punished with destruction and desolation. Euen from hence must euery one confesse that he is a sinner because he carrieth a body subiect to corruption, and in time death shal sease vpon him. When as the Lord did see that the wickednesse of man was great vpon the earth before the flood, hee brought that deluge to ouer-flow the world, that the waters might breake the heart and strength of the earth, that mens liues might be shortned by the putrefaction
of the Elements, and so weakenesse bee brought vpon the world. We may see it by examples. Noe liued 950. yeares, Terah the father of Abraham liued but 205. yeares, and Ioseph that was in a neere generation in the descending line from Terah, died at the age of an hundred and ten, in the 50. of Genesis and the last verse. So the yeares of men after the flood were strangely altered, euer from 950. to 110. in some succeeding ages. Sinne is the cause of all this. Tyrants that rule enioy their kingdomes but a while as histories can testifie. For because their vices and cruelties are most vntollerable, they are soonest ended. And vngodly men they liue not out halfe their daies, the Lord hath said it, and God performeth it, when they are an impediment to his worke, and when their iniquity cannot be endured, although it be not alwaies so. For he worketh diuersly as he sindeth occasion: sometime he smiteth, sometimes he suffereth, his prouidence being not tied to any limits. But sinne according to the nature of it worketh a man to his end, and still playeth the part of a destroyer. If this be so, let vs be carefull to auoide it, and carefull to amend it, make an end of sinne before God make an end of you. For know this, where iniquity is: Gods hatred followeth, and will cut down that which displeaseth him with a finall confusion. Yet sinne is of that nature that it desires to be continuall, the delight of it coueteth to bee euerlasting, when a man is taken captiue and wonne to carnall bewitching pleasure: he wisheth to dwell there without ceasing or interruption. How vnequall then is
vice in the proceeding: for although it make an end of the sinner, it will make no end of it selfe. Hence it is that repentance is deferred, and suffereth so many procrastinations till a man finde a fitter time, a better inclination of his heart within, a more conuenient opportunity without, so making his transgression to continue. Hence is it that the euill seruant saith, my master doth defer his comming, therefore he smites his fellow seruants and goeth on with a presuming boldnesse. And will not forecast his heauy euents, nor consider, that although his master deferres his comming; yet he commeth after his deferring, and at last will end his enterprises with vnwelcome issues.
And to what purpose shal the world spinne out an vngodly third? when this fatall stroke shall cut it off: what fruite shall a man expect from a falling tree. Pleasure and content beeing once changed become more sorrowfull; euen as a mans sorrow being changed is so much more pleasant. Alas this end is that which reacheth not sinne alone, but for our sinnes cuts off all that this earth can yeild. The principall matters of a mans estate, that he desireth to get together for his soule to rest on, by lawfull and good proceeding, his end will cut him short of a full fruition, and make his desires lame in his greatest purposes. This did Seuerus the Emperour truly see and finde by true experience, who hauing passed through many aduentures at last died in our land ouerladen with troubles weighing with himselfe what his life had beene, he broke forth into these speeches (...) -- I haue beene all that might bee,
and now am nothing the better. This end is that which ouerturneth all, and will giue a foule wound to the fairest member of our earthly happinesse.
The second is an end of perfection.
For the Lord hath so tempered his heauy blow with mercy, that the good shall gaine by the fall, that God which consumeth others shall perfect them. And for this end the whole world may expect. Rom. 8. verse the 21. The creature shall be deliuered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sonnes of God. And S. Paul speaketh of himselfe and the other Apostles, not onely the creatures of the world, but we doe groane within our selues waiting for the adoption, to wit the redemption of our body. Here in earth the seruice of God is not absolute, but in part, ioyned with many infirmities, the reward also of true obedience is not seene, so that the imperfection of things present seemeth to require a future accomplishment. Here wee stand by faith, and our faith is wrought by hearing and reading the word of God. Now although hearing of good newes be some comfort: and the reading of a letter doth somewhat reioyce the heart, that declareth the state of an absent friend: yet these are not like the present fruition of the thing desired. So when the Lord dealeth here by the sacred Gospell, the comfortable tidings of peace and ioy: Yet because it is but in hearing, it seemeth to point out at something beyond, for the nature of words are only to signifie or to resemble another thing besides themselues, by representing somewhat that lyeth hid. So
then if in this life our state doth lie in hearing, to shew that we are farre of, neither yet attained to our full expectation. Our end shall be an end of accomplishment, to perfect that which before did want full perfection. Againe, hearing is for this life, seeing is for the next in enioying a happy and blessed vision, a mans fight is the most noble sence of the fiue, therfore that must be the guide or rather the instrument that is reserued to conueigh the blessed gifts of the other life: that the things which are most perfect in themselues, may be deriued to vs in the most perfect manner. Wherefore you see that because our religion hath not all the fulnesse that so worthy a cause requireth: Our end shall be an end of perfection, to finish those hopes, and to make vp those breaches that doe keepe vnder the minde, and doe here restrame it in some sort.
Secondly, the vices of this world doe crie out for an end, that wickednesse may not vaunt it selfe, but that a better estate and a more perfect condition may beare the sway. And indeede the vices of this world doe proclaime an end of perfection. For what infinite idolatry doth euen since the world stood, and at this very day ouer-spread the face of the whole earth? How doe base surfets and riotous excesse abound? How doe oathes breath forth without any reuerence or regard of him that is named? What oppression and biting of poore men doth passe with haughtinesse and pride? Can wee now thinke that the iust God can euer endure that these should euer stand? Yea and flourish also, and out braue his Maiesty?
No surely hee will bring matters to a better passe, and set things in a right order by a iust gouernment, we must expect an end of perfection.
Thirdly and lastly, as our religion doth require an accomplishment, and as the vices of men that are against religion doe require a reformation, so our morall vertues that doe not immediately concerne Gods worship, but are vsed as good meanes, and helpes for it, and the ordinary things that are either for necessity or for ornament of this life: they are here so full of want that they seeme to groane for a redresse, to be better seated by a happy end. Our knowledge and vnderstanding, whereby we comprehend the deepe mysteries of God and the hidden qualities of his workes, is full of doubt and difficulty as we haue it in this life. Solomon that did wish it, and was commended for his wish, yet heare how he censured it in the first of Ecclesiastes and the last verse. Much reading is a wearinesse to the flesh, and he that encreaseth knowledge encreaseth sorrow. A mans ioy and mirth, which is of worldly blessings most principall, for men scrape all the rest together to obtaine it, because it is but a shadow, and a flying vanity as we haue it, heare how the same Author doth iudge of it who did enioy all things his heart could desire. I said of laughter thou art mad, and of mirth what is this that thou dost, Ecclesiastes the second verse the second. To leaue the minde and come to the body, eating and drinking, the meanes to preserue our naturall life, it is no priuiledge aboue the beast, therefore the basest of all delights. When a certaine Poet that loued his ease, and
that content of pleasing his belly, gaue Hadrian the Emperour a verse, to this effect: the Emperour being a man giuen to versifying.

Ego nolo Caesaresse,
Ambulare per Britannos, etc.

I would not be an Emperour to march among the Britans and to be nipt with the frosts of Scythia: the Emperour answered him in the like fashion.

Ego nolo Florus esse,
Ambulare per tabernas, etc.

I would not be Florus to walke from tauerne to tauerne, and to bury all my daies in the graue of swinish sensuality. So meane a thing is this corporall pleasure to them that truly conceiue thereof. Let me leaue the minde, and the body, and view the outward contents that the earth affordes. The glory, the pride and honor of this life is much eclipsed with imperfection. That which is lift vp in one day, may fall downe the next. There is prepared a moth for appatell, and wormes and putrifaction doe waite for him that is aduanced: when this end shall come it plucketh the highest vnder foote, and layeth his honour in the dust. Behold then wisedome and content of minde, the pleasure of the body, the outward pompe of worldly honour, being in themselues lawfull if vsed with moderation, and directed to a right intent: Yet as we haue them in this life they suffer their diseases. We must thinke of a time when they shall be perfected, and refined, for the God of nature doth order all things aright, and whereas they seeme heere to be kept in prison or to miscarry in diuers points, they shall be rectified
by an estate aboue, which doth fixe them vpon their true obiect.
Then shall wisedome and knowledge receiue accomplishment, we shall see the Lord as he is, not obscurely as in a glasse, but face to face as the Apostle speaketh.
Then shall a mans ioy be complete and substantiall, seeing he shall enioy that is better then himselfe: For earthly ioy is therefore imperfect, because nothing in the world is so excellent as a mans soule, and therefore it cannot rest in these inferiour things, till it come to the Lord who is a spirit, euen the Father of spirits, in whom alone the spirituall soule doth receiue satisfaction. Then shall bodily sustentation also cease, the belly is here for meate, and meate for the belly, and God destroyeth both it and them: there shall be a feeding onely of the soule, and a drinking of that water, whereof hee that drinketh shall neuer thirst as our Sauiour speaketh. The spirituall contents are set downe by bodily descriptions. Howbeit the happinesse is spirituall, for spirituall things are most excellent. Seeing all things must be most absolute. Aquin and Lyra haue vrged this text against the Turkes that dreame of carnall delights in a bodily paradise after death.
Lastly, that desire of honour which God hath giuen men by nature, because the earth is not able to satisfie, doth point out the right way to wandring thoughts. A man ought to eschew basenesse, that is, to detest sinne which doth worke a downefall, and to aspire to that kingdome of glory: that here by
honouring God, hereafter the Lord may honour vs, according to that speech giuen out for our encouragement. To him that ouercommeth I will grant to sit with me in my throne. In the third of the Reuelation.
I haue here propounded two ends for you, an end of destruction, and an end of persection. The first end is for all, the second for a few. For vs let it be our care seeing we must end: let vs end the best waie: let vs not loose that faire possibility wherewith God hath endowed vs, by taking vs from the multitude of aliants, and made vs members of his Church, in as much as he sheweth vs by his word what is to come: but let our life be so squared, that our consciences may tell vs we seeke perfection. For woe be to him that endeth not the best way, and happie, yea thrice happie is hee whose end is the doore to happinesse. Let that be our resolution, which was the wish of an euill man, of Balaam, who hauing a little touch giuen him, and a certaine light of the end of Gods elect, because he was a Prophet: brake out into a good desire, let vs vse it with a more sound affection, that we may prooue more then wishers and woulders in the case. O that I may die the death of therighteous, and that my last end may be like his.
So much of the end of the old world.
I come now to the establishing of a new.


When hee shall haue deliuered vp the kingdome to God the Father.
AS the king doth send forth his generall with regall authoritie to the warre, who hauing subdued the enemy, returneth in triumph, and all beeing finished maketh a surrender of his place. So our Sauiour came into the world from the Father with equall authority, here he discharged his office imposed on him, and hauing confounded all his aduersaries, at the day of iudgement endeth the warre. And like a Dictatour that gouerneth only in times of danger, so the vsing his authority vpon rebellious men: When the worke is finished, leaueth his function by deliuering the kingdome vp to the Father. Wee may ferch an exposition to these words from the 28. verse of this chapter. And when all things shall be subdued vnto him, then shall the Sonne also himselfe be subiect vnto him, that put all things vnder him; that God may be all in all. Whereas the Lord did not visibly gouerne among men by shewing the fulnesse of his owne power, but gouerned it by men, keeping as yet his Maiesty more secret: he shall then put downe all authority of men, and guide all things immediately by his owne hand. That is; To be all in all, to deliuer the kingdome to the Father, and to put downe all rule, all authoritie, and power. Because of some obscurity in these words, I must resolue two doubts that arise from hence. First of all: some may obiect, Wherefore is our Sauiour
said to resigne his kingdome to the Father? seeing the Scripture saith, Christs kingdome must haue no end. For the prophecy of him goeth to this purpose. Daniel 2. verse 44. And in the daies of these kings, shall the King of heauen set vp a kingdome that shall neuer be destroyed, and the kingdome shall not be left to other people, but it shall consume and breake in peeces all these kingdomes, and it shall stand for euer.
Againe, Luke the 1, and the 33. the Angell Gabriel said to the Virgin Marie. He shall reigue ouer the house of lacob for euer, and of his kingdome there shall be no end. How then doth the Apostle say, hee shall bee made subiect, and deliuer vp the kingdome to the Father. Secondly, the Arrians haue vrged this place against the diuinity of Christ, that he is not of the same nature, and equality with the Father, because he is here said to bee subiect and to giue ouer his kingdome, therefore his power and dignity is not eternall, hee that is God can be vnder none, as here the Sonneresigneth his soueraignity to the Father. I will answer both these by expounding the words, for when they are well explained, these doubts will vanish of them selues: to this purpose I lay downe these two conclusions.
First, not withstanding the words here seeme to inferre the contrary, Christ shall reigne for euer. For he sitteth at the right hand of the Father, a place of honour and aduancement. If he then reigned before in the field, much more must he reigne in his owne pallace, where he sitteth in the throne of Maiestie. Christ is the head of the Church, if he be the head,
then hee must needs gouerne still, and keepe that height that is due to the highest part. His very humanity obteining honour aboue all creatures, euen aboue the Angels themselues, as it is in the first to the Hebrewes prooued from my text. To which of his Angels did he say sit at my right hand till I make thine enemies thy foote-stoole.
The second conclusion. In Scripture things that are heauenly are vsually ascribed to the Father, although they appertaine to the Sonne if they doe not appertaine to his office, to disclose to vs, and doe not concerne this life: then he puts them from himselfe to the Father. Of this we haue sundry examples. Our Sauiour Christ maketh himselfe ignorant of the day of Iudgement. Of that day and houre knoweth no man no not the Angels in heauen, nor the Sonne himselfe saue only the Father. Some haue supposed that Christ as hee was man knew not that day, and certainely he knew it not by his humanity, although it is likely he knew it in his humanity. For as he was man, hee was king, and it derogateth from the Maiesty of a king to be ignorant in his owne times or affaires. Secondly,
Ioh. 3.34. he had not the spirit by measure, therefore he knew all that a creature could know or receiue, by vertue of his vnion to the diuinity. But his meaning is, It is not a thing that appertaines to my office to declare, I came to teach things necessary to saluation, but this is a secret thing that must rest in the counsell of my Father. So Caluin vpon the place, Non dubium est quin ad munus sibi a patre impositum respiciat. He had respect to the commission that the Father had giuen him, when he
said he knew not the day of iudgement.
Againe Matthew the 20. verse the 23. Christ answereth the mother of the Sons of Zebedeus. To sit at the right hand and left hand in my kingdome, is not mine to giue, but it is for them for whom it is prepared of my Father. No doubt but Christ had power to giue that as well as the Father.
Mat. 11.27. For he saith in another place, all things are deliuered vnto me of my Father.
But the meaning is, I come to teach patience, can you drinke of the cup that I must drinke of? and be baptized with the baptisme that I must be baptized with? that is, my office now to declare, but to satisfie these climing thoughts, to tell who shall be highest or lowest in the kingdome of God, and now at first, to answer your request, I come not to doe it in this life: but my Father reserueth it for whom he pleaseth in another world. Againe, Iohn the 14. and the 28. The Father is greater then I. The Arrians haue abused that place in the same manner, making Christ inferiour to the Father.
Zanchius de tribus Elohim lib. 3. cap. 10. But the meaning is. Status ille Coelestis apud patrem praestantior est isto. The glory that I haue here is not so great as the glory of heauen. For when the disciples were grieued because he told them of his departure to the Father, he raiseth them vp with this comfortable speech. The Father is greater then I, that is, the heauenly comfort is better, then that content you haue in my earthly presence. From hence we may collect that the matters of heauen are by our Sauiour ascribed to the Father, although they belong to him. Indeede the Father and the Sonne do reigne ioyntly togither, and wheresoeuer the one reigneth,
the other reigneth also. But because the Son tooke vpon him our flesh, and was incarnate among men; whereas the Father was not made man, nor yet seene by any mortall eye, but reueileth himselfe by the Son, as by his image. Earth is the kingdome of the Sonne, and heauen the kingdome of the Father. These Heretikes call not the diuinity of the Father into question, but all confesse him to be a king, yet he saith in the second Psalme and 6. verse. I haue set my kingdome vpon my holy hill of Sion. If Christs ruling do not exclude the ruling of the Father, by the like consequence the ruling of God the Father doth no way derogate from the dignity of the Sonne.
These two conclusions being now set downe, all cauils against this truth doe vanish. For Christs dominion is as large as euer. Euen when he giueth vp the kingdome to God the Father.
Christ is said to deliuer vp the kingdome in three respects. First, because he ceaseth to execute that authority, which neuerthelesse he hath, as a Iudge that goeth from the bench, is a Iudge still: although he giue no iudgement but imployeth his time in other occasions. And as a warriour that liueth in the time of peace, or sleepeth, doth retaine his old valour although he want opportunity to set forth his might by proouing it in outward action: So Christ is said to resigne his place, not that his authority is subiect to diminution, but that he maketh no shew, for when his enemies are all put vnder, there is no neede that any more blowes should proceed from his kingly power.

Secondly, Christ deliuereth vp the kingdome to God the Father, not because his authority is impayred, but because the manner of his kingdome shall be changed. He shall not reigne in the same fashion, there needeth no preaching in heauen, because there is no sinne. There neede no sacraments, for when wee enioy Christ that is the thing signified: wee shall want no outward signes. There neede no good lawes to keepe from starting into wickednesse, whereas the felicity of Saints is confirmed by an eternall decree. In this respect therefore hee giueth ouer the kingdome, because hee changeth the orders of this life into a new kinde of gouernment.
The third and most absolute exposition is set downe by Aquin. Hee ceaseth to increase his dominion. For here our Sauiour by the preaching of his word gaineth more soules to his kingdome, so spreadeth his dominion further and further. But when the Lord shall haue made vp the number of his seruants to his minde, then he will end the world and giue vp his kingdome, namely, hee will cease to enlarge his confines any more, but be content with the number of those subiects that hee hath already. To end this point, we learne from hence how great his glory shall be, and how much it ought to draw our minds after it, Christ shall change these obscure gouernments on earth, into an absolute fulnesse, when he giueth ouer his fierce and stormy conquest, for the happy peace of a quiet calme. For here the most happie subiect that serueth the Lord, standeth in the
field, and taketh on him the condition of a souldier. But when the tumults of this earthly warfare shall be appeased, when the Church Militant shall be made triumphant, when the Sonne shall end this kingdome, infinite shall bee that consolation, where the diuinity shall shine forth, and the Maiesty of the Father is declared. Let ambition refine it selfe and it shall climbe higher then yet it hath aymed by any politicke endeauour. For honour vpon earth is but a type or a shadow of that honour which is aboue. What stirring and shuffling haue we heare for high places? how obsequious will a man shew himselfe, if that can promote him? what flattery of great men? sometime onely for their assistance, or to be shrouded vnder their protection. Whereas all height is but lownesse, all glory but ignominie, and all maiesty but seruitude, compared to this supreame degree of eminence. For the poorest Saint that is in Gods kingdome is in a greater state of excellency, then was the royaltie of Salomon, or Dauid, or the greatest Monarch that euer the Sunne saw. For all these are but the kingdomes of the Sonne, and the Sonne tooke vpon him onely the forme of a seruant. And therefore he will end this kingdome because it doth not sure wel with his greatnesse, neither thinketh he that it is worthy to continue, but lifteth vp his gouernment to that dignitie w^^^h is like himselfe. Hee will deliuer vp the kingdome to the Father.
I come now to the third part, which is the forme of gouernment in this kingdome.



Hee shall haue put downe all rule, and all authority and power.
I Finde three expositions of this place. Some ancient Popish writers expound it of the Angels: God shall gouerne immediately by himselfe, not vsing the Angels in their degrees, as Ministers to put his commands in execution as now they doe. Beza doth giue it a restraint to bad rulers vpon earth, God shall put them downe, and disanull their authority, For in the next verse it is said. He must reigne till hee hath put all his enemies vnder feete. Calvin vnderstandeth good gouernours as well as bad, and indeede all gouernment in generall. The best way is to agree to him, and giue the words a large sence. So when God shall come, he will not rule by substitutes or vicegerents, but he himselfe will be all in all. Concerning the superiority of the Angels, something may bee said, for the Apostles speech may in a sort be applyed to them. And the Schoolemen out of these words do dispute the continuance of their dignity. But that which I conclude shall be in probability rather then exact demonstration. Saint Austen is commended for his silence, a fit patterne for my imitation. The strange conceit wherewith Dionysius hath possessed the Schoolemen of that Coelestiall Hierarchie, of three orders or companies of Angels one aboue another, and that in euery degree there are three rankes, some
Thrones, some Dominions, some Powers, some Angels,
Dicunt qui possunt, si tamen probare possunt quod dicunt, ego me ista ignorare confiteor Augustinus in Enchirid ad Laurent. cap. 58. and some: Archangels, etc. Because this inuention hath neither warrant in Scripture, nor force of argument to confirme it, let it vanish of it selfe. Questionlesse, there are degrees among the Angels, some are higher, and some are lower. Wee reade of Michael the Archangel that disputed with the diuell about the body of Moses, and that Christ at the day of the resurrection shall come with the voice of an Archangel. The Lord hath beautified the creation with varietie, one starre differeth from another starre in glory, In earth among men, one man hath greater gifts then another, among sexes, the man is more excellent then the woman. Among liuing things, those that haue sence as the beasts, exceede the trees, in euery thing there is Order and difference. So likewise among the Angels. But whether it be by nature or by office, it is doubted. Perhaps by nature as in the rest, perhaps their office is according to their nature, here I must confesse ignorance. A dignitie they haue whether it bee onely for a while according to the greatnesse of their worke, or whether it continue longer. Saint Ierome is of opinion that their dignitie aboue one another shall be perpetuall, because that earthly kings haue diuersities of seruants in orders and degrees: much more the king of heauen, will haue seuerall sorts of Attendants to administer in that state of glory. Zanchie confutes him from this text. If God doe abolish all power, if the Sonne seeme to end his kingdome in some sort, then the dignitie that one Angell hath aboue another, must
needs fall and Gods immediate power take place alone. These arguments doe stand vpon likelihood, neither doe they command beleefe on either side. For resolution; I dare with safety expound the words as of Christ, the Angels shall not gouerne then, as they gouerne now, some ouer one man, some for a citie, some ouer many, some in a larger, some in a smaller prouince, as God doth place them in their stations, according to the greatnesse of particular occasions. This kinde of ruling shall be ended togither with the end of the world.


That we may leaue the Angels.
Certainly these words may most properly be accomodated to humane authority and secular gouernment. We may likewise see the great wisedome of the holy Ghost expressed by these three words, (...) and (...), for herein we finde a most absolute description of earthly gouernment. (...), rule doth signifie the height of place, or superiority of a man in office. (...) Authoritie, doth import the lawfulnesse of rule, when it is not by vsurpation. (...) betokeneth abilitie to discharge it. For then is gouernment happie, when these three are ioyned, a man to haue dignitie of rule, a lawfull authority, and power sufficient to execute his function. Gods will is that gouernment should bee well armed and furnished, that common wealths may enioy their priuiledges, and for his glorie to stand stoutly to their taske. And the miseries of kingdomes doe then spring vp, when these are seuered. When a man ruleth by tyrannie
insteed of authoritie. When a mans authoritie is mastered and ouerruled, that hee cannot smite as occasion doth require. Or when hee hath both rule and authoritie wanting gifts or power to set them forwards. You see then these three doe rarely fit the purpose in describing the condition of worldly gouernment.
This dignitie is put downe at the second comming of Christ for two reasons. First because sinne ceaseth. For the law is not for the iust, but for their-religious, the disobedient, and the sinner. 1. Tim. 1. No happinesse in religion or security in temporall matters can stand without it here on earth.
Eccles. politic. 1. see. 10. M. Hooker supposeth the worst times of the world to haue beene before the flood. Wee may conclude it also from the greatnesse of the plague a vniuersall deluge. There were but eight iust men and a Cham among them, righteousnesse was so exceeding scant in that age. The cause of this by him is ascribed the want of rulers, We reade not of any till the time of Nimrod the first Monarch, who liued after the flood. Law is the restraint, and the Magistrate the destroyer of sin. From this we haue an vndeniable argument against the Anabaptists, abusing that speech in the twentieth of S. Mathew. The princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion: but he that will be chiefe among you let him be your seruant. Hereupon these men haue dreamed, that after Christs comming we should bee without rulers or authoritie. See how this cause and this text doe combine to giue an ouerthrow to their fancie. Rule and authoritie, and power, must hold till the
sinnes of men bee ended vpon earth. And when is that? At the last day of iudgement, when the kingdome is deliuered vp to God the Father.
Againe, let vs quench a sparke not yet broken out into that Anbaptisticall flame, I meane our Nouelists at home, that from the same words haue contended to breake the bond of Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction. The same way discouers their error. If our ministery be yet subiect vnto sinne, and specially to fall by erroneous doctrine, there must be rulers to suppresse and censure it. If sickenesse be here, here we must haue phisicke, euen a most perfect rule, authoritie, and power, seeing the falles of religion are most dangerous. For spirituall rulers are to censure things spirituall, to keepe vnder falsehood, and to curbe the violence of faction. Onely where sinne is not, there must gouernment cease, when Christ shall wipe away euery blemish in the life to come.
Secondly, in this life we are not growne to our full ripenesse, wee are in our none-age, nor as yet aduanced to the heritage of heauen. Now Saint Paul saith in the fourth chapter to the Galathians, the first verse. The heire as long as he is a childe differeth not from aseruant, but is vnder Tutors and Gouernours till the time appointed of the Father. Status huius vitae assimulatur pueritiae saith Aquin. The state of this life is the state of a childe, as long as we liue here, we must be guided, no man is so wise but hee wanteth admonition. The counsell of superiours must direct vs, the counsell of Gods word must direct them, and both must still desire the Spirit of God to direct both. Euery one is of
himselfe vnsufficient to tread the steps of righteousnesse, his care must be euer bent to chuse a good leader, that may guide his feete into the way of peace.
The next thing I obserue from hence, is the naming of rulers in the changing of the world. The greatnesse of their power is here declared. As the next life is gouerned by the Father, so the world seemeth to be theirs and committed into their hands. There God is all in all, here on earth they are, all in all. And great is the stroke and infinite are those matters that be carried in the name and office of Superiours. The greatnesse of their calling now must shew the greatnesse of their charge. For God giueth not this honour for nothing, but as they stand for him in their dignity. So they be like him in their actions. Let this consideration smite the heart of euery ruler, both spirituall, and temporall, seuerally to examine their conscience, whether in their proceedings they make God a patterne. Euery one that is more then a priuate man, that hath either rule, or authority, or power, be it more or lesse: it is a gift of God, and it is borne not for himselfe, but for God. To the good is a reward vnspeakeable, a double honour, for a double benefit. For wise men they shall shine like the brightnesse of the firmament: but they that turnem^ny to righteousnesse shall shine like starres in the 12. of Daniel. Seeing they liued here like starres that did not keepe their light in their owne Sphaere, but diffused the same abroad vpon the earth: their glory shall bee like the starres and answerable to their worke. Blessed then is that power in earth that beareth it selfe in true loyalty
and subiection to the power in heauen. But to the bad I must denounce a true tragedy from this text. And indeede tragedies are for great men, the institution is ancient, for in old time the Comedies were for the meaner sort and we obserue the same custome. If we may interpret that which is past, there is some terrible thing in this obseruation. For the mighty to whome is giuen height of place and the same graced with a latitude of prosperity: they flie out without any feare; and because they keepe not within compasse, they are wounded by a higher hand, and dashed vnder the feete of a Supreame Maiesty. The Lord will contest most sharpely with these men in the day of iudgement that tooke the sword from him, and either did not manage the cause with courage, or smote against him. He will complaine as Pompey did against the men he put in trust.
Comment. de bello cibili lib. 3. Caesar writeth, His often exclamations were bent against them. Aquo genere hominum victoriam speresset, ab eo initio fugae facto, pene proditus videretur.
Those men whom he supposed would winne the victory, where the first that did turne their heeles to the enemy, and in a sort be tray him. For vs and our times I now for beare to censure of actions, For in the matters of state, that which is well done may haue an ill shew; and that which is ill done may seeme commendable to ordinary apprehension. To come then to the conscience where the testimony should bee most infallible. It is a rule propounded by Philosophers, and drawne from morrals of the Heathen (much more must it hold in the Christian common
wealth (that the publike good must bee so preferred by the ruler, that hee ought to put it before the priuate in his heart, the glory of God before his owne, and the welfare of the countrey before his priuate commodity, all the omitting of necessary good, all winking at euill doth lie vpon the necke of the Superiour. This must excite a diligent care that a ruler must rule himselfe with more then an ordinary circumspection. In these euill daies wherein the vniuersall crie of sinne betraies it selfe, when men cry out of a corrupt age, and say that the world is ending because that vice abounds. Here you see a cause that requireth industry. The spirituall power must detect sinne and inueigh with vehemency, the sword of the temporall power must correct and reforme with seuerity, to procure amendment. I must confesse that we cannot haue Platoes common-wealth, neither can we so labour but our purging will leaue drosse behind it. Sinne when it is smitten will rise againe, and some abuses will be incurable, yet a man must bestir that power that he hath, and doe his best, or else God will punish him for slacknesse, and visite with a heauy Iudgement because he did not visite offendours with his deriued authority, and that iudgement committed into the rulers power. That I may finish this point, there is a gouernment which masters haue; and parents also ouer their children. For the Lord hath giuen much authority, power and rule to them. See the great care of almighty God, his desire is to see things well ordered, and hath placed a threefold authority in the world, spirituall in the
pastour, temporall in the Magistrate, as also domesticall in priuate families in as much as a threefold cord is not easily broken. He in mercy striueth to giue sin the foyle and draw vnder the world into true obedience. Doe masters and fathers represent diuine authority? Let them be then in Gods place, to bring vp and tutor those vnder them in Gods feare, to teach and instruct them in religion, not to let them sinke or swim, to let them liue or die in ignorance pretending businesse, they haue no leasure, or corrupted by the diuell with a foolish bashfulnesse, that maketh them to let passe this duty. Doubtlesse the Lord will require their blood at the hands of slacke ouerseers. But when I say masters must teach their seruants, I doe not meane, they must teach them to lie, or to deceiue, and by example, or command, to corrupt them in their youth in shewing those base and false proceedings, that when the age is greene, and capable of all conditions, youth is spoyled before it can discerne: and the new vessell seasoned with vnseasonable liquor, this is odious instruction. Is this to be a tutor or gouernour in Gods place. This is like to Antichrist that sitteth in the Temple of God, but aduanceth himselfe against all that is called God. I haue the rather insisted vpon this subiect, for the corrupter of the earth, the power of hell will alwaies be ready to poison the degrees of gouernment, and mustereth all the forces against true authority to hinder the endeauours of good men that they may be crossed and opposed, that here the bond of amity may be broken, that the affaires of the world, may draw the
minde another way, working like to Sampson, that laid hold vpon the pillars whereon the house did stand, that ouerthrowing them: the house and the men might fall in a common ruine. If he also can lay hands on him that is commander, then he is in his prime, such intentions that are fostered in the highest places doe best agree with his desires, and are most like to spread abroad, knowing that when the fumes and cloudes are fitted in the a^re, when the sky is darke aboue, the storme will come; and the earth shall feele a tempest.
Lastly, see that the Lord to shew his power, triumphs against them that are highest. To breake downe them that are already low, is an argument of lesser might: but when these are brought downe whome none could tame, when their power is abrogated that before was not to bersisted by violence, or stubborn contradiction, or gain-said in their commands: here we see a mighty arme, and a powerfull blow. This must bee a great argument to feare the Lord, and to dread his displeasure, because his reach is vnlimited, no compasse or strength can stay his force. The greatest man on earth oweth as much humility to God as the meanest, and is equally yoaked to vndergoe the edicts of heauen. Wee preach alike to all, and God will deale without distinction. Christ in Daniel is described to ouerthrow kingdomes. That Image which Nebuchadnezzar saw in the dreame with a gold on head, with armes and brest of siluer, and the rest: did either signifie the foure great Monarchies of the world or else the three first
with the remnant of Alexanders succession. Although this Image was most glorious, yet a stone cut without hands, brake the Image, and became a great mountaine, filling the whole earth. And as the Scepter was not departed from Iuda, nor a Law-giuer from betweene his feete till Shilo came. So Christ will alwaies make his comming notable with alterations. When Shilo came first, Iuda lost his Scepter, and when he commeth againe the world shall loose all dominion. You see how infinite is the the power of God aboue all earthly power. Let no man swell in greatnesse of heart, although the Lord exalt him to height of dignitie, but that mildnesse and moderation may temper him in all his counsels. For there is one aboue euery man, euen our Sauiour, that can turne him as he pleaseth. The time shall come when scepters shall be broken, when power shall grow impotent, and when authoritie shall loose her authoritie.
Thus much for the first, which is the doing of good, I will now enter into the second which is the remoouing of euill. He must reigne till he hath put all his enemies vnder his fecte. First of his kingdome: As Christ is God hee must reigne. Hee reigneth ouer all, as hee is Mediatour hee reigneth also Which office belongeth to him according to both his natures, whereby hee maketh his kingdome absolute by vniting two in one bond: reconciling the subiect and the soueraigne God and man. This assumed kingdome is the thing here mentioned, which is inferiour to the diuinitie. For Christ is God by nature, and of necessity, but he is Mediatour by election
and office: it was a thing arbitrarie, he might haue chosen whether hee would haue suffered the world to sinke in sinne, or to haue redeemed it by his merits. Ignatius therefore maketh a threefold difference, of all: first, of the creatures: secondly, of the office of the Mediatour aboue all creatures: thirdly, of the diuine nature. This kingdome hath a large extent, he reigneth euery way, and in euery place, in the rulers, and ministers, one being the hand, the other the mouth of Christ. In the world his prouidence extendeth to a falling sparrow, and hee will iudge the Gentiles by the creatures, in the first to the Romanes. But two principall parts doe set out his spirituall regiment:
His word, which comprehendeth the lawes and statutes by which his kingdome must be ordered: and the Sacraments, that are his oathe of allegiance to sweare his subiects to fidelitie. I can not now stand vpon all: Onely I will instance is his word, for the same will make vs subiects, as beeing the chiefe triall of our obedience. For the word of God is the iudge and rule of euery word and deede. The chiefe rule a man hath within himselfe is his conscience; therefore as the conscience is, so is the man: a good conscience will doe well, a large conscience will swallow all, a scrupulous conscience is troublesome with nice curiositie. Here may then appeare the supremacie of Gods word, that whereas the conscience doth rule the man, Gods word doth rule and command the conscience. For our waies are framed according to our minde: and our minde is framed by aduice.
Christ hath so large a dominion in mens hearts that he ruleth the minds of the most vnruly, in the 110. Psalme the second verse: Be the ruler in the middest of thine enemies. Hee will make the conscience a mans executioner where it can not be a perswader. When wicked men doe reiect God by their blasphemous thoughts, or will doubt of the life to come, because these spirituall things are inuisible: yet there will arise a secret thought beyond that, which reacheth the Atheist, and maketh him to stoope and yeild against his will. They that contemne or regard not the Lord, will giue testimonie in swearing by his name; to shew that he is the iudge of their speeches, by him their asseuerations must win credit, so they confound themselues. Euery Papist will pretend Christ, the Turkes speake honourably of him. And the Gothes did spare the Christians that fled to the temples for succour when Rome was destroyed, a thing vnheard of in other places; for among Pagans they burnt and destroyed both Gods and temples, as S. Austen obserueth in the first booke De Ciuitate Dei and second chapter.
Thus doth our Lord rule among his enemies; a most large power. Earthly Monarches bee their might neuer so boundlesse, are kept within their owne precincts, and Illa se iactet in aula, is all they haue. Their power is confined to their owne territories: but he who made all, ruleth all; and that man who is against him, he will make turne against himselfe with the sting of conscience. Let our consciences therefore entertaine him peaceably, otherwise
hee will let loose his mastiue dogge to torment vs, when he seeth time. The conscience of an euill man in this life, is like a dogge tyed vp, now it pulleth, and onely barketh. And as a dogge may bee stilled with words, or gifts, so worldly pleasure, and merry company, will make quiet the troublesome noise of an vrged conscience. But when a man is loosed from the bonds of his flesh, and seeth where hee stands: that which did barke before will bite then, and teare the hard and hardy sinner. Alwaies therefore let vs honour and obey his word. We haue his kingdome in abundance. This place wherein we liue I may truly call in this respect the Chamber of the King: suffer him therefore to win you, to subdue you by his edicts and proclamations in this place. Let this crosse crucifie sinne, that he may vanquish vnder his signe, as Constantine did Maxentius. It is written of him that going once to fight, a banner was seene in the ayre hauing a crosse with this writing (...). In this thou shalt ouercome. So yeild your obedient hearts, that we may be victorious for our master, and not smite the ayre when we should smite your sinne: our endeauour we doe, but this victory is in the Lords hand. When I doe but consider the many combates in this place, so much preaching against transgression, I can not but say, nihil supra, scarce can any thing be spoken that is not spoken, labourers haue beene so exquisite, that a new speaker may double at the first vpon what subiect his thoughts may fasten. Sometimes here doe spring bitter hearbes to cure the corrupt diseases, and to expell the spirituall pestilences
out of this citie. Carrie not then so daintie stomacks, as to die in sinne rather then take the potion, or like children, to leaue wormewood, and regard the tooth-somnesse rather then wholesomnesse of the hearbe.
Here ariseth a starre to guide wise men to our Sauiour, when the errours of Poperie and other falsehoods are confuted. Which light should so guide the learner that the continuall diligent hearers might be furnished with abilitie to controll a Papist, or to foile an aduersarie in an ordinarie point: if that Mammon, the pleasures and distractions of this life, did not possesse their hearts, that no man almost will goe beyond his profession, but leaue learning for those who teach it. Although in iudging and censures they flie quite out of compasse.
Here are administred words of comfort in due season for weake mindes, to preuent despaire, in not following common corruption. Bee not so hard as to scorne and neglect them, like the flint to send out the fire of reproch, in stead of hearts mollified with grace to receiue impression.
Thus doe we endeauour that God might rule the best way, that you might yeild rather then stand out. But I feare we speed as Pompey against Mithridates, who often did conquer him in the field: neuerthelesse he returned againe with a new armie, as if he had gained by the fall. In the like manner we are heard, and our sayings passe for current. Yet whole swarmes and armies of offences doe continue. The Lord may complaine of hearing as he did with the Israelites in the three and thirtie chapter of Ezechiel,
verse 31. They say, come I pray you, and heare the word that commeth from the Lord, and they come vnto thee as the people vseth to come, and my people sit before thee, and heare thy words, but they will not doe them: for with their mouth they shew much loue, but their heart goeth after their couetousnesse. And loe thou art vnto them as a louely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well vpon an instrument: for they heare thy words, but they doe them not. The verie fashion of our times, men come to heare sermons as they heare musicke: to delight the eare, to see a mans skill, to passe their censure, and there is an end. These humours must know this musicke will raise vp a iarring sound in the conscience insteed of a melodious harmonie: and will make them sing a sad note at their dying day. If Gods word bee a kingdome, it must worke vpon the heart. There it must subdue a rebell, and renew that part of the old man that lurketh in the bosome of the soundest hearer.
So much of the kingdome: I come to the Conquest. First the Enemie, then the Ouerthrow.


His enemies.
REctum est sui iudex and obliqui. A priuation is defined and knowne by the habit: and an enemie by a friend, as a crooked line is well discerned if we compare it with a streight.
First then, a friend is discouered by his affection, if he loue and desire societie, if he take pleasure in conuersing with the partie: So if a man take delight
in holy exercises: that loue and reioycing is a token of a friendly disposition. Whereupon we may iudge those to be no friends, that cannot relish our praiers, to whom preaching is tedious: and such heauenly matters grow troublesome: Those that care not to come to Church, but often keepe a way, because they finde nothing agreeable to their minde: In as much as they care so little for Gods presence in the publike assemblie, and regard comming to his house so little: they are no friends.
Secondly,
De Genesi. ad literam lib. 11, cap. 4. a true friend is tried in aduersitie, so must wee stand in temptation. For God will sifte and search the stabilitie of our loue. S. Austen thinketh it had beene no great matter of commendation for Adam to stand in Paradise, if none had tempted him to fall. If he had beaten backe the alluring temptation, the Lord might well haue crowned him with the rewards of blessednesse. The case is euery mans owne, the Lord will command to come to him, and cast impediments in the way to draw from him, that he may trie, whether we wil chuse. Yea as the diuel at the first entered into the Serpent, the most subtile of the beasts of the field: so he will euer contriue his stratagems in the wisest manner. God hath said, he would set enmitie betweene the Serpent and the womans seede, and he will euer be biting at the heele, if hee cannot reach the head. Here wee condemne them for no friends, that will shrinke at euery storme, men that are well disposed in themselues: but will bee wrought into euery shape, and drawne any whither by perswasion. That see not the plots laid against
them, but take all that is offered; running through thicke and thin without difference, so they may not displease themselues or others.
Thirdly, true friendship is constant, And as God loueth to the end, so must his friends be led by the same perseuerance. From hence we condemne the Arminian friendship that starteth aside like a broken bow. They imagine a man may haue the Spirit of God, the graces of regeneration, and bee partaker of the priuiledges of a Saint., yet fall away and bee damned. These men haue deuised such a worship towards God, as olde Bias of Greece brought in friendship towards men. When he had considered mans fickle disposition, hee gaue counsell, his loue should not be too earnest, but so to loue that he may thinke of a time to hate. If friendship may be so exact that it will bee euer: and him that breaketh off we censure an hypocrite, or a wauerer, or that hee conceiued vaine flashes of vnsetled loue: so he that prooueth an Apostate, was neuer a Saint: either he was an hypocrite, or had some good naturall desires in spirituall things, but neuer well seated by the grace of the holy Ghost.
Fourthly, true friendship excludeth all Neutrals and Corriuals, being onely among two according to Aristotle. For if our fountaine of loue should runne out through many channels, it would bee emptie. Therefore hee who is all complementall, and will loue euery bodie, doth indeede loue no bodie. I confesse the loue of charitie is due to all, but the superlatiue affection that is placed on a friend, cannot
be well dispersed among multitudes. So the similitude is with God. Wee must giue a certaine loue to the creatures, but there is a loue due to God, that no creature must haue besides. Our Sauiour hath said, No man can serue two masters:
Math. 6.24. for either he will loue the one and hate the other, or leane to the one, and despise the other: ye cannot serue God and Mammon.
Likewise in the 12. of Saint Matthew, verse 30. he disclaimeth all Neutrals that would giue way to the Pharisies against him, and notwithstanding did wish him well in heart. He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathereth not with me, scattereth abroad. Therefore commit not euill, and accuse the times. Breake not Gods law, and accuse prouocation. This is to play with both hands, if ye wil be friends, keepe to God alone, resist euill prouocations, stand against euill customes, and reforme them.
Hitherto I haue described a friend, that I might declare an enemie. For although friendship be a humane vertue, yet in the way of similitude it doth in some points excellently expresse our dutie to God: and so he vouchsafed the name of a friend to Abraham. Now must I passe this dreadfull sentence, He that in some measure is not such a friend is an enemie. If we could deuise a middle betweene both, all would flocke thither. Men would for their own turne giue God some seruice, except where his law is tedious and difficult; in those parts they would please themselues, pretending an excuse, because of the infirmities of flesh and blood. If we could open this middle state, it would be the most welcome and plausible doctrine that euer
the world heard. But this cannot be. Our religion maketh no veniall sinnes here, it promiseth no Purgatorie hereafter. There a man shall finde a heauen or a hell, here he must finde himselfe a friend or a foe.
The enemies of God are of two sorts, either open or secret. The open enemies are of three sorts, the infidels, the Iewes and the Turkes, Although there bee some doubt concerning the last, whether they be open or secret, seeing they speake well of our Sauiour and acknowledge the Bible, he being an Arrian that togither with Nestorian ^ Munke did make their Alcoran. Yet I agree to Tilenus in his tractate de apertis Christihostibus, who placeth him among the open enemies, because hee doth persecute the Christian name, whereas the Heretikes doe grace their errours by Christs name, and pretend his authoritie. The secret enemies againe are of three sorts, either heretiques, or profaners, or hypocrites, which are enemies of his houshold. I doe but repeate these diuisions, my intent only is to take the office of a Scoute or Sentinell to discouer this hoste of aduersaries, and leaue them for others to assault: and for a stronger arme to close with in the field. But lest I should by the discouerie of so huge an armie, seeme to worke the same effect that the Spies did when they returned from the land of Canaan. They terrified the people by relations of so mighty giants, and the sonnes of Anak that the men had no courage but their heart melted with astonishment: I shall avoide this by the next point, there we shall see see them strongly subdued by a fearefull fall, these enemies shall be put vnder feete.

Their ouerthrow, vnder feete.
This heauie lot did the Heathen imagine due to the Giants for opposing their Gods.

Famaest Enceladi semiustum fulmine corpus
Vrgeri mole hac In Virgil.

Aetna was thought a burden weighing downe one of this companie. In Scripture this is taken as a note of conquest as Iosua 10.24. The captaines of the people did tread vpon the neckes of the fiue Kings. Which thing no doubt was a type of this, as Iosua that temporall Sauiour was of the eternall Sauiour Iesus. In this kinde also Ioas derideth Amazia King of Iuda. 2. Chron. 25.18. shewing his weakenesse and arrogancie vnder this similitude, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the Caedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Giue thy daughter to my sonne to wife, and a wilde beast came and trode downe the thistle. For all the enemies of God doe fall miserably, finally, and in the most contemned manner, and the extremities of all ruine shall confound him that is not an embracer of religion.


Obserue two things in this punishment torment and shame.
1. Torment. As a man that is pressed to death, doth groane and languish vnder the weight, without the comfort of a little ease, or a breathing time to gather strength, to vndergoe the torture with any patience: so are the eternall woes of another life. Gods anger and heauy iudgement shall weigh downe the sinner, the burden of his displeasure vpon the conscience shall be intollerable, and insupportable, griefe
shall make the sinner to sinke vnder the heauinesse. This did he a little see that cried mine iniquities are gone ouer my head, and are a burden to heauy for me to beare, yet this is the voice of repentance and not of desperation. So heauy a loade is a mans offence when it presseth vpon the conscience.
2 Basenesse and shame maketh vp the misery. As he that lieth vnder foote is in the state of ignominie and reproch: So at the day of iudgement when a mans villanies are laid open, when his Maiestie appeareth who was offended, then a man shall haue his nakednesse truely seene like Adam in Gods presence. That which before he did glory in, shall then make him to hide himselfe if it weare in his power: where the filthinesse of sinne shall be laide open in true colours. And are these the men that must not now be spoken to: and strout it in their gallantry? Their wit in this deserueth commendation, that they honour themselues, and in a case of necessitie doe magnifie their practises, very neede requireth it, they must a little braue it now, they fall so low hereafter. The pretious pearle of the word is ouer topped by the haughtie, and now set light by, and the labours of preaching are as a thing trampled vnder by these men. Therefore these two must change places, God must haue the glory, and they the shame. For wherefore is it that these flourishing offenders are hearers of it, for the learning or the eloquence, or some worldly respect. Whereas saluation is built vpon simple admonition, and common principles, things that make no shew: because the Lord would bring downe all humane
mane inuention and pride to this plainnesse. All brauery, policy, learning, elocution, must at that time stoope to this simplicitie of diuine truth: whereas now we can scarce get this inward substance, this marrow of diuinitie to take place, but these outward orornaments doe obscure it. Strange and lamentable is the folly of the world. As men that are vnfurnished come to a tree to gather fruite, and when they are come: they onely looke vpon the faire body of the tree, and the goodly bowes, and if they can snatch a branch they runne away, and leaue the fruite behind: So fareth it with our common auditours, They are sicke and want, yet come to get some new thing to please their fancy, that may tickle the care, or delight the minde: returning with empty soules, as if God had ordained his word to please and not to profit. Let this then haue the preheminence now, lest the contempt of so high a thing lay the auditour in dishonour.
Conceiue now what it is to lie vnder the feete of God. They shall call for mountaines to couer them, the weight of iudgement shall be so heauy. Worldly sorrow is grieuous to flesh and blood, burning in fire is a torment that cannot be endured: this is a Tophet prepared with much wood, and the breath of the Lord as a riuer of brimstone to kindle it. Trauell of women is a plague in earth for sinne, this suddaine destruction that commeth vnawares is like it. 1. Thess. 5. Discontents of this life doe sometimes preuaile against humane infirmitie, that a man ouerwhelmed will delect his minde, goe against nature, and lay
violent hands vpon himselfe, If this be so in the sorrowes on earth; how shall it fare with the sorrowes of hell? If a man doe thus shrinke when he is smitten by the hand of the creature? how shall he sinke when he lieth vnder the foote of the Creator? See here in this life how a wounded conscience doth dismay a perplexed soule. It maketh a man forget all worldly pleasure, that cannot helpe him: It ouercommeth all earthly sorrow, for that yeildeth vnto this: neuerthelesse, a troubled minde hath some hope, God may release out of that agonie. It seeth not God and his iudgements, but feareth and suspecteth a miserie to come; it beholdeth vengeance a farre of. If that may so lay a man vnder foote in his life, how shall the feeling eternall punishments ouerthrow him. What shall I say more.
Pugna suum finem cumiacet hostis habet.
Equity requireth the fight should cease when the enemie is vnder foote. I neede to threaten no longer. But that my end may giue a direction to the end of others. Beware this ditch, for sake sinne that maketh an enemy to God, let his word smite your conscience by reforming you, I cannot speake it without griefe, nor (I thinke) you heare it without pittie, that our Church should haue those hearers that are diligent, and yet vnsound in practise, some that set their saluation light, let it goe either way, that follow the world and trouble not their braines about heauen. These men are to bee put among the enemies, among the Iewes and Turkes, euen those that haue not knowne God, that haue blasphemed Christ, that haue borne
armes against him: They are in the same degree with them, all are stickes to be put in the same bundle, and cast into the same fire. The diuell hath hid this ditch into which they fall, their owne lust hath beene a mist that rose into the eies to darken their soule: that they will not beleeue it, till they feele it: nor beware it, till they finde it. Yet make peace, for you fight with the Lord of hosts, you shall be ouermatched at the last: although you see not his vengeance at the first. Be hot then in his cause, stand for him like a friend, or else he will account you as his foe, worship him here with a constant and faithfull heart, fall downe before his feete by praier and true repentance lest you fall vnder his feete in the day of wrath.

FINIS.

