


A TRVE CHRONOLOGIE OF THE TIMES OF THE PERSIAN MONARCHIE.

CIcero, if euer any other was one which verified that doctrine of the blessed Apostle Paul, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians: that the wisedome of God, of the wisest of the world was accounted foolishnes. The learning of the Grecians, all artes pertaining to humanitie, beeing held together to vse his owne tearme in a certaine kindred betweene themselues hee had in great price. The knowledge thereof he admired, the professors he honoured, and by quicke conceit and sharp wit, together with earnest trauaile and diligent study therein: he grew to that ripenes of deepe knowledge and sweet speech, and wise counsell, whereby he became the rare ornament of his countrie, the precious iewell of his age, and the great glorie of the world, far beyond al before

him, neuer ouertooke of any after him. But touching true diuinity, and the people of God, with the word of life amongst them: they were no better esteemed of him, then Paul and his preaching was of the learned Philosophers of Athens; being mocked for his labour, and acounted a babling toole. Let his owne mouth make proofe hereof, in an Oration which he made for Lucius Flaccus, beeing at that time accused amongst other matters, for detayning great summes of gold, sent yearely vpon deuotion by an vsuall custome out of Italie, and some other prouinces of Rome to Ierusalem. This action of his client, withstanding the Iewes herein; he greatly commendeth. Ierusalem, the holie and glorious seate of God his seruice, hee calleth a suspitious and backebyting Citie. The deuout worship of God, and the holy religion of the Iewes, he termeth barbarous superstition, by great contempt, in regard of the glorie and ancient customes of the Roman Empire, and in the end he concludeth them a people not accepted of God: because they had beene ouercome by the enemie and put to their tribute. This was the reckoning which Tullie made of them, who by diuine knowledge of God his worde, were the onelie wise people in the world:Deut 4. whereby it appeareth that in his eyes the prophane learning of men was deemed more excellent then the wisedome of God. Amongst his sciences

no place was left for diuinitie. The knowledge of God his word, was too base for that companie. Much better was the doome of the ancient Fathers of the primitiue Church, by the light of God his spirit, who vsed all other artes and learning, as helps and handmaids to the vnderstanding of diuine scripture, beeing Ladie and Mistris of all: to the which all humane wisedome oweth dutie and seruice. Augustine a rare instrument for the benefite of GOD his Church, came notably furnished with much other reading to the studie of diuinity. His skill therein he prooued not onely by writing of the liberall sciences: but also alleadging of Poets and other Authors, and fitting their sayinges to the phrase of holy scripture to make it more plaine; wherof one commeth now to my mind, in his bookes of speeches, taken out of a secular Author as hee termeth him. Et scuta Latentia condunt. They hide the priuie or secret lying shieldes, meaning such as not before, but after the hyding, lay secret and hid. This hee maketh serue for the vnderstanding of a like speech, in the 25. chapter of Genesis in the Greeke bible, of Esay, and Iacob, whose birth a little before was mentioned. (...) the young men grew. They were new borne babes, farre from that ripenes of yeares, to bee called young men, and therefore the action of growing in this place, goeth before the young

mens age: to signifie that being little children. At the length after much growing vp in age, they became young men. In his second booke De doctrina Christiana, hee declareth at large, that humane sciences, and the learning of the gentiles, and prophane histories, are very helpfull and profitable to the vnderstanding of holy scripture. The learned father Hierom also in many places bringeth much light, and great seruice, from diuerse and sundry prophane writers, to the vnderstanding of God his woorde. In his commentaries on Esay the thirteenth chapter, declaring the true meaning of the prophets woordes there vttered concerning the desolation of Babylon, which other leauing the truth of historie expounded allegorically: hath these woordes. Audiuimus Medos, audiuimus Babylonem, and inclytam in superbia Chaldaeorum: nolumus intelligere quod fuit, and quaerimus audire quod non fuit. Et haec dicimus non quod tropologicam intelligentiam condemnemus; sed quod spiritualis interpretatio, sequi debeat ordinem historiae. Quod plaerique ignorantes, lymphatico in scripturis vagantur errore. We haue heard saith he of the Medes, wee haue heard of Babylon the glorious city of the Chaldeans; we will not vnderstand that which hath bin; but we seeke to heare that which hath not beene. Neither say I this to condemne tropologicall vnderstanding, but that spirituall interpretation

ought to follow order of historie: which the most parte being ignorante of by mad wandring doe range about in the scriptures. The same father being by some blamed, as too much addict to ye study of Secular knowledge; in an epistle of his to on Magnus a Roman Orator, taketh vpon him the defence and commendation thereof, by the examples of the best and most excellent christian fathers before him. I must needes therefore greatly commend the wisedome of our forefathers, in ordering our vniuersities. VVhere young schollers are first trained vp in the studies of humanity, before they enter into God his schoole: that by that meanes comming furnished, and ready stored with many helpes from their former learning, they may find a more easie waye and speedy course in that most graue race of diuine knowledge, which is yet behinde for them to runne. And surely so it is; and euery one shall finde the experience hereof in himselfe. It is not to be spoken, how much and how cleare light, the diligent study and reading of Latin and Greeke writers; yeeld to the knowledge of holy scripture. Which by some few examples I will let the reader vnderstand. The Eleans, in time of pestilence brought vpon them by exceding great abundance of flies; call vpon their God Myiagrus: which being by sacrifice once appeased, all those flies forthwith perish.

This Pline reporteth in his tenth booke the eight and twentith chapter. Whereunto for confirmation may be added, that which is recorded by Pausanias in the first booke of his Eliaca: that Hercules sacrificing in Olympia, was mightily troubled with a huge multitude of flies; till such time as he had done sacrifice to Iupiter apomytos, by whose power all those flies were soone after dispersed. And hereof he sayth, that the Eleans vse to sacrifice (...): that is to Iupiter Apomytos which driueth away flies. Sotinus also in his Polyhistor the second chapter, maketh mention of Hercules his chappell in the beefe market at Rome; into the which after sacrifice and prayer made to the God Myiagrus, hee entred by diuine power without flies. All these testimonies serue to vnderstand the reason of the name Baalzebub, in scripture giuen to the God of Ecron, in the first chapter of the second booke of the Kings: signifying the god of flies, or the flies Iupiter (If it be true that Augustine affirmeth in his questions vppon the booke of iudges, that Baal is Iupiter) so called as should seeme by those reportes of Plinie, Pausanias, and Solinus: of the power which was attributed vnto him in driuing away flies whereof hee is termed Myiagrus, that is a chaser of flies, and Apomyius, as it were a defender, or preseruer from flies.

Horatius in his last Satyre, telleth of one Rufus Nasidienus, who had inuited to a great supper, Mecaenas a chiefe Lord in the Emperour Augustus Caesars Court; with many other noble men of Rome: that whenas in the middest of supper, the daintiest dishes being now set vpon the borde, the hangings aloft by chance suddenly brake, and daubed that honorable company with cobwebs, and powdred the costly meates and wines with filth, and filled all full of choaking dust: Posito capite, vt si filius immaturus obisset, flere: Holding downe his head, he wept bitterly, as it had been for the vntimely death of a deare sonne. So then the casting downe of Cain his countenance in the fourth of Genesis, argued sorrow. And the virgins of Ierusalem, at the destruction of their citie, hanging downe their heads to the ground, in the Lamentations of Ieremy the second chapter, thereby declared their conceaued griefe. The prophet Dauid at such time as he fled from his sonne Absolon, and likewise all the men that were with him; euery one couered his head and wept. Haman also being made an instrument to honour Mardochaeus, whome hee hated to the death: for sorow hasted home with his head couered, whereby some haue vnderstood nothing else but dust and ashes laied thereon, which is a cerimonie indeed of sorow; but not meant in those places. The custome in those

times was, not onely to lay dust on the heade in token of griefe; but also to enclose and shut vp as it were the head and face, with some cloth or vaile from mens eyes. As manie examples out of the Heathen Authors may easily shew.
Vlysses as Homer declareth, hauing heard one Demodicus sing of the glorious and worthy acts of the Grecians at Troy: couered his head and face with a cloath and wept. The souldiers of Aiax in Sophocles, hearing of the wofull case of their Captaine, for griefe of Vlysses preferme^t before him, being bestraught of minde; couered their heads with vailes. Demaratus a King of Sparta by the subtill practising of his enemies, was deposed of his kingdome, as not of the Royall blood: who after bearing Office in the Citie, and opprobriously in way of scorne, and derision, beeing asked, what it was to bee first a King and then an Officer; tooke it to the heart, and with these wordes vttered, that that question should bee the cause either of much ioy, or much woe to the Lacedaemonians, couered his head and got him home. This is recorded by Herodotus in Erato.
Xenophon in his Symposio^ telleth of a certaine iester called Phillip: who at a seast where Socrates with other graue co^pany was present, assaying once or twice by his ridiculous iestes to mooue them to laughter, but all in vaine: mufled vp himselfe for sorrow and left his supper.
Demosthenes the famous Orator of Athens, as Plutarch writeth in his life, in a certaine Oration of his before the people beeing hissed at; hied him home in great heauines with his head couered.In his 4. booke. It is recorded by Q. Curtius of Darius King of Persia; that hearing of his wiues death; Capite velato diu fleuit. He wept a great while hauing his head couered. That the couer was a cloath hiding the face as well as the heade, appeareth immediatlye after in these wordes:
Manantibus adhuc lachrimis, vesteque ab ore reiecta, the teares yet trickling downe, and the cloth being cast away from his mouth, he lift vp his handes to heauen. Sisigambis that Kinges mother, was a spectacle of rare miserie. Shee lost her Father and foure score brethren, all in one day most cruelly killed by Artaxerxes Ochus. Her owne childe a mightie King the last Monarch of Persia, shee saw twice ouercome by Alexander, and in the end traiterously slaine by his owne seruants; the kingdome of Persia a ouerthrowne, her selfe Captiue: yet all these crosses she bare in some tollerable manner, so long as Alexander liued, who honoured her exceedingly as his owne mother. But after his death, bereaued of all comfort, shee tare her haire, cast her bodie on the grounde, refused succour, and wrapping vp her heade with a vaile, euer after abstained from meat and light,

till welcome death made an end of her woes.
Thus Dauid and Hamans couered heades, by so manie examples, of such as for extreame sorrow or shame of themselues, not abiding mens sight, muffled their faces, are cleared of doubt. And herby the vnderstanding of another place in the 53. Chapter of Esay not a little helped: where our blessed Sauiour is compared to one hiding his face. For this, as hath beene prooued, beeing an argument of an heart oppressed with griefe, is effectuall and notable, to declare that which immediatly before was spoke^ of Christ: despised and refused of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefe: whereunto the next wordes are these: (...): That is, to interpret it aright, and as it were hiding the face from vs.
This here I may not pretermit: that this ceremonie of the couered head is vsed sometimes in scripture, and other where in another sence. As in the 7. Chapter of Ester: where wee reade of Hamans head couered by other against his will, to signifie that now in the kings wrath hee was appointed to death. For this likewise was an ancient custome vsed of diuers Nations, to muffell vp the heads of men condemned to die: or guiltie of some grieuous crime deseruing death. Polixena king Priamus his daughter, by the sentence of Agamemnon and other Princes of Greece adiudged to die, was ledde to the

slaughter of Vlisses, with a vaile ouer her head. As we read in the tragedie of Euripides, called Hecuba. Philotas the sonne of Parmenio one of the chiefe Princes of Alexander the great, fou^d guiltie of high treason against the king: was brought before him to his answer, Capite velato hauing his head couered saith Q. Curtius in his 6. booke. Festus Pompeius, in the word Nuptias saith, that the Law commanded his head to bee couered, who had killed his Parente. Lastlye Cicero in his Oration for C. Rabirius, bringeth the verie sentence of iudgement it selfe, or verses, as he termeth them, vsed of Tarquinius superbus, the last and most cruell king of Roome. Caput obnubito, arbori infaelici suspendito. Couer his head, hang him vp on a wofull tree.
Let me by thy patience (gentle Reader) proceed to one argument more in this kind, and so an end. That which is told by the Euangelist of Saint Iohn Baptist eating Locusts seemed incredible to some, greatly doubting of that kind of meat: and therefore supposing the place to haue been corrupted by the writers fault, by some slip setting downe (...) for (...), as though his meat had not bin locusts, but choake peares.
Thus in their owne conceit they were wiser than God, by ignorance of trueth witnessed in diuers prophane Authors. Galen vpon Hipocrates his Aphorismes the 2. book, the 18. Chapter is one, declaring there the force, which locustes

being eaten haue to nourish. Plinie in the 28 chap. of his 11. book saith, that among ye Parthians they were counted a pleasant meate. Strabo in his 16. booke of Geographie, maketh mention of a certaine people which liued of them. Bellonius in the 2. booke of his obseruations, the 88. chapter, testifieth from the report of some Authors, that in Africa they were eaten as dainties: not for Phisicke, but euen for nourishment. Thereby proouing it a thing not vncredible, that Iohn Baptist should eat locusts. But Diodorus Siculus most fullie of all other declareth this in his, 4. booke: where hee telleth of certain Aethiopians called (...), that is locust eaters, who neyther eat fish, nor cattel, but onely locusts continually: which at the spring time of the yeare they get in great abundance, and salt them vp to preserue them for meate.
Thus I haue giuen as it were a taste by this little, out of Plinie, Pausanias, Solinus, Horatius, Homer, Sophocles, Herodotus, Euripudes, Xenophon, Plutarch, Quintus Curtius, Festus, Pompeius, Cicero, Galen, Strabo: how great seruice Heathen writers doe to the word of God, for opening the true meaning thereof. A taste I call it in regard of all that which for declaration of other matters might bee sayd herein, which were the worke of a huge volume, and great toyle.
These writers then for many partes of Scripture

are diligently to be sought into, and not as some rash braines imagine, to bee cast away as vnprofitable in the Lordes schoole house: but especially for Daniell aboue all. In other places they may seeme profitable: but heere they are necessary: euen by Hieroms iudgement, who in a preface to his commentaries on this booke affirmeth, the manifold Histories of Greeke and Latine Authors, to bee necessary for the vnderstanding of Daniels Prophesies.
These helpes therefore I minde to vse for vnfolding the 4. last verses of the 9. Chapter of Daniell, containing an entire prophesie of the estate of the holy City after the Iewes returne, from the building thereof, vnto the vtter destruction of the same by Vespasian the Emperor of Rome: and therein of the comming of Iesus Christ the Lord of life, aboue 500. yeres before. Which is a most certaine argument of Diuine wisedome in Daniell from heauen, and a proofe of that which Balthasar had heard, that the spirit of the holy Gods was in him: whereby also he foreshewed many yeares before the destruction of the Babylonian Empire by the Medes and Persians, and the Persians ouerthrow by Alexander; and the great troubles, which long after that time the Iewes suffered vnder Antiochus Epiphanes. All this skill came from God: for the knowledge and foretelling of thinges to come, is that which God onely hath

left in his owne power, and challengeth to himselfe in the Prophet Esay. I make knowne those things saith, God, which haue not yet hapned. The Heathen Poet Sophocles could see this, thus writing in the Tragedie of Aiax the whip bearer. (...). Many things saith hee may bee knowne of men, when they see them come to passe: but of thinges to come yet vnseene, there is no prophet.
I am not ignorant that Porphyrius a Tyrian Philosopher, a wicked and vngodly Iew, of the kindred and sect of the Sadduces, an Infidell, an enemie of Christ, a hater of God and his word: who wrote fifteene bookes against the Christians, to weaken and extenuate the trueth and authoritie of Daniels Prophesie, deuised this shift to say, that the Iewes long afore Daniels time (seeing these thinges done,) committed them to writing vnder Daniels name, thereby to win credit to their bookes.
This fine deuise of Porphyrie is nothing else but a vaine cauill: For it is well knowne, that the comming of Christ is spoken of by Daniell in diuers places: which can not bee saide to haue beene written by the Iewes, who first had seene the comming of Christ, seeing that they neyther at that time when hee came, acknowledged him, and euer since haue beene so farre from beleeuing in him, that vsually to this day

they euen curse his memorie. Porphyrius herein hath beene answered at large by the learned Fathers Methodius, Eusebius, Caesariensis, and Apolinarius, withstanding his blasphemie. And Hierome for learning as noble as any, in one short sentence most wittily and pithilie, turneth all his reasoning against Daniell, for Daniell against himselfe. Porphirii impugnatio testimonium veritatis est. Tanta enim in hoc Propheta dictorum fides inuenta est; vt propterea incredulis hominibus videatur non futura dixisse: sed praeterita narrasse. Porphyrie his impugning of Daniell (saith Hierome) is a testimonie of his trueth: because the sayings of this Prophet haue beene found so certaine, and of so great credit, that therefore vnbeleeuers haue iudged him rather to tell things past, the^ to speak of things to come. But if there were nothing else at all to be saide: yet euen this one prophesie of Daniell which I haue in hande, touching the desolation of Ierusalem, the trueth and certaintie whereof was at the length verified by the euent it selfe, at such time as Titus destroyed the Temple, and Citty: were enough to stoppe the aduersaries mouthes. Yea though all the Infidell Porphyries in the world, with all their cunning shifting stand together, they shall neuer be able to auoid the force of this prophesie: but that it must needes argue a diuine spirit in Daniell. For they cannot here say, that the Iewes after they had

seene the Temple destroyed by the Romanes, forged a prophesie thereof in Daniell his name. Because euen Christ himselfe, in the 24. of Matthew, alleadgeth this prophesie of Daniel concerning the desolation of the holy Citie, in the flourishing time thereof, about 37. yeares before it was fulfilled. Whereby it is euident, that this prophesie was commonly knowne and read in the Church of God among the Iewes, as written by Daniell long before the euent had shewed the trueth thereof: So Daniell yet standeth a diuine prophet of the Lord, inspired with heauenly knowledge of thinges to come from aboue; and seeing that in one thing truely foretold this is prooued of him, there is no cause at all to doubt of the rest.
This is a sure foundatio^ of diuinitie, a sound stay of religion, a strong prop of faith to be reposed in the vndoubted trueth of GOD his word, a mightie vpholder of the prouidence of God against all the Atheistes and Epicures of the world: Which Josephus verie well perceiuing, and in the end of his 10. booke of antiquities, disputing against this kind of men, fetcheth his reason from the sure truth of Daniels Prophesies. The errour saith hee of the Epicureans hereby is reprooued, which take Gods prouide^ce in gouerning things out of this life, beleeuing the world to be carried by his owne force without a guide or ouerseer. Wherefore considering

Daniels prophesies, I cannot but condemne the foolishnes of those men, which deny that God hath any care of mens affaires. For how could it come to passe, that the euent should answere his prophecies, if all thinges in the world were done by chance. Caluin also in the first book of his institutions: Doth not Daniell saith he, so prophesie of thinges to come by the space of 600. yeares, as though he wrote an Historie of things alreadie done, and commonly knowne? Good men by the diligent meditation hereof shall bee abundantly furnished to quiet the barking of the vngodly: for this euidence is clearer, then that it can be subiect to any cauils.
This was the iudgement of Iosephus and Caluin against Atheists and prophane Epicures, to their shame and ouerthrow: taken from the certaintie of Daniels foreshewing things to come. Euen this one prophecie of Daniels weekes, is a verie hammer to beate them downe to the ground, and a wier scourge as it were to teare them all in peeces: And therefore of all true Christians to be had in great reuerence, and the vnderstanding therof to bee desired as pearles, and diligently sought for, as hid treasure. To the finding out hereof two thinges are most requisite: the one is a iust account of the times: the other, a true interpretation of the wordes in the originall tongue. If wee faile in either of

these, there is no hope to knowne what Daniell meant by his weekes: For neither good interpretation alone is enough without exact chronologie; nor this without the other serueth much to purpose. The sundring of these two things, which must needes stand together, hath beene the cause of such turning and tossing this excellent peece of Scripture in so many mens heades, so many waies: therefore in these two thinges especially shall be the imployment of my paines; if happily thereby this noble text of Scripture may receaue some light to the clearer perceauing thereof.
Marcus Varro a learned Roman, as Censorinus telleth in his booke De die natali, measured all time by three spaces: whereof one was from the beginning of men, to the first flud: for the ignorance of the things which happened therein called (...), vnknown. The second from that floud to the first Olympiad; for many fables and tales therein reported, tearmed (...), fabulous. The third and last, from the first Olympiad to his age, containing more certaine truth of historie, and therefore called (...), historicall.
This was Varro his iudgement commended by Cicero also in his first booke of Academicall questions: where speaking to Varro hee vseth these words: Thou haste opened the age of thy countrey and ordering of times. Vnto Varro herein agreed Iulius Affricanus in his third

booke of Chronicles, (As Eusebius witnesseth in his tenth book De praeparatione Euangelica) vntill the time of the Olimpiads, saith Affricanus, there is no sure knowledge in the Greeke Historie, all thinges beeing confusedly written without agreement betweene themselues: But the Olimpicke times haue beene exactly handled of the Grecians, by reaso^ of regestring their acts and records therein, of no longer time then euery foure yeares space. Censorinus after him speaking of the time from the first Olimpiad; In this space, saith he, was neuer any great dissentio^ or controuersie among writers for computation of time: except in some sixe or seauen yeares at the most. And euen this little that was, Varro himselfe by his great skill and diligent paines, at the length discussed, and founde out the truth, and shewed cleare light: by which the certaine number not of yeares onely, but euen of daies might be perceaued.
The Grecians, saith Chitraeus in his Chronicle, haue no certaine computation of times, and order of yeares before the Olimpiads. This was the iudgement of the best learned in all times, in all countries, for all kinde of skill, concerning the certaine, accou^t of time by Olimpiads vsed of the Grecians, receaued of the Romanes, followed and commended of Christians, euen the flower of the^, the most ancient Fathers, Clemens Alexandrinus. Eusebius, Hierome, Orosius, and

other for knowledge of Gods worde most famous and renowned: continued and kept from age to age, not contradicted with reason of anie. Except peraduenture some to shew the finenesse of their wit by Sophistrie, might cauill against it. For the better vnderstanding of that which hath bin, and shall hereafter be said of Olympiads; it shal not be amisse here to shew what is meant thereby.
Olympia was a certaine place of Greece, where games of running, wrestling, leaping and such like were instituted by Hercules in honor of Iupiter Olympius, wherof the place was called Olympia, and the games Olympiads, and Olimpiac games, and the sports of Olympia, which after Hercules for a long time beeing discontinued, were at the length renewed againe by Iphitus King of that countrie, about seauen hundred seauentie and fiue yeares before the birth of our Sauiour Christ. Beeing so reuiued, they were from that time forward continued, by the space of a thousand yeres and more after, euery foure yeares in sommer, about the month of Iuly solemnized. This foure yeares space was called Olympias. By these Olympiads the Grecians numbred their yeares, counting from that time wherein they were begun againe by Iphitus. As appeareth by Velleius Paterculus, Solinus, Phlegon, Pausanius, Censorinus: who all referre the beginning thereof to Iphitus: neyther for this

matter that I know of amongst writers, is there any doubt at all. Beyond Iphitus I cannot warrant any certaine account of yeeres among the heathen, greatly meruailing at the folly of those men, who busie themselues in searching for sure knowledge by ordered times, many ages before.
A Christian Prince not long agoe standing much vpon his parentage, by this kinde of men was seduced. A trifling Courtier perceiuing his humor, made him beleeue that his petigree in ancient race of royall blood, might be fetched from Noa his Arke: wherewith being greatly delighted, forthwith he laid all busines aside, and gaue himselfe wholly to the searche of this thing so earnestly, that hee suffered none to interrupt him whosoeuer, no not Embassadors themselues, which were sent to him about most waightie affaires. Many meruailed heereat, but none durst speake their mind: till at the length his Cooke, who^ he vsed sometime in stead of a foole, told him that the thing which hee went about, was nothing for his honor: for now saith he, I worship your Maiestie as a God; but if we goe once to Noas Arke, wee must there your selfe and I both be a kinne.
This saying of his foolish Cooke cast him in a dumpe, and stayed the heat of his earnest studdy, and brought him to a better mind, from his vaine error in deceiueable times, farre beyond

the compasse of truth: which, as before hath bin shewed, was limited from the first Olimpiad downeward, within these limits of time by the testimonie of Varro, Affricanus, Censorinus, and the Iudgements of manie other learned men in all ages, being certaine and void of error, is the reach of Daniels weekes: yea to come nearer home by 200, yeares and more, within that part thereof, which by the learning, wisedome, and knowledge of excellent men, hath beene made most famous: that is to say from the Persian Monarchie, in the first yeare of Cyrus, to the second of Vespasian Emperour of Roome; wherein the Cittie of Ierusalem was destroyed, and the Iewes common wealth ouerthrowne, within the lists and compasse whereof, the fulfilling of this Prophesie is contained, euen Beroaldus himselfe, though an aduersarie of the receaued Grecians Chronologie, in his 2. booke, and 2. chapter: where hee saith, that before the times of Cyrus the Greek Histories haue no certainty: seemeth to acknowledge some truth of Historie afterward: whereof he giueth this reason, because in Cyrus his age, were the 7. sages of Greece liuing together, one of them beeing Colon the Athenian, acquainted with Croesus King of Lydia, who fought against Cyrus. This whole space from the beginning of Cyrus his raigne, to the destruction of the holy Cittie by Titus, containeth 629. yeares from the Olimpiad,

wherein Cyrus began, to the same season of that yeare, wherein Ierusalem, Temple, and Citie was set on fire. For the Persian kings raigned by the space of 230. yeares. From the death of the last King of Persia to the birth of Christ, were about 328. yeares and a halfe. And thence to the desolation of Ierusalem set on fire 70. and a halfe with two monthes, or there about.
The proofe of these three partes, in this order I minde to follow. But before I come to the right path, as it were of the Persian times: It shall be requisite, first to take certaine stumbling blockes out of the readers way: whereof one is the opinion of the Hebrewe writers, who by great reason should haue been skilfull in these matters, in regard of their deliuerance from slauish captiuitie, and many other benefits graunted vnto them by the Persian Kinges. Some of these writers reading in the 11. of Daniell of a fourth king to raigne in Persia; and presently after a prophesie of the ouerthrow of that Empire by Alexander the great: thought there could not possibly be any more than foure in all. The names forsooth of these foure they gather from Esdras, making mention in his fourth chapter of Cyrus, Assuerus, Artaxerxes, Darius, and then after in his seuenth chapter of another Artaxerxes. Now lest that Esdras should seeme by fiue names, to dissent from Daniell, speaking onely of foure kings, they

make the first Artaxerxes to be all one with Assuerus, and because the last king of Persia, ouercome by Alexander, in the Histories of diuers nations was knowne by the name Darius: to make all good, they say he had likewise two names, one Artaxerxes, the other Darius. This was Aben Ezras opinion, one of the wittiest and best learned amongst them. R. Moses a Spaniard and Priest, came somewhat nearer to the trueth, parting these two names Assuerus, and Artaxerxes mentioned in the 4. of Ezra, betwixt two seuerall Kinges, and so by his iudgement they were fiue in number. Others, as R. Sadiah, and Abraham Dauison, counting Daniels fourth king not from Cyrus, but from Darius the Mede inclusiuely, leaue onely three kinges for the Persian Monarchie to runne out vnder them: that is, first Cyrus, and after him Assuerus, the third and last Darius, the supposed Sonne of Ester by Assuerus. But howe can this agree with Esdras in whome fiue names of the Persian Emperours are recorded? Well enough say they, for Assuerus and the first Artaxerxes were one and the same. And likewise Darius and the second Artaxerxes by Abraham Dauisons opinion. Now concerning the yeares of their raigne. Aben Ezra maketh this reckoning of his three former kinges yeares. Cyrus to haue continued three yeares, Assuerus foureteene, Darius twelue, the rest of that Monarchie

expired in Artaxerxes, whose 32. is mentioned in scripture: but Dauison giueth to Cyrus three, to Assuerus sixteene, to Darius 32. In whose second (as he sayeth) the Temple was builded, and himselfe slaine 30. yeares after by Alexander: But the most generall and receaued opinion seemeth to bee that which is declared in their Hebrew Chronicles Rabba and Zota: that the whole time of the Persian kingdome was 52. yeares, counted from the first of Darius the Mede: whereof 18. were spent before the building of the Temple, and 34. after.
This is the Rabbinicall stuffe of the chiefe Masters of the Hebrewes, being at ods betwixt themselues, and dissenting from others, and therefore not without cause doth Pererius in his commentaries vppon Daniell (speaking of this chronologie of theirs) say, that it is false, fained, full of faultes, toyes, ignorance, absurditie, and vnconstancie, and altogether ridiculous, as it is indeede. Temporarius is more sharpe and bitter against them. The Thalmudists, Cabbalists, and Rabbines (saith he) are blinde in the Persian times, and the writinges of the Iewes herein plaine proofes of pittifull ignorance in them: who can reade the chronologies of the Rabbines, their Seder Olam Rabba, their Seder Olam Zota, their Historicall Cabbala, without laughing? Therefore the knowledge of times is not to bee fetched from the dotings of these

men being more blinde than moules. All this which they say is true I confesse: The Church of God for other matters is much beholding to the Hebrew Rabbines, beeing great helps vnto vs for vnderstanding holy scripture in many places, as well of the new testament as the olde: but touching the knowledge of the Persian Empire, wherein they should haue bin most cunning, they were as blinde as beetles, no light herein amongst them for knowledge to be seene, but darkenes for ignorance enough and too much. The reason whereof is, that they wanted the key as it were of prophane Histories, and secular learning, to vnlocke the shut and hid meaning of Daniels oracles. Without the which by scripture alone it ca^ neuer be opened. Some of them not disdaining to read the Latine and Greeke histories, by the direction of these guides went not so far astray. Iosephus in his Antiquities prooueth it. This may suffice to cleare the right way from the first stumbling blocke.
Annius Viterbiensis hath been another to the downfall of many, setting forth certaine ancient chronicles, vnder the names of Berosus, Manetho, and Philo; and together with them, one other of the Persian Monarchie, fathered vpon Metasthenes an ancient Persian: Wherein he reckoneth the kinges of the Persian Monarchie, eight in number, in this order: First Cyrus, then ancient Artaxerxes Assuerus: After

him Darius with the long hande, the fourth Darius Nothus, the fift great Artaxerxes Darius Meneon: the sixt Artaxerxes Ochus: the seuenth Arses: the eight and last an other Darius. The whole time of these kings he maketh 190 yeres. These books thus commended with such glorious titles of noble and ancient Historiographers, were in great request and much followed of many learned men, and excellent Diuines, for a long time embracing the^ as the only true Chronologie of all other, and alleadging their authorities as oracles from heauen vndoubted and sure: beeing indeede nothing else but masking counterfaites, couered with the glorious titles of auncient and famous writers. At the length they were found out and detected by the cunning of diuers skilfull men: who searched vnto them and sifted them nearely. Volaterranus in his fourteenth book, giueth no credit vnto them. Lewes Viues in his preface to the eighteenth booke of Augustine de ciuitate dei, calleth them monsters, and dregges, and friuolous bookes of vncertaine Authors. Gerardus Mercator counteth of them no better than Fables, and false and forged writinges. Ioseph Scaliger inueyeth sharply against them in many places, terming them lies, dreames, forged and fained stuffe. And the Author thereof himselfe he calleth vnlearned and shameles. Iohannes Vargara, Beatus Rhenanus, Functius, Beroaldus,

Pererius, and Temporarius.
All these haue vncased these counterfait Authors, and taken the visardes from their faces: But especiallie aboue all the rest, the two last named Pererius and Temporarius, haue laied the^ open to the wide world, to appeare that which in very deed they were. That is not ye true Berosus, Mauetho, Metasthenes, and Philo the^selues: But all false, and forged out of Annius his shop of lies: Whome Temporarius therefore calleth a triffeler, a iugler, a deceauer, and the books so set forth by him, toyes, lyes, legerdemaine, witcherie, bastards, changelinges. Pererius reprooueth Annius his childish ignorance, follie, rashnesse, arrogancie, and the writinges themselues he termeth false, erroneous, fained, lies, deceits, with this conclusion in the end. Valeat igitur, and in perpetuu^ valeat haec Anniana Chronologia, and quae toties a viris doctis profligata and iugulata est, iaceat in posterum, sempiterna hominum obliuione sepulta: nec sit post hac qui eam exhumare, and ad fidem aliquam atque authoritatem, quasi ad vitam reuocare audeat. Sat sit adhuc eam, cum non erat bene nota, imposuisse multis, nunc detectis atque in apertum prolatis fucatis eius mendaciis, and fallaciis, si quem circumuenerit, ac deceperit: nimis profecto stupidu^ and vecordemeum fore necesse est. That is, Let this Chronologie therfore of Annius farewell, yea for euer let it farewell; and that which hath

often bin cast down, and the throte thereof cut, let it hereafter lie buried in euerlasting forgetfulnesse: neither let any take it out of the graue, and call it backe againe into credite and authority, as it were to life. Let this be sufficient, that it hath alreadie deceaued many, whilest it was not thoroughlie known: but now the coloured lyes and deceits thereof being detected and brought to light, If hereafter any be deceaued thereby, he must needes bee too too blockish and witlesse.
This is Pererius his censure, no otherwise in my iudgement then such forgerie and falsehood hath deserued: whereof take this as a manifest argument. Iosephus in the tenth booke of his Antiquities the 11. Chapter writeth, yt Megasthenes (...), that is in the fourth book of his Indian affaires, making mention of Nabugodonosor: went about to prooue him, (...); to haue passed Hercules in prowesse, and greatnes of acts: which place Peter Comestor in his Scholastical Historie vpon Daniel, vsing to proue Nabugodonoserum fortitudine and actuum magnitudine Herculem transcendisse: that Nabugodonosor went beyond Hercules in valour and great acts, citeth Megasthenes for it in his booke of Iudgements, reading Iudiciorum by some corruption in the translation of Iosephus, crept in for Indicorum. Hereupon Annius transforming first Megasthenes into Metasthenes:

and then Indica, that is Indian affaires, into Iudicia which signifieth iudgements: made this the title of his forged stuffe, Metasthenes his booke of the iudgement of times. This I hope is enough, if any thing can bee enough, to keepe men which haue eyes, from taking hurt at this blocke.
An other much like vnto it hath bin the conceited fancie of Mathew Beroald in the thirde booke of his Chronologie the eight Chapter, setting downe the Persian Kinges in this order. The first Cyrus, the next Assuerus Artaxerxes, the third Darius Assirius, the fourth Artaxerxes Pius, the fift Xerxes: And then after him the other sixe in order, as they haue beene declared and named by other. Of these eleuen Kinges how many yeares particularlie euerie one raigned, it is vncertaine saith Beroaldus; but generally the whole time of all was 130. yeares, beginning with Cyrus in the 3. yeare of the 80. Olympiad, and the 295 of Rome. This is Beroaldus his opinion, for the kings and time of that Empire: much like that of Annius. In maner it is more honest, beeing not fathered on other: in matter as absurde and ridiculous, if not more; making more kinges, and fewer yeares: thrusting in such as neuer were knowne, and fayning names which neuer were heard of. For where was Assuerus Artaxerxes, Darius Assirius, and Artaxerxes Pius, euer spoken of by any

Author of credit diuine or prophane? Who euer besides himself, once dreamed of an Artaxerxes Pius to be Father to Xerxes? Or that Xerxes made warre against Greece before his Fathers death? Aeschilus a learned Poet, who florished euen in those verie times, in his Tragedie called Persa, might soone haue taught him a better lesson: raysing his father Darius long before dead, out of his graue to tell newes. Doeth not such stuffe as this deserue the tearmes of monsters, dregs, dreames, lyes, toyes, as well as that opinion of Annius, which euen Beroaldus himselfe reprooueth? Is it not worthy of such a farewel, as that wherewith Pererius biddeth Annius his Chronologie adew?
These be the opinions, which in the course of Chronologie, haue to diuers learned men, been occasions of error. The vanity whereof shall yet better appeare by that which followeth, beeing layde vnto them. For as diuers sorts of cloath compared together, and held to the light, are quickly by the eye discerned, the course from the fine: So the approoued true historie of ancient time, beeing laied to these latter conceits, will leaue an easie view for reason, and the eyesight as it were of the minde, to iudge which is best.
First for the kinges of Persia who they were that raigned therein. The name of the first to be Cyrus, is agreed of all. The second was Cambyses,

heire thereunto as wel by birth as his fathers will. The next lawfull king after him was Darius: whose father Histaspis, as Seuerus Sulpitius in his second booke of the holy Historie writeth, was cosen German to Cyrus. The fourth king succeeding to the imperiall Crowne of Persia, was Xerxes the sonne of the same Darius. Then the other sixe in order; of whom amongst writers, that I know of, there is no controuersie at all. The first foure kinges here named, in that order succeeding one another, haue beene so recorded by those names vnto vs, of most ancient Poets, and noble Historiographers, which eyther liued in the dayes of the said kinges, or els came very neare vnto them, and so haue bin deliuered from hand to hand, and from age to age, to this day continued by a long successio^ of the most skilfull men for learning, that euer haue beene: whether rightly or no let reason scan. First the dominion of the Persians was large and wide, and contained manie countries. A great part of India, all Medea, Parthia, Babilonia, Chaldea, Hyrcania, Armenia, Arabia, Mesopotamia, Phaenicia, all the land of Israell and Iuda, all Egypt, and much of Lybia, all Syria, and the lesse Asia; wherein also they had their imperiall seate at Sardes a Cittie of Lydia, the kinges of Persia oftentimes making their abode therein. And continuallie theyr deputies in their absence, most of the Kinges

blood or alliance. Besides Cyprus, and manie other Ilands. To be short, it reached from Persia all a long, so neare Greece and Europe, that there was no land left to part them, but the Sea called Aegeum. And that in some place so narrow, as a bridge hath beene made ouer it from brinke to brinke, not a mile long, with continual recourse and traffique betweene them. These were the places of this Monarchie, of all other for wisedome and prowesse most famous.
The times therof, by the singuler knowledge and vertues of excellent me^, were no lesse noble. The seauen wise men of Greece so renowmed, Thales of Miletus, Solon the Athenian, Chilon the Lacedaemonian, Pittacus of Mytilene, Bias of Priene, Cleobulus of Lindia or Caria, and Periander the Corinthian, all much of one standing, about the time of Cyrus. Besides them Pherecides the Syrian, and Pythagoras both for deepe knowledge wondered at, Zenophanes, Anaximander, Heraclitus, Anaximines, Philosophers. Aeschilus, Anacreo^, Pindarus, Simonides Poets. Theagines, Hecataeus, Dionisius, Herodotus, Storie writers. Partlie in the dayes of Cambyses and Darius: partly in the time of Xerxes: Then Socrates, Thucidides, Euripides, Sophocles, Democritus, Hippocrates, vnder Artaxerxes, and his sonne Darius Nochus, about the times of the Peloponesian war. Plato and Xenophon, were Socrates his schollers, who

continued towards the end of ye Persia^ Monarchie, with Isocrates, whose schollers were Theopompus and Ephorus, both historiographers, so contrarie one to another by their masters censure, that the one needed a spur to set him on; the other a bridle to hold him in. Aristotle and Demosthenes saw the end. Many of these were borne, and dwelling in those places which were vnder the Persian gouernment; and payed tribute vnto them.
In these places and times so furnished, and bewtified with these worthy ornaments, marke the wayes and meanes, whereby the kings of Persian made their names known and preserued their memorie. By proclamation whereof we haue an example in the first of Esra. Thus sayeth Cyrus king of Persia and so forth. By letters to and fro, wherof are to be seene in the same book and Thucidides, and other: making mention by name who sent them, and to whom. By immunities and priuiledges as in the seuenth of Esra. By ambassage whereof manie examples are reade in Herodotus. Cambyses sent to the Aethiopian king, and Darius to the Grecians: By leagues and couenants of peace, as we read in Thucidides. By coynes, as the peeces of gold coyned by Darius Histaspis, thereof called Darikes. By erected monumentes. The same king going to war against Scithia, erected at Bosphorus two pillers with two inscriptions, one in Greeke, the

other in the Assyrian language, thereon engraued; declaring the Nations which went with him: And at the riuer Toarus in Thracia, an other with this inscription: HITHER CAME DARIVS THE SONNE OF HYSTASPES KING OF THE PERSIANS, LEADING HIS ARMIE AGAINST THE SCYTHIANS, as Herodotus declareth in Melpomine. By Cities and Riuers called of their names Cyropolis of Cyrus, Cambysene of Cambyses, Xerxene of Xerxes; Cyrus a riuer in Scythia, and Cambyses an other. In Volaterranus, Pomponius, Mela, Plinie, Strabo, by their pictures. Mandrocles painted Darius sitting in a thorne, after the manner of the Medes: and conueying ouer his Armie, which he dedicated to the Temple of Iuno, with mention of Darius his name. By their Images: and those remayning many ages after. Plutarch in Alexanders life, telleth that Alexander seeing the Image of Xerxes throwen downe by the company pressing into the kinges Pallace of Persia; stayed at it, and spake vnto it, as it had beene aliue. Lastly, by their Tombes, testifying their names to the worlde after their death: being a thing desired of al euen of meane account, and willinglie yeelded of kinde posteritie, that the memorie of their name may endure, and not die with themselues. Strabo in the fifteenth booke of his Geographie from Aristobulus, and Onesicritus, recordeth

that the toombe of Cyrus was found by Alexander, so many yeares after his death preserued, with an inscription testifying who he was. And that Darius also had the like memoriall.
The names then of the Persian kings could not possibly bee hid, by so many meanes being made knowne in flourishing times, and learned ages, and places of knowledge, and withall their Courtes frequented with many noble Grecians, for vertue and birth. Hippias, and Demaratus, whereof the one had been king of Sparta; the other tyrant of Athens: Metiochus the eldest sonne of Miltiades, Democedes a famous Phisition of Croton in Italie, who healed king Darius and his wife Atossa of grieuous paines, and diuers other which were too long to rehearse, to omit many braue soldiers of Greece seruing them in their warres.
Now let the Reader vse his skill for choice of the names, and number of the kinges betwixt Cyrus and Xerxes. Whether with Beroaldus he wil haue these three; Assuerus Artaxerxes, Darius Assyrius, and Artaxerxes Pius, in so many ages neuer knowne or read of in any author of reckoning: or only these two; Cambyses, and Darius Histaspis from Theagines of Rhegium, and Hecateus of Miletus, storie writers: the one vnder Cambyses, the other vnder Darius, deliuered vnto vs by continual succession, from age to age, by the space of two thousand yeares and

more, by the carefull diligence of the best historiographers, that euer haue bin in the world, without any disagreement or controuersie amongst them. Thus much for the kings now concerning their yeares.
That the beginning of Cyrus was the first yeare of the 55. Olympiad, is agreed of all: the first yeare of Cyrus, sayeth Codomon in his chronicles; of all writers is applied to the first of the 55. Olympiad. Ioseph Scaliger prooueth it by two testimonies in his fift booke de emendatione temporum. How manie ancient and learned writers so euer saith Scaliger, haue accounted times, euery one of them hath cast the first of Cyrus, to the first of the 55. Olympiad. Diodorus Siculus, Thallus, Castor, Polybius, Phlegon; as the most auncient and learned Author Tatianus writeth. Africanus also in Eusebius testifieth the same in these wordes. After the 70. yeres of captiuitie, Cyrus raigned ouer the Persians that yeare wherin the 55. Olympiad was celebrated, as may appeare by the Libraries of Diodorus, and the Histories of Thallus and Castor, and besides of Polybius and Phlegon, yea of other also who regarded Olympiads, for the time is agreed vpon of all. This therefore for the beginning of the Persian Monarchie beeing so generally testified, may suffice. If any here doe aske in what part of that yeare Cyrus began to raigne, it is gathered from the same Africanus

probablie in the third booke of his Chronicles: where, as Eusebius testifieth of him, in his tenth booke de praeparat. Euang. hee reckoned from the first Olympiad to Cyrus, 217. yeres. Which is not otherwise true, except Cyrus begin toward the end of that yeare. Againe, in the fift booke of his Chronicles, making the fourth yeare of the 83. Olympiad, the fifteenth of the Persian Monarchie; as we read in the same Eusebius his eight booke de demonstrat. Euang. he leaueth the beginning of Cyrus to the first yeare of the 55. Olympiad, nere the end thereof: as euery one may easily perceiue.
The beginning thus made manifest, wee are now further to search the end of that Empire: Which beeing once likewise founde maketh knowne the continuance thereof. Alexander the great was the man which ouerthrew that Empire: whose death by the testimonies of Diodorus Siculus in the seuenteenth book of his Historicall Liberarie, Arrhianus in his seuenth booke, and Eusebius in his Chronicles, is set in the hundred and fourteenth Olympiad. What say I Diodorus, Arrhiamus, Eusebius, when as all, whosoeuer wrote of those times, agree herein, by Gerardus Mercator his report in his Chronicles? The death of Alexander, saith he, of all writers is noted to haue happened in the hundred and fourteenth Olympiad, when Hegesias was chiefe ruler at Athens. If this testimonie

of Mercator be of lesse importance, in regard of the late time wherein he liued; Iosephus an ancient Author of credit and skill, in his first book against Appian beareth him record, very constantly affirming this to be verified by the vniuersall consent of all writers; yt Alexander died in the hundred and fourteenth Olympiad. This is somewhat, but not altogether inough, except we can learne in what part of that first yeare of the same Olympiad hee died. For the knowledge of this we are beholding to Eusebius. Whose words are these in his eight booke de demonstratione Euangelij. (...). That is in English thus much, Alexander ended his life in the beginning of the hundred and fourteenth Olympiad.
Making then our account fro^ the fiue and fiftieth Olympiad, to the beginning of the hundred and fourteenth, wherein the light of Macedonia was put out; wee finde the space of two hundred thirtie and sixe yeares between approued not by weake coniectures, friuolous conceits, or trifling toyes, but a strong consent of writers, which as Iosephus in his 1. book against Appian, is a sure token of vndoubted truth; when they all agree. Six yeares and about three quarters before Alexanders death, the Persians had beene by him subdued, receiuing as great a blow, as euer before other Nations had

receiued from them; their power now beeing brought to an end. How is this proued? The yeare is declared by Diodorus, the second of the hundred and twelfth Olympiad, the month by Arrhi^mes, October, the day by Plutarch is found the first of that month. This was the vnhappie yeare of the Persian ouerthrow, the wofull month of their fall, and the sorrowfull day of king Darius his vndoing, who after this victory was contemned of his men, forsaken of his souldiers, betraied by his seruants, made a slaue to his Captaines, in most base manner shut vp within a vile wagge^, couered with filthie skins, as it were in a prison, and so carried about at their pleasure. In the end they stabbed him with many woundes, and left him for dead, slew the waggener, thrust the beasts through with darts, which wanting a guide strayed from the high way about halfe a mile. Where one of Alexanders souldiers going to drinke, by chance espied the waggen, and comming vnto it found the king now drawing on; who first craued of him a little water. After he had drunke, acknowledging this for the last miserie of his wretched estate, that hee was not able to requite his kindnes, and withall wishing well to Alexander for the great honour which hee had done to his wife and children, hee ended his life in the third yeare of the hundred and twelfth Olympiad, as appeareth by Diodorus Siculus, and Arrhiames;

who further hath set downe the moneth Hecatombeon, beeing the season of the Olympick sports, and answering partly to our Iune, and partly Iulie: This was the tragicall end of that mightie king, making proofe of the brickle estate of Princely pompe, and the vnstayed stay of worldly glorie, wherein he liued neere sixe yeares.


These limits thus bounded of the Persian Empire, that is to say, the fiue and fiftieth Olympicke exercise for the beginning, and the entrie of the third yere of the hundred and twelfth for the end, giue sure euidence of the whole continuance to be two hundred and thirtie yeares, if we begin from the fiftie and fiue Olympiad; if from the end about nine or ten monethes after in the spring of the yeare, when Cyrus began to raigne as is probable and likelie, by that which before hath beene declared, two hundred and nine and twentie yeares with two or three months. And thus they are deuided among the Persian kinges.
Cyrus raigned thirtie yeares, recorded by two auncient Historiographers liuing in the Persian times, in their Persian Histories; Dionisius and Ctesias; Cicero also in his first booke De diuinatione, Iustin, Clemens Alexandrinus 1. Strom. Eusebius in his Chronicle, Hierom on the seauenth of Daniel, Beda in his book De sex aetatibus confirme the same: and

Orosius in his second booke against the Heathen, bringeth Tomyris the Queene of Scythia, after she had slaine Cyrus in battaile and throwen his head into a vessell of blood, insulting ouer him with this speech: Now fill thy selfe with blood, which could neuer yet satsifie thee this thirtie yeares. This had been foreshewed to Cyrus by a dreame, as Cicero from Dionisius reporteth. VVherein the sunne appearing at his feete, and Cyrus catching at it thrice with his handes, euerie time it trowled it selfe away. Which the skilfull Magi of Persia interpreted of thrice ten yeares raigne.
Cambyses succeeded him, the time of whose raigne was seauen yeres and fiue months: which together with the seauen monethes more of Smerdis the vsurper, and counterfait brother of Cambyses, made vp eight yeares, as Herodotus declareth in Thalia.
Darius Histaspis ruled by the space of full sixe and thirtie yeares, as Herodotus writeth, and Eusebius in his Chronicles, and Seuerus in his second booke. Xerxes in the second yeare of his raigne subdued the Aegyptians, and in the sixt inuaded Greece with an innumerable army, yet driuen to flie by a few. In the 16 yeare after, and one and twentieth of his raigne, being the last yere of the seauentie and eighth Olympiad, as Diodorus Siculus declareth by his cowardise and corrupt life, hee growing into contempt

with his Nobles was slaine: Many writers giue him one and twentie yeares. Seuerus, Beda, Eusebius, Clemens Alexandrinus, 1. Stromatum hath (...) for (...) twentie six for twentie one: an easie slip in writing far from the enditers minde.
Artaxerxes the long handed was his sonne, who held that Monarchie by the space of fortie yeares; witnessed by Diodorus Siculus in his eleuenth and twelfth bookes; Eusebius, Hierom, Isidorus, Beda, with other.
Xerxes and Sogdianus after him enioyed the Empire one yeare betweene them both.
The next was Darius Nothus, holding the imperiall crowne ninteene yeares, as Diodorus Siculus, Tertullianus against the Iewes, Eusebius, Isidorus, Seuerus, Beda and other declare.
Artaxerxes Mnemon succeeded him, and continued in his gouernment the longest of all other; euen three and fortie yeares, my Author is Diodorus in two places: first in the ende of his thirteenth book, and againe in his fifteenth; who likewise witnesseth that Artaxerxes Ochus his successor ruled three and twentie yeres: which is confirmed by the testimonie of Sulpitius in his second booke.
The last but one was Arses, continuing three yeares in his Empire by Sulpitius. In whose death the bloud Royall from Cyrus, was extinguished; all his brethren and children by cruell

treason beeing made away. A iust reward of his father Ochus, his Tigerlike, and Woluish crueltie in murthering his Princesse.
The last of all was Darius Codomanus, an vsurper rather than a lawfull heire, who of all the rest had the hardest hap in his imperiall state, receiued by wrong, continued in toyle, ended in woe, after sixe yeares, which by Eusebius, Isidorus, Hierom and others, was the time of his raigne.
The whole number and generall summe of all from first to last, is two hundred and thirtie yeares; so by this reckoning of euerye seuerall kings raigne, is found nine or ten monethes in the whole aboue the Olympick account, from the end of the first yeare of the 55. Olympiad. These months must bee taken partly from the one and twentieth of Xerxes beeing not fullie expired, as appeareth by Diodorus Siculus, giuing him not ful one and twentie: yet (...) more than twentie. And partlye from Arses; whome Bagous a faithles Eunuche poysoned, (...). that is, nowe raigning the third yeare, saith Diodorus about the beginning of his seuenteenth book, thereby signifying that it was not fully compleat; and partly also from the sixt of the last Darius which was not whollie and perfectly finished. For Artaxerxes Mnemon begun his raigne in the end of the Peloponnesian warre, or a little after in

the month of Aprill, as may bee gathered by Diodorus Siculus, in the end of his thirteenth booke, compared with Thucidides. Thucidides saith it begun in the beginning of the spring two months before the yeares end: which time by Codoman and others skill, fell to the first of Aprill. It lasted (saith Thucidides) seuen and twentie yeares, and some few dayes more. Darius died after the peace made betweene the Athenians and the Lacedemonians, saith Diodorus Siculus, meaning that peace which made an end of the warre.
Giuing therefore him three and fortie, and Ochus three and twentie, and Arses three, all perfect; they must end about that season in the first yeare of the hundred and eleuenth Olympiad. Arses I graunt reached to that yeare, yet not to that moneth of Aprill by a good while. For Philip king of Macedonia, was slaine by Pausanias in that hundred and eleuenth Olympiad the first yeare thereof, witnesses Arrhiames and Diodorus, and that in winter about the foure and twentie of Ianuarie, as Chitraeus affirmeth in his Chronologie. But Arses was poysoned, and Darius had succeeded him, while Philip was yet a liue; and had purposed to haue made warre against him, as Diodorus writeth. Hereby it is euident that neither Arses his three yeares, nor Codomans sixe yeares could be fully ended, seeing that he was slaine in summer,

about the beginning of the third yeare of the hundred and twelfth Olympiad, as appeareth by Arrhiames.
Thus are found from the beginning of the fiue and fiftieth Olympiad, to the death of the last Monarch of Persia, two hundred and thirtie yeares. And from Cyrus thither two hundred and nine and twentie yeares, and more by gesse about two or three moneths. And lastly from Cyrus to Darius, now the second time by Alexander vanquished, in which conquest many make an ende of the Persian Empire, two hundred and eyght and twentie yeares and a halfe.
These times of the Persian Monarchie, being I know not by what mishap brought into question and great controuersie among the learned, and withall of great importance for the vnderstanding of God his word; haue neede to bee strengthened with all force that may bee. And therefore I will yet make further search for stayes and props as it were to vpholde them.
Eusebius in his tenth booke, de Preparatione Euangelica saith, that the second yeare of Darius Hystaspis, was the first of the threescore and fift Olympiad, so found iust by the former reckoning. The warre of Xerxes, that Darius his sonne, and Nephew to Cyrus, of all other was the most famous. Who led against Greece the greatest armie that euer was heard of before

or after, of twentie hundred thousand fighting souldiers; for the huge multitude thereof drinking running riuers drie, and as Cicero saith, walking vpon the Seas, and sayling on the land: because that hee digged through great mountaines, to make the seas meete for his nauie to passe. And in other places of the sea, made bridges to goe ouer a foote. Leonides a valiant king of Sparta, to the wonder of all ages following, onely with foure thousand men, encountred, resisted, and fought with that powerfull hoste, at the straights of Thermopylae. Xerxes at the first sent fifteene thousand, then twentie thousand, and last of all fiftie thousand against them. At euery time making choyce of better men then before. First begun the Medes, bearing hatefull mindes against the Grecians with desire of reuenge; for the slaughter of their kinsemen a little before at Marathon. Next after them fought the Persian souldiers themselues, in whom the Persian king of all other nations vnder him reposed most confidence. Yea of these Persians were chosen the most valiant men amongst them all, called the immortals; because their number neuer decayed. Last of all was a choyce companie of the chiefest men of all the whole hoast, for stoutenes, valour and courage, picked out from the rest. And they also stirred vp by great promises of rich rewards. All these fighting against

that handfull of the Grecians had like successe: a great number was slaine; many wounded, the rest put to flight. Xerxes maugred, thus stayed by a few from passing further into Greece, was at his wits ende, till such time as one of that countrey had informed him of another way, by which some of the armie came vpon the backe of Leonides, and so inclosed him on both sides, which Leonides hauing intelligence of by a secret friend a little before, sent all the rest of his companie home sauing fiue hundred. These he encouraged, and the more to enable them for battell, exhorted them to dine before, with resolued mindes to take their supper among the dead. Which done, and night come, they inuaded the Persian campe, came to the kings Pauilion, slew all that were in it, wandred to and fro seeking the king, who a little before had got himselfe away, and killing on both sides as they went. The Persians in the darke not discerning the matter, were greatly amazed, ran out of their tents they wist not whether, fearing nothing so much as this, that the whole power of Greece had set vpon them. In this hurlie burlie they slew one another, till the day light bewrayed the trueth, when Leonides with his souldiers fought still. At the length wearied with ouercomming, and oppressed on euery side with mayne force of that powerfull number; they dyed in the middest of their enemies

with glorie, hauing slaine to the number of twentie thousand.
The battailes wherein Xerxes had this welcome into Greece, many olde writers with great agreement refer to the beginning of the seuentie and fiue Olympiad. Diodorus in his eleuenth booke writeth, that Xerxes warred against Greece in the first yeare of the seuentie and fiue Olympiad, Callias then being Maior of Athens. Dyonisius Halicarnassaeus in the beginning of his ninth booke agreeth hereunto; naming that very yeare of the same Olympiad, and the same Maior of Athens, for the time of Xerxes fighting against Greece. Eusebius also in his Chronicles hath a plaine confirmation hereof, referring to the first yeare of this seuentie and fiue Olympiad, that battaile wherin Xerxes his power by sea fought against the Athenians, and tooke a most shamefull ouerthrow. Diogenes Laertius in the life of Socrates writeth, that in the time of Callias his gouernement at Athens, in the first yeare of the seuentie fiue Olympiad, the Poet Euripides was borne; Suidas nameth the very day of his birth, euen that wherein Xerxes his nauie was ouercome by the Grecians at Salamis. The same Laertius reporteth from ancient Historiographers, that Anaxagoras being borne in the seuenty Olympiad, was twentie yeares old when Xerxes passed into Greece, and Callias ruled at

Athens: thereby giuing vs to vnderstand that by the receiued opinion of former ages, Xerxes inuading Greece, and Callias his Maioraltie at Athens, fell to the first yeare of the 75. Olympiad. In like manner Pindarus, borne in the 65. Olympiad, and at Xerxes his warre fortie yeare olde by Suidas record, approueth the trueth of that account. Who so list to make triall shall easilie see an exact agreement betwixt this Olympiad and the yeares of Xerxes before rehearsed. Africanus in the fift booke of his Chronicles, affirming that the fourth of the 83. Olympiad, was the 20. of Artaxerxes Longimanus, and the 115. of the Persian kingdome, maketh all good.
The Athenians after the Persians ouerthrow, and Xerxes his flight out of Grecia grew mightie, hauing by their great nauie obtained the rule of the sea, and subdued many people of Greece. Whereupon the Lacedemonians, who dwelt in that part of Greece which was called Peloponnesus, suspecting their power, and fled vnto for ayde, tooke parte against them; which in the ende was the occasion of that long and fierce warre betweene the Athenians and the Lacedemonians, called the Peloponnesian war. The one people spoyling by sea, the other by land: so that by this means the Grecians which most gloriouslie had triumphed in many battailes ouer the mightie Monarchs of the world,

were now brought low, and pittifullie wasted in most lamentable manner, turning their forces from the common enemy to their ruine against themselues: the continuance, beginning, and ende of this warre is most exactly described by Thucidides an Athenian Gentleman, the penner thereof, who flourished in that time and saw the warre with his eyes, from the beginning to the end; yea was a chiefe captaine therein, a writer for certaine trueth of historie, and perfect reckoning of time most excellent, and of such account in the ages following, that euen the best followed him, and gaue credite vnto him. Demosthenes the famous Orator of Athens tooke paines to coppie out his bookes eyght times with his owne hand, as Lucian reporteth. This exact historiographer, in the entrie of his second booke, telleth that this warre begunne in the fifteenth yeare of the league, which after the taking of Eubaea was made for thirtie yeares to come, Aenesias being then Maior of Sparta, and Pythodorus of Athens, and the yeare of their Maioraltie now within two moneths expired, in the beginning of the spring. For the better vnderstanding of these wordes, concerning the taking of Eubaea, and the thirtie yeares league, I will briefely touch the historie.
Eubaea was an Iland neere vnto Greece, in the Aegean sea, which hauing been subiect and

tributarie to the Athenians; at the length spying their opportunity, by reason of a great ouerthrow of the Athenians in Baeotia, and the Lacedemonians holding against them; by which their power was greatly weakened, fell from them, refusing to serue them, or pay them tribute any longer. For this cause Pericles a noble man of Athens, was sent against them with a great hoast, who once againe subdued them. And a little after their returne from Eubaea, now the second time by Pericles so conquered; a league was made betweene the Athenians and the Lacedemonians, to endure for thirtie yeares following. The articles and couenants of this league were grauen in a pillar of brasse set in Olympia, as Pausanias recordeth in the first of his Eliacx, where hee also declareth the time thereof to be the third yeare of that Olympiad, wherein Criso of Himaera won the race. Now that that Olympiad wherein Criso of Himaera won the race, was the 83. we haue the testimonie of Dionysius Halicarnassaeus in the ende of his tenth of Roman antiquities, and the beginning of the eleuenth. Hereof it followeth by Thucidides compared with other writers; that the Peloponnesian sturres began in the first yere of the 87. Olympiad; for that is iust the 15. yeare from the third of the 83. wherein the thirtie yeares league was made. Againe, for cleerer confirmation hereof, Diodorus Siculus in his

twelfth booke hath left in recorde, that the yeare of Pythodorus his Maioraltie at Athens, in the ende whereof Thucidides beginneth that war, was the first of the 87. Olympiad.
This therefore I holde for a certaine trueth, that the beginning of the Peloponnesian warre happened in the first yeare of the 87. Olympiad, toward the end thereof, about the beginning of Aprill, so as the Olympicke exercises of that yeare, were solemnized the sommer before going: and the 4. 8. 12. 16. 20. 24. 28. sommers of that war were Olympicke yeares; which of the fourth and the twelfth is plainly testified by Thucidides himselfe in the third and fift bookes of his historie. In the seuenth yeare of this war Thucidides telleth, that Artaxerxes died in winter; which for the certaine knowledge of the Persian times, is a most excellent place, a sure fort, a sound argument, a cleere testimonie, a strong proofe from him, which liued at that time, was as olde as the thing it selfe which he telleth, saw the effect with his eyes, studied from his heart to set forth the trueth. If the former account be agreeable to this testimonie of Thucidides, as it is most precisely, I see no cause why it may not triumph ouer all aduersaries, how powerfull and how well learned soeuer. Marke then the agreement.
Xerxes his 21. wherein he dyed, was saide to be the fourth of the 78. Olympiad. Artaxerxes

raigned 40. which being numbred from that yeare of his fathers death, bring vs iust to the fourth of the Olympian, and the seuenth of the Peloponnesian war; the set time of Artaxerxes his death by Thucidides: who best of all other writers now extant in the world, knew the certaine trueth of it, and for credite in this matter, hee hath none comparable vnto him. The same Thucidides making the 20. of the Peloponnesian war, to be the thirteenth of Darius Nothus, confirmeth it once againe. For adding thirteene of that war vnder Darius, to seuen vnder Artaxerxes, that number is made vp. The continuance and ende of this war, by the same Thucidides is shewed in his fift booke: where hee declareth the whole time of that war to haue been 27. yeares, to the ouerthrow of the Athenian Empire, and the taking of their hauen Pyreus by the Lacedemonians, and their associates. Of this had gone a Prophesie long before in many mens mouthes: which himself with his owne eares many times had heard; that it should endure thrise nine yeares: which is confirmed by Diodorus Siculus, very plainely affirming that war to haue lasted 27. yeares, in two places: first in his twelfth booke, treating of the beginning of that war, and after in his thirteenth booke, speaking of the last yeare thereof, which hee saith was the last of the 93. Olympiad, as in deede it was: for 27. yeares added

to the first of the 87. Olympiad, wherein it began, make an end of it in the fourth of the 93.
After Thucidides followed Xenophon, who from the one and twentie yeare of that warre where Thucidides left, continued in writing the course of that Historie to the ende: a man liuing in those dayes carefull of the truth, and skilfull in Historie, commended euen by Beroaldus himselfe, though otherwise an aduersarie of the true ancient Chronologie, and Historie of those times: In the fifth Chapter of his fourth book, Xenophon saith Beroaldus, writeth that the gouernment of Athens was committed to a few in that Olympick yeare, wherein Crocinus the Thessalian won the race, but which Olympiad it was in number hee declareth not: Which if he who then liued, and prepared himselfe for seruice had done; hee had rid vs of much trouble. Let vs see therefore what help is giuen by this excellent writer to ease vs herein.
In his first booke of Greeke affaires, this first hee setteth downe verie flatlie, that the yeare wherein Enarchippus at Sparta, and Enctemo at Athens were Maiors, was the first of the 43. Olympiad, wherein Eubotas the Cyrenian won the race, and a new game of yoaked horses called Synoris was first ordayned, at that time won by Enagoras of Elis, where lest anie

might think Xenophon to haue bin deceiued, we haue for further warrant, the testimonie of Pausanias in the first booke of Eliacx. The running (saith hee) of two horses of ripe age called Synoris, was instituted in the 93. Olympiad, wherin Euagoras the Elian got the victorie. Nowe this being made plaine by Xenophon, that Enarchippus was gouernour of Sparta in the first yeare of the 93. Olympiad; if it can bee further shewed by him, in what yere of the Peloponnesian warre the same Enarchippus ruled at Sparta; we shall easilie perceiue by euident direction from this worthie Author, to what yeare of euery Olympiad, the beginning, midst, and ending, and euery particular yeare of that war appertaineth.
To shew this we haue a Catalogue of all the chiefe Spartan Magistrates, which bare Office in euery yeare of that warre called Ephori, set downe by Xenophon in order by their names, in the second booke of his Greeke Historie in these words. The first (saith Xenophon) was Aenesias vnder whome the warre began in the 15. yeare of the 30. yeares league, made after the taking of Eubaea. After him succeeded these, Borasidas, Isanor, Sostratidas, Exarchus, Agesistratus, Agenidas, Onomacles, Zeuxippus, Pityas, Pleistolas, Cleiomachus, Ilarchus, Leon, Chaeridas, Patesiades, Cleosthenes, Lycarius, Exeratus, Onomantius, Alexippidas, Misgolaidas,

Isias, Aracus, Enarchippus, Pantacles, Piteas, Archytas, Endius. In whose time Lysander hauing done the exploits before rehearsed sayled home. By this Catalogue of the Lacedemonian Maiors, it is manifest that Xenophon for account of time, in this warre agreeth most exactly with Thucidides. The war began in the nine months end of Aenesias the first Ephorus, and ended at the pulling downe the walles of Pyreus, 27. yeares after, which reach to the nine months end of the 28. Ephorus; so that from the beginning of the second Ephorus, neere three months after the beginning of the warre, to the end of the 28. Ephorus, nere three months after the end of that war; are likewise iust 27. yeares, perfectly and fully compleat.
And is it not euen so by Xenophon? doth not hee declare the throwing downe the walles in the hauen Pyraeus to haue happened toward the end of Archytas his gouernment at Sparta? And are there not full and euen 27. yeares from the beginning of Brasidas, the second Ephorus to the end of Architas, who by Xenophons number in that Catalogue was the 28? Is there any beetle so blind, which cannot perceiue this exact agreement betwixt Xenophon and Thucidides, for the account of those yeares?
The Peloponnesian warre as may be gathethered by Thucidides, begun with the spring

about the first of Aprill toward the end of Aenesias his yere. Brasidas succeeding him begun his yeare about the beginning of the next sommer, beeing the first of that warre. The second sommer fell to the third Ephorus, and so in order with the rest. The eleuenth Ephorus by Xenophons beadroule was Pleistolas, for the tenth sommer: which is verified also by Thucidides, in his fift booke, speaking of a league made betwixt the Athenians and the Lacedemonians in the end of Pleistolas his Maioraltie at Sparta before the sommer of the eleuenth yeare. The 21. Ephorus recited by Xenophon for the 20. sommer, is Alexippidas. The trueth whereof is witnessed and confirmed by Thucidides likewise in his eight booke, wherein hee telleth that in the twentieth yere of the Peloponnesian warre a peace was concluded betweene Tissaphernes Lieutenant of Asia, and the Lacedemonians in the plaine of Meander, Alexippidas then being Ephorus of Sparta. The next after Alexippidas, for the 21. yeare there named, is Misgolaidas, for the 22. Isias, for the 23. Aracus. Then after them followeth Enarchippus the fiue and twentieth Ephorus for the 24. yeres sommer. This Enarchippus being first placed in the beginning of the 93. Olympiad, and after by his Catalogue found in the 24. yeare of the Peloponnesian war; leaueth this cleere by Xenophons meaning, that the 24. yeare of that war

beginning with sommer, was the first of the 93. Olympiad. The three Ephori after Enarchippus, succeeding in the other three yeares of that Olympiad set downe by Xenophon in order, not onely in his table, but euen in the context of his Historie, for three seuerall yeares are these. Pantacles, Pyteas, and Archytas, in whose time the Athenians beeing conquered by Lysander, were driuen to yeeld. The next yeare after was the first of a new Olimpiad, so acknowledged most truely, and verie orderly by Xenophon himselfe, in his second booke; where hauing declared the thinges done vnder Archytas. In the yeare following (saith hee) was that Olympiad wherin Crocinus the Thessalian won the race, Endius then bearing office at Sparta, and Pythodorus ruling at Athens. Now if anye aske which Olympiad this was in number; that most manifestlie appeareth by the former, namely expressed to haue beene the 93, so that it needed not againe for the next expresly to say yt it was the 94. which had bin nothing els but recocta crambe, according to the prouerb, Colworts sodden againe. Furthermore Xenophon not far fro^ the begining of the 2. book writeth, that the nauie of the Lacedemonia^s was deliuered to Lysander. Whe^ 25. yeres of the war were past and gone, which must needes be in the 29. yeare. Immediatlie after hee addeth that in that yere Cyrus killed two of his kinsemen, for not

holding their handes within a muffe when they met him, as was vsed to be done to kings, in token of honour and loyall dutie for their greater securitie, that they might bee void of all suspition and feare of harme. And then followeth that the next yeare after which must needes bee the 27. and last, Archytas was Ephorus of Sparta.
Thus from Xenophon wee learne, that which Beroaldus wished, the 24. and 27. yeres of the Peloponnesian warre yoaked the one with the first, the other with the last of the 93. Olympiad, which for sound knowledge of the Persian times, to discerne them a right is very material, and a sure bulwarke for defence of my former Chronologie. Whereby was proued that Cyrus begun in the first of the 55. Olympiad towarde the end, from which time to the fourth of the 93 nere ended are 155. yeares. That is to say. 30 of Cyrus, 8 of Cambyses, 36 of his successor, of Xerxes 21. of Artaxerxes 40. and with that of Xerxes, and Sogdianus included 20. of Darius Nothus; whose raigne ended almost together with the Peloponnesian warre, as before hath beene declared by the testimonie of Diodorus Siculus, and appeareth by Thucidides making his thirteenth, the twentieth of the warre.
Erastosthenes an auncient writer in the time of Ptolomeus Euergetes (a man to vse Plinie his terme) cunning in the subtiltie of all learning

and approued of all (so Plinie testifieth of him in his second booke) set forth certaine rules of Chronologie; which Dionisius Halicarnasseus for the truth thereof, and exact reckoning greatly commendeth in his first book of Roman antiquities. These rules haue beene preserued vnto this age by the carefull diligence of the ancient learned father Clemens Alexandrinus. 1. Strom. From the first Olympiad to Xerxes passing into Greece, he accounted 297. yeares: thence to the beginning of the Peloponnesian warre 48. and after to the end and dissolution of the Athenians common wealth 27. all these gathered together are 372. from the first Olympiad, so saieth Eratosthenes, agreeing with Xenophons reckoning to Archytas his Maioraltie at Sparta ended with that warre and the fourth of the 93. Olympiad. For 93. Olympiads are fourescore and thirteene times foure yeres, that is the number of Eratosthenes 372. From which summe 54. Olympiads, contayning 216. before that wherein Cyrus begun, being taken awaie; with almost one yeare more from the beginning of it to Cyrus, there remaineth for the Persian Monarchie to the end of the Peloponnesian warre 155. yeares before spoken of.
Diodorus Siculus was a man of wonderfull paines, and exceedingly precise in exact computation. He spent thirtie yeares in making his Historie, from Sicilie his natiue countrie hee

trauailed into Egypt, and the greatest part of Asia, and Europe to search the trueth of those thinges which hee wrote. A diligent reader of all the auncient writers before him from Herodotus, and other before and after succeding in order, whom hee hath followed in the matters which he telleth. And therefore not vnfitly the title of his worke is called, not a Historie but a Librarie. Iustinus Martyr called him the most famous Historiographer of the Grecians. Eusebius commendeth him by the name of a notable man, in great request among the learned. But Henry Stephen aboue all other praiseth him exceedingly, giuing him that place and degree amongst the learned Historiographers, which the sunne hath amongst the starres; in regard of exact defining those thinges which he writeth of by ordered times. This writer therefore confirming all those thinges before spoken of touching the kings of Persia, and the time of their raigne may be in steed of many: so as in him alone we may see the iudgement not onely of Herodotus, Thucidides, Xenophon; but also of Callisthenes, Duris, Timaeus, Philiscus, Theopompus, Ephorus, and other by him diligentlie read, perused and cyted, which at this day are not any where found.
It were infinite to bring all that might bee said out of Authors for the verefying of this Chronologie: tedious to be read, and toylesome

to be written. Therefore passing ouer many testimonies of diuers writers, I will now come to the Roman Storie, to see if it likewise by agreement of time, may auaile any thing to fortifie those limits and bounds, which haue beene set for the Persian kings.
The Romanes in continuance of time became Lordes of Greece, where the Olympicke sports were celebrated. And therefore it could not otherwise bee, but that they knew well enough how the yeares of their Citie were answerable to the Olympick reckoning of the Grecians. Polybius of Megalopolis a Cittie in Arcadia, neere as auncient as Eratosthenes, by Cicero accounted amongst the best authors, for worthinesse and credit commended by Iosephus, by Velleius Paterculus honoured with this testimonie, that he was a man excelling in wit, had in great estimation, and followed by Liuie and other: in the third booke of his historie affirmeth, that the first Consuls of Rome were 28. yeares before the passage of Xerxes into Greece, which was in the end of the last yeare of the 74. Olympiad, as appeareth by that which before hath bin declared. Hereof it followeth, that the first of the 68. Olympiad beeing the 14. of Darius Histaspis, was that wherin the new gouernment of that Cittie by Consuls was established. Whereas before it had bin gouerned by kings for the space of 244. yeares

from the first building thereof, vnto this time adding 28. yeares, or seauen Olympiads more. We come toward the end of the last yeare of the 74. Olympiad, and being the 272. of Rome, wherin Xerxes passed into Greece, as Polybius testifieth; the next yeare after was the first of the 75. wherein Xerxes with his great armie was ouercome, as before hath bin prooued.
The truth hereof is verified by A. Gellius in the last chapter of his seuenteenth book, where he writeth that Xerxes was ouercome by Themistocles at Salamis foure yeres before the consulship of Menenius Agrippa, and Horatius Puluillus, wherein a great kinred of noble Romans called Fabij, to the number of 306. hauing taken vpon them at their owne charge to fight against a certaine people, were slaine by the subtiltie of their enemies, circumuented at the riuer Cremera: for this is declared by the Romane histories, to haue fallen out in the 277 yeare of Rome, and the 33. from the banishment of the kings.
Dionysius of Halicarnassus in his fift booke of Romane antiquities, reckoneth sixteene yeares betwixt Brutus one of the first Consuls death in the end of his yeare, and the Marathon fight, referring the battaile at Marathon to the seuenteenth yeare after Brutus his buriall, and the eighteenth after the kings driuen out of the Citie, wherein Gegainus, Macerinus, and Minutius

Augurinus were Consuls.In his 7. Booke. Which by constant agreement of almost all authors, hee sayeth was in the second yeare of the 72. Olympiad. So he maketh the 31. of Darius Histaspis, and the 262. of Rome, and the second of the 72. Olimp. all one yeare: as it was indeede most exactly agreeing to the testimony of Polybius before rehearsed, and the Greeke Chronologie of the Persian kings and the Olympick reckoning. A. Gellius in the place aforenamed saith, that the Marathon battell happened in the 260. yeare of Rome: which is likewise true according to his beginning of the yeares of that City, as afterward shall appeare.
Liuie the famous Latine writer of the Romane historie, in the end of his fift booke telleth, that the Frenchmen and Swichers hauing inuaded a certaine people of Italie, were by a noble ambassage from Rome intreated to depart, without hurting their friends and associats hauing no cause offered to doe it. This verie stoutly they refused to doe, except they might haue part of that countrie graunted vnto them to dwell in: a thing thought vnreasonable, that by force of armes and dint of sword they should go about to take that which pertained nothing vnto them. Whereuppon they fell to a fierce and sharpe battaile, wherein the Roman Embassadors contrarie to the law of armes, tooke part with their associate neighbours against

them: yea killed one of their chiefe captaines. At the first the French by their legates complained, and receiuing no amendes for the wrong done vnto them; their heartes were so stirred, that presently without any more adoe they turned their force against Rome, going in all haste to inuade it. About eleuen mile from the Citie, they were met withall by the Romans, who being put to flight, fled the greatest part to other places, a few to Rome; which was so interpreted by the Citizens, as though all the rest had beene slaine; being astonished with feare, they had no regard to shut their gates. At the length they sent a certaine number of the stoutest and strongest me^ into their Castle called the Capitoll, well appointed with victuals and weapons to defend it. The aged Senators being resolued to hazard their liues, and to bequeath themselues to the sword, went home, sate downe in theyr robes at the entrie of their houses in open sight of their enemies, who meruailed thereat: yet vsing no crueltie, till one of them for stroaking M. Papirius an old Senator, his beard was rapt on the pate for his labour with an iuorie staffe. Then began the slaughter, first of him, after of the rest; the Citie they sacked and burned, all but the Capitoll, which had bin taken also by them in the night climing vp, had not the keaking of Geese in time bewrayed their intent. This calamitie happened to the Romans in

the 365. yeare of Rome, as we reade in Liuie: which by auncient registers and recordes of the Censors, of long time preserued in their posteritie, from father to childe by many ages, was testified to be the 121. yeare from the last kings raigne. These records Dionysius Halicarnassaus read and saw with his eyes. This 121. after the Consuls, with 244. before them, make vp Liuies number 365.
Now that Rome was taken of the Swichers in the beginning of the 98. Olympiad, is prooued by great agreement of learned writers in the first booke of the same Dionysius, which from the 68. wherein the Consuls began, is iust the 121. yeare. Adding hereunto the yeares before the 68. Olympiad, to the beginning of the Persian Monarchie in the 55. and those after the 98. Olympiad, to the ende thereof in the third of the 112. all agree. The Olympick reckoning of the Persian times is iustified by the Romaine Historie.
Polybius in his third book telleth, that L. Aemylius being Consul of Rome, was sent into Illyrium with an armie in the first yeare of the 140. Olympiad. At what time Annibal set forward in Spayne to besiege Sagunt, which by the Roman historie is found the 533. of ye citie. Of these 533. one hundred and eleuen were betweene the death of the last king of Persia and that setting forth of L. Aemylius. And 192. of

them were from the beginning of Rome, with the seuenth Olympiad to Cyrus. There remayneth for the Persian Empire 230. yeares, which space for it before hath been declared, and now once againe prooued by the yeares of Rome.
One proofe more of the testimonie fro^ Heauen, and so an end: Time is of the Philosophers defined to be the measure of the heauenly motion; the course and mouing whereof being alwaies certaine and vniforme, without disorder or going astray, how so euer it is with men, there can be no error in it. By that measure is knowne the length from one Solstitium to another, from eclips to eclips, exactlie without missing a daye or an houre. Astronomie, saith Temporarius, teacheth what space of Heauen, the Sunne, the Moone, and other Starres, runne out in an houre, a daye, a moneth, a yeare, yea many thousand yeares, and defineth the spaces from one eclips to another most perfectlie; so as one of them being once found, we cannot after for the times following be deceaued in a daye. Ptolomie a learned Aegyptian, of a deepe and long reach in the knowledge of Astronomie, and other Mathematicall sciences, in his Almagest hath recorded diuers eclipses of the Moone of ancient time preserued amongst them, from the beginning of Nabonasars raigne, long before the Iewes captiuitie in Babylon: which Censorinus in his booke, de die

natali, speaking of, saith. Vt a nostris ita ab Aegyptijs, quidam aenni in literas relati sunt, quos Nabonozaru nominant; quod a primo eius imperij anno consurgant As (saith he) of our men, so of the Aegyptians, certaine yeares haue been committed to writing, which they call Nabonasars, because they rise together with the beginning of this Empire. One of these eclipses there by him so registred, happened in the seuenth yeare of Cambyses, about the 16. daye of Iulie, 224. yeares, and 140. dayes after the beginning of Nabonasar, which was the sixe and twentie daye of Februarie, in the first yeare of the eyght Olympiad, and the fift yeare of Rome. Another by the same Ptolomie recorded, was in the yeare wherein Phanostratus was Maior of Athens, 365. yeares, with 112. dayes after Nabonasars coronation, which leade vs to the eyghteenth daye of Iune, in that yeare of Phanostratus now very neere spent. The distance of these ecclipses, by examination is found full a hundred one and fortie yeares within one moneth. So much time by the course of Heauen ran out, from the sixeteenth daye of Iulie, in the seuenth of Cambyses, being the second yeare of the 64. Olympiad; to the eyght daye of Iune, in the yeare of Phanostratus, which Diodorus Siculus very truely setteth in the second of the 99. Olympiad, yet blamed for it by Temporarius in his third booke of Chronologicall

demonstrations: who striueth for that yeare of Phanostratus to be the third of the named Olympiad but all in vaine. Heauen it selfe giueth sentence against him, and verifieth the testimonie of Diodorus, making the very same number neither more nor lesse.
Meto, a skilfull and learned Astronomer, as Ptolomie in the third booke of his Almagest declareth in the 316. yeare of Nabonasar, the 21. daye of the Aegyptian moneth Phamenoth, answerable by our computation to the 28. day of Iune, Apsendes then ruling at Athens, obserued the Astronomicall poynte of summers beginning, called Solstitium, which in this our age is about the eleuenth of that moneth, the Sunne then entring into the tropicke of Cancer. So great alteration in the space of 2020. yeares is bred betwixt our time and theirs, for want of exact appoynting and right ordering of the leape yeare. From that time to the end of the 50. yeare of Calippus his first period: Hipparchus an excellent Mathematician, a man whome nature made partaker of her secrets, as Plinie writeth of him; gathered a perfect summe of 152. yeares. That this period of Calippus began with the third yeare of the 112. Olympiad, it is agreed by cleere consent of many writers. For about that time Darius was slaine, and thereby this period of Calippus began together with Alexanders Monarchie,

now by the death of Darius established in his hands, without clayme of any. In memorie whereof this period was ordayned, and the account of yeares after taken from that head.
The 50. yeares then of this period being taken from the former summe, there remaynes 102. yeares from the end of Apsendes his gouernement, to the death of the last king of Persia: which by the recorde of auncient writers is so acknowledged and verified, placing Apsendes in the last of the 86. Olympiad (which was the 32. yeare of Artaxerxes the long handed) and the slaughter of Darius in the third of the 112. These 102. with 127. and some odde moneths from Cyrus to the 32. of that Artaxerxes included, containe the receaued time of the Persian kings, 229. yeares with some few moneths more to the beginning of Alexanders Monarchie, at the last Persian kings death. Which euen that most famous eclipse of the very next yeare before, wherewith Alexanders souldiers were scared, eleuen dayes before his last battaile against Darius; putteth out of doubt. For from that in the seuenth of Cambyses before spoken of, to this Astronomical comming by exact calculation, findeth 192. yeares and 66. dayes. Which with the time following from the last eclipse to Darius his death, and the yeares of Cambyses and Cyrus before the

first Eclips, make vp that full reckoning.
Thus the glorious seruant of all the worlde the Sunne, which among other seruices to the vse and behoofe of men (whereof he tooke his name in the holy tongue to be called (...), which signifieth a minister or seruant (according to that in the fourth of Esdras: God commanded the Sunne, the Moone and Starres, that they should serue man) hath this for one appointed vnto him, to be for times, and yeares, and dayes. Euen this Chronologer I say, of all other without exception most true and sure, witnesseth for Herodotus, Thucidides, Xenophon, Eratosthenes, Polybius, Diodorus, and other writers of auncient time; if they bee not for credit sufficient of themselues, that their Chronologie of the Persian yeares is good; the mouth of Heauen which cannot lie hath approued it.
The trueth for this poynt being thus opened; it now remayneth to see what may be brought against it, and to remoue some doubtes, as it were mists from the readers eyes.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus in the preface to his first booke of antiquities, affirmeth that the Persians continued not aboue 200. yeares in their soueraigntie. It is true being accounted from the death of Cyrus, who by the space of thirtie yeares was occupied in winning that Empire; and being once wonne, they kept it neere 200. yeares after.
Ioseph Scaliger a man of rare giftes, a great light of this age; one whome the Churche of GOD for his paines, is much beholding to, in his fift booke de emendatione temporum, speaking of Xerxes his passage into Greece, is so vncertaine and wauering in this poynt, that it is hard to finde in what iudgement he rested. For first hee maketh it a thing vndoubted, that Xerxes passed into Europe in the ende of the fourth yeare of the 47. Olympiad: and in the beginning of the 75. fought at Thermopylae: then a little after hee thinketh that passage of Xerxes to haue happened the yeare before, that is to saye, in the end of the third yeare of the 47. Olympiad, being moued thereunto by the authoritie of Herodotus and Thucidides. The one euen Herodotus in Polymnia, making mention of an eclipse of the Sunne, at such time as Xerxes marched forward with his hoast from Sardes toward Europe in the spring time of the yeare: which by Scaligers calculation fell to the third yeare of the 74. Olympiad, and so Xerxes his battailes in Greece to the fourth yeare of it. The other, that is Thucidides in his first booke, writing that the Persians once againe inuaded Greece in the tenth yeare after the Marothon field, which being fought in the second yeare of the 72. Olympiad, the tenth after it, is the fourth of the 74. Againe, contrarie to both these sentences, he yet alleageth another from

Eratosthenes, Diodorus Siculus, and Plutarch, three worthy men for skil, who referred Xerxes his passage into Greece to the first yeare of the 75. Olympiad: and this he approueth most of al in the chapter of the first Consuls. Thus Ioseph Scaliger (...), that is, dissoluing one doubt by another as one saieth, leaueth his reader in the briers; which I will assaye to helpe him out of either all or some, if happely I can.
First therefore concerning Herodotus, it is euident and playne by his testimonie, that Xerxes fought his battailes in Greece, in the first yeare of the 75. Olympiad; because he maketh account of 80. yeares from the first of Cyrus thether: and if this bee not enough, the same Author in playne wordes declareth, that the games of Olympia were celebrated about that very time, wherein Leonides resisted his huge hoast, and stopped their passage. First in Polymnia speaking of this matter, he sayeth, that the time of the Olympiad fell out together with that busines. Againe in Vrania he confirmeth it, telling that as Xerxes marched forward from Thermopylae, certaine Grecians came vnto him offering their seruice, who being asked what the Grecians then were about, answered that they kept and beheld the Olympian games, the winners whereof receiued an Oliue crowne: which one Tigranes a noble

Lord of Persia hearing, presently burst forth into this speech: What worthie men are wee brought to fight against; which striue not for money, but vertue and prowesse. This then by Herodotus his owne mouth being thus made cleere, that the yeare of Xerxes fighting in Greece, was an Olympicke yeare, it could not possibly be in Herodotus iudgement, as Scaliger would haue it, the fourth yeare of the 74. Olympiad. Moreouer, Herodotus writeth in Vrania, that Callias was then Maior of Athens, when Xerxes tooke that Citie and burned it, which yeare of Callias his Maioraltie at Athens, being the first of the 75. Olympiad, as hath been sufficiently alreadie declared by the testimonies of Diodorus Siculus, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Diogenes Laertius, and Suidas, what doth it else but make further proofe of the same Herodotus his meaning against Scaliger? But what shall we then say to the eclipse of the Sunne, mentioned by Herodotus, which as Scaliger writeth, prooueth that warre to haue been sooner by one yeare? H. Bunting dissolueth this doubt, by acknowledging that eclips to haue happened in the spring time of that yeare, wherein Xerxes went to Sardes, which Herodotus by some error as he thinketh, transposed to the yeare following, when Xerxes went from Sardes into Greece, an easie slip in Historie.
Now to come to Thucidides, whereas hee writeth that the tenth yeare after the Persians ouerthrow at Marathon, they came againe with a huge armie to subdue Greece; he meaneth that yeare to be the tenth, wherein Xerxes hauing gathered his armie together, marched to Sardes: which was the very beginning of that warre, for that was the first leading of his armie against the Grecians: and in that yeare he made a bridge from Asia to Europe, for the passage of his armie ouer, and digged downe the hill Atho, to make the seas meete for his Ships to passe through, and sent his Ambassadors into Greece, to demaunde land and water; which was a kinde of proclayming warre against such as refused to be subiect vnto him. These things all were done in the tenth yeare after the Marathon fight: and in the next which was the first of the 75. Olympiad, were Xerxes his battailes fought at Thermopylae, and other places of Greece, being the eleuenth from that Marathon warre, euen so acknowledged by Scaliger himselfe in that booke, in the chapter of the Persians ouerthrowe at Marathon; howsoeuer after he seemeth to be of another opinion, and to make it the tenth, not vnderstanding Thucidides aright.
Yea but Eratosthenes, Diodorus Siculus, and Plutarch, three excellent writers, referred the passage of Xerxes into Greece, to the first

yeare of the 75. Olympiad, and so his battaile at Thermopylae, to the second yeare thereof. Eratosthenes indeede I graunt, reckoning from the first Olympiad to Xerxes passing into Greece 297. yeares, reacheth to the beginning of the second yeare of the 75. Olympiad, and goeth a yeare further then other. Yet so as if any thing be here amisse, it is mended in his next account, from Xerxes to the Peloponnesian warre, the distance whereof he maketh 48. yeares; which with the former 297. are in all 345. from the first Olympiad, to the first summer of the Peloponnesian warre: which is a most perfect reckoning receiued and agreed on, so there is no great matter of difference.
Now touching Diodorus Siculus, his words are so manifest against that assertion of Scaliger, as maketh me meruaile that he should be so deceiued in mistaking them. First the worde which he vseth is (...), he warred, or led his armie, being much more large then he passed ouer. Againe hauing described the yeare by the number of the Olympiad 75. the first yeare thereof, and the chiefe officer of Athens Callias, and the Romane Consuls: he setteth downe for that yeare so described, the battailes of Xerxes at Thermopylae, at Artemysium, at Salamis, and his flying out of Greece, and the leauing of Mardonius there with a great hoast. And in the second yeare of that Olympiad, being the

yeare of Xantippus his Maioraltie at Athens; he placeth the victory of Pausanias against Mardonius at Plateae, and the departure of Xerxes from Sardes to Susa, after the ouerthrow of his forces by sea and by land: so that there is no doubt at all by Diodorus Siculus, but that Xerxes his fighting at Thermopylae, happened in the first yere of the 75. Olympiad, according to the testimonies and consent of auncient Historiographers before declared.
As for Plutarch, howsoeuer that is gathered of his wordes in one place there cited by Scaliger: yet otherwhere he sheweth himselfe of another minde: For in the life of Aristides, the battell at Plateae which happened the very next yeare after Xerxes his discomfiture, hee referreth to the second of that Olymp. that by the iudgement of Scaliger himselfe so expounding the place, in his first booke treating of the Theban period. If then the next yeare after Xerxes inuading Greece be the second of the 75. Olympiad by Plutarch; needes must the yeare of Xerxes fighting in Greece, by him bee the first, which is agreeable to others Chronologie and the verie trueth.
The same Plutarch in the life of Numa maketh some doubt of the Olympick reckoning, beeing committed to writing in regard of the beginning thereof verie late, by Hyppias of Elis, without any sure ground, whereunto of necessitie

we must yeeld credit. This obiection is answered by Temporarius in his Chronologie, that though it were graunted that Hyppias erred in setting downe the true and exact time of the first Olympiad, yet that hindereth the true Chronologie and order of times following nothing at all, which is very true: for set the case, that that Olympiad which Hyppias made the 40. in number, was not so much, but onely the 30. and so the first, 40. yeares short at the least of his account. It is not a pin matter. The order and account of the times comming after for all that, may be most perfect and sure without missing one minute, which I wil declare by a familiar example. The yeare wherein our gracious Queene began her happie raigne, according to the computation of the Church of England, was the 1558. of our Lorde, but in truth the 1558. and this yere by our account 1597. is in very indeed by exact reckoning 1598. The cause wherof was the errour of Dionysius, called Paruus Abbas, who was the first inuenter of this account, supposing Christs birth to haue beene later by one yeare then indeede it was: and so making that the first of our Lorde, which was the second; as is confessed and acknowledged of the best learned and most skilfull Chronologers of our age. This error in the first yeare of Christ, is no let at all to the exact reckoning of all the yeres following. For there is the same

distance of yeares, from the 1558. to the 1597. by the vsuall account: which is from the 1559, to the 1598. by the true account. Yet to speake my minde, howsoeuer Dionysius missed in the reckoning of the yeares of Christ; I hold it out of controuersie that Hippias erred not, vnto whose time the memory of the Olympiads had beene preserued, from foure yeares to foure yeares, from the beginning thereof, in times of knowledge, and places of fame, where was great concourse of people keeping the account therof, not in their mindes onely, but also in writinges as is most like. And whether hee erred or no; for the Persian times and after it is no matter, as I haue declared before, seeing the error in the first is constant in all the rest, if any error haue beene.
Therefore Plutarchs doubt for any thing that I can see, had no reason at all, but seemeth to sauour of an vsuall custome of the Academicall sect, which was alwaies readie furnished to dispute on eyther side, pro or contra, eyther for the truth or against it. For this is most certaine that hee followeth that reckoning by Olympiads himselfe in many places, as giuing credit thereunto and making no doubt thereof. In his treatise of the ten Orators he saith, that Andocides was borne in the 78. Olympiad, when Theogenides was gouernour of Athens. And that Callias was gouernour in the 92. Olympiad,

and that Isocrates was borne vnder Lysimachus in the 86. Olymp. 22. yeares after Lysias, whose birth he setteth in the second of the 80. Olympiad, in the yeare of Philocles: all which reckonings agree very perfectly to the ancient Olympick account, and the Histories of Thucidides, Xenophon, and Diodorus Siculus. Plinie in the fourth Chapter of his 36. booke hath these wordes; Marmore scalpendo primi omnium inclaruerunt Dipoenus and Scyllis, geniti in Creta insula etiamnum Medis imperitantibus: Priusquam Cyrus in Persis regnare inciperet, hoc est Olympiade circiter quinquagesima. The first of all other for grauing of marble were famous Dipoenus and Scyllis, born in the Iland of Creta, whilst yet the Medes bare rule; before Cyrus began to raigne in Persia, that is about the 50. Olympiad. Hereof Matthew Beroald in the second Chapter of his booke of Chronologie gathereth, that Cyrus began in the 50. Olympiad by Plinies testimonie, herein dissenting from other, who placed his beginning in the 55 but whosoeuer commeth with an euen minde to the truth, may easilie perceiue another meaning in Plinie, and that the words hoc est Olympiade circiter 50, ought not to be referred to that which is said of Cyrus, priusquam regnare inciperet, before he began to raigne; but the former part of the sentence giuing vs this to vnderstand the time wherin Dipoenus and Scyllis

were famous engrauers in Marble, to haue beene about the 50. Olympiad in the dayes of the Medes Soueraigntie before Cyrus had got it away from them to the Persians. Thus no dissention at all betweene Plinie and other, but great agreement is found.
Much other such like stuffe is brought of Beroaldus from diuers authors, by cold coniectures, not any sure knowledge: all for the most part in that kind as maketh either against himselfe, or nothing for him. Pericles being a yong man, was of some of the aged sort in Athens thought to fauor Pisistratus the tirant in countinance and speech, as Plutarch telleth in his life, which could not bee as Beroaldus supposed, except the old men who had knowne Pisistratus, had at that time beene a hundred yeres old. A thing in his iudgement vnlike to bee true. It is not so vnlike, as strange that a man of his learning and reading should iudge so of it; seeing that we read of many examples of men of those yeares. Valerius Corninus, who was Consull of Rome six times, liued full out a hundred yeares, and likewise Metellus Pontifex. Solinus in his Polihistor telleth, that Masinissa begot his Sonne Methymnus at 86. yeres age. In the time of Claudius Caesar, one T. Fullonius of Bononia, was found to be 150. yeres of age, which in Lydia was a common thing, as by Mutianus is reported. Terentia the wife of Cicero

liued 107. Clodia 115. Many other by Plinie are recorded in his seuenth booke the 48 49, 50, Chapters, in diuers countries betweene a hundred, and a hundred and 50. yeares olde. But of all other one Xenophilus liuing 105. yeares without anie disease or hurt of his bodie, was wondred at. That Gorgias Leontinus a famous Oratour much about that time with Pericles, liued 109. yeares, wee haue the testimonie of Appolodorus his Chronicles in Diogenes Laertius, within one yere acknowledged also by Plinie. Euen in this our age at home in our own countrie, it is no strange thing to find examples of such as liued out that time, which Beroaldus accounted so incredible, that he could not perswade himselfe of it to be true: but his incredulitie is no proofe to weaken the credit of credible writers. But I will not strike with him for this to graunt it a thing vncredible, let vs examine his reckoning.
Pericles died in the third yeare of the 87. Olimpiad (not the 88. as Beroaldus saith) before his death he had beene one of the chiefe gouernours of the Athenian common wealth fortie yeares. This Cicero teacheth in his third booke de oratore: so the beginning of his authoritie falleth to the three yeares (not of the 78. as Beroaldus would) but the 77. Olympiad. About that time some olde men gaue this iudgement of him, that he was like Pisistratus: and might

not that be done but of such as were then a 100 yeres old? surely yes; for Pisistratus died not past threescore yeares before: whereof 22. had passed from the Marathon battaile, and 20. more from the expelling of Hippias out of Athens, declared by Thucidides, and 18. before from the beginning of Hippias who succeded Pisistratus. Yet some more besides these must bee added to the old mens age to haue knowledge of Pisistratus in his life time to deale liberally, let that time be twentie yeres before the death of Pisistratus: so their age is left foure score yeres very vsuall at this day in diuers lusty men, although I would haue this obserued which Plutarch writeth, that iudgement to haue bin giuen of Pericles when hee was a young man, whereby some aduantage yet might farther be taken if it were a matter worth the standing vpo^. Aelianus in his third book, the 21. chapter (saith Beroaldus) telleth of Themistocles, that being a childe, and as hee came from Schoole meeting Pisistratus the tyrant, was willed by his ouerseer attending vpon him to goe out of the way: which he refused to doe, and asked if there were not roome enough for him besides. Whereunto is repugnant that which Iustin telleth in his second booke, that Themistocles was a young man at the Marathon war, when he must needes be at the least 66. yeares olde, if Aelianus say true: for the sonnes of Pisistratus

after their fathers death raigned 36. yeares, witnessed by Herodotus in his fift booke, then after were twentie more to the Marathon fight; and before Themistocles could in such an answer shew so stoute a minde against the tirant, it is like he was ten yeares of age.
Beroaldus here also in his account is deceiued, mistaking Herodotus, who in Terpsichore indeede affirmeth, that the Pisistratan stocke raigned 36. yeares: yet not meaning thereby as Beroaldus would faine haue it, that Pisistratus his children raigned so long after their fathers death; but that the whole time of father and sonne was in all so much. This appeareth by Aristotle, an author for credit very sufficicient, in the fift booke of his politickes the twelft chapter, making the whole raigne of the Pisistratan stocke 35. yeares, that is 17. of Pisistratus himselfe, and 18. after of his children. And so is Herodotus to be vnderstoode, giuing them 36. in all, onely differing from Aristotle in a yeare. Whereby it may be thought that Pisistratus raigned some few moneths more aboue 17. yeares: so his reckoning comes short by almost twentie yeares. Againe, there was another Pisistratus the sonne of Hippias, and Grand childe to the elder Pisistratus before spoken of, who in the yeare of his Maioraltie, dedicated in the market place at Athens, the Altar of the twelue Gods, as Thucidides writeth

of him in his sixt booke. And this in my iudgement is the man, to whome that Historie in Aelianus may be fitly applied, and stand very well with that which Iustin hath concerning Themistocles fighting at Marathon.
Yea but Plinie in his 34. booke writeth, that the Athenians the same yeare wherein the kings of Rome were driuen out, being the fourth of the 67. Olympiad, set vp ye images of Harmodius and Aristogiton, who had killed Hipparchus the tyrant: farre wide from that which Dionysius telleth in his sixt booke, that Hipparchus was ruler at Athens in the 71. Olympiad. What say you to that? Nothing, but that Beroaldus being belike ashamed of his follie in bringing such an argument, calleth it in againe as it were, by answering that it was another Hipparchus which Dionysius speaketh of. Another argument he taketh from Dionysius Halicarnassaeus in his fift booke, making the warre at Marathon later by sixteene yeares then the death of Brutus; thereby referring the yeare to the fourth of the 71. Olympiad, which by Cicero seemeth cast to the 73. wherein Coriolanus a Senator of Rome made warre against it. Here we haue nothing but vntrueth vpon vntrueth, fit groundes for such a rotten building: for sixteene yeares after that of the first Consuls, which was by Dionysius the first of the 68. Olympiad, in the end whereof Brutus was slaine, reach not to the

fourth of the 71. but to the second of the 72. Olympiad: wherein the same Dionysius in plaine words placeth that warre. As for that of Coriolanus against Rome, it happened in deed in the first of the 73. Olympiad, onely three yeares after the other. And therefore Cicero in his Brutus affirming, not that this of Coriolanus was at the same time, with that other of the Persians, but almost at that time, speaketh a trueth, dissenting nothing at all from Dionysius.
It followeth in Beroaldus: the same Dionysius in his ninth booke, Diodorus Siculus agreeing vnto him saith, that Xerxes went to warre against Greece in the 75. Olympiad, when Callias gouerned Athens: that is twelue yeares after the Marathon fight being past, to that of Xerxes at Salamis: Glossa corrumpit textum, the glosse here marreth the text with a manifest vntrueth: for neither Dionysius nor Diodorus maketh aboue eleauen yeares distance betwixt those battailes, the one placed in the second of the 72. Olympiad, the other in the first of the 75, almost in the beginning thereof. Now let any man count the distance betweene, on his fingers ends, and see if he can finde twelue yeares. But to omit this and come to the purpose: Gelo was at the time of Xerxes his warre by Pausanias and Herodotus tyrant of Syracusae. And Gelo tyrant of Syracusae, by Plutarch in the life

of Lysias the Orator, in the second of the 82. Olympiad. So the war of Xerxes must by this reckoning come backe neere 30. yeares after the 75. Olympick sport. Plutarchs words are these, (...). That is in English thus much, Lysias an exceeding rich man, was the sonne of Cephales, grand childe of Lysanias, the sonne of Cephales: his father Cephales was a Syracusian borne, and flitted to Athens for loue, partly of the citie, and partly of Pericles the sonne of Xanthippus, who perswaded him thereto being his friend and host: or as some say, for that hee was driuen from Syracusae, at such time as it was subiect to the tyrannie of Gelo.He meaneth that Lysias was borne. Being borne at Athens vnder Philocles, the next ruler after Phrasicles, hee was first brought vp with the noblest children of the Athenians, about the second yeare of the 83. Olympiad. Afterward being fifteene yeares olde, he went to Thuriae, a citie of Italie, Praxiteles then being Maior of Athens, as followeth there in Plutarch. Philocles was Maior at Athens in the second yeare of the 80. Olympiad, as Diodorus declareth. Then was Lysias borne, and being about eyght yeres

olde in the second yeare of the 82. Olympiad, he was brought vp with other noble mens children in Athens: and therein continued till the yere of Praxiteles his gouernement, which was the first of the 84. Olympiad, as we reade in the same Diodorus, and the fifteenth of Lysias his birth. Where can Beroaldus now finde in this place of Plutarch, that Gelo was tyrant of Syracusae, in the second yeare of the 82. Olympiad? What meant he so co^fidently to burst forth into this co^plaint? Tam incerta sunt apud aut hores rerum istarum tempora: So vncertaine are the times of these matters: what reason had hee for it? For hee that vnderstandeth Greeke, and compareth Plutarchs owne words, with that which Beroaldus gathereth by them, will bee ashamed (I beleeue) of such an interpreter, being so blinded with conceited affection that hee seeth not what is written, and careth not what he saith. Plutarch doth notablie in this place confirme the receiued ancient Chronologie of the Greekes: so farre he is by any disagreement from weakening their credite.
Let vs now examine one or two other places of Beroaldus concerning the time of Xerxes fighting in Greece. In the eyght chapter of his third booke, Pausanias, sayth Beroaldus, telleth in his Arcadikes, that Xerxes then passed into Greece when Gelo gouerned at Syracuse, which is likewise witnessed by Herodotus in his seuenth

booke. But that same Pausanias in his Eliaca affirmeth, that Gelo held the gouernment of that citie in the second yeare of the 72. Olympiad. Except it be a strange thing that one king should continew his raigne by the space of twelue yeares. This argument of Beroaldus is not worth a rush to proue disagreement betweene ancient writers, referring Gelo his tiranie some to the second of the 72. Olympiad, other to the first of the 75. when Xerxes passed into Europe, for the beginning of his dominion was about the second of the 72. Olympiad, as Dionisius Halicarnassaeus declareth in the seauenth booke of his Roman Antiquities. And the end thereof in the 75. Olympiad the thirde yeare thereof, as Diodorus witnesseth in the eleauenth booke of his Historicall librarie: So both might stand together well enough.


Beroaldus hath yet more matter from Pausanias in his Eliaca, who referreth the ouerthrow of Mardonius at Plateae, the next yeare after Xerxes inuaded Greece, to the 75. Olympiad: whereas Diodorus Siculus saith, that Xerxes in that Olympiad inuaded Greece, both can not bee true. The worde Olympias pertaineth sometime to the game itselfe celebrated euerie first yeare of the foure, as where Solinus telleth that the 207. Olympias was in the publike acts recorded to be in the 801. yeare of Rome, wherein Pompeius Gallus and Q. Veranius were

Consuls, and Eratosthenes in Clemens Alexandrinus accounteth from the first Olympiad to the passage of Xerxes into Greece 297. yeares. Xenophon also in his Historie of the Greeke affaires writeth, that the next yeare after Dionysius had got the kingdome of Syracusae, happened that Olympias wherein Pythodorus was Maior at Athens. In all these places Olympias is taken for one yeare onely, and that the first of the foure: in which sence Diodorus vsed it, where hee saith that Xerxes inuaded Greece in the 75. Olympiad. Now, because that from one Olympias to another were foure yeares complete; the word is also vsuallie taken for that whole space of foure yeares, betwixt one and another, not much vnlike that which we read in blessed Lukes gospell of the proude Pharisie, boasting of his fasting twice in a sabboth, taking one day of the weeke for all the weeke, from the beginning to the end. So it is vsed of Solinus, writing that Rome was builded in the first yeare of the seauenth Olympiad, and when the seauenth Olympiad began, and Iosephus in the last chapter of his fourteenth booke of Antiquities, saith that Herode tooke Ierusalem in the 185. Olympiad, hee meaneth the whole foure yeares space of that Olympiad, for that was done in the last yeare thereof. In this sence that saying of Pausanias is true concerning Mardonius his ouerthrow at Plateae in the 75

Olympiad, and so no discord proued.
As for Polybius, from whom hee gathereth the warre of Xerxes to haue been in the third yeare of the 74. Olympiad; there is no such matter. Beroaldus was deceiued in his reckoning, I haue brought the place of Polybius before, and declared his meaning.
Oebotas, a man of Achaea wonne the race in the sixt Olympiad, who for so glorious a victorie receiuing not that honour of his countriemen which he looked for at their hands, and in his owne iudgement had deserued; conceaued such discontentment thereat, that hee euen cursed them, praying that neuer any of the Achaeans more might win any Olympicke game againe: which so fell out for a long time, till at the length by the councell of Apollo his Oracle, they had in honour of Oebotas erected a piller for an eternall monument of his vertue, with an inscription testifying the same; which was performed vnto him in the 80. Olympiad, as Pausanias telleth in his Achaica and Eliaca: who for that cause meruaileth at the report of some Grecians, who saide that Oebotas fought against Mardonius in the 75. Olympiad, and thinketh it vncredible, as hee might well enough, that a man hauing wonne the race in the sixt Olympiad, should bee a fighting Souldier neere two hundred and fourescore yeares after. What is here now in Pausanias to be seene, which in his

owne perswasion doth not confirme the trueth of the Olympicke Chronologie, rather then make against it any way? For the great credite which he put therein, nothing doubting of the true reckoning of so many yeares betweene, bred that meruailing in him, and made him think that Oebotas which fought against Mardonius in the 75. Olympiad, to haue been some other of that name, rather then the ancient race winner in the sixt Olympiad. It was true, that by some they were supposed one and the same, but by such as Pausanias iudged fooles for their labour. Their folly stirred him neuer a whit from the true receiued account of Olympicke yeares. Of the certaintie whereof, what a setled and grounded perswasion he had may appeare by this, that in diuers places he maketh mention of Olympicke recordes and registers which himselfe saw and read, wherein he testifieth the memorie of the Olympiads to haue been preserued by the Eleans, in whose countrie those games were kept, and that with such care and diligence, that from the first in Iphitus his time, to the Emperor Nero, not one of them all was missing: this hee witnesseth in his Phocica, much auayling to the credite of that account.
Another obiection in Beroaldus is concerning the time of the Peloponnesian warre, of which saith he, both beginning and end is vncertaine, by the dissention of authors betweene

themselues. Plinie referreth the time of it to the fourth of the 81. Olympiad, and A. Gellius to the first of the 89. and Diodorus Siculus to the third of the 87. So saith Beroaldus. If truelie, there is great ods between them. Plinies words in the thirtie booke and first chapter are these: Plenumque miraculi and hoc, pariter vtrasque artes effloruisse, medicinam dico magicenque: eadem aetate illam Hipocrate, hanc Democrito illustrantibus circa Peloponnesiacum Graeciae bellum, quod gestum est a 300. vrbis nostrae anno. This also saith Plinie is much to bee meruailed at, that both the arts flourished together; I meane Phisicke and Magick, in the same age Hippocrates teaching the one, and Democritus the other about the Peloponnesian warre in Greece, which was made since the 300. yeare of the Cittie. That warre began about the 32. yeare of Rome, and therefore Plinie saying that it was after the 300. saith, that which is true, not purposing there to set downe by a straight and exact account, the verie iust yere wherein it began: but to gesse much about the time by an euen and readie number keeping within the compasse of truth.
In A. Gellius the 21. chapter of his seauenteenth booke wee reade. Bellum inde in terra Graeciae maximu^ Peloponnensiacum, quod Thucidides memoriae mandauit, caeptum est circa annum fere post conditam Romans trecentesimum

vigesimum nonum. That is, Afterwarde the great war of the Peloponnesians, in the land of Greece, which Thucidides committed to memorie, began here about the 329. yeares after the building of Rome. What is the cause of this difference betwixt Gellius and other? Surely not any fault of the authors iudgement, but onely a slippe of the writers pen, putting vigesimum nonum in stead of decimum nonum. 29. for 19. as may bee prooued by two reasons: First because immediatlie after those wordes, Gellius together with the beginning of that warre yoketh the yeare wherein A. Posthumius was Dictator of Rome, who killed his own son, for that with great courage he went somewhat further in fighting against the enemie tha^ his father had appointed. This yeare of A. Posthumius his Dictatorship, by Liuie is the 323. of Rome: but by A. Gellius and some other setting the building of that Cittie in the second yeare of the seauenth Olympiad, and the first Consuls in the 242. of Rome, it is the 320. running together with the first yeare of the Peloponnesian war for the greatest part of it, though not wholly, because the war began somewhat before in the 319. Another reason may bee taken from that which followeth a little after in the same chapter, concerning the time of the new gouernment of the Athenian common wealth by 30. tyrants, being as wee are taught

by Xenophon the 28. yeare of the Peloponnesian war, which A. Gellius referreth to the 347. of Rome, from which summe 28. according to Xenophons reckoning, being taken away there remayneth the 319. of the Citie for the beginning of that warre. As for Diodorus Siculus, it is vntrue that he referred the beginning of that warre to the third of the 87. Olympiad: for in flat wordes hee acknowledgeth Thucidides the cheefe of all other authors for it, to referre it to the first of that Olympiad: neither is there against it in Diodorus anie thing to be found.
As the beginning of that war is vncertaine, so the end hath as much controuersie. I thinke euen so, that is iust none at all, if Authors may bee suffered to speake for themselues, to open their meaning, and declare their minde: but let vs see this great controuersie. The greatest part of authors, saith Beroaldus, taught that war to haue continued 27. yeares. Yet Aemilius Probus saith, it lasted but 26. And Xenophon giueth it 28. and a halfe, here is great ods. The wordes of Aemilius probus are these in the life of Lysander: Lysander Lacedaemonius magnam reliquit sui famam, magis foelicitate quam virtutem partam. Athenienses enim in Peloponnesios sexto and vicessimo anno bellum gerentes confecisse apparet. Id qua ratione consequutus sit latet. Non enim virtute sui exercitus, sed immodestia factum est aduersariorum. Quid quod

dicto audientes suis imperatoribus non erant, dispalati in agris relictis nauibus in hostium peruenerunt potestate^? Quo facto Athenienses se Lacedaemoniis dediderunt. Lysander the Lacedemonian (saith he) left a great fame of himselfe, which he got rather by good lucke then prowesse: for it is well knowne that he subdued the Athenians, hauing made warre against the Peloponnesians sixe and twentie yeres, but how hee obtained, this is not so apparent: for this happened not by the manhood of his owne armie: but the disorder of the Athenians, who not ruled by their captaines, but scattered abroad from their ships, came into their enemies power; which being done the Athenians yeelded themselues. There are three seuerall times set downe by good Authors for the end of this warre. One was Lysanders victorie by sea against the Athenians at a towne in Hellespont called Aegos Potamoi, that is, Gotes floud, where Lysander espying his oportunitie, when the Athenians leauing their ships had gone to the townes there about for prouision of victuals, sodainely set vppon them, and tooke to the number of a hundred and foure score, euerie one except eight or nine, which by flight escaped away. Hee tooke also 3000. men with their Captaines, besides a great number slaine, which thing being done and the spoyle taken, he returned with minstrelsie and great mirth; hauing

as Plutarch saith, atchieued a great matter with a litle labour, and in an houre space made an end of a long warre. From the beginning of the war to this ouerthrow, whereby the Athenians power was nowe so weakned, that they could not hold out any longer, and so an ende made of that warre as Plutarch writeth: where about 26. yeares, and therefore Aemilius Probus respecting that time, as by his owne words manifestly appeareth, his account is true.
Thucidides with the greatest part of writers for the end of that warre goe about a yeare further, to the peace concluded with the Athenians, and the pulling downe of their walles: so making the continuance 27. as before is prooued. So there is as much disagreement between these two times set for the Peloponnesian war, the one by Thucidides, the other by Aemilius Probus: as there is difference betwixt these two waies, the one from London to Ware, the other from London to Hodsdon, and thence to Ware.
If meaning may be taken without cauelling at wordes, the like may bee sayd of Xenophon: not withsta^ding what soeuer Beroaldus bringeth against ye credit of his historie before spoken of, in regard of some coruptio^, which in his pinion hath happened in the notes and numbers of Olympiads and yeares. Xenophon (saith hee) referreth the 93. Olympiad to that yeare

wherein Enarchippus was Ephorus at Sparta. After whom in the same historie the next is named Pantaeles, ordeyned Ephorus in ye 22. yere of the Peloponnesian warre: which beeing so the yeare of Enarchippus, that is Pantacles, Pyteas, Archytas, Endicus: in whose yeare Lysander, the war being ended, and the walles of Athens throwen downe, returned home; by this meanes it must expire at the 25. yeres end. Contrarie whereunto Xenophon affirmeth in plaine wordes, that Lysander went home after 28. yeares and sixe months, an end being made of that war in the 29. yeare thereof: for which cause he also numbereth 29. Spartan Magistrats vnder whom the warre continued.
Thus far Beroaldus, for answere whereunto I will first set downe the wordes of Xenophon as they lie: whereby it may appeare what Xenophons meaning was. In the first place speaking of Enarchippus his yeare, he vseth these wordes. (...) etc. And this yeare saith Xenophon expired, wherein the Medes also rebelling against Darius king of the Persians became his subiects againe. In the yeare following the temple

of Minerua in Phocaea by the fall of a thunderbolt was set on fire. After winter was ended Pantacles being Ephorus, and Antigenes bearing rule at Athens. In the beginning of the spring, when 22. yeares of the warre were past, the Athenians sayled to Proconesus with all their Armie. Thence moouing to Chalcedon and Byzantium, etc. In their wordes are contained the acts of three diuers yeres. One of the Medes rebellion against Darius, which was the 24. Another of Mineruas temple burning when Pantacles was Ephorus; beeing the yeare following, that is the 25. The third of the Athenians sayling to Proconnesus after 22. yeres past of the Peloponnesian war, which was the 23. and therefore before these wordes. In the beginning of the spring, etc. I haue set a full point to distinguish them from the former, as pertayning to a diuers yeare: for here Xenophon goeth backe againe to that which had happened two yeares before. A thing vsuall enough in writers, when they will make their historie with more consequence and coherence the better hang together, to goe backe from one matter to another before omitted, and so to prosecute it on an end without interruption. I need not goe farre for examples in Xenophon himselfe, if it were a thing to be stood vpon.
This for Xenophons meaning after some diligent reading and perusing the place was my

iudgement, wherin afterward I was more confirmed by Diodorus Siculus and Codoman. For Codoman in the fourth booke of his Chronologie, very flatlie affirmeth that these wordes in Xenophon; In the beginning of the spring, etc. begin the 23. yeres of the Peloponnesian war: yea he is so farre from thinking with Beroaldus the yeare of Pantacles gouerning, though immediatly before mentioned to be all one with this: that he remooueth it two yeares off, placing one whole yeare betwixt them as I doe: yet differing herein that he placeth Pantacles in the 21. yere, which was his error, as more plainly by God his assistance shall appeare hereafter. But the testimonie of Diodorus Siculus an auncient Historiographer, is much more notable, who in his thirteenth booke referreth these acts which heere in Xenophon begin after the 22. yeare of the warre, to the 23. of the same two yeares before the Magistracie of Pantacles, which by Diodorus is set downe in the 25. yere thereof, which without all question is most vndoubtedly true; and shewed by Xenophons table of the Spartan gouernours euidently and plainely, as euery one whose sight is not dimme with a cauelling affection and wilfull wrangling may very clearely see it.
If any thing in the writing of Xenophons historie by corruptio^ of numbers be amisse, as for my part, I thinke there is none at all, if hee bee

well vnderstood: yet for one thing amisse, another which is true must not bee forsaken. Let that which is right be so still, and not cast away for that which is wrong. Xenophons table is sure, and hath the consent of excellent Authors to approue it.
Thucidides from the Marathon war, which by the learned is set in the second sommer of the 72. Olympiad, to the end of the Peloponnesian warre, maketh account of 87. yeares, that is to say, 10. to Xerxes inuading Greece, and 50. thence to the Peloponnesian war, with 27. more to the end thereof, which from the second of 72. fill vp Xenophons number of 93. Olympiads. In the last whereof by Xenophon were gouernours of Athens; first, Enctemo, then Antigones, next Callias, the fourth and last Alexias.
Let vs here a little examine how Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, in the seauenth booke of his Roman Antiquities agreeth to these, there hee writeth that Callias ruled at Athens, in the third yeare of that 93. Olympiad, which is so by Xenophon. Moreouer that the next before Callias for the second yere of that Olympiad, was Antigenes, found true in the like manner by Xenophon, and lastlie from the second yere of the 72 Olympiad, wherein the Marathon battell was fought, to that yeare of Callias he gathereth 85. yeares: which with that yeare of Callias, and the

other following of Alexias, make vp exactly the iust reckoning of Thucidides his 87.
Diodorus Siculus for Xenophons meaning may take all doubt away, and end the controuersie, who agreeing with Xenophon in the number as well of Olympiads, as yeares of the Peloponnesian warre, referreth the 24. of that war to the first of the 93. Olympiad, as Xenophon doeth, and in all the other yeares thereof writeth accordingly: wherefore the opinion of Beroaldus concerning the corruption of Xenophons numbers, I hold as true as his interpretation of 22. yeares for the next after 22. beeing past.
Now touching the second place of Xenophon, making the warre of longer continuance then Thucidides doeth: it no way hindereth the agreement of the Chronologie of those times, if his wordes be well waied in the second booke of his Greeke Historie: where after hee had declared in the last yeare of that warre, the glorious victorie of Lysander against the Athenians at Gotes floud, and the besiege of that City by sea and by land, whereby they were driuen to yeeld and giue vp their shippes to the Lacedemonians, and to throw downe their long wals in the hauen Pyreus; hee addeth that the next yeare after happened that Olympiad, wherein Crocinas the Thessalian won the race, and Endius in Sparta, Pythodorus in Athens were

chiefe officers: In which the fame of the Athenian common wealth was changed, and the gouernment of the Cittie committed to thirtie, who by their cruell tyrranie in the space of eight months, killed more than before by warre had died in ten yeares. This being done saith Xenophon, Lysander sayled to Samus, and tooke it, and restored the old inhabitants and driue out the new, and after returned home to Lacedemonia with a great bootie in the end of summer, 28. yeares and sixe months of that warre being then expired: In which time were 29. Magistrates called Ephori: The first of them being Aenesias, vnder who^ the war began, and the last Endius, in whose time Lysander sayled home. Here Xenophon fetcheth the beginning of that warre further than Thucidides, euen from the beginning of the first Ephorus, and for the end most apparantly goeth likewise beyond him to Lysanders winning of Samus, and setting order in it in the yeare of the 29. Ephorus: yea further yet hee stretcheth it, euen to Lysanders comming home; vnto which time reckoning from the beginning of Aenesias wee finde 28. yeares and a halfe.
Againe Beroaldus obiecteth dissention of Authors touching the beginning of Dionysius his tyrranie; some referring it to the third of the 93. Olympiad, some to the fourth. A waightie reason sure for a little difference of one yeare in

Xenophon from other in one thing to ouerthrow the credit of all ancient writers in an other by vniuersall consent established and agreed vpon, and yet this little difference may bee rather in shew then indeede; seeing it is a thing well knowne and confessed, that diuers writers begin their yeares diuerslie: some halfe a yeare, some verie nere three quarters before other; as Gerardus Mercator prooueth in his Chronologie: but howsoeuer it were graunted that here in one yeare, there were flatte contradiction betweene them: yet it is a ridiculous toy by one yeres difference to cut off a hundred from the Persian Monarchie.
I but A. Gellius hath yet a contrarie opinion to both the former, laying the gouernment of Dionysius on the 346. yere of Rome, which was the second of that Olympiad. In Gellius we reade not 346. but 347. so that if the 346. of Rome be the second of the 93. Olympiad, then the 347. is the third thereof, and therefore good agreement between the Storie writer of Halicarnassus and him. The Attick nights were belike too dark for Beroaldus his eyes, to see what the enditer layed vp in that place, whereunto I haue giuen light before to perceiue his minde.
It followeth in Beroaldus. It is reported of Euripides and Sophocles, that they both died in one yeare, that is the fourth of the 92. Olympiad: whereof may be gathered, the 30. tyrants set

ouer Athens by Lysander, and the ende of the Peloponnesian warre to haue beene in the first of the 93. because the death of Sophocles is knowne to haue happened about that time. By whome is this reported? It were to bee wished that he had beene named. Manie I am sure they cannot be, and I thinke no one ancient Author at all can be found, who plainely hath said it: so as it may appeare to haue proceeded of iudgement in him, and againe if any can bee founde, who of iudgement set them both together so high: yet that might bee well enough without misplacing the thirtie tyrants, from the first of the 94. Olympiad, to the first of the 93. Let vs goe on to the rest.
Solinus telleth that Pythagoras came into Italie in the time of the first Consuls. Gellius in the time of Tarquinius superbus, which might bee the yeare before. Dionysius saith that hee taught in Italie after the 50. Olympiad, which dissenteth neyther from that former saying of Solinus, nor the other of Gellius, because the times by them named, were both after the 50. Olympiad. Diogenes Laertius writeth, that hee flourished in the 60. Olympiad. All this touching the time of Pythagoras wherein he liued and taught, may stand well enough without disagreement. Plinie putteth him backe from the time named by Solinus an hundred yeares and more. And Beroaldus bringeth him as many

or more forward euen to the Peloponnesian warre, by his opinion begun about the 94. Olympiad: which beeing so, needes must Cyrus also bee pulled forwarde in some proportion from the 55. Olympiad to the 80.
Betweene these two extreamities of opinion concerning the age of Pythagoras, the one of Plinie, the other of Beroaldus; in my iudgement medium tenuere beati, the merry meane is best as we see, especially beeing approoued by a farre greater number of the learned.
But let vs examine his proofe that Pythagoras was so late. His first reason is brought from the authoritie of Eusebius, who in his tenth book De praeparatione Euangelica, writeth that Xenophons and Pythagoras were in the same times with Anaxagoras, who came within the compasse of the Peloponnesian war. If an old man may liue at the same time with a young man, this is no good proofe to bring Pythagoras to the Peloponnesian warre, because Eusebius sayde that Anaxagoras, in whose time Pythagoras liued was in it. Let Eusebius bee his owne interpreter in his Chronicles, where hee putteth the matter out of doubt, setting the death of Pythagoras threescore and foure yeres at the least before the beginning of the Peloponnesian war, and yet withall, making Anaxagorus who saw that war to flourish in his dayes. Another reason of his much like to the former

is this. Pythagoras with diuers of his acquaintance beeing in the house of Milo: certaine enemies in desire of reuenge vppon some conceiued griefe, burned it ouer their heads, where Lysis and Archytas, two of Pythagoras his schollers at that time escaped. This Lysis after became teacher of Epaminondas the valiant Theban Captaine, who fighting at Mantine in the second yeare of the 104. Olympiad aboue 40. yeres after the Peloponnesian war was slaine.
And what of all this? I know his conclusion, that this being so late an age wherein Epaminondas died, whose master was Lysis one of Pythagoras his schollers: It must needes be that Pythagoras himselfe reached to the time of the Peloponnesian warre somewhat nere to Epaminondas, and when was that warre? the end of it, if we may beleeue Beroaldus, was about the 100. Olympiad, and by that meanes Pythagoras must bee brought to the 94. at the least wherein it began, not much aboue 40. yeares before the raigne of king Phillip of Macedonia, the Father of Alexander the great.
If I should stand to number all the absurdities which would follow of this position (according to that which Aristotle saith, that one absurde thing graunted, many other follow vppon it) it were a tedious thing to write or read; except peraduenture that beeing so ridiculous in themselues, the moouing of laughter might

some way ease the readers toyle.
But leauing this I will declare that the distance of time made by auncient writers, betweene Pythagoras his teaching, and Epaminondas his learning of Lysis; can no way hinder, but that Pythagoras may stand well enough still in that place, where they haue set him. His death by Eusebius is put in the last yere of the 70. Olympiad. At which time Lysis his scholler might bee 16. yeares of age, and liue fourescore and eight yeares after, till hee was 104. yeares old in the beginning of the 93. Olympiad. When Epaminondas might be of the age of sixteene yeares, instructed before of Lysis in his old age. What one thing is there heere incredible, or not vsuall in those times? Gorgias Leontinus much about the same times with Lysis, liued a hundred and nine yeares, which before hath beene shewed with diuers other like examples, and Aemilius Probus in the life of Epaminondas testifieth of him, that beeing a yong man, hee was instructed in Philosophie by Lysis in the time of his graue and seuere old age. Philosophiae praeceptorem habuit Lysim Tarentinum, Pythagoreum: cui quidem sic fuit deditus, vt adolescens tristem and seuerum senem omnibus aequalibus suis in familiaritate anteposuerit, saith Aemilius. Thus Beroaldus his sharpe assault against the Chronologicall forte of the Grecians account, hath not so preuailed

to batter it, but that it can defend it selfe against the enemie.
Let vs now see with what successe hee hath oppugned the Latine Storie, against this hee fighteth with two weapons, one taken from the Roman Decemuirs, the other borrowed of the Frenchmen at their sacking of Rome, in the 302. yeare of Rome, wherein L. Menenius, and P. Sestius were Consuls, towardes the ende of their COnsulship, certaine Commissioners called Decemuiri, were chosen by the people to the gouernment of the Citie and the making of Lawes, against the next yere now approching, beeing the 303. of the Citie. Hereof is that difference and dissention of some Authors betweene themselues alleadged by Beroaldus: some referring the Decemuirs to the 302. yeare of Rome, respecting the time wherein they were elected, as Solinus and Liuie, some to the 303. because that was the yeare wherein they first executed that new authoritie, beeing appointed and chosen vnto it in the end of the former yeare. As Dionysius Halicarnassaeus in his eleuenth booke declareth. Besides Varro and Onuphrius As for A. Gellius and some other, naming the 300. yeare of Rome for the Decemuirs, the cause thereof is manifest; that some make the time of the kings of Rome not 244. but onely 241. yeres, and those began from the second of the seauenth Olympiad, not the first,

that is from the end of the building of Rome, when Romulus tooke vpon him to be king. By their opinion there are two yeres fewer than other account of; so that their 300. is the 302. of other, whereof I haue spoken before, by reason of some like examples in Gellius, who followed that reckoning: so there is no difference betweene these indeed, but onely in shew and diuers respects. These ten Commissioners held that authority by the space of two whole yeres. In the latter whereof being the 304. of the Citie, Virginia a beautifull maide of Rome was slaine by her own Father, with a butchers knife taken from his stall in the open streete, rather then that shee should satisfie the filthie lust of Appius Claudius one of the ten, who by great violence and open wrong went about it. Cicero in his second booke de finibus, writeth that this happened in the threescore yeare after the beginning of the first Consuls, which was not the 301. of Rome as Beroaldus saith, making dissention betweene Authors where there is none at all, but the 304. for adding threescore to the 244. wherein the last king was expelled, the summe is 304.
But what shall we say then to Dionysius Haelicarnassaeus, who is contrarie to himselfe in his second book, affirming those ten Co^missioners to haue beene in the 300. yeare of Rome? Euen this, that it is an increase of Beroaldus his vntruths:

for there speaking of the Lawes which Romulus the first king ordained, and namely of that whereby it was made lawfull for a father to sell his owne child: that this Law saith hee, was not made by the Decemuirs, who three hundred yeres after were appointed to that businesse, it is gathered by this ordinance of Numa. Patri post hac nullum ius esto vendendi filium; let it not be lawfull hereafter for the father to sell his sonne. It is manifest in this place that the 300. yeare is accounted, not from the building of the Citie: but from the time wherein Romulus established the common wealth with lawes, which was after the foundation of the Citie layed. Otherwise this historiographer most vndoubtedly, perfectly, and exactly declareth the yere of their authoritie to be the 303 of the Citie.
Thus there is no cause at all for Beroaldus so earnestly, and with such heat, to complaine of great ignorance, and disagreement in these Authors one from an other, beeing in truth at great concord betweene themselues, and dissenting only in shew, and yet all the dissention which he nameth, if it were so indeede, consisteth within the space of three or foure yeares betwixt 300. and 303.
But that all these are wide from the true time of the Decemuirs, in his opinion aboue threescore yeares: hee can prooue both by prophane

storie, and holy scripture.
If Beroaldus can doe this, I will say hee is a cunning iugler, let vs see how. Hermodorus the Ephesian, the interpreter of the Decemuirs lawes, was acquainted with Heraclitus, and flourished in his dayes, and Heraclitus citing the writings of Pythagoras, must needes be after Pythagoras. Againe Pythagoras reached to the times of the Peloponnesian warre, as may be prooued by this, that Lysis one of his familiar friendes, instructed Epaminondas in Philosophie, who died long after that warre. Heereof we may conclude that Heraclitus, and Hermodorus his friende with him flourished in the time of the Peloponnesian warre, and that the Decemuirs lawes are there to bee placed.
The fingering of this feate is too grosie to deceiue any mans eyesight, who is but carefull to marke somewhat nerelie. First this is an vnprouing proofe, that Heraclitus was later than Pythagoras, because hee alleadgeth some sentence out of his workes, for it is an vsuall thing for those which are of one standing, as wee say, and equall in time, to read the bookes one of another. Cicero liued in the same age with Varro, yet notwithstanding he had recourse to his writings, and alleadged vppon occasion the contents thereof.
The other argument touching Pythagoras his reaching to the Peloponnesian warre, by

Lysis and Epaminondas, being the mayne reason of all, is as vayne as that; which a little before I haue made playne.
Lastlie though it were graunted, that Heraclitus and Hermodorus were in the time of the Peloponnesian warre: yet for all that the Decemuirs lawes might be before that time interpreted by the same Hermodorus; as well as Master Beza his first interpretation of the new Testament, was many yeares before the late taking of Calis by the Spanyards; and yet the same light of God his Church at those dayes still shining therein. This is such a sorie Sorites, as maketh me meruaile what conceite came in Beroaldus his head to bring it. As likewise that colde coniecture out of Liuie which followeth concerning the twelue tables of the Decemuirs lawes, to be in the 370. yeare of Rome, is as farre and further from Liuies minde, in playne wordes otherwhere declared, as threescore is from three.
The second weapon wherewith Beroaldus fighteth against the Latine historie, is some doubt concerning the time of the French mens taking Rome, in ye 365. yeare from the building of that citie, and the first of the 98. Olympiad. For Plutarch in the life of Camillus, hauing declared the receaued opinion concerning the time thereof, that it happened a few more then 360. yeares after Rome was builded, addeth

this doubting speech: If it seeme credible, that an exact account of these times had been so long preserued; seeing that euen the confusion of that time, hath brought some doubt and controuersie to other later.
Plutarch least hee should seeme without cause to haue made that doubt, bringeth this reason: that the fame and rumor of that warre wherein Rome by the French was taken, presentlie was spread abroad in Greece, and came to the eares of Heraclides Ponticus, and Aristotle: whereby may bee gathered that it happened in the time of king Phillip of Macedonia, in whose dayes those authors liued saith Beroaldus. The raigne of this king began about the 105. Olympiad, seuen and twentie yeares after the common receaued time of that taking of Rome set by other, and endured full foure and twentie yeares.
For answer to this doubt, I am to let the reader vnderstand, that the French men discontented, and vnquiet in minde for their ill successe at their taking of Rome, being driuen out againe, and all their pray taken from them by Marcus Furius Camillus, came diuers times after into Italie, and namely in the 406. yeare of Rome, being the fourteenth of Philip the Macedonian King; when Aristotle was about foure and thirtie yeares olde. In this yeare Lucius Furius Camillus being Consull, and

he alone Consull after his fellowes death: the French inuaded Italie with a mightie power. Amongst them one at that time for stature of bodie passing other, chalenging any one of the Romane hoste whosoeuer durst fight with him, was with the Consuls leaue set vpon by M. Valerius, a valiant Captaine. In this combate a rauen came suddainely to the Romane champion, and sat vpon his Helmet, and flew vpon the French man, against his face with bill and talents fighting, till at the length being greatly amazed thereat, he was slaine by Valerius. Who thereof tooke name to bee called Coruinus, in memorie of the rauens fighting for him; which was interpreted to haue come from God. The French men after the death of their champion so miraculouslie slaine, were discomfited and fled, and durst not of a long time after come against the Romans. And this was the battaile by all likeliehoode, which Aristotle and Heraclides Ponticus spake of. For it is confessed by Plutarch himselfe, that the conquerer of the French at that time was called Lucius in Aristotle; which agreeth to this time wherein Lucius Camillus was Consull alone, and conquerer: not to the taking of Rome, when Marcus Camillus, father to this man had giuen them the ouerthrow.
As for the taking of Rome then mentioned by Heraclides and Aristotle, which was by a

rumor and vncertaine reporte noysed abroad: the cause thereof might bee, that they were the same people then vanquished, who before had taken it. So it is true in regarde of the men.
One argument more is yet behinde, reserued as may seeme to the last place, as of all the rest most forcible to disturbe the set boundes of the Peloponnesian warre, and thereby those of the Persian Empire. The force of this argument in the conceite of Beroaldus is so strong and pythie, as that it cannot possibly suffer the ancient accounte of those times to stand. Let vs (saith Beroaldus) first set downe, that which is reported by Polybius a graue author in his first booke: that the Lacedemonians hauing gotten the soueraigne Empire of Greece, by their victorie against the Athenians, in the ende of the Peloponnesian warre, scarse held it by the space of twelue yeares after. In the next place this wee are to knowe, that the same Lacedemonians were spoyled of that their Empire by the Thebans, in the famous battaile fought betweene them at Leanctra, in the second yeare of the 102. Olympiad: whereof this for a certaintie followeth; that the Peloponnesian warre ended about the time of the 100. Olympiad. For it is manifest by Xenophon, that the ende of it was in an Olympicke yeare.
This is the reason of all other so sure, vndoubted, and strong, in the opinion of Beroaldus: but in very deede as friuolous, ridiculous, and childish, as euer any was framed. To make good my saying, let the author himselfe speake with his owne words: which be these, not farre from the beginning of his first booke. (...). The Lacedemonians (sayth Polybius) striuing many yeares for the soueraignetie of Greece, after they had once gotten it, kept it scarselie twelue yeares entire without trouble and losse. Indeede if Polybius had sayde, that the Lacedemonians had quite and cleane lost their whole dominion, within twelue yeares after they had obtained it, as Beroaldus maketh him say, the reason which hee vseth had been good, to bring the ende of the Peloponnesian warre within three yeares of his reckoning: (so much hee is wide after his wonted manner) for they were wholie spoyled of that cheeftie, by Epaminondas, generall of the Theban armie, in the second of the 102. Olympiad. From which the twelfth yeare backward, is the third before the 100. Olympiad, and the second of the 99.
But there is as much difference betwixt the authors word (...), and the interpretation of Beroaldus: as betweene breaking a mans head and killing him out right. It is true, and that

which Polybius ment, that the Lacedemonians, about twelue yeares after Lysanders victorie against the Athenians at Aegos Potamoi, whereby they became Lordes of Greece, lost much of their dominion by the valour of Conon an Athenian Captaine, who ouercame the Lacedemonians in a battel by sea, and toke fiftie of their shippes, and 500 of their men, whereby diuers Cities fell from the Lacedemonians vnto him as Diodorus Siculus declareth in his fourteenth booke, yet for all this they stood still, and recouered much again afterward, til at ye length they were vtterly dispossessed of all by the Thebans, who gaue them a deadly blow. Heereby it appeareth that it was no part of Polybius his meaning, to make only twelue yeares from the end of the Peloponnesian war, to the Lacedemonians vtter ouerthrow: but to that conquest of Conon ouer them by sea fight before spoken of.
And if this bee not enough to make that appeare sufficiently, Polybius himselfe yet once againe shall make it manifest, and all gainesayers as dumbe as a fish, which would gather by his testimonie, that the fielde at Leuctra was fought within 12. yeares after the Peloponnesian warre: for within one leafe after the former sentence, he declareth that the battaile at Leuctra was nor twelue, but 34. yeares after that other at Aegos Potamoi, whereby they won the

soueraigntie of Greece that is to say, 18. to the Frenchmens taking of Rome, and sixteene more afterwarde to the fight at Leuctra, and that not obscurely or in a riddle: but very flatly in plaine words, though not vnderstood by the Bishop of Sipontu^, who for these words of Polybius, (...) that is after the battaile by sea at Aegos Potamoi, translated Post Xerxem a Cymone superatum. After Xerxes was ouercome by Cymon, which was long before the time spoken of by Polybius, and no part of his meaning at all.
By this one place may bee seene what intolerable shifting hath beene vsed of Beroaldus to make his matter good, affirming Authors to say that which they neuer meaned, yea which they are as flat and plaine in manifest words against, as may be. But euery vaine color, and deceiueable shew is good enough for such as are disposed to wrangle out new deuises by cauelling Sophistrie.
As for that which followeth out of Xenophon to prooue that assertion of Beroaldus, it hath neyther head nor foote, and is vnworthie of an answere, and therefore I purpose not to trouble the reader with my confuting such paltrie stuffe, except peraduenture some will professe to frame it into an argument of some shew or color at the least, then will I also professe my skill to answere it, and to turne all against him

for the truth; as knowing Xenophon to haue nothing for his conceited opinion, but much against it.
Hitherto I haue particularly answered all the Sophisticall elcnchs, and reasonlesse reasons, and vnproouing proofes of Beroaldus out of prophane Histories, one by one, wherewith to the trouble of God his Church, and the darkening of his worde, hee hath stuffed so many papers, without leauing any one to my knowledge vnanswered, except the last out of Xenophon for the cause before declared. Touching his scripture proofe so often vrged against the auncient Chronologers of the Persian times, it shall by God his assistance appeare hereafter how vain it is. And thus much touching the first part concerning the chronologie of the Persian Monarchie.
Now followeth the second, contayning 328. yeares and a halfe, not much vnder or ouer from the death of the last king of Persia, to our Sauiour Iesus Christ, the proofe hereof is good: for that Christ our blessed Redeemer was borne in the third yeare of the 194. Olympiad, Eusebius, to omit the testimonies of other Fathers, declareth in his Chronicles, at this yeare and Olympiad writing thus. Iesus Christ the sonne of God was borne in Bethleem of Iuda, in which yeare the saluation of Christians began: which therefore is also counted the first yeare of the

Christians saluation. Darius the last king of the Persians was slaine, neere the beginning of the third yeare of the 112. Olympiad. The distance is the number before declared. The same is prooued by the Chronologicall Historie of the yeares of Rome; the building whereof by Solinus, Dionysius, Eratost henes, and other learned Authors, is set in the first yeare of the seauenth Olympiad, the trueth whereof is testified by olde marble monuments digged out of the ground, and as Solinus writeth, was confirmed euen by the publike acts and registers of Rome: wherein the 207. Olympiad was recorded to be in the 801. yeare of Rome, when Pompeius Gallus, and Q. Veranius were Cousuls: this Beroaldus himselfe acknowledgeth, and bringeth reason for it. By this account then the third of the 194. Olympiad, wherein the birth of Christ is put, should be the 751. of Rome, let vs now examaine whether this be so or no.
The yeare after Caesars death, wherein Hersius and Pansa were Consuls, and Augustus began his raigne, as Eusebius in his Chronicles, and Ioseph Scaliger in his fift book De emendatione temporum declare, was the 710. of Rome, so witnessed, not onely by Solinus in his Polyhistor, but euen the very ancient Marble monuments also, wherein was engrauen his record, at the 710 yeare of the Citie. In Pansae occisi locum factus est C. Iulius. C.F.C.N. Caesar. Qui

postea imperator Caesar Augustus appellatus est. That is, in the place of Pansa being slaine, Caius Iulius Caesar, the sonne of Caius, the grandchild of Caius, was made Consull, who after was called the Emperour Caesar Augustus. In the 42. yeare of Augustus his raigne, the first thereof beeing that 710. of Rome, was our Sauiour borne. This wee are taught by Eusebius, not onely in his Chronicles, but also very plainly in the second chapter of the first booke of his Ecclesiasticall historie. It is verified also by Epiphanius, and Onuphrius,51. Haeresi. setting the time of Christ his birth, in the thirteenth Consulship of Augustus with M. Plantius Silanus, which was iust the 42. yeare from the beginning of that, wherein Hersius and Pansa were Consuls, and Augustus began his raigne; as the Roman histories with great agreement declare, adding then these 42. of Augustus, to 709. more past before to the building of Rome: wee haue that which by examination we sought, that is, the birth of Christ in the 751. yeare of Rome, agreeably to the Olympicke reckoning, from which 423. before Darius his death, being deducted, there remaines 328. yeres from the Persian Monarchie to Iesus Christ, with some fiue or sixe months more, betwixt the sommer season wherein Darius died, and the time of winter wherein Christ was borne.
An other proofe we haue from learned writers

in Clemens Alexandrinus, 1. Strom. accounting 294. yeares from the death of Alexander, to the victorie of Augustus Caesar against Antonius; when he slew himselfe, and Augustus nowe the fourth time was Consull: which wordes by them are there added for distinctions sake, to make it knowne what victorie they spake of: For when as now a long time Augustus and Antonius had together gouerned the Roman Empire: at the length falling at variance, they made open warre one against another, and fought betweene them by sea, that famous battail at Actium a promontorie of Epirus nere Greece, the second day of September from fiue of the clocke in the morning to seauen at night; wherein Antonius with his glorious wife Cleopatra Queene of Aegypt, was discomfited and fled. This was done in the 722 yeare of Rome, and the second of the 187. Olympiad, and the time of Augustus Caesars third Consulship with Valerius Messala Coruinus. The next yeare after, Caesar nowe the fourth time beeing Consull with M. Licinius Crassus, went against Antonius and Cleopatra into Aegypt: where with happy successe he won from him a Citie of Egypt nere Lybia, called Paraetonium, and againe a little after, ouercame him at Pharus, and once againe euen in that fight, wherein hee put great confidence of his goodly horses he was put to a shamefull foyle.

His onely refuge now left, whereby hee hoped to stand, was his nauie, which when Antonius the first day of August betimes in the morning was now preparing to battell, all fel away from him to Caesar: whereat Antonius conceauing deadly griefe, hasted to his Pallace, and a little after seeing Caesar comming flat against him, and the citie troubled, slew himselfe. Cleopatra also not obtaining so much fauour of Augustus, as she eyther looked for, or desired; opened her left arme to the byting of a poysonfull Serpent, and so ended her life.
Augustus (his enemies now being slain) got Alexandria and the rest of Egypt with no great adoe, and thenceforth had the whole gouernment of all the Roman Soueraigntie, before the end of the same month, which thereof was named Augustus, beeing before that time called Sextilis of the number, beeing the sixt from March. Augustus Caesar, (saith Xiphilinus) called the moneth Sextilis by the newe name of Augustus, because hee was first made Consull, and got many victories therein: But in Macrobius more plainely, and especially amongst other causes of that moneth so to be termed in the honor of Augustus, this is one set downe, that therein Egypt was first subdued to the Romans. These be the victories then, which those ancient Chronologists in Clemens Alexandrinus, make the end of 294. yeres, from the death

of Alexander, respecting their beginning with the moneth of August, and somewhat before: For Alexander died towardes the end of Iulie, in the verie entrie of the 114. Olympiad: So that to and fro the same season of the yeare, the distance being reckoned, was iust so much, that is to say 294. yeares, which is likewise verified by an eye witnesse of those times, whereof hee writeth, and flourishing in them, that is, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, who in the Preface to his Roman antiquities, telleth not by hearesay, but of knowledge, that he came into Italy when Augustus Caesar had made an ende of ciuill warres, about the middest of the 187. Olympiad. The time which he meaneth, was that before declared of Augustus Caesars conquest ouer Antonius in Egypt, in the moneth of August, not farre from the beginning of the third yere of that Olimpiad which he nameth: being indeed (as hee saith) neere the middest of that foure yeares Olympick space, vnto which accounting from the first yere of the 114. wherein Alexander died, we finde that number of the former Authors in Clemens euen 294. yeres.
The truth hereof is yet further confirmed by Ptolomie, for exact accou^t of times exceeding skilfull, who in the third book of his Almagest, maketh the distance betweene the death of Alexander and the Monarchie of Augustus 294.

Egyptian yeares. The account whereof began with the beginning of their first moneth called Toth, as Censorinus declareth in his booke de die natali, and Ioseph Scaliger in diuers places, which at that time fell about the twelfth day of our Nouember. So long after the sommer season wherein Alexander died, the Egyptians began their account of yeares after his death. These 294. Egyptian yeres from the twelfth of Nouember, expire not in the twelfth of Nouember againe, but in the 29. day of August before, and reach iust as farre as the same number of Roman yeares doth, being begun from the 29. day of August before going. The cause whereof is this, that the Egyptian yeare is shorter then the Roman by six houres, or one fourth part of a day, which in so many yeres breedeth the losse and difference of threescore and thirtie dayes and a halfe.
So there is no disagreement betweene the old writers in Clemens reckoning after the Roman manner, and Dionysius following the Greeke account, and Ptolomie numbring by the vsuall custome of the Egyptians: except this, that Ptolomie respected the verie end of that war, in the taking of Alexandria and Egypt in theende of that month after Antonius was slaine, the other goe somewhat hier to the beginning of it, wherein Antonius by the falling away of his nauie was quite vndone, and not

able to stand out any longer. Vnto these 294. yeares betweene the Monarchies of Alexander and Augustus, sixe more being added, which had passed before Alexanders death, to the end of Darius, the number is made 300. yeares.
For the truths sake I may not here omit one error of Ioseph Scaliger, notwithstanding the reuerence and loue which I beare him, in regarde of his fruitefull paynes employed to the benefite of learning, and aduauncement of knowledge, whereby he hath well deserued of God his Church; in his fift booke de emendatione temporu^, speaking of that victorie of Augustus Caesar at Actium, which as (he saith) hapned in the third Consulship of Augustus Caesar, with Valerius Messala Coruinus, hee affirmeth that Ptolomie counteth vnto it from Nabonasars coronation 718. yeares fullie compleat, which commeth short of my reckoning by a yeare: Ptolomie indeede counteth from Nabonasars coronation to the death of Alexander 424. yeares, and thence to Augustus his Monarchie 294, which in all make 718. yet not naming the conquest at Actium for the ende of those yeares; for that was obtayned in September, as Dio testifieth, beyond the compasse of Ptolomies precise reckoning, by foure or fiue dayes in regarde of the moneth. But to let that passe, it is plaine euen by his owne testimonie a

little before in the same booke, in the chapter where he treateth of the first Thoth of the yeares of Alexanders death, that hee was deceaued here in his reckoning. His words there be these, Alexander decessit anno 424. diebus aestiuis. Thoth vero sequens est initium annoru^ a morte eius Nouemb. 12. feria prima, anno periodi Iulianae 4389. anno primo Olymp. 114. that is, Alexander departed in the 424. yeare, meaning of Nabonasar, in the sommer time. But the Thoth following, is the beginning of the yeares from his death, in the twelft of Nouember, the first daye of the weeke, in the 4389. yeare of the Iulian period, in the first yeare of the 114. Olympiad. Let any now make the reckoning of 294. Egyptian yeares, from the twelft of Nouember, in the first yeare of the 114. Olympiad, and hee shall stay and make his rest toward the ende of August, in the third yeare of the 187. Olympiad: which was the yeare of Augustus Caesars fourth Consulship, wherein he got the sole Empire of Rome into his hands, by the death of Antonius, as before is shewed, and not of his third Consulship wherein hee got the victorie against Antonius at Actium, as Scaliger would haue it. Ptolomie therefore counteth from Alexanders death, not to the victorie at Actium, as Scaliger saith, but to Augustus his Monarchie, or to vse Ptolomies owne word, (...), that is, his kingdome;

which he had not entire till such time as Antonius was dispossessed of all.
Likewise whereas Scaliger saith, that the Egyptian nauie was ouercome at Actium by Augustus, in the time of his third Consulship with Coruinus, and that in the sixteenth Iulian yeare: it cannot possiblie be so, because the sixteenth Iulian yeare began together with the fourth Consulship of Augustus. The first Iulian yeare was the very next before Caesars death, beginning at Ianuarie, in the 708. of Rome, and the third yeare of the 183. Olympiad, as Censorinus teacheth. Foure Olympiads, that is, sixteene yeares thence continued, bring vs to the third of the 187. Olympiad: wherein Augustus was Consull the fourth time, and his fellow Consull with him was Licinius Crassus, so as no part of it could fall to that battaile at Actium, except we wil make it twice fought, once in the third Consulship of Augustus, and againe in his fourth the yeare after.
The grounde of this error of Scaliger, was misunderstanding of Censorinus, as may be euidentlie seene in his third booke, in the chapter of the Egyptian Actiac yeare, where his words are these: Censorinus ait annum Augustorum Actiacum 267. esse 1014. Iphiti and 986. Nabonosari: that is, Censorinus saith, that the 267 Actiac yeare of the Augusts, was the 1014. of Iphitus, and the 986. of Nabonasar. Censorinus

neither saide it nor thought it: hee maketh no mention of any Actiac yeare at all, but onely affirmeth that the 986. of Nabonasar was the 265. of the yeares called Augusts: the beginning whereof was taken from Augustus his seuenth, and Vipsanius his third Consulship accounted of the Egyptians the 267. Quia biennio ante in potestatem ditionemque populi Romani venerunt, because they became subiect to the power and dominion of the people of Rome two yeares before (saith Censorinus) speaking not of the victorie at Actium, but of the subduing of Egypt: which after the death of Antonius, was conquered to the Romane Empire, and made a prouince a yeare after that ouerthrow of Antonius at Actium.
Therefore I see no cause why my former reckoning ought not to bee receaued as vndoubtedly true (whatsoeuer Scaliger may seeme to haue to the contrarie or any other:) that is to saye, that from the death of Alexander to the Monarchie of Augustus, in the yeare of his fourth Consulship, were 294. yeares: and from the slaughter of the last king of Persia, in the third yeare of the 112. Olympiad, which made Alexander an vndoubted Monarch, to the third of the 187, wherein the death of Antonius did the like to Augustus, were 300. yeares.
Now that Iesus Christ was borne in the 28. yeare of the Monarchie of Augustus, wherein

after Antonius his death, he ruled alone without the part taking or fellowship of any other with him therein, wee haue the testimonie of Clemens Alexandrinus. 1. Stromat. Eusebius in the first booke of his Ecclesiasticall Historie, in plaine words confirming it., In the 42. yeare saith he, of the raigne of Augustus, and the 28. after the subdewing of Egypt, and the death of Antonius and Cleopatra, in whom the raigne of the Egyptian kings, called Ptolomies was extinct; our Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christ was borne in Bethleem of Iuda, Cyreneus being gouernour of Syria, and so forth.
The 42. yeare of Augustus his parted raigne was all one with the 28. of his lone raigne. That began in the 710. of Rome: these 14. yeres after in the 724. of Rome; being the fifteenth of Augustus from his first beginning. For though the ciuill warres were ended by the death of Antonius, and the subdewing of Egypt, in the fourteenth yeare of Augustus, in the moneth of August: yet the yeares of his Monarchie after the manner of the Romans, began to bee reckoned from Ianuarie following, in the beginning of the next yeare, being his fifteenth. (...). Augustus the king of the Romanes attayning the fifteenth yeare of his raigne, got Egypt and the rest of the world, saith Eusebius in his eyght

booke, de demonstratione Euangelij. And in his Chronicles likewise hee beginneth the Monarchie of Augustus from the same his fifteenth yeare. For foureteene yeares then past, being added to 28. following, the number is 42.
The same beginning of Augustus his Monarchie from that yeere, is confirmed by Paulus Orosius in the sixt booke of his Historie against the Gentiles. Where hauing declared in the nineteenth chapter of that booke, that Antonius and Cleopatra now forsaken of their nauie, which in the beginning of August, had turned to Caesar, for griefe slew themselues: And that Caesar after passed from thence into Syria by land, and then into Asia, and at length by Greece into Italie: in the next chapter immediatly he addeth that Augustus Caesar in the yeare following, wherein himselfe now the fift time and L. Apuleius were Consuls, the sixt daye of Ianuarie, entred into Rome with three triumphes. Atque ex eo die summa rerum ac potestatem penes vnum caepit esse and mansit, quod Graeci Monarchiam vocant. And from that daye saith Orosius, the soueraigntie and cheefe power called of the Grecians, a Monarchie begun to be in one mans hand, and so remained.
Ioseph Scaliger I can but maruaile at, in his sixt book de emendatione temporum, affirming

that Christ our Lorde was borne in the seuen and twentie yeare after the victorie at Actium, which is short of the time by mee set for his birth in the 42. of Augustus, by two yeares and more. For the yeare of Christs birth was the 30. at the least after the Actiac victorie 29. full yeares beeing past and almost foure moneths.
Now touching the moneth and daye of our Sauiours birth: I see no cause why we ought to referre that constant opinion of ancient Fathers, that it was the 25. of December, receaued of Augustine, Orosius, Chrysostom, and other, from them continued nowe by many ages to this daye, except direct proofe can be brought to the contrarie. Which Beroaldus after his wonted manner goeth about, in the second chapter of his fourth booke of Chronicles affirming in plaine words, that our Lorde Iesus Christ was borne in the middest of the moneth September, when the daye and night is of one length.
His reason to proue that assertion of his, is in this manner. Christ preached three yeares and a halfe before his death, this is prooued by the words of Daniel in his ninth chapter. Hee shal confirme ye couenant to many one weeke, and halfe that weeke shall abolish sacrifice and offering: which saith Beroaldus, is to be vnderstoode of Christ, preaching three yeares and a

halfe from his baptizing to his death. Now that his baptisme begun together with the 30. yeere of his age, is testified by Luke in his third chapter the 23. verse where Christ is sayd to haue entred the 30. yeere of his age when he was baptized. The end of the last halfe yeere wherein Christ dyed, being the 14. day of the Iewes Nisan and of our March: Leaue as well the begining thereof, as consequently the birth of Christ, to the 14. of September.
In deede if those his interpretations of Daniel and Luke in these places, were both of them certaine and cleare, as he sayeth they are, his proof were good: but if either of them faile, his reason is not worth a strawe. And so farre they are from being both certaine, that neither of them both is sure: Scaliger maketh it an vndoubted thing, that they are otherwise to bee vnderstood, referring the wordes of Daniell to the beseging and warre against Ierusalem by the Romanes, and making the time of Christes preaching, not three yeeres and a halfe but full foure. Beda and Ignatius made it onely three yeeres after his baptisme. And Apollinaris with diuers other eyther on or two at the most. And as for the wordes of Luke, a precise and exact beginning of the thirtie yeere of Christes age can not be gathered of them. Seeing hee vseth the word (...), importing a doubtfull and imperfect number, wherevnto somewhat, more or lesse,

may be added or taken away, and signifying that Christ begunne to bee about thirtie yeeres of age at the time of his baptisme: As in our English bible it is well translated, and so vnderstood by Epiphanius, and Iustinus Martir, and Augustine, with some other of the ancient fathers.
Wherfore this his best reason is too weake to pull backe the receaued time of Christes birth, from the 25. day of December, to the 14. of September.
An other argument of his is taken from the custome of the Greeke and the Egyptian churches, beginning their yeare from September. Whence also the indictions haue their begining. This (saith Beroaldus) they did because they knew that Christ was borne in the middest of September. And how proueth he that? Beroaldus for sooth sayth so. The mans bare yea was enough belike to perswade the simple and vnskilfull. Other reason he bringeth none at all, either from authoritie or otherwise. Neither in deed do I see how he could possibly bring any. For it is a thing held without controuersie, that the cause of the yeres beginning in the midst of September, was the memorie not of Christes birth, but of the glorious conquest of Alexander against Darius at Gaugamela, retained long after euen in the Greeke church. Which Scaliger out of Epiphanius declareth in his second

booke, De emendatione temporum; the chapter of Calippus his period beginning in Autumne; and also in his fift booke, the chapter of the councell of Nice which by Socrates was set downe to haue bene in the 636. yeere of Alexander.
But what shall we need goe further then to Beroaldus himselfe for confirmation hereof, who euen in the verie next Chapter before going, had prooued by the Greeke Canons, and the first Tome of councels printed at Paris, that the Greeke church counted their yeres from Alexander. If the Greeke church counted fro^ Alexander, and that accompt of Alexanders yeeres begun in the Equinoctiu^ of Autumne, as Scaliger teacheth, about mid September; how can the cause and custome of this reckoning be referred to Christs natiuitie? as for the Egyptians, the first month of their yeere called Thoth, before they were subdewed by Augustus, went through all the monthes and seasons of the yere some times in Februarie, after in Ianuarie, and so in order to Februarie againe. But after Antonius and Cleopatra were ouerthrowen, and Egipt made one of the Roman prouinces, won by Augustus Caesar in the month of August; the first of their Thoth was not the 14. of September, nor any part of it, but the 29. of August; and that in memorie not of Christ his birth being yet vnborne, but of Augustus his

victory therein against the Egyptians. Whereof also as before hath beene shewed the moneth Sextilis, tooke a new name to bee called August.
Now follow the indictions, which begunne about the 24. of September, and therefore by Beroaldus made likewise an argument of Christes birth in that month. Constantine after the death of his father Constantius, who died here in England at Yorke, obtayned the empire of Rome in the yeere of Christ 312. The time of his coronation being the 24. of September, was celebrated with much ioy, and great solemnitie, and many sportes and games against that time proclamed: thereof called an Indiction, that is, a proclaming. And from that day in memorie thereof, a new accompt of yeeres begunne by that terme of Indiction. This accompt the church also obserued. Yet beginning it later with the month Ianuarie following, to make it agree with the yeeres of Christ. Therefore this argument of all other is most forcible against that, which Beroaldus being blinded with a new fangled conceipt brought it for; as euerie one may see which will open but indifferent eyes. For the 24. of September, was 11. or 12. dayes after the aequinoctium: wherein he setteth Christ his birth; and the cause thereof Constantine crowned, not Christ borne. And because the time of Christ

his birth was in those dayes celebrated and kept in winter and the beginning of the yerae of Christ in the first of Ianuarie, as now at this day it is with vs: the holy and zealous Christian fathers of that age in honour of Christ, changed the time of that Indiction from the 24. of September to the first of Ianuarie. Thus it pleaseth the God of truth to blind the aduersaries therof, that they may fight against themselues which striue against it.
His last proofe is fetched from the course of Abiah, whereof Zacharie Iohn Baptists father was, as the Euangelist Luke testifieth in the fift verse of his first chapter. There were 24. courses of the Priests, seruing in the Temple at Ierusalem, two families or courses appointed for euerie moneth, in the first of Chronicles the 24 Chapter, (saith Beroaldus) the first of these courses began most like in March, as other holy thinges pertaining to the temple did: so the course of Abiah beeing the eight, falleth to Iune. In that moneth vnto Zacharie seruing in the Temple, was foretold the birth of Iohn Baptist by an Angell. About that time then his wife Elizabeth conceaued, and sixe moneths after the blessed virgin Marie, as is gathered by the 26. and the 36. verses of the first chapter of Luke: So the time of Christ conceaued falleth to December, and the ninth moneth after for his birth is September. All these linkes hang together

but vpon bare likelyhoods. One that the Priests courses of seruice began in March: the other, that two courses were appointed for euery moneth, neyther of them both is certaine, Beroaldus himselfe in that chapter witnesse. Zacharias quidem ad Abiae familiam pertinebat, cui forte octauo loco ministerium obeundum erat in sacrario: Sed quando aut quamdiu non intelligitur a nobis. Zacharias (saith he) pertained to the course of Abiah, to whose lotte the eight course of seruing in the Temple fell, but when and how long wee know not. That which hee saith of the vncertaintie of these thinges is most true: for it may bee that the courses began presently at that time, wherein they were first appointed, which is vnknowne to vs. And if they did begin at the first with March, yet the next beginning must needes be changed if the times of their seruice were equall, because twelue moneths of the sunne are not euen all alike in dayes. It may be also, that euerie course had his wecke of seruice, which in my iudgement is most like to be true.


But to take all doubte away concerning the beginning of the first course of Iehoiarib, and his posteritie: wee haue a plaine testimonie in the Hebrewes auncient Chronicle called (...) seder olam rabba, in the last chapter thereof, against that coniecturall likelyhood of Beroaldus, for the beginning of those courses in

March, in this manner: (...): That is, whe^ the first temple was destroyed. That day was the next after the sabbaoth, and the next after the weekes end, and the course of Iehoiarib, and the ninth of Ab, and in like manner was it at the destruction of the second temple. If Iehoiaribs course as there it is witnessed, being the first of all the 24. fell about the ninth day of the Iewes fifth moneth called Ab, which in some part is answerable to our Iulie: then by no meanes could the eight course of Abiah, in that order fall to Iune, beeing the fourth moneth.
Thus all Beroaldus his coursing of Abiahs course, yeeldeth him no more help, nor maketh any whit more for his purpose, then the rest of his wise reasons, as children say, and therefore by them no let, but that the receiued opinion of ancient fathers so long continued in God his Church, touching the birth of Christ in the 25. day of December, may bee still retained for any thing that yet is prooued to the contrarie.
Wherefore I conclude that our glorious Lord and Redeemer Christ Iesus, blessed be his name and his memorie for euer, was borne in the third yeare of the 194. Olympiad, and the 751. of Rome, now within sixe dayes or there about expired, wherein Augustus Caesar the 13 time was Consull, and M. Plautius Silanus with

him, 328. yeres and almost a halfe after the Persian Monarchie, and so end the second part of the compasse and boundes which haue bin set for Daniels weekes.
The third and last part therof only remayneth fro^ Christ his birth, to the destruction of Ierusalem by the Romans: which som of the ancient Fathers,1. Stroae. as Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius in his Chronicles, and P. Eberus in his historie of the Iewes referre to the 73. yeare of Christ, and the third yeare of the 212. Olympiad, going further than the true acount permitteth almost by two yeares: As Functius in the fift booke of his commentaries vpon his chronologie declareth, and Ioseph Scaliger in his fift booke de emendatione temporum, where they shew the cause of this errour, to bee the confused raigning of diuers Emperours together at one time, Galba with Nero, Otho with Galba, Vitellius with Otho, and Vespasian with Vitellius: So that whereas Vitellius is said to haue raigned in all seauen monethes, two of them and more were spent in the Soueraigntie of Otho, and foure at the least in the raigne of Vespasian. Hence came that ouershooting by sundring those times, which were confounded in themselues, and so reckoning the same yeres twice or thrice ouer in the seuerall raignes of diuers Emperours.
Functius himselfe came somewhat nearer

the mark, in placing that ouerthrow of the holy Citty, in the second yeare of that Olympiad, which is true: yet making it the 72. of Christs birth; he therein erreth, and is at strife with himselfe; for how can this possibly stand, that the second sommer of the 212. Olympiad, should be the 72. yere from the third winter of the 194 Olympiad wherein Christ was borne.
H. Bunting in his Chronologie did hit the marke right, affirming that Ierusalem was destroyed in the 71. yeare of Christ, the 822. of Rome, Vespasian the second time, and his Son Titus being Consull the second yere of the 212 Olympiad. The day wherein the Temple was set on fire by Iosephus is obserued euen the 10. of August. Conflagrante nouissimo templo numerabantur a nauitate Christi 70. anni cum diebus 221. From the natiuitie of Christ to the burning of the last Temple were 70. yeres and 200. and one and twentie dayes, saith Laurence Codoman in his Chronicles of holy scripture, which is most certainely true, and confirmed of him againe in the fourth booke of his chronologie toward the end of the 29. chapter: where notwithstanding he also hath his errour, in numbring 105. yeres to that time from the beginning of Herods raigne at his taking of Ierusalem, beeing at the least 106. full yeares, with three weekes ouer: For Ierusalem was taken of him about the beginning of the fourth

yeare of the 185. Olympiad. Wherein M. Agrippa and Canidius Gallus were Consuls, the seauenteenth day of the Iewes fourth month called Tamuz, answering in parte to our Iune and partlie to Iulie, as appeareth by Iosephus in the end of his fourteenth book of antiquities, compared with Ben Gorion his fourth booke the 23. chapter. The Temple by Titus his souldiers was fired the ninth day of their next moneth called Ab, as we read in the end of his seder olam rabba, and the eight day of the next moneth following, the Citie it selfe was set on fire by them. Vnto which time Iosephus from Herods beginning before mentioned, counteth 107. yeares in his 20. booke of Antiquities the eight chapter, beeing no more but 106. yeres with seauen weekes more: Therefore according to the vsuall custome of Historiographers, he reckoneth a part of the last yeare for the whole, and his meaning is, that the burning of the citie hapned in the 107. yere after Herods beginning to raigne, and that the distance betwixt the one and the other was 107. yeres running on, so as the last of them was not yet compleat.
By that which hitherto hath beene prooued, it appeareth that from the beginning of the Persian Monarchie, and the first yeare of Cyrus, to the end of the Iewes common wealth in the second of Vespasian; were 628. yeares, and

so much time more as had past, partly before the second yeare of the 55. Olympiad to the beginning of Cyrus, and partlie after the end of the first yeare of the 112. Olympiad, to the eight of September following: wherein the holie City of God (Ierusalem) was set on fire, and that if account be made from the entrie of that 55. Olympiad to the time wherein the Citie was burned, the whole space is euen 629. yeres with some two monethes more or there abouts.
Thus I end my reckoning of the times within the compasse, whereof Daniels weeks haue runne out their course, which is the first help requisite to the vnderstanding of Daniels meaning.
The second now followeth, that is a true interpretation of his wordes: for though the fulfilling of those weekes, is contained within the reach of those 629. yeares and odde monethes before spoken of: yet in what time thereof they began or ended, that is a controuersie, to the discussing whereof this second help may happely bring some light.





THE NINTH CHAPTER OF DANIEL, THE 24. verse.
Vers. 24. Seuentie weekes are determined vpon thy people, and vpon thy holy Citie, to sinish wickednesse and to ende sinne, and to make reconciliation for iniquitie, and to bring righteousnesse euerlasting, and to seale vp vision and Prophet, and to annoynt the holy of holies.
Vers. 25. Know then and vnderstand from the going forth of the worde, to builde againe Ierusalem vnto Messias the Gouernour, shall be seuen weekes: and threescore and two weekes it shall be builded againe streete and wall, and in troublesome times.
Vers. 26. And after those threescore and two weeks, shal Messias be cut off and he shal haue no being: and the citie and sanctuarie shall the people of the come gouernour destroy, and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and vnto the ende of the warre shall be a precise iudgement of desolations.
Vers. 27. And he shall make a sure couenant to many one weeke, and halfe that weeke he shall cause sacrifice, and offering to cease, and for the ouerspreading of abominations shall be desolation,

which to vtter and precise destruction shall be powred vpon the desolate.




FOr the plainer vnderstanding and proofe of this interpretation I haue thought good to set downe cerraine annotations thereon where need shall require.
In the 24. verse. weekes.] The Hebrew word (...) signifieth a weeke, or as wee also terme it a sennet or seuenet, which better fitteth the Hebrew, hauing that force, as likewise (...) in Greeke, and septimana in Latine, all so called of the number of seauen: but it is to bee obserued that the Hebrew word here vsed, signifieth sometime the space of seauen dayes; as here in this prophesie the tenth chapter, and second verse: where Daniel saith that hee mourned (...) three weeks or seuenets of dayes, and in the sixteenth of Deuteronomie the ninth verse: where commandement is giuen from Easter to Whitsontide to number seuen weeks or seuenets, (...): And sometime it containeth seuen yeres, as in the 29. chapter the 27 verse of Genesis, (...) fulfill her seuenet, and then shee also shall bee giuen vnto thee for the seruice which thou shalt serue me yet seuen yeares more. The Greeke word (...) in approued Authors is in like manner vsed not onelie for seauen dayes, but also euen for seuen yeares space, and namely in the end of the seauenth

booke of Aristotles politikes, where mention is made of such as deuided ages by seuenets of yeares. (...). M. Varro also in his first booke of Images writing, se iam duodecimam annorum hebdomadam ingressum esse. That hee had now entred into the 12. sennet of yeares, expresseth it more plainely and fullie. In this signification I take the worde in this place, vnderstanding by 70. seuenets 490. yeares, hauing proofe thereof from holy Scripture and prophane writer. As for those which stretch the worde further to a seuenet of tents or Iubilies or hundreds of yeeres as some haue done: their opinion hath neither warrant from God his word nor any likelihood of trewth.
Are determined,] The word (...) signifieth properly to cut, and by a metaphor from thence borowed to determine as hereafter I shal haue occasion to declare.
The Reader is here to know that in the Hebrew we haue word for word. Seuentie weekes is determened: A verbe singular being ioyned with a nowne plurall, by an vsuall custome of the holy tongue, when a thing spoken in generall is to bee applied to euerie part. As in the twelft chapter of Iob the seuenth verse: Aske the beastes and it shall teach thee, that is, euerie one of them shall teach thee. And in the Prouerbes of Salomon the third chapter, the 18.

verse, in their originall tongue. They which holde wisdome, is made blessed, that is to saye, they are made blessed euery one of them. So here the same kinde of speech being vsed, 70. weekes is determined, importeth thus much, that euerie one of those weekes particularlie from the first to the last shall bee precisely and absolutely complet. Which force contained in these wordes I might not omitte. In English thus it may be expressed. Seuentie weekes euery one are determined vpon thy people.
Thy people] that is thy countreymen the Iewes for this is a common speech often vsed in the hebrew tongue, to call that people mine of which I am one. As in the first chapter of Ruth the 15. verse. the Moabites are called the people of Orpha a woman of Moab: Thy sister is gone backe to her people. So in the 10. verse of that chapter the Iewes are called Naomies people. We will returne to thy people with thee. And the same Ieremies people in the lamentations the 3. chapter and 14. verse where he complaineth, that he was a laughing stocke to all his people. Here then in like manner by Daniels people are vnderstoode the Iewes whereof he was.
And vpon thy holy citie] The holy citie is Ierusalem mentioned in the nexte verse so called, because it was the place consecrate to the holy worship of God. Esa the 52. chapter and 1.

verse put on thy bewtifull garmentes O Ierusalem holy citie. And in the 4. chapter of Math. the 5. verse, the diuell caried him to the holy citie, and set him vpon a pinacle of the temple. But why is it called Daniels citie? was it because God had forsaken it, as though it were now to be called any others rather then Gods citie? So the learned father Hierom thought, but herein deceaued. For being a holy citie it must nedes bee also Gods citie. It was rather called Daniels citie, ether of his birth or bringing vp therein. As in the ninth chapter of Mathew Capernaum is called Christs citie because he dwelt in it. And Rama in the first book of Samuel the first chapter is called the citie of Elcana and the citie of Samuel in the 28. chap. of that booke. And Rogelim the citie of Barzillai, in the second of Samuel the 19. the 38. verse. Let me die (sayeth he) in my owne citie.
By this which I haue sayde of Daniels people and Daniels citie, it may appeare howe wide Hierom shot from the marke, with some other of the ancient fathers interpreting it as though God had forsaken both: and giuen them ouer as well the Iewes as Ierusalem.
To end sinne] (...) being as the Masorites terme it the (...), keri, of these wordes that is the true reading thereof; signifieth properly to consume finish or end sinne. And therefore Hieroms interpretation, Vt finem accipiat peccatum

that sin may haue an end, is good. Neither doe I se how that other of sealing vp sinnes can heere be warranted.
This abolishing and finishing of sinne, was wrought and fulfilled by our blessed Lord and redeemer Christ Iesus. He was that vnspotted lambe of God which tooke away the sinnes of the world, the first of Iohn, the 29. verse. In the end of the world he once appeared to put away sinne, by the sacrifice of himselfe. Hee was once offered to take away the sinnes of many. Heb. 9.26.28. He washed vs from our sinnes in his blood. In the first of the Reuelation the 3. ver. He deliuered vs from sinne. By him the bodie of sinne is destroied, we are dead to sinne, that it should not haue dominion ouer vs. See the 6. chapter. to the Romans 6.11.14.18. verses. Hee condemned sinne in the flesh. Whosoeuer is borne of God can not sin. Christ therefore fulfilled this heere spoken of by Daniell, that is to say,Rom 8.3. 1. Ioh. 3.9. made an end of sinne two wayes, first in iustifying vs from sinnes past, and quitting vs from the guilte thereof. And secondly in sanctifying vs from sinnes to come, so as though wee afterward sinne: yet wee cannot be seruantes vnto it. Neither of them was or could bee performed by the lawe. For the lawe causeth wrath.Rom. 4. Heb. 10.1. Heb. 10.4.11. It could neuer sanctifie the commers thereunto. The sacrifices thereof could not take awaye sinnes. Iesus

Christ onely was the fulfiller hereof according to the saying of Ezechiel the prophet in his 36. chapter the 35. verse: I will powre cleane water vpon you and clense you from all your filthynesse. A new harte also will I giue you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and J will take away the stonie hart out of your body, and I will giue you a harte of flesh. And I will cause you to walke in my statutes, and ye shall keep my iudgements and doe them
And to make reconciliation for iniquitie] by appeasing and pacifiyng God his wrath against sinne. Which was the effect of Christ his death offering vp him selfe an acceptable sacrifice to God for the sinnes of the world.^om. 5.10. ^om. 5.1. By his death we are reconciled to God. VVe haue peace toward God through Christ.
To bring euerlasting righteousnesse.] The declaration hereof we haue in the epistle to the Hebrewes from the 12. ver. of the 10. chap. vnto the end of the 18. verse of the same. There wee are taught that by the sacrifice of Christ Iesus once offered, remission of sinnes is obtained for euer: so as after there can be no other propitiatorie oblation for them.
Here therefore the euerlasting righteousnes of Christ, is opposed to the righteousnesse of the law, to the obtaining whereof dayly sacrifices were offered. But Christ hauing once made reconciliation for our sinnes by his blood: therby

purchased vnto vs euerlasting saluation and righteousnesse, which in the 9. chapter and 12. ver. of that Epistle is called euerlasting redemption. The priesthood of christ is euerlasting.Heb. 7.24. Heb. 9.11. Heb. 8.2. and 9.11.12. And of good thinges to come euerlasting. His sacrifice once for all euerlasting. And the sanctuarie into which he entred euerlasting. And lastly the saluation, redemption, and righteousnesse, which he purchased for vs is euerlasting. So there is great difference betwene the Leuiticall priestes and Christ, and betweene their oblations and his sacrifice. Of this effect in bringing righteousnesse, he hath this name to be called the Lorde our righteousnesse in the 23. chapter of the prophet Ieremie: the reason whereof is giuen by the blessed Apostle in the first epistle to the Corinthians the first chapter and 30. verse; where hee sayth, that Christ was made righteousnesse vnto vs.
To seale vp vision and prophet.] A testament or couenant in writing is neuer sure before the seale be set vnto it. That maketh all good. That confirmeth and giueth strength. And therfore by a metaphor or borrowed speach; to seale vp vision and prophecie, is as much as to confirme the same. So the word is taken in the 3. chapter of Iohns gospell and 33. verse. He which receaueth his testimonie hath sealed vp, that God is trewe, that is confirmed.
Whatsoeuer in the old testament had been

foretold and promised by the holy prophets of God concerning Christ his birth, his redeeming the elect from thrall, and sauing from sinne, his forerunner, his preaching, his miracles, his humility, betraying for money, death, resurrection, ascnceon, and glorious kingdome, were all most certainly performed by him in their dew time. The verifying and fulfilling whereof, was as it were a seale for sure confirmation of the vndoubted truth thereof. And for this cause the time of vision and prophet, is limited to the comming of Christ and the cleare preaching of the gospel in his kingdome, wherby he was to verifie, confirme and fulfill the same. This we are taught in the beginning of the epistle to the Hebrewes in these wordes. God in times past spake often and many wayes to the fatheres by the prophets. But in these last dayes he hath spoken to vs by his sonne.
And to anoint] This interpretation of the word (...) I dare commend vpon my knowledge to the Church of GOD for good: if euer any hath been good. It is sure as heauen and earth, no sillable amisse. VVhich I speake to this end that no man doubt to receaue and hold fast this for the vndoubted truth of God in this place co^cerning the annointing of Christ being an excellent point of diuinitie, whereof he euen tooke his name to bee called Messias or Christ that is annointed.Ioh. 1.42.
For the better vnderstanding whereof wee are to know that in time of the lawe the holy priestes, prophets and kinges, when they first tooke their offices vpon them, were annointed with holy oile. And this was the ceremonie of consecrating them to the seruice of God in those callinges. For the annointing of priestes we haue the commaundement of God in the last chapter of Exodus the 13. verse where speaking to Moses of Aaron. Thou shalt (sayeth God) annoint him and sanctifie him, that hee may minister vnto me in the priestes office. For the prophets annointing; we haue the example of Elizeus annointed by Elias to be a prophet his stead. And for kinges many testimonies. in VVhereof I wil bring onely 2. one of Dauid annointed king ouer the house of Iuda. The other of Salomon annointed kinge by Tsadoc the priest and Nathan the prophet.2. Sam. 2.4.
Now Christ was the trewe high priest enduring for euer,1. Reg. 45. much more excellent then the priests of the law.Heb. 7.24. and 8.6. Act. 3.22. He was also that excellent prophet commaunded to be heard in al things. Lastly he is the eternall king to whome God gaue the throne of his father Dauid,Luk. 1.32.33. to raigne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, of whose kingdome shall be no end.
Christ then hauing in himselfe alone al those dignities of King, Priest, and Prophet at once together, to the which other were annoynted,

seuerally, someone, some another, was therefore by a certaine kinde of excellencie called (...), that is the annoynted. The Law, Priests, Prophets, and Kings were annoynted with materiall holy oyle, but Christ with the spirituall oyle of the holy Ghost, which in the 45. Psalme, is called the oile of gladnes. God hath annointed thee with the oyle of gladnes aboue thy fellowes: that is with the holy Ghost: which therefore in the first Epistle of Iohn the second chapter, the 20. and 22. verses, is called an oyntment, by a translation taken from the annoyntings of the Law. Yee haue an oyntment from him that is holie.
This spirituall annoynting of Christ is spoken of by Esay in his 61. chapter the first verse. The spirit of the Lord is vppon mee, therefore hath hee annoynted mee: Hee hath sent me to preach good tydinges vnto the poore. Clemens Alexandrinus hereof touching Christ his annoynting hath this saying.1. Strom. Our Lord Christ the holy of holies, who came and fulfilled Vision and Prophet, was annoynted in the flesh with the spirit of his father. Therfore those materiall annoyntings of the law, were nothing els but tipes and figures of this spiritual annoynting of Christ.
The holie of holies]. That is, the most holie; Christ was endued with the holie Ghost without measure. Iohn. 3.34. Euen a verie fountaine

of holinesse, of whose fulnesse wee are all made holie. Christ Iesus saith Paul, is made vnto vs sanctification. Hereof in the first of Luke,1. Cor. 1 30. the 35. verse, he is called (...): that holie one.Ch. 7. v. 26. Hee is in the Epistle to the Hebrewes sayde to be an high Priest, holie, innocent, vndefiled, seperate from sinners, and made higher than the heauens, and therefore not without cause in this place called most holie. The Popes holines striueth with Christ about this tittle, at least to be equal with him, challenging to himselfe the name not to bee called holie, which were enough for a spotted man; but that is not enough for him, he will bee as good as Christ, euen most holie, yea holinesse it selfe, or nothing at all. Well if he can say so much for himselfe to haue that title, as Gods word sayeth for Christ, let him take it: otherwise let him see howe hee can auoide Antichristian pride.
Thus the generalitie of Daniels weekes is declared, so plainely pointing out the comming of Christ and the effects thereof, as though hee had read the writings of the Euangelists and the Apostles, or had beene an eye-witnes in the time of Christ to the verifying and fulfilling of these thinges.
Now followeth a more speciall and particular handling of them, deuided into three parts in the other three verses.
The 25. verse. The going forth of the word.]



Moses in Deut. the fourth chapter, and thirteenth verse saith, That God declared vnto Israell his couenant, euen the ten wordes, and wrote them vpon two Tables of stone, meaning therby the ten commandements. Assuerus commanded his seruants to bring Vashti the Queene before him,Hest. 1.12. but she would not come at his word, that is at his commandement. When the same king had decreed that all the Iewes in his dominion should bee destroyed: For publishing thereof the Posts went out in all haste by the kinges word, which was nothing els but his commandement: So here by the word going forth, is to be vnderstood a commandement which then is saide to goe foorth when it is first sent to bee published and proclaimed, as in the first of Ester the ninteenth verse. If it seeme good to the king, let a royall word goe forth from him: that is; Let a commandement by the kings authoritie be published. In the second chapter of this Prophet the twelfth verse. The decree went forth, and the wise men were slaine. In the second booke of the Machabies the sixt chapter, and eight verse. Thorough the counsell of Ptolomie there went out a commandement into the next cities of the heathen against the Iewes, to put such to death as were not conformable to the manners of the Gentiles. In the second chapter of Luke the first verse, there went out a decree from Augustus Caesar, that all the

world should be taxed.
To build againe Ierusalem.] In Hebrew to returne and build Ierusalem. Of this a little after toward the end of this verse.
Vnto Messias the Gouernour.] The worde Messias in Hebrew (...) is as much as (...) in Greeke, and with vs annoynted: So these three in signification are all one, Messias, Christ, Annoynted. The Hebrew word in the holy Scripture, attributed sometime specially to the perso^ of Christ Iesus our Lord, as in the first of Iohn the 42. ver. we haue found the Messias. And in the second Psalme the second verse. The Rulers tooke counsell together against the Lord, (...) and against his Messias or Christ, that is, against Christ Iesus our Lorde, as the place is expounded in the fourth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Sometime more generally to any annoynted Priest, as in the fourth chapter and fift verse of Leuit. (...) that is, the Annoynted Priest shall take off the bullockes blood, or to the annoynted Prophets. Touch not mine annoynted and doe my Prophets no harme.Psa. 105.15 Or lastlie to the kings and chiefe gouernours of the people. Thus Saul in the first of Samuel the 24. chapter and 7. verse, and Dauid in the 2. of Samuel the 19. chapter and 22. verse, is called the annoynted of the Lord.
The word (...) signifying any Ruler or Gouernour, is vsed sometime of kinges, as in the

first of Samuel the tenth chapter, the second verse, where Saul is called the Gouernour of the Lords inheritance, and in the second of Samuel the seauenth chapter, Dauid is called the ruler of Gods people, and Ezechias in the second booke of the Kings the 20. chapter and fifth verse. In all those places this worde (...) is vsed: Sometime it is giuen to other inferiour rulers, or gouernours: as in the 2. of Chronicles the 11. chapter and 11. verse. Hee repayred the strong holdes, and set (...) that is Gouernours therin, and in the 19. chapter and last verse of the same booke.(...) Zebadias the Ruler of the house of Iuda, shall be for the kings affaires, and in the 11. chapter of this Prophet Daniel the 22 verse, the Prince and chiefe gouernour of the Jewes is called (...). So there is no let by the force and signification of the word, but that it may bee well referred to the chiefe ruler of the Iewes common wealth in Ierusalem after the building thereof.
Seauen weekes:] It is great pittie that this message of the holy Angell contayning a most excellent Prophesie from Gods owne mouth, should be so peruerted and depraued, as it hath beene by those which picke out this sence, as though hee said, there should be from the outgoing of the commaundement to Messias 69. weekes in all. A strange interpretation and such (I dare boldly say it) as by the Hebrew text can

neuer bee vpheld. That interpretation which I haue made leauing a stay or rest at seuen weekes: as the halfe sentence being past, and continuing the 62. weekes with the other part of the sentence following to the end of the verse, and not referred to the former, as part of one whole number with them, by the Hebrew text is most sure and vndoubted and iustifiable against all the world: contayning that which God himselfe in his owne wordes hath vttered, neyther more nor lesse, but the verie same which Gods Angell deliuered to Daniel by word, and Daniel to the Church by writing in the holie tongue, and this once againe it is; From the going forth of the word, to build againe Ierusalem vnto Messias the gouernour shall be seauen weekes, and threescore and two weekes it shall be builded againe street and wall, and in trouble some times. Marke the wordes, consider their order, and weigh well the rests. As I finde in the Hebrew so I haue Englished, that is, the truth of interpretation, be it vnderstood as it may.
It shall be builded againe.] Word for word in the original tongue is written. It shall returne and be builded: which learned Hierome verie learned lie translated thus. Iterum aedificabitur. It shall bee builded againe. This is a familiar phrase in the Hebrew peoples mouth: For proofe whereof take a view of these places.


First of that in Malachie the first chapter and fourth verse. We will returne and build the desolate places. It is as much to say, as we wil build them againe, also in the 26. chapter 18. verse of Genesis. Isaak returned and digged the wels of water: which beeing digged in the dayes of Abraham, the Philistians after his death had stopped.
The meaning is therfore that he digged them againe, rightly vnderstood by the Greeke interpreters called the 70. thus tra^slating it. (...) He digged againe, Hierome agreeing thereunto, rursus fodit. In the sixt chapter of Zacharie the first verse. I returned and lifted vp my eyes and saw, which Tremellius verie wel translated thus. Rursus attollens occulos meos vidi. Againe lifting vp my eyes I saw: That therefore which some interpreters here haue imagined, concerning the returne of the people from the captiuitie of Babilon, is to vse the old prouerbe nothing to Bacchus; an interpretation farre from Daniels purpose.
The like reason is of that before written in this verse to returne and build Ierusalem, being in sence the same which there I haue translated, and Hierome long before me: to build againe Ierusalem. Moreouer it shall be builded, importeth as much as if hee had said it shall continue builded, or beeing once builded it shall so remaine by the space of 434. yeares before the

desolation thereof come, as Saadias and Gershoms sonne expounded the meaning of the word.
The 26. verse, Shall Messias be cut off.] The signification of the worde (...) is much more large then to slay, as by the most part of interpreters it is here taken, and reacheth to any cutting off, eyther by death, or banishment, or any other kinde of abolishing, whereby a thing before in vse, afterward ceaseth. Ioel. 1.8. The new wine is cut off from your mouth. (...) Amos. 1.5. (...) I will cut off the inhabitant of Bikeathauen, and him that holdeth the Scepter out of Betheden, and the people of Aram shall goe into captiuitie vnto Kir, saith the Lord.
And hee shall haue no beeing.] (...) And there shall not bee vnto him: that is, hee shall not be: He shall haue no beeing: he shall be extinct and gone. Much like hereunto is that in the 42. of Genesis the 36. verse. Simeon is not: Ioseph is not: where the meaning is, that neither of them was remaining aliue or had any being. Ieremie 31. Rachel mourned for her children because they were not. Genesis 5.24. Enoch was not because the Lord tooke him away. That is hee had no longer being among the liuing, a speach vsed in prophane authours. Homer. 2. Iliad.
(...)(...). that is,

For the sons of valiant Oeneus were not any lo^ger, neither was he himself yet. And more plainly in the Tragedie of Euripides called Hecuba: where she bewailing the death of her son Polydorus. I vnderstand now (saith she) the dreame,
(...)(...)(...)
which I saw touching thee my child, not being anie longer in the light of heauen: Therefore the Hebrew scholiast Solomon Iarchi, thinking (...) here to be alone with (...) in other places, of all other interpreters iudged best, and the same which my selfe approoued before euer I read it in him or any other: As likewise master Fox in a sermon of his, entituled De Oliua Euangelica vnderstandeth it so (...) saith hee, is an Hebrew phrase, whereby is signified mans life taken away, and therefore he giueth this interpretation thereof. Et vita priuabitur. Hee shall be depriued of life. His iudgement touching the force of the worde to bee all one with (...), he shall not be, is all one with mine and that of Rabbi Solomon: yet as I vnderstand the word of cutting off somewhat more largelie of thinges abolished otherwise then by death: So this not beeing may bee referred to the gouernment ceasing and extinguished of the gouernour taken away, though not dead.
Of the come Gouernour.] A come gouernour,

I call Presidem aduenam a deputie stranger, called here in the originall (...) a ruler which is come: for in the times before the destruction of Ierusalem by the Romans, there were two rulers of the Citie, one of their owne people, a Iew by profession or birth, after their manner annointed to the gouernment of the common wealth amongst them, here named in the verse afore going (...) the annointed Prince, the other a stranger appointed Deputy by the Roman Emperour called (...) a ruler not borne in the country, or one of the same Nation, but a stranger come from another place. In which sence the same worde seemeth sometime otherwhere to be vsed. In the 42. of Genesis the fift verse. The sonnes of Israell came to buy foode (...) among the commers, meaning other strangers which were come to Egypt. In the second booke of Chronicles the 30. chapter and 25. verse, (...) strangers which were come fro^ the Isralites are opposed to the inhabitants of Iudea. Also in the fift of Nehemias the 17. verse, (...) commers of the gentiles are set against such as were Iewes borne.
With a floud.] Vespasians hoste, the mightie power of the Roman enemies with great force inuaded and went through the whole land of Israell and Iuda, and as it were ouerflowing waters ouerwhelmed all. A metaphor taken

from flouds, as in the 11. of this prophesie the 40 verse. The king of the north shall come against him with Chariots and Horsemen, and ouerflow, and passe through.
Vnto the end of the warre shall bee a precise iudgement of desolations.] In the time and continuance of that warre, partly by the forraine enemies, partly by the ciuill dissentions within the citie, a great desolation of Ierusalem and Iuda was made: many of the Iewes for the intollerable miserie of those times, leauing their Citie and flying as far as their legges could beare them, from their owne natiue countrie into strange landes: which likewise happened in the former destruction of that land and Citie by Nabugodonosor and the Chaldeans. Ierem. 42.14. We will goe into Egypt that wee may see no more war, nor heare the sound of the Trumpet, nor haue hunger of bread and there wil we dwell. This is it which the same Prophet bewaileth in his Lamentations the first chapter, and third verse. Iudah went away because of affliction and great seruitude. Besides these which fled, many were slaine, a great number perished by famine. All the places about the Temple were burnt vp, and the Citie was made a Wildernesse, and a solitarie floore, as Iosephus writeth, who knew it so well as no man liuing better.
The same Author testifieth, that the land

which before had beene beautified with goodlie trees, and pleasant gardens and orchards, became so desolate, that none which had seene Iudea before with the faire buildings therein, at the sight of such a wofull change thereof could haue contained himselfe from weeping and lamenting: For all the beautifull ornaments had beene destroyed by warre: so that if any which had knowne the place before, comming then againe vnto it on a suddaine, could not haue knowne it, but would haue asked where Ierusalem was though present in it. This wee read in Iosephus his seuenth booke of the Iewes war, the first chapter: and the sixt book the first chapter, and some other places: therfore the speaking of desolations in the plurall number, here wanteth not his force to note the multitude thereof. They were manifold, comming fast one vpon an other: first in one place, then in another, till all was wasted.
The 27. verse. One weeke.] This seemeth to pertaine not only to the couenant confirming next before in this verse mentioned, but also to all the thinges spoken of in the former verse touching Messias to be cut off, and the enemies wasting of the Citie by continuall war to the vtter desolation and ruine thereof: All these thinges came to passe in the last weeke of the 70.
Halfe of that weeke.] That is, of that last weeke mentioned in the next wordes afore going, and not a new halfe of an other weeke besides the 70. For this cause the demonstratiue Article (...) ha is set before the word (...) to signifie no other but the same weeke spoken of before, according to the Hebrewes custome, and manner of speaking, obserued also and retained in the Greeke tongue as the learned knowe. A like example wee had in the beginning of the next verse afore going in the word (...), hauing the same Article, and referring vs to those same 62. weekes before spoken of and no other. Touching this couenant and sacrifices abolished, I will by God his help in that which followeth declare what I thinke.
Shall be desolation.] So I interpret the word (...) substantiuelie as the Greeke and Latine interpreters here, and the 31. verse of the 11. chapter, haue taken it, though otherwise it seemeth to haue the forme of a Participle. Wee haue like examples in the fift chapter of this booke and twelft verse where (...) signifieth an exposition, and (...) a loosing or dissoluing: so that this need not seeme strange.
Vtter and precise destruction.] (...). There is in proprietie of signification some difference betweene these two words, (...) signifieth a perfect desolation of that which is vtterlie and wholie destroyed, (...) is referred to the

resolute and precise determination of that vtter destruction to come. When it is precisely and certainly decreed, all hope of recalling the same being quite cut off. One respecteth the greatnes, the other the certaintie of God his vengeance to come. Esa. 10.22. The Lord in the middest of the land shall make (...) vtter desolation and precise waste past all calling backe.
Hauing thus made first a true account and reckoning of the times wherein the fulfilling of Daniels prophecie is contained, by the helpe of prophane writers testifying the certaine truth thereof, and secondly a true interpretation of Daniels wordes, according to the originall tongue: It now remaineth by applying the one to the other, to search and examine, where the beginning and end of those 70. weekes may be found.
The greatest part of those who haue laboured for the vnderstanding of this Prophesie: haue vnderstood the Messias here spoken of to be Iesus Christ, and first seauen weekes, then 62. that is 69. in all to bee the distance betwixt the commandement and him, referring the end of those yeares eyther to his birth, or his baptisme, or his death, and the beginning eyther to Cyrus, who first gaue leaue for the returne of the people and the building of the temple, or to Darius Hystaspis, who confirmed the same by

a new decree, in the second yeare of his raigne, as they take it, mentioned in the sixt of Esdras: or lastlie to Artaxerxes the long handed, supposing him to be the Artaxerxes mentioned in the seauenth of Esdras, and the second of Nehemias; who in the twentie yeare of his raigne gaue a new commandement for the building of the walles of the Citie, and sent Nehemias about it. Though some recko^ from his seuenth yeare, wherein Esdras was sent to Ierusalem by the Kinges authoritie with great priuiledges graunted.
Touching their opinion which bring the time of their yeares from Cyrus to Christ: it is with good reason confuted by Iulius Affricanus in the fift booke of his Chronicles, because that from Cyrus to Christ are many yeares aboue that time, that the compasse of Daniels weeks can reach to, which may be likewise obiected against Darius Histaspis his second yeare: from which to Christs birth are aboue 500. yeares.
But all this reasoning of Africanus toucheth Beroaldus no whit at all, bringing Cyrus downe from the 55. Olympiad to the 80. within the reach of these weeks, and so Darius Hystaspis in proportion; if euer there were anie such Darius among the Persian kings: For Beroaldus reckoning them al by their names, hath no one of this name amongst the^ to bee found;

but other in his stead I know not who, such as were neuer heard of before.
If these fancies had beene broched before the dayes of Africanus: his answere I beleeue would haue beene, as is vsed amongst the learned contra negantes principia, against such as denie principles and grounds, not with words, but eyther with silence or hissing: as Aristo and Pyrrho were serued for making no difference betwixt riches and pouertie. Either of these answeres is good enough for him, who going against the streame of al antiquity and learning, neither acknowledgeth any Cyrus before the 80. Olympiad, nor any king of Persia by the name of Xerxes in proper person as king to haue inuaded Greece, and so for mee it shall rest. The true time of Cyrus his age and the Persian Monarchie, which the Reader may safely leane to, is alreadie declared.
The last opinion is of such as referre the beginning of the 490. yeres of Daniels Prophesie to Artaxerxes the longhanded, some reckning them from his seau^enth yeare, to the death and passion of Christ Iesus; as Functius and some other. The seuenth of that Artaxerxes was the second yeare of the 80. Olympiad, and our Sauiour suffered in the last of the 202. The distance betweene is 490. yeares; so that in regard of the time and space of yeares, this opinion

would in some sort agree: if other things were answerable: but this is certaine that Esdras was in that seauenth yeare of Artaxerxes sent to Ierusalem by the kings authoritie, with letters and many priueledges graunted vnto him, and great summes of monie for offerings and vses of the Temple: yet no decree made for the building of the Citie, eyther Temple, which had bin finished before, or walles which were made vp after by Nehemias, by speciall commandement.
Moreouer if the decree to build the Citie had beene then published in the seauenth yeare of Artaxerxes, we must from thence to Messias onelie account seauen yeares, and sixtie two as the Angell in plaine wordes declareth, which expire seauen yeeres, before the death of Christ.
Lastlie this opinion disagreeth from the Historie of Ezra, where we read of an other Artaxerxes before this, vnder whom Ezra came to Ierusalem, which had forbidden the Iewes to proceed in the building of God his Temple, and therefore this could not bee the long handed Artaxerxes, before whome there was no king of Persia called by that name. Which reason likewise serueth to improue the next opinion here following: for manie goe somewhat lower to the 20. yere of the same Artaxerxes, wherin a newe decree went out for the building of

the walles of Ierusalem, as we reade in the second chapter of Nehemias. This twentieth yeare of Artaxerxes, was for the most part of it answerable to the 4. of the 83. Olympiad, and the commandement giuen in the first moneth in the beginning of the spring: as wee reade in the second of Nehemias. From which time to the death and passion of our Sauiour in the spring time of the last yeare of the 202. Olympiad, were 477. yeares full and no more. So there wants of Daniels number thirteene yeares.
To supply this want, two waies haue bin deuised. One by Iulius Africanus, Beda, Rupertus, Comestor, Pererius, and other, who thought the yeares of the Moone to bee vnderstood in this place. Which opinion, as of all other most fitlie agreeing to the true interpretation of this place, Pererius on the 9. of Daniel embraceth, and bringeth reason for it; because it is sayd in the Latin translation 70. Hebdomadae abbreuiatae sunt: that is, 70. weekes are shortened; Quo significatur annos earu^ hebdomadaru^ non esse ad longitudinem annorum solarium exigendos, sed ad breuitatem lunarium coarctandos. Whereby is signified that the yeares of those weekes are not to be driuen out to the length of the Sunne yeares: but to bee drawne into the shortnes of the Moone yeares, sayth Pererius.
I would it were the worst that might be said

of this reason, to call it absurd, friuolous, foolish. It is all that and more: euen derogatorie from God and his word: which by this meanes is defaced and thrust out of doores, and caused to giue place to the follie and error of a sillie man. For the ground of it is a decree from the Councell of Trent, establishing the authoritie of the olde Latin vulgar translation, as the very authenticall word of God, not to bee reiected or refused of any, vpon any pretence whatsoeuer. Hereof the Papists in their expositions alleadge that translation, preferring it before the originall text it selfe receiued from heauen. And hereof it is that Pererius in his exposition on this place, standeth so much vpon the word abbreuiatae shortened: vrging it greatly for proof of his short Moone yeares. It is a proofe indeede from the bad interpretation of a man: not warrantable from the mouth of GOD: whose word in this place is (...): which in the holie tongue signifieth properly to cut. In that sence it is often vsed by the Hebrew writers thereof, calling a peece of a thing (...) and (...), as Camius in the second part of his Miclol, and Elias in his Tishbi testifie: where he declareth the true signification thereof by the Dutch and Italian tongues. Wherein the words to those Hebrew answerable, are in Dutch, ein schint, or ein stuck: in Italian Pez, or talio, signifying any piece of a thing cut off. It is so also expounded

by the Greeke interpreter: who here to expresse the Hebrew (...), hath (...), signifying to cut.
The meaning is, that so many yeares were determined and decreed, by a speech borrowed from things cut out: because that in determining and decreeing things, the reason of mans minde, sundring trueth from falshood, and good from bad, doth by iudgement as it were cut out that which is conuenient and fit to bee done. Whereunto a like example in the same word is read in the Chaldie paraphrasis of Ester the 4. chapter and 5. verse, (...): which in English is thus much: And Ester called for Daniel, whose name was Hathac, by the word of whose mouth the matters pertayning to the kingdome were cut out: that is, determined and appoynted. And in other wordes of the same signification wee haue like examples. In the second chapter of Ester the first verse, King Assuerus remembred Vashti, (...) and that which was cut out vpon her: that is decreed and by iudgeme^t determined to come vpon her. Also in the first booke of the Kings, the 20. chapter and 40. verse (...) So is thy iudgement, thy selfe hath cut it out: that is, thou hast by thy owne sentence determined it. A phrase in Latin Authors vsuall enough, as when Cicero in his 4. plea against

Verres sayth, Res ad eum defertur istiusque mere deciditur. The matter is referred to him and cut off after his manner: that is, determined. Theodoretus in his exposition of this place, taketh the Greeke word in the same sence, they are cut: that is, appoynted and decreed.
Hereby it is cleere that Pererius his reason being taken from mans interpretation, and not Gods worde, can bee no good ground for the Moone yeares to stand vpon. Let the Pope and twise so many Bishops more, in their Councell set it vp as sure as they can, God his word is more powerfull then they, to pull it downe.
Furthermore, though this were graunted vnto him, that the Latin edition by the Councels decree hath diuine authoritie, and therefore force sufficient to proue the yeres of the moone to be vnderstood in this place by the word abbreuiatae shortened: yet for all that, such was the mans blindnes, euen those his short yeares are yet too short to fill vp the want before spoken of, and to reach to the passion of Christ. For 490. yeares of the Moone make but 475. of the Sunne: which expire two full yeares at the least before Christ dyed.
I am not ignorant that Pererius would help out this matter by a distinction of inclusiue, and exclusiue computation. Jnclusiue hee termeth when the first and last are included in the number. Exclusiue when they are left out; and

thinketh that the whole number in all should bee 490. Moone yeares or 477. of the Sunne, with the first and last included: and without them two onely 488. of the Moone and 475. of the Sunne betweene to be reckoned.
This is a ridiculous shift. For the Prophet doth not namely speake of 490. yeares or 477. (that is, gathered by interpreters, and not without some controuersie among them) but of 70. weekes. So that if the extreames, first and last, were to bee excluded, they should bee weekes, rather then yeares. Indeede if the Prophet had sayd that there were 490. or 477. yeares, from the yeare of the commandement to the yeare of Christs death: it might peraduenture haue made some cause of wra^gling about this, whether the first and last yeares should be excluded or no. But heere is no such matter. The extreames here expressed, are the commaundement to build Ierusalem for one: and the other, as it is vnderstood, the death of Christ. Now then, if the Prophet say, that from one of these extreames to the other, are 490. or 477. yeares exclusiuely: two dayes onely must bee excluded, rather then two yeares. For the commandement was giuen in a daye, and the death of Christ happened in a daye. It were strange to make each of them of one whole yeares continuance: and farre from that exact reckoning which Daniel maketh of his 70. weekes: first

seuen: then sixtie and two: and last of all one.
Therfore Julius Africanus, who as the chiefe author of these Moone yeares, is alleadged by Pererius, neuer once dreamed of any such exclusiue computation. I must acknowledge that he taketh indeede this place to bee vnderstood of 490. Moone yeares: which kinde of yeares the Hebrewes vsed, as he saith. But he could not stretch them any further then to the 16. yeare of Tiberius the Emperour of Rome: which is short by two whole yeares of the time set by Pererius for the passion of our Lord, in the 18. yeare of Tiberius. And as they are short of his passion: so they goe further then his baptisme. For which cause that opinion of Africanus can no waye stande, making an ende of Daniels weekes, neither in the birth, nor the baptisme, nor the death of Iesus Christ.
Neither can that conceit of Africanus touching the Moone yeares hereto be vnderstood, by that reason which he bringeth for it, that is, by the custome of the Hebrewes, be approued. Their moneths, I graunt, were in some sort taken by the course of the Moone. But the continuance of their yeres was euer directed by the Sunne: and that as well before the captiuitie of Babylon, as after: as may by good arguments out of holie Scripture be proued.
They were commaunded to celebrate their

feast of vnleauened bread, yearely from the 14. day of the first moneth to the 21. thereof, answerable to our Aprill in part (This was according to the course of the Moone.) And withall, to keepe it yearely in that season of the yeare, wherein their barlie haruest begun: as is euidently to bee seene in the 23. chapter of Leuit. the 10. verse. When yee bee come into the lande which I giue vnto you, and reape the haruest thereof: then ye shall bring a sheafe of the first fruites of your haruest vnto the Priest. Which could not bee but by the course of the Sunne. Likewise seuen weekes after that feast ended, was appoynted the celebration of Whitsontide, at the end of their haruest: which for that cause is named the Haruest feast, and the feast of first fruits, whereof an offering was brought to the Lord, Exod. 23.16. Lastly, their feast of Tabernacles euery yeare was kept in the 15. day of the 7. moneth: and withall in the ende of the yeare, after their vintage in Autumne, when all their grapes and other fruites of that season were gathered, Exod. 23.16. Deut. 16. vers. 13. It could not possiblie be, that the end of their haruest should be euery yere 7. weekes after Easter: and the end of their vintage, called the end of the yeare, alwayes from time to time in the 15. day of the 7. moneth, but by the yeare of the Sunne: whose course being finished brought it to passe.
Now that it seme not strange which I haue brought concerning the Iewes haruest beginning in Aprill, and ending seuen weekes after toward the ende of Maye, or not long after the beginning of Iune, because in our countries it is much latter about August: we are to knowe that Iewrie being a hotter countrie, as nearer to the equinoctiall line, and the sommer tropick then ours by 20. degrees, hath the haruest by reason thereof much sooner then with vs is accustomed, euen in their first month and the spring of the yeare. The Isralites went ouer Iorden the 10. day of the first month, being the time of haruest, and foure daies before their passe-ouer. The disciples of Christ in ye 6. of Luke the first verse,Ios. 3.15. and 4.19. and 5.10. a little after Easter walking through the corne plucked the eares of corne, and rubbed them in their handes and did eate them. VVhich argued the ripenesse of corne at that season. Plinie in his 18. booke and 18. chapter, speaking of the Egiptians, which are neere vnto Iudea; telleth that they goe into their fieldes with the sicle a little before Aprill, and finish their haruest in May.
These feastes then euery yeare falling to the time of haruest, bring manifest proofe for the yeare of the Hebrewes, that it was ordained by the course of the Sunne. The time of the children of Israels eating Manna, in scripture is accompted 40. yeares: in the end of the 16.

chapter of Exodus, reckoned from their departure out of Egypt, Nombres the 33. chapter the 38. vers. Which number from the same season of the yeare to the same, by the yeares of the sunne is most exact. For they came forth of Egipt the 15. day of the first month, in the beginning of barly haruest. And the very same day of the same month, in barly haruest their Manna ceased. Ios. 5.12. In the 25. chapter of Leuiticus, the Isralites are commaunded to sow their feeld, and cut their vineyardes, and gather the fruites thereof 6. yeares: and to let the 7. rest as a sabbath yeare to the Lord. And 7. of those sabbaths are accompted 49. yeares, at the end whereof in the 10. day of the 7. month began the Iubelie. These yeares most manifestly were yeares of the sunne. Otherwise all the fruites of those yeares could not haue been gathered in haruest and vintage, as God appointed. For 49. yeares of the moone would verie neere haue cut off one and a halfe, the last expiring in winter before anie corne or other fruite were redie to be gathered therein.
Daniell himselfe toward the beginning of this chapter, made mention of the 70. yeares of captiuitie. VVhere no one, that euer I heard of, vnderstood other yeares then of the sunne. It were a strange thing, if in one chapter first speaking of 70. yeares, and after of 70. weekes of yeares, he should vnderstand diuers sortes of

yeares one of the sunne, and an other of the moone. Augustine in his 15. booke de ciuitate Dei the 14. chapter, disputing against the opinion of some, who were perswaded that the yeares of the ancient fathers, which liued in the first age, were not of the Sunne: vseth these wordes: Tantus tunc dies fuit, quantus and nunc est. Tantus tunc me^sis, quantus and nu^c est: quem luna caepta and finita conclusit. Tantus annus, quantus and nunc est, quem 12. menses lunares, additis propter cursum solis 5. diebus and quadrante, consummant. The daye was as great then (sayth Augustine) as it is now. The moneth as great then as now, contained within the compasse of the Moones course from the beginning to the end. The yeare was then as great as now, perfected by twelue moneths of the Moone, with fiue dayes and a quarter added. Twelue moneths of the Moone with fiue dayes and a quatter more, make vp the Sunnes yeare, the same which wee now vse at this day. For euery moneth in old time, by Augustines iudgement, contained iust thirtie dayes: as is to bee seene in his fourth booke De Trinitate the fourth chapter, where he writeth thus: Si 12. menses integri considerentur, quos triceni dies complent, talem quippe mensem veteres obseruauerunt quem circuitus lunaris ostendit. That is, if the twelue moneths whole bee considered which containe thirtie dayes a peece.

Such was the moneth by men of olde time obserued, eue^ that which the course of the moone shewed. This is manifest by the historie of Noes floud in the seuen and eight chapters of Genesis, where we are taught that the floud begun the seuenteenth day of the second moneth: and the Arke rested on a mountaine of Ararat in the seuenteenth day of the seuenth moneth. Which space there by Gods holy spirit is counted 150. dayes: which reckoning giueth to euery moneth thirtie daies a peece, neither more nor lesse.
I might bring other testimonies to confirme this custome of the Hebrewes yere, ordered by the compasse of the Sunnes mouing, if it were needfull: but I hope that which hath been sayd alreadie, is sufficient to improoue the first shift of Africanus and other, deuised by 490. short Moone yeres to cut short the time of Daniels prophesie by 13. yeares: that is, two whole weekes of the 70. within a yeare. Seeing that they can neither serue to fill vp the distance from Artaxerxes his 20. yeare, to the suffering of Christ, for which they are brought, nor yet the custome of the Hebrewes reckoning in holie Scripture will beare them.
The other shift is as bad and sillie as that, if not more. For some who could not abide that forced wresting of Moone yeares, where there is no likelihood of such to be ment, went another

way to worke, making two beginnings, and thence two twentieth yeres of Artaxerxes his raigne. One beginning was immediatly after the death of his father Xerxes in the 4. yeare of the 78. Olympiad. The other nine yeares before in the 4. of the 76. Olympiad: wherein he was appoynted king by his father yet liuing, nine yeares before his death: from which the 20. is the 3. of the 81. Olympiad for the beginning of Daniels weekes, sayth Gerardus Mercator. Wherein notwithsta^ding he was greatly deceiued, by what error I know not. For reckoning from the third of the 81. Olympiad, to the last of the 202. wherein Christ dyed: wee shall finde no more but 486. yeares at the most. And therefore I see not by what reason he sayth, that the 70. weekes contayning 490. yeares, beginning at that twentieth of Artaxerxes, expired in the death of Christ.
Temporarius therefore making two beginnings, and two 20. yeares of Artaxerxes, as he doth, accounteth from the first twentieth 483. yeares to Christ his baptisme; which was aboue three yeares before his passion, and so endeth the death of Christ, three yeares and more before the end of Daniels weekes. But what reason had Mercator and Temporarius to thinke, that Artaxerxes begun to raigne whilest his father was yet aliue, so long before his death? This is a matter worth the examination,

being the ground of a great errour. The reason which they bring is in this manner. Themistocles the Athenian in the second yere of the 77. Olympiad, being expelled out of Athens by his vnthankfull countrie men and citizens, notwithstanding the great and wonderfull deliuerance of all Greece from the power of Xerxes king of Persia, by his wisedome and prowesse especially wrought: fled to the same Xerxes; as Ephorus, Deino, Cleitarchus, Heraclides, Diodorus Siculus, and other storie writers declare.
Againe, that Artaxerxes the sonne of Xerxes raigned in Persia, at such time as Themistocles fled to the king thereof for succour, it is testified by an ancient author of credit, euen Thucidides himselfe in his first booke of the Pelopo^nesian warre, writing that Themistocles flying by sea to Ephesus, and after going higher into Asia with a certain Persian, (...): that is, sent letters to king Artaxerxes the son of Xerxes, who a little before begun to raigne. If Themistocles flying, came to Xerxes king of Persia, and sent letters to Artaxerxes his sonne then raigning also in Persia: it must needes be that Artaxerxes had been made king a good while before his fathers death: for that happened about sixe or seuen yeares after the banishment of Themistocles. This is the force of their argument.

I haue heard it reported of one Doctor Medcalfe, who sometime was master of Saint Iohns Colledge in Cambridge, a man of no great learning himselfe: but for care and earnest endeuour euery way to aduance learning, giuing place to none. Whereby it maye bee thought that that famous Colledge hath by his meanes the better prospered and flourished euer since, with so great a companie of excellent Diuines and skilfull men in other knowledge. I haue (I say) heard it reported of him, that hauing on a certain day at supper with him some of the chiefe Seniors of the Colledge, hee sent for two Sophisters to dispute before them. The one tooke vpon him to proue that his fellowes blacke gowne was greene; requiring this only first to be granted vnto him, that if there were any greene gowne in that chamber, it was on his backe. Which was not thought vnreasonable: because it was euident, that there was none else had any. This then being once granted, he framed the rest of his proofe in this maner. That (saith he) poynting to a greene carpet on the table, there is a greene in this chamber all our eyes witnesse: and that there is gowne in it, your owne vpper garment on your backes proueth: whereof it followeth, that here amo^gst vs in this chamber there is a greene gowne. Doctor Medcalfe hearing this was greatly delighted, and affirmed in good sadnesse that it

was a good reason: and withall asked the iudgement of the Seniors there present: who smiling, commended the schollers wit.
Such a sophistication is here brought, by ioyning things together which ought to bee sundred. For neither they which tell of Themistocles flying to Xerxes, once euer dreamed of Artaxerxes raigning at the same time: nor Thucidides speaking of his co^ming to Artaxerxes, had this in his mind to think that Xerxes should bee then aliue: which I will prooue by good witnesse. For Plutarch in the life of Themistocles writeth thus: (...). Thucidides, saith Plutarch, and Charon Lampsacenus tell that after Xerxes was dead, Themistocles came to his sonne. Aemilius Probus confirmeth it in these wordes: Scio plaerosque ita scripsisse, Themistoclem Xerxe regnante in Asiam transiisse: sed ego potissimu^ Thucididi credo, quod aetate proximus crat. I know, saith Probus, that many writers report, Themistocles to haue passed into Asia whilest Xerxes was yet aliue: but I rather beleeue Thucidides, who was neere those times. Lastly, Lawrence Codoman in the second booke of his Chronologie, is as plaine for it as may be. That (sayth he) which Thucidides testifieth in his first booke, that Themistocles fled to Artaxerxes, of late hauing begun to

raigne: must bee vnderstoode of the Monarchie of Artaxerxes, begun after his fathers death.
There was some difference betweene them I grant, in regard of the persons to whom, and the time when Themistocles came: some thinking it to bee done when Xerxes was king, before the raigne of his sonne. Other, when Artaxerxes raigned after the death of his father. But all agreed in this, that at such time as Themistocles fled out of Greece, there was not two, but only one king of Persia: which is most certainly true.
Let the record of all histories bee sought, for the whole time of the Persian Monarchie from the beginning to the ende: it shall neuer bee found that the father and his sonne raigned together. Herodotus indeed in Polymnia, not far from the beginning, telleth of a custome and lawe of the Persians, that their king going to warre, first appoynted an heire who was to succeede him in the Empire. And that Xerxes was so appoynted by his father Darius, hauing prepared all things readie for his voyage agaynst Aegypt, to be next king after him. Yet he neuer raigned till his father was dead. (...): when Darius was dead, sayth Herodotus, the kingdome came to his sonne Xerxes. So that if Artaxerxes, as they say, were appoynted king by his father Xerxes in his life time, it was

but for the next place after his fathers death, to be an heire apparant and successor. Farre from that imperiall maiestie which Thucidides giueth to him, calling him (...), a king newly come to his kingdome.
But for my part, weighing all circu^stances, I see not any colour that Artaxerxes should be chosen so much as heire apparant by his father yet liuing: much lesse king. He had three sons by his chiefe wife Queene Amestris: first of all Darius: then two yeares after another called Hystaspes: and last of all this Artaxerxes: besides two daughters, as Ctesias declareth. By the custome of the Persians it must needes bee, that he named his next heire and successor to the crowne, before his famous voyage into Greece. And who was then to be named before his eldest sonne Darius? For Gerardus Mercator in his Chronology maketh it a thing past doubt, that Artaxerxes was at that time vnborne. Whereunto agreeth that which wee reade in Iustin, in the beginning of his third booke concerning the age of Artaxerxes at his fathers death: which happened about 16. yeares after his going foorth agaynst Greece. For there by Iustin he is termed admodum puer, a very child. If he had then been borne: yet there is no likelihood that he should haue been preferred either before Darius the eldest of all; or the next, that is Hystaspes, being elder then

he. This deuise therefore of two beginnings and two 20. yeares of Artaxerxes, to helpe out the want of so many yeares betwixt the twentieth yeare of Artaxerxes and the death of Christ, is a very poore shift and altogether friuolous.


If plaine proofe had been brought by the testimonie of ancient writers, that the kingdome and monarchie of Artaxerxes begun whilest his father liued, and that they raigned both at once many yeares together; they had sayd somewhat to the purpose. But that is not done: It is fetched about I know not how, by vaine coniectures, and gessing, and childish wrangling and sophistrie. The reasons to work it are deceitfull, and haue nothing at all in them but a colourable shew without substance.
That therefore which Iulius Africanus writeth in his Chronologie the 5. booke, that if we begin to number Daniels 70. weekes from any other beginning then the 20. of Artaxerxes: (...): neither the time will accord, and many absurdities follow; is true as well in that yere which he excepteth, as any of the rest. Neither doe I see, how by iust chronology of the times, either the yeare of Christ his birth, or his baptisme, or his death, may serue for the 490. yeares of Daniels 70. weekes to bee accounted vnto, from any commandement and decree giuen out by

the Persian kinges to build Ierusalem; or how the word Messias in this place can bee applied to our Sauiour Iesus, euen by their owne exposition, for if the 70. weekes expire in the death of Christ, as Beroaldus with the most part and best learned thinke, why doeth Daniel reckon onely threescore and nine to Messias, except they will say that Messias is here taken for the seauenth yeare before the death of Messias, which were a strange kinde of interpretation. And as Chronologie here fitteth not for Messias to be vnderstood of Christ our Lord: so the verie text it selfe is against it, which maketh onlie seuen weekes, that is 49. yeres distance from the co^mandement to Messias in plaine speech; so that it cannot bee applied to our blessed Sauiour without strayning and wresting, which they who so vnderstand it of Christ Iesus are driuen vnto. They are faine to vse chopping and changing, adding and taking away, contrarie to the expresse commandement of God: For first, whereas the original text after these words seauen weekes hath a rest, yea that rest which is vsuall in the middest of a sentence, to signifie a pause after halfe the verse now alreadie ended: this pause by them is taken away, and the wordes without anie rest at all continued with the next following, and the pause or stay made at 62. weekes in this manner: From the out going of the word to build againe Ierusalem vnto

Messias the gouernour, shalbe seauen weekes, and 62. weekes. Againe because in that interpretation of theirs, the wordes, and 62. weekes are seuered from the other following, wherewith they should be ioyned, as in my interpretation before deliuered may appere, and by that meanes the sence so darkned, that of it selfe in any plaine construction of sence it cannot stand: To make somewhat of it they are faine to thruste in words of their own inuention, as for that which God sayeth, it shall bee builded againe, they say, and it shal be builded againe, thrusting in the coniunction more than ought to bee. Some put in other wordes, some change verbes into Participles, and all to make 483. yeares distance betwixt the decree and the Messias heere spoken of, in steed of onlie 49.
Here is great ods, what is this els but to make Gods word a wax nose to turne which waie a man list at his pleasure? How is it possible that by such kind of dealing diuine scripture should be rightly vnderstood? Howe shall the Iewes by such wresting of texts, bee made Christians and brought to beleeue that Christ is come? Here it may bee, some will say vnto mee, you make more a doe about distinctions and pauses and pointes then is need: those are small matters and not so streightlie and preciselie to be looked into. I may giue men leaue to thinke as they list: but the truth is, that euen these small

matters of distinctions and rests, are of great weight and importance to the true vnderstanding of God his holie word: yet bee it graunted, that as small matters they may bee neglected. Is that also a small matter to put in wordes of their owne, which the custome of the originall tongue will not beare? Well let that bee yeelded to, be it a trifle not to bee stood vppon.
Though all this were graunted, and though there were no vowels nor points at all, yet euen the verie manner of the speech it selfe were enough to reproue their interpretation: for who euer read in the Hebrew Bible this kinde of speech; Seuen and threescore, and two for threescore and nine? It is not the custome of the holie Ghost to speake after that manner. If all the Hebrew scripture from the beginning of Genesis, to the end of Malachie be sought throughout, no one cleare example of the like can bee found.
As for that which Pererius bringeth from the twelfth verse of the 45. chapter of Ezechiell: Tremellius will soone teach him, that it is in another kinde.
If therefore neither agreement of time, nor text of holy scripture permit the name Messias in this place to be referred to Iesus Christ: we are to examine what other signification of this word is more agreeable to both. It is vsed somtimes of our Sauiour Christ, and sometimes

more generally take^, as before is shewed, for any annoynted Priest, Prophet, Prince, or chiefe Gouernour of the common wealth, and this is the signification, which in my iudgement best fitteth this place. And of Christian interpreters Eusebius is the man, which hath either taught me it, or guided me to it, or confirmed mee in it: who in his eight booke de demonstratione Euangelica hauing brought the expositio^ of Africanus, vnderstanding here Christ Iesus by the name of Messias or Christ, addeth these wordes. (...). That is; I say that the Gouernour Christ here spoken of in this text of scripture, by an other signification or acception is no other but a succession of high Priests, which after this prophesie, and the Iewes returne from Babilon gouerned the people, which the scripture vsuallie calleth Christs or annoynteds.
In this number hee reckoneth Iudas Machabaeus and his brethren, and their posteritie, who exercised a kingly gouernment ouer the Iewes, and a little after expounding these words in the 26. verse. Christ shall be cut off: who (saith he) is this Christ, but the gouernour which by succession of the Priests kindred ruled the people? This Christ therfore endured all the time wherin

these weekes were to bee fulfilled: but so soone as they once were ended according to this prophesie, the chiefe ruler of the people of that succeeding kindred was cut off, saith Eusebius.
This is a notable saying of Eusebius to declare the true meaning of the worde Messias; which may direct vs to vnderstand this most excellent prophesie aright, Theodoretus herein agreeth vnto him.
I take it somewhat more largely then Eusebius and Theodoretus doeth, not of the Machabies onely, but of other chiefe rulers and kings of the Iewes common wealth, within the compasse of these weekes, as the Hebrew scholiasts Saadias, Aben, Ezra, Iarchi, and some other expounde it. Not one Hebrew writer that euer I read, vndestood their Messias by this worde, but a succession of annoynted, eyther Priestes, or Gouernours.
The decree to build Ierusale^, I take to be that which was made by Darius for the building of the temple, which was the chiefest parte of the citie. In the second yeare of that Darius, and the 6. month the first day toward the end of our August, they were commaunded in the Lordes name by his prophet Aggie, to build the holy temple of Ierusalem: as wee read in the first chapter and first verse of the prophet. After they had begun to build, the gouernours of the

countries beyond Euphrates came vnto them to know by whose authoritie they tooke that worke vpon them,Ezra chap. 5. and 6. who answered that Cyrus had giuen them leaue to doe it long before in the first yeare of his raigne. Of this answere they certified king Darius. By whose commaundement search was made: first in the recordes at Babylon: after at Ecbataua the chiefe citie of Medes, where a record touching that matter was found. Herevpon Darius made a new decree for building thereof; and sent it to the gouernours of his countries beyond Euphrates, charging them to permitte and helpe forward the building thereof.
All these thinges were not done in a little time, from the prophets sending by God about that matter, to the time wherein Darius sent his decree. It asked some time to beginne the worke after the prophets warning. And then for the gouernours in other prouinces to be certified. And after themselues to come and examine the matter. At what time it is sayd that they found the worke in good forwardnesse, the beames being layde in the walles. Ezra the 5 chapter 8. verse: and after to certifie Darius: and then to search the recordes, and that in those farre places of Babylon and Ecbataua. And lastly to send forth the new decree.
So farre as we may gesse, this time might be about some 8. or 9. monthes, and bring vs to

the month of Aprill or Maie in the 3. yeare of Darius. And who was this Darius? In my iudgement no other but the surnamed Nothus, who was sonne to Artaxerxes Longimanus. This Artaxerxes (as Thucidides then liuing testifieth) died in the 7. yeare of the Peloponnesian warre in winter which was the 4. of the 88. Olympiad. After him Xerxes and Sogdianus raigned 1. yeare. And after them this Darius whose 3. yeare at that season wherein the decree to build the temple went out, falleth toward the end of the 3. yeare of the 89. Olymp.
For the publishing of that decree to Messias, that is the first gouernour of the new builded citie, are accompted here by Daniel 7. weekes, contayning 49. yeares. VVhereof 17. pertained to Darius after the decree: for he raigned 19. in all. The other 32. were of Artaxerxes Mnemon his successor. In whose 20. yeare Nehemias was sent to build the walles of Ierusalem, and 12. yeares after, the building of the walles being finished and the Messias or gouernour appointed, and the common wealth euery way set in order: hee returned to Artaxerxes in the 32. yeare of his raigne.
The proofe hereof is cleere by scripture. In the 5. chapter of Nehemias the 14. verse. From the time sayth Nehemias, that the king commaunded me to be gouernour in the land of Iudea, from the 20. to the 32. yeare of king Artaxerxes,

that is 12. yeares: I and my brethren haue not eaten the bread of the gouernour. For the gouernours before mee had beene chargeable to the people, and so forth. Also in the 13. chapter of the same booke the sixt verse. All this while (saith he) was not I at Ierusalem, for in the 32. yeare of Artaxerxes king of Babell I returned to the king.
Ioseph Scaliger in his sixt booke de emendatione temporum, giueth his voice with this exposition, affirming that Darius Nothus was the king vnder whome the decree was made to build the Citie, and that from it to the streetes and walles of Ierusalem finished, were nine and fortie yeares. After which time, Nehemias directis platais vrbis and vicis exaedificatis, atque omnibus rebus compositis reuersus est in Persidem anno Artaxerxis altero and tricesimo. Nehemias (saith Scaliger) so soone as the streets of the citie were directed, and the lanes builded, and all thinges set in order, returned into Persia in the two and thirtieth yeare of Artaxerxes.
It is here to be obserued yt the Prophet speaketh of the Messias, and the building vp of the Citie, as beginning both at one time: For hauing foretold that there should bee to Messias seauen weekes: it followeth immediatly after how long the Citie was to continue. The reason whereof is this, that there could not be conueniently any Princely gouernment of the common

wealth before the building of the Citie, wherein the Princes Court and Pallace should be: which Pallace for the Prince was builded by Nehemias also, as appeareth in the second of Nehemias, verse eight. Hereof it is that Sanballat in a letter to Nehemias, ioyneth these two together: the building of the walles, and a king set ouer the Iewes. It is reported (saith Sanballat) among the heathen, that thou and the Iewes thinke to rebell: for which cause thou buildest the wall that thou mayest bee their king according to their wordes. Thou hast also ordained Prophets to preach of thee in Ierusalem, saying there is a king in Iuda.
These two thinges then begun together, the Citie builded, and the annoynted Gouernour thereof, as also the end of both was at one time, declared in the 26. verse. After those 62. weekes shall Messias be cut off, and the Citie and Temple shall the people of the come Gouernour destroy.
Thus whereas Daniel hath deuided his 70. weekes into three parts: The first of them hath his true meaning by text and time approued, from the decree to build Ierusalem, to the same building finished, and the established gouernment in it, beeing the space of 49. yeares: The second part containeth 62. weekes, wherein Ierusalem so builded with the common wealth, and state, and princely gouernment

thereof was to continue, that is to say, from the building of the Citie finished, and the Prince or ruler appointed in the 32. of Artaxerxes Mnemon: vnto such time as the ruine and fall of the same Citie began, which was about the nine yeare of Nero: For about that time Albinus the Roman Gouernour of Iudea and Ierusalem, by his great couetousnes and crueltie in most wofull manner oppressed the Iewes, for bribes, euen selling them to be spoyled and robbed of their goods, at the will and pleasure of most lewd ruffins and bad persons. As Josephus declareth in his second booke of the Iewes warre the thirteenth Chapter, inferring thereof that (...). the seedes of Ierusalems captiuitie approching, was from that time sowne, meaning that those troubles vnder Albinus were the beginnings of the Iewes thraldome and vndoing, as indeede they were, which in the twentieth booke of antiquities the eight chapter, hee declareth more plainely: where hauing spoken of the great miserie of the Iewes, which they suffered by the mercilesse crueltie of Albinus, hee vseth these wordes. (...). From that time forward saith Iosphus, especially our Citie began to be sicke, and all things going then more and more to decay. The wofull calamities of Ierusalem euery day falling more and more to

wracke after the gouernment of Albinus, by a borrowed speech hee termeth sicknes.
In the beginning of that yeare, at the feast of the Tabernacle it was, that a certaine man of the common sort brought vp in the countrie, called Iesus the sonne of Anani, as a messenger by diuine motion from God, to foreshew the vtter ruine and desolation of Ierusalem to come in that last weeke of the 70. which was yet behinde, in the streetes of the Citie cryed day and night; a voice from the East, a voice from the West, a voice from the foure windes, a voice against Ierusalem and the Temple, a voice against Bridegroomes and Brides, a voice against all the people. The Magistrates and Nobles of the Citie not abiding his outcries brought him before Albinus: who caused him with scourges to bee torne to the bones, when the sillie wretch neyther wept nor craued anie mercie, but at euery stroke answered woe, woe, to Ierusalem. In this manner crying hee continued seuen yeres and more without anie hoarsnes or wearines: neyther cursing them that hurt him, nor thanking them that releeued him. At the length going on the walles with this crie woe, woe, to the Citie, and the Temple, and the people, hee added these wordes, woe also to my selfe, and was presently slaine with a stone hurled by an Engine at him from the enemie beseeging the Citie.
Thus the second part of this Prophesie, foreshewing how long the Iewes common wealth after the ordering thereof should continue before it began to decay, contained 62. weekes, that is, 434. yeares: for the 32. of Artaxerxes Mnemon was the fourth yeare of the 101. Olympiad, towards the end wherof the building of Ierusalem was finished, and the Iewes common wealth appointed, and the first yere of the last weeke, was the second yeare of the 210. Olympiad, beginning toward the end of it in the spring time of the yeare. The space included containeth the full number before declared.
The third and last part is one weeke, euen the last of all the 70. wherein after the former 62. weekes expired, Messias, that is the last Ruler was cut off, and the gouernement of the Citie quite extinct, for when their last king Agrippa in the twelfth yeare of Nero, foure yeares before the destruction of the Citie, went about to perswade the people to obey Florus the Roman deputie, by whose tyrannie they had beene incomparably more vexed and oppressed, then in the time of Albinus his predecessor: The people were so stirred against him, that they could not containe themselues any longer, but threw stones at him, and droue him out of the Citie, as Iosephus declareth in the sixteene chapter of the second booke of the Iewes war.
If any here obiect, that Caius Caesar the Emperour

of Rome after the death of this Agrippas father, made Iudea a prouince to bee gouerned by a Roman Deputie, and bestowed on this Agrippa the kingdome of Chalcis, which pertained to his vncle Herod; I answer that this Herod had his kingly Pallace in Ierusalem, and obtained of C. Caesar for himselfe and his successors, not onely the rule and power ouer the Temple, and whole treasurie: but also authority of chusing the high Priests, and deposing them at his pleasure, and the calling of the iudges together, and other matters pertaining to the seruice of the Leuites and Priestes in Gods Temple; All which his Soueraignty dyed in this last weeke about foure yeres before the destruction of the Citie, yea before in the time of Albinus, in the beginning of this last weeke: anarchie and vnrulie disorder begun to rise, and good gouernment to fall: which Iosephus immediatly before the worde concerning the seedes of Ierusalems thraldome sowen, in the second booke of the Iewes war the thirteenth chapter before by me cited, seemeth in this short speech to signifie (...). Tyrranie or vsurped gouernment was exercised by manie. This beginning of misrule by little and little grew to further increase, till at the length the king was driuen out, and not long after al other magistracy of Ierusalem was likewise abolished, all good gouernment ceased, as Iosephus in plaine words

declareth in the fourth booke and fift chapter of the Iewes warre, that the citie was without a ruler to guide it. And in the second chapter of the fift booke: that all law of man was troden vnder foot, and the law of God made a scorne, and the lawes of nature it selfe disturbed. All things were ordered by the will of lawlesse ruffians, their pleasure stood for law. A most pitifull disorder and tumultuous anarchie raigned amongst them by the wilfull malice of gracelesse rebels, appoynting iudges of their owne choyce for their turne, and creating hie priests whom they list, vile and vnworthie men: and those of such tribes, as by Gods commaundement were forbidden that holie seruice.
Thus was it fulfilled and verified which Daniel here foretold of Messias, to bee cut off after 62. weekes in the last of the 70. Whereunto he also addeth this more; that in the same weeke the citie and Temple should bee destroyed by the come gouernours people: meaning the Romane armie which wasted Ierusalem and Iudea by the space of foure yeres together continually, from the 12. yeare of Nero to the end of the warre. First, Florus the Romane deputie begun by his intollerable couetousnes and merciles oppression, turning the peoples hearts against him to complaine of their wrongs by him sustained. Which so stirred him, that forthwith hee sought a new quarrell of greater reuenge,

and sent vnto Ierusalem for 17. talents of siluer to be giuen him forth of the holie treasurie. Which being denied, he made no more adoe, but came against Ierusalem with an host of horsemen and footmen, by force and armes to obtaine his wil, and reuenge himselfe of such as had spoken against him. Being entred within the citie into the Deputies pallace, he cryed to his souldiers, commaunding them to spoyle the citie and slay whomsoeuer they met.
Thus Ierusalem was giuen for a prey, and the inhabitants slaine, man, woman and childe, to the number of 630. and many of the Nobles whipped and torne with scourges and crucified. And not herewith content, a little after he sent for new souldiers, who once againe killed the poore Iewes in peaceable manner, going foorth of their citie to meete and receiue them with a friendly welcome. Some were beaten downe with clubs, some troden vnder the horses feete, some choked in the great prease at the gates, many slaine with the sword. And after that, by the same Florus, was a new slaughter made of the Iewes in Caesarea. After all these troubles, Florus not yet contented, made a great complaint of the Iewes to Cestius the gouernour of Syria: who for that cause brought a great armie against Iudea, and destroyed many townes and villages therein, giuing the spoyle thereof to his souldiers. At the

last he brought his armie in battel aray into Ierusalem, and burned diuers streets thereof, and made hauocke of the Iewes.
Thus was the Lords inheritance consumed and destroyed by the cruell Romanes, til at the length Vespasian and Titus, sent by the Emperour Nero, wasted all the whole lande, and brought vtter desolation vpon the Temple and citie, both burnt with fire: thereby fulfilling Daniels prophesie, and making an ende of his 70. weekes, being yeares 490. From the third of Darius Nothus, wherein the decree went out to build Ierusalem, to the ouerthrow thereof, that was the third of the 89. Olympiad, this the first of the 112. both almost expired: the space betweene is 490. yeares.
Yet for all this crueltie and hot warre of the Romanes against the Iewes, diuers of the deputies and generals in most friendly manner were content to make couenants of peace with many of the Iewes: who being quietly minded in fauour to the Romanes, and detesting the disorder and lewd doings of the seditious rebels, sought their friendship. Cestius Gallus in the beginning of that warre, offered a league of friendship to the citizens of Ierusalem: which many (leauing that rebellious rout) embraced, and fled out of the citie vnto him. Likewise, Vespasian and Titus diuers and sundrie times receiued many into their friendship comming

vnto them, and most louingly offered a faithfull league of sure peace to anie whosoeuer were desirous of it, in loue and good meaning to the Romane gouernment, and hatred of the rebels. Of which sort desiring peace, and parties of that league, was a great number not only in Ierusalem, but diuers other places.
All this is faithfully recorded by Josephus an eye-witnesse of those times: Dauisons historie also confirming the same. And this it is which the Prophet Daniel seemeth to meane, where he speaketh of a couenant to be established to many one weeke: as some expositors haue vnderstood it, and namely R. Salomon, surnamed Iarchi, Rabbi Leui the sonne of Gershom, Aben Ezra, and R. Abraham in his Cabbala. But for my owne part, I thinke rather that it is to bee referred to the new couenant of the Gospell of Christ, by the preaching whereof in this last weeke, the beleeuing Iewes were especiallie at that time aboue al other, when so great miserie of woful destructio^ was now at hand, to be confirmed more and more in the true faith. And many also thereby then called and wonne anew vnto it, whom it pleased the Lord of life by offering that gratious league of saluation vnto them, not only to rid from those (horrible indeede, yet temporall) troubles approching; but also to saue euerlastingly. For there was (no doubt) at that time a great companie of holie

Saints in Ierusalem and Iewrie which beleeued in Christ: of whose deliuerance at that time the Lord had especiall care.
Although this is a thing not to bee doubted of: yet by the prouidence of God, that thereby his prouide^ce ouer his church may be knowne; wee haue a notable record thereof in Eusebius the third booke of his Ecclesiasticall historie the fift chapter. The Church (sayth Eusebius) which was gathered together at Ierusalem, was commanded by an oracle from God to flit out of it to a certaine towne beyond Iorden called Pella: to the entent that those good and holie men being taken out of the citie, place thereby might be giuen to the vengeance of GOD against it and the wicked Iewes, by the destruction and ouerthrow thereof.
If any here aske who there is before mentioned to whom these words, he shall make a sure couenant, may be referred but the Romane generall. I answere, that it is no new thing in the Hebrew tongue for the person of the doer to bee vnderstood, though not expressely spoken of before: when the transitiue verbe hath an impersonall notion. A hundred such examples might be brought, some out of the olde Testament, some out of the new, some out of prophane authors, which I will not stand vpon, being a thing well knowne and taught, euen in the Grammer rules of the holie tongue. The

meaning is, that before the vtter destruction of Ierusalem, a holie and sure couenant should be made vnto the faithfull number of the Iewes, chosen to saluation by such ministers and instruments as it should please God to vse for that worke in that last weeke of Ierusalem: in the one halfe or middest whereof the sacrifices appoynted in the law of God and accustomed, begun to be neglected and cease.
First they reiected al sacrifices and oblations for any stranger which was not a Iew, being before vsually from time to time wont to bee offered. And a little after in the 13. yere of Nero, when Vespasian was come into Iudea and wasted the countrie: then the vnrulie rebels in Ierusalem abolished the lawfull custome of sacrificing, appoynting priests of the common people and countrie clownes, a thing forbidden by Gods lawe. They held the Temple and holie places, keeping themselues therein as a castle of defence: and at the length partly by the sedition within, and partly sharpe warre without, it came to passe that the priests in time of their sacrificing were slaine by darts and stones hurled from the rebels: and in the ende for want of men there was no daily oblation any more offered. This Iosephus declareth in the 2. booke the 17. chapter, the 4. booke the 5. chapter, the 5. booke the 9. chapter, the 6. booke the first and fourth chapters, the seuenth



booke the fourth chapter of the Iewes warre. Wherfore not without cause in my iudgement may those words of Daniel, touching the sacrifices ceasing in the middest of the last weeke, bee referred vnto these times of this warre: wherein by meanes thereof the sacrifices of the Lords house were hindered so many wayes: some were quite abolished, and others done either not by those to whom they pertained: or not so safely and freely as they ought. Yea I see not how any at all many dayes could bee offered, by reason of the seditious hurlie burlies in the citie, and the warre without, the sacrificers themselues oftentimes being slaine or wounded in the middest of their offering.
Master Iunius though hee thinke Christ Iesus to bee the agent and worker of these abolished sacrifices: yet for all that partly he referreth the working thereof to the time of Ierusalems besieging. Impijs sacrificium and munus abolebit ex facto, quia premente obsidione vrbis destituentur commoditatibus sacrificiorum. He shall abolish (sayth Iunius, speaking of Christ) sacrifice and offering in regard of the wicked by deede, because that the besieging of the citie pressing them, they shall bee bereaued of the profits of sacrifices.
This exposition is not strayned, it is plaine, without any wresting, turning, adding, or taking away: the course of Heauen, and holy

Scripture, and prophane storie, all make one account, they all agree in the same reckoning: if it bee not new, all is well. For this is well sayde of an Hebrew writer, and worth the bearing in minde. (...) Better is the grape gleaning of the auncient, then the gathering of the later. Neither is it lightly to be regarded, which Iosephus in his second booke against Apion affirmeth: that length of time is a most sure proofe.
For my owne part, I reuerence antiquities gray heares as much as any other, who beareth but this indifferencie to thinke that good reason is aboue all. For without it I would not haue her contradicted.
Wherefore least this opinion of newnesse discredite my iudgement: I am to let the reader vnderstand, that though it be not so rife as other: yet it is more ancient then peraduenture may be thought. Tertullian was one of the Latine Fathers most auncient, and very neere the Apostles, flourishing in the raigne of Seuerus the Emperor, about 200. yeares after Christes birth, and not past one hundered after the death of Iohn the Euangelist. Who in a booke of his, written against the Iewes, expounding this prophecie of Daniels weekes, beginneth the reckoning thereof from a Darius, which raigned nineteene yeares, after whome these foure succeeded one after another to the ende

of the Persian Monarchie. First Artaxerxes, then Ochus, after him Arses, and last of all another Darius, who was ouercome by Alexander. Whereby it is manifest that he meaneth the same Darius that I doe: for the beginning of this 490. yeares. Onely herein he was deceiued, that he supposed this Darius to be the same which is mentioned in the ninth of Daniel, and raigned ouer the Medes, when this message was brought vnto him by the Angell Gabriell. And for the ende thereof hee bringeth it to the first yeare of Vespasian making this conclusion of all his account: Ita in diem expugnationis suae Iudaei impleuerunt hebdomadas 70. praedictas in Daniele. So the Iews (saith Tertullian) at the daye of their subdewing fulfilled the 70. weekes foretolde by Daniel.
Thus for the Persian king, vnder whom Daniels weekes begun, there is no great difference betweene Tertullian and me: and for the time wherein they ended none at all.
After Tertullian Seuerus Sulpitius, of the same standing with Augustine, Epiphanius, and Chrysostome, a writer for skil in the Persian storie deseruing great commendation, and to the true vnderstanding of Ezra, and Nehemias, and Daniels weekes bringeth such light, as is not in any ancient writer that euer I read to be found the like.
This Father in the second booke of his holy

history speaking of Cyrus, saith that hee gaue the Iewes leaue in the beginning of his raigne to build the Temple, wherein they went a little forward, till such time as they were hindered by their enemies nere a hundred yeres after, in the raigne of Artaxerxes, who forbad them to meddle any more in that worke, which by that meanes ceased till the second yeare of Darius. The same Author after Cyrus hauing spoken of Cambyses, Darius Hystaspis, and Xerxes, placeth next him that Artaxerxes; Qui templi aedificatione^ inhibuit, which forbad the building of the Temple, and then hauing set another Xerxes with his brother Sogdianus betweene, commeth to that Darius vnder whom the temple was restored, and the building thereof perfected in the sixt yeare of his raigne: From which time to the destruction of the Citie by Vespasian, he numbreth 483. yeares. His words be these, Caeterum a restitutione templi vsque in euersionem quae sub Vespasiano Consule Augusto per Titum Caesarem consummata est, anni 483. Praedictum id olim est a Daniele, qui ab instauratione templi ad euersionem eius 69. hebdomadas futuras pronunciauerat: But from the restoring of the Temple, (saith Seuerus) to the ouerthrow of it, which by Titus Caesar was finished vnder Vespasian then beeing imperiall Consull, were 483. yeares.
That was by Daniel long agoe foretold,

who had before declared that from the restoring of the Temple, to the ouerthrow of it should bee 69. weekes, whereas hee saith that Daniel foretold 69. weekes to bee from the restoring of the Temple to the destruction thereof: it is true beeing vnderstood from the commandement going out concerning that restoring, to the time wherein the desolation of the Citie, and the ouerthrow of the Iewes common wealth begun: for Daniel in plaine words foreshewed that after 69. weeks counted from that commandement, Messias should be cut off, and the Citie and Temple destroyed, leauing the last week of the seuenty, for the accomplishing thereof: wherein by certaine degrees by little and little it was wrought by the Romans.
The ruine begun vnder Albinus his gouernment strait after the 69. weekes, as before hath beene prooued by one or two euident testimonies of Iosephus. It continued and increased more and more vnder Florus, till at the length Titus vnder his father Vespasian made a finall end and vtter vndooing of all.
Thus Seuerus Sulpitius, most manifestlie declareth his iudgement for the beginning of Daniels weekes, to be referred to the raigne of Darius Nothus, and the end of them to be made in the destruction of Ierusalem by Titus, not seeing how the Prophesie of Daniel might otherwise bee vnderstood or applied, beginning

and end to anie other kinges.
Ioseph Scaliger in his 6 booke de emendatione temporum, acknowledgeth Darius Nothus to bee the Persian king, by whose decree the building of the temple was restored. And that from that time the accompt of Daniels weekes beginneth. The end he referreth to the destruction of Ierusalem. Ab instaurandis Hierosolymis incipiunt hebdomades, in Hierosolymorum excidium terminantur. Neque enim frustra caput hebdomadum ad Herosolymorium incolumitatem pertinet, cum earum finis ad eiusdem vrbis casum et deletionem pertineat. The weekes beginne, sayth Scaliger, at the restoring of Ierusalem, and end in the ouerthrowe of it. Neither is it without cause that their beginning pertayneth to the safetie of Ierusalem, seeing that the end thereof belongeth to the fall and destruction of the same citie. Vnderstanding the time wherein the warre against the Iewes begun their desolation.
Lastly Iunius in the last edition of his bible, in his notes vpon the 9. of Daniell numbreth these 70. weekes, from the second of Darius Nothus, to the second of Vespasian wherein Titus destroyed Ierusalem.
Moreouer for the end of these weekes Clemens Alexa^drinus was of the same iudgement, a man for great knowledge rare, and as ancient, if not more then Tertullian, whose neere

age to the apostles I haue spoken of before. He thought them to expire in the destruction of the citie by Titus.
Also Origen in his 29. treatise vpon Mathew was of the same opinion, and Chrysostom in his 2. oration against the Iewes: To say nothing of the Hebrew writers houlding the same, Aben Ezra, Iarchi and R. Leui Gershoms sonne in their commentaries and R. Abraham in his historical cabbala.
And surely whosoeuer readeth the place of Daniell with an euen minde, not preuented with preiudice, or blynded with affection: shall hardly find any other end wherin those seuenets of yeares can settle their feete to rest, for hauing deuided the whole 70. into 3. partes: first he sheweth what was to be doone in seuen weekes, and then in 62. and lastly in that one which was lefte after the 62. before the end whereof, he maketh mention of Messias to bee cut off, and the citie destroyed. If Daniel hauing propounded to himselfe an exact and straight order of weekes, should first tell of Messias his cutting off in one weeke, and then of the destruction and desolation of Ierusalem about 37 yeares after it, and then presently come backe againe to the sacrifices abolished in the same weeke which he had spoken of before, and immediatly after go yet once againe to that desolation which happened 40. yeares after verie

neere: it were a strange kind of ridling, and farre more confuse then the vaine oracles of Delphos; especially seeing that these clauses and partes, are ioyned and knit together by no other but copulatiue coniunctions. And therefore it is no maruell that those excellent and worthie fathers, as well as the Hebrew scholiastes could finde no place by Daniels text for his weekes to stay in, but the ouerthrowe of the Iewes common wealth by the Romans.
The end thus appearing by their testimonie, the beginning cannot bee hid. It must needs fall to the raigne of Darius Nothus where I set it.
Hereby it appeareth, that this exposition of Daniels weekes by me brought, is neither new nor any singular deuise of my owne. I haue Eusebius, and Theodoretus and Aben Ezra, and, R. Abraham in his cabbala, with other hebrew writers befornamed with me for the Messias cut off, to be vnderstood of the gouenor of Ierusalem, R. Leui also verie neere agreeing therunto: and differing onely in this, that in stead of the annointed princes vnderstood of them by the name of Messias, he rather taketh the annointed priestes to be ment. Yea and that which is of farre greater force then all their authorities, the plaine testimonie of God his word which nu^breth 7. weekes only to Messias and no more: as before I haue already proued by the original

text which if Eusebius and Theodoretus had throughly knowne, as the Hebrewes their partners in that iudgement did, they would haue stoutly stood for it against all the world.
For the end of the weekes in the desolation of the citie, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Origen, Crysostom, Sulpitius, Scaliger, Iunius, testifie with me. And 4. of them for both beginning and end agreeing or verie little differing.
I am not ignorant that though Ioseph Scaliger referre the end of these weekes to the desolation of the temple: yet he vnderstandeth by the name of Messias in the 26 verse, Christ Iesus our redeemer to bee killed after 62. weekes, contayning yeares 434. And that these 434. yeares ended in the death of Christ, and begun in the 5. yeare of Artaxerxes Mnemon, wherein by a new decree, leaue was giuen to Esdras the priest to returne with such of his countriemen as would goe with him to Ierusalem.
I am loth to speake any thing without reuerence and loue of so excellent a man, who hath brought much light to the true vnderstanding of this prophecie. This is all which I will say, that his opinion for this matter, wandreth far astray out of reasons path. For how can this be proued that Artaxerxes Mnemon gaue out any decree for Esdras in the 5. of his raigne, either by prophane learning or diuine scripture?

It is sayd in Esdras, that hee went to Ierusalem in the 7. yeare of that king. And therefore by the authoritie of that place skilfull men haue layde the foundation of Daniels seuenets in the 7. yeare of Artaxerxes. How then is his fift yeare brought in for a new decree? Ab eo edicto ad perfectionem Esdrae annus solidus interest. There was one whole yeare, sayth Scaliger, betweene the decree and Esdras his going. And what reason hath he for this? Surely none at all but this bare coniecture. Eo interuallo opus fuit Esdrae ad reliquias Iudaeorum per Babiloniam, Mediam, ac Persidem sparsas colligendas. That space, sayth he, was needfull for Esdras to gather together such Iewes as were left scattered abroade, through Babylonia, Media, and Persia.
This is nothing els but a proofles conceipt: a fancie vnfit to build any credit or faith vpon. If such kind of gessing might stand for reason, it were a hundred fould more prone to bee gathered that the decree was made presently vpon his going in the verie same yeare, as Functius and other of the learned by vew of that scripture haue iudged. For what matter was it for so great a man of that estimation and honor that Esdras was in, to gather 1500. speedily together. Could it possibly take a yeares preparation in such a willing people of themselues so readie to go? Or if it were so great a matter and a

worke of so long time, could so Godly and so zealous a priest be so negligent in the Lordes businesse, that hauing a yeares warning to gather a little companie together, hee should forget the Leuites, which of al other were most necessarie in regard of Gods seruice in the temple of Ierusalem? For when al were come together, no Leuit was found among them: the chiefest of all, in a whole yeares space, were neuer thought vpon, till he was in some forwardnesse on his way: then on a sudden hee sent to seeke for them. Read the 8. chapter of Esdras the 15. verse, and see how that which is there told can beare any such coniecture.
But to let that passe, it is not a yeares matter that can serue Ioseph Scaligers turne, to helpe out his deuise, and to bring this geare about. For by the iudgement almost of all the best writers, by the space of this twelue hundred yeares, our blessed Sauiour suffered toward the end of the last yeare of the 202. Olympiad: at which time was obserued, euen by prophane Authors, the strange eclipse of the Sunne, which happened at the passion of Christ. Phlegon, by the iudgement of Eusebius, an excellent accounter of Olympiads, in his foureteenth book writeth thus. In the fourth yeare of the 202. Olympiad was an exceeding great eclipse of the Sunne, aboue all other that euer happened before. The day at the 6. houre, that is, high noone,

was so turned into darke night, that the starres were seene in heauen: and an Earthquake ouerthrew many houses in Nice, a citie of Bythinia.
This Eusebius testifieth of Phlegon: and it agreeth notably to the testimonie of the Euangelists, touching the Sunnes darkening from the 6. houre to the 9. when Christ was crucified. Thence therefore numbring backward 434. yeares, from the 202. Olympiad almost at an end, we come to the second yeare of the 94 Olympiad drawing to an ende: at which time, euen by Scaligers own opinion, the third yeare of Artaxerxes Memor begun. By this meanes not one, as Scaliger sayth, but foure full yeares at the least: that is, the third, fourth, fift, and sixt yeares of Artaxerxes should haue been betweene the decree and the going of Esdras to Ierusalem.
I know that Scaliger putteth off the time of Christs passion a yeare further then other. But if that were granted him, yet should the decree goe ful three yeares before Esdras his comming to Ierusalem. A thing vncredible and beyond all sence of reason, that leaue should be giuen Esdras to goe to the house of God, and a solemne decree by the kings authority published for it, and he linger and protract the time of his going three yeares after.
Besides, euen the Prophets owne words are

altogether against this interpretation of Scaliger, and will no wayes suffer it. For first hauing expounded the generall summe of 70. weekes for the state of Ierusalem, he deuideth them so into three parts, as that the first should bee to the building of the walles and citie finished, and then 62. for the continuing thereof so builded, and after all them one more.
Who hauing the reason of a man in him, can gather any other thing by Daniels words, but that those 62. weekes spoken of, should immediatly follow after the first seuen, and goe next before the last one? Which being so, needes must they begin after the 32. of Artaxerxes, and end seuen yeares before the vtter ruine of Ierusalem, brought vpon it by Titus.
Moreouer, it is to be obserued, that after the first seuen, set for the restoring and building of the citie, he sayth, that the citie should be builded 62. weekes streete and wall, and that after, not some other, but euen these very same 62. weekes before spoken of, should Messias bee cut off and the citie made desolate. For the demonstratiue article in (...), hath this force, to referre vs to a knowne thing spoken of: which is likewise vsuall in the Greeke tongue. What the^ can Scaliger make of this, that Christ should be killed after those 62. weekes, wherein the citie of Ierusalem continued builded street and wall? For it is well knowne that Ierusalem

continued so builded streete and wall aboue thirtie yeares after the passion of Christ, before it begun to bee made desolate, and in all that time greatly flourished. This interpretation therefore of Scaliger hath no successe for probabilitie.
Another thing in Scaliger troubled me more then this: by reason of the excellencie of the man, not making any doubt of his account: Hebdomades incipientes ab edicto instaurandi templi desinunt in initio abominationis, hoc est, circa initia belli Iudaici, quo primum caedes in vrbe patrari coeptae ac templum pollui: quod tempus incurrit in finem vndecimi and initium duodecimi anni Neronis. The weekes (saith Scaliger) beginning from the decree to restore the temple, doe end in the beginning of the abomination: that is, about the beginnings of the Iewes warre, when slaughters first begun to be committed in the citie, and the Temple to bee polluted: which time met with the end of the eleuenth and beginning of the twelfth yeare of Nero.
This saying of Scaliger made mee maruell, till such time as I made some doubt of his reckoning, and called it into question. For if the 70. weekes of Daniel were (as hee sayth) ended in the beginning of Nero his twelfth yeare; my account cannot possiblie stand, drawing them on further to the vtter destruction of the holie

citie by Titus, which happened foure yeares after. This therefore is to be examined. Darius Nothus died a little before the end of the 93. Olympiad. This is agreed betweene vs, that fro^ the decree to his death, had passed seuenteene yeares, it is likewise agreed. For Scaliger numbring the first seuen weekes, sayth, that after the second yeare of Darius, seuenteene yeares are left to the beginning of Artaxerxes Memor: whereunto 32. being added, the summe is 49. yeres, being the distance from the decree to the streetes ordered.
By this meanes the decree being made 17. yeares before the death of Darius, and that by his owne iudgement, must needes fall toward the end of the third yeare of the 89. Olympiad: from which time to the first yeare of the 212. Olympiad almost expired, when Titus destroyed the suburbs of the citie, and battered the walles with his iron rammes about the 22. day of Aprill, as Paulus Eberus writeth in his Iewish storie: about a fortnight after which time in the beginning of May, one of their wals was broken, and part of the citie entred and won, were full 490. yeares, and not 494. as Scaligers deceitfull account would make it. Scaliger therefore rather prepared a way for others to come to the trueth, then came himselfe vnto it: and gaue some light to other to see the right meaning of Daniels prophesie, which himselfe

neuer perfectly saw. By his helpe Junius sawe somewhat more, and came neerer vnto it then he: yet so as he hath likewise done that for other which Scaliger did for him: that is, left somewhat behind to bee vnderstood of other, which himselfe neuer attained. Especially in the 26. verse, where it is said, that after those 62. weekes Messias shall be cut off. Where Master Iunius vseth some wresting by turning the future tence into the preterperfect, and leauing out some coniunctions, and changing other: thereby making the accusatiue case of the nominatiue, reiecting the ancient interpretations Greeke and Latin, without any cause.
These inconueniences they are of force driuen vnto, who by the word Messias, doe not with Eusebius and the Hebrew expositors vnderstand the anointed gouernours. Some may here say vnto mee: Is it not plaine by the 24. verse, that Daniel in this prophesie speaketh of Iesus Christ the redeemer of the worlde, of whose death so many singular and notable effects are declared therein: of abolishing sinne, of reconciling sinners vnto the fauour of God, and bringing euerlasting righteousnesse, and fulfilling whatsoeuer had been foretold by the former Prophets of him? I answere to this, that of all other places in the old Testament touching the comming of Christ, whereof there is great store, that verse of Daniel is most excellent

and cleere: yet withall I deny that by the name of Messias in the verses following, Christ our Sauiour is vnderstood. For neither the true account of yeares will suffer it, nor the text of holie Scripture beare it.
But how then is it here sayd, that 70. weekes were decreed for abolishing sinne and making attonement, if Christ came not in the ende of those 70. weekes? The meaning is, that within the space of those 70. weekes, Christ by his passion should worke that redemption and saluation from sinne and wrath to the world. As Tertullian speaketh in his booke against the Iewes: where writing of the passion of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, he saith that it was perfected in the time of Tiberius Caesar, Intra tempora septuaginta hebdomadarum, within the times of the seuentie weekes.
I am not ignorant that by the Hebrew writers, it is a thing acknowledged and granted, that Christ came in the verie ende of those weekes. For they held that their Messias should begin to raigne at the destruction of Ierusalem. And therefore Rabbi Leui ben Gershom expounding those wordes of this text, to bring euerlasting righteousnesse, and to seale vp vision and prophet, referreth the fulfilling thereof to the kingdome of Christ, which hee calleth the fift kingdome, because it was to succeede the other foure spoken of before in the second and

seuenth chapters of this prophesie.
It was an olde tradition amongst the Hebrews of auncient time, receiued from the schoole of Elias, declared in their Talmud, in the treatise Sanhedrim the eleuenth chapter, and diuers other places, that the world should endure sixe thousand yeres: whereof two thousand should bee voyd without the lawe, two thousand vnder the law, and two thousand the time of Christ. Whereby the iudgement appeareth concerning the comming of Christ, that it should be at the desolation of the holie citie immediatly after the ceasing of the law. For the law then ceased, and all the ceremonies thereof ended, when Ierusalem, the seat of God his worship, according to that lawe, was destroyed by Titus, and neither place nor people there left anie longer for the law-seruice of God. Diuers such testimonies of the auncient Hebrewes are recorded by Philip of Morney Lord of Plessie in his book of the truth of Christian Religion, the 29. and 30. chapters: wherby he gathereth that it was a common opinion among them, that the Messias should come about the destruction of the Temple. R. Hama the sonne of Hauina in the same chapter of the Talmudicall treatise before alleadged, sayd, that the sonne of David should not come, so long as any soueraigne authoritie (were it neuer so small) remained in Israel. Also R. Mili alleadging

Rabbi Eliezer the sonne of Simeon, sayd, that Christ should not come vntill there were a cleane riddance of all Iudges and Magistrates in Israel. And R. Moses Haddarsan vpon the 49. of Genesis, gaue this iudgement of the Iewes Senate, consisting of seuentie Elders or Iudges called Sanhedrim; that they were not to cease before the comming of the Messias. Let vs then examine when the authoritie of those Iudges and all gouernment ceased in Ierusalem, that thereby wee may know the time of Christ his comming by the Hebrew writers opinion. That honorable Lord of Plessie in his booke before mentioned, hauing cited the testimonie of Philo in his booke of Times, to proue that Herod slew al the Sanhedrim about the 30. yeare of his raigne, affirmeth that to be the time wherein the soueraigntie and iurisdiction of Iuda did cease: not for a few dayes or yeares, but for a continual time. How this may stand for trueth I cannot perceiue. For to say nothing of that fained Philo, an author forged in the shop of Annius his toying braine: it is well knowne that the common-wealth of Ierusalem and Iewrie flourished with princely rule and other gouernment of Magistrates, yea of the very Sanhedrim themselues, aboue three score and ten yeares after that time, euen to Ierusalems desolation. Christ in the 30. yeare of Herod was yet vnborne: who about the 33.

yeare of his age, in the sixteenth of Matthew, foretold to his Disciples, what he was to suffer of the Elders and chiefe Priests and Scribes. All these were gouernours and rulers of the citie; and by the name of Elders, the best interpreters haue especially vnderstood those Sanhedrim, hauing great reason for it. For these Sanhedrim were nothing els but (...) that is, 70. Elders of the great Consistorie or iudgemeat place in Ierusalem. As by Elias Leuita they are described in his Tishbi. The old Rabbins in their Talmud haue borowed from the Greeke tongue many words: whereof this worde (...) Sanhedrim is one, signifying a sitting of Iudges or Senatours together in councell or iudgement. So it is taken in the 107. Psalme the 32. verse, by the Chaldie interpreter: where for these Hebrew wordes there vsed, (...). Let the^ praise him in the sitting, that is, the assemblie of the Elders. The Targum hath (...), that is, Let them praise him in the sitting together of the wise: expressing the word of sitting by Sanhedrim, as Synedrion in Greeke is taken. Christ therefore in the fift of Matthew, saying, Whosoeuer calleth his brother Raca, (...), shall be bound ouer to a sessions or sitting: meaneth the sitting in iudgement of the Sanhedrim; applying his speech to the manner of the ciuill iudgements

in Ierusalem. Iosephus in his 20. booke of Antiquities the eight chapter, telleth, that when Festus the Romane gouernour was dead, Ananus the high priest, (...), made the assemblie of the Iudges to sit, by whom Iames the brother of Christ, was adiudged to be stoned. This happened vnder the gouernour Albinus, not long before the destruction of the citie. Whereby may bee gathered, that magistracie, iudgement, and gouernment, yea the authoritie of the 70. Iudges called Sanhedrim; continued long after Herods 30. yere, and was not cut off, till the desolation of Ierusalem brought it to an end. For when the warres begun to worke the desolation thereof then king Agrippa, by seditious rakehels, was driuen out of it: then were the Sanhedrim deposed at the rebels will, and other base men set vp in their stead: as Josephus telleth in the fift book of the Iewes warre the first chapter. Then was the Priesthood and all good order made a mockerie. The rebellious cutters did what they list, no lawes to restraine them, no magistracie to punish them, no authoritie to bridle them. They ruled al at their own pleasures themselues as they would: good gouernment was turned into anarchie and disorder, and Ierusalem became, as Iosephus termeth it, (...), a citie without a guide.
And this it is that Daniel sayth touching

Messias to bee cut off in the last weeke of the seuentie: meaning the rule and authoritie of the annointed gouernour, as before I haue expounded the place. Thus by the iudgement of the Hebrew writers in their auncient monuments, the comming of Christ falleth to the fall of the Iewes common-wealth, in the ouerthrow of Ierusalem, when gouernment and authoritie ceased therein: which long before had been foretold by the Patriarch Iacob in the 49. of Genesis, in that old prophesie of his concerning the comming of Christ: The scepter shall not depart from Iuda, nor a law giuer from betweene his feete till Shiloh come: and him shall the people gather themselues vnto. For together with this diuine oracle of Daniel, that other most ancient and excellent prophesie of Iacob, hitherto not perfectly and cleerely, according to the true meaning therof, declared of any that I know of, may receiue light.
Many haue sought the fulfilling of that prophesie in the first comming of Christ at his birth: but without straying it could neuer yet be there found. For the meaning of it was, that in the tribe of Iuda should bee royall supremacie and gouernme^t of Magistrates, for the good of the Iewes, and vpholding of their Commonwealth, till the comming of Christ: whose new spirituall raigne, by the preaching of the Gospell, should abolish their old earthly kingdome

and outward policie. So was the place vnderstood by the Hebrew Doctors aforenamed, R. Hama, R. Mili, R. Eliezer.
The Chaldie paraphrasts both of them most excellently expound the place, which themselues vnderstood not: being like therein vnto Virgils Bees, which make honey for other, and not themselues. First Onchelos interpreteth it in this manner; A Magistrate exercising authoritie of the house of Iuda shall not depart, nor a Scribe of his posteritie for euer, till Christ come, to whom the kingdome pertaineth, and him shall the people obey. The other called the interpreter of Ierusalem, thus: Kings of the house of Iuda shall not faile, neither skilful law-teachers of his posteritie, vnto the time wherein the king Christ shall come: vnto whom the kingdome pertaineth, and all the kingdomes of the earth shall be subdued vnto him. If Christ came when authoritie was gone, and authoritie went away at Ierusalems fall: needes must one comming of Christ bee referred to the ouerthrow of that citie.
R. Moses of Tyroll and Bioces looked for the comming of Christ towards the end of the second Temple: being led thereunto partly by their owne reckoning vpon Daniel, and partly by a text in the last chapter of the prophet Esay the seuenth verse: where it is sayd, Before her throwes came vpon her she was deliuered

of a manchilde. Some of the Rabbines sayd, Messias was borne the very same day that the second temple was destroyed in: supposing that scripture of Esay to be therein fulfilled. In their book called Bereshith Rabba, is read this parable: As a certaine Iew was at plow, an Arabian passing by hearing one of his oxen low, bad him vnyoke, because the destruction of the Temple was at hand. And by and by hearing also the other low, bad him vnyoke out of ha^d, because the Messias was alreadie come. R. Abon in another place telling the same: What neede we (saith he) to learne it of the Arabians, seeing the text it selfe declareth it?
Iosephus in the seuenth booke of the Iewes warre, the twelfth chapter, writeth, that in the holie Scripture was found an olde prophesie, that at the time of the ouerthrow of Ierusalem, a king should come out of Iewrie, who should raigne ouer all the world: which he by flattering falshood, interpreted of Vespasian. This prophesie in those daies was bruted abroad in many mens mouthes euery where: yea, some write that it was engrauen in an open place of the castle at Ierusalem: which (as Iosephus writeth) made the Iewes at that time so readie to rebell. And this was the cause that so many fained themselues to be the Messias about that time of the destruction of the Temple. Vnder Cuspius Fadus, one Theudas a iugler made the

people beleeue that he was a prophet, and would deuide the waters of Iordan that they should goe ouer drie, as they had done long before miraculously, in the time of Ioshua by the power of God. And when Felix was the Romane gouernour of Iudea, one comming out of Egypt, fayning himselfe to bee a prophet, perswaded the people if they would follow him to mount Oliuet, they should see the walles of Ierusalem fall downe. And afterward one Barcozba, so called of his lying, tooke vpon him to bee the Messias, and seduced many: but in the end performing not the deliuerance looked for at his hands, he was knocked on the head for his lying and slaine.
All these tooke aduantage of the time, being answerable to their intent, and of the peoples disposition, then looking for their promised Christ. Moreouer, there was yet another prophesie bruted amongst them, that Doctor Hillels schollers should neuer faile till Christ were come. The youngest of them was R. Iochaman the sonne of Zacheus, who liued to see the destruction of the Temple: and also the miracle of a great gate thereof, a little before opening of it selfe: which Iosephus speaketh of in his seuenth booke and twelfth chapter of the Iewes warre: Whereat this R. Iochaman being amazed, remembred this saying of the Prophet Zacharie in the beginning of his 11. chapter:

Open thy gates O Libanus, and let fire consume thy cedars: applying the place to the comming of Christ.
Furthermore they had amongst them these olde traditions touching the tokens of Christes comming. When Christ the sonne of Dauid co^meth, sayth R. Iudas, there shall be few wise men in Israell, and the wisdome of the scribes shall stinke, and the schooles of diuinitie shall become brothelhouses. R. Nehorai sayd that good men in Israell should bee abhorred, and mens countenaunces past shame at Christes comming. And R. Nehemias sayd, that wickkednesse should bee multiplied without measure, and nothing but vnto wardnesse and Epicurisme amongst them. VVhat is this els but that ouerspreading of abominations which Daniell foretelleth should be in those times of the desolation of Ierusalem? which is declared as large by Iosephus, pointing out the abominable doings of the Iewes at that time committed against nature, and all law of God and man. The religious and holy places (sayth Iosephus) were defiled by the vncleane feete of wicked men: The temple of God was held and kept as a tower of defence against the people by the seditious rebels: the holy ground was sprinkled with the blood of wounded men, contrarie to Gods lawe entering thereunto: strangers and towne-borne, prophane and holy

were mingled together: and the blood of diuers men being slayne, made a poole in the courtes of the Lords house. They abused the diuine vessels, annointed themselues with the holy oyle, drunke of the consecrate wine. In euerie place of the citie was spoyling and robberie. Burning with lust they forced women in most filthy and abominable manner for their pleasure, liuing in Ierusalem as a stewes or brothelhouse. At this their extreame wickednesse God was offended: and abhorred his citie, and detested his temple.
All this Josephus testifieth in diuers places. And in the 2. chapter of his 5. booke of the Iewes warre. All law of God and man (sayth he) was troden vnder foote and derided. The holy oracles of the prophets were counted no better then common fables and tales. And contemning of the decrees their forfathers touching vice and vertue, by the euent they verified those thinges which long before had beene foretold of their countrie. For an ould prophecie, as Iosephus witnesseth, went abrode, that then the citie should bee taken, and the temple burnt: when sedition should arise amongst them, and their own handes first defile God his sanctuarie.
Thus doe Iosephus and Daniel refer the raigning and ouerflowing abhominations of the Iewes, to the destruction of Ierusalem, which the Hebrew Rabbines applied to the comming

of Christ: So that is prooued true which the Lorde of Plessie in his booke aforenamed affirmeth, that it was a common opinion among the Iewes for their Messias to come about the destruction of the Temple, which for any thing that I can see to the contrarie, may in some sort not without reason bee yeelded vnto: For two commings of Christ are declared in holy scripture. The first in humilitie spoken of by Zacharie in his ninth Chapter. Reioyce greatly Oh daughter of Sion, bee glad O daughter of Ierusalem, for loe thy king commeth vnto thee, euen the righteous and Sauiour, lowlie and simple ryding vpon an Asse and a coult the fole of an Asse. The other in glorie wherein Christ came in his kingdome: whereof we read in the sixteene chapter of Mathew the last verse. Verilie I say vnto you, there be some of them that stand heere, which shall not taste of death till they haue seene the sonne of man come in his kingdome, and before in the tenth chapter of the some Euangelist. You shall not finish all the Cities of Israel till the sonne of man be come. And in the twentie one chapter of Iohn. If I will that hee tarrie till I come, what is that to thee? whereof this word went abroad that this Disciple should not die.
All these speeches our Sauiour Christ vttered being once come alreadie, and after his first comming: wherefore that an other second

comming of his therein is to be vnderstood, is so cleare and manifest, that it need not bee stood vpon: which in my iudgement can not to anie time more fitly agree, then that wherein the citie of Ierusalem with the holie Temple of God therein was destroyed, according to the opinion of the Hebrewes before declared. Then Christ our Lord first begun to appeare a reuenging iudge against the wicked and stubborne Iewes, in punishing them for their malice against him at his death, and cruell persecution of his Church afterward, as Eusebius declareth in the third booke of his ecclesiasticall historie, the fift chapter.
Master Iunius, in his annotations on this ninth Chapter of Daniel expounding those wordes: From the going forth of the commandement to restore and build Ierusalem vnto Christ, shall be seuen weekes, and threescore and two weekes; referreth them to the comming of Christ, and that comming of Christ, to the last of Daniels weekes, wherein the desolation of Ierusalem began, yeelding this reason: because then Christ declared himselfe a Lord by a most seuere iudgement against Ierusalem and the Iewes, and by the benefit of the Gospell a Prince and head of the Church, which raigneth in the house of Dauid for euer.
Master Caluin in his harmonie acknowledgeth that by the iudgement of some expositors,

that place in the tenth of Mathew, was referred to the desolation of the holie Citie made by the Romans. In the 24. chapter of Mathew, when Christ vpon the Disciples praysing of the glorious building of the Temple, had spoken of the destruction thereof to come, wherein one stone should not bee left vpon another. They asked him when those thinges should bee, and what signe should bee of his comming, and of the end of the world, ioyning these three things together, the desolation of the Temple, the comming of Christ, and the end of the world, as it were all pertayning to one time, and therefore for that which is asked in Mathew touching the signe of Christs comming, and the end of the worlde: in the other two Euangelistes Marke and Luke, this only is demanded, what signe should be of the destruction of Gods holie Temple in Ierusalem: wherby may bee gathered that the Apostles of Christ held the opinion of the olde Hebrewes concerning the comming of Christ at the desolation of the Temple, and therein a change of the world: for after that the state of the old Church should be once ouerthrowne, the ancient Hebrewes looked for a new worlde, as it were by the new raigne of their Messias, which in their writings they called (...) that is, the world to come, vnderstanding therby the time of Christs kingdome.
This appeareth in the Chaldie paraphrasis of Ionathas the sonne of Vzziell in the first of kinges the fourth chapter and 32. verse, where he calleth the daies of Christ (...) the world to come of Messias: for the Authors of the Iewes law called Talmud, treating of sacrifices in the chapter (...) that is, the bullocke of the sinne offering contained the whole time of this life, from Adam the first man to the last that euer shall bee borne, in two worldes, which in Hebrew they call (...) The first from the beginning of thinges created to the comming of Christ. The second from that time to the resurrection of the dead. This tradition of the Hebrewes made an end of the old world in the co^ming of Christ. The Disciples then asking what should bee the signe of Christs comming and the end of the world, may seeme to haue thought the verie same, and vnderstoode the same world which ended at the comming of Messias to raigne in a new world by the Gospell, and for this cause those times betweene the preaching of Christ and Ierusalem destroyed, were called the last dayes in the second chapter of the Actes of the Apostles the 17. verse. In the last dayes saith God, I will powre of my spirit vpon all flesh, and in the beginning of the Epistle to the Hebrewes. In these last dayes God hath spoken vnto vs by his son. These last dayes are all one with the end of the worlde, spoken

of by the blessed Apostle Paul, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, the tenth Chapter, eleuenth verse, calling that time the ends of the world. These things (saith he) were writte^ to admonish vs, vpon whome the ends of the world are come, and in the Epistle to the Hebrewes the ninth chapter, and twentie sixe verse. Now in the end of the world hath Christ appeared once to put away sinne by the sacrifice of himselfe. That which R. Nehemias said of wickednesse to be multiplied against the comming of Christ, is it not in plaine wordes verified by Christ himselfe in the verie same twenty foure Chapter of Mathew the twelft verse, giuing this for one token of his comming and the desolation of Ierusalem to be at hand, that iniquitie should abound and charitie wax cold? If any here demaund, how the second comming of Christ can be with any reason referred to the destruction of Ierusalem, seeing that it is euident by that verie same twentie foure chapter of Mathew, that the comming of Christ to iudgement at the latter day is there described, by ye suddennes therof, by his appearing in the clouds, the gathering of the elect with the sound of a trumpet, by the doome of the iudge declared in the next chapter, where the same argument is continued. Come yee blessed of my father, inherit yee the kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world: depart yee

cursed into euerlasting fire, which is prepared for the diuel and his angels. I answere that the second co^ming of Christ containeth his whole raigne, iurisdiction, and iudgement, in the Citie of God the heauenly Ierusalem by the gospel preached, fro^ the desolation of ye outward and earthly Ierusalem when it begun, to the end of the world at the resurrection of all flesh: so that the destruction of Ierusalem, and the latter doome, being both included within the time of Christs second comming: there is no let but that the comming of Christ may be referred to both: to one in regard of the beginning, to the other in regard of the end and consummation thereof. And this is the cause that Christ there speaking of his second comming, blendeth these two together, the desolation of Ierusalem and his last iudgement, because both pertained to one and the same kingdome of Christ. And hereof it is that respecting the beginning of that kingdome, in the destruction of Ierusalem, wherein hee first appeared a rauenging iudge, hee saith, that that generation should not passe till all those thinges were fulfilled. All one with that in the end of the sixteene chapter of the same Gospel. Verily I say vnto you, some of them that stand here shall not taste of death, till they haue seene the sonne of man come in his kingdome. What time was there more fit for an other comming of Christ to fall vnto

within one generation from those wordes by him vttered a little before his death then this? what time more agreeable to that, which after his resurrection hee spake of Iohns tarrying till he came, then the downefall of the Iewes estate and the vtter desolation of their Citie, and common wealth, which that Euangelist liued to see? It is not vnlike or disagreeing to reason, that then should begin the spirituall raigne of Christ ouer all Nations by the preaching of the Gospell; when the doctrine of the law with all the ceremonies thereof were vtterly abolished. That then shuld begin the heauenly kingdome of Christ, whe^ ye earthly kingdom of the Iewes, and all their law gouernment was first extinct. That then should begin the inward subiection of Gods newe people the elect amongst the Gentiles, and the spirituall seruice of GOD, when the Iewes outward worship had ceased. That then should begin the spirituall Sion and new Ierusalem from heauen, when the earthly Sion and olde Ierusalem had no more being. According to the saying of Esay the Prophet in his second chapter: It shall come to passe in the last daies, that the mountaine of the Lords house shall be prepared in the top of the mountaines, and shall be exalted aboue the hils, and all nations shall flow vnto it. And many people shall goe, and say, Come, let vs goe vp to the mountaine of the Lord, to the house of the God

of Iacob, and he will teach vs his wayes, and we will walke in his paths: for the Law shall goe forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Ierusalem. Where, by the high mountaine of the Lords house, and the names of Sion and Ierusalem, is vnderstoode not any certaine earthly place, or materiall citie: but the Church of Christ ruled and guided by the preaching of the Gospell. Which the Apostle in the fourth chapter of the epistle to the Galathians, calleth (...): that is, high Ierusalem, or Ierusalem which is aboue. Alluding to the former prophesie of Esay, and opposing the high Ierusalem to the earthly and materiall Ierusalem, which begot children of bondage by the law like Agar, and mount Sinai there called the new Ierusalem, or Ierusalem that now is. For as there were two kinds of Iewes, spoken of by Paul in his Epistle to the Romanes the second chapter, one visible, the other secret: so there were two Ierusalems, one outward by the visible ceremonies of the Law: the other in ward by the spirituall graces of the Gospell, which is Christ his Church termed the heauenly Ierusalem in the Epistle to the Hebrewes the twelfth chapter and 22. verse. This heauenly Ierusalem then begun when the earthly Ierusalem was brought to an end, being destroyed by the Romane armie and consumed by fire, and the Iewes led captiue and dispersed abroad.
The preaching of the gospel begun long before the destruction of Ierusalem I confesse, euen by Christ himselfe while he liued: and continewed after by the apostles for the space of 40. yeares. All this is true. Yet so as withall the outward and ciuill gouernement of the Iewes common wealth with their ceremoniall seruice and law worship remayned still all that while in the holy citie and temple of God. And therefore that preaching of Christ and his apostles so long before, seemed rather a preparation to this kingdome of Christ, then any perfect beginning thereof. According to that manner of preaching vsed by Christ and followed of his apostles:Mat. 4.17. Mat. 10.7. repent for the kingdome of God is at hand. Meaning that Christ in his kingdome was shortly to come, euen before they should haue gone preaching throughout all the cities of Israell: as he telleth them after in the same chapter. Then was the full and cleare beginning of the new spirituall raigne of Christ ouer God his people: when the olde gouernement and outward seruice had wholly giuen place vnto it: when Christ raigned alone in God his church by his gospell without any fellowship or part taking with the law therin. For those 2. at one time could not stand together to be both of force. In this respect that which was sayd touching Christ in the 24. ver. of ending sinne and making attonement, may

be applied to this time: bycause that although those thinges were performed before: yet then especially, and by a kind of excellencie Christ sanctified his church from sinne, and reconciled sinners into God his fauour: when he did it alone, all the partes of the lawe therein being ended. VVhen Christ by his gospel without any more law-purifyings and oblations was himselfe all in all. When the shadow was gone and the body come into the place of it. That also of the comming of euerlasting righteousnesse, which may be vnderstood of Christ Iesus himselfe, being called our righteousnesse in the prophecie of Ieremie the 23. chapter, and the first epistle to the Corinth. the first chap. doth well agree to the beginning of his raigne, whereunto his comming by the Hebrew writers especially it is referred. And the sealing of vision and prophet so agreeable likewise vnto it, as I se not how it could be fulfilled before. For amongst manie other thinges foretold of Christ by the prophets in former ages: his glorious kingdome was one. The time whereof euen by Christ him selfe in many speeches is set within one generation after his death: and therefore vision and prophecie was not fully and absolutely before that time performed. Lastly the annointing of the holy of holies being a ceremonie of consecrating kinges to their raigne of all other for the beginning of Christes kingdome

is most fit. Thus wee see that opinion of the Hebrewes, concerning the fulfilling of this prophecie in the comming of Christ to raigne, referred to the end of Daniels weekes in the desolation of Ierusalem not to be altogether strange or absurd, hauing some motiues from holy scripture to perswade vs thereto. But it is not my mind to vrge or presse any man further for the receauing or holding thereof then it shall seeme good in his own iudgement to approue. If any thinke rather that other comming of Christ in this place to bee vnderstood: that is, some part of the time wherein hee was conuersant with men vppon earth, from his birth to his death, it may stand wel enough in that sence which before I haue declared.
Thus by God his mercie I haue, according to my poore talent, declared my iudgement for the true vnderstanding of Daniels weekes by interpretation of his wordes, and account of the times. The beginning of the 55. Olympiad and the eight day of September, in the second yere of Vespasia^, wherin the Citie of Ierusalem was fired, by the learned haue bin made the extreme yeres for the fulfilling of that Prophesie. The space betweene contained, is 629. yeres and two moneths. Within this compasse some haue gone hier, some lower, for the beginning and end thereof. Of that space 230. were of the Persian Monarchies, and from the end of that
(...)


The Olympiads.A Cronologicall Table of the Greeke Olympiads from the first restoring of them by Iphitus, to the destruction of Ierusalem by the Romaines: with the yeares of the citie of Rome, of the Persian Monarchie, of Christ his birth, so many as fell within that space, referred thereunto for the better vnderstanding of the account of Daniels weekes.The yeres of Rom.1The first Olympiad renued by Iphitus king of Elis began in the 775 yeare before the birth of Christ, in the sommer season about the first of Iuly. 2The second Olympiad contayning foure yeares as all the rest of these spaces. 3  4  5  6  7About the beginning of this Olympiad was the citie of Rome builded, as Eratosthenes, Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Solinus, and some other in their writings haue testified.48In the first yeare of the 8. Olympiad was Nabonassar crowned king of the Chaldeans the 26. day of Februarie.89 1210 1611 2012 2413 28Olymp.1234Yeares of R.14    3215    3616Romulus the first king of Rome died in the 37. yeare of his raigne.In this yeare Rome had no king.Numa the second king of Rome begun in the 39. yere thereof.The 2. yeare of Numa.401734564418789104819111213145220151617185621192021226022232425266423272829306824313233347225353637387626394041428027Numa died in the 43. yeare of his raigne.Tullus Hostilius succeeding raigned 32. yeares.2384284567882989101192301213141596311617181910032The 20. yeare of Tullus Hostilius.212223104332425262710834282930311123532Ancus Martius begun: who raigned 24. yeares.23116364567120378910111243812131415128391617181913240202122231364124Tarquinius Priscus raigned 38. y. 1231404245671444389101114844121314151524516171819156462021222316047242526271644828293031168493233343517250363738Seruius Tullius raigned 42. yeares. 117651234518052678918453101112131885414151617192Olymp.Persian Kings.Kings of Rome.Yeares of Rome.551This yeare Cyrus began his raigne ouer the Persians, about the Spring time, toward the end of the yeare.The 18. yeare of Seruius Tullius.193221919433201954421196561522197262319837241994825200Olymp.Persian Kings.Kings of Rome.Yeares of Rome.571The 9. yeare of Cyrus.The 26. of Seruius Tullius.2012102720231128203412292045811330205214312063153220741633208Olymp.Persian Kings.Kings of Rome.Yeares of Rome.591The 17. yeare of Cyrus.The 34. of Seruius Tullius.2092183521031936211420372126012138213222392143234021542441216Olymp.Persian Kings.Kings of Rome.Yeares of Rome.611The 25. yeare of Cyrus.The 42. yeare of Seruius Tullius.2172264321832744219428Tarquinius Superbus raigned 1 in Rome.22062129222123032223Cyrus slaine by Tomyris in the end of his 30. yeare, which expired in the spring time of this Olympic yeare.42234Combyses succeeded Cyrus in the end of the former yeare, so that this was his first for the most part of it.5224Olymp.Persian Kings.Kings of Rome.Yeares of Rome.63 In this Olym. Parmenides of Camarina wu^ the rase, as Diod. writes.1The 3. of Cambyses began toward the end of this yeare.The 6. yeare of Tarquinius.22524722635 Cambyses subdued Aegypt: Diodorus Sic.82274692286417 The 7. of Cambyses began about the end of this Olymp. yeare.1022928 The 16. day of Iulie, about the beginning of this Olymp. year, hapned the Eclipse of the Moone, recorded by Ptolomie in the 7. year of Cambyses1123031 Cambyses wounded by the fall of his sword out of his sheath, dyed thereon, and Smerdis his his counterfeit brother vsurped the kingdom seuen moneths. After whom Darius Hystaspis was chosen king.1223142 Darius began with the spring of the year before going: by which means his first ran out for the most part of it together with this yeare.13232Olymp.Persian Kings.Kings of Rome.Yeares of Rome.6513 The second yeare of Darius for the most part: yet so as his 3. began toward the end of it.The 14. yeare of Tarquinius2332415234351635546172366617182372819338392023941021240
(...)
Olymp.Persian Kings.Consuls of Rome.yeares of Rome.69119M. Valerius. P. Posthumius Tubertus.249220 The 20. of Darius began toward the end of this yeare, and ran out most of it with the next.P. Valerius. T. Lucretius.2503In the 20. day of Nouember happened 21 the eclips of the Moone, recorded by Ptolomie to haue bene the 20. yeare of Darius Hyst.P. Posthumius. Agrippa Meuenius.251422Opiter Virginius. Spurius Cassius.25270123Posthumus Cominus. T. Lartius.253224Ser. Sulpitius. Marcus Tullius.254325P. Veturius. T. Ebutius.255426T. Lartius. Q. Cloelius.256
Olymp.Persian Kings.Consuls of Rome.yeares of Rome.711The 27. yeare of Darius Hyst.A. Sempronius Atratinus. M. Minutius Augurinus.257228A. Posthumius. T. Virginius.258329M. Claudius. P. Seruilius.259430A. Virginius. T. Veturius.26072131 Toward the end of this Olympic yeare was the eclips of the moone, spoke^ of by Ptol. for the 31. year of Darius Hys. a litle after the beginning of his yere.Sp. Cassius. Posthumius Cominus.261232 The Marathon Battel, wherein the Persians had a great ouerthrow by the Athenians.T. Gegauius Macerinus. P. Minutius Auguriuus.262333A. Sempronius. M. Minutius.263434Q. Sulpitius. Sp. Lartius.264
Olymp.Persian Kings.Consuls of Rome.Yeares of Rome.731The 35. yeare of Darius.C. Iulius. P. Pinarius.2652This 36. of Darius began neare with Aprill, toward the end of this yeare, and expired about the same moneth of the next yeare following.Sp. Nautius. Sex. Furius.26631 Darius died, and Xerxes his sonne succeded about the end of this yeare.C. Aquilius. T. Sicinius.26742Sp. Cassius. Proculus Virginius.2687413Q. Fabius. Ser. Cornelius.26924L. Aemilius. Caeso Fabius.27035M. Fabius. L. Valerius.27146Q. Fabius. C. Iulius.272
Olymp.Persian Kings.Consuls of Rome.Yeares of Rome.7517 Xerxes in the 6. yeare of his raigne inuaded Greece with his huge army, and was put to flight.Caeso Fabius. Sp. Furius.27328 Mardonius, whom Xerxes left generall of his forces in Greece, was slain at Plataeae.M. Fabius. Cn. Manlius.27439Caeso Fabius. T. Virginius.275410L. Aemilius. C. Seruilius.27676111Q. Horatius. T. Menenius. The Fabian kindred of Noble Romaines slaine.277212A. Virginius. Sp. Seruilius.278313P. Valerius. C. Nantius.279414L. Furius. C. Manilius.280
Olymp.Persian Kings.Consuls of Rome.Yeares of Rome.771The 15. yeare of Xerxes.L. Aemilius. Iulius Tullius.281216P. Furius. L. Pinarius.282317T. Quintius. Ap. Claudius.283418L. Valerius. T. Aemilius.28478119A. Virginius. T. Numicius.285220T. Quintius. Q. Seruilius.286321 This 21. of Xerxes he raigned not full out: it began about the end of this yeare.T. Aemilius. Q. Fabius.28741 Xerxes slaine by Artabanus, one of his chiefe Lords: whom Artaxerxes the long handed succeeded.Q. Seruilius. Sp. Posthumius.288
Olymp.Persian Kings.Consuls of Rome.Yeares of Rome.791The second yeare of Artaxerxes, vnder whom the building of the temple was inhibited.T. Quintius. Q. Fabius.28923A. Posthumius. Sp. Furius.29034P. Seruilius. L. Ebutius.29145L. Lucretius. T. Veturius.2928016P. Volumnius. Ser. Sulpitius.29327P. Valerius. C. Claudius.29438Q. Fabius. L. Cornelius.29549Q. Nautius. L. Minutius.296
Olymp.Persian Kings.Romaine Gouernours.Yeares of Rome.811The 10. of lo^gha^ded Artaxerxes.C. Horatius. Q. Minutius.297211M. Valerius. Sp. Virginius.298312T. Romilius. C. Veturius.299413Sp. Tarpeius. A. Aterius.30082114Sex. Quintilius. P. Horatius.301215P. Sextius. L. Menenius.302316In stead of Consuls this yeare 10. magistrates called Decemuiri ruled the Citie.303417The Decemuirs gouerned againe.304
Olymp.Persian Kings.Romaine Gouernours.Yeares of Rome.831The 18. of longha^ded Artaxerxes.L. Valerius. M. Horatius.305219Lar. Herminius. T. Virginius.306320 Euboea taken by Pericles. The 30. yeares league begin.M. Geganius. C. Iulius.307421T. Quintius. Agrippa Furius.30884122M. Genutius. C. Curtius.309223L. Sempronius. L. Papirius.310324M. Geganius. T. Quintius.311425M. Fabius. Posthumius Albutius.312
(...)
Olymp.Persian Kings.Gouernours of Rome.yeares of Rome.87134 The Pelopo^nesian warre began toward the end of this yeare.Three Tribunes gouerned Rome.321235T. Quintius. C. Iulius.322336L. Papirius. L. Iulius.323437L. Sergius. Hostius Lucretius.32488138T. Quintius. A. Cornelius.325239C. Seruilius. L. Papirius.326340Tribunes.3274Artaxerxes hauing raigned 40. yeares, dyed in winter in the 7. yeare of the Peloponnesian war. Another Xerxes succeeded.Tribunes.328
Olymp.Persian Kings.Magistrates of Rome.Yeares of Rome.8911 Sogdianus after Xerxes held the Persia^ Empire the rest of the yeare. After whom Darius Nothus was Monarch toward the end of the yeare.Tribunes.32922 The first of Darius Nothus for the most part of it ran with this yeare.C. Sempronius. Q. Fabius.33033 The Iewes went forward with the building of the Te^ple by the commandement of Darius. Here Daniels weeks begin.Tribunes.33141The 4. of Darius begun in the end of this yeare.Tribunes.33290125T. Quintius. N. Fabius.333236Tribunes.334347Tribunes.335458Tribunes.336
Olymp.wePersian Kings.Magistrates of Rome.Yeares of Rome.9116The 9. of Darius.Tribunes.3372710Tribunes.3383The 2. we^. 111Tribunes.3394212Tribunes.340921313Cornelius Cossus. L. Furius.3412414Q. Fabius. C. Furius.3423515M. Papirius. C. Nautius.3434616M. Aemilius. C. Valerius.344
(...)
Olymp.we.Persian Kings.Gouernours of Rome.Yeares of Rome.951The 4. wee. 1The 6. of Artaxerxes.Tribunes.353227Tribunes.354338Tribunes.355449Tribunes.356961510Tribunes.3572611Tribunes.3583712Tribunes.3594The 5. wee. 113Tribunes.360
Olymp.we.Persian Kings.Romaine Magistrats.Yeares of Rome.9712The 14. of Artaxerxes.L. Lucretius. Ser. Sulpitius.3612315L. Valerius Potitus. M. Manlius Capitolinus3623416Tribunes.3634517Tribunes.364981618Camillus Dictator of Rome, deliuered it, being taken by the French men and Swissers.3652719Tribunes.3663The 6. wee. 120Tribunes.3674221 Toward the end of this yeare, Nehemias by the kings leaue went to Ierusalem to build the walles of it.Tribunes.368
Olymp.Persian Kings.Romaine Magistrats.Yeares of Rome.991322Tribunes.3692423 An eclips of the moon recorded by Ptolomie the 18. day of Iune, Phanostratus being Maior of Athens.Tribunes.3703524Tribunes.3714625Tribunes.3721001726Tribunes.3732The 7 wee. 126Tribunes.3743227Tribunes.3754329Tribunes.376
Olymp.Persian Kings.Magistrats of Rome.yeares of Rome.1011430Tribunes.3772531Tribunes.37836322 Fiue yeares was Rome gouerned by two chiefe Officers of the co^mon people, without Consuls or Tribunes authoritie.3794733 Nehemias finished the wals of Ierusalem. Here endeth the first part of Daniels weeks, containing 49. yeares.23801021The 8 wee. 134338122354382333653834437Tribunes.384
Olymp.we.Persian Kings.Magistrats of Rome.yeares of Rome.1031538Tribunes.3852639Tribunes.3863740Tribunes.3874The 9. wee. 141L. Aemilius. L. Sextius.3881041242L. Genutius. Q. Seruilius.3892343 Spanimondas slaine.C. Sulpitius. C. Licinius.390341 Artaxerxes Memor died, his sonne Artaxerxes Ochus succeededL Aemilius. Cn. Genutius.391452Q. Seruilius. L. Genutius.392
Olymp.we.Persian Kings.Magistrates of Rome.Yeares of Rome.10516The 3. of Artax. Ochus.C. Licinius. C. Sulpitius.393274M. Fabius. C. Petaelius.3943The 10. wee. 15M. Popilius. Cn. Manlius.395426C. Fabius. C. Plautius.396106137C. Martius. Cn. Maulius.397248M. Fabius. M. Popilius.398359C. Sulpitius. M. Valerius.3994610M. Fabius. T. Quintius.400
Olymp.wePersian Kings.Magistrates of Rome.Yeares of Rome.10717The 11. of Artax. Othus.C. Sulpitius. M. Valerius.4012The 11. wee. 112P. Valerius. C. Martius.4023213C. Sulpitius. T. Quintius.4034314M. Popilius. L. Cornelius.4041081415L. Furius. P. Claudius.4052516M. Valerius. M. Popilius.4063617T. Manlius. C. Plautius.4074718M. Valerius. C. Petaelius.408
Olymp.wePersian Kings.Consuls of Rome.Yeares of Rome.1091The 12. w^e. 1The 19. of Artax. Ochus.M. Fabius. Ser. Sulpitius.4092220C. Martius. T. Manlius.4103321M. Valerius. A. Cornelius.4114422C. Martius. Q. Seruilius.4121101523L. Aemilius. C. Plautius.413261 Artaxerxes Ochus died, and his sonne Arses succeeded.T. Manlius. P. Decius.414372T. Aemilius. Q. Publilius.4154The 13. wee. 13L. Furius. C. Maenius.416
Olymp.we.Persian Kings.Consuls of Rome.Yeares of Rome.111121 Arses died, and the last Darius called Codoman was made king in his stead. About that time was Philip king of Macedonia slaine, and Alexander began his raigne.C. Sulpitius. P. Aelius.417232L. Papirius. C. Duilius.418343M. Valerius. M. Atilius.419454T. Veturius. Sp. Posthumius.420112165A. Cornelius. Cn. Domitius.421276 Darius the second time ouercome by Alexander at Gangamela.M. Claudius. C. Valerius.4223The 14. wee. 1Darius slaine in the beginning of this yeare by one of his Nobles called Bessus, whereby Alexander had the Monarchie.L. Papirius. L. Plautius.42342 L. Aemilius. C. Plautius.424
Olymp.we.Persian Kings.Consuls of Rome.Years of R.11313 P. Cornelius. P. Plautius.42524 L. Cornelius. Q. Publilius.42635 L. Papirius. C. Paetelius.42746 L. Furius. Iunius Brutus.42811417About the beginning of the Olympic yeare Alexander diee.L. Papirius, was this yeare Dictator without Consuls.4292The 15. wee. 1 C. Sulpitius. Q. Aelius.43032 Q. Fabius. L. Fuluius.43143 T. Veturius. Sp. Posthumius.432
Olymp.we.Consuls of Rome.Years of R.11514L. Papirius. Q. Publilius.43325L. Papirius. Q. Aelius43436L. Plautius. M. Flossius.43547Q. Aemilius. C. Iunius.4361161The 16 wee. 1S. Nautius. M. Popilius.43722L. Papirius. Q. Publilius.43833M. Petaelius. C. Sulpitius.43944L. Papirius. C. Iunius.44011715M. Valerius. P. Decius.44126C. Iunius. Q. Aemilius.44237Q. Fabius. C. Martius.4434The 17. wee. 1L. Papirius, Dictator without Consuls.44411812P. Decius. Q. Fabius.44523Ap. Claudius. L. Volumnius.44634Q. Martius. P. Cornelius.44745L. Posthumius. T. Minutius.44811916P. Sempronius. P. Sulpitius.44927Ser. Cornelius. L. Genutius.4503The 18 wee. 1M. Liuius. M. Aemilius.45142A Dictator without Consuls.45212013Q. Apuleius. Marcus Valerius.45324M. Fuluius. T. Manlius.45435L. Cornelius. Cn. Fuluius.45546Q. Fabius P. Decius.45612117Ap. Claudius. L. Volumnius.4572The 19 wee 1Q. Fabius. P. Decius.45832L. Posthumius. M. Atilius.45943L. Papirius. Sp. Caruilius.46012214Q. Fabius. D. Iunius.46125L. Posthumius. C. Iunius.46236Pub. Cornelius. M. Curius.46347M. Valerius. Q. Caeditius.464
(...)

12713L. Papirius. S. Caruilius.481
24C. Quintius. L. Genutius.482
35C. Genutius. Cn. Cornelius.483
46C. Fabius. Q. Ogulnius.484
12817P. Sempronius. Ap. Claudius.485
2The 23. wee. 1M. Atilius. L. Iulius.486
32N. Fabius. D. Iunius.487
43Q. Fabius. L. Mamilius.488

12914Ap. Claudius. M. Fuluius.489
25M. Valerius. M. Otacilius.490
36L. Posthumius. Q. Mamilius.491
47L. Valerius. T. Otacilius.492
1301The 24. wee. 1Cn. Cornelius. C. Duilius.493
22L. Cornelius. C. Aquilius.494
33M. Atilius. C. Sulpitius.495
44C. Atilius. Cn. Cornelius.496

13115L. Manilius. Q. Caeditius.497
26Ser. Nobilior. M. Aemilius.498
37Cn. Cornelius. A. Atilius.499
4The 25. wee. 1Cn. Seruilius. C. Sempronius.500
13212C. Aurelius. P. Seruilius.501
23L. Caecilius. C. Furius.502
34C. Atilius. L. Manlius.503
45P. Claudius. L. Iunius.504

13316C. Aurelius. P. Seruilius.505
27L. Caecilius. Num. Fabius.506
3The 26. wee. 1M. Otacilius. M. Fabius.507
42M. Fabius. C. Atilius.508
13413A. Manlius. C. Sempronius.509
24C. Fundanius. C. Sulpitius.510
35C. Lutatius. A. Posthumius.511
46A. Manlius. Q. Lutatius.512

13517C. Claudius. M. Sempronius.513
2The 27. wee. 1C. Manilius. Q. Valerius.514
32T. Sempronius. P. Valerius.515
43L. Cornelius. Q. Fuluius.516
13614P. Cornelius. C. Licinius.517
25T. Manlius. C. Atilius.518
36L. Posthumius. Sp. Caruilius.519
47Q. Fabius. M. Pomponius.520

1371The 28. wee. 1M. Aemilius. M. Publicius.521
22M. Pomponius. C. Papirius.522
33M. Aemilius. M. Iunius.523
44L. Posthumius. Cn. Fuluius.524
13815Sp. Caruilius. Q. Fabius.525
26P. Valerius. M. Atilius.526
37M. Valerius. L. Apustius.527
4The 29. wee. 1L. Aemilius. C. Atilius.528
(...)

14314M. Marcellus. T. Quintius.545
25C. Claudius. M. Liuius.546
36Q. Cacilius. L. Veturius.547
47P. Cornelius. P. Licinius.548
1441The 32. wee. 1M. Cornelius. P. Sempronius.549
22Cn. Seruilius. C. Seruilius.550
33T. Claudius. M. Seruilius.551
44Cn. Cornelius. P. Aelius.552

14515C. Sulpitius. C. Aurelius.553
26L. Cornelius. P. Villius.554
37T. Quinctius. Sex. Aelius.555
4The 33. wee. 1C. Cornelius. Q. Minutius.556
14612L. Furius. M. Marcellus.557
23Porcius Cato. Valerius Flaccus.558
34P. Cornelius. T. Sempronius.559
45L. Cornelius. Q. Minutiur.560

14716L. Quintius. Cn. Domitius.561
27M. Acilius. P. Cornelius.562
3The 34 wee 1L. Cornelius. C. Lalius.563
42Cn. Manlius. M. Fuluius.564
14813C. Liuius. M. Valerius.565
24M. Aemilius. C. Flaminius.566
35Sp. Posthumius. Q. Martius.567
46Ap. Claudius. M. Sempronius.568

14917P. Claudius. L. Porcius.569
2The 35. wee. 1Q. Fabius. M. Claudius.570
32L. Aemilius. Cn. Babius.571
43P. Cornelius. M. Baebius.572
15014Posthumius. Calphurnius.573
25Q. Fuluius. L. Manlius.574
36M. Iunius. A. Manlius.575
47C. Claudius. T. Sempronius.576

1511The 36 wee. 1Cor. Scipio. Q. Petilius.577
22P. Mutius. M. Aemilius.578
33Sp. Posthumius. M. Mutius.579
44L. Posthumius. M. Popilius.580
15215C. Popilius. P. Aelius.581
26P. Licinius. C. Cassius.582
37A. Hostilius. A. Aulius.583
4The 37 wee. 1Q. Martius. Cn. Seruilius.584

15312L. Aemilius. C. Licinius.585
23Q. Aelius. M. Iunius.586
34C Sulpitius. M. Claudius587
45T. Manlius. Cn. Octauius.588
15416A. Manlius. C. Cassius.589
27T. Sempronius. M. Iuuentius.590
3The 38 wee. 1Pub. Cornelius. C. Martius.591
42M. Valerius. C. Faunius.592

15513L. Anicius. M. Cornelius.593
24Cn. Cornelius. M. Fuluius.594
35M. Aemilius. C. Popilius.595
46Sex. Iulius. L. Aurelius.596

15617L. Cornelius. C. Martius.597
2The 39 wee 1Scipio Nasica Claudius Marcellus.598
32Q. Opimius. L. Posthumius. These two ended their Consulships the first of Ianuary. Q. Fulius. T. Annius. Begun with Ianuarie in the same Olympic yeare.599
43Q. Fulius. T. Annius. From Iulie to Ianuarie. M. Marcellius. L. Valerius. From Ianuarie to Iulie.600

Olymp.we.Consuls in theOlympic yeares.Yeares of R.15714From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.601M. Marcellius. L. ValeriusL. Licinius. A. Posthumius.25L. Licinius. A. Posthumius.T. Quintius. M. Acilius.60236T. Quintius. M. Acilius.L. Marcius. M. Manilius.60347L. Marcius. M. Manilius.Sp. Posthumius. L. Calphurnius.6041581The 40. wee. 1Sp. Posthumius. L. Calphurnius.P. Cornelius. C. Liuius.60522P. Cornelius. C. Liuius.Cn. Cornelius. L. Mummius.60633Cn. Cornelius. L. Mummius.Q. Fabius L. Hostilius.60744Q. Fabius. L. Hostilius.Ser. Sulpitius. L. Aurelius.608
Olymp.we.Consuls in theOlympic yeares.Yeares of R.15915From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.609Ser. Sulpitius. L. Aurelius.Ap. Claudius. Q. Caecilius.26Ap. Claudius. Q. Caecilius.L. Caecilius. Q. Fabius.61037L. Caecilius. Q. Fabius.Cn. Seruilius. Q. Pompeius.6114The 41. wee. 1Cn. Seruilius. Q. Pompeius.C. Laelius. Q. Seruilius.61216012C. Laelius. Q. Seruilius.Cn. Calphurnius. M. Popilius.61323Cn. Calphurnius. M. Popilius.P. Cornelius. D. Iunius.61434P. Cornelius. D. Iunius.M. Aemilius. C. Hostilius.61545M. Aemilius. C. Hostilius.P. Furius. Sex. Atilius.616
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.16116From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.617P. Furius. Sex. Atilius.Fuluius. Calphurnius.27Fuluius. Calphurnius.Cornelius. Fuluius.6183The 42. wee. 1Cornelius. Fuluius.Mutius Scaeuola. Calphurnius Piso.61942Mutius Scaeuola. Calph. Piso.Popilius. Rupilius.62016213Popilius. Rupilius.Crassus. Flaccus.62124Crassus. Flaccus.Perperua. Lentulus.62235Perperua. Lentulus.C. Sempronius. M. Aquilius.62346C. Sempronius. M. Aquilius.Cn. Octauius. T. Annius.624
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.16317From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.625C. Octauius. T. Annius.L. Cassius. Cornelius Cinna.2The 43. wee. 1L. Cassius. Corn Cina.Aemilius Lepidus. L. Aurelius.62632Aemilius Lepidus. L. Aurelius.M. Plautius. M. Fuluius.62743M. Plantius. M. Fuluius.C. Cassius. C. Sextius.62816414C. Cassius. C. Sextius.Q. Caecilius. T. Quinctius.62925Q. Caecilius. T. Quintius.Cn. Domitius. C. Fannius.63036Cn. Domitius. C. Fannius.Q. Fabius. L. Opimius.63147Q. Fabius. L. Opimius.P. Manilius. C. Papirius.632
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls of R.Years of R From Ianuarie to Iulie.6331651The 44. wee. 1P. Manilius. C. Papirius.Caeclius. Aurelius.22Caecilius. Aurelius.M. Cato. Q. Martius.63433M. Cato. Q. Martius.Caecilius. Mutius.63544Caecilius. Mutius.C. Licinius. Q. Fabius.63616615C. Licinius. Q. Fabius.M. Aemilius. M. Caecilius.63726M. Aemilius. M. Caecilius.M. Balbus. C. Cato.63837M. Balbus. C. Cato.C. Caecilius. Cn. Papirius.6394The 45. wee. 1C. Caecilius. Cn. Papirius.Liuius Drusus. Calphur. Piso.640
Olymp.we.Consuls of Rome.Consuls of R.Years of R.16712From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.641Liu. Drusus. Calph. Piso.P. Cornelius. L. Calphurnius.23P. Cornelius. L. Calphurnius.M. Minutius. Sp. Posthumius.64234M. Minutius. Sp. Posthumius.Q. Caecilius. M. Iunius.64345Q. Caecilius. M. Iunius.Sulpitius Galba. M. Scaurus.64416816Sulp. Galba. M. Scaurus.L. Cassius. C. Marius.64527L. Cassius. C. Marius.C. Atilius. Q. Seruilius.6463The 46 wee 1C. Atilius. Q. Seruilius.P. Rutilius Cn. Mallius.64742P. Rutilius. Cn. Mallius.C. Marius. C. Flauius.648
Olymp.we.Consuls of Rome.Consuls.years of R.16913From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.649C. Marius. Cn. Flauius.C. Marius. L. Aurelius.24C. Marius. L. Aurelius.C. Marius. Q. Lutatius.65035C. Marius. Q. Lutatius.C. Marius. M. Aquilius.65146C. Marius. M. Aquilius.C. Marius. L. Valerius.65217017C. Marius. L. Valerius.M. Antonius. A. Posthumius.6532The 47 wee 1M. Antonius. A. Posthumius.Q. Caecilius. L. Didius.65432Q. Caecilius. T. Didius.Corn. Lentulus. Licin. Crassus.65543Cor. Lentulus. Licin. Crassus.Cn. Domitius. C. Cassius.656
Olymp.we.Consuls.years of R.Consuls.yea^s of R.17114From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.657Cn. Domitius. C. Cassius.Licinius Crassus. Mutius Scaeuola.25L. Crassus. M. Scaeuola.C. Caelius. L. Domitius.65836C. Caelius. L. Domitius.Flaccus. Herennius.65947Flaccus. Herennius.Claud. Plucher. M. Perperna.5601721The 48. wee. 1Claudius Pulcher. M. Perperna.L. Martius. Sex. Iulius.66122L. Martius. Sex. Iulius.L. Iulius. P. Rutilius.66233L. Iulius. P. Rutilius.C. Pompeius. L. Porcius.66344Cn. Pompeius. L. Porcius.Cornel. Sylla. Q. Pompeius.664
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.Yeares of R.17315From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.665Corn. Sylla. Q. Pompeius.Octauius. Cinna.26Octauius. CinnaCinna. Marius.66637Cinna. Marius.Cinna. Carbo.6674The 49. wee 1Cinna. Carbo.Cinna. Carbo.66817412Cinna. Carbo.Scipio. Norbanus.66923Scipio. Norbanus.Marius. Carbo.67034Marius. Carbo.Tul. Decula. Corn. Dolabella.67145Tul. Decula. Corn. Dolabella.L. Cornel. Sylla. Metellus Pius.672
(...)
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.17717From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.^81L. Gellius. Cor. Lentulus.Aufidius. Lentulus.2The 51. wee. 1Aufidius. Lentulus.Cn. Pompeius. M. Crassus.68232Cn. Pompeius. M. Crassus.Hortensius. Metellus.68343Hortensius. Metellus.Metellus. Martius.68417814Metellus. Martius.Piso. Glabrio.68525Piso. Glabrio.Lepidus. Volcatius.68636Lepidus. Volcatius.Sylla. Antronius.68747Sylla. Antronius.L. Casar. C. Martius.688
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.1791The 52. wee. 1From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.689L. Caesar. C. Martius.M. Tullius Cicero. Antonius.22M. Tullius Cicero. Antonius.Silanus. Murena.69033Silanus. Murena.Pupius. Messala.69144Pupius. Messala.Afranius. Metellus.69218015Afranius. Metellus.C. Iulius Caesar. M. Calphurnius Bibulus.69326Caesar. Bibulus.Piso. Gabinius.69437Piso. Gabinius.Cor. Lentulus. Metellus.6954The 53. wee. 1Lentulus. Metellus.Cor. Lentulus. L. Martius.696
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.Years of R.18112From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.697Cor. Lentulus. L. Martius.Cn. Pompeius. M. Crassus23Cn. Pompeius. M. Crassus.Ap. Claudius. L. Domitius.69834Ap. Claudius. L. Domitius.Cn. Domitius Valerius Messala.69945Cn. Domitius. Val. Messala.Pompeius. Metellus. These began in March by reason of great contention in the common wealth.70018216Pompeius. Matellus.Ser. Sulpitius. Mar. Marcellus.70127S. Sulpitius. M. Marcellus.Aemilius Paulus. C. Marcellus.7023The 54. wee. 1Aem. Paulus. C. Marcellus.C. Marcellus. Cor. Lentulus.70342C. Marcellus. Cor. Lentulus.C. Iulius Caesar. P. Seruilius. Caesar this yeare got the lone soueraignty of Rome.704
Olymp.we.ConsulsConsulsYears of R.18313From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.705C. I. Caesar. P. Seruilius.Calenus. Vatinius.24Calenus. Vatinius.Iul. Caesar. Lepidus.70635I. Caesar. Lepidus.Iulius Caesar made Dictator ordered the yeare anew. This was the first Iulian yeare.70746I. Caesar Dictator without any fellow Co^sul. The first Iulian yeare.Caesar the 5. time Co^sul with Antonius. Caesar being slaine the 15. of March, Dolabelia succeeded.70818417Antonius. Dolabella.Hirtius. Pansa.7092The 55 wee 1Hirtius. Pansa. He being slaine, Augustus succeeded.Lepidus. Plancus.71032Lepidus. Plancus.Seruilius. L. Antonius.71143Seruilius. Antonius.Cn. Domitius Caluinus. C. Asinius.712
Olymp.we.ConsulsConsuls.years of R.18514From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.713Domitius Calu. Asinius.Martius. Caluisius.25Martius Caluisius.Ap. Claudius. C. Norbanus.71436Ap. Claudius. C. Norbanus.M. Agrippa. L. Canidius.71547M. Agrippa. L. Canidius.L. Gellius. M. Cocceius.7161861The 56. wee 1L. Gellius. M. Cocceius.L. Cornificius. Sex. Pompeius.71722L. Cornificius. Sex. Pompeius.Libo. Sempronius.71833Libo. Sempronius.Augustus Caesar the second time Consul with Cicero.71944Caesars second ConsulshipDomitius. Sossius.720
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R18715From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.721Domitius. Sossius.Caesar the 3. time. M. Val. Messala.26Caesar the third time. M. Valerius Messala. Antonius ouercome at Actium in Septe^.Caesar the 4. time. M. Li. Crassus.72237Caesar the 4. time. Crassus. This yeare in August Antonius and Cleopatra by manie battels ouercome, slue themselues.August. Caesar the 5. time. Sex. Apulcius. This yeare with Ianuarie began the accompt of Augustus his loue raigne.7234The 57. wee 1Caesar the 5. time. Apuleius.Caesar the 6. time. M. Vipsanius Agrippa72418812Caesar the 6. time. Vipsanius.Caesar the 7. time. Vipsanius againe.72523Caesar the 7. time. Vipsanius.Caesar the 8. time. T. Statilius Taurus.72634Caesar the 8. time. Statilius.Caesar the 9. time. M. Iunius Syllanus.72745Caesar the 9. time. Syllanus.Caesar the 10. time. Norbanus.728
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.Yeares of R.18916From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.729Caesar the 10. time. Norbanus.Caesar the 11. time. Cn. Calph. Piso.27Caesar the 11 time. Piso.M. Marcellus. L. Aruntius.7303The 57. wee. 1Marcellus. Aruntius.M. Lollius. Q. Lepidus.73142Lollius. Lepidus.M. Apuleius. P. Silius Nerua.73219013Apuleius. Nerua.Saturninus. Cinna.73324Saturnius Cinna.Cn. Lentulus. P. Lentulus.73435Cn. Lentulus. P. Lentulus.T. Furnius. C. Iunius.73546T. Furnius. C. Iunius.L. Domitius. P. Scipio.736
Olymp.we.ConsulsConsuls.Yeares of R.19117From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.737Domitius. Scipio.Liuius. Piso.2The 59. wee 1Liuius. Piso.M. Crassus. Cn. Lentulus.73832Crassus. Lentulus.Tiberius Nero. Quintilius Varus.73943Tiberius. Quintilius.M. Messala. P. Sulpitius.74019214Messala. Sulpitius.Q. Aelius. Paulus Fabius.74125Aelius. Fabius.Iulius Antonius. Q. Max. Fabius.74236Antonius. Fabius.Drusus Nero. L. Quinctius Crispinus.74347Drusus. Quinctius.C. Martius. C. Asinius.744
(...)
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.19512From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.753Iulius. Paulus.Asinius. Vinicius.23Asinius. Vinicius.L. Aelius. M. Seruilius.75434Aelius. Seruilius.Sex. Aelius. M. Sentius.75545Sex. Aelius. C. Sentius.Corn. Cinna. L. Valerius.75619616Cor. Cinna. L. Valerius.L. Aruntius. M. Lepidus.75727L. Aruntius. M. Lepidus.A. Licinius. Q. Caecilius.7583The 62. wee. 1Licinius. Caecilius.M. Furius. Sex. Nonius.75942Furius. Nonius.Q. Sulpitius. C. Poppaeus.760
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.19713From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.761Sulpitius. Poppaeus.Dolabella. Syllanus.24Dolabella. Syllanus.T. Satilius. M. Lepidus.76235Statilius. Lepidus.Germanicus. Fonteius.76346Germanicus. Fonteius.C. Silius. Munatius Plancus.76419817Silius. Plancus.Sex. Pompeius. Sex. Apuleius.7652The 63. wee. 1Pompeius. Apuleius. Augustus died in August.Drusus. Norbanus.76632Drusus. Norbanus.Statilius. Scribonius.76743Statilius. Scribonius.C. Caecilius. L. Pomponius.768
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.19914From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.769Caecilius. Pomponius.Tib. Caesar. Germanicus.25Tib. Caesar. Germanicus.M. Iunius. L. Norbanus.77036M. Iunius. L. Norbanus.M. Messala. Aurelius Cotta.77147Messala. Cotta.Tiberius Caesar. Drusus.7721The 64. wee 1Tib. Caesar. Drusus.D. Haterius. C. Sulpitius.77320022Haterius. Sulpitius.C. Asinius. C. Antistius.77433Asinius. Antistius.Ser. Cornelius. Varro.77544Cornelius, Varro.Asinius. Lentulus.776
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.20115From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.777Asinius. Lentulus.Corn. Lentulus. C. Caluisius.26Lentulus. Caluisius.M. Crassus. C. Piso.77837Crassus. Piso.Ap. Iunius. Pub. Silius.7794The 65. wee. 1Iunius. Silius.C. Rubellius Geminus. C. Fusius Geminus. Christ baptized.78020212Rubellius. Fusius. Gemini.M. Vinicius. L. Cassius.78123Vincius. Cassius.Tib. Caesar. Aelius.78234Tib. Caesar. Aelius.Cn. Domitius. M. Furius.78345Cn. Domitius. M. Furius.Ser. Sulpitius Galba. Corn. Sylla. In this part of their yeare Christ suffered.784
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.20316From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.785Galba. Sylla.P. Fabius. L. Vitellius.27Fabius. Vitellius.C. Sestius. M. Seruilius.7863The 66. wee 1Sestius. Seruilius.Plantius. Papienus.78742Plautius. Papienus.Acerronius. Portius. Tiberius died.78820413Acerronius. Portius.Germanicus Caesar. Apronius.78924Germanicus Caesar. Apronius.M. Aquilius. P. Nonius.79035Aquilius. Nonius.C. Iulius Caligula Germanicus. Augustus the thtrd time.79146C. Caesar Caligula the third time.C. Caesar Caligula the fourth time. Saturninus. Caligula slaine.792
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.20517From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.793Claudius Caesar. Saturninus.Tib. Claudius Caesar the second time. C. Licinius.2The 67. wee 1Claudius Casar the second time. Licinius.Claudius Caesar the third time. L. Vittellius.79432Claudius Caesar the third time. L. Vitellius.C. Quinctius. T. Statilius.79543Quinctius. Statilius.M. Vinicius. M. Statilius.79620614Vinicius. Statilius.C. Valerius. M. Messala.79725Valerius. Messala.Claudius Caesar the fourth time. L. Vitellius.79836Claud. Caesar. Vitellius.A. Vitellius. L. Vipsanius.79947A. Vitellius. L. Vipsanius.Q. Veranius. C. Pompeius Gallus.800
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.2071The 68 wee 1From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.801Qu. Veranius. Pompeius Gallus.C. Antistius. M. Suilius.22Antistius. Suilius.Claudius Caesar the fift time. Cor. Scipio.80233Caesar. Scipio.Cor. Sylla. L. Otho.80344Sylla. Otho.D. Junius. Q. Haterius.80420815D. Iunius. Q. Haterius.Marcellus. Auiola.80526Marcellus. Auiola.Nero Caesar. Antistius.80637Claud. Caesar poysoned by his wife. Nero. Antistius.Saturninus. Caepio.8074The 69. wee 1Saturninus. Caepio.Nero againe. Piso.808
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.20912From Iulie to ^anuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.809Nero. Piso.Nero the third time. Messala.23Nero. Messala.C. Vipsanius. L. Fonteius.81034Vipsanius. Fonteius.Nero the fourth time. Cor. Lentulus.81145Nero. Lentulus.C. Caesonius. C. Petronius.81221016Caesonius. Petronius.P. Marius. L. Asinius.81327Marius. Asinius.L. Memmius. P. Virginius. In this part of their yeare endeth the second part of Daniels weekes.8143The 70. and last wee 1L. Memmius. P. Virginius.C. Laecanius. M. Crassus.81542Laecanius. Crassus.P. Silius. C. Iulius.816
Olymp.we.Consuls.Consuls.yeares of R.21113From Iulie to Ianuarie.From Ianuarie to Iulie.817P. Silius. C. Iulius.C. Suetonius. L. Pontius.24Suetonius. Pontius.Fonteius Capito. Iulius Rufus.81835Capito. Rufus.C. Silius. M. Galerius.81946Silius. Galerius.Sir. Galba. T. Iunius. And other after them in their places.82021217A. Vitellius Emperour.Vespasian Emperour. Titus.821

