


THE FIRST TREATISE OF THE MEMORIALL: VVHEREin is contained an Exhortation to good life.

Of the punishmentes which our Lord threatneth vnto such as liue a sinfull life. CHAPTER. I.
ONE OF the principall meanes which our Lord hath vsed often times to bridle the heartes of men, and to draw them vnto the obedience of his commandementes, hath bin to set before their eyes the horrible plagues and punishmentes, that are prepared for such persons, as be rebbels and trangressors of his law. For although the hope of the rewardes that are promised to the good in the life to come, may moue v^ very much hereunto, yet are we commonly
 more moued with thinges that bee irksome vnto vs, tha^ with such as be pleasant: euen as wee see by daily experience, that wee are vexed more with an iniurie done vnto vs, than delighted with anie honour, and wee are more troubled with sicknes, then comforted with health, and so by the discommodity of sicknesse, wee come to vnderstand the commoditie of health, as by a thing so much the better perceaued, by how much it is sensibly felt. Now for this cause did our Lord in times past, vse this meane more than any other, as it appeareth most clearely by the writings of the Prophets,Why our ^e ordi^ly vseth ^r^atnings. ^eremy. 36. ^erse. 2. which are euerie where full of dreadfull sayings, and threatnings, wherewith our Lord pretended to put a terror into the harts of men, and so to bridle and subdue them vnder the obedience of his law. And for this end hee commaunded the Prophet Ieremie, that he should take a white booke, and write in the same all the threatninges, and calamities, which hee had reuealed vnto him, euen from the first day hee began to talke with him, vntill that present houre, and that hee should read the same in the presence of all the people, to see if peraduenture they would bee mooued therewith to repentance,
 and to chaunge their former life, to the end that he might also change the determination of his wrath, which hee had purposed to execute vpon them. And the Holy Scripture saith, that when the Prophet had done according as he had commaunded by almighty God, and had read all those threatnings in the presence of the people, and of the rulers, there arose such a feare and terrour among them, that they were all astonished, and as it were bestraught of their wits, looking one in anothers face, for the exceeding great feare which they had conceiued of those words.
This was one of the principall meanes that almightie God vsed with men in the time of the lawe written, and so did he also in the time of the law of Grace: In which the holie Apostle saith, that as there is reuealed a iustice whereby God maketh men iuste,Rom. 1. so is there also reuealed an indignation, and wrath, wherewith he punisheth the vniust. For which cause Saint Iohn Baptist, the glorious forerunner of our Sauiour Christe, was sente with this commission, and ambassage, to preach vnto the worlde,Mat. 3. verse. 10. Luk. 3.9. that the axe was now put to the roote of the tree, and that euerie tree that brought not forth good fruite should be cut downe, and cast
 into the fire. He saide moreouer, that there was an other come into the world more mightie than he, that caried in his hand a fanne, to winnowe and cleanse therwith his flower, and that he would put vp the corne into his granard, but the chaffe he would burne in a fier that shuld neuer be quenched. This was the preaching and ambassage which the holie forerunner of our Sauiour Christe brought into the worlde. And so great was the thunder of these wordes, and the terror which entred into mens hartes so dreadfull, that there ranne vnto him of all states and conditions of men euen of the verie Pharises, and Publicans, yea and Souldiars also, (which of all others are wont to bee most dissolute, and to haue least care of their conscie^ces,) and eche of them for himselfe demaunded particularlie of that holie man, what he should doe to attaine vnto saluation, and to escape those terrible threatnings which he had denounced vnto them: so great was the feare they had conceiued of them.
Now this is that (my deare christian brother) which I do at this present in the behalfe of Almightie God preach vnto thee although not with such feruencie of spirite, and like holines of life, yet that which importeth more to this case) with the same
 trueth, and certaintie: forsomuch as the faith and ghospell that Saint Iohn Baptist preached at that time was none other, but this which we preach at this present.

. 2.
NOW if thou be desirous to vnderstand in few wordes, howe great the punishment is, that almightie God hath threatned in his holie scriptures to the wicked, that which may most brieflie and most to the purpose be saide in this matter is this. That like as the rewarde of the good is an vniuersall good thing, euen so the punishment of the wicked is an vniuersall euell, which comprehendeth in it all the euels that are. For the better vnderstanding whereof it is to be noted,The mise^ies of thi^ life are particular. that al the euels of this life are particuler euels and therefore do not torment all our senses generallie, but onlie one or some of them. As taking an example of the diseases of our bodie, we see that one hath a disease in his eies, an other in his eares, one is sicke in his hart, an other in his stomake, some other in his head, and so diuers men are diseased in diuers parts, howbeit in such wise, that none of all these diseases be generally throughout all the members of the
 body, but particular to some one of them. And yet for all this we see what griefe only one of these diseases may put vs vnto, and how paineful a night the sicke man hath in any one of these infirmities, yea although it bee nothing else but a little ache in one tooth. Now let vs put the case, that there were some one man sicke of such an vniuersall disease, that hee had no part of his body, neyther any one ioynt or sence free from his proper griefe, and torment: but that at one time and instant hee suffered most exceeding sharpe paines in his head, in his eyes and eares, in his teeth and stomake, in his liuer and heart, (to bee short) in all the rest of the members and ioyntes of the body, and that he lay after this sort stretching himselfe in his bed, pained with these griefes and torments, euery member of his body hauing his particuler torment, he I say, that should lie thus pained and afflicted, howe great torment and griefe of minde (thinke yee) should he sustaine? O what thing could any man imagine more miserable and more worthy of compassion? Surely if thou shouldest see but a dogge so tormented in the street, his very paines would mooue thee to pitty him.^ow the da^^ed are tormented in hell. Now this is that (my deare christian brother, if anie
 comparison may bee made betweene the^) which is suffered in that cursed horrible place of hell, not only for the space of one might, but euerlastingly, for euer and euer. For like as the wicked haue offended Almighty God with all their members and senses, and haue made Armour of them all to serue sinne, euen so will he ordaine that they shall all be there tormented each one of them with his proper torment. There shall the wanton and leacherous eyesEies. bee tormented with the tirrible sight of diuels: The earesEares. with the confusion of such horrible cryes, and lamentations as shall there be heard: The noseNose. with the intollerable stench of that filthie and loathsome place: The taste,Taste. with a most rauinous hunger and thirst: The touching,Touching. and all the members of the body, with extreame cold and fire: the imagination,Imagination. shall bee tormented by conceauing of griefes present: The memory,Memorie by calling to minde the pleasures past: The vnderstanding,Vnderstanding. by considering what benifits are lost, and what miseries are to come. This multitude of punishmentes, the holy scripture signifieth vnto vs, when it saieth, that in hell there shall be hunger, thirst,Math. 1^ Psa. 10. weeping, wailing, gnashing of teeth, swords double edged, spirites created for reuengement, serpentes,
 wormes, scorpians, hammers, wormewood, water of gaule, the spirit of tempest, and other things of like sort. Whereby are signified vnto vs, as in a figure, the multitude and dreadfull terrour of the most horrible paines, and tormentes that bee in that cursed place. There shall be likewise darkenes, both inward and outward, both of body and soule: farre more obscure than the darkenesse of Egipt,Exod. 10. which might be felt eue^ with hands. There shall be fire also, and not as the fire here that tormenteth a little and shortlie endeth, but such a fire as that place requireth, which tormenteth exceedingly, and shall neuer make an ende of tormenting. Now if this be true, what greater wonder can there be, than that they which beleeue and confesse this for truth, should liue with such a strange negligence, and carelesnesse as they do? What trauaile and paines would not a man willingly take to escape euen one only day, yea one houre, the very least of all these torments? And wherefore doe they not then to escape the euerlastingnes of so great paines, and horrible tormentes, endure so little a trauaile, as to follow the exercise of vertue. Surely the consideration of this matter were able to make a man besides himselfe in case he would deepely
 weigh it.The damned haue no kinde of co^fort, or hope of any ease or ende of their most horrible torments. And if among so great a number of paines there were any manner of hope of end, or release, it would bee some kinde of comfort: But alas it is not so: For there the gates are fast shut vp from all expectation of any manner of ease, or hope. In all kinde of paines and calamities that bee in this world, there is alwaies some gappe lying open, wherby the patient may receiue some kinde of comfort Sometimes reason, sometimes the weather, sometimes his friends, sometimes the hearing that others are troubled with the very same disease, and sometimes at the least, the hope of an end may cheare him somewhat. Onelie in these most horrible paines and miseries that be in hell, all the waies are shut vp in such sort, and all the hauens of comfort so embarred, that the miserable sinner cannot hope for remedie on any side, neyther of heauen nor of the earth, neyther of the time past or present, or of the time to come, neyther yet by any other meanes. The damned soules thinke that all men are shooting dartes at them, and that all creatures haue conspired against them, and that eue^ they themselues are cruel against themselues. This is that distresse, whereof the sinners doe lament by the Prophet,
 saying:Psal. 17. verse. 6. The sorrowes of hell haue compassed mee round about, and the snares of death hath besieged me. For on which side soeuer they looke or turne their eyes, they doe continuallie behold occasions of sorrow, and griefe, and none at all of any ease,Mat. 25. verse. 10. or comfort. The wise virgins (saith the Euangelist) that stoode readie prepared at the gate of the bridegroome entred in, and the gate was forth with locked. O locking euerlasting! O inclosure immortall! O gate of all goodnes, which shall neuer any more be opened againe! As if hee had said more plainely, the gate of pardon, of mercy, of comfort, of intercession, of hope, of grace, of merite, and of all goodnes is shut vp for euer,Exod. 16. and euer. Sixe daies and no moe was Manna to bee gathered, but the seauenth daie, which was the Saboath daie, there was none to be found, and therefore shall he fast for euer, that hath not in due time made his prouision aforehand.Prouer. 20. The sluggard saith the wise man wil, not till his ground for feare of cold, therefore shall he beg his bread in summer, and no man shall giue him to eate. And in another place he saith:Prouer. 10. hee that gathereth in sommer is a wise sonne, and he that giueth himselfe to sleeping at that season, is the sonne of confusion. For what confusion can there bee greater
 than that which that miserable couetous rich man suffereth, who with a few crums of bread that fell from his table, might haue purchased to himselfe abundance of euerlasting felicity and glory, in the kingdome of heauen. But because hee would not giue so small a thing, hee came to such an extreame necessity, that he begged, yea and shall for euermore begge, but onely one droppe of cold water, and shall neuer obtaine it. Who is not mooued with that request of this infortunate damned person, who cried. O father Abraham,Luke 16. haue compassion vpon me, and send downe Lazarus vnto mee, that he may dippe the tippe of his finger in water, and touch my tongue, for these horrible flames doe torment me exceedingly. What smaller request could there be desired than this? He durst not request so much as one cup of water, neyther that Lazarus should put his whole hand into the water, nor yet (which is more to be wondred at) did hee request so much as the whole finger, but only the tip of it, that it might touch his tongue, and yet euen this alonely would not bee graunted vnto him. Whereby thou maist perceaue, how fast the gate of all consolation is shut vp, and how vniuersal that interdict and excommunication is, that is there laid vpon
 the damned, sith this rich gluttton coulde not obtaine so much as this small request. So that wheresoeuer the damned persons doe turne their eyes, and on which side so euer they stretch forth their handes, they shall not finde any manner of comfort, be it neuer so small. And as hee that is in the Sea choked, and almost drowned vnder the water, not finding any stay whereupon to set his foot, stretcheth forth his hands oftentimes on euery side in vaine, because all that he graspeth after is thinne, and liquid water, which deceaueth him, euen so shall it fare with the damned persons, whe^ they shalbe drowned in that deepe sea of so many miseries, where they shall striue and struggle alwaies with death, without finding any succour, or place of stay, whereupon they may rest themselues. Now this is one of the greatest paines wherewith they bee tormented in that cursed place. For if these torments should haue their continuance limited but for a certain time, though it were for a thousand, yea a hu^dred thousand millions of yeres, yet euen this would be some little comfort vnto them. For nothing is perfectly great in case it haue an end.In hell shall be no end of torments. But alas, they haue not so much as this poore and miserable co^fort, but contrariwise
 their paines are equal in continuance with the eternity of Almighty God, and the lasting of their miserie, with the eternitie of Gods glory. As long as almighty God shal liue, so long shall they die, and whe^ almighty God shall cease to be God, then shall they also cease to be as they are. O deadly life! O immortal death! I know not whether I may truely tearme thee eyther life or death. For if thou be life, why dost thou kill? And if thou be death, how dost thou endure? Wherefore I will call thee neyther the one, nor the other: for so much as in both of them there is contained somewhat that is good, as in life there is rest, and in death there is an ende, (which is a great comfort to the afflicted:) but thou haste neither rest, nor end. What art thou then? Marie thou art the worst of life, and the worst of death. For of death thou hast the torment without any end, and of life thou hast the continuance without any rest. Almighty GOD hath spoiled both life and death of that good which they had, and hath put in thee, that which remained to be a punishment for the wicked. O bitter composition! O vnsauorie purgation of our Lords cup! of the which all the sinners of the earth shall drinke their part.Psa. 74.

Now in this continuance, in this eternitie, I would wish that thou my deare christian brother, wouldest fixe the eyes of thy consideration a little while, and that as the cleane beast cheweth her cud, eue^ so thou wouldest chew and weigh this point within thy selfe with great deliberation, and to the intent thou mayest doe it the better, consider a little the paines that a sick man abideth in one euill night: especially if hee be vexed with any vehement griefe, or sharpe disease. Marke how often he tumbleth, and tosseth in his bed, what disquietnes hee hath, how long and tedious one night seemeth vnto him, how duelie hee counteth all the houres of the clocke, and how long he thinketh each houre of them to be, how hee passeth the time in wishing for the dawning of the day, which notwithstanding is like to help him very little towardes the curing of his disease. If this then be accou^ted so great a torment, what a torment shall that be (trow ye) in that euerlasting night in hel, which hath no morning, nor so much as any hope of any dawning of the day? O darkenes most obscure! O night accursed, euen by the mouth of Almighty GOD, and of all his Saintes! That one shall wish for light, and shall neuer
 see it, neyther shall the brightnesse of the morning arise any more. Consider the^ what a kinde of torment shall that bee, to liue euerlastingly in such a night as this, liing not in a soft bed, (as the sick ma^ doth) but in a hot burning furnace, foming out such tirrible raging flames? What shoulders sh^ll bee able to abide these horrible heats? O how it maketh me euen to tremble and quake, onely to thinke of it! If it seeme vnto vs as a thing intollerable to haue only some part of our feete standing vpon a pan of burning coles for the space of saying one Aue Maria, what shall it bee (trow yee) to stand body and soule, burning in the middest of those euerlasting hotte raging fires in hell, in comparison whereof the fires of this worlde are but painted fires? Is there any witte or iudgement in this world? Haue men their right senses? Doe they vnderstand what these words doe import? Or are they peraduenture perswaded that these are only fables of Poetes? Or doe they thinke that this appertaineth vnto them, or else that it was ment only for others? None of all this can they say. For somuch as our faith assureth vs most certainely herein. And our Sauiour Christ himselfe, who is the euerlasting
 truth crieth out in his gospel,mat. 24.35 mar. 13.31 saying: heaue^ and earth shall faile, but my word shall not faile.


 3.
The paines of hell continue euermore in one degree.OF THIS miserie there followeth another as great as it, which is, that the paines are alwaies continuing in one like being, and in one same degree, without any manner of intermission, or decreasing. All manner of thinges that are vnder the cope of heauen doe moue and turne round about with the same heauen, and doe neuer stand still at one state or being: but are continually eyther ascending, or descending. The sea and the riuers haue their ebbing, and flowing. The times, the ages, and the mutable fortune of men, and of kingdomes, are euermore in continuall motion. There is no feuer so ferue^t that doth not decline, neyther griefe so sharpe, but that after it is much augmented, it doth forth with decrease. To be short, all the tribulations and miseries are by little and little worne away with time, and as the common saying is, nothing is sooner dried vp than teares. Only that paine in hell is alwaies greene: Onely that feare neuer decreaseth: only that extremity of heat knoweth not what is either euening, or morning. In the time of Noes flood Almighty God raigned forty daies,
 and forty nights continually without ceasing vppon the earth, and this suficed to drowne the whole world, but in that place of torment in hell there shall raine euerlasting speares, and darts of furie vppon that cursed land, without euer ceasing so much as one onely moment. And this is so true, that according to S. Thomas opinion,Summa S. Tome. 12. quest. 87. Artic. 5. i^ responsione ad tertium argumentu^ eue^ the paines which shall bee there giuen for veniall sinnes shall be likewise euerlasting, aswell as those paines which be there prescribed for deadly sins. For although infinite punishment be not due vnto Veniall sin, yet because in that state of damnation, there is no absolution, or discharge of any debt, (for that the time of paying and satisfying is then past) therefore shall the paine due vnto veniall sin continue euermore in one same state, and shall neuer cease. Now what torment can be greater, and more to be abhorred, than continually to suffer after one like manner, without any kinde of alteration or change? Though a meate be neuer so dilicate, yet in case we feede continually thereupo^, it wil in very short time bee verie loathsome vnto vs: for no meate can be more precious and delicate, than that Manna was, which Almighty God sent vnto the Children of Israel in the desert, and
 yet because they did eate continuallie thereof, it made them to loath it, yea and prouoked the^ to vomit it vp againe. The way that is all plaine (they say) werieth more than any other, because alwaies the varietie (yea euen in punishment) is a kinde of comfort. Tell mee then of good fellowship, if thinges that be pleasant and sauorie, when they bee alwaies after one manner are an occasion of loathsomnesse and paine, what kinde of loathsomnes will that bee, which shall bee caused by those most horrible paines and torments in hel, which doe continue euerlastingly after one like sort? What will the damned and cursed creatures thinke, when they shall there see themselues so vtterly abhorred and forsaken of almighty God, that he wil not so much as with the remission of one Veniall sin mitigate somewhat their torments? So great shall the fury and rage be, which they shall there conceaue against him, that they shall neuer cease continually to curse and blaspheme his holy name.


 4
VNTO all these paines, there is also added the paine of that euerlasting co^sumer, which is the worme of conscience,The worme of conscie^ce.
 whereof the holy Scripture maketh so oftentimes mention, saying.Esaie. 66. verse. 24.
Their worme shall neuer die, and their fire shall neuer bee quenched. This worme is a furious raging despite, and a bitter repentance without any fruit, which the wicked shall alwaies haue in hell, by calling to their remembrance the oportunitie and time they had, whiles they were in this world, to escape these most grieuous and horrible tormentes, and how they would not vse the benifit thereof, and therefore when the miserable sinner seeth himselfe thus tormented and vexed on euery side, and calleth to minde how many dayes and yeares he hath spent idlely in vanities, pastimes, and pleasures, and how oftentimes he was aduertised of this perrill, and how little regard he tooke thereof, what shall he thinke? What anguish and sorrow shall there be in his heart? Haste thou not read in the Ghospell, that there shall be weeping,Luke. 13. and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Now these and others the like shall be the causes of this so great and excessiue griefe. For the better vnderstanding hereof, beeing a matter of so great importance, I will giue thee a like example.Gen. 41. Let vs call to minde the History of Ioseph, and that great famine which continued
 for the space of seauen yeares in Egypt, before which famine (as the Holie Scripture saieth) the abundance of corne in the other seauen yeares before was so great, that it might be compared with the sands of the sea, and exceeded all measure. But after that these seauen yeres were ended, there followed other seauen yeres of so great barrennes, and dearth, that euen in the first yeare of them, all the people of Egypt came before King Pharao, crying out and saying:Gen. 47. giue vs somewhat to eat. The king sent them to Ioseph, who required of them, al the money they had, and gaue them for the same corne sufficient for that yere. When that was consumed and spent, they returned the yeare following vnto Ioseph, saying: giue vs to eate: what? Wilt thou suffer vs to die for hunger in thy presence, because wee haue no more money to giue the? To whome he answered: deliuer vnto me all your heards of cattel, and for the same I will giue you corne in exchange, sithence you haue no more money left. After that they had deliuered vnto him all their cattell, and that their prouision was also spent, they came againe to him the next yeare, saying: Nowe thou knowest my Lord that we haue no more mony nor cattell to giue
 thee, and that there remaineth nothing else but onely our bodies and landes, how canst thou suffer vs to die here for hunger in thy sight? Our persons and our lands which are only left of all our substance are thine, buy vs as slaues for the King, and giue vs (if it be thy pleasure) corne to ^ow the land that it lie not vntilled, and desolate, when they are all dead that should till and inhabit it. By this meane came Ioseph to buy all the land in Egypt, for euery one sold his possessions by reason of the great extreame famine which they suffred. This is the history, now let vs take that out of it that serueth to our purpose. Tel me then I beseech thee, what a griefe was it vnto these miserable men, whe^ they remembred themselues of those seauen plentifull yeares past, and saw well with howe little money they might haue prouided corne before hand, yea, and haue laide vp also and gathered great treasures, and enriched themselues during their liues? How iustlie might they lament and reproue themselues, saying. O how vnfortunate and cursed men are we, that might so easly haue prouided for this derth, and procured abundance for our selues during our liues, and would not! If we had not bin admonished of this before hand, the^ perhaps
 our negligence might haue had some excuse, but being thereof aduertised so long time before, and knowing that hee would surely tell the truth of thinges to come, that had foretold the truth of thinges present, and seeing with all, what speed and dilligence the kinges purueiours made to gather together, and lay vp all the corne they could get, the which was sufficient to giue vs to vnderstand what wee ought to haue done in that behalfe, and yet for all this to be so slouthfull, and carelesse as we were, what excuse can wee haue? O how much worth would that bee vnto vs at this present, which then we despised and contemned? What riches might we now get with the same corne which we did then wilfully cast away? Where was our iudgement at that time? Where were our senses and wits become, that wee would not vse the benefit of so great an opportunitie? These and such other more grieuous accusations spake those wretched men against themselues, and it seemeth that they stoode all that time as me^ in vtter dispaire and trouble of mind, musing vppon their great misfortune, and negligence. But tell me now my good Christian brother, what is all this in comparison of that which wee here speake
 of, but as it were a shadow compared with the truth. That famine in Egypt endured only for seauen yeares, but this in hell shall endure euerlastingly: That found a remedy though with great difficulty and charge, but for this there shall neuer be any remedy found: That might be redeemed with money and cattell, but this can neuer bee redeemed with any manner of exchange. this punishment can not bee pardoned. This paine cannot bee exchanged. This sentence cannot be reuoked. To conclude those men of Egipt, after that the seauen yeares were once ended, began to lift vp their heades, and to come out of their miserie: But in hell whosoeuer once entereth to bee punished, shall neuer know againe what rest and ease meaneth. Now if they then notwithstanding all this were during that time somuch afflicted, and vexed, in how much worse case shal he be, that shall see himselfe in hell fire so horibly tormented, and vexed, and that without all hope of remedie? O if thou knewest, and wouldest consider, how euery one of them shall there stand tormenting, and renting himselfe, weeping and wailing, and saying.The lamentation of a damned person. O miserable and vnfortunate wretch that I am! what times, and what opportunities
 haue I suffered to passe in vaine? A time there was, when with one cup of cold water I might haue purchased vnto my selfe a crowne of glory, and when also with such like necessary works of mercy in releeuing the pore, I might haue merited life euerlasting? wherfore did I not look before me? How was I blinded with thinges present? how did I let passe those fruitfull yeares of such abundance, and did not enrich my selfe? Yet if I had bin brought vp amongst Infidels and Pagans, and had beleeued that there had bin nothing els, but onely to be born, and to die, the^ might I haue had some kind of excuse, and might haue said that I knew not what was forbidden me. But for so much as I haue liued among Christians, and was my selfe one of them, and helde it for an article of my beleefe, that the houre should come, when I should giue vp an account, after what order I had spent my life: for somuch also as it was daily cryed out vnto mee by the continuall preaching and teaching of Priestes, and Religious persons in the Catholicke Church, whose aduertisementes manie following, made preparation in time, and laboured earnestly for the prouision of good workes, whose life also and example was a greater proofe
 of that which they spake: for somuch I say as I made light of all these examples, and preachinges, and perswaded my selfe verie fondly, that heauen was prepared for me, though I tooke no paines for it at all, what deserue I that haue thus led my life? O yee infernall furies, come and rent mee in peeces, and deuoure these my bowels, for so haue I iustly deserued! I haue deserued to bee hunger staruen for euer, seeing I would not prouide for my selfe while I had time. I deserue not to reape, because I haue not sowen. I am worthy to be destitute, sith I haue not laid vp in store. I deserue that my request should now bee denied me, sith when the poore made request vnto me, I refused to releeue them. I haue deserued to sigh and lament in vain, so long as God shal be God I haue deserued that this worme of conscience should gnaw my intrails for euer, and euer, by representing vnto me the litle pleasure which I haue inioyed, and the great felicitie which I haue lost, and how far greter that was which I might haue gained, by forgoing that litle which I would not forgoe. This is that immortall worme that shall neuer die, but shal lie euerlastingly gnawing their intrails which is the terriblest paine that can be.



 5.
THOV wilt peraduenture bee amazed (good Christian Reader) in reading so many kind of paines in hel, as haue bin here described. And now thou art perswaded that there can bee added vnto this no more than hath bin said. But surely the mighty arme of God wanteth not force to chastice his enemies more, and more. For all these paines that wee haue hitherto rehearsed, are such as doe appertaine generally to all the damned: but besides these generall paines,The particular paines of the damned. there are also other particular paines, which each one of the damned shall there suffer in diuerse sort, according to the qualitie of his sinne. And so according to this proportion, the haughty and proudThe proude. shall there bee abased and brought low to their great confusion. The couetousThe couetous shall be driuen to miserable necessity. The gluttonThe glotton. shall rage with continuall hunger, and thirste. The leacherousThe leacherous. shall burne in the very same flames which they themselues haue enkindled, and those that haue all their lifetime hunted after their pleasures and pastimes, shall liue there in continuall lamentation and sorrow.
But because examples are of very great
 force to moue our harts, I will bring onely one for this purpose, wherby somewhat of this matter may the better be perceaued.
It is written of a certaine holy man, that he saw in spirit the paines of a licentious and worldly man in this sort. First,The paines of hell reuealed to a Holy man he saw how the diuels that were present at the houre of his death when he yeelded vp his ghost, snatched away his soule with great reioycing, and made a present thereof vnto the Prince of darkenes, who was then sitting in a great chaire of fire, looking for the co^ming of this present. Immediatlie after that it was presented before him, hee arose out of his seate, and said vnto the damned soule, that hee would giue him the preheminence of that honourable seat, because he had beene a man of honour, and was alwaies very much affected towardes the same. Incontinently after that he was placed therein, crying, and lamenting in that honourable torment, there appeared before him two other most vglie diuels, and offred him a cuppe full of most bitter and stincking licour, and made him to drinke and carouse it vp all perforce, saying: it is meet sithence thou hast bin a louer of precious wines, and bankets, that thou shouldest likewise proue of this wine, whereof
 all we doe vse to drinke in these parts. Immediatly after this, there came other two, with two fierie trumpets, and setting them at his eares, began to blow into the^ flames of fire: saying, this melodie haue we reserued for thee, vnderstanding that in the world thou haste very much delited with minstrelsie, and wanton Songes. And sodainely he espied other diuels, loden with vipers, and serpents, the which they threw vpon the breast and bellie of that miserable sinner, saying vnto him, that for somuch as he had bin greatly delighted with the wanton embracings and lecherous lusts of women, he should now solace himselfe with these refreshings, in steed of those licentious delites and pleasures, which he had enioyed in the world. After this sort (as the Prophet Esay saith) when the sinner is punished,Esay. 47. there is giuen measure, for measure, to the end that in such a great variety and proportion of punishments, the order and wisedome of Gods iustice might the more manifestly appeare.
This vision hath almighty God shewed in spirit to this Holy man for our aduertisment, and instruction, not that in hel these thinges are altogether so materially done, but that by them we might in some manner
 vnderstand somewhat of the varietie and multitude of the paines, which bee there appointed for the damned. Whereof I know not how some of the Pagans haue had a certaine knowledge: for a Poet speaking of this multitude of paines, affirmed, that although he had a hundred mouthes, and as many tongues, with a voice as strong as iron, yet were they not able to expresse the names only of the^. A Poet he was that spake this, but truely therein hee spake not like a poet, but like a Prophet and Eua^gilist.
Now then if all this shall assuredly so come to passe, what man is he that seeing all this so certainely with the eyes of his faith, will not turne ouer the leafe, and begin to prouide for himselfe against that time? Where is the iudgment of men now become? Where be their wits? Where is at the least their selfe loue, which seeketh euermore for his owne profit, and is much afraide of any losse? What may it bee thought that men are become beastes, that prouide only for the time present? or haue they peraduenture so dimmed their eye-sight, that they cannot look before them? Harken saith Esaie, O yee deafe, and yee blind, ope^ your eies that you may see?Esay. 42. who is blind but my seruant? And who is deafe
 but ye vnto whome I haue sent my messengers? And who is blind but he that suffereth himselfe to be sold for a slaue? Thou that seest so many things wilt thou not see this? Thou that haste thine eares open, wilt thou not giue eare hereunto? If thou beleeue not this, how art thou a Christian? If thou beleeue it, and doest not prouide for it, how canst thou be thought a reasonable man?The difference betweene an opinion and imaginatio^. Aristotle saith, that this is the difference betweene an opinion, and imagination: that an imagination alone is not sufficient to cause a feare, but an opinion is: For if I doe imagine that a house may fall vpon me, it is not enough to make mee afraid, vnlesse I beleeue or haue an opinion that it will bee so indeed: for then it is sufficient to make mee afraide. And hereof commeth the feare that murderers alwaies haue, by reason of the suspition they conceaue at their enemies that then doe lie in waite for them. If then the opinion and only suspition of danger is able to cause the moste valiant and couragious to feare, how is it that the certaintie and beleefe of so many and so great tirrible miseries, which is farre more suer than any opinion or knowledge, doth not make thee to feare. If thou perceauest that for these many
 yeares past thou hast led a licentious and sinfull life, and that at the least according to present iustice thou art condemned to these horrible torments in hell: If I may also probably coniecture, that there is no more likelihood of the amendment of thy life to come, than thou haste shewed hetherto after so many yeares past, how hapneth it, that running headlong forwardes into so manifest a danger thou art nothing at all afraid? Especially co^sidering the sinfull state wherein thou liuest, and the horrible paines and tormentes, which doe attend for thee, and the time that thou haste lost, and the endles repentance which thou shalt haue therefore in the moste horrible torments of hell. Assuredly it passeth all co^mon sence to consider that there should be such wilfull grosse blindnes in men.



OF THE GLORIE OF THE blessed Saints in heauen. CHAPTER. II.
TO THE end there might want nothing to stir vp our mindes vnto vertue, after the paines which Almighty God threatneth vnto the wicked, hee doth also set before vs the rewarde of the good.
 Which is that glory, and that euerlasting life, which the blessed Saintes doe enioy in the kingdome of heauen: wherby he doth very mightily allure vs to the loue of the same. But what manner of thing this reward and what this life is, there is no tongue neyther of Angels, nor yet of men, that is sufficient to expresse it. Howbeit that wee may haue some kinde of sauour, and knowledge thereof, I intend to rehearse here euen word for word, what S. Augustine saieth in one of his meditations, speaking of this life.S. August. medita. 22. O life (saith he) prepared by Almighty God for his friendes, a blessed life, a secure life, a quiet life, a beautifull life, a cleane life, a chaste life, a holy life, a life that knoweth no death, a life without sadnes, without labour, without griefe, without trouble, without corruption, without feare, without variety, without alteration, a life replenished with all beautie, and dignity, where there is neither enimy that can offend, nor delghte that can annoy, where loue is perfit, and no feare at all, where the day is euerlasting, and the spirit of all is one, where almighty God is seene face to face, who is the onely meate whereuppon they feed without any loathsomnesse. It deliteth me to consider thy brightnesse, and
 thy treasures do reioyce my longing hart. The more I consider thee, the more I am striken in loue with thee. The great desire I haue of thee, doth wonderfullie delight mee, and no lesse pleasure it is vnto mee, to keepe thee in my remembrance. O life most happie! O Kingdome moste truelie blessed! where there is no death nor ende, neyther yet succession of time: where the daie continuing euermore without night, knoweth not any mutatio^: wher the victorious conquerour beeing ioyned with those euerlasting quiers of Angelles, and hauing his head Crowned with a garland of glorie singeth vnto Almighty God one of the Songes of Sion! O happie, yea and most happie should my Soule bee,S. August. medit. 25. if when the race of this my Pilgrimage is ended, I might be worthy to see thy glorie, thy blessednesse, thy beautie, the wals, and Gates of thy Cittie, thy Streetes, thy lodginges, the noble Cittizens, and thine Omnipotent KING in his most glorious Maiestie. The stones of thy walles are precious. Thy gates are adorned with bright Pearles. Thy streetes are of verie fine excellent gold, in which there neuer faile perpetuall praises. Thy houses are paued with rich stones, wrought throughout
 with zaphiries, and couered aboue with massie gold: where none entreth in that is not cleane, neyther doth any abide there that is defiled. Faire and beautifull in thy delightes art thou O Ierusalem our Mother! None of those things are suffered in thee, that are suffered here. There is great diuersity betweene thy thinges, and the thinges that we doe continually see in this miserable life. In thee is neuer seene neyther darkenes, nor night, neyther yet any change of time. The light that shineth in thee commeth neyther of Lamps, nor of the Moone, nor yet of the bright glistering Starres, but God that proceedeth of God, and the light that commeth of light is hee that giueth clearenes vnto thee. Euen the very king of kinges himselfe keepeth continuall residence in the middest of thee, compassed about with his officers and seruants. There doe the Angels in their orders and quiers sing a most sweet and melodious harmonie. There is celebrated a perpetuall solemnity and feast, with euery one that commeth thither, after his departure out of this pilgrimage. There be the orders of Prophetes.The blessed company of Heauen. There is the famous company of the Apostles. There is the inuincible Army of Martyrs. There is the
 most Reuerend assembly of Confessors. There are the true and perfect Religious persons. There are the holy Virgins which haue ouercome both the pleasures of the world, and the frailtie of their own nature. There are the young men and young women, more ancient in vertue, tha^ in yeres. There are the sheepe, and little lambes, that haue escaped from the Wolues, and from the deceitfull snares of this life. And therfore doe now keepe a perpetuall feast each one in his place, all alike in ioy, though different in degree. There Charitie raigneth in her full perfection. For vnto them God is all in al, whom they behold without end, in whose loue they be al continually inflamed, whom they alwaies loue, and in louing doe praise, and in praising doe loue, and all their exercises consiste in praises, without wearines, and without trauaile. O happy were I, yea and very happy indeed, if at what time I shall be loosed out of the prison of this wretched body, I might bee thought worthy to heare those Songes of that heauenly melody, song in the praise of the euerlasting King by all the cittizens of that so noble citty! Happy were I, and very happy, if I might obtaine but a little roome among the Chaplens of that Chappell,
 and wait for my turne also to sing my Alleluia: if I might be nere vnto my king, my God, my Lord, and see him in his glorie, euen as he promised me when he said! O father,Iohn. 17. this is my last determinate will, that all those that thou hast giuen vnto me may be with me, and see the glorie which I had with thee before the world was created. Hitherto are the words of S. Augustine.
Now tell mee (good Christian reader,) what a day shall that bee, that shall shine in thy house, (if thou leade thy life in the feare of God,) when after the course of this Pilgrimage, thou shalt passe fro^ death to immortalitie, and in that passage when others shall begin to feare, thou shalt begin to reioyce, and lift vp thy head, because the day of thy deliuera^ce is at hand. Come forth a little (saith S. IeromeS. Ierome. vnto the virgin Eustochia) out of the prison of this body, and when thou art before the gate of this tabernacle, set before thine eies the reward, that thou hopest to haue for thy present labours. Tell me, what a day shall that be, when the blessed virgin Marie accompanied with all the companies of Virgins shall come to receaue thee, and when euen our Lord himselfe thy spouse, with all his Saints, shall come and meete thee in the
 waie, saying vnto thee. Arise,Cantic. 2.10, 11, 12: and make hast O my beloued, my delight, and my turtle doue, for now the winter is past, and the tempestuous waters are ceased, and flowers begin to appeare in our land.
How great ioy shall thy soule then receaue when it shalbe at that time presented before the throane of the most blessed Trinitie, by the hands of the holy Angels, (especially by that angell to whome thou wast committed, as to a faithfull keeper,) and when this Angell with all the rest shal declare thy good workes, and what crosses, tribulations, and iniuries, thou haste suffered for Gods sake. Saint Luke writeth that when holy Tabitha,Act. 9. the great almes giuer was dead, al the widdowes and poore folke came about the Apostle S. Peter, shewing vnto him the garments, which shee had giuen them, wherewith the Apostle beeing mooued, made his praier vnto Almightie God, for that so mercifull a woman, and by his praiers he raised her againe to life. Now what a gladnes will it be to my soule, when these blessed spirites shall take thee in the middest among them, and placing thee before the Consistory of almighty God, shal report thy good works,The Angels rehearse our good workes before God. and rehearse by order, thy almesdeedes, thy praiers, thy fastings, the innoce^cy of thy life, thy suffering
 of wronges and iniuries, thy patience in afflictions, thy temperance in diet, with all other vertues, and good workes, that thou haste done in all thy life. O how great ioy shalt thou receaue at that time for all the good workes that thou haste done? How clearely shalt thou there vnderstand the value and excellencie of vertue? There the obedient man shall talk of victories. There vertue shall receaue her rewarde, and the good shall be honored according to their merite. Moreouer, what a pleasure will it be vnto thee, when thou shalt see thy selfe to bee in that sure hauen, and shalt looke vpon the course of thy nauigation, which thou hast sailed here in this life: whe^ thou shalt remember the Tempestes wherein thou hast bin tossed, the streights through which thou hast passed, and the daungers of Theeues, and Pirates, from whom thou haste escaped? There is the place, where they shall sing that song of the Prophet,Psal. 93. which saith. Had it not beene that our Lord had bin myne helper, it could not be but that my soule had gone into hell: especially when fro^ thence thou shalt behold so many sins as are committed euery houre in the wo^^d, so manie soules as doe descend euery day into hell, and how it hath pleased Almighty God,
 that among such a multitude of damned persons, thou shouldest be of the number of his elect, and one of those to whome he would graunt such exceeding great felicity and glory. Besides al this, what a goodly sight shall it be to behold the feastes, and triumphes, which they dayly celebrate with their new brethren, who hauing conquered the world, and finished the course of their Pilgrimage, doe enter in there to be crowned with them! O what a ioy will it be to see those seates filled vp, and that citty builded, and the walles of that noble Ierusalem repaired againe! With what chearefull embracinges shall the whole Court of heauen entertaine them, beholding them when they come loaden with the spoyles of their va^quished enemie! There shall those valiant men and women enter with triumph, which haue together with the world co^quered the weakenes of their owne fraile nature. There shall the innocent Virgins enter, which haue suffered Martirdome for Christs sake, with double triumph ouer the flesh, and the worlde, adorned also with garlands of lillies, and roses vpon their heades. There shall also enter dayly many young men, and children, which haue vanquished the tendernes of
 their young yeares with discretion and vertue, and shall receaue the reward of their pure virginitie. There shall they find their friendes. There shall they acknowledge their Masters. There shall they knowe their Parentes, and embrace one another with sweet and friendly kisses, and reioice with them at their glorious entrie and felicitie. O how sweete and sauorie shall the fruit of vertue then be, although for a time before, her rootes seemed very bitter! Sweet is the colde Euening after the hotte sunnie day: sweete is the fountaine to the wearie trauailer: sweet is rest and sleepe to the tyred seruant: but much more sweet is it to the Saintes in heauen, to inioy peace after war, securitie after perill, eternall rest after their paines, and trauailes. For then are the warres at an end. Then need they no more to goe al armed both on the right and on the left side. The children of Israell went forth armed towardes the land of promise,Exod. 13. but after the land was conquered they laid downe their speares, and cast away their armour, and forgetting all feare and turmoile of warre,3. Reg. 4. ech one vnder the shadow of his pauilion and harbour, enioyed the fruite of their sweete peace. Nowe may the eyes sleepe there; that haue beene
 wearied with continuall watching. Now may the watching Prophet come downe from his standing,Abac. 3. that did watch and fixe his feete vppon the place of the sintinell. Now may the blessed Father Saint IeromeS. Ierome. take his reste, who in his watchinges made no difference betweene dayes and nights, beating himselfe vppon the breast in deuout praiers, and fighting couragiouslie against the violence and force of the olde Serpent. There is no more feare of inuasion by the terrible armies of the bloodie enemie. There is no place for the subtile craftes of the lurking Viper. There cannot arriue the deadly sight of the venemous Basiliske, neyther yet shall the hissing of the auncient Serpent bee hearde there, but onely the soft breathing ayre of the holy ghost, wherin is beholde^ the glory of A^mighty God. This is the Region of peace, and place of securitie, scituated aboue all the Elementes, whither the cloudes and stormie windes of the darke aire can not come O what glorious things haue bin spoken of thee, O Cittie of God!Psal. 86. Blessed are they (saith holie Tobias) that loue thee, and inioy thy peace. O my soule praise our Lord,Tob. 15. for he hath deliuered Ierusalem his Citie from all her tribulations.
 Happy shall I be if the remnant of my posterity might come to see the clearenes of Ierusalem. Her gates shal be wrought with Zaphires, and Emraldes, and all the circuite of her walles shall bee built with precious stones. Her streetes shall bee paued with white and polished marble, and in all parts of her territorie shall bee sung Alleluia. O ioyfull countrie! O sweet glory! O blessed company. Who shall be these so fortunate and so happie that are elected for thee. It seemeth a presumption to desire thee, and yet I will not liue without the desire of thee. O yee sonnes of Adam, a race of men miserably blinded and deceaued. O yee scattered sheepe wandring out of your right way. If this be your sheepcote, whether go you backward? What meane ye? Why suffer ye such an excelle^t benefit to be wilfully lost for not taking so little paine? If labour and trauaile bee requisite hereunto, surely from henceforth I desire, that all the labours and paines of the worlde were laid vpon me.A godly desire. Let all sorrowes powre downe vpon me as thicke as haile. Let diseases vexe me. Let tribulations afflict me. Let one persecute mee, an other disquiet me. Let all creatures in the world conspire against me. Let me bee made a laughing
 stocke to all men, and a refuse to the world: yea let my life bee wholly consumed with griefes, and my yeares with weeping, and lamentation, so that after this life I may rest my selfe in the day of tribulation, and bee thought meete to haue a place among that blessed people, which are adorned and beautified with such inestimable glorie in the kingdome of heauen.
Now then O thou foolish louer of this miserable world, goe thy way, seek as long as thou wilt for honours, and promotions, build suptuous houses, and palaces: purchase lands and possessions, enlarge thy territories, and dominions: yea command if thou wilt whole Empires, and worldes: yet shalt thou neuer be so great as the least of al the seruants of Almighty God, who shall receaue that treasure, which this world cannot giue, and shall enioy that felicity, which shall endure for euermore. Thou with thy pompe, and riches, shalt keepe companie with the rich glutton, buried in the deepe pit of hell: but the deuout spirituall man, shalbe carried vp by the holy angels with poore Lazarus into Abrahams bosome.Luke. 16


OF THE BENEFITS WHICH our Lorde promiseth to giue in this present life to such as liue a iust and Godly life.
 CHAPTR. III.
PERADVENTVRE thou wilt now say that all these thinges before rehearsed bee rewardes and punishmentes, that are promised onelie for the life to come: and that thou desirest to see some thing in this present life, because our mindes are wont to bee much mooued with the sight of thinges present. Well to satisfie thee herein, wee will likewise giue thee heere thy hands full euen of this thou doest to earnestlie desire. For although our Lorde doe reserue the best wine, and the moste delicate dishes vntill the end of the banket: yet he suffereth not his friendes to be vtterly destitute of meate and drinke in this tedious voiage. For he knoweth verie well, that they could not otherwise holde out in their iournie. And therefore when hee said vnto Abraham: feare not Abraham,Gen. 15. for I am thy defendor, and thy rewarde shall bee exceeding great: by these wordes he promised two thinges, the one for the time present, that was to bee his sauegard and defence in all such thinges as might happen in this life: and the other for the time to come, and that is, the reward of glory, which is reserued for the next life. But how great the first promise is, and
 how many kindes of benifites and fauours are therin included, no man is able to vnderstand, but only he, that hath with great diligence read the holy scriptures, wheerin no one thing is more often repeated, and set forth, than the greatnes of the fauours, benefits, and priuiledges, which almighty Ged promiseth vnto his friends in this life.Prouerb. 3. Harken what Salomon saith in his prouerbes, as touching this matter. Blessed is that man that findeth wisedome: for it is better to haue it, than all the treasures of siluer and gold, be they neuer so excellent and precious, and it is more worth, tha^ all the riches of ^he world, and whatsoeuer mans hart is able ^o desire is not co^parable vnto it: the le^gth of daies are at her right hand, and riches and glory at her left: her waies bee pleasant, and ^ll her passages are quiet: she is the tree of ^fe to all those that haue obtained her, and ^e that shall haue her in continuall posses^ion shalbe blessed. Keep therefore O my ^on the laws of almighty God, and his coun^els: for they shalbe as life to thy soule, and ^weetnes to thy tast. Then shalt thou walke ^afely in thy waies, and thy feete shall not ^nde any stombling blockes. If thou sleepe ^ou shalt haue no cause to feare, and if thou ^ke thy rest, thy sleepe shalbe quiet.

Now this is (good Christian brother) the sweetnes and quietnes of the waie of the godly. But the waies of the wicked as far different, as the Holy Scriptures doe declare vnto vs. The pathes and waies of the wicked (saith Ecclesiasticus) are ful of bra^bles,Ecclesi. 21 Ecclesi. 40 and at the end of their iournie are prepared for them hell, darkenesse and paine. Dost thou thinke it then a good exchange to forsake the way of Almighty God for the way of the world: sith there is so great difference betweene the one and other, not only in the end of the way, but also in all the steps of the same? What madnesse can be greater, then to choose rather with one torment to gaine an other torment, than with one rest to gaine an other reste. And that thou maiest more clearely perceaue the excellencie of this rest, and what a number of benefites are presently incident thereunto, I beseech thee harken attentiuely what euen Almighty God himselfe our Lord hath promised by his Prophet Esay to the obseruers of his law, in (...) manner with these wordes, as diuers interpreters doe expounde them.Esaie. 58. When tho^ shalt doe (saith he) such and such thinges which I haue commaunded thee to doe there shall forthwith appeare vnto the^
 the dawning of the cleare day, that is the sonne of iustice,) which shall driue awaie all the darkenes of thy errours, and miseries, and then shalt thou beginne to inioy true and perfect saluation, and the iustice of thy good workes shall shine as it were a candle before thee, and the glorie of our Lorde shall compasse thee on euery side. Then shalt thou call vpon the name of our Lord, and he will heare thee. Thou shalt call, and he will say, behold I am here present, and readie to graunt thee whatsoeuer thou shalt haue need of. Then in the middest of the darkenes, tribulations, and vexations of this life, the light of Gods fauour shall shine vpon thee, which shall comfort thee, and thy darkenes shall be as the noone day, (for our Lord will so ordaine that the very calamities, and withall euen the very falles of thy sins past, shall be an occasion vnto thee of greater felicitie.) And he will giue thee alwaies true peace and quietnes in thy soule, and in the time of famine and dearth, he will send thee plenty, and abundance, and thy bones shall bee deliuered from death, and from the euerlasting fires, and thou shalt be like a garden of pleasure, and like a fountaine of water, that neuer ceaseth running. Of thee will hee make a
 buildding (which lay for many yeres before desolate) in such sort that it shall stand stedfastly, and endure with such foundations from generatio^ to generation. And if thou shalt take paines in sanctifying my feasts, not mispending them in lewd exercises, nor yet in fulfilling thine own will against mine, but shalt obserue with all diligence, and care, all such thinges as I haue commanded thee this day, the^ shalt thou take delight in our Lord, (whose delightes excell all the delightes of the world,) and I will lift thee vp aboue the height of the earth, that is, vnto a moste happie state of life, whereunto all the treasures of fortune or of humane nature can not reach. Finally, I will giue thee afterwards plentie and abundance of that precious inheritance, which I haue promised vnto Iacob thy Father, which is the felicitie of glorie, for the mouth of our Lord hath spoke^ it. All these in a manner be the words of almighty God by the Prophet Esaie.
Now these are the benefites which Almighty God hath promised to his serua^ts. And albeit some of them bee for the time to come, yet are some of them to bee presentlie receaued in this life.The great rewarde that vertuous persons doe receaue euen in this present life. As that newe light and shining from heauen: that satietie
 and aboundance of all good thinges: that assured confidence and trust in A^mightie God: that diuine assistance in all our prayers and petitions made vnto him: that peace and tranquility of conscience: that protection and prouidence of almightie God: that garden of delightes (which is the verdure and beauty of grace:) that fountaine which neuer wanteth water, (which is the prouision and sufficiency of all things:) those heaue^ly delights that do excell al the delights of the world, and that eleuatio^ of spirit wherunto no strength or power of nature is able to aspire. All these are the gratious gifts, and fauours which almighty God hath promised to his seruants in this present life. They all are the works of his mercy, effects of his grace, testimonies of his loue, and blessinges which he of his fatherly prouidence sheweth towards the^. Vpon euery one of which there is so much to be said, that the breuitie of this volume will not suffer mee to treat particularlie of euerie point: But to be short, all these benefites doe the godlie enioy, both in this present life, and in the life to come. And of all these are the vngodlie depriued, both in the one life, and in the other. Whereby thou maiest easelie perceaue, what difference there is betweene
 the one sort and the other, seeing the one is so riche, and the other so poore and needie. For if thou ponder well all these wordes before declared, and doe likewise consider the state and condition both of the good, and of the wicked: thou shalt finde,The difference betweene the state of the good and the wicked. that the one sort are in the fauour of Almighty God, and the other in his displeasure. The one be his friends, and the other his enemies: the one be in light, and the other in darkenes. The one doe inioy the company of angels, and the other the filthie pleasures and delightes of swine. The one are truely free, and Lords ouer themselues, and the other are become bondslaues vnto Sathan, and vnto their owne lustes, and appetites. The one are ioyfull with the witnes of a good conscience, and the other (except they be vtterly blinded) are continually bitten with the worme of conscience euermore gnawing on them. The one in tribulations stand stedfastlie in their proper place, and the other like light chaffe are carried vp and downe with euery blast of winde. The one stand secure and firme with the anker of hope, and the other are vnstable, and euermore yeelding vnto the assaultes of fortune. The praiers of the one are acceptable, and liking vnto
 God, and the praiers of the other are abhorred, and accursed.Psal. 115. The death of the one is quiet, peaceable, and precious in the sight of God, and the death of the other is vnquiet, painefull, and troubled with a thousand frightes, and terrours. To conclude, the one liue like Children vnder the protection and defence of Almighty God, and sleep sweetly vnder the shadow of his pastorall prouidence, and the other being excluded from this kind of prouidence wander abroad as straide sheepe without their sheepheard, and master, lying wide open to all the perils, dangers, and assaults of the world.
Now then (my deare brother) if a vertuous life bee accompanied with all these benefits, tell mee I pray thee of good fellowship, what is the cause that should with draw thee, and perswade thee not to embrace such a precious treasure? What art thou able to alleadge for excuse of thy great negligence. To say that this is not true, it cannot be admitted, for so much as thou seest that all is grounded vppon the word of God,Esaie. 64. and the testimonies of his holy Scriptures. And to say that these are but small benefites thou canst not, for somuch as they doe exceed (as we haue before
 declared) all that mans hart can desire.1. Cor. 2. To say that thou art an enemie vnto thy selfe, and that thou doest not desire these benefits, this cannot be said, considering that man is euen naturally a friend to himselfe, and the will of man hath euer an e^e to his owne benefit, which is the verie obiect or mark that his desire shooteth at. To say that thou haste no vnderstanding or taste of these benefits, it will not serue to discharge thine offence, forsomuch as thou haste the faith and beleefe thereof, though thou haste not the taste. For the tast is lost through sinne, but not the faith, and the faith is a witnesse more certaine,Faith is a more certaine witnes than all the witnesses and experiences ^f the world. more secure, and better to bee trusted, than all other experie^ces, and witnesses in the world. Why doest thou not then discredit all other witnesses with this one assured testimonie? Why doest thou not rather giue credit vnto faith, than to thine own opinion, and iudgement? O that thou wouldest make a resolute determination to submit thy selfe into the hands of almightie God, and to put thy whole trust assuredly in him! How soone shouldest thou the^ see all these Prophecies fulfilled in thee. Then shouldest thou see the excellency of these Diuine treasures: the^ shouldest thou see how stark
 blind the louers of this world are, that seek not after this high treasure. To bee short, then shouldest thou see vppon what good grou^d our Sauiour inuiteth vs to this kind of life, saying: Come vnto me al ye that traueile and are loaden, and I will refresh you.Mat. 11. Take my yoake vpon you, and you shall finde reste for your soules: for my yoke is sweete, and my burden is light. Almightie God is no deceauer, nor false promiser, neyther yet is hee a great boaster of such thinges as hee promiseth. Why doest thou then shrinke backe? why doest thou refuse peace, and quietnes? why doest thou despise the gentle offers and sweet callings of thy pastour? How darest thou despise and banish away vertue from thee, which hath such prerogatiues and priuiledges as these bee, and with all confirmed and signed euen with the hand of Almighty God.2. Para. 9. The Queene of Saba hard farre lesse thinges then these of Salomon, and yet shee trauailed from the vttermost partes of the world to trie the truth of those thinges, which she had heard. And why doest not thou then hearing such notable, yea and so certaine news of vertue, adue^ture to take a litle paines to try the truth and sequele therof. O my deare Christian brother, put thy trust in God, and in his word, and commit
 thy selfe boldly without all feare into his armes, and vnloose from thy handes those trifling knots, that haue hitherto deceaued thee, and thou shalt finde that the merites of vertue doe farre excell her fame, and that all which is spoken in praise of her is nothing, in comparison of that which shee is in deede.


THAT A MAN OVGHT not to deferre his Repentance and Conuersion vnto God from day to day, considering hee hath so many debtes to discharge, by reason of the offences committed in his sinfull life past. CHAPTR. IIII.
NOVV then if on the one side there be so many and so great respectes that doe binde vs to change our sinfull life,A sinner ^ught not to ^elay his ^onuersion ^nto God. and on the other side, we haue not any sufficient excuse why wee should not make this exchaunge: I beseech thee tell mee, how long time wilt thou tarrie vntill thou fullie resolue to doe it. Turne thine eyes (O my Christian brother) and looke backe a little vpon thy life past, and consider that at this present of what age soeuer thou be,
 it is high time, or rather the time is well neere past to begin to discharge some part of thine olde debtes. Consider that thou which art a Christian, regenerated in the water of Holy Baptisme, which doest acknowledge Almighty God for thy father, and the Catholicke Church for thy mother, whome shee hath nourished with the milke of the Ghospell: to wit, with the doctrine of the Apostles, and Euangelistes, and that which is more, euen with the verie bread of Angels, (which is the most blessed Sacrament of the Aultar) consider I say, that all this notwithstanding thou hast liued euen as loosely, and dissolutely, as if thou haddest bin a meere Infidel, that had neuer any knowledge of Almighty God. And if thou denie this, then tell mee what kinde of sinne is there that thou haste not committed? what tree is there forbidden, that thou haste not beholden with thine eies? what greene medow is there in which thou hast not (at the least with desire) feasted thy leacherous lust? What thing hath beene set before thine eyes, that thou hast not wantonly desired? What appetite hast thou left vnexecuted, notwithstanding that thou diddest beleeue in Almightie God, and that thou were a Christian? what
 wouldest thou haue done more, if thou haddest not had any faith at all? If thou haddest not looked for any other life? If thou haddest not feared the dreadfull daie of iudgement? What hath all thy former life bin, but a web of sins, a sinke of vices, a way full of brambles, and thornes, and a froward disobedience of Almightie God? With whom hast thou hitherto liued, but onely with thine appetite, with thy flesh, with thy pride, and with the goods and riches of this transitory world? These haue bin thy gods, these haue bin thy Idols, whome thou haste serued, and whose lawes thou haste diligentlie obeyed. Make thine account with Almighty God, with his lawes and with his obedience, and peraduenture thou shalt finde, that thou haste esteemed him no more than if hee had bin a God of straw. For it is certaine, that there be many Christians, which beleeuing that there is a God, are induced to sinne with such facilitie, as though they beleeued that there were no God at all, and doe offend no whit lesse though they beleeue that there is a God, than they would doe if they beleeued that there were none at all. What greater iniurie, what greater despite can there be done, than thus to contemne his
 diuine Maiestie? Finally, thou beleeuing all such thinges as Christes Catholicke Church doth beleeue, hast notwithstanding so led thy life, as if thou were perswaded that the beleefe of the christians were the greatest fables or lies in the world.
And if the multitude of thy sinnes past, and the facilitie that thou hast vsed in committing them doe not make thee afraide, why doest thou not feare at the least the Maiestie and Omnipotencie of him, against whome thou haste sinned? Lift vp thine eyes, and consider the infinite grea^nes and omnipotencie of that Lord, whome the powers of the heauens doe adore, before whose Maiestie the whole compasse of the wide world lieth prostrate, in whose presence all thinges created are no more than chaffe carried away with the winde. Consider also with thy selfe, how vnseemely it is, that such a vile worme as thou art, shuld haue audacitie so many times to offend and prouoke the wrath of so great a Maiestie.
Consider the wonderfull and most terrible seueritie of his iustice,The terrible seuere iustice of A^mightie God agains sinners. and what horrible punishments he hath vsed from time to time in the world against sinne, and that not only vpon particular persons, but also vpon Cities, Nations, Kingdomes, and Prouinces:
 yea, vpon the vniuersall world, and not onely in earth, but also in heauen, and not only vpon strangers and sinners, but euen vpon his owne most innocent sonne, our sweet Sauiour Iesus Christ, when hee tooke vppon him to satisfie for the debt which they owed. And if this seueritie was vsed vpon greene and innocent wood,Luke. 23. verse. 13. and that for the sinnes of others, what then will he doe vpon drie and withered wood, and against those that are loaden with their own sins. Now what thing can be thought more vnreasonable, than that such a vile wretched weake dwarfe as thou art, should be so sawcie and malapert, as to mocke with so mighty a Lord, whose hand is so heauie, that in case he shuld strike but one stroke vppon thee, hee would at one blowe driue thee downe headlong into the deepe bottomlesse pit of hell without all remedie.
Consider likewise the great patience of this our mercifull Lord,The great patience of Almighty God. who hath expected thy repentance so long, euen from the time that thou diddest first offend him, and thinke that if after so long patience and tarying for thee, thou shalt still continue thy lewd and sinfull life, abusing thus his mercy, and prouoking him to further indignation, and wrath he will then bend his bow,
 and shake his sword,Psal. 7. and raine downe vppon thee euen sharpe arrowes of euerlasting death.
Consider also the profoundnesse of his deepe iudgementes,The profoundnesse of the deep iudgments of almightie God. whereof wee read and see dayly so great wonders. Wee see how king Salomon himselfe, after his so great wisedome, and after those three thousand parables, and most profound misteries, vttered by him in his booke called Cantica canticorum, was forsaken of Almighty God,3. Reg. 11. and suffered to fall downe, and adore Idols.Act. 8. We see how one of those seauen first Deacons of the Primitiue Church, which were full of the holy Ghost,Apoc. 2. became not only an Heriticke, but also an Arch-heriticke, and a father of Heresies.Many daylie fall out of the Catholicke Church, and from vertuous life, into scisme and heresie, and into a dissolute wicked life. Wee see dayly manie starres fall downe from heauen to the earth, with miserable falles, and to wallow themselues in the durte, and to eate the meat of swine, which sate before at Gods owne table, and were fed with the very bread of angels. If then the iust and righteous for some secret pride, or negligence, or els for some ingratitude of theirs be thus iustly forsaken of almighty God, after they haue bestowed so many yeares in his seruice, what maiest thou looke for that hast done in a manner nothing els all
 thy life time, but onelie heaped sins, vpon sins, and haste thereby offended almightie God most grieuouslie.
Now if thou haste liued after this sorte, were it not reason that thou shouldest now at the length giue ouer, and cease heaping sinne vpon sin, and debt vpon debt, and begin to pacifie the wrath of almighty God, and to disburden thy sinfull soule? Were it not meet that that time which thou hast hitherto giuen to the world, to thy fleshe, and to the diuell should suffice, and that thou shouldest bestow some little time of that which remaineth to serue him, who hath giuen thee all that thou haste? Were it not a point of wisedome after so long time, and so many great iniuries, to feare the most terrible iustice of almighty God, who the more paciently hee suffereth sinners, the more doth he afterwardes punish them with great seueritie and iustice? were it not meet for thee to feare thy long continuance so many yeares in sin, and in the displeasure of Almightie GOD, procuring thereby against thee such a mightie aduersarie as he is, and prouoking him of a mercifull louing father, to become thy seuere terrible Iudge, and enemie? Were it not meete to feare, least that the force
 of euill custome may in continuance of time bee turned into nature, and that thy long vicious vsuall manner of committing of sinne, may make of a vice a necessitie, or little lesse? Why art thou not afraid least by little and little thou maist cast thy selfe downe headlong into the deepe pitte of a reprobate sence,Rom. 1. whereinto after that a ma^ is once fallen, he neuer maketh account of any sinne, be it neuer so great.
The Patriark Iacob said to Laban his Father in law:Gen. 30. these fourteene yeares haue I serued thee, and looked to thine affaires. Now it is time, that I should looke to mine own, and begin to attend vnto the affaires of mine own houshold. Wherefore if thou haste likewise bestowed so many yeares in the seruice of this worlde, and of this fraile transitorie life, were it not good reason, that thou shouldest now beginne to make some prouisio^ for the saluatio^ of thy soule, and for the euerlasting life to come? There is no thing more short, nor more transitorie, than the life of man, and therefore prouiding so carefullie as thou doest for all such thinges as bee necessarie for this life, which is so short, why doest thou not prouide likewise so^ewhat for that life that is to come, which shall endure for euer and euer,



THE CONCLVSION OF ALL THE PREMISES. CHAPTER. V.
IF NOW all this be so, I beseech the then (O my deare Christian brother) euen for the bitter passion of our sweet Sauiour Christ to remember thy selfe, and to consider that thou art a Christian, and that thou beleeuest assuredly for a most vndoubted truth whatsoeuer thy faith instructeth thee. This faith telleth thee, that thou hast a iudge aboue, that seeth all the steps and motions of thy life:Mat. 12. verse. 36. And that certainelie there shall a day come, when hee will require an account of thee, euen of euerie idle word. This faith teacheth thee, that a man is not altogether at an end when hee dieth, but that after this temporall life, there remaineth an other euerlasting life, and that the soules die not with the bodies, but that whiles the body remaineth in the graue vntill the general daie of iudgment, the soule shall enter into another new cou^trie, and into a new world, where it shall haue such habitation, and companie as the faith and workes were, which it had in this life. This faith telleth thee also, that both
 the reward of vertue, and the punishment of vice, is a thing so wonderfull, that although the whole world wer full of books, and all creatures were writers, yet should they all be wearied, and the world come to an end, before they should end their description, and make a perfect declaration what is comprehended in ech one of these pointes. This faith informeth thee also, that the debtes and duties which wee owe vnto almighty God are so great, that albeit a man had so many liues as there bee sandes in the sea, yet would they not suffice, if they were all employed in his seruice. And this faith likewise telleth thee, that vertue is such an excellent treasure, that all the treasures of the world, and that mans heart can desire, are not to bee compared vnto it.
Wherefore if there bee so many and so great respects that doe inuite vs vnto vertue, how commeth it to passe that there be so few louers and followers of the same? If men be mooued with gaine, and commoditie, what greater commoditie can there bee, then life euerlasting? If with feare of punishment, what punishment can be greter, than euerlasting horrible torments in hell fire, vvorld vvithout ende? If vvith
 bondes of debts, and benefits, what debtes are greater, than these, which we owe vnto almightie God, aswell for that he is which he is, as also for that which we haue receaued of him? If the feare of perils doe moue vs, what greater perrill can there bee than death, the houre thereof beeing so vncertaine, and the account so strait? If thou be mooued with peace, libertie, quietnesse of minde, and with a pleasant life, (which are things that all the world desireth) it is certaine, that all these are found much better in the life that is gouerned by vertue and reason, than in that life, that is ruled by the affections, and passions of the minde: forsomuch as man is a reasonable creature, and no beast Howbeit in case thou account all this as not sufficient to mooue thee thereunto, yet shall it not suffice thee to consider that Almightie God so abased himselfe for thy sake, that hee descended from heauen vnto the earth, and became man? And whereas he created the world in sixe daies, he bestowed thirtie and three yeares about thy Redemption, yea and was also content for the same to loose his life. Almightie God died that sin should die, and yet for all this doe we endeuour that sinne might liue in our hearts, notwithstanding
 that Almightie God purposed to take away the life of sinne with his owne death? What shal I say more? Assuredly of reasons we haue shewed enough, and enough, if this matter were to be discussed by reason: For I say this, not onely in beholding almightie God himselfe vpon the Crosse, but whithersoeuer we turne our eyes, wee shall finde that euery thing crieth out vnto vs, and calleth vppon vs to receaue this so excellent a benefit: For there is not a thing created in the world, (if we doe well consider it,) but doth inuite vs to the loue and seruice of our common Lord and Sauiour. Insomuch that looke how manie creatures there bee in the world, so manie preachers there are, so many books, so many voices, and so many reasons, which doe call vs vnto almighty God. And how is it possible then that so manie callinges as these are, so many promises, and threatninges, should not suffice to bring vs vnto him? What might Almightie God haue done more than hee hath done, or promised more than he hath promised, or threatned more than he hath threatned, to draw vs vnto him, and to pluck vs away from sin, and yet al this notwitstanding, how co^meth it to passe that there is so great (I will not
 say arrogancie but) bewitching of men, that doe beleeue these thinges to bee certainely true, and yet be not afraide to continue ^l the daies of their life in deadly sin?Marke these words. yea to goe to bed in deadly sin, and to rise vp againe in deadly sinne, and to imbrew themselues in euery kinde of sinne? And this is done in such sort, so without feare, so without scruple of minde, so without breaking of one houres sleepe, and without refraining from any one delicate morsell of meat for the same, as if all that they beleeued were dreames, and old wiues tales, and as if all that the Holy Euangelistes haue written were starke lies. Tell me now thou desperate traitour, tell me I say, thou firebrand prepared to burne in those euerlasting and reuenging horrible fires of hell, what wouldest thou haue done more than thou haste done, in case thou haddest bin perswaded that all were meere lyes which thou haste beleeued? For although I see well, that for feare of executio^ of the Princes lawes, thou haste somewhat bridled thine appetites, yet can I not perceiue that for any feare of Almighty God thou haste refrained thy will in any one thing: neyther from carnall pleasures, nor from taking reuenge of thine enemies, nor from
 backbiting and slaundering thy neighbours, nor yet from fulfilling thy inordinate lusts and desire, in case thine abillity serued therunto. Tell mee thou blind grosse bussard, and franticke fellow, what saith thy worme of conscience vnto thee, whiles thou art in such afond securitie, and confidence, continuing in such a dissolute wicked life, as thou dost? Where is now become the vnderstanding, iudgement, and reason, which thou hast^ of a man? Why art thou not afraide of so horrible, so certaine, and so assured perils, and dangers? If there were a dish of meat set before thee, and some man (albeit he were a lier) should say vnto thee that there were poison in that dish, tel me, durst thou once aduenture to stretch out thy hand to take a tast thereof, though the meat were neuer so sauerie, and delicate, and hee neuer so great a lyer that should beare thee thus in hand? If then the Prophets, if the Apostles, if the Euangelistes, yea, if Almightie God himselfe doe crie out vnto thee and say. Take heed thou miserable man,4. Reg. 4. for death is in that kinde of meat, and death lieth lurking in that gluttonous morsell, which the diuell hath set before thee, how darest thou reach for euerlasting death with thine owne handes,


 and drinke thine owne damnation. To what vse puttest thou in this meane while thy wits, thy iudgement, and the discourse and reason, which thou haste of a man? where is their light? where is their force? sith that none of them doe bridle thee any whit from thy common vsuall vices. O thou wretched and mad carelesse caitife, bewitched by the diuel, adiudged to euerlasting darkenes, both inward and outward, and so doest goe from one darkenes to the other! Thou art blinde to see thine owne miserie, insensible to vnderstand their perdition, and harder then any Adamant to feele the ha^mer of Gods word! O a thousand times most miserable thou art, worthy to be lame^ted with none other teares, than with those wherewith thy damnation was lamented, when it was saide: O that thou knewest this day the peace,Luke. 19. quietnes, and treasures, which almighty God offereth vnto thee, that doe now lie hidden with thine eyes! O miserable is the day of thy natiuitie, and much more miserable is the daie of thy death: for somuch as that shall be the beginning of thine euerlasting damnation!Marke. 14. O how much better had it bin for thee neuer to haue bin borne, if thou shalt be damned in the most horrible torments
 of hell for euer, and euer?The wicked Christians shalbe punished in hell more grieu ouslie for their wicked liues than the infidels. Rom. 1. How much better had it bin for thee neuer to haue bin baptised, nor yet to haue receiued the Catholicke faith, if through the abusing therof by thy wicked life, thy damnation shalbee thereby the greater. For if the light of reason only sufficeth to make the heathen Philosophers inexcusable, because they knowing God in some degree did not glorifie him, nor serue him (as the Apostle saith:) how much lesse shall he be excused, that hath receaued the light of faith, and the water of baptisme, and doth euery yeare open his mouth to receaue euen almighty GOD himselfe in the most blessed Sacrament of the Aultar, and euery day heareth his doctrine in the Catholicke Church, if he do nothing more, tha^ those Pagan Philosophers haue done. Now what other thing may we inferre of the premisses, but briefly to conclude, that there is none other vnderstanding, none other wisdome, none other counsell in the world, but that setting aside all the impedimentes and combersome waies of this life, wee follow that only true and certaine way, whereby true peace and euerlasting life is obtained? hereunto are we called by reason, by wisedome, by law, by heauen, by earth, by hell,
 and by the life, death, iustice, and mercy of Almighty God Hereunto are we also inuited verie notablie by the Holie Ghost, speaking by the mouth of Ecclesiasticus in this wise.Ecclesi. 6. My sonne harken to instruction euen from the first yeares of thy youth, and in thy latter daies thou shalt inioy the sweet fruit of wisedome. Approach vnto it as one that ploweth, and soweth, and with patience expect the fruitful encrease which it shall yeelde vnto thee. The paines that thou shalt take shall be but little, and the benefits that thou shalt quicklie enioy shal be great. My sonne hearken to my words, and neglect not this my counsell which I shall giue thee. Put thy feet willingly into her fetters, and thy necke into her chaines Bow downe thy shoulders, and carrie her vpon thee, and bee not displeased with her bondes. Approach neare vnto her with all thy hart, and follow her waies wirh all thy strength. Seeke for her with all diligence, and she will discouer her selfe vnto thee. And after that thou hast found her, neuer forsake her. For by her shalt thou find rest in thy latter daies, and that which before seemed painefull, will afterwardes become pleasant vnto thee, and her fetters shall be a defence of thy strength, and foundation
 of vertue, and her chaine shall bee a roabe of glorie. For in her is the beauty of life, and her bonds are the bonds of health. Hitherto be the wordes of Ecclesiasticus: whereby thou maist in some degree vnderstand, how great the beautie, the delightes, the libertie, and riches of true wisedome are, which is vertue it selfe, and the knowledge of almightie God, whereof we doe intreat.
But if all this be not sufficient to mollifie thy stony hart, lift vp thine eyes, and fixe thy mind not vpo^ the waters of the world, which vanish away, but behold that Lord, who is vpon the Crosse dying, and satisfiing for thy sinnes. There standeth hee in that forme which thou seest, with his feete nailed fast looking for thee, with his arme spread abroad to receaue thee, and with his head bowing downe, to giue thee, as to an other prodigall sonne new kisses of peace, and attonement. From thence hee calleth thee (if thou couldest heare him) with so many callings, and cries, as there be wounds in his whole body. Harken therefore vnto these voices (O my deare Christian Brother,) and consider this well with thy selfe, that if his praier bee not heard that harkeneth not vnto the cryes of the poore, how much lesse shall he bee heard that maketh
 himselfe deafe to such cries as these are? wherefore if thou bee now determined to harken vnto these cryes, and doest fullie resolue with thy selfe to change thy sinfull life, and to doe true pennance indeede for the same, it shall be declared vnto thee in the treatise following, after what sort it ought to be done.

THE END OF THE FIRST TREATISE.



THE SECOND TREATISE OF THE SACRAMENT OF PENNANCE.

Of the cause and necessitie of the Sacrament of Pennance.
AL the children of Adam are borne (as the Apostle affirmeth) the children of wrath,Ephe. 2. verse. 3. through the sinne of our first parents, Adam, and Eue: and therefore all mankind descending from them were iustly excluded from entring into the kingdome of heauen,None can enter into the kingdome of heaven, vnlesse they be regenerate by che Sacrament of Baptisme. Iohn. 3.5 The Sacrament of baptisme is the first beginning of Christianity, and the first gate into the kingdome of heauen.Note the solemne promise and couenant wee made in our baptisme with Almighty god. Mat. 19. verse. 17. Mat. 11.30 2. Cor. 12.9 Colo. 4.13. 1. Ioh. 5.3.Verie few Christians doe keepe their couenant made with Almighty God in their baptisme, but doe breake his Comma^dements. whereinto none of them can now enter, but such onely, as eyther in act, or at least wise in will, and desire, are regenerate, and borne new againe, by meanes of the Sacrament of Bapti me. According as our Sauiour Christ himselfe very plainely affirmeth in the Ghospell of S. Iohn, ^aying: Vnles a man be borne a new of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdome of God.
This Sacrament of Baptisme is (as it were) the first beginninge of christianitie, the first enterance into the catholique churche of Christ, and vnto all other sacraments, and it is the first gate vnto the kingdome of heauen and by the same sacament wee receaue such singular grace, as that therby we are clensed from all manner of sinne, and paine dewe vnto the same, deliuered from the bo^dage and power
 of the diuel, restored vnto innocencie, incorporated into Christ as his members, reco^ciled into the grace and fauoure of almightie God, and made his adoptiue sonnes, and coheires, and inheritors with our Sauioure Iesus Christ of the kingdome of heauen. And this inheritance of euerlasting glorie with our Sauiour Iesus Christ we be assured to enioye, in case we doe faithfullie keepe our solemne promise made and couenaunted in our baptisme with almightie God: which couenante and promise was not onlie to beleue all the articles of the Christian faith, but also to renounce the diuel and al his workes, the worlde, and all his pompes, the flesh, and all her inordinate lustes, and concupiscences, and to keepe the commaundements of almightie. God which euerie christian may be able to keepe, beinge assisted with the force and strength of his grace, and with the vertues and gifts of the holie ghost, wherewith our soule is wonderfullie illuminated, ^anctified, adorned, armed, and strengthened, in the ^acrament of baptisme.
But (alas) liuinge as we do in the tempestuous sea of this mi erable fraile transitorie life, where we be continuallie assaulted and te^pted with our fierce enemies, the diuel, the worlde, and the fleshe, verie few of vs doe after our baptisme saile safelie with the ship of innocencie, and iustice, wherewith wee promised to serue almightie God all the dayes of our life: but doe ^ometimes turne our face awaie from his eruice, and be negligente to fight manfullie vnder his standarde againste the deuel, the sworne enemie of almightie God, and of almankind, and doe play the parte of fal^e traitors, and rebels, and runne vnto our enimies side, by breakinge the commandements of almightie God, and fulfilling the wicked workes of the deuel which is done by
 euerie deadlie sinne whereby we become againe the bondslaues of the deuel, and traiterous enemies vnto almightie God, and consequentlie doe therby deserue to be depriued for euer of his grace, and fauour, and of all glorie, and felicitie, which he hath prepared for his obedie^t faithfull children* and also to be damned euerlastinglie in the most horrible pitte of hell fier, which he hath prepared for the deuel, and al his rebellious adherents.
Now notwithstandinge this so heynous ingratitude of his rebellious seruants, almightie God (who is the father of mercies, and the God of all consolation,) hath not quite shutte vp the founteins of his graces against them, nor vtterlie debarred them of the multitude of his mercies,Apoc. 3.20. verse. 20. but is euer crienge and calling vnto them in this life to remember their solemne promise, and couena^t, made by them vnto him in their baptisme, which they haue so wickedlie broken, and to consider their present damnable state, and to returne with a penitent harte vnto him. And he is alwais readie to offer them his helpinge hande,Psal. 94. verse. 8. Rom. 10.21 Heb. 4.7. 1. Cor. 2.16 Mat. 23.3. and to plucke them owt of the great raging waues of deadlie sinne, (wherewith they be in so great danger of iminente drowninge in hell fire,) in case the verie sinners them selues do not harden their hartes, when they heare his voice, but will giue eare thereunto, and with a contrite and humble hart returne vnto him againe, and verie thankefullie accept his graces which he so louinglie offerth vnto them.The Sacrament of Pe^nance is a remedie fo^ sinners after baptisme.
This remedie for sinners after bapti^me our Sauiour Christ hath prouided by institutinge the sacrament of pennance, which S. Ierome and other learned deuines doe verie aptlie tearme a second parte after shippewracke: whereby all sinners may with the help and assistance of the grace of God
 saue them selues from drowning euerlastingly in the most horrible pit of hel fire, and be reconciled againe to the fauour of almighty God.
Who so co^mitteth any deadlie sin after Baptisme, cannot attaine to saluation without the Sacrament of penna^ce. The necessitie of the sacrament of pennunce to a Christian, presupposeth that he hath fallen into deadly sin after Baptisme. Iohn. 3.5. Luke. 13.3. Mat. 4.17. Mar. 1.15.And here it is diligently to be noted, that like as none can attaine vnto saluation without the Sacrament of baptisme, (either in act, or at least wise hauing a will, and desire therof, when he wanteth meanes, and opportunitie to receaue it:) euen so no christian committing any deadlie sinne after baptisme can attaine vnto saluation without the sacrament of pennance, (either in act, or at least wise hauing a will and desire vnto it, when he ca^not fullie performe all the partes of it.) And so it appereth in the holie scriptures, that our Sauiour Christ hath comaunded these two sacraments (of baptisme and pennance,) with like bond of necessitie, and with like threatning and penaltie of euerlasting damnation. For as he said in S. Iohn of the sacrame^t of baptisme. vnlesse a man be borne againe of water, and and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdome of God euen so likewise hath he said in the ghospell of S. Luke of the sacrament of pennance, which he purposed afterwards to institute: vnlesse ye haue pe^nance yee shall all likewise perish. And also in the ghospell of Saint Mathew he saith: doe pennace, for the kingdome of heauen is at hand. And moreouer it appereth in the ghospell of Saint Marke, that he beganne his preaching vnto the people with requiring them to be penitent for their sinnes saing, be penitent, and beleue the gospell: wherby our Sauiour Christ propounded vnto them both these two points equallie as a necessarie precept: to wit, to bee penitent for their sins: and to beleue the ghospell.
Now forsomuch as a man sinneth against almightie God in three manner of waies, that is to say, with his hart, with his tongue, and with his wotkes,
 therefore against these three manner of sins our, Lord hath ordeined the sacrament of pennance: which conteineth in it three principall parts: to wit, contrition,1. Contritio^. confession,2. Confessio^. and satisfaction.3. Satisfaction. For considering that sinne is first of all ingendered in the hart,Mat. 15. verse. 20. from whence (as our Sauiour affermeth) do issue euell thoughts, and other wickednes that defile a man, therfore contrition of hart is first required. And because sinne is also committed with the tongue. therfor it is required that the sinne be confessed with the tongue. And because sinne is also fulfilled with worke,Mat 3.8. therfore satisfaction vnto almightie God with painfull works (which Saint Iohn Baptist tearmeth fruits worthy of pennance) is likewise necessarily required of all sinners.


THE PROLOGVF.
AMONG all the euils that are at this day raigning in the world, there is none more to be lamented, than the manner that manie Christians doe vse in making their Confession of their sinnes, at such time as our holy mother the Catholicke Church commandeth the same. For (excepting such vertuous and deuout Catholickes as liue in the feare of God, and haue due regard of the saluation of their soules,) we see what euill preparation many others doe make, when they intende to take the benefit of this Sacrament of Pennance:How confession is abused by manie euill Christians for want of repentaunce and examination of their consciences. and how rashlie without any repentance of their sins, and without any examination of their consciences they come to the Priest to make their confession. Whereupon it ensueth, that so soone as they haue
 made their confession, and communicated, they returne agaime immediatly vnto their accustomed wicked life, and scarcely is the holy Passion weeke of pennance fullie ended, but they returne againe out of hand vnto the same filth, wherein they wallowed themselues before, and so they returne back againe,Prouer. 26. 2. Pet. 2. after the manner of dogges to eate that which they had before vomited vp. This is assuredly a great contempt of almighty God, of his Catholicke Church, and of his Priestes and Sacraments, and it seemeth that they vse it as an ordinary custome to goe once euery yeare at Easter to dallie, and mocke with almighty God, for they desire him at that time of pardon for all such sinnes and offences, as they haue before committed against him, and doe protest an amendment of their life, and yet doe they out of hand beginne a fresh to offende him more grieuously than before.
The punishment that these persons do deserue, is euen such as almightie God ordeineth for them, which is the greatest that can be deuised: and that is, to suffer them to mocke on after this sort all the daies of their life, euen vntill the houre of theyr death, and then it hapneth vnto them, as it is wont to those that haue neuer done true pennance vntil that time, the end of whom (to speake ordinarily) shall be as the Apostle saith, according to their workes,2. Cor. 11. for which they neuer did true Pennance, but alwaies false and counterfeit Pennance. As
 our Lord himselfe lamenteth by the Prophet Ieremie, sayrng:Note the end of such as bee not truelie repentant for their sinnes. Ieremie. 3. verse. 10. They turned not vnto mee with all their harts, but with lying: and here he calleth lying that false and fained Pennance, that such persons doe counterfeit, which seemeth in apparance to be Pennance, and is not indeed. Wherewith they deceaue not Almightie God, but themselues, in that it seemeth to them that they haue done true Pennance, whereas in truth, all that they haue done is nothing els but fained and counterfeit, and therefore without any fruite.
Now if anie man haue a desire to conuert him selfe earnestlie, and with all his hart vnto almightie God, and to doe true Pennance indeed, we shall here declare vnto him in fewe wordes, what order hee ought to obserue in this behalfe, intending to set before his eyes the most common and general aduices, which the holie Doctors of the Catholicke Church doe giue concerning this matter. The which aduises, although to the learned Diuines they are sufficiently knowne, yet to the vnlearned and simple people (for whose instruction this, booke is ordeined) they are not so well knowne. And therefore it is meet that they should be aduertised of them.The Sacrament of Pe^nance conteineth ^hree partes Contrition, Confession, Satisfactio^ And because this sacrament of pennance containeth three parts, (which be Contrition, Co^fession, and Satisfaction: we wil brieftly declare what is to be done in each of these parts, that the Pennance may bee true and perfect in all respects.




OF THE FIRST PART OF the Sacrament of Pennance, which is Contrition, and of the meanes whereby it is obtained. CHAPTR. I.
HEE THAT desireth vnfainedlie and with all his hart to conuert himselfe vnto Almighty God, he that vnderstandeth the vanitie of this world, and the bounden dutie he oweth vnto the seruice of his Creator,Earnest sorrow for sin is the first gate, wherby to enter againe into the grace and fauour of God. Psal. 5^. verse. 1^. Contrition hath two principall partes. and Redeemer, and is fullie resolued to returne vnto him, and with the Prodigall Sonne to repaire home againe vnto his Fathers house, must vnderstand that the first gate whereby he must enter in, is Contrition. For this is one of the most precious sacrifices that wee are able to offer vnto Almightie GOD, according as the Prophet Dauid saith: A sorrowfmll minde is a Sacrifice vnto God, and a contrite and humble hart thou O Lord wilt not despise!
This Contrition conteineth two principall partes. The one is a Repentance for the sinnes past, and the other is a firme and determinate purpose of amendment in time to come.What Contrition is. The reaso^ hereof is, because Contritio^ (to speake properly) is a detestation
 and abhorring of sinne aboue all things that may be hated, and abhorred, in regard that it offendeth the Maiestie of almighty God. And therefore hee that conceaueth this so earnest detestation and hatred against sinne, doth as well abhorre the sins past, as those that are to come, because his diuine Maiestie is offended both with the one, and with the other:We must be sorrowfull for our sins past: and also constantly determine to eschew them hereafter. S. August. But as concerning the sins past, (sithence they are done, and cannot be recalled,) hee must sorrow and lament, that hee hath committed them. And for such sinnes as may come hereafter, (which are in his own free will and power,) hee must make a full and constant determination with himselfe to eschew, and auoide them. Wherby it appeareth plainly that (as Saint Augustine saith in his book of the medecine of Pennance) it is not sufficient for a man to please God by changing his former sinfull life, and by auoyding in time to come the sinnes past, but it is very needfull also, that he make SATISFACTION for them with the sorrowe of Pennance, with the bewailing of humility, with the Sacrifice of a contrite and humble hart, and with the workes of mercie.
And so according hereu^to, the first thing that a true penitent ought to procure, is to
 haue sorrow and repentance for his sinnes, dooing the same, that the holy Penitent did,Esaie. 38. verse. 15. Note for what cause a ma^ should principallie bee sorrowfull for his sinnes. who said: I will call to minde before thee all the yeares of my life, in the bitternes of my soule. And this sorrow and bitternesse ought not principallie to be, for that by his sinnes he hath deserued hell, and lost heauen, with all other benefits which are lost thereby, (although to bee sorrowfull for this cause bee good also:) but for that by his sinnes hee hath lost almightie God, and hath offended him most grieuouslie. And as almighty god deserueth to be loued and esteemed aboue al things: euen so reason would that we should bee more grieued for the losse of him in the world, and for offending him, than for all other thinges in the world. For the greater the offe^ce is, the greater griefe is required, and the greatest losse ought most of all to bee lamented. True it is, that the mercy of our Lord, and the desire he hath of our saluatio^ is so great, that though the griefe and sorrow bee not fully answerable to the sinne committed if it bee ballanced after this sort, yet the verrue of the Sacrament of Pennance beeing ioyned therewith, (which giueth grace to the receauer, in case there be found none impediment in him to hinder the same,) shall
 suffice to restore him againe to saluation, and this is the cause that moueth the learned Diuines so commonly to say,In .4. Sent. dist. 17. q. 2 The vertue of the Sacrament of the law of grace. that the Sacraments of the law of grace make a ma^ of attrite to become contrite: For like as a candle newly put out, which is as yet smoking, is with a small blast lighted againe, and hauing before lost his light is quickly reuiued, and so of a dead candle commeth to bee a liuely burning candle: euen so the soule which with the vertue of attrition, to wit, with some sorrow and griefe for the sinnes committed) standeth yet as it were smoking, although not enkindled,None but God onely knoweth howe great the attrition should be that may suffice when it is ioyned with the sacrament of pennance, to make a man of attrite co^trite. S. Thom. in 4. Sentent. distin. 17. whe^ the blast and vertue of the Sacrament of Pennance commeth and ioyneth therwith, then beginneth it altogether to take light, and where before it was dead, it reuiueth, and receaueth light againe: but how great this attrition or sorrow of minde for sin ought to bee, that should attaine to this degree, it is not graunted to any mortall man to know: but the knowledge thereof belongeth only to that Lord, from whom nothing can be hidden.
Here it is likewise to bee noted for the comfort of the weake, and scrupulous, that this sorrow and griefe for sin, which is here required, is not so of necessitie, that it bee
 alwaies as other sensible griefes are (which are in the sensible part of our soule,S. Bonauen. in 4. sent. dist. 17. and are afterwards resolued into teares:) for there may be true repentance and sorow of minde without any such outward show, when our will detesteth and abhorreth sin aboue all thinges that may be detested and abhorred. The which earnest detestation of sin is often times conceaued of penitent sinners without weeping, and without this outward manner of sorrow: but how and by what meanes this kinde of repentance and sorrow for sinne ought to bee procured, it shall bee declared hereafter in his proper place.
A penitent must haue a firme determination neuer to offend God by committing anie deadly sin. The loue of God must be the principall cause to mooue vs to forsake sinne.The second part (and very principall also) which is requisite vnto this contrition, is to haue a firme and resolute purpose neuer to offend Almightie God any more in any thing that is a deadly sinne. And this resolution likewise (as I said before of sorrow and griefe) must not be principally intended eyther for heauen, or hell, or else for any other peculiar interest or commoditie of our owne, but for the loue of God. As wee see that the honest wife purposeth fullie in her minde rather to die a thousand deathes, than she will once consent to breake her promise, and faith, which shee
 oweth vnto her husband. And this shee doth, not so much for feare of punishment or for hope of commodity, which she looketh for at his hands, as for the pure loue she beareth vnto him. And yet neuerthelesse it must needs be granted that to feare hell, or to desire heauen, are not to bee reprooued, but are very profitable, and laudable, yea and a gift of God also.
And as a man is bounde to haue a resolute purpose, and intent,The penitent muste intend to forsake his old deadlie sins, otherwise his co^fession and the absolution of the Priest bee nothing auailable vnto him. to eschew all deadly sinnes that are to come, so is it necessarie also, that he seperate himselfe from his present sinnes, and doe forsake them, if they bee deadly sinnes: for otherwise his confession should bee no confesion, but a Sacriledge, and an iniurie vnto the Sacrament, and so consequently both hee that confesseth, and the priest that giueth him absolutio^, shuld be both giltie of sacrilege, and should dishonor the sacrament of Pennance. And a confession made in this wise should not be any remission of his sins past, but a further augmentation and increase of other new sins vnto them. Wherefore hee that wil not make of this medecine a poiso^, nor abuse that to his own damnatio^ which almighty God hath ordained for his help, and remedy, let him indeuor aboue al things
 to sequester and keepe himselfe from all kinde of deadly sinne,The vsurer must also leaue his vsury, and he that hath kept a Harlot must also leaue her, and doe so no more. if he bee entangled therewith.
And therefore hee that beareth anie malice or hatred against his Neighbour, must put away his malicious minde, and be hartilie reconciled vnto him, yea and speake vnto him againe, if hee haue forborne the same, when it may bee feared that by not dooing thereof some notable scandale or offence may ensue therby: which must be well considered by the iudgement of the discreet Ghostly father. As for example, in case that he who did thee an iniury desired pardon of thee in the Court (as we tearme it) of conscience, and thou diddest denie it him: by this deniall thou diddest offende him, and prouoke him to conceaue malice and anger against thee. Likewise hee that withholdeth any other mans goods against the will of the owner, is bound to restore them vnto him againe forth with, and mark well, that I say forthwith: for in case he be able to pay forthwith: hee is bound to pay forthwith vnto him, and it is not sufficie^t to say that he purposeth to restore such goods in time to come,The penitent must make restitution out of hand. or to bequeath them to the true owner in his last testament, in case he be able presently to doe it: but he must
 doe it out of hand, although by such restitution and repaiment, he shall cast himselfe farre behinde hand, and thereby come to necessitie. And this restitution ought to be done out of hand, and without delaie, then especially, when the right owner to whom it is due standeth in such, or like necessitie of it himselfe. And for somuch as touching this bond of restitution or repaiment out of hand much is to bee said, because much craft and deceit is vsed now a daies, by reason of vnwilling and naughtie restorers, therefore who so will haue a secure and quiet conscience, let him aske cou^saile of such godlie and learned men, as are able to direct him safely from such dangerous deceits. He must also vnderstand, that not onlie he that stole or embeseled goods awaie is bound to restitution, but euen he also, that was the occasion thereof, eyther by accompanying, counsayling, consenting, or by receiuing the malefactor as a malefactor into his house, or by bying of anie suspected person, or by receiuing such into his house, or els by not resisting and prohibiting the damage that was done, beeing such a person, as both ought and might haue done it: for all these and euery one of them are bounde to make restitution in solidum,
 that is, for the whole) vnto him to whome the iniurie was done. And in case one of them doe restore the whole, all the rest are then bound to restore againe so much vnto him, as he (deducting his owne part) hath disbursed or them all.
Restitution of fame. Soto de iustitia and iure. lib. 5. quest. 10. Artic. 1. Quod detractio non dicitur respectu veritatis, sed respectu famae. Restitution of honour.I may not publish to others anie secret fault of my neighbour, though it be true: because his fame is therby hurt, vnlesse of charity I discouer it to such as may correct him: or else do it by due order of lawe.And in like manner as there is restitution of goods, so is there also restitution of fame. As if I haue published abroade any grieuous and secret crime or faulte of my neighbour. And so likewise in their restitution of honor and estimation: as if I haue done him any iniurie either by worde, or deed. In the first case I am bou^d to restore to him his good name, and fame, by speaking some good wordes in his commendation, whome I had before disgraced, when any commoditie may thereby ensue vnto him. In the second case it is very necessarie to satisfie and content the person offended, eyther by sending to aske him forgiuenes, or by recompensing the iniurie, or by both, if the case doe so require, according to the iudgment of his ghostly father: so that we haue here three kinds of restitutions, one of goods, another of fame, and the third of honor and estimatio^. In euery one of which points it is meet for euery man to consider well what he is bound of dutie to
 doe for the discharge of his conscience.
Those men also that doe vse any dishonest or filthie communication, or haue any euill purpose, or lewd affection, it is necessarie that they purge themselues of that pestile^ce, if they meane to inioy the grace of this Sacrament of Pennance. And it is not enough to remoue their hart from sin, if they remooue not withall the cause and occasion of the saide sinne:The occasion of sin is to be auoided. for otherwise the sinne will hardly be auoided. In which point many deceaue themselues, who with the only purpose and intent not to fall into the like sinne hereafter perswade themselues that they are safe, and secure, and doe not consider that the seed of the sinne remaineth in their house, which in time will begin to bud out, and spring againe afresh. And therefore S. BernardS. Barnard. saith: wilt thou euery day keepe company with women, and yet bee accounted chaste? well, admit thou so be, yet canst thou not auoide at the least the blemish of an euill suspition: for if thou so doe, I say that thou art a scandale vnto me, and therfore take away the matter, and the cause of the scandale: for it is written,Matth. 18. woe bee to him, by whome any scandale ariseth: But that is much more to be feared, which the same Saint Barnard saith in a Sermon vppon the Canticles, in these wordes:
 Peraduenture it is a greater miracle for a man to dwell with a woman,S. Bernard. and not to loose his chastity, than to raise one vp againe from death to life. If thou canst not doe that which is lesse, how shall I beleeue that thou art able to doe that which is greater?The penitent must remoue away out of his house and companie the harlot with whome hee hath offended. For this cause then it is meete that thou remoue away from thee all occasions of sinnes, especially if thou haue alreadie once broken the vaile of shamefastnes, and opened the way to wiekednes: For so long as this gate remaineth open, it is a thing impossible, (speaking morrally) so to staie the wickednes, but that it wil passe stil forwards. If thou say that it is very harde for thee to auoide this occasion, for that thou muste in so dooing put out of thy house such and such persons, to whome thou art much beholding, and haste great need of them to doe and atende vnto thine affaires: hereunto I knowe not what other answere to make, but euen with the saying of our Sauiour, who saith.Math. 18. Marke. 9. If thy foote or thy hand be occasio^ vnto thee of offence, cut off thy foot and hand, which giueth thee this occasion. For it is better to goe to heauen maimed, and lame, than with two feet, and two handes to go into hell. I see well, that this is a very hard remedy: but like as there bee some corporall diseases
 that cannot be cured but, with iron and fire, by cutting awaie sometimes one member to saue all the rest of the body: euen so I confesse, that there are some spirituall diseases that cannot otherwise be healed, but with such like sharp medecines as these be. And therein the law of God is not to bee blamed, (which is most iust and sweet,) but thou thy selfe, that haste broken the veile of shamefastnes, and haste opened a gappe to sin and wickednes, and haste prouoked a wilde raging beast, which was inclosed within her owne denne, where thou haste no feet to flie away, nor place to retire thy selfe: and therefore it skilleth not, if thou doe now pay that thou hast deserued, and gather fruite according to the seede thou hast sowe^: It skilleth not I say, if thou take some great paine to driue awaie thine enemie out of thy house, sith thou thy selfe haste opened the gate, and giuen her an entrie therein.
This is that which appertaineth vnto the two principall partes of Contrition. Now will we treat of the meanes, whereby this vertue of Contrition is obteined, and especially of the first part thereof, which is, how to procure sorrow, and repentance for the sinnes past.



OF THE PRINCIPALL meanes whereby Contrition is obtained, and especially of the sorrow for the sinnes committed. CHAPTR. II.
HEE THEN that desireth earnestly and with all his heart to obtaine this precious iewel of Contritio^, must vnderstand, that the first meane for the obtaining thereof,Perfect Pennance is the gift of God. is to demaunde the same of Almightie God, with all the humilitie and instancie that is possible. Because for a man to repent himselfe of his sinnes as he ought to doe indeed, proceedeth of a very speciall grace and gift of almightie God, and is a worke that exceedeth all the power and force of mans nature, and the reason hereof is, for that the nature of man remaineth now through originall sinne out of the vprightnes, and naturall order, in which Almightie God created it: For hee created it vpright, and lifted vp vnto God by loue: but sinne hath crooked it, and inclined it downe to her selfe, that is vnto the loue of visible thinges, which it loueth and esteemeth more than Almighty God, and therefore like as a ma^ that is borne with a crooked
 backe from his mothers wombe, cannot finde any naturall medicine, or vertue, that is able to restore him againe to his naturall streightnes: euen so also our will being borne with this kind of deformitie, and spirituall crookednes, there is nothing able to strengthen it againe, and to direct it vnto God, by causing it to loue God aboue all thinges, but onely the same Lord that hath created it. Now then as a man cannot haue this loue of God aboue all things, but by God himselfe: so likewise can hee not haue the sorrow for sinne aboue all things for the loue of him, but by the special help of God himselfe: for somuch as of the one followeth the other. And therefore our Lord saith in the Ghospell: No man can come vnto me vnlesse my father draw him.Iohn. 6.44. To come vnto Christ, is nothing els but to loue him aboue all things, and to be sorrowful for our sins more than for all other thinges in the world, and such loue and sorrow no man can haue of himselfe as it is requisite to be had, vnles it be giue^ him by almighty god: now for almighty god to grant this benefit vnto a sinner, is the greatest grace, and the greatest benefit that he can possibly grant him. for although it be a greater benefit to giue glory tha^ grace: yet it is a greater matter to plucke and
 help a man out of sinne, and to set him in state of grace, than after that hee is placed in grace,Summa. S. Thomae. 1. 2 quest. 113. art. 9. to giue him glorie, beeing a farre greater distance from sinne to grace, than from grace to glorie. Wherefore S. Thomas treating of the workes of Almightie God, saith: that the iustification of a sinner is a greater worke,The iustification of a sinner is a greater worke, than the creation of the world. than the creation of the world. Forsomuch as all the beeing of the world, is none other, but a good thing limited with an end, (for so be all thinges that are created:) but the iustification of a man is a participation of the diuinitie and glorie of God, which is an infinite good thing.
We ought to demaund of God co^trition, and sorrowe for our sinnes with great humility and instancie. Mat. 15. verse. 22. Mar. 7.If this then bee a worke of God, and so great a worke, and mercy of him, it followeth, that wee ought to demaund the same of him with all the humilitie, and instancie that is possible, continuing in this request with that godly woma^ of Canane, who said: O sonne of Dauid haue mercie vppon mee: for my daughter (which is my soule) is sore vexed by the diuell. And although our Lord do shew himselfe at the first somewhat seuere and rigorous, (as he did to that woman,) yet let vs not therefore giue ouer the enterprise, nor bee discouraged in that our demaund. For to this end did he shew himselfe so seuere to that woman, that by her example
 we might learne not to mistrust when hee sheweth himselfe in like sort vnto vs, but that we should rather perseuere as she did, and then shall wee vndoubtedly obtaine that which shee obtained.2. Tim. 2. Heb. 10. 1. Cor. 1. 1. Thes. 5. For Almightie God, (as the Apostle saith) is faithfull, and can not denie any man his lawfull request. And to help that this praier to Almightie God for Contrition, may be done with the more facilitie, there are placed hereafter certaine deuout praiers, and considerations, to the end, that such as know not how to speake with Almightie God for themselues, and to declare vnto him their necessity, may by meanes of these praiers, the better signifie their mindes, and require of him this gracious gift.
The second meane to obtaine Contrition, and sorrow for our sinnes,The second meane to obtaine Co^trition. is for a man to keepe a Parliament within himselfe in time and place conuenient, and to consider all such thinges as may prouoke and incline him to get this repentance, and sorrow for his sinnes. For the more he shall consider the causes that may moue him therevnto* the more clearely shall he perceaue, how much it importeth him to lament and bewaile his miserable state: for nature hath not without cause ordained, that the verie
 same sence that serueth vs to see, should serue vs also to weepe, sith of the one followeth the other: For hee that seeth well, can weep well: that is to say, he that knoweth how to consider his sins as they ought to be considered, knoweth also how to bewaile them as they ought to be bewailed. Wherefore let the sinner open his eyes, and fixe them first vppon the multitude of his sinnes, and afterwards vpon almighty God against whom he hath sinned: for each of these considerations will tell him, hovv good cause he hath to sorrow and bewaile his sinnes.


OF THE CONSIDERATIons, that may helpe vs to conceaue sorrow and hatred of our sins: and first of the multitude of them. CHAPTER. III.
NOW TO stirre vp and prouoke thy soule to conceaue this sorrowe and griefe for thy sinnes,How sorrow and griefe for our sins may be procured. thou must first of all set before thine eyes all the course of thy life past: to wit, all the sins that thou haste committed in the same, and withall hovv thou haste abused all the benefits and graces
 which thou haste receaued of Almightie God.What sin is. And because sin is a swaruing out of the way from the chiefest felicity, and from the end for which man was created of Almighty God, let him first consider this end and so shall he more clearely see how farre hee hath strayed from the same. The end wherefore Almighty God created man in this world, was not assuredly to sow corne, to build faire houses, or to heape riches together, and so to purchase landes, dignities, and promotions, therewithall to liue in pleasures, and delights,The end wherefore God created man.The gifts of God vnto man. (as the workes of certaine worldly men doe giue vs to vnderstand: but to know God, to loue God, and to keepe his Commandements, that a man may thereby obtaine the chiefest felicitie, for which he was created. In consideration hereof he gaue him a law,Law. to wit, his co^mandements, wherein he should liue, and Grace,Grace. whereby he might obserue his law, and sacraments,Sacraments. by meanes wherof it might bee ministred vnto him, and teachersTeachers that might instruct him therein, and inspirationsInspirations. that might prouoke him therunto,God himselfe. and (that which is far more tha^ all this) he gaue euen himselfe to be the price and remedie of all his sins. For this end he gaue him likewise the giftes of nature, which bee life, health,
 strength,Giftes of nature. the powers of the soule, the senses, and members of the bodie, to the end that hee should applie all these in the seruice of him, who had bestowed them vppon him, and for this very same end, he also prouided for him the goodes which are commonly called the goodes of fortune,Goods of fortune. that with them he might sustaine his owne life, and releeue the necessitie of others, and thereby procure and merite to himselfe euerlasting glorie in the kingdome of heauen.
Note for what end Almighty God bestoweth his benefites vpon vs.These and other the like are the benefits and helps, which Almightie God hath giuen thee, to the end, that by meanes of them thou shouldest loue him, know him, and imploy them in his seruice. Consider now then with thy selfe, how thou haste vsed all these great benefits, and how thou haste obserued all these lawes and conditions. And first if thou looke to the end for which Almightie God created thee, and doest consider well the end, that thou hast had in the whole order, and course of thy life, thou shalt clearely see, how thou haste gone astray, and how farre off thou haste wandered from the same: For hee created thee for himselfe, that is, to the end that in him thou shouldest imploy all thy vnderstanding,
 memorie, and will, and that thou shouldest repose in him all thy loue, faith, and hope: but thou as one vnmindfull of all this, hast wholly imployed thy selfe vpon transitorie and base creatures, and despised thy creator, applying, and attributing that vnto them, which was due vnto him alone. Them hast thou loued, desired, and adored: In them haste thou reposed thy faith, thy hope, and thy comfort: vpon them hast thou fixed all thy quietnes, delight, and contentation. In dooing wherof thou haste giuen that vnto creatures, which appertained properly vnto the Creator, and hast employed that vpon earthly thinges, which ought to haue beene imployed vpon heauenly treasures. By this maist thou also perceaue, how lewdly thou haste fulfilled the chiefest of thy bondes: to wit, the first commandement of almightie God, which appertaineth to this end. If thou denie this, then consider how mindefull thou haste beene of this Lord, in that thou haste passed ouer in a manner all thy whole life, without euer calling him to minde: how vngratefull thou haste beene for his benefits, in that thou haste rendred vnto him such slender thankes for them: how little account thou haste made of his
 Commandements, in that thou hast so oftentimes transgressed the^: how little loue thou haste borne towardes him, (who hath deserued somuch to bee beloued,) in that thou haste borne so great loue to the vile and trifling toyes of the world: And to be short, how little feare thou hast had of the great puissance of his Maiestie, in that thou haste feared so much the vaine wormes of this world.
Consider also how oftentimes thou haste sworne and forsworne by his holy name in vaine, tearing, and renting it in thy filthie mouth, and vsing it as a testimonie to confirme all thy falshood and lies. Consider likewise how thou haste sanctified the holy Feastes which were ordeined to glorifie and praise him, and to bewaile thy sins past: whereas thou hast stood waiting for them to none other end, but only to adde sinne vnto sinne, and so to solemnize feastes vnto diuels. Consider moreouer what honor and reuerence thou haste giuen to thy naturall Parents, and to thy spirituall fathers, which are thy Prelates and Superiours: sith thou haste so little esteemed all their lawes and Commandements: and what brotherly loue thou haste shewed towardes thy neighbour: sith thou haste so oftentimes euen
 for very trifles, and matters of no weight, disdained him, quarrelled vvith him, reuiled him, and wished his death. Consider furthermore, how thou haste preserued thy body and soule from the vices of the flesh: sith thou haste so many times in workes, in wordes, in thoughts, in desires, and in voluntarie pleasures, defiled thy selfe in this filthy puddle, and so haste prophaned the temple, which almightie God had sanctified for himselfe: Now who can expresse the dissolute wantonesse of thine eyes, the filthinesse of thy thoughtes, the dishonesty of thy words, thy braueries, thy pastimes, thy scoffing, thy flouting, thy proude behauiour, and conuersation, and the deceitful practises, and inuentions of thy lewd dealinges? But what shall I say of thy falshood and couetousnes, sith thou haste esteemed, and adored no one thing more tha^ thy mony, reposing therein thy last end, in that thou diddest serue it, loue it, and didest that for it, which ought to haue bin done for almightie God alone. Now as touching the licentious losenes of thy tonge, thy slaunders, detractions, infamies, iniuries, flatteries, curses, and lies, who were able to declare the^? sith in a manner al thy practises and dealings haue bin exercised therein.

Besides the ten Commaundements, examine also the seauen deadly sins, and thou shalt see in howe many of them thou haste offended. How great hath beene the ambition, presumption, vaine glorie, and pride of thy hart? How intollerable the boasting and vaunting of thy wordes, and vanitie of thy works? How exceeding thy malice, thy anger, thy enuie, thy gluttonie, and the pleasures of thy body? And withall, thy dulnes, and irkesomenes to all goodnesse, and thy promptnes, and liuelines to al mischiefe and wickednesse?
Peruse likewise the workes of mercie, both corporall, and spirituall, and consider how small account thou hast made of the^: and how little regard thou haste had of the necessitie, and miseries of others, being so carefull as thou hast bin to prouide for thy selfe. And now to enter into the benefits and giftes of Almightie God, tell mee I praie thee, how haste thou vsed them? the life which hee hath giuen thee, wherein haste thou bestowed it? thy wit, thy strength, and other giftes of nature, wherein haste thou imploied them? thy goodes, thy landes, and thine other temporal substance, wherin haste thou consumed them? For if thou wilt speake plainely the truth, thou must
 needes say, that thou hast wasted them vpon vanities, and trifles, which haue offended Almightie God: So that of the benefits which thou hast receaued of him, thou haste made weapons to fight against him: and with what thinges thou waste bound to doe him greater seruice, with the same thou haste committed greater sinnes: taking an occasion of the^ to offend him more grieuously, whereas indeede they should rather haue prouoked thee to haue loued him with greater affection. To bee short, thou haste liued in such sort, as if thou haddest bin bound nothing at all to Almighty God: as if thou haddest neuer receaued of him any benefit at all, or as if thou haddest created thy selfe, and diddest not depend of him. He therfore that hath eyes to see al these miseries, and to vnderstand how farre astray he hath wandered in all his waies, and how lewdly he hath fulfilled all these bo^ds and Commandements, hath not hee good cause (trow ye) to bewaile and lament, yea and to resolue himselfe wholly into teares also, with the consideratio^ of these so great offences? What sense hath hee, that is not mooued herewith? Who is he that can lament, and will not lament at this? vnlesse he bee such a one, as seeth not how great
 waste and hauoke he hath made of all the riches and treasures of his soule.

THE SECOD CONSIDERAtion: wherein is declared what thinges are lost by a deadly sinne.  2
VVHEN THOV haste considered the multitude of thy sins, consider forthwith what is lost by them: to the end, that thou maiest by this meane see how great thy losses haue bin, and how oftentimes the same losses haue hapned. For this consideratio^ may peraduenture moue thee vnto sorrowe and repentance for thy sinnes. And surely sorrow can not be more conueniently bestowed in any other matter, than in being sorrowfull for our sinnes, for as S. CbrisostomeSaint Chri^tome. saieth: There is no losse in the world that can be recouered with sorrow and griefe of minde, but onely the losse that commeth by sinne: wherefore in all other matters it is vnprofitablie bestowed, sauing in this case alone. He then that wil indeuour to obtaine this holsome and medicinable sorrow, let him consider with all humilitie and attention, what is lost by committing one deadlie sinne, and
 so shall he see, what good reason hee hath to be sorie for the same.
For first by a deadly sin is lost the grace of the Holy Ghost,What is lost by committing one deadly sin? which is one of the greatest giftes that Almightie GOD can giue to a creature in this life. Thereby is lost all the charitie, and loue of God, which goeth alwaies in companie with the same grace. And if it be thought so great a losse to loose the fauour of an earthly Prince, yee may well conceaue, how farre greater losse it is to loose the fauour of the KING both of heauen and earth. Thereby are likewise lost the vertues infused, and the giftes of the holy Ghost, (although neither faith nor hope are lost,) wherwith the soule was beautified, and adorned in the sight of God, and also armed and fortified against all the power and forces of the enemie. Thereby is also lost the title and interest to the kingdome of heauen: which title proceedeth likewise fro^ the grace of God: forsomuch as by grace is giuen glorie (as the Apostle saith.)Rom. 6. Therby is lost likewise the spirit of adoptio^, which maketh vs the sons of God, and imparteth vnto vs the Spirite and minde of Sonnes towardes him. And together with this spirit is lost therby the louing entertainment due vnto Sonnes, and
 the fatherly prouidence which Almightie God hath of those whom he receaueth for his Children, which is one of the greatest benefits that may be possessed in this life. Moreouer, thereby is lost the peace and tranquility of a good conscience, together with the blessinges and consolations of the holy Ghost. And withall therby is lost the merite and fruit of all the good workes that a man hath done in all the time of his whole life vntill that very houre. In like manner, thereby is also lost the participation of the benifits of al the whole Catholicke Church, which no man then enioyeth in such sort as hee did when hee was in the state of grace.
what is gained by a deadly sin.All this is lost by one deadly sinne, and that which is gotten thereby, is that a man (vntill hee repent and be reconciled with Almightie God) remaineth condemned for euer to the horrible paines of hell, and during the time that hee shall continue in deadlie sin, he remaineth as then cancelled out of the booke of life, and whereas before he was the sonne of God, hee is by a deadly sinne become a bondslaue of the diuel, and whereas before he was the temple and habitation of the most holie Trinitie, hee is thereby become a denne of
 theeues, and a neast of cockatrices.
Among all which losses, the greatest and that which is most to bee lamented is the leesing of almighty God: because this losse is the roote and cause of all other losses:What is it to loose Almighty god For to leese God is a refusing to haue God for his speciall father, gouernour, pastour, defender, and helper, in all his necessities, and to cause him of a mercifull father to become an enemie, and a rigorous iudge. Now he that hath lost such a precious tresure as this is, were it not conuenient that hee should lament and bee sorie for his so great losse? Reioyce not O Israel (saith the Prophet,) be not so merrie as the rest of the people:Ose. 9^*1. because thou haste committed fornication against thy God. The host of the Tribe of Dan marching on a time to besiege a Citie, entred into a house that was in the way, and stole an Idoll of siluer which they found therein, and the owner vnderstanding thereof followed after them, making great lamentation for the losse of this Idoll, the theeues demaunded of him why hee wept: to whome he answered and said:Iudict. 18. verse. 24. yee haue stolen away my God from me, and yet doe yee now demaund of mee why I weepe? Nowe if this miserable Infidell made so great lamentation for the losse of his God
 of mettall, which hee himselfe had made, thinking that he had iust cause to weep and sorrow so grieuously for such a losse as that was: how much more ought a Christian man weepe, and lament, knowing vndoubtedly that so ofte^ as he committeth a deadly sinne, he looseth not a false God, which he himselfe hath made, but the true euerlasting God, which hath made all thinges, both in heauen and earth.
Now then sith this so great benfit, with all the rest, are lost by one deadly sin, consider with thy selfe, whether hee hath not good cause to be earnestly sorie at the very hart, that hath lost so many benefites, so great riches, and such an euerlasting glorie, and hath cast himselfe downe headlong into such a great sea of miseries? why should not he lament, and be wholly confounded and ashamed of himselfe that hath fallen voluntarie after this sort into so many calamities? Open thine eyes O miserable soule (saith holy Anselmus,S. Anselmus. The state of the soule before sin.) and consider what thou haste beene heretofore, and what thou art now: where thou haste bin heretofore, and where thou art now. Thou hast beene the spouse of the highest Lord: Thou haste beene the temple of the liuing GOD: Thou haste beene a vessell of election:
 Thou haste beene the bridebed of the euerlasting KING: Thou hast bin the throne of the true SALOMON: Thou haste beene the Sister of Angels, and the inheritour of the heauens. All this thou haste beene, and so often as I repeate, and say, thou haste beene, thou haste beene, so often haste thou neede to sorrow and lament.
Now what a wonderfull great chaunge is this?What chang is made in a man by committing one deadlie sin. The spouse of almightie God is become the harlot of Sathan: the Temple of the Holie Ghost is chaunged into a denne of theeues: the vessell of Election, into a vessell of corruption: the Bride bedde of Christ, into a stincking puddle of swine: the seat of Almightie GOD, into a chaire of pestilence: the sister of Angels, into the fellowshippe of Diuels: And shee that flew a loft as a Doue in the aire, creepeth now as a Serpent, hissing vppon the earth. Wherfore O thou miserable soule,All creatures do bewaile a sinner. lament and be sorie for thy selfe, sith the heauens doe weepe for thee, sith the angels doe bewaile thee, sith the Catholicke Church mourneth for thee, and sith al the Saints doe lame^t thy state.Phillip. 3. S. Paul bewaileth thee with teares, because thou hast sinned, and haste not done Pennance for such wickednes as
 thou haste committed. The Prophetes weepe full bitterly for thee, because they see the furie of Gods terrible iustice comming fiercely vpon thee. And Ieremie the Prophet sheadeth more teares for thee,Ierremy. 22 tha^ for the ruinous walles of Ierusalem: because he seeth the noble Israel fallen downe from heauen, and the daughter of Sion to haue lost all her beautie.


THE THIRD CONSIDERAtion, of the Maiestie and goodnesse of Almightie God, against whom wee sin.  3.
IF THOV wilt now step one foote further, and consider the greatnesse of the Maiestie and goodnesse of Almighty God, against whom thou haste sinned, thou shalt here also finde greater matter of sorrow, and griefe: For it is certaine, that the greater the personage is that is offended, the greater is the offence, that is committed against him. Whereupon it followeth, that if the person offended be of infinite dignitie, the offence committed against him, must also bee infinitely grieuous, as it is indeede. Wherefore the more a man shal consider, and vnderstand the exceeding greatnesse
 of the Maiestie of Almightie GOD, the more shall hee penetrate and vnderstand the malice and heinousnes of his owne sin. Lift vp thine eies therefore on high, and behold (if thou canst) how great the nobilitie, the riches, the dignitie, the wisedome the bewtie, the glorie, the goodnes, the maiestie, the benignitie, and power of this Lord is: and how much all creatures are bound vnto him: and hereby shalt thou vnderstand in some degree the heynousnes of thy sinnes, which thou hast committed against him.
But among all theise excellencies and perfections of Almightie God, the consideration of the wonderfull goodnes of his deuine maiestie is wont to bee of greatest force to moue the hearts of true Penitents:The consideration of the goodnes of God is of greatest force to moue a sinner to repentance. especially to him that hath alreadie some experience and knowledge thereof. The goodnesse of Almightie GOD as it may be knowne by many other meanes, so is it knowne principally by the inestimable benefit of the Incarnation and Passion of the sonne of God, and by the institution of the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar, wherein he offereth himselfe daylie for vs, and doth comunicate himselfe vnto vs, and dwelleth in our company. The goodnes of
 Almightie God, may also bee somewhat more particularly vnderstood, by considering the manner of the louing treyting, which this Lord vseth towards his elected friendes, whome hee visiteth oftentimes with so manie and so great consolations, with such great and speciall fauours, with so great light, with such abundance of peace, and spirituall comfort, that manie times the weakenes of mans nature is not able to sustaine the force of so great consolations. And according hereunto it is written of one of those Holy fathers in the wildernes, that being sometimes at his praiers he was wont to say. O Lord, with draw a little the waues of thy consolations. And at another time he said. O Lord seperate thy selfe a while from me: for I cannot abide the exceeding greatnes of thy sweetnesse. Now such a one is Almighty God, and such are the fauours, louing kindnes, and benefits, w^ich the godlie are wont to receaue of so noble, good, gratious, sweet and mercifull a Lord. For it is not to bee merueiled at, that hee should giue them to drinke of the cuppe of his delightes, who for their sakes hath drunken the cup of his most bitter Passion.
He then that setteth before his eyes this so great goodnesse of Almighty God, and
 calleth to minde how oftentimes hee hath offended him, hath hee not good cause (trow yee) to be sorie, and to lament, yea, and to wish that all the members of his bodie were eyes, to weepe and bewaile this so great ingratitude?S. Iohn Climacus. Saint Iohn Climacus writeth of one of those ancient Monkes, who hauing committed a certaine fault, demanded licence of the father of the monastery to goe into the house of the Penitentes, (which was called a prison,) to doe Pennance for that sin. And hauing obtained the said licence, (although against the Fathers will, because his fault required mercie,) the griefe which his soule there felt was so great, for that he had offended such a Lord, and the knife of sorrow so pearced his hart, (which charitie had made sharpe) that in the space of eight dayes he yeelded vp his soule vnto almightie God. Consider thou the^ with thy selfe, how great this sorrow must be, that was able in so short a time to bereaue him of his life. But such is the inward feeling which those doe conconceaue of sin, whose eyes it pleaseth Almighty God to ope^, that they may see the exceeding great malice, which is in the same. Now then if this holy penite^t sorrowed and lame^ted somuch for the committing one of
 onlie deadly sinne: how much more ought he to sorrow and lament, that hath consumed the greatest part of his life in heaping sinnes vpon sins, and in multiplying euermore offences against Almightie God.


THE FOVRTH CONSIDEration: of the great iniurie that is done to Almighty God by a deadly sinne.  4
CONSIDER also (besides the premisses) the great iniurie that is done to Almightie GOD by sinne, that thou maist thereby vnderstand how much thou oughtest to bee greeued there vvith: For as often as we sinne, this iudgment passeth secretly in practise within our harts although we doe not perceaue it: of the one side there is set before vs the profit of sinne, (which the delite or commoditie for which we doe sinne:) and of the other, the offence which wee commit against Almightie God, whose frindship is lost by that deadly sinne. So that almightie God is put in one ballance, and the commoditie that commeth by sinne in the other, and man being placed in the middest, resolueth with himselfe rather to leese the fri^dship and fauor of almightie God, than the
 pleasure or commoditie which hee thinketh will come vnto him by sinne? What thing now can be more horrible than this? What thing can be more vnseemelie for that soe greate a maiestie, than to preferre so base a thing before him? What thing doth more resemble that wicked fact of the Iewes, who when they had the choyse offered vnto them, whether they would haue Christ or Barrabas:Mat. 27. answered that they would rather haue Barrabas, than Christ? What other thing else is this, but (so far forth as our wicked act can extend) to take away from Almightie God his Crowne, and glorie, which is due to him alone as to the last end, and to attribute the same vnto a mans owne sinfull commoditie or pleasure? For vvhosoeuer doth more esteeme his owne pleasure than God, and doth preferre it before God, he depriueth God thereby (somuch as lieth in him) of that dignitie which is due vnto him as to the last end, and giueth it to his pleasure, which is al one, as to take away the crowne from the Creator, and to giue it to his creature. What thing can bee more horrible than this? Almightie God commaundeth euen the heauens themselues, that they should wonder hereat, saying by his Prophet
 Ieremie: Wonder O ye heauens at this matter, and let your gates fall downe with wonder: for two euils haue my people committed: they haue abandoned mee, who am the fountaine of liuelie water, and are gone to drinke of a broken conduit, that is not able to holde any water at all. Hee then that shall consider how many thousand times hee hath done this iniurie vnto Almightie God, how can hee but tremble and quake for feare? How can he but desire that his eyes were become riuers of teares, that hee might weepe and bewaile both day and night for his so great offences? Consider therefore O thou miserable sinner, against whom thou haste sinned, and wherefore thou haste sinned: whom thou haste forsaken, and whom thou hast taken: what thou haste lost, and what thou haste gained, and bee ashamed of thy selfe now whilest thou haste time, that thou be not confounded hereafter euerlastinglie at the day of Gods iudgement.


THE FIFT CONSIDERATIon: Of the hatred that Almighty God beareth against sinne.  5.
FOR THE obtaining of this Holie sorrowe and hatred of sinne, it will helpe
 thee very much to consider deepely with thy selfe, the great hatred that Almightie God beareth against sinne: the which is so great,Howe great hatred God beareth against sin. that no mans vndersta^ding is able to comprehend it, and it is also verie certaine, that if of all the vnderstandinges created there were made one vnderstanding, and of all the tongues in the world one tongue, all this were not able to expresse, nor to vnderstand the exceeding greatnesse of this hatred. The reason hereof is manifest: for it is cleare, that the better a man is, the more hee loueth that which is good, and abhorreth that which is wicked. Wherefore Almightie God being good,God beareth infinite loue to goodnesse: and infinite hatred against sinne. Mat. 25. and not onelie good, but also infinitelie good: it followeth that he must needes beare infinite loue to goodnesse, and infinite hatred against wickednes: and therefore the one he rewardeth with euerlasting glorie, and the other hee punisheth with euerlasting torments, and with depriuation of infinite felicitie.
Moreouer it is certaine, that Almightie God abhorreth sinne so much as it deserueth to be abhorred: that is, according to the malice, and deformitie that is therein.The malice of sinne is infinite. And this malice being infinite, (for that it is against Almightie God, whose Maiestie
 is infinite,) it followeth, that the hatred and abhorring which Almighty God conceaueth against sin must needs be also infinite.
But for the better vnderstanding of the greatnes of this hatred, it shall serue verie well for our purpose to consider deeplie some of the most terrible punishme^ts that almightie God hath at times sent into this worlde for sinne:The seuere punishments vsed against sinne declare, how much God hateth and abhorreth it. Esay. 14. 2. Pet. 2. to the intent that (for so much as by the works the hart is known,) we may come to vnderstand by theise punishments of almightie God for sin somewhat of the greatnes of the hatred which he conceaueth against sinne. Tell me then, what a terrible punishment of almightie God was that vpon that most bewtiful angell Lucifer, and vpon all his complices, sith that for on onelie sinne so noble and so excellent a creature as he was, became the most horrible and fowlest feend in hell? and being so familiar afrend as he was with almightie God, became the greatest of his enemies?Gen.. 3. What a punishment of almighty God was that likewise vpon our first father Adam, and all his posteritie? and that also, when al the whole vniuersall worlde was drowned with the water of the flood? and that of those fiue cities,Gen. 7. Gen. 19. 1. Reg. 3. which were burned with flames of fier form heauen?
 And that of Hely for his negligence,1. Reg. 15. 2. Reg. 12. in not chastising his sonnes? And that of Saule for his disobedience? And that of Dauid for his adultery?Daniel. 4. Act. 5. And that of Nabuchodonozor for his pride? And that of Ananias, and Saphira, for their couetousnes? To conclude, what a terrible iudgement is that of the most horrible paines of hell,Math. 25 that shall endure for euer and euer, which is the proper punishment for sinne? But aboue all this, how great was that punishment, and satisfaction which Almightie God laide vpon the shoulders of his owne onely begotten Sonne our sweet Sauiour Iesus Christ, for the sins of the world? That punishment is much more to be wondred at, than all the others, considering the infinite dignitie of the person vpon whome it was executed. Each one of these so terrible punishmentes if they bee considered attentiuely with all their parts, and circumstances, will help vs very much to vnderstand the wonderfull rigour of Gods iustice, and the great hatred which he beareth against sinne: by meanes of which consideration the feare of GOD shall bee stirred vp in our hearts, and with all an earnest sorrowe and abhorring of all sinnes. Forsomuch as in verie deede they deserue to be abhorted somuch as almightie
 God himselfe doth abhorre them. And although neither thou nor any other man is able to conceaue so great a hatred against sinne as Almightie God doth: yet at the least abhorre sinne so much as is possible for thee to doe, and pray alwaies vnto Almighty God, that it may please him to increase in thee this hatred and abhorring of sinne: for therein consisteth a verie great part of true Pennance, and of Christian iustice.


THE SIXT CONSIDERATIon: Of death, and of that which followeth after the same.  6.
LIKEWISE the calling to rememberance of the paines of hell, which bee so horrible,The consideration of death withdraweth vs from sinne.) and of the vniuersall last iudgement, which shall be so rigorous,) and of the particular iudgement immediatlie after each mans death, (which euery houre looketh for vs) should moue vs by all reason to conceaue sorrow and feare for our sins: sith that each one of these things by themselues doe threaten such great terrible calamities to him, that shall be found guiltie of any one deadlie sinne. And the lesse
 time we haue to liue in this world, the nearer we are thereunto: For when this time of departing out of this world shall come, (and surely euery man ought to think that it is very neare vnto him,) what shall the sinner doe? What shall he say? What shal hee thinke? For then euerie wicked man may truly say: O my soule, now is the time expired of thy pride, of thy vanities, of the delightes, and pleasures of thy fleshe, the which thou haste loued more than God, and vnto whom thou haste beene more obedient than to God: sith that for them thou hast so oftentimes offended God! where are yee now my vanitie, and pride? Whether are yee fled O my delights and pleasures? What haue yee giuen mee? What haue yee left me in possession for so manie yeares employed altogether in your seruice? For your sakes haue I lost euerlasting life. For you haue I offended Almightie God. For you haue I lost Heauen, and gained Hell. For you haue I lost infinite benefits, and haue deserued to be a perpetual companion of the Deuils.
Tell me now, what is that which ye haue left me in recompence of so great miseries, and calamities? If this then willl thus assuredlie followe at the honre of death if
 all these prickinges and remorse of conscience for thy sinnes; shall at that time bite and gnaw thy hart, (and peraduenture all in vaine:) how much better were it for thee to suffer nowe presently these prickings, and remorse of conscience for thy sins, to thy great profit and commoditie, and to enter into iudgement now presently with thy selfe for thy sins, to the end that thou bee not at the houre of thy death iudged for them of almightie God? especially co^sidering that the Holy Scripture forewarneth and assureth vs,1. Cor. 11.31. that in case wee shall iudge our selues, we shall not be iudged.


THE SEAVENTH CONSIderation: Of the benefites of Almightie God.  7.
The consideration of the great benefites of of almighty God causeth a man to refraine from sinne.BVT ABOVE all these considerations, it shall increase this abhorring and sorrow for thy sinnes, to consider the multitude of the benefites of Almightie God. For the more profoundly thon shalt consider how beneficiall Almightie God hath bin towades thee, the more confusion and shame shalt thou conceaue against thy selfe, when thou seest thine owne ingratitude,
 and lewde misdemeanour towardes him: For by this way the Prophets vsed many times to induce the people of God to bewaile and lament their sinnes, and with this kinde of perswation began Nathan the Prophet to agrauate the sin of Dauid,2. Reg. 12. whe^ before that he would reprehend him of his sinne of adulterie, which hee had committed, hee first declared vnto him the great graces, fauours, and speciall benefits, which he had receaued of Almightie God.
Now in like sort maiest thou call to remembrance the multitude of the benefits of Almightie God towards thee:The benifits of God towardes man-kind. and especially the benefits of thy creation, conuersation, redemption, baptisme, vocation, diuine inspirations, preseruatio^ of thee from dangers, and miseries, with other innumerable benefits, which our Lord hath mercifully bestowed vpon thee: For if thou be able to cast this account aright, thou shalt finde, that all thinges which are in heauen or in earth are his benefits, and that all the members and senses of thy bodie, are his benefites, and that all the motions vvhich thou haste of life are his benefittes, to be short, that the bread which thou eatest, the ground which thou treadest vpon, the Sun which giueth thee heate, and the heauen
 vvhich yeeldeth thee light, vvith other thinges, are his benefittes: and to comprehe^d all in one word, all thinges in this world (be they benefits, or miseries,) are his benefits: For all these benefits hath he created for thee, and from all these miseries hath he deliuered thee, or at the least, from the greatest part of the^: for certaine it is, that there is no kinde of miserie that any man suffereth, but that an other may suffer the same. Now what thing is more to be lamented, than that thou hast liued so long time in such a great forgetfulnesse, and ignorance of such a louing Lorde, in whose armes thou wast embraced, of whose breasts thou wast nourished, by whose spirite thou diddest liue, whose shining sonne gaue thee heate, whose prouidence gouerned thee? to be short in whome thou diddest mooue,Act. 17. liue, and haddest thy beeing. What greater wickednes could there be, than to continue so long time in offending him, who alwaies continued in doing thee good? and to commit so many lewd actes against him, who hath bestowed so manie benefits vppon thee? But aboue all this, what greater iniquitie could there be deuised, than to offend him, who hath trauiled for thy sake so many waies: fasted so
 many and so long fasts, shed so many teares, made so many praiers, suffered so manie iniuries, taken so great paines, sustained so many dishonours, so many infamies, so many, yea and so great tormentes? For it is most certaine, that all these he suffered for thy sinnes, as well to satisfie for them, as to giue vs to vnderstand the great hatred he beareth against the^, sith he tooke so great paines to destroy them. Consider therefore, whether thou haste not good cause to mollifie, yea, and to resolue thy selfe whollie into teares, sith thou hast so oftentimes with thy sins buffeted a fresh, whipped, and crucified such a most louing and mercifull Lord, who hath suffered all this for thy sake? Now then when a man considerth on the one side this so wonderfull mercie, and bountifulnes of Almightie God towardes him, and on the ot^^r side, his owne so great ingratitude and rebellion against God, let him turne vnto him with a contrite and humble heart, and let him say this praier following.



A Praier to stirre vp in the Soule a compunction, and sorrow for her sinnes. Chapter. 4.
O Thou only begotten Son of almightie God, great and wonderfull are the benefites, O
 Lord, which I haue receaued of thee: thou haste raised me from the mire and dust of the earth, and haste created my soule of nothing after thine owne Image, and likenes, and haste made it capable of thy glory. Thou haste giuen me vnderstanding, memorie, will, free choice, with all my other members, and senses, to the end that with them I might know thee, and loue thee. Thou haste preserued me euen whiles I was yet in my mothers wombe, that I might not there die without the holie water of Baptisme. Thou haste patiently borne with mee a long time, after so manie deadlie sinnes, euen vntill this present houre, whereas others hauing lesse offended than I, (because thou diddest not expect their repentance so long a time as thou haste done mine,) are now peraduenture tormented in the most horrible burning fire of hell. Besides all this, it was thy pleasure to become man, and to be conuersant among men for my sake: and for mee to be afflicted, punished, troubled, and couered all ouer with a bloodie sweat, to be taken, bound, buffeted, and spit vpon, to be despised, blasphemed, reuiled, and apparelled in mockerie with white and redde garments. For my sake thou wast contented to be torne with whips, crowned with thornes, smitten with a reed, and to haue thine eyes couered with a veile, to be condemned to death, and to be ledde to the place of execution with that heauie Crosse vpon thy shoulders, whereupou thou wast nailed with
 great and sharpe nailes, set betweene two theeues, and reputed among the wicked, giuen to drinke bitter gaule, and viniger, and in the end put to a most cruell and shamefull death. In this wise O Lord with so many intollerable troubles and paines hast thou redeemed me: and I a most vile and wretched sinner, shewing my selfe vnthankefull for all these benefits, haue so oftentimes smitten thee againe vpon the face, and haue so often with my sins crucified thee, that I haue deserued that all creatures in the world should rise vp in armes against mee, and be reuenged of mee, for the great iniuries which I haue done vnto thee.
But what shall I say besides all this of the abusing of the holy Sacraments, and of the medicines, which thon haste ordeined for mee with thy most pretious blood? Thou haste washed me, and receaued mee as one of thine in the holie Sacrament of Baptisme: there was I made thy sonne by adoption, and consecrated as thy temple, annointed as a Priest, as a King, and as a warlicke Souldier, that should alwaies fight against the diuell thyne enimie. There thou tookest my soule to be thy Spouse, and gauest mee all such beautifull ornamentes as were requisite for that so excellent a dignitie. Now what haue I done with all these pretious Iewels, which thon haste bestowed vpon mee? Alas most miserable vile sinner that I am, what diligence or care haue I take^ to preserue these treasures? Thou
 haste taken me for thy sonne, and I haue made my selfe a bondslaue to sinne. Thou haste consecrated me for thy temple, and I haue made my selfe an habitation for the diuel: Thou gau^st me armour, and diddest binde me to be thy true Knight, and I haue run to thine enimies side: Thou haste made mee a King, and I haue rebelled against thee, with the kingdome which thou gau^st me: Thou hast espoused my soule vnto thee in perpetuall Charitie, and I haue loued vanity more than truth, and esteemed a creature more than the Creator. It were reason (O my Lord) that I should now begin to weepe and bewaile, sithence I haue committed such heinous sinne^ against thee. This sorrow and griefe for my sinnes is the thing which thou haste so long time looked for at my handes, euen from the time that thou first gauest me life: for this hast thou so oftentimes called me, borne with me, punished me, chearished me, and sought by all meanes to draw me againe vnto thee: thou hast looked and taried for me, and I haue abused thy patience: thou haste called me, and I haue stopped mine eares, and would not hearken to thy calling: thou haste giuen mee a long time to doe pennance for my sins, and I haae consumed it in pride and vanity: thou haste striken me, and I haue not felt it: thou haste chastised mee, and I would not receaue thy correction: thou haste taken great paines and trauaile to make me cleane, and yet is not the rustines of my vices scoured away,
 no not with fire. The more I haue bin chastised, and cherished by thee, the more hath mine hart bin hardned: shewing my selfe vnthankefull towardes the one, and rebellious towardes the other: but yet for all this, O my most louing Lord, sithence thou haste suffered for my sake so many thinges, and hast giuen me in commandement that I should neuer dispaire, nor mistrust thy goodnesse: I therefore refer my selfe wholly to thy mercy, and doe beseech thee to graunt me grace to amend my life, that fro^ this time forwards I may please thee, and serue thee in such sort, that I neuer seperate my selfe fro^ thee any more, but that I may continually remaine in thy grace and fauor, world without end. Amen.


HERE FOLLOWETH AN Other deuout praier, to desire pardon and remission of our sinnes. Chapter 5.
O Most mighty Lord and Creator of al things, when I thinke with my selfe how grieuously I haue offended thine infinite Maiestie with my sins, I wonder at mine owne follie: when I consider what a louing and bountifull father I haue forsaken: I accurse myne ingratitude: when I behold how I am fallen from such a noble liberty, into such a miserable bondage, I condemne my selfe for an vnconstant foole, and know not what other thing I may set before my eies but only hel and da^nation:
 forsomuch as thy iustice from which I cannot flie, putteth a great terrour into my conscience: But contrariwise when I consider thy great mercie which (as the Prophet witnesseth) exceedeth all thy workes,Psal. 144. then doe I feele forthwith a fresh and pleasant aire of hope, to refresh and strengthen againe my weake and sorrowfull soule. Wherefore should I than despaire to obtaine pardon of him, who hath so oftentimes by the writings of the holie Prophets inuited sinners to Pennance? saying: I desire not the death of a sinner,Eze. 18. Eze. 33. but that he should liue, and be conuerted. Moreouer thy onely begotten sonne, our sweet Sauiour Iesus Christ, hath reuealed vnto vs by many parables, how readie and willing thou art to graunt pardon to all such as are penitent for their sinnes.Almightie God is readie to pardon all such as be penitent and sorie for their sins. Luke. 15. This he signified vnto vs by the iewell lost, and founde againe: by the strayed sheepe, and brought home againe vpon the sheepheards shoulders: and much more by the comparison of the prodigall son, whose liuely image I acknowledge in my selfe: For I am hee, that haue most vniustly forsaken thee my most louing father, and haue riotouslie cousumed all my substance, and by obeying the appitites of mine owne flesh haue disobeyed thy commandementes, and by breaking of them haue fallen into the most filthie prison of sinne, and am brought to extreame miserie, out of which I know none other that can help me, but only thou O my almightie God whom I have
 haue forsaken. Receaue therfore O lord the humble that desireth pardon of thee, whome thou hast so patientlie looked for, euen vntil this present houre. Alas I am not worthie once to lift up myne eies towardes thee, or to cal thee father: but for so much as thou art a true father in deed, may it please thee to looke vpon me with thy fatherly eies: for thy only sight raiseth the dead, and it is that which causeth al those that wander out of the way to returne againe to them selues, for this repentance of sorow for my sins I had not had, if thou hadest not first cast thine eie vpon me. When I went wa^dring a farre of from thee, thou didest looke downe euen from heauen vpon me, and didest ope^ mine eies that I might see my selfe, and take a veiw how full fraught I was with so many sinns: and euen at this instant thou commest to receaue me againe giuing me knowledge, and mindfulnes, of mine innocencie, which I haue lost. I doe not request thy most sweet embrasings, and kisses nor the rich garment that was wont to cloth me: neither yet the ring of my ancie^t dignitie: I seek not to be receiued into the state and dignitie of thy sonnes: but thou shalt doe much for me, in case it may please thee to nu^ber me among thy bondslaues, and so to marke me with thy signe, and to fetter mee with thy chaines, that I may neuer runne away from thee: againe it shall neuer greeue mee to be in this life one of the most abiect slaues in thy house, so that I
 may neuer be separated from thee. Hearken therefore vnto me I beseech thee, O most mercifull Father, and graunt me the fauour of thine only begotten sonne, and the remedie of his most grieuous passsion and death. Graunt me also thy spirit that it may cleanse my heart, and confirme it in thy grace, and fauour, that through myne ignorance, I doe neuer returne againe into my late banishment, fro^ whence thy mercy hath called me backe. To thee O my Lord be all honour, and glory, world without end. Amen.

ANOTHER NOTABLE DEuout praier,The Ghostly fathers shall doe well to cou^sell some of their penitents to say this praier, eyther before they come to Confession, or before they doe ^ommuni^ate, to pro^oke them ^hereby to ^e more sor^owfull for ^eir sins. to desire pardon for our sins.

This praier the Penitent ought to say (before hee goe to Confession) with all the attention, and deuotion that is possible: that Christian I meane, which desireth to obteine Contrition and pardon for his sins: for herein he shall clearely ^ee, how much hee is bound to Almightie God, and how great repentance he ought to haue, for that he hath offended such a Lord.

VVHO shall giue moisture to my head, and fountaines of teares to mine eyes, and I will bewaile both day and night my sins, and mine ingratitude against A^mightie God my Creatour? There are many things of great efficacy, O most omnipotent Lord, to stirre and prouoke the heartes of men to compunction, and to
 cause them to come to the knowledge of their sins: but there is no one thing so effectuall, as to consider the greatnes of thy goodnes, and the multitude of the benefits which thou haste shewed euen towards sinners themselues: and therefore that my miserable soule may in this wise be confounded, I will begin O Lord, to rehearse some part of the benefits, and some part of my wickednesse, that hereby it may more clearely appeare, what thou art, and what I am: what thou haste bin towardes me, and what I haue bin towardes thee.
A time there was, O Lord, when I had no being at all, and thou gauest me a being, and diddest raise mee vp from the slime of the earth, and diddest make me after thine own image and likenes. Euen from my Mothers wombe thou hast bin my God: for so much as fro^ the first beginning of my being vntill this present daie: thou haste bin my father, my Sauiour, my defender, and all my comfort: thou hast there formed my body and al my senses: thou hast created my soule with all her powers, and euen vntill this verie instant thou haste preserued my life with the benefits, and cherishings of thy prouide^ce: al this was but litle considering thy mighty power: for although the same in it selfe was
 was verie much (in respect that it was all:) yet forsomuch as all the same was to thee without any cost or charge, to make mee the more bound vnto thee, thou wouldest bestow vppon mee some thing that should cost thee full dearely, and therefore thou camest downe fro^ heauen vnto the earth, to seeke mee out, through all those waies whereby I had lost my selfe: Thou haste honoured my nature, with thy humanitie: Thou haste deliuered me out of captiuitie, by thine owne imprisonment: Thou haste plucked me out of the power of the diuel, by putting thy selfe into the hands of sinners: Thou haste destroyed my sins, by taking vpon thee the shape and forme of a sinner. It was thy blessed will and pleasure to bind me with this grace, to make mee in loue vvith thee vvith this benefitte, to strengthen my hope with these merits, and to cause me vtterly to abborre sinne, by shewing vnto me what thou haste done to destroy sinne: Thou haste cast hotte burning coales vppon the dead coales of my heart, to the intente that by such a multitude of benefits as are included in this benefit I should loue thee, that haste done so much for mee, and haste discouered thy so great and speciall loue vnto me.

Thou seest me here O Lord redeemed: but what should it haue holpen me to bee redeemed, in case I had not beene Baptised? Among such a multitude of Infidels as are dispersed throughout the whole world, it was thy blessed will, that I should be in the number of thy faithfull Catholicke Christians, and one of those to whom belongeth so happie a lot, as to be thy son, regenerated by the water of Holy Baptisme: there was I receaued for one of thine, and there was that wonderfull accord solemnized and agreed vpon betweene thee and mee, that thou shouldest be my God, and I thy seruant: thou my father, and I thy sonne: and that so wee should contend together, thou in doing to me the workes of a father, and I in rendring vnto thee the seruices, and obediences of a childe. What shall I say of the other Sacramentes which thou haste ordeyned for a remedie of my miseries, prouiding a medicine for my woundes, with the precious blood of thine owne woundes?
Notwithstanding now all these kinds of succours and helps, my wickednesse hath bin so great, that I haue lost this first grace of innocencie: and thy mercy hath bin so abou^dant, that thou hast forborne me vntill
 this present houre. O my hope, and only refuge! How can I without teares call to mind, how ofte^times death might haue taken mee out of this world, in all these times so lewdly spent, and yet did not! How many millions of soules are now perhaps burning in the most horrible torme^ts of hell fire, for smaller sinnes than some of those which I then committed, and as yet am I preserued by thee, from burning in that most horrible fire! what should haue come of me, if thou O Lord haddest taken me out of this life at that time, as thou tookest others? What a terrible iudgement should haue bin prepared for mee, in case thy iustice had found me in that damnable state with my grieuous sins so newly committed against thee? Who was hee that held hy handes at that time, from doing of iustice vpon me? Who was he that intreated for me when I was fast a sleep? who staide the punishment of thy furie at that time, when I through my sinnes prouoked the same? What sawest thou in me, that it pleased thee to make my state and conditio^ better than theirs, whome death tooke away in the middest of their licentious dissolute wantonnesse, and perillous heates of raging youth? At that time did my sins
 crie out against me, and yet it pleased thee to stop thine eares, and not to heare them. My wickednesse encreased daylie against thee, and yet did thy mercy encrease daylie towardes mee. I continued in committing of sinnes against thee, and thou in looking for my repentance: I in running away from thee, and thou in seeking by all meanes to finde mee. I alwaies laboured to offend thee, and thou wast neuer weary of tarrying for my conuersion. And as though my sinnes had bin seruices, and not offences, I did euen in the middest of them receaue from thee manie good inspirations,Apoc. 3. and manie mercifull rebukes, which did reprehende and condemne my dissolute and sinfull life. How oftentimes haste thou called me, and inwardly cryed vnto mee, saying:Ieremy. 3. thou haste committed fornication with as manie Louers as thou wouldest, yet returne vnto mee, and I will receaue thee? How many times haste thou called mee with these, and other the like louing speeches: yea, and somtimes feared me also with terrours, and threatninges, by putting mee in minde of the daunger of death, and of the rigour of thy Iustice? How many Catholike preachers and ghostly Fathers hast thou ordeined, to the end,
 that with their deuout sermons and godlie counsels, they might awake me, and helpe me out of my wicked damnable estate of life! How oftentimes haste thou pursued mee, not onely with wordes, but also with workes, sometimes alluring me with benefits, and sometimes chastising me with punishments, laying in waite for me all manner of waies, (as the hunters do when they follow their game) that I should not flie away from thee.
Now what recompence can I make thee O Lord for all these benefits? For in that thou haste created me, I owe vnto thee all that I am: forsomuch as all is thine owne handy worke. In that thou haste preserued me, I owe vnto thee all my being and life: for somuch as thou doest whollie susteine it: and whereas thou gauest thy selfe as a ransome for my redemption, what haue I now remayning to bestow vpon thee? If I had all the liues of men, and of Angels, and should offer them vp all vnto thee in Sacrifice, what were all this in comparison of one droppe of that most precious blood, which thou haste shed for me?
Now who shall giue teares to mine eies,Iere. 9. Esay. 5. that I may bewaile mine vnthankfulnesse for so many benefits? Help mee O Lord at
 this present, and giue me grace, that I may know how to confesse mine vniustice against my selfe. I am that vnfortunate ma^, which (although it hath not so appeared) am thy creature, and made after thine owne image and likenes. Acknowledge O Lord, this figure which is thine, remooue away that which I haue done, and thou shalt finde that handieworke, which thou haste made with thine owne most mercifull hand. I haue employed all my forces in seeking how to displease thee, and with the verie workes of thine owne hands haue I offended thee. My feet haue bin swift to al mischiefe, and my handes busily exercised in couetousnes. Mine eyes haue bin licentious in gasing after vanities, and mine eares alwaies hearkening after lies. That most noble part of my soule which hath eyes to see thee, I haue turned away from beholding thy glorious beautie, and haue fixed it vpon the fading flowers of this miserable transitory life. That part also, which should haue meditated vppon thy Commandementes, hath studied both day and night, how to get opportunitie to transgresse the^. Now if my vnderstanding hath bin emploied after this sort, what is to be thought of my will? Thou hast, O my God, offered
 vnto my will the delights of heauen, and it hath exchanged heauen for earth. It hath opened the armes (which thou diddest consecrate for thy selfe) to the loue of creatures. This is O Lord the recompence, that I haue made for thy benefits: and these are the fruits, that my senses haue brought forth, which thou haste created. Now what answere shall I make, O Lord, when thou shalt enter into iudgement with mee, and shalt say vnto mee: I haue planted thee as a vine chosen out of many good plantes,Iere. 2. Esay. 5. and how art thou thus peruerted, and become so wilde? If the^ I know not what to answere to this first demaund, what answere shall I make to the second, as touching the benefit of thy preseruation? Thou hast preserued him, O Lord, with thy prouidence, whose studie was onely bent to none other thing, but wholly to transgresse thy law, to persecute thy seruants, to scandalize the Catholicke Church, and to fortifie the kingdome of sinne against thee: thou haste mooued the tongue that did blaspheme thee: thou hast gouerned the members that haue offended thee: and thou haste giuen sustenance to him that hath serued thine enimies in battaile against thee at thine owne cost and charges: so that I haue not onely bin vnthankefull
 for thy benefites, but haue also with the verie same benefits made armour to fight against thee: thou haste appointed all creatures to doe me seruice, and I haue bin enamored with all them, and haue committed adultery with the^ all: forsomuch as for the loue of them I haue so oftentimes offended thee. I haue borne greater affection to the gifts, tha^ to the giuer, and where I should haue taken occasion to acknowledge thine excellent beautie, I blinded my selfe with the sight which I beheld, and would not lift vp mine eyes to consider how farre the Creator excelleth in beautie the creature: thou hast giuen me all things to the end that I shuld giue my self wholly vnto thee, and I haue taken the commoditie of them all, and yet I neuer gaue thee either the glory, or the tribute, which of duty I was bound to giue thee. They were alwaies obedient at my Commandement, (because thou haddest giuen them so in charge,) and I alwaies attended to offend thee, for whose sake each thing was ready to doe mee seruice: Thou haste giuen mee health; and the Diuell hath carried awaie the fruite thereof: Thou haste giuen mee strength, and I haue employed it in the seruice of the DIVELL thine
 enimie. What shall I say? How is it, that so manie kindes of miseries, and afflictions, which I saw in others, were not sufficient to perswade mee, that all their calamities were thy benefites to mee: forsomuch as thou haddest deliuered me from them all? Art thou onlie he to whom it is lawfull for vs not to be thankefull for a benefit receaued? Who is so priuiledged that hee ought not to shew himselfe thankeful vnto him of whom he hath receaued a benefit? If the fiercenes of Lions, and Serpents be tamed with benefits, how is it that thy manifold benefits are not able to make me tame, in such sort that I might some times say with the Prophet:Ier. 5.24. Let vs feare our Lord, who sendeth vs water downe from heauen in due season, both in the morning and euening, and giueth vs aboundance of al good things euery yere: vndoubtedly O lord, it was a sufficient demonstratio^ of thy bountie and excellencie, in that thou hast borne so long with me, being so wicked as I haue beene, and there need no further testimonies to declare thy goodnesse.
And if the account which thou shalt demaunde of mee for these thinges that cost thee so little shall be so strickt, and rigorous: what account shall that be, vvhich
 thou shalt require of mee for those thinges that cost thee thine owne most pretious blood? How haue I peruerted all thy cou^sels? How haue I defaced (so much as lay in me) al the holy misterie of thy incarnatio^? Thou hast made thy selfe man to make me a God: and I (louing mine owne vilenes) haue made my selfe a beast, and the sonne of Sathan. Thou haste abased thy selfe downe into the earth to exalt mee vp to heauen: and I, vnworthie of such a vocation (being not deserued of my part,) would not take notice thereof, nor acknowledge it, but continued still drowned in the filth of mine owne vilenes, and basenes: Thou haste deliuered me out of thraldome, and I returned vnto it againe. Thou haste raised mee from death to life, and I returned to embrace death againe: thou hast incorporated mee with thee, and I returned to ioyne my selfe againe with the diuel, neyther were such excellent benefits of thine able to cause mee to know thee, nor such demo^strations of loue able to allure me to loue thee, nor such merits able to prouoke mee to trust in thee, nor yet such iustice as was executed vppon thee for my sake, to make me afraide of thee. Thou hast humbled thy selfe eue^ to the dust of the earth,
 and I haue verie fondly aduanced my self aloft, and am puffed vp in mine own pride: thou wast contented to stand naked vpon the Crosse for my sake, and all the vvhole world is not enough to satisfie my couetousnes. Vnto thee which art the God and Creator of all thinges, were giuen buffets, and blowes, and I which am a sillie worme of the earth doe greatly disdaine, in case any man doe so much as touch mine apparell.
What shal I say, O my Sauiour, but that the mercy and loue that thou hast shewed towasds me, hath bin so great, that it pleased thee to suffer death, therby to destroy sinne in me, and I presuming ouermuch in that thy goodnes and loue, haue taken encouragement by the same to sinne against thee. Now what blasphemie can be greater than this? I haue taken occasion of thy goodnesse to continue in my wickednesse. I haue bin mooued to sinne by the verie same meane that thou wast mooued to destroy sinne. After this sort haue I peruerted thy counsels, and haue made the inuentions of thy mercy, to serue the wicked inuentions of my malice. Because thou art so good, I imagined that I might be euill. And because thou diddest bestow vppon
 me so great benefites, I concluded that I might commit against thee great offences: So that euen the same medicine vvhich thou haste ordeined against sinne, I made a prouocation vnto sinne: And that sword which thou gauest me to fight against sin, I yeelded it vp into the handes of sinne, that it might bereaue mee of my life. To conclude, thou diddest suffer death as a meane for thee to haue the Soueraignetie ouer the quicke, and the dead: to the end that (as the Apostle saith) those that liue may not liue now to themselues, but to thee,2. Cor. 5. which diddest die for the^:4. Reg. 9. 3. Reg. 21. but I as the son of Iesabel haue vsed thy very death as a meane to spoile thee of thy goodes, by running awaie out of thy seruice, and making my selfe a verie bond-slaue vnto the Diuell thine enimie.
Now what is hee worthie to haue, that hath plaid such a villainous and traiterous part? If the dogges deuoured the flesh of Iesabel for the like offence, how is it, that my flesh remaineth yet vntouched, hauing committed the same offence?Rom. 7. And if the Apostle detested so much the malice of mans heart, for taking occasion of the law to transgresse the same lawe, how much greater malice is this of mine, to take occasion
 occasion of grace, to ouerthrow the same grace? O most meeke and patient Lord in suffering such strokes and buffets, as thou diddest for sinners, but much more patient in suffering after this sort the sinners themselues! But what? will this so great patience endure any long time? I see what thou saist by the Prophet Esay: I haue holden my peace and kept alwaies silence,Esaie 42. and haue suffered much: but now I will speake as a woman that were trauailing in child-bearing.Hebr. 6. verse. 8. Esaie. 5.6. I see that the earth which after raigne yeeldeth no fruite is excommunicated, and accursed, and I know that the Vine, which being duelie manured, and tilled, yeeldeth wilde fruite insteed of good grapes is by thine own order and appointment vtterly destroyed and forsaken. Now then O thou foolish and fruitles branch, how commeth it to passe, that thou diddest not feare the voice of the great wise husbandman, which cutteth off from the vine the branch that beareth no fruite,^ohn. 15.2. and casteth it into the fire? How can he be thought to haue had any iudgement, that feared not such terrible iudgements? How deafe was hee become, that gaue not eare to these callinges? What a dead sleepe was hee in, that was not awaked with the thundering of such terrible
 threatninges? This earthly mansion did greatly delight me, though it were so vnworthie a lodging for my soule, and I tooke very great pleasure to stand among the pricking thornes. The fire of my passions burned mee: the thornes of my appetites pricked mee: the distractions of my thoughtes rented my heart in sunder: the worme of my conscience was euer more gnawing me: and all this I dreamed to be libertie and quietnesse, and these so great miseries I tearmed peace. O how far haue I bin deceaued in the knowledge of my selfe, and how rebellious haue I bin against thee O Lord, whom of dutie I ought continually to haue serued.
Now what shall I doe, O my Almightie God: Alas what shall I doe?Psalm. 138 I know certainely, that I am vnworthy to appeare in thy presence, or once to lift vp mine eies to behold thee: But whether shall I goe? where shall I hide my selfe fro^ thee? what? art thou my father, and the father of mercies, which haue neither measure, nor end? For although I haue refused to be thy son: yet haste not thou hitherto refused to be my father: and although I haue committed such grieuous offe^ces, as for the which thou mightest condemne me: yet hast not
 thou lost the meanes whereby thou maiest saue mee. What els may I then doe, but cast my selfe downe at thy feete, and beseech thee of mercie? Whome els shall I call vppon, or who can succour mee, but thou alone? Art not thou my Creator, my maker, my gouernour, my redeemer, my deliuerer, my king, my pastour, my priest, and my sacrifice? To whome then shall I goe, or whether shall I flie, but vnto thee? If thou refuse me, who will receaue me? If thou forsake me, who will defend me? Acknowledge O my most merciful Lord, this feelie straied sheepe, that returneth now againe vnto thee. If I come full of scabbes and woundes, thou canst heale me againe. If I be blind, thou canst restore me to my sight againe. If I be deade, thou canst raise mee vp againe. If I be filthie, thou canst make mee cleane againe. Thou shalt sprinkle me O Lord with Isope, and I shall be cleane. Thou shalt wash mee,Psalm. 50. and I shall be whiter than snow. Thy mercie is greater than mine offences. Thy pittie is more than my wickednes, and thou art able to pardon more sinnes than I am able to commit. Wherefore despise me not, O Lord, neither looke vnto the multitude of my sins, but vnto the multitude of thy mercies. To thee, O thou
 my most mercifull LORDE, I make my humble supplication, that liuest and raignest for euer and euer, world without end. Amen.



OF THE GREAT COMMOdities, and fruits, that ensue of true Contrition, and earnest sorrow for our sins. CHAPTER VI.
THESE are, good Christian reader, the praiers, and considerations, that maie help vs to attaine vnto this so great grace of Contrition. And in this part I haue staied the longer, because to haue Contrition for our sinnes is the key and foundation of all the other parts of Pennance,Contrition for our sins, is the key and foundation of pennance and of all our profit in the spirituall life. Wherefore these praiers ought to be read with as great deuotion, closse recollection of minde, and preparation, as is possible, chusing with all a fit conuenient time, and a solitary place for the same: For oftentimes it chanseth,Praier maketh an alteration in our soule. that like as one that beginneth to pray without deuotio^, doth afterwades find it: euen so he that beginneth to read some of these praiers or cosiderations,
 without Contrition, may in the middest of his prayers obteine it: For as wee reade that our Sauiour was transfigured (as saint Luke writeth) whiles he was praying:Luk. 9. Mat. 17. Mar. 9. euen so many times whiles we be at our prayers, there are wrought many changes in our soules, and wee obteine that at the end of our praiers,The end of praier is better than the beginning. which at the beginning we had not: and therefore it is commonly said, that the end of prayer is better than the beginning.
Now so soone as the Penitent sinner (whether it be by this meane, or by any other,) obteineth the spirit of true Contrition, forthwith at that very instant is the grace of the holy ghost restored vnto him, and the same spirit is giuen vnto him to be his teacher, director, and gouernour of his life: to the end, that it may like a wise and faithfull Pilot, guide him safely vnto the hauen through the raging waues of the te^pestuous sea of this life. At that very time also hee is forthwith vnited by Charitie vnto our Sauiour Christ, as a liuely member to his head: to the end, that being incorporated with him, hee may be made partaker of the influences of his grace, and of the merits and paines of his death, and of his most holy life. Then is hee likewise
 receaued and adopted for the son of God, named an inheritour of his kingdome, and treyted as his sonne: For then Almightie God taketh such care and prouidence for him, as he is wont to doe for those whome he so receaueth for his sonnes. Then doth the mercifull Father receaue againe his Prodigall sonne into his house,Luke. 15. and commandeth, that he be apparrelled with the first garment of grace, and giueth him the ring of the secrets of his diuine wisedome: to wit, a new knowledge that is giuen vnto him of thinges apperteyning to almightie God, which is hid from worldly eies.
At that time doe the heauens reioyce, and the angels sing praises vnto almightie God,Luke. 15. verse. 7. and a solemne feast is celebrated in that supreame Court for the conuersion of their new brother. And all creatures that were sorrowfull before for the offences committed against the Creator, and for the losse of his creature, are then in great ioy, and gladnesse, and doe sing most sweetly Alleluia, for that he is now reconciled and restored againe vnto his grace and fauour. And among them all, the good pastour that had taken such paines in seeking out his straied sheep, and in carrying him home vpon his shoulders to his sheepecote, inuiteth
 now vnto him all his friendes, and neighbours, and saith vnto them: Reioyce ye all with me, for I haue now fou^d againe my straid sheepe that was lost.Luke. 15.
And here it is to be noted, that the greater the contrition and humilitie of the penitent sinner is, the greater disposition hee hath therby to receaue a more high grace, and it is wont to be a signe of greater mercie shewed vnto him: For as in buildinges, when the foundations are laid very deepe, wee vnderstand thereby, that the worke shall be of very great height, and the Tree that casteth his rootes verie deepe into the earth; groweth commonly bigger than others: euen so likewise the more that that most high Soueraigne Lord preuenteth a man with greater humilitie, and repentance for his wicked life, it is a signe, that hee disposeth him vnto higher grace.
Psa. 88. ve 15.The Prophet saieth, that iustice and iudgement are the preparations for the seate of Almightie God. It apperteineth to iudgement to examine the cause, and to iustice to execute the sentence. Now the soule that doth both the one, and the other: I meane, that entring into iudgement with her selfe, doth forthwith humbly acknowledge the offence shee hath committed,
 (which was in despising her Creator, for the delight of the creature) and according to this iudgement doth execute the sentence (which is, that he that hath thus dishonored almightie God, doe humble and dishonour himselfe, yea and abase himselfe euen to the dust of the earth, and that hee that hath taken inordinate delight in creatures, doe lament and chastise himselfe very sharpely for his delight,) such a soule I say, prepareth her selfe to be the seat of almightie God, and the habitation of that diuine wisdome, which wil make his dwelling place in her. S. Bernard saieth,S. Bernard. God hath one foote of feare: and another of loue. that Almighty god hath two feet: the one of feare, the other of loue: and when he intendeth to enter into a soule, his manner is, first to put into it his foot of feare, and afterwardes his foot of loue: and the greater the feare is that goeth before, the greater is the loue commonly that foloweth after.1. Reg. 2. Deut. 32. Tob. 13. Our Lord (saieth the Prophet) killeth, and giueth life, he bringeth into hell, and plucketh out againe. For this is the wont, and vsuall manner of this Lord, that after that sinners are come to haue so great feare and sorrow for their sinnes, that they seeme alreadie to bee in hell for the same, hee then mercifullie deliuereth them out from thence, and raiseth them vp againe,
 and sendeth them so many great comforts, and consolations, as the multitude of their griefes and sorrowes was great, which they had before.
Wherefore (O my good Christian brother) when thou shalt perceaue thy selfe thus troubled with these assaultes of mistrustfulnes, be not therefore dismaied, but thinke then with thy selfe, that there is ministred vnto thee a strong purgatio^, to the end that therwith thou maiest recouer thy health more perfectly: and that thou art washed with such a strong water, to the end thou shouldest remaine more pure, and cleane: and that thou art heated with such a hotte burning flame, to the end it may scoure away from thee all the rustinesse of the vices, that haue sticked so long vnto thee. Then oughtest thou to call vpon almightie God with the Prophet, saying: O Lord thou haste moued the earth and troubled the same:Psal. 39. restore that againe vvhich is broken, sith thou diddest moue it, and immediatly thou shalt see that verified in thy selfe, which the Prophet saierh: The earth trembled,Psal. 75. and was in quiet, when almightie God arose to giue iudgement: For when thou thy selfe (being mooued thereunto by almightie God) shalt begin to giue that iudgme^t
 vpon thy selfe, (as we haue before declared, then shall the earth of thy soule tre^ble with the feare and terrour of the iustice of Almightie God. Howbeit afterwardes it shalbe quieted againe, with the peace, and confidence, which our lord of his mercie will send vnto thee,Esaic. 4. Our Lord vseth commo^ly in the co^uersio^ of sinners to send them first a terour and feare of his terrible iustice: and afterwardes he comforteth them againe with the spirit of loue, and with confidence in his mercie. 3. Reg. 19. which washeth awaie the filthines of the daughters of Sion, and taketh awaie the bloud from among them, with the spirit of iudgment, and with the spirit of heate, to wit, by striking first a terrour into the soule with the spirit of iudgement, and with the feare of the iustice of Almightie God: and afterwardes by comforting the soule againe with the spirit of loue, and with co^fidence in his diuine mercie. Elias heard first the thunder and tre^bling of the earth, and the tempestuous windes that shaked the hills: but after the tempest, there followed a sweete and pleasant aire, in which Almightie God came him selfe.
This is the order that is co^monly wont to be kept in the conuersio^ of fouls: which is euen the same that our Lord obserued in the sanctification of the worlde, which receaued first the law and afterwards the gospell. And conformable vnto this order, the soule must first feele in it self
 the operation and rigour of the law,The Law feareth. The Gospell comforteth. Exod. 19. and afterwards the peace and consolation of the Gospell. The operation of the law is to strike a terrour, and to feare, as it was signified by the feare wherewithall it vvas first giuen vpon the Mount Sinay:Act. 2. Mat. 5. But the operation of the Gospell is to comfort and to encourage as it did, when it was giuen vpon the day of Pentecost vpon the Mount Syon. He then that intendeth to come vnto this Mount, must first passe by the other Mount: that is to say, hee that will receaue the spirit of loue, must first feele the spirit of feare: And he that vvill feele in his soul the operatio^, and consolation of the Gospell, must first passe by the operation, and feare of the law: And vnto the soule that is thus disposed, there are promised and offered all the graces, and treasures of the Gospell. As the Prophet signified, when speaking in the person of our Sauiour Christ he said:Esay. 61. Luke. 4. The spirit of our Lord is in me, for he hath annoynted me with his grace, and hath sent mee to preach vnto the meeke, to the end that I might cure them, that had their heartes wounded, and declare vnto them that are in captiuity, redemption: and to them that be prisoners liberty: and that I should comfort
 the afflicted, and strengthen such as doe bewaile Syon, and that in steede of ashes I should giue them a Crowne, and in steede of bewailing, the oyle of co^fort, and in steed of theyr spirit of sorrow and affl^ction a ma^tell of praises. Consider now here, by how many kindes of metaphors the workes of the law, and of pennance, are signified on the one side, and the works of the gospell and of grace on the other side, and how the one are promised for the other.
Wherfore whosoeuer seeketh to enter into Christes Pallace,How wee must enter into Christs Pallace. and into the Seller where the pretious wines of the true Salomon are, he must vndersta^d, that the gate whereby we must enter in, is by the bitternes of penance, and by affliction with paines and tribulations. And in case he goe about to enter in by any other way, hee shall be guilty of burglary, and theft. And therefore (my good Christian brother) ascend vpp first with the spouse vnto the hill of mirre, (which is the bitternes of sorrow and mortification,) and thou shalt heare forthwith those wordes that follow.Cantic. 3.7. Thou art whollie beautifull O my dearely beloued, and no manner of spot is in thee.
True it is, that sometimes it so falleth out that our Lord chaungeth this order, and
 preuenteth them whome hee mindeth to drawe vnto him: first, with blessinges of sweetnes, to the end they should not retire, and shrinke backe with the strokes of mistrustfulnes, and terrour of Pennance, but after that they be once encouraged, and confirmed with those pledges of hys mercy, he then sendeth immediately vnto them a spirit of great sorrow and feare: after which followeth againe the grace of peace and consolation, whereof wee haue spoken before. This hath our Lord himselfe signified, speaking with the soule of a true penitent by the Prophet Osee,Osee. 2.14. saying: Behold I will giue her sucke from my breast, and will lead her into the Desert. I will speake vnto her hart, and will giue her the valley of Achor, (vvhich signifieth trouble,) that it may open vnto her the way to hope, and there shall she sing in such sort as she sung in the dayes of her childhood: so that first here is giuen to the soule, the milke of spirituall sweetnes, and afterwards the valley of Achor, which is the trouble and bitternes of Contrition: and this being done, there doe follow out of hand the songs of her childhood, which are the reioycinges, and praysinges of the soule, receauing inwardly the pledges of
 new loue, and grace, which our Lord sendeth vnto her, as it were a pledge of Matrimony, and the first fruites of his glory.
And it is much to be noted, that this very order which we haue here declared, and is commonly obserued in the chaunging of life, and in departing from sin to grace,The order that our Lord commonly obserueth in exalting a soul from a lesser grace to a higher grace. is also generally obserued in the ascending from a lesser grace to a greater grace: for when our Lord intendeth to exalt and lift vp a soule vnto greater things: first, hee disposeth her with mourninges, desires, feares, and sorrowes, and with affliction of spirit, and trouble of body, that so he may bestow his gifts vpon her: meaning thereby, that this rayme and tempestuous winter, should alwaies goe before the pleasant and fruitfull sommer of his gifts, and graces. And the greater that the graces shalbe, the greater are the afflictions, and desires, which are wont to goe before, to dispose the soule to receaue the same graces. Let no man therefore dispaire, nor be discomforted, when hee shall see himselfe afflicted after this sort, but let him rather take the same for a pledge and signe of new graces, and fauours, which our Lord intendeth to send vnto him.



OF CONFESSION OF OVR sinnes to our Ghostly Father.


Accipite spiritum sanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata remittuntu^ eis, and quorum retinueritis, retenta sunt. Iohn. 20 22. Multi credentium veniebant confitentes, and annunciantes actus suos. Act. 19.18.



That it is no dishonour but an honour to almighty God, that Christian Bishops and Priestes doe forgiue, and reteine sinnes in the Sacrament of Pennance, according to our Sauiour Chrtsts Commission graunted vnto them. @. 1.
IT appeareth in the Holy Scriptures, that the Iewes vnder pretence that Almightie God only forgiueth sinnes, obiected blasphemie euen vnto our Sauiour Christ himselfe, whilest hee was conuersant here in earth, for that hee forgaue sins.
(...)
 sinnes, whatsoeuer christian seeketh afterwards in such wi^e for remission of hys sinnes of Almightie God alone, by meanes of our Sauiour Christ, as that he beleeueth not that Christs Priests haue full Power and commission from our Sauiour Christ, to forgiue and reteine sinnes, or contemneth, or wilfully refu eth, or neglecteth the same power, and commission: such a wicked christian shall not obteine remission of his sinnes of almighty God, nor haue any benefit of the merits of the Passion, and death of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, or of any of his sacraments:Note that Christs ordinance is that all Christians that sin deadly after Baptisme must haue absolution of their sins of his priests but offendeth almighty God most grieuouslie by breaking and peruerting our Sauiour Christs owne will and ordinance, which hee hath appointed to continue for euer in his Catholicke Church. And this holy ordinance of his is, that all christians should humbly ^ubmit them-selues vnto his Priestes, and make confession vnto them of all their deadly sins committed after their baptisme, and haue absolution of them of his Priestes, according to the commission and power, which hee hath giuen vnto them in ministring the sacrament of Pennance: whereby the vertue of the me^its of his most bitter passion and death, is imparted in the Catholicke Church vnto all humble penitent, and obedient Catholicke Christians, and to none other.
The old heretickes called Nouatians (as appeareth in the Ecclesiasticall history,Socrates li. 7. Hist. Ece. cap. 21. S. Amb. lib. 1. de penitentia cap. 2.) denied also that christian Priestes haue any commission or power from our Sauiour Christ to forgiue or reteine sins in the church after baptisme: and they made euen the same pretence then, as their schollers doe now at this day, that they would attribute this honour to almighty God alone to forgiue sinnes, and that they would confesse theyr sinnes to him onelie:
 which heresie was then abhorred and condemned by all the Bishops and Pastours of Christs Catholicke Church, and written very earnestly against by Saint Cyprian, Saint Ambrose, Pacianus, and other holy auncient renowmed fathers: whose bookes and writings against the Nouatians haue euer afterwardes bin approued in all ages among all christians throughout Christendome, and not one booke of the Nouatians hath remained to the posterity, nor can be seene at this day.S. Ambro. lib. 1: de peniten.. ca. 2. And S. Ambrose proueth vnto the N^uatians, that Catholickes doe honour Christ, in obeying humbly his commission, and commandement, by seeking for absolution of their sinnes, at his Priestes hands, and that the Nouatians by contemning, and resisting Christs commission graunted therein vnto his priests, doe greatly dishonour Christ.S. August. Hom. 49.50 Tomo. 10. And S. Augustine in like manner confuteth that heresie of the Nouatians, (wherwith as it seemeth some of his owne flocke within hys Dioces were infected,) and saieth these wordes vnto them. Doe ye such Penance, as is wont to be done in the Church, that the Church may pray for you. And let no man say: I doe Penance secretly: I doe it before God alone: God which hath to pardon me, knoweth well that I repent in my hart:Iohn. 3.5. Act. 2.38. Act. 22.17. 1. Cor. 6.11. Gal. 3.27. Ephe. 5.26.27. Tit. 3.5. 1. Pet. 3.21. Concil. mileuitanu^. Can. 2. S. Ciprian. Epist. ad Ianuariu^, and caeteros Episcopos Numid. S. Aug. Tom. 7. contra duos Epi. pelag. lib. 3. Cap. 3. and contra Iulianu^ pelag. lib. 6. Cap. 4. and Tomo. 8. Psal. 50. and tract. 3. in Ioan and lib. 4 de baptismo Cap. 22. Epi. 108. S. Nazianzenus ora. in sanctu^ lauachrum. S. Ciril. Hierosol. in catech. S. Chri. Hom. 24 in Ioan. If this be all, then in vaine was it said vnto the Priests: whose sinnes yee shall loose in earth, they shall be loosed in heauen: Then in vaine were the keyes giuen to the Church. Thus farre be S. Augustines wordes.
Now whereas it is euident in the holy scriptures, and also in the Nicene Creede, and in the bookes of the ancient holy Fathers, that by meane of the sacrament of Baptisme (as by an instrumentall cause) all our sinnes are truely washed away, I doe greatly meruaile, why it should not as well be accounted by the Heretickes a dishonour to Almighty
 God, that Christian Priestes doe baptize, and wash sinners of their sinnes in the Sacrament of Baptisme, as they accounte it a dishonour vnto him, that Christian priestes according to his owne commission doe absolue sinners of their sinnes in the Sacrament of Penaunce. For it cannot be denied, but that al christians since Christes ascension to this day haue beleeued, and confessed, that there is no remission of sinnes but in the Catholicke Church: nor ordinarily otherwise than by the ministerie of the priestes of the said Catholicke Church. And that like as when wee be receiued and incorporated into Christs Church it is necessary that we haue remission of originall sinne, and of all our actuall sinnes by meanes of the Sacrament of Bapti^me, according to Christes institutio^ thereof: who said not onlie, who so shal beleeue, shalbe saued: but who so shall beleeue, and be baptized, shalbe saued:Mar. 16.16 Iohn. 3.5. Iohn. 20.22 23. Christes Priests haue as good and plaine commission from Christ to absolue vs fro^ our sinnes by the sacrament of Pe^nance, as they haue to wash vs of our sins by the Sacrame^t of Baptisme. Saint Ambros. lib. 1. de peniten- Cap. 7. euen so when we sinne deadlie after Baptisme, it is necessary also, that those deadlie sinnes be forgiuen vs by meanes of the sacrament of Pennance, instituted by our Sauiour Christ to that end. Wherefore sith the ministerie of Priestes is vsed in both the sacramentes, for imparting by them vnto vs remission of our sinnes, and sith priestes haue as good warrant, commission and power from our Sauiour Christ, and as plainly expressed in the holie scriptures, to impart vnto vs remission of our sinnes by the sacrament of penaunce, as they haue by the sacrament of Baptisme, (which be as it were two condit pipes to deriue vnto vs the vertue of the merites of our Sauiour Christes passion, and death,) what should moue the heretikes to accounte the ministrie of Christes Priestes to be a more dishonour vnto our Sauiour Christ in ministering the one Sacrament
 vnto vs, than in ministering the other? And Saint Ambrose in his time made the very same demaund of the Nouatian heretikes: asking them why it should be more dishonour to Almightie God, or more impossible, or more inco^uenient for priestes to forgiue sins hy the sacrament of penance then by the sacrament of Bapti^me, sith it is the holie ghost that forgiueth sins by the Priestes office and ministerie in both the s^cramentes?
Ad hereunto this one notable reason, that sith Almightie God without any dishonour at al to him selfe giueth vertue and force to the dead element of water to purge sinnes in the ^acrament of Baptisme, and vseth that element as his instrument in imparting to vs thereby Remission of our sinnes, he may much more vse in the sacrament of pennaunce for the same effect the ministerial office of a man, being a reasonable creature, whome he hath thereby called to the high office of Priesthod, and hath thereby appointed him to be a dispensator of his misteries, and graces towards vs. And if some wrangling Puritane Caluenist will here cauill, and aie, that they doe also deny, that Almightie God v^eth water as his instrument in the ^acrament of Baptisme to the remission of sins: I refer the^ then vnto sundrie places of the holy Scripture^ inculcating most euidentlie this verity:Iohn. 3.5. Act. 2.38. Act. 22.17. 1. Co. 6.11. Ephe. 5.26.27. Tit. 35 1. pet. 3.21. but especiallie let them note that notable place of Saint Paule to the Ephesians in the fifte chapter, verse. 26.27. Where our Sauiour is saied to be mundans ecc^esiam s^am lauachro aquae in verb^, vt exhiberet ips^ sibi gloriosam ecclesiam, non habentem maculam, aut r^gam, aut aliquid huiusmodi, sed vt sit sancta, and ^mmaculata. That is to say: clen^^ng and washing his Church by the laue^ ^f water in the word, that he might present to himselfe a glorious Church, not hauing spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing,
 but that it may be holy, and vnspotted. Where you see euidently, that the Apostle expresseth our Sauiours instrume^t wherwith he washeth his Church from al ^pots of sinnes, to be the lauer of water, to wit, the water of Baptisme. I referre them also to the auncient holy doctours of Christes Church and namely to Saint Augustine de Baptismo contra donatistas: and to Saint Ambrose vpon this place who presuppo^e it as a thing very manifest, and cleare, that Baptisme washeth away our sinnes. And the caluinistes in denying this truth shew themselues to be more wicked, and absurde, than the Nouatian heretikes were.
Wherefore let no christian deceaue him selfe with this deceitfull pretence of the heretikes, but haue due regard herein to his owne saluation.Saint Ierom ad demetr. ad Cap. 6. For the Sacrament of penau^ce is the second table or boord after shipwrake, (as Saint Ierome calleth it) and whatsoeuer christian sinning deadlie after baptisme will not take hold of this second table shall vndoubtedly perish euerlastingly, and be damned in Hell fire because hee contemneth, and wilfullie neglecteth Christes commission ordeined for his saluation.S. August. Epist. 180. And accordingly Saint Augustine speaking of both the sacramentes, saieth* It is a pitifull case, when by the absence of God his Priestes men depart this life, aut non regenerati, aut ligati: that is, either vnbaptized or not absolued from their sins, but bou^d, because such shalbe excluded from euerlasting life, and euerlasting damnation followeth them.Saint Victor. lib. 2. de persecutione Vandalica S. Ciprian Epist. 54. And Saint victor telleth the most lamentable complaint of the Catholicke people in his time, when the Priestes were banished by the Arian Heretiks, and how they saied then one to another: Who shall baptise these infants? Who shall minister Penaunce vnto vs, and loose vs from the Bonds of our sinnes? And Saint CIPRIAN,
 very often, and namelie in his fiftie foure epistle calleth it a great cruelty, and such as Priestes shall answere for, to suffer any man that is penitent for his sins, to depart this life without this Absolution, and reconciliation. Because (saieth he) the law-maker himselfe our Sauiour Christ hath graunted, and ordeined, that thinges bound in earth, shall also be bound in Heauen, and that those thinges there be loosed, which were loosed here in the Catholike Church.
So that vpon all the premisses we may wel conclude, that sith christian priestes haue our Sauiour Christes owne commission and authority plainely specified in the Gospell to warrant them for absoluing all penitent sinners of their deadlie sinnes committed after baptisme, it is a great malice and follie in the Heretickes, to account it any dishonour at all to Almightie God, that christian priestes doe obediently performe and execute our Sauiour Christes Commission therein.


Of the commission, power, and authority, giuen in the Gospell by our Sauiour Christ him selfe, to his Apostles, and to Bishoppes and Priestes, their Successours, to absolue, and reteine sins. @. 2.
BVT the Heretiks will here demaunde  some place of scripture, whereby it may appeare that Priestes haue commission and power fro^ our Sauiour Christ, to absolue and retaine sinnes. I answere  that it appeareth most euidentlie in the twentith chapter of Saint Iohns Gospell, that our Sauiour Christ after his Resurrection gaue to his Apostles and their successours, full commission and power to forgiue and retaine sins. Note I beseech
 you these plaine wordes of our Sauiour in that chapter. As my Father hath sent me,Iohn. 20.22.23. I also doe send you: when he had said this, he breathed vpo^ them. And he saieth vnto them: Receaue ye the Holie Ghost: whose sinnes ye shall forgiue, they are forgiuen them: and whose sins ye shall retaine, they are retained. In which words the Christian reader must diligently note,Mat. 28.18.19. that like as when our Sauiour after his Resurrection gaue commission and power to his Apostles, and their successours, to preach and baptise throughout the whole world, the first made mention of his owne commission and power, which hee had receaued therein as a man of his Father: euen so after his Resurrection also before he instituted the sacrament of pennance,Iohn. 20.2.23. and gaue to his Apostles and their successours commission and power to forgiue sins, least the wicked should afterwardes demaund, by what commission they tooke vpon them to exercise so high an office, and function, he sheweth first his fathers commission giuen vnto him as man, and then in plaine wordes he imparteth this power vnto his Apostles, and to Bis^oppes and Priestes their successours, to forgiue and retaine sinnes. So that who so now after this so plaine commission of our Sauiour Christ graunted vnto his priestes to forgiue sinnes, doth make any doubte, whether his priests haue power (as ministers of God) to forgiue sins by the same meane they call into doubt (as the wicked Iewes did) whether our Sauiour Christ coulde forgiue sinnes:Math. 9.5. Marc. 2.5. Luc. 5.21. Iohn. 20.21.22 and 23. and whether he had any such commission and power graunted vnto him as man by his Father.
And here for the satisfying of some Readers, I thinke it co^uenient, to examin a litle, how fo^dly or rather maliciously the heretiks of our time do e^deuour to auoide this manifest text of our Sauiour
 Christs commission graunted vnto his Apostles,Note the Heretickes new deuised interpretation of Christs commission gra^ted to hys Apostles, and their successours: videl. that to remit sinnes, is nothing else but to preach the ghospell. and their successours, to remit sinnes in the sacrament of pennance, by giuing a false glose vnto the text, and interpreting this commission of remitting sins, to be nothing els, but only a commission to preach the Gospell: that so they might bring all remission of sinnes to only faith, and exclude all sacraments, sacrifice, praiers, and other ordinarie meanes, appointed and left by our Sauiour Christ in his Catholike church to that end. And this is the foundation, and principall bulwark of their other new erronious doctrines, and lately deuised caluinisticall religio^, for establishing wherof they litle care to fal into manifold grosse, and most horrible absurdities.
First therefore, that this commission giuen by our Sauiour Christ here in the twentith chapter of  S. Iohn vnto his Apostles, and theyr successours, signifieth not the Apostles authority or commaundement to preach the gospell, it appeareth verie plainly: forsomuch as that comandement of Christ vnto them to preach the gospell, was giuen in other manner, by other very plaine and expresse words in the holy scripture. As in S. Math. 28.19. Euntes ergo docete omnes gentes: that is. Going therefore teach yee all Nations.Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.15 And in S. Marke. 16.15. Euntes in mundu^ vniuersum, praedicate Euangelium omni creatura: that is* Going into the whole world, preach yee the Gospell to all creatures.
Secondly, we must note, that this commissio^ giuen  by our Sauiour vnto his apostles, and their successours in the 20. chap. of S. Iohn, doth not signifie that one speciall kind of preaching Pennance to remission of sins: for he that preacheth penance to a multitude of people, (as S. Iohn Baptist did) doth not thereby remit the hearers sins. Neither did our @auiour Christ himselfe remit the Iewes sins by his
 preaching vnto them, many of them hauing the more sin, in that they heard, and yet obeyed not the gospell: But this remitting of sinnes, whereof our Sauiour Christ speaketh in this 20. cap. of S. Iohn, was such, that thereupon remission in heauen proceeded, or was ioyned. Is it probable that our Sauiour would euer haue said to his apostles, Vnto whome soeuer ye preach Penance, or Remission of sinnes, they shall haue Remission of theyr sinnes in heauen? Oftentimes wee see that repentance followeth vpon good preaching, and so doth it sometimes also vpon many mens and womens good cou^saile, and aduise: yet were it a straunge speech to say, that euery man and woman that giueth good aduise vnto another forgiueth his sinnes.
Thirdly, this forme of speech here, of remitting  of sinnes, is vsuall in the holy scriptures: and signifieth not preaching of forgiuenes of sinnes, but actuall forgiuenes of sinnes. As when Christ said to the man sicke of the palsey, and to Mary Magdalen. Remittuntur tibi peccata tua. Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. And in S. Mathew 12. verse 32.Luke. 5.20. Luke. 7.48. Mat. 12.32 Luk. 12.10. Iac. 5.15. And in Saint Luke. 12. verse 10. Non remittetur ei, neque in hoc saecu^^, neque in futuro. And in S. Iames Epist. 5. ver. 15. si in peccatis fuerit remittentur ei. And in a hundred such like places. By all which it appeareth very plainly, that the nevv deuised vvrangling euasion of the Heretickes is foolish and peruerse, in that they vvould vvrest the meaning of our Sauiour Christs commission, graunted to his apostles, and their successours, to forgiue sins, to be nothing els, but only a commission to preach the Gospell vnto sinners: wheras our Sauiour meant therby (according as it hath euer bin since, beleeued and practised in all ages in Christs catholike church) that it was a plaine commission giuen by him to his apostles and
 their successors actually to forgiue sins in the sacrament of Pennance.
Fourthly, the Prophets preached also to sinners to repent theyr sinnes, and to beleeue, that by the Messias they should haue Remission of theyr sins: and yet the auncient Holy Doctors of Christes church beleeued and taught, that Christ gaue to S. Peter, and to the other Apostles, a farre higher power of forgiuing, and reteyning sinnes than the prophets had. And it is very straunge, that any wise man can be so farre abused by Heretickes, as to thinke, that only to declare to sinners in a sermon, that theyr sinnes be forgiuen them, was that so great and excellent rewarde, which our sauiour Christ promised so solemnely before his Passion to S. Peter, for his so notable confessio^ of him to be the sonne of God:Mat. 16.19 for which our sauiour promised him in recompence, that he would giue vnto him the keyes of the kingdome of heauen: and that whatsoeuer he should binde in earth should be bound in heauen, etc. Surely, the auncient Holy Doctors of Christes Church, would neuer haue so highly extolled this power of the keyes of the kingdome of heauen,Mat. 16.19 Mat. 18.18 Iohn. 20.23 of binding and loosing in earth, of forgiuing and reteyning sinnes, which our sauiour gaue to S. Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, and their successours, neyther would they haue bin in so great admiration of the great office, and high dignity, that christian Priests haue thereby, in case it were no more, hut only to declare to sinners in a sermon, that theyr sinnes be forgiuen them by beleeuing the Gospell.
Fiftly: In the wordes of Christ in the twenteth chapter of Saint Iohn this is further to he noted, that at what time after his Resurrection, and before his Ascension into heauen he gaue vnto his Apostles power, and commission to forgiue sinnes in
 eatth, he breathed vpon his Apostles, and gaue vnto them the Holy Ghost, by an outward signe. Now I demaund what neede was there to giue the Holy Ghost so extraordinarily at that time to all the Apostles for this only effect, to declare in a sermon to a sinner, that his sinnes be forgiuen him: for although our Sauiour gaue not then the holy Ghost so fully vnto them for all purposes, as he did afterwards at Whitsontide:Quest. no. and veter. testamenti. quest. 93. contra epist. parmeniani. lib. 2. ca. 11 S. Cirillus. lib. 12. cap. 56. in Ioh. yet for the grace of the sacrament of Orders (as S. Augustine saith) and that none hereafter should doubt of the power of christian Priests in forgiuing of sinnes, the Holy Ghost was then purposely giuen vnto them for the exercise of the same power. Wherefore, if any will yet doubt of the Priests power therein, he must needs consequently deny the Holy Ghost to be God, and not to haue power to forgiue sins. Saint Cirill saieth: It is not any absurde thing, or any inconuenience at all, that they forgiue sinnes, who haue the holy Ghost: For when they forgiue or retaine sinnes, the Holy Ghost forgiueth or retaineth sinnes in them, and that they doe two waies: first in Baptisme, and afterwards in Penance: S. Chrisostome also declareth the true meaning of Christs wordes, and of his commission, power, and dignity, giuen to Priests in the Gospell of S. Iohn. chap. 20. And because his wordes be notable, I will rehearse them at large. Thus he sayeth.8. Chrisost. lib. 1. de Sacerdotio. They that dwell in the earth, and conuerse in it, to them commission is giuen to dispense those thinges that are in heauen. To them it is giuen to haue this power, which almightie God would not to be giuen eyther to Angell, or Arke-angell: For to them it is not said:Iohn. 20. whatsoeuer yee shall binde in Earth, shall be bound in Heauen: and whatsoeuer yee shall loose in Earth, shall be loosed in Heauen. The earthly Princes indeede haue also power to binde, but the bodies only: but that binding of Priestes which
 I speake of, toucheth the very soule it selfe, and reacheth euen to the heauens. Insomuch that whatsoeuer the Priestes shall doe beneath. The very same doth almighty God aboue, and the sentence of the seruant our Lord doth confirme. And indeed what is this els, but that the power of heauenly things is graunted by God vnto them. Whose sinnes soeuer (saith he) ye shall retaine, they are retained. What power I beseech you can be greater tha^ this.Iohn. 20.21 22. and 23. The father gaue all power to the sonne: but I see the same power deliuered altogether by the sonne vnto them. These be saint Chrisostomes owne vvordes, grounded vpon the true sense of Christs commission, graunted vnto his apostles, and to Bishops and Priests their successours in the twentith chapter of saint Iohn. And the same sense of Christs commission signified in those words, hath beene allowed by all the auncient holy Fathers, and practised accordingly in Christs catholicke church in all christian countries: wherefore the late Holy Generall Councell of Trent hath confirmed the same true sense and meaning of Christs commission, and condemneth al other false interpretations of them in these vvordes.Concil. Trident. saess. 14 in doctrina de sacrame^to peniten^. cap. 1. And our Lord did then specially institute the sacrament of Pennance, when being raysed from the dead, he breathed vpo^ his Disciples, saying. Receaue yee the Holy Ghost, whose sinnes yee shall forgiue, they are forgiuen: and whose sinnes yee shall retaine they are retained: By which so notable fact, and plaine wordes, the consent generally of all the Fathers hath euermore vnderstood, that a power of forgiuing and reteyning of sinnes, was communicated vnto the Apostles, and theyr lawfull Successours, for reconciling of the faithfull that be fallen after Baptisme. And the Nouatians (who in times past, obstinately denied the power of forgiuing of sinnes) the Catholicke Church hath with great reason reiected, and condemned as Heretickes.
 Wherefore this Holy Councell allowing, and receauing this true meaning of those wordes of our Lord, condemneth the fond interpretations of those men, which against the institution of this sacrament, doe falsly wrest those wordes vnto a power of preaching the word of God, and declaring the Gospell of Christ.
This confirmation of the true sense of Christes vvords by all the learned Fathers in the late holy generall Councel of Trent is sufficient for al faithfull obedient catholiks, knowing that our Sauiour hath commaunded vs, humbly to obey the Gouernours of his catholicke church, saying:Luk. 10.15. Hee that heareth you, heareth mee: and hee that despiseth you, despiseth me.


That in sacramentall confession it is not sufficient for a penitent sinner to confesse to his Ghostly Father in a generall sort, that he is a sinner: but he must also confesse vnto him all his deadly sinnes in particular wise. @. 3.
THE Hereticks to shift off sacramentall confession of their deadly sins vnto theyr ghostly father, vvill seeme sometimes to graunt, that Priests haue commission and power from our Sauiour Christ, both to absolue sinners of theyr sinnes, and also to retaine theyr sinnes. Which COMMISSION and POVVER (say they) the PRIESTS may exercise when all sinners doe in a
 common praier according to the new Geneua manner make a common generall confession of theyr sinnes with the whole congregation in a generall sort, saying, or singing all alowd these wordes: I am a sinner, and that then the priest may absolue all the whole people together in the church of all theyr sinnes. And therefore (say they) it is superfluous for euery sinner to confesse vnto hys Ghostly Father his deadly sinnes, by specifying them in particular wise vnto him.
I answere, that this generall manner of confession of sinnes, in saying I am a sinner, is not sufficient to obtaine remissio^ of euery particular offence, but that euery penitent sinner ought to specifie in particular wise in his confession vnto his Ghostly Father all his deadly sinnes that hee remembreth. And that for diuers reasons, and for the auoyding of diuers great inconueniences, and absurde errors, whereof some of the most importaunce I will here aledge.
The Ghostly Father knoweth not the secret woundes of our soules, vnlesse wee confesse the^ particularly vnto him.For first, the Ghostly Father is appoynted by Christ to be here in earth a spirituall Iudge, surgion, and phisition of the woundes of a sinners soule: and I thinke all men will graunt, that it is not sufficient for one that hath in a battaile receaued ten, or fifteene or eighteene woundes in seuerall parts of hys body, to tell his surgion in a generall sorte, that he is wounded in his body; but hee must shew vnto him all his wounds in particular wise, one by one, in all parts of his body: to the end that the surgion may duelie consider, and iudge of all the vvoundes particularly, vvhich be more grieuous, and more hard to be cured, and accordinglie apply seuerall plaisters vnto each of the vvoundes: because no good surgion or phisition vseth one plaister for all kindes of woundes, nor one potion,
 or purgation for all kindes of diseases. And in our case it is to be noted, that sacramentall confession vnto a Priest ought to be vsed as a iudiciall act, to the end that the Priest being iudge vnder Christ of the sinners conscience, may be able to iudge rightly thereof, vvhether to absolue or retaine his sins: and vvhether to apply to him comforts or threatninges: and how to giue him medicinall penances, and counsaile, according as hee shall iudge by intelligence had in sacramentall confession vnto him, of the number, difference, heinousnes, and continuance of euery sinners deadly sinnes, and of the seuerall state and order of their liues, and present disposition of theyr consciences.None can rightly iudge, but by knowledge of the particulars. Pro. 12.17. And forsomuch, as none can rightly iudge without knowledge of the cause: because iudgement is an act of prudencie, vvhich cannot be done in due manner, but by knowledge of the things in particular that are to be iudged, (according as Salomon saith. He that iudgeth what hee knoweth, is a iudge of iustice:) Therefore I say, that a generall confession only in saying to a Ghostly Father, I am a sinner, vvithout specifying the deadly sinnes in particular, is no sufficient knowledge for the Ghostly Father to iudge rightly of euery sinner, that demaundeth absolution of him, vvhose sinnes are to be remitted, and vvhose sinnes are to be retained.
Secondly, if such a generall confession by euery  sinner to hys Ghostly Father were sufficient to require thereby absolution of him without specifiing vnto him the particular sinfull actes,If a generall confession were sufficient, then the Ghostlie Father should be enforced to absolue al sins, and retaine none. then this great absurdity vvould follow, that our Sauiour Christ did in vaine and to no purpose giue this power of binding and loosing of sinnes to his apostles, and their successours, because the Priest not knowing by the sinners confession, his particular sinfull
 actes, whereunto binding or absoluing is due, must then of necessitie vse either one maner of absolution of all sinners, or one maner of binding of al sins. And then euery blasphemer, murderer, adulterer, periurer, theft, vsurer, etc. making one like manner of general confession vnto his ghostly Father as others did, would require of his ghostlie father to absolue him also in like sorte as he did others, without doing any maner of penaunce or restitutio^ at all for any of his secret and most horribie deadly sinnes of blaspemie, murder, adultry, periurie, thefte, vsury, etc. otherwise hee would accuse his ghostly father of partialitie vsed towardes him: sith his confession was made as all others were, that is in a general sort, with these wordes, I am a sinner. And so all Priestes should be inforsed to absolue al sinners of their sins, and to retaine no sinnes: and so their commission and power to retaine sins: should be in vaine, and could not be exercised: which is contrarie to our Sauiour Christes owne commissio^ giuen to them in the ghospell of Saeint Iohn,Iohn. 20.21.22. and 23. where he maketh mention, aswel of the Priestes power to binde and retaine sinnes, as of their power to loose and forgiue sinnes.
 Thirdlie wee must note, that this generall maner of confession in saying I am a sinner, is a common saying aswell to all holie men, as to all wicked horrible malefactors. And the more iust and holie a man is, the more he continuallie considereth and abhorreth his owne sinnes, and the greater sinner will hee at all times confesse him selfe to be.Prouer. 24.16. Now albeit the most iust christians doe ordinarilie sinne seauen times in the day in veniall sinnes, which doe not exclude them from the grace of God, yet all christians doe not alike committe deadly sinnes. For all christians be not
 so heinous sinners as wicked Cain, Iudas, Herod,Al Christia^s doe sin, but some more grieuosly than others Simo^ Magus, and other blasphemers, murderers, adulterers, common thieues, vsurers, periured persons, etc. Neither yet be all christians of so innocent iuste and holy liues, as our blessed Ladie the Mother of God, or as the Apostles, and other holy Sainctes were. And therefore for euery sinner to confesse in these general wordes only I am a sinner is no sufficient notice to the Ghostly Father to be able to iudge, what christians are more heinous sinners than others: and whose sinnes to absolue, and whose sinnes to retaine, according to Christes commission graunted to him to that end.
Fourthlie, we must also consider, that as it appeareth  verie plainlie in the holy scriptures,Note that al sinnes be not a like heinous before God. Mat. 5.22. Mat. 11.15. Mat. 12.32. Iohn 19.11. One kinde of deadly sinne is more heinous befor^ God, than an other kinde of deadly sin. all sins be not a like before God. As for example, the speaking of an idle word (which is only a veniall sin) is not so heinous before God, as for a ma^ to speake blasphemy against the Holie Ghost, or to murther his Father, or to committe incest, or adultery, or to robbe a man of all his goodes which bee most horrible deadlie sinnes. And certaine it is also, that one kinde of deadly sinne is more heynous before God, than an other kinde of deadlie sinne. As murder is more heynous in his kinde than thefte: and incest more heynous than adulterie: and adultery more heynous than fornicatio^: and heresie, and blasphemie, and to sinne against the Holie Ghost are more heynous before God in their kindes, than all the other kindes of sinnes. And euerie kinde of deadlie sinne requireth a seuerall discreet consideration and iudgement in the Ghostlie father, what wholesome penances and cou^saile are most fit and conuenie^t for curing of the^. For as one medicine will not serue for al diseases of the body: so likwise one manner of penance and Ghostly
 cou^saile wil not conueniently serue for the curing of all kindes of deadly sins, being so different both in malice, scandal, infection, and heinousnes. And withall the seuerall state of life, and disposition of one sinners conscie^ce, be so diuerse one from an other, that a more milde medicine wil serue for the curing of one sinner, than will serue for another. Because one sinner conceaueth more inward griefe and remorse of conscience for his sinnes than another. And that sinner that hath committed either adultery, robbery, vsury, periury, or fornication, but only once or twice in all his life, is sooner reclaimed, and cured, than another that hath committed those deadly sinnes very often times, or hath continued in a manner all his vvhole life in them, many yeares together and therefore as the deadly sinnes haue bin committed more often, and in more seuerall kindes, and haue bin more heinous, more scandalous, and of longer continuance in some penitent sinners, than in some others: so the Ghostly Father by hearing euery penitent sinner confessing his deadly sinnes particularly vnto him, and by discreet noting of greater compunction and sorrow for the committing of them in some sinners, than in others, may thereby discerne, how to inioyne diuers sorts of pennances, and how to be more austere, and more milde therein to some penitents, than to others, according as his wisedome and discretion shall iudge most fit and conuenient, for euery penitent sinner.S. Ierome. super Maet. cap. 16. And so S. Ierome expounding the vvordes in saint Mathew, speaking of the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen, sayeth: That then the Bishop or Priest knoweth who is to be bounde, and who is to be loosed, when hee heareth the varietie of sinnes: Othervvise the Ghostlie Father by hearing only the general maner of confession: I am
 a sinner:1. Tim. 5.22. 1. Timot. 5.22. 2. Co. 10.8. Sinners co^ceiue no shame by making a generall co^fession of their sinnes saying onlie I am a sinner. without specifying vnto him any particular deadly sinnes, shall iudge very blindly, and at Randon, and absolue many sinners that are not to be absolued, and so communicate with other mens sins, and abuse the power vnto destruction, which he hath receaued vnto edification.
Fiftly besides all these great inconueniences, and absurdities, the very sinner himselfe by his general confession to his ghostly father, saying only I am a sinner, shall loose a wonderful great benefit, which otherwise he might haue (as by common experie^ce is tried) by the shame he should conceiue, in case he specified in particular wise all his deadly sinnes in sacramentall confession to his ghostly father: as his secret adulteries, fornications, theftes, vsuries, periuries, etc. For what shame it is to a man to co^fesse in general wordes, either to his Ghostly Father or to all others, that he is a sinner, which all holy men will at all times more willingly and earnestly confesse, than the most wicked malefactor that is? and also an other great spiritual profit commeth ordinarily vnto sinners by particular rehearsall in confession of their deadly sinnes, which commeth not so ordinarily vnto them by a generall manner of confessing them. And this profite is that the verie shame which commonlie penitent sinners haue of confessing their deadly sins in particular wise to their ghostlie father, procureth thereby greater motions of sorrow, and compunctions of minde in them, especially in hearing their ghostlie fathers godlie counsell, and aduise, against their deadlie sinnes, which they haue confessed particularly vnto him, and it prouoketh the^ to be more afraide, and to make a more firme, and resolute determination not to fall into the same deadly sinnes againe, knowing that then they must
 of necessitie specifie them againe particularlie and plainly in their next confession to their Ghostlie father and that otherwise their very confession is not only voide, but also wicked, and sinfull, in case they doe wittinglie conceale therein any one of their deadly sins fro^ their Ghostly father. The consideration whereof is a great bridle to withhold all such as haue any sparkle of the feare and loue of God fro^ committing any deadly sin. But this great spirituall profit with many others begotten and learned only by experience in deuout frequenting of sacramental confession: for want wherof the Heretikes of this our corrupte age are growne altogether so malicious, so wilfull, and so blind herein, that they neither haue any knowledge, sense or feeling, to conceiue, or vnderstande, what inestimable spirituall profit commeth by humble confession of all our deadly sinnes in particular wise to our Ghostlie Father.


That it is as necessary to confesse to our ghostly father, as well our secret deadly sins, as our publike notorious deadly sinnes. And that it is both conuenient and also neceslary, that penitent sinners do ordinarily confesse their secret deadly sins in secret wise to a Priest alone. @. 4.
IT appeareth by the premisses, that in the sacrament of pennance there is a iudgement: wherein the priest by vertue of our sauiour Christes
 commission doth the office of a iudge: and the sinner is the guilty person that is to be iudged by him: and that this is a secret iudgment in the court of conscience, where the sinner hath none other accusers, but only himselfe, and therefore it behoueth, that he doe first accuse himselfe particularlie of all his deadly sinnes vnto the Priest his Ghostly Father, that he may afterwardes exercise his office of iudgement, in absoluing the sinner from his sins, in case he be capable of absolution, otherwise to retaine his sinnes, if he repent him not of them, and will not promise to leaue hereafter his deadly sins: as his heresies, schismes, adulteries, periuries, slau^ders, thefts, vsuries, fornications, etc. and to make restitution of his euill gotten goods to the right owners, the sinner being then vnworthy to be absolued from his sinnes: so that the iudgement in heauen followerh and approueth this iudgement on earth.S. Ierome in Epist. ad Heliodorum. And as saint Ierome saith, Priestes hauing the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen iudge after a sort, before the day of iudgement.
Now the Heretickes will not seeme to be vnwilling to graunt publike confession, of publike notorious sinnes to the whole church: but they vtterly denie, that confession of sinnes ought to be made in secret wise to a Priest alone, or that wee are bound to confesse our secret deadly sinnes to the church, or to a priest, either publikelie, or secretlie. And this secret manner of confession to a priest alone, (commonly called auricular confession,) the heretickes be moued to deny, with a malicious wilie intention to make an entrie, thereby to denie afterwardes all manner of confession of secret deadly sins, eyther publikelie to the hearing of the whole church, or secretly to a priest alone.The Heretickes mali^^ i^ chieflie against Confession of secret deadlie sinnes. For in case they might once obteine this point, that
 none other confession of deadlie sinnes is either conuenient, or needfull, but onlie publike confession to the open hearing of the whole church, the^ by the lawe of nature would they easily inferre thereupon, that it is not conuenient to binde vs to confesse publikly abroad vnto a multitude our secrete deadly sinnes. And so would they take away out of the church, aswell all publike confession, as secret confession of secrete deadlie sinnes.
Now the catholikes on the other side do first lay their foundation by prouing, that it is as necessary to confesse our secret deadly sinnes to our Ghostlie Father to haue absolution of them, as wel as our publike notorious sins. And this foundation being laied, the^ it easily followeth thereupon by good collection, that it is most seemely and conuenient for penitent sinners to confesse their secret deadly sinnes in very secret wise to a christian priest alone to haue absolution of them.
Wherefore, let vs first proue this principal fou^dation:Note, that we offend God, as well with our secrete sinnes, as with our publike sins. Exod. 20.17. Isay. 1.16. Mat. 5.28. Rom. 7.7. Iac. 1.15. Mat. 15.19. Iohn. 20. videlicet that it is as necessary for vs to confesse to our ghostly father, as wel our secret deadly sinnes, as our publike notorious deadly sinnes. And thus I proue it. For we offend Almighty God not only with our publike notorious deadly sins, but euen also with our secret deadlie sinnes committed onlie by consenting thereunto in thought. And so our sauiour affirmeth in the Gospell, that whosoeuer shal see a woman to lust after her, hath alreadie committed aduowtrie with her in his hart. And in an other place he saieth, that the euill workes proceede from the harte, as euill cogitations, murders, aduoutries, fornications, theftes, false testimonies, blasphemies, and that these are the thinges that defile a man.
Now sith secrete deadly sinnes doe defile the hart of man, and consequently doe shutte the kingdome
 of heauen from al that committe them: and sith our Sauiour hath in the Gospell of Saint Iohn giuen a full ample commi^sion and power to his apostles and their successors to absolue al deadly sins both publike, and secret, without any manner of restraint or limitation to publike notorious sinnes only: and sith it appeareth hereby, that it is the will and ordinaunce of our Sauiour Christ, that all christians that committe any deadly sinnes either publikly or secretly after Baptisme, should haue remission of them by meanes of the iudgeme^t and absolution of his Priestes and sith the ghostly Father must iudge of the euill workes by their originall causes: and sith when the deadly sinnes are secret, the Ghostly Father cannot come to the knowledge of them, but only by the sinners owne reueiling, and confession vnto him: therefore I conclude, that al maner of deadly sinnes, aswell secret as publike, are of necessitie to be confessed by euery penitent sinner to his Ghostly Father.
For otherwise,The Ghostly Father can not know secrete deadly sins, but by the sinners own confession of them. how can the ghostly Father know secret deadly sinnes, but by the sinners own confession? can he possible discerne only by looking vpon the sinners face, how many kindes of deadlie sins he hath secretly committed in thought, word, and deed and how often times he hath committed them? or can the ghostly Father or any other mortall man know by any other meane, but by the sinners own confession, what horrible malice, of Heresie, blasphemie, pride, enuy, desire of reuenge, and howe many adulterous concupiscences, etc. Haue lien festering in the sinners hart, and how long time they haue continued therein, vnlesse the ghostlie father should haue some reuelation thereof from Heauen?
If then the Ghostlie Father cannot come to the
 knowledge of these secret deadly sins, but by the sinners owne confession: and without his confession of them, he cannot be duely absolued of them: and without absolution of the^ by a christian priest the sinner cannot haue the kingdome of heauen opened againe vnto him, in case by contempt, or wilful negligence he die without absolution: what a madnesse is it then in the Heretickes to denie, that penitent sinners are bou^d to confesse to their Ghostly Fathers their secret deadly sinnes, the absolution of them being as necessary for them, as the absolution of theyr publike notorious sins.
Certainely, our auncient holy christian forefathers vsed to confesse vnto christian Priestes, not only their publike notorious sinnes, but theyr secret deadly sinnes also: yea euen such secret deadly sinnes, as they offended almighty God onelie in thought: as most plainely appeareth in an ancient Holie Councell,Concilium Cabilonense. 2. Can. 32. tempore Caroli Magni. holden in the time of the most christian Emperour, Carolus Magnus: wherein it was ordeined, that forsomuch as a man consisteth of two substances: to wit, of the soule, and of the body, and sith he offendeth God, not onely by externall act of his body: but euen also by only consenting vnto the euill motions of his soule, that therefore sinners should confesse vnto the priests, not only such sinnes as they commit by their body, but such sinnes also as they offend God by only thought: and that the priest should make diligent enquiry of their Ghostly children of the sins committed by ech part, vt ex vtrisque plena sit confessio: That is to say: To the intent that of them both, there may be a full confession. And it is also to be noted that complaint is made in this very Canon of that holy councel, for that diuers christians in that time did not make a full confession in this wise to
 the priests: which moued those ancient holy Fathers assembled in that councell to ordeine this Canon for due reformation thereof.
Now as touching the heretickes co^mon malicious rayling against secret auricular confession of deadly sins to a priest: I doe greatly meruaile, why any man of wisdome and grauity should reprehend the same: sith whether the confession of our deadly sins to a Priest is to be made secretly, or publikely, priuily, or openly, it is but accidentary,Dominicus Soto, in 4 senten. dist. 18. quest. 1. Artic. 1. and quest. 2. Artic. 6. and not of the substance of sacramentell confession. And yet I affirme, that for the due maintenance and continuance of a religious obseruation in the church of sacramental confession of all secret deadly sins, it is not only very seemely, and conuenient, but also very necessary: both for the penitent sinner, and also for the priest his ghostly father, that ordinarily it be done in secret wise to a priest alone,If secret deadlie sins should not be secretlie confessed, few or none would confesse them, and then Christs commissio^ were in vaine, and to no purpose. and not openly to the hearing of all the people in the church: for sith our nature very much abhorreth to discouer publikely vnto others our most shamefull heinous secret deadly sins, as secret blasphemies, heresies, treasons, murders, incests, adulteries, fornications, robberies, vsuries, periuries, etc. which may procure derision, reproch, hatred, reuenge, infamy, and terrible punishment by lawes vnto vs, very few persons or none could be induced but with extreame violence, to make open confession of them to the hearing of al the people in the church: and therefore the prouidence of almighty god disposing all things sweetly, according to euery mans nature and necessity, hath likewise prouided, and ordeined in the Gospell for the securitie of all penitent sinners, that they should make secret confession of their secret horrible deadlie sinnes in a secret Court of conscience to a Priest
 alone,Vide in opusculis Caietani. Tract. 21. de Sigillo co^fessionis.Quod confessor tenetur occultam seruare deliberationem confitentis se omuino occisurum Su^mum pontificem, and quod in nullo casu, etiam infectionis Haeresis, licet reuelare peccatum in confessione detectum. Mat. 11.30. S. Chris. lib. 3 de Sacerdotio: and in sermone, de poenitentia. Leo. 1. Epist. 78. ad vniuersos episcopos per campaniam, camniu^, and Picenum, constitutos. and as it were only to Almighty God himselfe: for otherwise this yoke and burden of sacramentall confession were to be intollerable, and contrary to our sauiours owne saying. My yoke is sweet, and my burden light, in case penitent sinners should be constrained by any commaundement to confesse publikely to the open hearing of all theyr neighbours, and of the whole parish church where they inhabit, their most horrible secret deadly sins, to theyr open shame, reproch, and infamy, and to the great daunger of most grieuous punishment, yea, and of most terrible death by the lawes for them.
The great inconueniences whereof saint Chrisostome well considered, when he counsailed penitents not to confesse publikely theyr secret deadly sinnes to theyr companions, that might vpbraid them of them, but to confesse them secretly to almighty God only, meaning vnto his Priests only, as his vicars appointed by him for the same: For so he meaneth, otherwise he should speake contrary to himselfe in diuers other places of hys owne workes: where he sheweth that penitentes must confesse their sinnes to christian Priestes, and that they haue power to purge the leaprosie of the soule.
And the auncient holy learned Pope Leo the great banished also by a decree a like euil custome practised in some parts of Italy, where the penitents were enforced vnto a publike confession of theyr sereet deadly sinnes, and to haue them recited openly out of a Libell, or paper, to the open hearing of all the whole church. And the reasons alledged by Pope Leo in that Decree for banishing that euill custome are: for that (saith he) it is sufficient to confesse the guilt of the con^ciences vnto the Priestes, by the secret meanes of confessions,
 and especially least many penitents should be with drawne from vsing the remedies of penance, whilest eyther they be ashamed, or afraide, to publish their secret grieuous sinnes to theyr enimies, by whom they may be troubled therfore by the laws. And he concludeth, that that confession is sufficient, which is made first to God, and afterwards to the Priest* by meanes of secret confession: and he affirmeth also, that more sinners may be prouoked vnto pennance, if the conscience of the penitent that is to make confession be not published vnto the eares of the people.


That our Sauiour Christ in the Ghospell of saint Iohn Chapter 20. hath bound and commaunded all christians, that commit any deadly sinnes after Baptisme, to confesse the^ to a christian Priest, to haue Absolution of them. @. 1.
NOW let vs answere vnto a common principall obiection  of the Heretikes, affirming that though our Sauiour Christ in the Gospell of saint Iohn chap. 20. hath giuen commission and power vnto Bishops, and Priestes, as successours of the Apostles, to forgiue, and retaine all sinnes, both publike, and secret: yet say they, wee cannot shew any place in the Ghospell, vvhere our Sauiour Christ commaundeth penitent sinners to confesse their deadly sinnes vnto a priest.
We answere,  that euen in that very place of S. Iohns Gospell, all christians are also commaunded by our Sauiour Christ to confesse all their deadly
 sinnes vnto a christian priest, to haue absolution of them. For according to the rule of al law, and reason, who so graunteth any commission or power to any person, graunteth (inclusiuely) therewith vnto him those thinges without which he can not well and duly exercise his commission. And so our Sauiour in graunting to his Apostles and their Successors, commission and power to forgiue and retaine sinnes, hath not only thereby giuen vnto the^ power to heare the confessions of sinners, and to iudge of their sinnes, whether to absolue or retaine them, but hath also thereby (implicite) bound and commaunded al christians, that commit any deadly sinnes after Baptisme, to come and confesse them vnto a christian priest, if they wil haue absolution of them.
For sith it is certaine by that place of the Gospel of Saint Iohn, that our Sauiour Christ hath ordeined, that the priestes Iudgement and absolution of sinnes in the Sacrament of Pennaunce must bee vsed as an ordinary meane for all christians to haue absolution and remission of al their deadly sinnes committed after Baptisme: and sith that Priestes cannot duly absolue sinners of their secret deadly sinnes vnlesse the sinners doe discouer and confesse them particularly vnto Priestes, it followeth, that in that our Sauiour hath giuen authoritie to his apostles and their Successors, to absolue sinners of their sinnes, he hath thereby also (inclusiuely) instituted, ordeined, and commaunded, that all christians shall confesse their deadly sinnes vnto them, to haue absolution of them^. Because without confession of them by the penitent sinners, there can be no due absolution of them by the priestes and so Christes commission grau^ted to his apostles, and their successors, to absolue, and retaine
 sinnes, should be otherwise ridiculous, void, and to no purpose, in case christians were not bound and commaunded to confesse their deadly sins vnto a christian priest.
For imagin this case, that none would confesse his sinnes to the priestes, for that they were perswaded, that they are not bound thereunto by any commaundement of Christ in the Gospell: would not this commission and power of our Sauiour Christ, graunted vnto priestes, to absolue, and retaine sinnes, seeme ridiculous, and to be giuen the^ in vaine? This commission I say,Math. 16.19. Iohn. 20.21.22.23. which was so solemly promised by our Sauiour before his passion, and performed and giuen by him after his Resurrection, with so great solemnity, with so many circumstances, with alledging first his Fathers comission graunted to him as man to forgiue sins, and with so solemne a ceremony of breathing vpon his Apostles, and giuing vnto them the Holie Ghost.
Wherefore, sith this blaspemous obiection of the Heretickes cannot be defended, but with a most horrible contumelious accusing our Sauiour Christ, God and man, of want of due prouidence and wisedome, wee must of force graunt, that hee hath by this commission (implicite) bound, and commaunded all christians, of necessity to confesse all their deadly sinnes to his priestes, to haue absolution of them: and that otherwise they cannot be absolued of their sinnes.
We read, that the Priests in the old lawe had commission, and authoritie,Leuit. 13.2 2. and 3 to discerne and iudge betwene leapre, and leapre, whe^ the law saied to the^, iudge of leapers. But to what purpose had that commissio^ bin to the Priests to iudge of leapers, in case the people had not bin bound and commaunded also, by the
 ^e commaundement, to present themselues, and ^ew their diseases vnto the Priestes? and so the ^maundement extended aswell to the people, ^iscouer and shew their diseases vnto the priests as it extended to the Priests, to discerne and iudge betwene leapre, and leapre. So likewise, when our Sauiour sayed in the Gospel of Saint Iohn to his Apostles,Iohn 20.21. and their successors, in this sence: Examin and iudge the sinnes of Christian people, and either absolue, or retaine their sinnes: in the same commission is also conteined an other Commaundement of Christ to sinners, that they ought to di^couer, and confesse their deadly sinnes to the Priestes, to the end the Priestes may discerne, whether to absolue or retaine their sinnes.
Math. 28.16.Againe, when our Sauiour commaunded his apostles, and their successors, to Baptise, was it not his wil, and commaundement also vnto others, to come and present themselues to be baptised? likewise when he commaunded his Apostles,Marc. 16.15. and their successors, to Preach, was it not his will, and commaundement also vnto others to heare their Sermons? Yes doubtles: for otherwise Christs comma^dement to his apostles, and their Successors, to Baptise, and Preach, were in vaine, and to no purpose. Euen so in our case, whe^ our Sauiour Christ commaunded the apostles, and Bishops, and priests, their Successors, to absolue and retaine sins, it had bin a very vaine commaundement, if in the same an other commaundement and bond vnto sinners had not beene included, and that is, that in those wordes, sinners are commaunded by our Sauiour Christ to discouer and co^fesse their deadly sins to a christian priest, whereby they may be absolued of them.
And it cannot be said, that those wordes of Christ
 are only spoken by way of counsaile vnto sinners: for the wordes following, quorum retinueritis,Iohn. 20.23. retenta sunt. Whose sins ye shall retaine, are retained, doe plainly proue, that they be wordes of Commaundement vnto sinners, to confesse their deadly sins to a Priest, to be absolued of the^. For what other thing is it for priestes to retaine sinnes, but for priests not to Remitte and absolue sinners of their sinnes. And so the most probable sence of those wordes of Christ to the apostles, and their Successors is, whose sinnes ye shall not remitt, and absolue, according to the commission and power I haue giuen vnto you, they be not remitted, and absolued. And then sith without asinners confession of his secret deadly sins to a priest, he cannot iudge whether to absolue, or retaine his sins, it is manifest vnto all that be not wilfullie blinded with malice against Christian Priestes, that in these wordes of our Sauiour Christ in the 20. chapter of the Gospell of Saint Iohn a commission is not only giuen therein to Priestes to absolue, and Retaine sinnes, but also a commaundement is further included therein vnto al sinners, that wil be absolued from their deadly sins, that they must of necessitie discouer and confesse them in particular wise vnto a Priest, their Ghostly Father. And therefore the auncient Holy Father Saint BasillSiant Basill. saieth very notablie.Inquest. Compend. 288. Necessarium est confiteri peccata ijs, quibus administratio misteriorum dei concredita est. That is to say. It is necessary to confesse sinnes vnto them, to whome the dispensation of the misteries of God is committed. In which words the discreet reader may note that S. Basil saith, necessarium efl etc. that it is necessary to co^fesse our sins vnto a priest, and if it be necessary, as S. Basil affirmeth agreable to the aproued iudgement, and continual practise of it in Christs church, the^ are we bound of necessity to do it and not
 to giue credit to any caluinist, or any other hereticke, that shall say it is not necessary.


That no Hereticke could euer yet shew, or can possiblie name any Ecclesiasticall Canon, Constitution, or Decree, made by any of the Popes, or by any General or Prouinciall Councell, since the Apostles time, whereby it may be prooued that secret confession of deadly sinnes to a Priest, had his first originall institution thereby. And here it is declared, that the generall councell of Lateran, holden vnder Pope Innocentius the third, did not first institute it: but only ordeyned for the circumstance of the time of comming to confession, at the least once euerie yeare. @. 6.
AND for a further manifest proofe that sacramentall confession to a Priest of all deadlie sinnes committed after Baptisme, was instituted and commaunded by our Sauiour Christ, it appeareth very plainly by the continuall vse and practise of it in the whole Catholicke Church of Christ, in all christian churches, and countries in the world, and in all ages since the Apostles time. Insomuch that no Lutheran, Zuinglia^, Caluinist, Puritane, or any other hereticke in the world, is able to name any one Ecclesiastical canon, constitution, or decree, made by any of the Popes, or by any generall or Prouinciall Councell, whereby it may be prooued, that secret confession of deadly sins to a Priest had his first originall institution, and practise thereby.
And though some Heretickes either of malice,
 or ignorance, doe commonly alledge in their fond lying bookes, and sermons, that sacramentall confession to a priest, was not practised before the generall Councell of Lateran,Concilium Lateran. Generale, sub Innocentio. 3. Can. 21. holden in the time of Pope Innocentius the third: wherein was Decreed; that all christians should confesse theyr sinnes at the least once in the yeare to their own Pastor, or by his licence to some other Priest: vpon which words the heretickes doe very lewdly inferre, that confession of sinnes to a Priest was then first instituted: wee and all others that haue any regard vnto sincere dealing in treating of matters of religion, cannot but greatly marueile at this their most shamefull wicked impudency: For that generall Councell of Lateran Decreed only for the circumstance of the time of comming to confession:Note that the generall councell of Lateran decr^ed as wel for the time of receauing the most blessed Sacrament of the Aultar, as for the time of confession. because christians had waxen then very negligent, and carelesse, in frequenting confession of their sinnes to their Ghostly Fathers. As also that generall councell of Lateran in the very same Decree, ordeined for the like cause, that all christians should receaue the blessed sacrament of the Eucharist once at the least euery yeare, and that at Easter. And the heretickes may with like impudent lying as well affirme, that the receauing of the Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist was then first instituted by the same generall councell of Lateran, as to say, that confession of sins to a Priest was first instituted by that councell: whereas that generall councell of Lateran, Decreed onely (as I haue said) for the time of receauing the Eucharist euery yeare at Easter, as it did only for the time of confession of sins at the least once euery yeare.
And the hereticks cannot deny, but that before that generall councell of Lateran,Concil. wormac. Can. 25 Concill. Cabilon. very many Decrees were made in diuers more auncient councels concerning confession of sins to a priest, as by the
 councell of wormes:Can. 8. Concill. Cabilonen. 2. Can. 32.33.34. Concil. Turon. Can. 22. Concil. Rhemen. Can. 12. and. 16. C^ncil Constantinop. 6. Generale. Can. 102. Concili Ancyranu^. Can. 23. Concill. L^odicen. Can 2. Consil. Tutonense primum, Can. 7. Concil. Toletanu^ primum. Can. 6. and before that, by foure other Councels holden in Fraunce: and also by the sixt generall Councell holden at Constantinople: All which holy Councels prescribed, and ordained, what great care Priestes should take in examining duely the causes and differences of sinnes, and in applying spirituall medicines vnto penitent sinners after theyr confession for the curing of them, according to the qualitie and grieuousnes of the sinnes, and the earnest sorrow and compunction of the sinners: and long before all those Councels were the three auncient Councels of Ancyranum, Laodicense, and Turonense, wherein mention is made of confession, and of pennance to be appointed vnto penitent sinners for certaine grieuous sinnes. And withall, in the first Toletane Councell it was ordeyned, that no Religious woman should haue any familiarity with her Ghostly Father, whom that auncient Councell calleth her Confessor: Whereby it appeareth, that at that time Religious vvomen had a peculiar Confessor, to whome they confessed theyr sinne. And likewise in a Councell holden at Aquisgrane,Concil Aquisgrane. Can. 1. in the yeare of our Lord. 742. wherat the Emperour Charles the great was present. It was Decreed, that euery captaine in warre might haue one priest with him, that might iudge in confession of sinnes, and enioyne pennance for them: which Decree is yet very religiouslie obserued at this day by the mighty King Catholicke of Spaine: who appointeth for euery band of souldiers one priest to heare the souldiers confessions. And it is also affirmed in another auncient Councell,Concil. Cabilonen. 2. Can. 45. holde^ likewise in the time of the said most christian Emperour Charls the great, that confessions of sins both to God, and to Priests, were both vsed in the church in his time, and the heretickes if they had any feare of
 God, would confesse this most manifest truth, the which such of them as be learned doe well know, that besides al these auncient approued Councels, euen Gratian, (who collected the decrees,Gratian. in distinct. de penitentia. Petrus Lombardus, lib. 4 sent. dist. ^8.Hugo de sancto victore. lib. 2. de sacramentis. P. 14. Cap. 8. S. Bernard. Sermone 2. in die Petri, and Pauli, and in Sermone ad milites Templi. and liued in the time of the Emperour Lotharius) was before the time of Pope Innocentius the third, and conseque^tly before the Generall Councell of Lateran, and so was Petrus Lombardus, Hugo de sancto victore, S. Bernard, and diuers other excellent learned writers in diuinitie, and that all these make as plaine mention in theyr bookes of sacramentall confession of all deadly sins to a priest, as the generall Councell of Lateran doth: and that it was generally practised, and allowed by all the Bishops, Pastours, and Gouernours of Christs church, in theyr times: and that none but infamous condemned hereticks, did then mislike with it: and also Anonius, or as some call him Amonius, an auncient Historiographer, affirmeth in his historie, that when the Emperour Lodwicke the first called Ludouicus Pius was sicke, he confessed himselfe euery day: and this godly Christian Emperour was almost 400. yeares before Pope Innocentius the third,Saint Ierom super Mat. cap. 16. or the generall councell of Lateran. And S. Ierome likewise saieth, that Priestes doe loose or binde, (audita peccatorum varietate) hauing heard the variety and differences of sins. And withall it appeareth most plainely in the life of the ancient holy Doctor saint Ambrose,Saint Ambrose heard confessions aboue 1200. yeares agoe. written by Paulinus Nolae Episcopus, that auricular confession (I meane secret confession of sinnes to a priest) vvas vsed in the church in his time: vvhich is aboue twelue hundreth yeares agoe: for Paulinus writeth, that vvhen any came to saint Ambrose to confession, to receaue pennance of him for his sins, he vsed to weepe so earnestly, whilest he heard the penitent sinner confessing his sins, that he caused the
 sinner himselfe thereby to weepe: and that he told our Lord only such sinnes as were confessed vnto him, vnto whome he praied for them that came to confession vnto him. In which words it appeareth very plainly to all readers that be not wilfullie blind, that penitent sinners vsed to confesse their sinnes in secret wise to Saint Ambrose alone.
Hereticall Preachers doe preach many impudent lies in their Sermons.Wherefore, it is apparant, that those lewde preachers doe most wickedly deceaue the ignora^t simple people, that preach vnto them at Poulscrosse in London, and in other places, that secret confession of sinnes to a priest was first instituted by Pope Innocentius the third, in the General councel of Lateran. But this most impudent refuge the Heretikes are now enforced to catch hold of, because (as I haue said) they are not able to name any one Canon,See in D. whitgiftes booke of defence against the puritans Reply. pag. 103. 104. 351 352. 539. that the Caluinistes doe allow and vrge this Rule of Saint Augustine, against the puritans to mainteine that the office of an Archbishope and that the Feastes of Christmas, Easter, and Pentecost, came by tradition from the Apostles sith they haue bin generally in vse in al Christian Churches, and their first institution is otherwise vnknowen. Summa S. Thom. 1.2. que. 91. ar. 4. Et plaud. in 4. Sentent. di. 7. que. 2. decree, or constitution, of any of the Popes, or of any general or prouincial councel to proue when secret, confession of sins to a priest was first ordeined, commaunded, and practised in the church since the Apostles time. And because the Heretikes, cannot name any canon, decree, or constitution of the first beginning, Institution, and practise thereof since the Apostles time, the catholikes doe inferre hereupon, to the great griefe of al Heretikes, but especially of the Puritans, that it came from age to age, by Tradition from Christ, and the Apostles: according to Saint Augustines approued Rule in his. 118. Epistle ad Ianuarium. Whereof it followeth, that sith confession of sinnes to a priest hath beene vniuersallie practised in al christian churches throughout al countries in christendome, and the original institution, beginning and first practise of it doth not appeare to be commaunded in anie age since the Apostles time, that therefore according to Saint Augustines rule
 it came from age to age, by tradition, from Christ and his apostles.
And for the better clearing of this poynt I request the Lutherans, Zwinglians, Caluinistes, puritans, etc. for the honour of God, and for the saluation of their own soules, to lay awaye all their malice against Christes Priestes, and to consider aduisedly of this one argument following: which is, that sith no humaine power was able to commaund and enforce sinners to make confession of their inward secret deadly sinnes to a priest, therefore they must needes graunt, that it was donne by diuine power, and commaundement.
And thus I proue it. For (as Saint Thomas very well affirmeth) a man cannot make a lawe but of those thinges only, whereof he can iudge: but the iudgement of a man cannot extend vnto the inward motions, and actes, that be secret, but onlie vnto the outwarde actes that doe appeare: according as our Lord saied vnto Samuell. A man seeth those thinges that doe appeare,1. Regu^. 16.7 1. Cor. 4.5. but God looketh into the hart: Wherefore as no humaine power is able to commaund such a confession of sinnes, the transgression whereof it is not able to punish, so no lawe of man can punish a sinner for not confessing to a priest his inward secrete deadly sinnes, which are not outwardly discouered, and knowne by word writing, or deede: because no mortall man is able to see them within the sinners harte, and consequentlie no man is able to accuse a sinner of concealing his secrete deadly sinnes in his confession from his Ghostlie Father. And therefore it were absurd to imagin, that any lawe of man would commaund sinners to confesse their secret deadly sinnes to a priest., being not otherwise bound thereunto by the law of God.

The generall practise of secret Confession of sinnes to a Priest in all Christian Churches, must needes proceede at the first of a Commandement.And yet the hereticks cannot deny, but that the Originall practise of confession of secret sins to a priest in the catholik church proceeded at the first of a co^mandement: forsomuch as all christians generally in all churches throughout all countries in christendome, haue heretofore vniuersally vsed, to make confession of their secret deadly sinnes to a priest, and do still at this day vse it in all catholicke countries. And it is apparent, that of all things that the christians doe, this confession of our most shame full secret deadly sinnes to a priest is of most difficulty: For nothing is more contrary to our corrupt and prowd nature, than to accuse our selues euen of small faults, but especially of most horrible secret sins, which by all meanes possible we seeke to hide, and excuse, that we may not be found falty in them. Againe, experience teacheth vs, that such thinges as are of difficulty to be done, wee be hardly induced to doe them, euen when they are commaunded: for though some few persons doe them, yet will not all generally agree by any vniforme consent thereunto, vnlesse they be perswaded with diuine authority. Now who is of so litle wit, and iudgement, as once to imagine that so many popes, cardinals, archbishops, bishops, pastours, and religious persons, with all other of the learned cleargie,We may not imagine that all our Holie Christian Forefathers so many ages together were starke fooles, and that a few late vpstart Apostata heretikes, as Frier Luther frier Buzer, Caluin, and Beza, were the only wise me^ and had only the spirit of God. and vvithall so many christian Emperours, Kinges, Dukes, Earles, Barons, with all the Magistrates, and common people, throughout all Italie, Germanie, Fraunce, Spaine, England, Scotland, Ireland, Polonia, Hungarie, Sweueland, Denmarke, and in all other countries in christendome, would haue vsed in all christian churches, at the least euery yeare at Easter, by a vniforme generall consent, so many ages together, this secret confession to a priest, of all theyr secret deadly sinnes, as of theyr secret blasphemies,
 murders, aduowtries, fornications, thefts, periuries, etc. vnlesse they had firmely beleeued, that they were commaunded therunto by our Sauiour Christ himselfe.
Moreouer, I wish that such as be wise and graue men among our aduersaries, would dulie consider also of the foresaied decree that was made for prescribing the time of comming to confession, commaunding all Christians to confesse their sinnes, at the least once euery yeare to their own Pastor etc. Let them duely consider I say, how this decree was made by the only Gouernours of Christes Church assembled in the fore-saied famous great Generall Councell of Lateran, holden in the time of Pope Innocentius the third, in the yeare of our Lord,Of the generall Councell of Lateran holden anno domini. 1215. 1215. being the most notable General councell for number of Bishops, and other learned diuines, that euer Was in all Europe. Where were present the two patriarkes of Constantinople and Ierusalem, lxx. Archbishoppes, aswell of the Greeke Church as of the Latine Church, and 400. Bishoppes, twelue Abbots. 800. Priors, besides, many other great learned Diuines: and also the Ambassadors of both the Empirs of Rome, and of Grece, and of the Kings of England Fraunce, Spaine, Ierusalem, Ciprus, etc. Which Decree those so godly and learned Fathers (being the only Gouernours then of Christes Church,Math. 28.20. Iohn 14.16. Iohn. 16.13. 1. Tim. 3.15. and consequenly according to his owne solemne faithful promise euermore enspired, assisted, and directed with his Holy spirit in their decrees,) would neuer haue made, and so straitly commaunded vnto all christians, vnlesse they had beleeued for most certaine, that before that Generall Councell of Lateran all christians vvere commaunded, and bounde thereunto. For whereas Satan vntill that time had bin bound for a thousand yeares, and beganne
 then to be loosed, and permitted to trouble more and more Christes Catholike Church, with many horrible Heresies of Berenga^ius, Waldenses, etc. who were the first fathers in some errors of the caluinistes new deuised religion: and the loue and seruice of God waxing then generally cold and the manners of christians declyning to worse, and worse, insomuch as it appeareth by the said Decree, that the christians beganne to neglect to come either to confession, or to receaue the most Blessed Sacrament of the Aultar, those godly learned Fathers would neuer haue laied at that time such a burden vpon al christians by any new commaundement, in case they had not beene commaunded, and bound thereunto before that Decree: neither would it otherwise haue bin receaued consented vnto, and put in practise, by so vniforme and general consent, of all Archbishopes, Bishops, Pa tors, Preachers, Doctors, and all other christians, both of the spiritualty, and temporaltie, throughuot all Churches,Secret Confession of secret deadlie sinnes to a Priest would not haue bin pract^sed in all Churches and Countries throughout Christe^dome if it had not bin commanded S. Thomas in 4. Senten dist. 17. que 3. Art. 1. quest. 5. Summa S. Thom. 3. P. in addit. que. 6. art. 6. Durandus. in 4. Sent. dist. 17. quest 9. Dominicus Soto in 4. Senten. dist. ^8. quest. 4. art. 5. Vniuersities, and countries, in christendome.
Wherefore, sith the original practise in al churches, and countries throughout christendome, of secret confession of ecret deadlie sinnes to a Priest, came at the first by a commaundement, and it could not be commaunded by anie humaine power, it is most certaine, that the commaundement thereof was made at the first by a diuine power, and lawe I meane, by commaundement of our Sauiour Christ himselfe after his Resurrection, as appeareth in the 20. chapter of Saint Iohn.
Insomuch, that (as the learned Diuines Saint Thomas, Durandus, and Dominicus Soto doe affirme) the Church cannot by any meanes dispence with
 any christian touching the substance of the commaundement of Sacramentall confession, but that euery sinner is bound of necessity to confesse his deadly sinnes to a priest, if he will haue Absolution of them. But as touching the circumstance of the time of confession: I meane of comming to confession once euerie yeare because that time is prescribed onely by a decree of the Generall C^uncel of Lateran, the Church may vpon good confideration dispence therein with some christians for a longer time. As for example: The Church maie dispen^e with a holy Hermit that liueth in wildernes, far from al company, and conuersation of men that he nede not come to sacramentall Confession, but once in two or three yeares. But the Churche can not dispence with hym or any other christian neuer to confesse his deadly sins to a Priest, no more tha^ the Church can dispence with any neuer to be Baptised. For such a di^pensation were directly co^trarie to or Sauiours will and commaundement,Iohn. 20. reuealed and declared vnto his Church in the holy Scriptures.


An answer to the Heretickes common Obiection, that King Dauid made no sacramentall confession of his sinnes: And that saint Peter, Mary Magdalen, and diuers others had their deadly sinnes forgiuen th^m by our Sauiour Christ, without sacramentall confession of them to any of the Ap^stles: with a declaration why no mention is made in the Actes of the Ap^stles, that the Apostles themselues made sacramentall confession of their sinnes after Christs Ascention. And here also it is prooued, that the christians vsed in the Primitiue Church to confesse their sins to Christes Apostles, and other christian pri^stes, to haue absolution of them.
 @. 7.
AND as touching theyr other fond obiection,  that King Dauid, saint Peter, Mary Magdalen, and the adulterous woman, had theyr deadly sinnes forgiuen them without sacramentall confession of them to any priest, or apostle: This I may well tearme a fond obiection,  because theyr sinnes were committed and forgiuen them before Christs Passion, and before hee had eyther instituted or commaunded sacramentall confession: For it was instituted and commaunded by him after his Resurrection^,Concil Trident. Sess. 14. Chap. 1. and Can. 3. as appeareth in the 20. chapter of saint Iohns Gospell.
And with all it is to be considered, that such thinges as were done by our Sauiour Christ himselfe vnto those persons by speciall priuiledge, ought not to be drawn in consequence for others. For Mary Magdalen,Christ might giue vnto sinners tho effect of the Sacraments, without the Sacraments: but Bishops, and Priestes cannot so do and the adulterous woman, and saint Peter, and the thefe vpon the Crosse, and diuers others, had their sinnes forgiuen them by our Sauiour Christ himselfe, who by the high excellent power which hee had, being both God and man, might conferre and giue vnto sinners the effect of his sacrament without the sacraments. But his apostles, and their successours haue their commission and power herein limited, and restrained, to be exercised only in ministring of Christs sacraments: I meane hereby, in washing of sinners of originall sin by the sacrament of baptisme, and in absoluing of sinners of all their deadly sinnes committed after baptisme by the sacrament of penance.
Why no me^tion is made in the Actes of the Apostles, that the Apostles vsed Sacramentall Co^fession of their sinnes.And whereas some doe meruaile, vvhy in the acts of the apostles no mention is made, that the apostles vsed sacramentall confession of their sins after Christs ascention into heauen: I answere, that
 as manie other thinges that they did be there also omitted: so might this also be omitted vpo^ this good consideration because the Apostles after that they were once confirmed in grace, by comming of the Holy Ghost vpon them, committed no deadly sins, but only veniall sins: which are not of necessitie to be confessed in sacramentall confession.
And yet it is plainely recorded in the Actes of the apostles, that S. Paule heard the confessions of very many penitent sinners at Ephesus that vvere christians, and beleeued in Christ: whereof expresse mention is there made in these words: Multique credentium veniebant confitentes and annunciantes actus suos: That is to say. Many of them that beleeued came confessing and declaring their deeds.Act. 19.18 Which was not only a generall manner of confession, as to say to S. Paule,Saint Paule heard the confessions of manie Christians at Ephesus. See in the new Testament published in English, and printed in Rhemes. I confesse vnto you that I am a sinner: but the text mentioneth, that they confessed moreouer, yea, and declared euery one of them to S. Paule their owne proper sinfull deedes: as it is very well noted, by M. Doctor Allen against the caluinists, in his marginall annotation vpon this place, in the acts of the apostles.
Now S. Paule heard the confessions of manie sinners at Ephesus, as an apostle of Christ, and as one of them to whom it was said by our Sauiour Christ after his resurrection: Whose sinnes yee shall forgiue, they are forgiuen: and whose sinnes ye shall retaine, they are retained. And in consideration of Christs institution and commandement of confession of our sins vnto his apostles, and their successours, S. Paule signified to the Corinthians,Iohn. 20.23 1. Cor. 11.28.29. that euery one of the^ must first prooue himselfe, before hee receaue the most blessed Sacrament of the Aultar. The which prouing of a mans selfe, the continuall custome and practise of it, aboue fifteene hundreth yeres in the
 catholicke church of Christ,Probet aute^ seipsum homo: and sic de p^ne illo e^^t, and de calice bibat. Qui enim manduc^t and bibit indigne, iudicium sibi manduc^t, and bibit non d^iudicans Corpus Domini. 1. Cor. 11.^8.29. 1. Iohn. 1.9. Iac. 5.14.16. S. Iames requireth Christians vvhen they be sicke to call for the p^^ests of the Church, and to make Confession of their sins vnto them. hath euer interpreted, ^o be by meane^ of examination of a mans own con^cience, vvhether he be in any deadly sinne: and afterwardes to confesse all his deadly sinnes vnto a Priest, to be absolued of them, before hee come to receaue the most blessed Sacrament: and that who so presumeth to communicate vvithout such prouing of himselfe, hath beene accounted by the vvhole consent and generall practise, of all christians in former ages, since Christs time, to communicate vnworthily, and to be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord, yea, and to eate and drinke (as S. Paule saith) iudgem^nt to himselfe, for not discerning the Body of our Lord. And saint Iohn also saith in his first Epistle, that if we conf^sse our sinnes, God is faithfull and iust, to forgiue vs our sinnes. And saint Iames sheweth likewise very plainly, that the practise of sacramentall confes ion of sins in the time of sicknesse vnto Priestes, was among christians in the apostles time: for after he had said in his Epistle: If any be sicke among you, bring in the Priestes of the Church, etc. then he saith. Confesse your selues one to another: meaning thereby, that the christians when they fall sicke, should confesse their sinnes to the Priests of the Church, whome hee required they should call for, in the time of sickenes. And Saint Iames meaning was not, that they should openly confesse all their publike and secret sinnes to euery one of their neighbours, when they were sicke, as the Caluinists doe vainely imagine: as theyr secret blasphemies, murders, robberies, adulteries, periuries, etc. For that were very vnseemely, and very dangerous, and vnconuenient to be required ordinarily of all Christians, eyther in theyr sickenesse, or health. And it were contrary to the vvise counsaile of Ecclesiasticus, vvhere he saieth. Non
 confundaris consiteri peccata tua, and ne subijcias te omni homini pro peccato. That is to say:Eccl. 4.15. Be not ashamed to confesse thy sinnes, and doe not submit thy selfe to euery man for thy sinnes.


That in the Catholicke Church no more is required of penitent sinners in sacramentall confession, but onlie to confesse the number of their deadly sins, and the circumstances that doe greatly aggrauate them, so farre forth as they can with dlilgent examination call the^ to their remembrance. And that this is not impossible to be done, as the heretickes affirme, to diswade Christians from sacramentall confession of their sins. @. 8.
THE last and most principall Obiection  of the heretickes is, that it is impossible to number all our sinnes, in confession, because the Prophet Dauid saieth, Delicta quis intelligit.Psa. 18.13 That is, who knoweth his faults? And therefore they say, that confession of all our sinnes being impossible, is neyther needfull, nor required of vs. I answere  that the Prophet Dauid in those wordes speaketh only of the malice, profunditie, and incertainty of mans heart, falling oftentimes into many sinnes through carelesnes, and negligence, that he is vncertaine whether in the iudgement of Almightie God he be worthy of loue, or of hatred.Eccl. 9.1. And also in those words Dauid speaketh only of faults, meaning thereby veniall sins, and not deadly sins, vnlesse they be of mere ignorance co^mitted. Neither doth he precisely signifie therein an impossibilitie, but onelie a difficultie. And withall those words be no
 more against confession of sinnes that is to be made to a Priest, than they be against confession of sins that is to be made vnto Almighty God. Because in both cases it is requisite, that the sinner doe conceaue an earnest sorrow and compunction in his harte for euery one of his deadly sinnes that hee hath committed, and can by due examination of his conscience call to his remembrance, otherwise he hath not true contrition.
Now most of the Heretikes being ignorant of the doctrine of the Catholike Church concerning confession of sinnes that is to be made to a Priest, doe falsly slaunder it among the simple and vnlearned people, as though the Church required of penitent sinners to confesse to their Ghostly Fathers the number of al their venial sinnes, which ordinarily cannot be donne. Because ordinarilie the iust man sinneth seauen times in the day,Prouer. 24.16. to witte in venial sinnes. Whereas in truth, the Churches doctrine is, that though it be well done to confesse our veniall sinnes, yet forsomuch as they doe not extinguish charity,Wee are not bound of necessity to confesse our venial sins in Sacramental Confession, but only our deadly sins Summa. S. Thomae. 3. parte. quaest. 87. artic. 3. and consequently doe not cause vs to loose the grace of God, wee are not bound of necessity to confesse them to a Priest to haue absolution of them. And the Church hath diuerse other remedies, whereby we may be purged of them. But we are bound of necessity to confesse al our deadly sinnes in Sacramentall confession to our Ghostly Father, so far forth as after due examination of our consciences we can call them to minde. And if vvee forgette any of them, they be then included in our confession, and forgiuen in the absolution, in case our forgetfulnes, proceedeth not of wilful negligence: and our minde is determined to confesse them when they come againe to our remembrance.

And let no man thinke, that either Almightie God,Neither God nor the Church doe commau^d vs thinges that be impossible to be fulfilled. or the Church doe require vs to performe this or any other commaundement that is impossible to be fulfilled. For sith this commaundemente is giuen to men, and of humaine actions, which be subiect to our own power, and hability, it were absurd to imagin, that we should be bound by precept to confesse such sinnes, as either wee cannot remember, or els a good conscience after due examination of him selfe is fully perswaded to be no sinnes at al.
So that the catholike church requireth no other confession of sins, but such as is possible to humaine hability, and frailty: neither yet doth it reiect any other confession of sinnes, but such as is donne by hipocrisie, malice, or negligence:Concil. Trid. Sess. 14. in doctr. de peniten. cap. 5. and accordingly the late holy Generall counsell of Trent hath determined in these words. It is also a wicked thing to say, that co^fession, which is commaunded to be made in this maner is impossible, or to call it a butchery of Conscience. For it is well knowen, that there is nothing else required of Penitentes in the Church, but that euery one when he hath diligently examined him selfe, and searched all the creekes and secret corners of his conscience, doe confesse those sins, whereby he remembreth he hath offended deadlie his Lord, and God. And the rest of his sins, that come not to his mind, thinking diligently of the matter, are vnderstood to be all generally included in the same confession. For which we may faithfullie say with the Prophet. O Lord clense me from my hidden sins.Psal. 18.13. The Co^clusion. Thus far be the wordes of the Holie Generall Councell of Trent.
Now for Conclusion of this discourse of Sacramentall confession, I desire all christians to be carefull of the saluation of their soules: and sith our Sauiour Christ hath giue^ ful power and commission
 to his priestes in the twenteth chapter of Saint Iohns Gospell, to absolue penitent sinners of all theyr sinnes committed after Bapti^me, and hath thereby instituted and commaund^d confession of sinnes vnto his priestes, as a part of the Sacrament of Pennance, whereby the vertue of the merits of his bitter Passion and death, are imparted to all penitent sinners for remission of their sins, that doe humbly obey his holy will, and ordinance herein, let not the heretickes malicious dispitefull railing withdraw any christian fro^ confessing hys sins vnto Christes priestes, vnder a fain^d pretence that it is a dishonouring of God: whereas it is in very deed a great honour vnto God, when wee doe humblie obey his holy will and ordinance herein. And it cannot be any di^onour or iniurie at all to God, when the sinnes of sinners are either washed away or remitted by priestes, that are called and appointed thereunto by God, and when the same i^ done in administring vnto sinners the Sacramentes of Baptisme, and Pennance, which are instituted and ordeined by God himselfe to that end.Iohn. 1.33.
And let them diligently note and consider, that as the holy scriptures doe affirme that it is Christ that baptiseth,Mark. 2.5.10. Luke. 5.24 Ioh. 20.23. As the holie Scriptures affirme that Christ Baptiseth and forgiueth sins: So they affirme that Ch^istes Apostles and their successors haue commission from Christ to baptise and fo^giue sins also. The words of abs^lution vsed by priests in a^sol^ung penitent sinners of their sinnes in sacramentall Confession. 1. Cor. 4.1. 2. Cor. 5.18. 2. Cor. 2.10. God vseth the ministerie of the diuels to execute hys iustice vpon sinners, and vseth Bishoppes and Priests as his instrumentes and meanes to exercise his mercy, and to Communicate his graces, and remission of sins vnto penitent sinners. and yet the Apostles and Priests doe also baptise (and the Caluinisticall Ministers cannot denie, but that in baptising a childe, they themselues vse to say: I baptise thee, and doe account that saying of theirs no dishonour at all vnto Christ,) so the Holy Scriptures doe affirme also, that both Christ forgiueth sinnes, and that the Apostles, Bishops, and Priestes their successors doe also forgiue sinnes, as the Ministers of Christ, and dispen^ators of his misteries, according to his owne commission plainly specified in the twentith chapter of Saint Iohns Gospell.

And so the Priests when they absolue penitent sinners of their sinnes in the Sacrament of Pennance doe vse to say. Dominus noster Iesus Christus te absoluat, and ego authoritate ipsius te absoluo ab omnibus peccatu tuis, In n^mine Patris, and Filij, and Sp^ritus Sancti. That is to say: Our Lord I^sus Christ absolue thee, And I by his authority doe absolue thee from all thy sinnes, in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost. And this ministeriall power of Christes priestes is insinuated by saint Paule in these wordes. Sic nos aestimet homo vt M^nistros Christi, and dispensatores Misteriorum Dei. That is to say: So let a man esteeme vs as the Ministers of Christ, and dispensators of the Misteries of God. And in an other place he sayeth* D^dit nubis Ministerium reconci^iationis. That is to say* He hath giuen vs the Ministerie of reconciliation. And likewise when Saint Paule absolued the Corinthian after hee had enioyned him a long time Pennance for a grieuous deadlie sin which hee had committed, hee saieth, that hee forgaue him his grieuous sinne in the person of Christ.
We see that Almightie God doth manie thinges by second causes, which he vseth as his instruments to fulfill his holy will, and ordinance, in diuers respects towardes his creatures. As for example To exercise his iustice, and to punish the wicked, hee vseth the ministerie of the diuels, and wicked spirits: And againe to exercise his mercie and to communicate his graces, and remission of sinnes vnto penitent sinners, hee doth it by meanes of hys Bishoppes, and Priestes, the successors of the apostles. And as in heauen he is serued by angels: so in earth hee vseth the seruice of Priestes to minister his Sacramentes vnto all Christians.

And all tendeth vnto his honour, and glorie, being all ordeined by himselfe for his owne seruice, and to accomplish his holy will, and ordinance: and to signifie the greatnesse of his incomprehensible mercy, and goodnesse: and withall the wonderfull Maiestie, and omnipotencie of his mightie power.
But because the diuell knoweth what great spirituall profit commeth vnto christians by meanes of humble confession of their sinnes vnto Christes Priestes, hee maliciously enuying their saluation, hath stirred vp many heretickes in this our corrupt age to bring Christs Priests and his holy sacraments into great contempt among the common ignorant people, to the intent they should neglect and contemne those meanes, vvhich our Sauiour Christ hath ordained for remission of their sinnes, and for their saluation.
Wherefore, let vs that be catholickes blesse our selues daylie from harkening vnto the diuels wily deceites, vttered by his crafty malicious ministers. And let vs not neglect to frequent most humbly confession of our deadly sins vnto Christs priestes, that we may haue theyr absolution of them, according to Christes owne commission graunted verie amply vnto his apostles and their successors, in the twentith chapter of saint Iohns Gospell. And let vs euer honour and glorifie Almighty God, (qui dedit potestatem talem hominibus.) Who hath giuen such power vnto men.





Of the second parte of the Sacrament of Penaunce: which is confession.

Of seauen things that are to be obserued in Confession. THE I. CHAPTER.
NOW that wee haue treated of the first part of Pennance,Here the author himselfe beginneth to treats of Confession. which is Contrition for our sinnes, let vs speak of the second part, which is Confession of our sins. Hee then that mindeth to make a full and perfect confession of hys sins as he ought to doe, (which is a thing that very fewe know how to doe,) after that he hath prouided for that which we declared heretofore as touching Contrition, hee must obserue also these rules following.

The first Aduertisement, that hee ought to examine his conscience very diligently before he come to Confession. @. 1.
THE first is, that hee take a time before he come to Confession to examine his conscience, and to call to his remembrance
 all his deadlie sinnes past: especiallie if he haue discontinued any long time from confession. In which examination (as a holie Father writeth) he ought to attend with the like diligence, and care as he would doe in a right graue and weighty matter, and of great importance: Forsomuch as this is certainly a matter most weightie,Confession is of verie great importance. Diligent examination is necessarie before confession. and of greatest importance, of all other affaires, and businesses in the world And this diligence in examination of his conscience before he come to Confession is so necessarie, that when it wanteth (in case the ghostly Father supplie not this want) the Confession so made shall be no Confession and to no purpose, or effect: euen in like sort, as that Confession should be, wherein the sinner doth willinglie, and ofset purpose leaue out of his Confession some deadly sinne vnconfessed. For as the Holy Doctors affirme:No deadlie sinne is to be omitted wittingly in confession. All commeth to one end, eyther of set purpose to leaue out some deadlie sinne vnconfess^d: or to make his Confession so negligently, and with so sl^nder examination before hand, rhat it were not possible, but that some one deadly sinne, or rather many deadlie sinnes must of force be left out vnconf^ssed. This is a thing that should be preached abroad, and cried out with lowde voice in the open streetes:
 forsomuch as very manie persons are so fowly deceaued herein, that they accustome them-selues to come to confession vnto their Ghostly Father vvithout anie manner of examination, or premed^tation of their sinful life before hand. The which persons (besides the sacriledge which they commit,) are bound to make their Confession againe, as if they had ofset purpose concealed some deadlie sin: forsomuch as in this case forgetfulnesse of their deadlie sins excuseth not,S. Bonauenture in 4. Sent. dist. 15. super literam. but doth rather accuse such a one, because r^commeth not of any defect of nature, but of manifest negligence of the same person.
Wherefore to auoide these inconueniences, a man ought (as wee haue said,) before he come to Confession, first to prepare himselfe, and to examine his conscience diligently.The manner of examining our consciences before confess^on. And the manner and order of this ex^mination may be by perusing the ten Commaundements, and the deadly sinnes, the which he ought to consider eu^ry one, how oftentimes hee hath sinned in each of them, by thought, word, or deede, with all the other circumstances that happened in the sin: I meane, vvhen the circumstances be such, as of necessity they ought to be confessed, whereof wee will treat particularly hereafter.



The second Aduertisement, that he ought to Confesse the number of his deadlie sinnes. @. 2.
It is requisite to confesse the nu^ber of the deadly sins, and it is not sufficient to say, I haue committed such a deadly sin oftentimes, or very manie times, but he must tell how often if he reme^ber them.THE second aduise is, to remember when he commeth to Confession, to declare the number of hys deadly sinnes: to wit, how oftentimes he hath committed such, or such a deadly sin: For if this number be not declared by him to hys Ghostly FATHER, the CONFESSION is not full and perfect. And in case hee doe not well remember the number of them distinctly, yet at the least let him giue a gesse thereof, as neare as he can possibly, more, or lesse, according as he shal be able to remember himselfe of the^. And if it so happen also, that hee cannot remember himselfe neare to any certaine number of the^, as if it were a deadly sinne that continued a long time, as enmity, or a sinne of the flesh: let him then declare vnto his ghostly Father, how long time he hath continued in the same deadly sin: for hereby the ghostly father may giue a coniecture with in litle, more or lesse, of the number of the deadly sins, that he might commit in such a time.

But in case it be a deadlie sinne that hath not this continuance, but was committed oftentimes, (as perirrie, slaundering, speaking euill of his neighbors, cursing, or such like,) and he cannot call to minde, how oftentimes he hath offended therein, let him declare to his Ghostly Father at the least whither he hath accustomed to offend in that kinde of deadlie sinne, so often as occasion and opportunitie was offered vnto him to commit the same: or if he did at any time vppon remorse of conscience refraine himselfe, and make resistance against it: for by this meanes, at leastwise his ghostly Father (beeing his spirituall phisition) may come to vnderstand the disposition of his patient, and so giue him medicines to cure and help him accordingly.


The third aduertisement: Of the circumstances of the deadly sinnes that are necessarily required to be confessed.  3.
AND it is not sufficient to confesse the kinde and number of the sinnes onlie,The circu^stances of sinnes are to be confessed when they doe greatlie aggrauate or chaunge the kinde of sinne. but it is necessarie also to confesse and specifie the circumstances of them, when
 they are such as haue a speciall repugnancie against some of the Commandements of Almightie God, or of his Catholicke Church: or els when they doe very greatly aggrauate the sinne, although the kind thereof be not thereby chaunged: for albeit that the act of deadly sinne is but one thing, yet notwithstanding, it may be accompanied with some wickednes of such qualitie, that of very necessitie the same ought also to be Confessed. As for example: If one had stolen Armour, with intent to kill another man, to take away his wife from him: here it is manifest, that although this be but one only act, which is to robbe, and consequently but one only sinne, (because it is no more but one act) yet neuertheles this act hath two other wicked offe^ces annexed vnto it, which be, that he had a will and intent to commit murther, and adulterie: the which are contrarie to those two Commandements: thou shalt not kill: and thou shalt not desire another mans wife:Exod. 20. verse. 17. Mat. 5.28. wherefore these kinde of circumstances, vvhich doe so aggrauate the sinne, must of necessitie be confessed.
What circu^stances are not to be Confessed of necessitie.But as for other kinde of circumstances that be of this qualitie, as speaking euill of others in the Church, or committing a sin
 vpon a Fasting daie, or vpon a Holy daie, these circumstances of the place or time, are not of necessitie to be confessed: although by way of counsaile they shall doe very wel to confesse them also, as they doe Confesse their veniall sins. And forsomuch as it is a matter of some difficulty to know the difference betweene the one kinde of circumstances, and the others, I will therefore set forth such circumstances, as most commonly we are bound to declare in co^fession. First, in sins of the flesh it is necessarie to declare in Confession the circumstances of the person with whom thou hast offended:what circu^stances night to be ^onfessed. Though all ^hese be deadly sins, yet some of the^ be more grieuous and more horrible before God ^han others. The desire to commit a deadly sin is to be expressed in Confession. for as the qualities of the persons be diuerse, so be the sinnes also diuerse: as for example, to sinne with a single woman is simple fornication: with a Virgin it is whoredome: with a maried wife, it is adulterie: with thy neare kinsewoman, it is incest: with a person that is religious, and consecrated vnto God by vow of chastitie, as Nunnes, etc. it is Sacriledge, or spirituall adulterie. And therefore such circumstances ought alwaies to be declared in this sin of the flesh, not only when it is committed in act, but also when it is by only thought, and desire: forsomuch as before almightie God all is one manner of sinne.

Likewise, both in this kinde of sinne of the flesh,What scandall or offence ougbt to be Confessed. and in all others, the circumstances of giuing of Scandall, or offence to others ought to be declared. And by this word Scandall, we vnderstand in this place, in case he haue giuen occasio^ by anie wicked deed,Scandalum est dictum, vel factu^ minus rectum occa^^onem spiritualis ruinae prebens* vide Summam Sancti Thome. 22. que. 43. Artic. 1. He giueth Scandall to others, that prouoketh an other to goe to Schismaticall praiers or Sermons: or to breake any of the Fasting daies: or to read anie Hereticall booke. or word, wherby an other might fall into deadly sinne: as he that soliciteth a woman to sinne, or a man to play at vnlawfull games, or putteth another in minde to be reuenged vpon his aduersarie: wherfore, in all sinnes of the flesh, besides that we haue here said, he ought also to declare in his Confession, if hee haue laboured to induce the other partie to sin, or els if shee did willingly offer her selfe thereunto: for in the first th^^^ is ^ scandall, (which is a grieuous sin,) (...) the second there is no scandall. He ought also to consider, if whe^ he committed a deadly sin, it were done in such a place, and before such persons, as that by the euill example which hee gaue, it might be a vehement occasio^ vnto others to doe the like. As if a man of authoritie should eate flesh without any necessitie in the holie time of lent, or vpo^ any other fasting daies co^manded by the church, or els should commit some other offence in the presence of such persons as might thereby
 thinke themselues licensed to doe the like. For in this case it shalbe necessary for him to confesse this circumstance of the scandall, and euil example, which he hath giuen. This point ought verie much to be noted of all Noblemen, and Gentlemen,A good note for all superiours, parentes, and maisters. and such as be housholders, and doe keepe seruants, and vse gameing in their houses: likewise of all Fathers, and Mothers, (whose workes and wordes their children doe commonly obserue as lawes:) for the children and seruants doe take those things to be lawfull, yea and commendable for them to doe, which they haue seene before practised by their Parents, and Maisters. King Saule slew himselfe with his owne sword,1. Reg. 13. the vvhich thing whe^ his Page that carried his speare after him perceaued, he drew out his own sword also, and slew himselfe likewise therewith, perswading himselfe, that he did not euill in doing the same act, which hee saw the King his Maister doe before him, although it were thereby to kill himselfe.
The circumstance also of the holy place is needfull sometimes to be declared in co^fession, and chieflie in three cases:The circu^stance of the Holie place. which be theft in a holy place: effusio^ of mans seed, or of mans blood: when either the one or the other is done there with sinne: because
 each one of these by reason of the place,It is a heinos sin to make any wicked vow, or oth, or to performe them, being contrarie to any of the commandementes of God, or of his Catholike church. changeth the kind of the sin, and causeth it to be sacrilege, which is a more heinous sin.
Likewise, if a ma^ haue promised by vow or oath to doe, or not to doe some thing, being bound to the contrarie of his foresaid wicked vow, or oath, by the expresse Commaundement of Almightie God: (as he is bound not to kill, not to commit fornication, not to continue in Schisme, or Heresie,) if he shall afterwardes doe contrarie to God his Commaundement herein, in fulfilling of his wicked vow, or oath, he is bound to declare in his confession the circumstance of his wicked vowe, or oath which went before: for this circu^stance maketh that which was one sin in one respect to be another sin also in another respect.


The fourth aduertisement: That we are bound to confesse but only the kinde of the deadly sinne  4.
THE fourth aduise is, that hauing performed so much as I haue declared concerning the number, and other circu^stances of the deadly sins, there remaineth nothing els to be Confessed, but onlie the kinde of the deadlie sinne: that is,
 the name of the deadly sinne: as theft, fornication, adulterie, or such like. Whereuppon may be inferred: first, that it is not necessarie in the Co^nfessing of a deadlie sinne,How to confesse a deadly sinne. to make rehearsall of the whole Historie: but it is sufficient to declare the name of the sinne, and how oftentimes hee hath committed the same, without any declaration of the whole historie, as it passed. The which point if the Penitentes would diligently marke, they might very easilie, and brieflie make their Confession of a great number of deadly sins, by reducing them al to their kinds, or names. As to say, I haue fifteene times robbed, killed, committed fornication, adulterie, periurie, etc. And for the better vnderstanding how to doe this, let a man consider, whe^ he intendeth in his Confession to declare vnto his ghostly Father a history of such sins as he hath committed, what the cause or causes be that moueth him to make so long a rehearsall: which is to accuse himself of some sinful wicked deedes that hapned therein: and let him cull and plucke these out of the whole corps of the Historie, and accuse himselfe of them: and thus dooing, hee shall accuse himselfe in his Confession as hee ought to doe. But if for vvant of
 knowledge he cannot so doe, let him then accuse himselfe as orderly as hee can: For almighty God requireth no more of anie man, than he knoweth, and is able to doe.
Note.Whereupon may likewise be inferred, that it is not necessarie to specifie in Confession particularly in what manner or order the sinne was committed, especiallie when it is a sinne of the flesh, but it shall suffice to declare (as we haue said) the kind or name only of the said sinne: and albeit this matter be verie loathsome, and filthie, yet intreating of the remedie of our filthines, it shall be needfull to put vs a little in reme^brance of our filth, and thereby somewhat to offend the cleane and chaste eares of the gentle Christian readers, by declaring this point more particularly at large.
How to co^fesse sinnes of the flesh.For the better vnderstanding whereof it is to be noted, that a dishonest sin may be committed either by thought, or by wordes, or by touching, or els by the very deed doing. If the actAct. be done indeed, it is sufficient to tell the name of the act: as to say, I haue committed adulterie, or incest, or simple fornication so many times, without any farther declaration of those particularities, which are vnderstood, when the kinde or name of the act is declared. If it
 were by touching,Touching. it is sufficient to say, I have touched dishonestly so many times,Note, that the penitent must not in any wise name the person with whome hee sinned. such a kinde of person, (as a single woman, or a virgin, or a maried wife, etc.) without adding other particularities, vnles by the touching there followed some thing that might change the kinde of the deadly sin. If it were by wordes, it shall suffice to say, I haue spoken filthie wordes,Wordes. and such as prouoked to sinne, or to delight my selfe therein, and not to say, I haue spoken these and these wordes. If it were by thought,Thought. it is sufficient to say, I haue had a dishonest thought, and I haue consented, or I haue taken delight, or haue stayed or continued a long time in the same, without any speciall declaration, as to say, I haue thought vpon such and such a thing, as some do vse in Confession, to their own great shame, and without any necessitie of the Sacrament of Pennance.
All these things are so cleare and manifest, that it were but superfluous to treat of the^, if we saw not the contrarie vsed by so manie: but there be some persons so rude, and giue^ so much to stumbling, that they haue neede of a Candle to see the way at noone daie. Neither ought such as are scrupulous to seeke any other order in declaring their
 sinnes: because it is sufficient to declare them in that order, which the Holie Doctors doe affirme to be sufficient: and therwith they ought to content themselues, sith they are bound to no more.


The fift aduertisement, In what manner we ought to co^fesse such sinnes as we commit in thought.  5.
How to iudge of euil thoughts when they he sinns, and when not.AND because it is a speciall great difficultie to Confesse sinnes of the thought, I will likewise brieflie declare, how this should be done: For the better vnderstanding whereof it is to be knowne, that in an euill thought a man may behaue himselfe after one of these foure waies: to  wit, either by endeuoring speedely to repell  it a way from him: or by staying himselfe  in the same for a short time: or by determining  to put it in practise: or at the  least by continuing willingly, and of purpose in taking delight therein.An euill thought spedelie repelled is no sin. As touching the first manner: that is, when he endeuoureth speedily to repell away the euill thought from him, it is a cleare case, that therein is no sin, but a merite, and reward: and therefore it requireth no confession. And albeit this resisting and striuing against the euill thought should continue all a whole daie,
 so that a man do striue and resist manfullie against it, therein is no sin, but euen a reward and merite.
2 As touching the second maner, that is,Gening co^sent to an euell thought is a deadlie sinne. Summa S. Thome 1.2. quest. 20. art 3. and. 4. Et pue. 2. de malo. arric. 2. ad 8. Co^tinuing willinglie in an euell thought and taking delight therein a deadlie sinne. when he staieth himself in the euil thought for a short time, it is a veniall sin: which is more or lesse grieuous, according as the co^tinua^ce or staying in the same thought was more, or lesse. The manner of confessing this sin is to say: I accuse my selfe, that I haue had a dishonest thought either of anger, or of hatred, or of lechery, etc. and I haue not put the same euill thought away fro^ me with such speed as I ought to haue done but haue staied my selfe in it for a time.
3 As concerning the third manner, that is, when he giueth his consent vnto the euel thought, and determineth to put it in practise, and execution, although afterwards he do it not indeede, it is cleare, that it is a deadly sin, and of the same kinde, as if it had bin perfourmed and executed in act. For (as the learned diuines affirme) the outward act addeth nothing essentially vnto the inward.
4. As co^cerning the fourth maner, that is, whe^ one continueth willingly, or suffereth himselfe to continue in thinking and taking delite in an euil thoght: as how to be reue^ged, or vpo^ some other filthie and dshonest
 thought, although he intend not to put it in execution, yet it is likewise a deadlie sinne, which by the learned diuines is called (delectatio morosa, a lingring delight: which is, as they are wont to say: Though I drink not in the tauerne, yet I take delight therein. This is a kind of sinne, wherein for the most parte those are wonte to fal, that are vicious, and dissolute persons and such as take greate pleasure in their own sensual delights. For although this be not a consenting vnto the act of the sinne,To giue full co^sent vnto the delight of an euil thought is a deadlie sin. yet is it a consenting vnto the delight therof: and a man putteth himselfe thereby in manifest daunger to giue his consent vnto the act of the sinne. This is to be vnderstood, when a ma^ perceiueth his euil thought, and yet doth, not endeuor to driue it away from him.Note. For in case when he perceaueth it, he do forthwith labour to roote out this firebrand from his minde, then shal it be no deadlie sinne: because he co^sidered not what he thought: but yet it is a veniall sin, because he ought to haue bene more carefull and circumspect in taking heed to his thoughts. And this manner of sinne may happen in al kind of deadlie sinnes, though it do chaunce more ordinarilie in sinnes of the flesh, of hatred, and of desire of reuengme^t, which be commonlie
 more fierie, more sticking, and more hardlie to be remoued awaie, than other sinnes be.
Into this sinne are al vicious and dishonest persons wont to fall, who when they knowe no waie how to accomplish their filthy desires, yet do they so much as their power is able to extend: that is, they turne and wallow the^selues in thinking vpon the filthines of the delight, especiallie when either in respect of their credit, and estimation, or by reason of restrainte of their liberty, they are past all hope euer to put their filthy desires in execution.
Those persons also are in great daunger of falling into this sinne, that are intangled with the dishonest affection of other persons, by reason of the great force that this affection hath to subdue and conquere the hart, and to bring it in subiection to the thing which it loueth. And therfore their is nothing more daungerous than to suffer such an affectio^ to haue any entrie into our minds: because it is as much as to entertain in our house a most cruell tyrant, a destroier of innocencie, and a stirrer and prouoker of infinite sins.
Such woers also are in verie great daunger of falling into this sin,A note for woers. as be too vehement
 and feruent in their wooing, and dealing for Mariage: for although the delits of them that are maried be lawfull after that they are maried, yet are they not so before mariage. Because the delight is present, and the mariage is to come, the which may manie waies be letted, and therefore such delight is not lawful as is taken at that time: I meane before the mariage.
Now that we haue vnderstood theise foure differences of thoughts, it shalbe an easie matter to know how to confesse the^: by declaring, whether the penitent staied himselfe in the euil thought, or consented therunto, or whether he had any lingring delight therein, by continuing willinglie in taking delighte in the same euill thought.
Nauarr. in Manuali, de ^ratione, and Horis Cano^icis. Cap. 7. ^umer. 11. ^age. 122.Note, that manie persons there be, that purpose not to heare Masse vpon some Sonday, or Holie day: or not to doe some other thing which they are commanded to do vnder paine of deadly sinne: And yet if such persons afterwards chaunge their euill purpose, and doe heare Masse, or fulfill other things that they be commanded, they haue the^ no care to Confesse vnto their Ghostlie Father their former euil deliberate purposes. As also verie many therebe, that purpose to go to Hereticall seruice, to
 fight, to commit adoulterie, or fornication, or theft etc. or doe purpose not to fast, when they be bound there vnto, not to pay their detbs, etc. the which persons in case they change their minds, and do not goe to hereticall seruice, nor fight, nor commit adulterie, nor fornication, nor theft, nor omitt to fast, to paie their debts, etc. they haue no care afterwards to Confesse those euill purposes vnto their Gostly Father. Such perso^s be in a miserable case,Exod. 20. verse. 17. Esay. 1.16. Mat. 5.28. Mat. 15.19 Rom. 7.7. Iac. 1.15. Concil. Trident. Sess. i 4. Cap. 5. and Can. 7.as doctor Nauarr tearmeth them. First, because it is certaine that al those former inward euil purposes be deadlie sinnes, and doe make vs the children of wrath, and the enimies of God: forsomuch as they be of the same kind as the external euil workes that proceed of them: and therfore (caeteris paribus) they be as euill as the externall euel workes are. And second lie, for that it is certaine also, that wee are bound to Confesse to our Ghostly Father all our deadlie sinnes, that we can call to our remembrance, yea, though they be but purposed and consented vnto onlie inwardlie in thought, and were neuer executed outwardlie in act.


The sixt aduertisement: that we ought to preserue the fame of our neighbour in Confession.
  6.
THE sixt aduise shalbe, that the penitent do take dilige^t heed to preserue the good name and fame of his neighbour,The penite^t must take heede that he disclos^ not the sins or names of others in hi^ Confession. confessing his owne sinnes in such order, that in nowise he do discouer the sinnes of others, or speak of any one perso^ by name. But let him only say: I haue sinned with a maried wife, or with asingle woman, etc. And in case the circumstance of the person shalbe such as the Ghostlie Father may thereby vndersta^d whome he meaneth, then ought he to seek for that time some other ghostly Father, that knoweth not the person, and so he may auoide this inconuenience. And if he cannot possible so do, the^ (the ghostly father being such a person) he may well confesse vnto him this circumstance: because this is not properlie a diffamatio^, but a declaration of his own sinne.
Let him beware likewise, that in his Confession he excuse not his owne sinnes:The penite^t ought to excuse his own sinnes. nor yet charge himselfe with more than is true: neither yet vtter that which is doubtful for certaine, nor such things as are certaine for doubtfull: but let him declare each thing in his place as it was indeed, without either adding or diminishing.



The seauenth and last Aduertisement: That the Penitent ought to be very carefull to haue a good Ghostly Father. @. 7.
THE last aduise shall be,The penite^t ought to be carefull to haue a good Ghostly Father. An ignora^t Ghostly Father is a guide to lead one to hell. that for the better fulfilling of the premisses, he be as carefull and diligent to seeke out a good Phisition for his soule, as hee would if he were sicke for his body: sith this is a matter of farre greater importance: for to seeke out an ignorant Ghostly Father, is as much to say, as to seek for a certaine guide to bring one to hell: Forsomuch as if the blind lead the blind (as our Sauiour saith) both shall fall into the ditch.Mat. 15.14 S. Chrisost. And those that be careles, and negligent herein, are in great perill, and daunger. For as Saint Chrisostome saieth: Ignorance excuseth not them, that had opportunity and meanes to finde, in case they had had a will to seeke For if truth be saluation and life vnto them that know it, it is not meete that truth should seeke for any man, but that it should be sought for of all persons.



Of certaine cases, wherein the Confession is of no value, or effect, and that then it ought to be iterated, and a new confession made againe.
 THE II. CHAPTER.
Sixe cases wherein the confession made is to be iterated.AND to the end that it may more clearly appeare of what importance each one of these thinges before declared is, it shall doe well to make mention here briefly of the most common cases, in which the Confession is of none effect, and therefore must of necessity be iterated, and made againe.
The confession is of no value when the penitent doth of purpose hide from his Ghostly father any deadly sin.The first is, when the penitent maketh a lye in his Confession in a matter of deadly sinne.
The second is, if in hys Confession hee did willingly conceale and hide from hys Ghostly Father any deadly sinne: as murther, adultery, theft, fornication, periurie, or any other deadly sinne. This is to be vnderstood, when the penitent is perswaded, that the sinne which he hath so concealed is a deadly sinne: for if hee tooke it not for a deadly sinne, but afterwardes it commeth to his knowledge that it is one in deed, then it is sufficient for him to accuse himselfe thereof, without any further repeating of the whole Confession againe. And albeit that the ignorance were such that it ^ould not excuse the penitent from sinne at the time of hys concealement, yet
 not withstanding it sufficeth to excuse him from this new bond.
The third case is, if hauing bin a long  time from Confession he hath not examined his conscience before hee commeth thereunto: for in this case forgetfulnes excuseth not the penitent, but doth rather accuse him the more, as wee haue before declared.
The fourth case is, when the penitent  mindeth not to leaue or forsake the deadly sin wherein he hath offended: as to forsake Heresie, Schisme, adultery, fornication, theft, vsury, enmity, reuenge, or any other deadly sin wherein he liueth: or whe^ hee intendeth not to make restitution of such goods or lands, as he ought to restore.
The fift case is, when the penitent is excommunicated,  and procureth not to be. first absolued from the Exco^munication
The sixt case is, when the Ghostlie Father  being ignorant, and the penitent him selfe also is not learned, there are notwithstanding great and weighty matters to be discussed in his confession: for in this case it can not be, but that some errours vvill happen that haue need of a further cure, as we haue before declared.
And it is to be noted, that in euery one
 of these cases wherin it is necessarie to iterate the Confession, if it be done with the selfesame Ghostly Father it is not needefull to repeate all those sins afresh, which he Confessed at such a time, in case the Ghostly father be mindefull of them: but it shalbe sufficient to say, I accuse my selfe of all those sins, which at such a time I co^fessed vnto you my Ghostly Father: and besides those sinnes, I accuse my selfe of such and such a deadly sin, for vvhich I am now bound to iterate this Confession.
And because many for good cause may feare, least they haue had peraduenture some of these foresaid defects in their former Confessions,Note this counsaile. therefore it seemeth to me very good counsaile, that euerie one doe once in his life make a Generall Confession in a very exact and diligent manner, that therewith he may reforme, and put away all these defectes, and negligences, and haue from that time forwardes greater diligence, and care of himselfe, than he had before.
Now it shall doe wel for help of memory, that we set forth a briefe Memoriall of deadly sinnes, to the intent that thereby the penitent may more easily examin his conscience, and prepare himselfe for this
 Sacrament of Pennance, which is the first of the aduises, that we haue before specified. Howbeit this we will doe, not by discouering infinite kindes of exquisite sins, (as many vse to doe,) but by rehearsing the most common and ordinary sins that are wont to happen.

Sanctus Vincentius, in Dominic. 19. Post Trinitat.
Aliqui dicunt, Interrogate me: quia non record or de aliquo peccato: vel habeo malam memoria^: and mentiuntur primo statim loco. Sed si Confessor interrogaret: quid scitis de tali vicina vestra, etc. non solum dicerent peccata ipsius mortalia, sed etiam quantumuis venialia. That is to say: Some persons doe say to theyr Ghostly Father, I pray you aske me some questions of my sins: for I doe not remember any sinne, or els I haue an euill memorie, and they make a lie euen at theyr first beginning: But if their Ghostly Father should demaund, and say vnto them, what know you of such a woman your neighbour, etc. then would they tell, not only her deadly sins, but her Veniall sinnes also.





A MEMORIAL OF SINNES to he^p the memory of such persons especially, as doe seldome times in the yeare make Confession of their sinnes to their Ghostly Father.


Accipite spiritum sanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata remittuntur eis, and quorum retinueritis retenta sunt. Iohn. ^0.22. Multi credentium veniebant confitentes, and annunciantes actus suos. Act. 19.18.



Accusations in the beginning of Confession.
 FIRST of all let the Penitent accuse himselfe, that hee commeth not with such preparation vnto this Sacrament of Penance as he ought to doe, that is to say: for that hee hath not such sorrow and repentance
 for his sins, neyther yet such a firme and determinate purpose, vtterly to forsake them as he ought to haue.
And for that he hath not vsed such diligence  in examining of his conscience, and in calling to his minde such sins as he hath committed, as he ought to haue done.
And for that he hath not had his minde  so closly recollected vpon the day that he receaued the most blessed Sacrament of the Aultar, aswell before as after receauing, as he ought to haue had.
And for that hee hath not fulfilled hys  pennance enioyned him with such expedition and deuotion, as hee ought to haue done.
And for that he hath not performed altogether  so fully such things as his ghostly Father commaunded him to doe. And here it sh^ll do wel to declare if his ghostly Father gaue him particularly in charge to make restitution of any thing, or to p^rforme any vow, or to forsake some speciall sinne, or to auoide any dangerous occasion of falling thereinto, which hee hath not done. These thinges ought to be declared, to the end, that the Ghostly father may thereby better vnderstand, how to behaue himselfe herein with the penitent.

This done, let him begin to confesse his sinnes in such order as followeth.

THE I. COMMAVNDEMENT. Thou shalt honour Almighty God aboue all thinges.
S. August.CONSIDERING (as S. Augustine saith) that almighty God is to be honoured with the three Theologicall vertues: which are Faith, Hope, and Charity: It shall be expedient to treate here of such sinfull acts as wee may co^mit against these three vertues.
A^cusations touching Faith.And conformably hereunto, let the penitent accuse himselfe: First as concerning Faith. If he haue doubted in any article of the Catholicke Faith: for he that doubteth in any point of the Catholicke Faith, is an Infidel: yea, and though he doubted not, yet if at leastwise he haue wauered or staggered neuer so litle in any doctrine of the Catholicke Religion, it is a veniall sinne.
If hee haue gone about to search curiously in any matter apperteyn^ng to the Catholike Faith. As if hee would beleeue such thinges only as might be prooued by reason.
Against Witch^s, and Witcheraf^e Nauarr. in Manuaeli.If he haue beleeued in dreames, diuinations, south-sayings, lottes, or witchcrafts: or if he haue vsed, or counsailed others to vse any of these things.


Note, that it is a deadlie sinne,
Confessari^ru^. cap. 11. Numer. 31. Deut. 18.10. and 11. Leuit. 19.31. Nauarr. ib. Numer. 30. Exod. 22.18. Leuit. 19.^1. Leuit. 20.6.27. Franciscus Pegna in suis Commentariis in Ambrosium de vignate super tractat: de heresi. qu. 12. art. 1. Nu^. 115. foll. 41 S. Thom. in 4. Sent. dist. 34. quaest. 1. artic 3. Soto in 4. Sent. dist. 34. que. 1. artic. 3. Sebastianus Medices in Summa peccatorum part. 1. quaest. 24. Tit Incantatores. and quaest. 27 Tit Malefici. Et Nauarr: in Manualli Confessariorum. Cap. 11, Numer. 29. Siluester. Tit. Maleficium. Numer. 8. in opusculis Caietani. Tomo 2. Tract. 12. de malificiis and vide Summulam Caietani. Tit. Maleficium.
to aske any Egiptians (as they tearme them) or any others, what fortune they shal haue, in case they demaund it with a minde to beleue what they answere therein.


Note that i^ is a deadly sinne also, to ask or cau^e others to aske of such as they tearme Diuiners, southsayers, wise-men, or wise women, for the finding out of any things stolne, or for any other secret or to seke to knowe the same with lots, dice, cards, or with a siue, or astrolobe.


Note that it is a deadly sinne likewise to consult with any witches: to exercise their witchcraft, about any thing. And note also, that it is not lawfull to seke to vndoe, or dissolue one witch-craft with an other witchcraft, albeit the witch of herselfe doe offer to dissolue or vndoe it. Because witchcraft is in his owne nature, euill, and therefore ought not to be admited, though it would dissolue the former witchcraft. Forsomuch as euill thinges ought not to be done, to the end that anie good thing should come thereof. And the Diuelles doe neuer kepe promise with any man, or woman, but to their distruction. And note, that Franciscus Pegna in his learned commentaries vpon the treatise of Heresie made by Ambrosius de Vignate, affirmeth, that it was condemned as an errour by all the learned diuines of Paris, An. Dom. 1318. to holde, that it is lawfull to dissolue one witchcraft with another witch-craft. And so it is generally condemned by all learned Diuines. Howbeit it is lawful to dissolue witch-craft by lawfull meanes. And the best remedie is by true penance: by deuout receauing the most blessed Sacrament by earnest prayers both by him-self, and by other godlie deuout persons: by Almes-deeds, and fasting: by holy-water and by the allowed Exorcismes of the catholike Church.



And (as the learned diuine Caietan affirmeth) it is lawfull al^o to desire an other to dissolue witchcrafte by any one simple vnloosing or dissoluing of the knotte of haires, or other thinges, wherewith the inchauntment or witchcrafte is conteyned: so that a due foresight be had therein beforehand* to giue a speciall charge to such as shall vnloose the knotte of inchauntment, and be withall suspected to vse any witchcrafte or inchauntment at other times, that in no wise they doe dissolue it with any inuocation of diuelles, or by any manner of witchcrafte, but simply and onlie to vnloose or dissolue the saied knotte. And note well, that this perticular act, to witte, onlie to vnloose or dissolue the said knotte, or other signe of witchcrafte, must be preciselie specified, and ought not to be lefte at Randon to the free choyce of the party that is requested to dissolue the witchcrafte: I meane hereby: that whe^ I or any others are bewitched, and I doe vnderstand, that such a man or woma^ knoweth how to dissolue the witchcraft, I may not request ^uch a one with these Generall wordes only: I pray you helpe to dissolue the witchcrafte for that were to request a witch to dissolue the witchcraft by al such waies and meanes as pleaseth the witch. But if any doe knowe that the witch-crafte done alreadie vpon anie man, or beast, consisteth in any knotte bound in some parte about them, it i^ no sinne to desire such a person that knoweth the same to vndoe or dissolue the said knotte. For herein is not exercised anie inuocation of diuells, or other diuelish operation, but onlie an humaine act, which any other person could doe, in case they knew in what place that knotte were.


And moreouer note, that it is a deadlie sin to beleue
 that the effect which proceedeth of the operation of witches, inchaunters, or southsaiers, doth come by vertu or force of the word^, or things which they applie to bring them to passe yea although health of body be procured: I meane, whe^ the thinges they applie thereunto doe of their owne nature want such vertue to produce such an effect for the diuell in that case procureth such an effect by other naturall causes, which he applieth for the same end, vppon some wicked couenant agreed vppon betwene the witch, and him, either in expresse wordes, or by priuy and secret insinuation. And the witches are fowly deceiued,
The alowed exorcistes in the Catholicke Church be assisted with Diuine power, in enforcing, and coniuring diuels out of such as are possessed with them. Against carying of any vnknowne Characters names, or figures. Siluest. Tit. Superstitio. num. 10. 4. Nauarr. in Manuali confessariorum. Ca. 11. Num. 34. A^milla Tit. So^tilegiu^. Num. 3 Sebastianus medices in Summa peccatoru^. part. 1. que. 16. Tit. breuia. Martinus Arles: tract. de Superstitionibus: Numer. 4. Ambrosius de vignate: in tract. de Haerefi. que. 4. Numer, 47 and 49. and Franciscus pegna, in suis Commentarjis in eundem tractatum.
in that they be perswaded, that they are able to compell the diuels inexercising of their witchcraft. For no man, or woman, (vnles they be assisted with diuine power) are able with anie art to call vp, or holde the diuels against their wills, or to compell them to do any worke. But the diuels, to the end they may allure men and women to credit them, and deale with them, doe feine that they be addicted to obey their wills, and constrained to doe as they commaunde them: which is but a malicious wilie deceit of them, to bring them more and more into his most wicked snares.


If he haue giuen credit vnto, or caried about him any writing, conteyning any superstitious names, with obscure vnknown characters, names, and figures. Note, that he that put^th his confide^ce in cariing about him any names in writing, firmely beleeuing: that by meanes thereof hee shall neuer be hurt in wars, nor in fighting, nor die a sodaine death, nor perish by water, or fire, sinneth deadlie, vnlesse hee or s^ee be so simple, as ignorance may excuse them. For such names haue no force by any naturall vertue, or by anie diuine or Ecclesiasticall
 ordinance to produce such effects. And as co^cerning figures, and characters, they doe not worke naturallie vnto any thing: forsomuch as a figure is not the beginning of any naturall action. In like manner it is vnlawfull to carrie superstitiously any praiers, wherin it is written, that who so carrieth about him this prayer, or place of Scripture, or shall say it thrise, or seauen times, shall not perishe by water, or fire, nor by any sodaine death. For these be Idle inuentions of some greedy couetous printers, or of other priuat superstitious persons, and not grounded vp on anie ordinaunce of the Catholike Church. But it is lawfull to say according to the deuout vse of Catholike Christians, fiue, tenne, or fifteene times, or more, or lesse. the Pater noster, and Aue Maria, and the Creede of the Apostles, to the seruice, reuerence, and honour of Almightie God, hoping thereby to moue h^s goodnes, and mercie to grant me, or my friends such or such a lawfull request, either spirituall, or temporall: or to deliuer me or them from some trouble, if it be his Holie will. And it is also lawfull to carry anie Holy Relique of a Sainct, or any diuine praier^, or wordes: so that respect be had therein onlie to the reuerence, and honor of God, and of a deuotion to honour the Saint whose Holy Relique I reuerence, and whose praiers and protection I hope in God to haue against the diuel and his members, and all their wicked deuises. And it is lawful also to cary crucifixes, and other Blessed Holy things, for such godly deuout endes, and purposes, as the Church hath instituted and ordeined them, to witte for increase of deuotion and of the seruice of God.


Summa. S. Thomae. 2.2.
But note diligently, that S. Thomas, and other learned Diuines doe affirme, that it is vnlawfull to
 carrie any writing conteining any names,
Quest. 96. Art. 4. Nauarr. in Manuali Confessariorum. cap. 11. Num 34. Siluester Tit. Superstitio. Num. 10. 4. Sebastianus medices in Summa peccat. part. 1. Quest. 16. Tit. Breuia.
vnlesse these foure conditions following be obserued, and doe concurre therein.


1. First, the names must be known, intelligible, and holy: I meane, taken out of the holy Scriptures, or the name of some Sainct.


2. Seco^dly, there must be none other character or signe conteined therein, but the signe of the crosse.


3. Thirdly there must not be any falshod, or vanitie conteined in the writing, or any thing apperteining to the inuocation of diuels: as the names of Belzebub Satanas, and such like, which Nigromancers and witches doe vse.


4. Fourthlie, they must put no maner of confide^ce in the manner of writing of them, neither yet in the matter wherein they be written as in virgines parchment (as they tearme it) nor yet in the time of writng it, as when the Sun riseth, or whilest the Ghospell is red, or vpon such a festiual day: nor in the manner of binding or folding of it, as with so manie thredes, and by a virgin, or such like follies, which neither tend to the honor of God, nor serue to any naturall effect.


In like manner it is vnlawfull to beleeue that hearbs gathered vpon the Ascention day,
Against Superstitious obseruation of dayes. Siluest. Tit. Superstitio. Numer. 10. 4. Nauarr. in Manuali Co^fessariorum. cap. 11. Num. 36.
or Saint Iohn Baptists day, or before the Sun-rising, haue more vertue, than if they were gathered the next day, or weeke following: or when the Sun goeth downe: or to obserue one day in the weke or yeare more than another in taking of a iourney-sauing that it is good not to trauail vpon Sondaies: and holie daies, vnlesse it be vpon necessitie, and after that we haue heard Masse: but all these other be superstitious abuses, and ought to be sharplie reprehended by the Bishoppes, Pastours, Preachers and Ghostlie Fathers, sith the Diuell deceaueth
 very manie, and especially simple vvomen with these superstitious follies.

If he haue done any deuotion to any euill or vaine end: as for example, that one might die, or to such like effect, etc.
Of Blasphemie.As concerning Blasphemie in matters of Faith, let him accuse himselfe, if hee haue blasphemed Almighty God, or any of his Saints.
If hee haue bin angry with Almightie God, or hath murmured or complained of him for such aduersities, and troubles, as he hath sent vnto him, as though he were not iust, or mercifull.
If in his rage hee haue desired his owne death, or wished that Almighty GOD would take him out of this life.
Of Hope.As concerning Hope, let him bethinke himselfe, if in his troubles, and aduersities, that haue happened vnto him, he haue had such a confidence and trust in Almightie God, as hee ought to haue had, together with such a strength, and consolation, as ordinarily a liuely confidence, bringeth with it.
If he haue contrariwise put all his confidence in creatures, or in the fauours, helps, and succours of the world.
If he haue mistrusted to obtaine pardo^ for his sins, or amendment of his life.

If he haue persecuted such Catholickes as do come to Confession, heare Masse, receaue the most blessed Sacrament of the Aultar, and be deuout in their praiers, or if he haue mocked, scorned, or grudged at them: or if he haue encouraged others to doe the same.

If he haue hindered the conuersion of any others from Heresie, or Schisme,
Against co^ming to any Schismaticall praiers, Sacrame^tes, or preachi^gs Num. 16. vers. 29. Psal. 25.5. Mat 18.17 Rom. 10.7. 1. Cor. 11.19. 2. Cor. 6.17. Ephe. 5.11 2. The. 3.6. Tit. 3.10. 2. Iohn. 1. vers. 10.11.14.
or from reconciling themselues to the due obedience of the Catholike Church.


If he haue communicated, or haue bin present with any Heretikes, or Schismatikes, or any of their praiers, sacraments or preachings: or haue compelled, counsailed, or encouraged any others therunto: or if for feare* or any other cause, he haue consented vnto any outward act of Schisme, Heresie, or other Infidelitie, albeit in his minde he beleeued the contrarie.


Note, that not only by the holy Scriptures, but also by the holy Canons of the Apostles, and by the auncient holie Councels of Laodice, Carthage, and diuers others, all Christians are straitlie prohibited from comming to the assemblies of heretikes, where they exercise their Schismatical Praiers, Sacramentes, or Preachinges. And whosoeuer commeth vnto such Schismaticall and Hereticall assemblies, seeming in apparance for feare of penal laws, imprisonment, or other worldly respectes, yea, or for any cause whatsoeuer, to be there as one of the^, and to pray among them, committeth thereby a grieuous deadlie sinne. And note, that by no humane dispensation it can be made lawfull, to pray in anie assemblie of heretickes, or schismatikes, or to be present at their praiers, or sacraments, as one of the^.



Cano^. Apost. 63 Concil Laodicen Canon, 33. Co^cil. Carthag. Canon. 72. vide Ambrosium de vignate, in tractatu de Heresi. que 15. de-Shismaticis Num. 177. and Franciscum-Pegna, in sins commentariis. et Simancas. in Cathol. Institu. Tit. 58. de Schismaticis Num. 6. Et Paulum ghirlandum in tract. de Hereticis, and eorum peni..
And note diligently also, that though such diss^mblers as come to Schismaticall seruice doe secretly protest among many Catholickes, that notwithstanding their dissimulation they beleeue inwardly in their hearts as other Catholickes doe, yet in very deede they giue great scandale and offence to many Catholickes: and doe openly signifie by their continuance in going to Schismaticall Seruice, (which includeth in it diuers wicked actes tending directly against the Catholicke faith) that either they be atheists, or els do beleeue many wicked Hertical opinions, te^ding directly to Athesme, and to the vtter defacing, and ouerthrowe of the Catholicke Religion. As that saluation may be obtained out of the Catholicke Church among Hereticks, and Schismatickes: That Christians are not bound to ob^y their chiefe Bishop, etc. That there may be a society, participation, and agreement, betweene the faithfull, and vnfaithfull: light, and darckenesse: Christ, and Beliall: which is directly contrary to^ Saint Pauls Doctrine. 2. Cor. vers. 14.15. That there is more than one holy Catholicke Church: which is directly contrary to the very article of our Creede. That out of the Catholicke Church the Sacramentes be lawfully and duely ministred: And also that they doe allowe, and beleeue the Hereticall opinion of the olde condemned Heretickes called Helchesaite: who taught that it is lawfull for a christian in time of persecution to deny his faith with his mouth, so that inwardly in his heart he doe beleeue as the catholike church doth. The^e and diuers other like Hereticall opinions doe these dissemblers seeme openly to protest and beleeue, to the great scandall of many Christians.


A confutaon of the co^mon excuses of Shismatickes.
But these dissemblers doe commonly excuse the^selues, for that the newe deuised Schismaticall Seruice consisteth for the most part of Psalmes, and chapters, collected out of the Holie Scriptures: and
 for that they omitte such Hereticall Praiers as be in that newe Seruice, contrary to the Catholicke faith. I aunswere that though the newe Schismaticall Seruice contained no Heresie at all in it, (as it is full stuffed therewith, and with manifolde Hereticall translations, and Rymes,) yet in that it is Schismaticall, I may no more be present at the same, than at the Seruice and Praiers of the Iewes, and of the Arrian Heretickes: the Iewes vsing none other Praiers in their Seruice, but only the Psalmes, or other praiers taken out of the Olde Testament, and saide in their Hebrue tongue: and the Arrians, Puritanes, Anabaptists, and al other Heretickes, praying also in their assemblies with singing of Psalmes, take^ out of the holy Scriptures.
Note well.
Howbeit it is not sufficient, that the Psalmes and Praiers which either the Iewes, Heretickes, or Schismatickes doe vse, be good in themselues, to cause other Christians to commend their use of them, and to participate with them therein: but the praiers must be accompanied with all their due circumstances. Among which, the chiefest be, that the Praiers be made in charitie, in vnity of christians, and in the Catholicke Church, out of which all particular Assemblies are the Synagogues of Sathan: and all workes good of themselues donne by them, whether it be Almes-deeds,
1. cor. 13. vers. 12. and 13.
Fasting, suffering of Martyrdome for the Faith of CHRIST, or praying with the tongue of Angels, doe profite them nothing at all, according as Saint Paule affirmeth.


And as touching their other common excu^e of comming to schismaticall ^eruice only for feare of loosing otherwise their Off^ces, Landes, and Goods, and vndoing their Wiues, and Children: this excuse will not serue before Almighty God,
Iohn. 12. vers. 42.43
but is vtterly condemned in the Gospel of S. Iohn:
 where certaine principall personages of the Iewes are grieuouslie reprehended, for that though they beleeued in Christ, yet they durst not confesse Christ openlie for feare of the Iewes, least they should be put out of the Sinagoue. And S. Iohn giueth this terrible sentence of their wicked dissimulation, that they loued the glorie of men, more than the glorie of God:
Iohn. 12. ver. 43.
whereas both they and we all ought to loue God aboue all thinges, and to preferre the glorie of God, before our liues, landes, goodes, offices, wife, children, and all other glorie of the world.


And forsomuch as our Sauiour Christ commandeth vs in the Ghospell, not to feare them that kill the bodie:
Mat. 10. ver. 28. Luke. 14. ver. 26.
muchlesse may we feare them that take away our goodes, offices, and landes. And in another place he saieth. If any come to me, and hateth not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his owne life besides, he cannot be my disciple.
Luke. 14. ver. 33.
And hee concludeth in the same chapter with these wordes: So therefore euery one of you that doth not renounce all that he possesseth, cannot be my disciple. For this crosse is laide now vpon vs by Almighty God to proue vs, whether we will preferre our worldly goodes, wife, and children, before the keeping of his commandements. And in S. Mathew hee protesteth,
Mat. 10. v. 32.33
that who so shall confesse him before men, hee will c^nfesse him before his Father which is in heauen. And that who so shall denie him before men, he will denie him also before his father which is in beauen. In which words it is to be noted, that our Sauiour affirmeth it to be a denying of him before men, not to confesse him before men, when the necessitie of our neighbour, and the glorie of God requireth it.


And in our case, all dissembling Catholickes
 that come to the Schi^maticall seruice of heretikes, do not only not confesse Christ before me^, but doe openly denie him before men* forsomuch as the whole world at this day, both Catholickes and Heretickes, especially in all such countries as any Heresies be permitted, do account the abstaining from comming to Schismaticall seruice to be the most principall externall signe and protestation of a true faithfull Catholicke: and the comming to the same, to be in common iudgement, either an apparant conforming of the dissemblers conscience vnto the Heretickes wicked proceedinges: or els an euident externall signe, that the dissembler in going thither contrarie to his owne conscience hath no true loue, or zeale to the auncient Catholicke religion.


And if such dissemblers notwithstanding their wicked dissimulation can be partakers with our Sauiour Christ of his euerlasting glorie in the Kingdome of heauen, then were Christs Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors farre deceaued, that were willingly content to indure so many vile reproches, contumelies, imprisonmentes, whippings, confiscations of landes and goodes, and most cruell torments, and death, rather than they would once yeeld their consents to dissemble with any of the Pagan Emperours, or with any Iewes, Turkes, Heretickes, or other Infidelles, in any one point that might sound against the glorie of Christ, or of his deare Spouse the Catholike Church.


Note also, that the learned diuines affirme,
Against marrying with an hereticke. S. Hier. cont. Louinia^. li. 1. Soto. in 4. sent. dist 39. Soto in quest. ^a^t. 2 and 4. Siluest. Tit. Matr^monium Num ^o Naua^r. in manuali Co^fessari^rum. Cap. 22. Num 49 ^eua^de^tius in Ruth. Cap. fol. 61. Concil. Flibert. can. 16. Concil. Lao. dicen. can^o. and 31. Concil Constant. 6. Gener. Cap. 72. Tit. 3. vers. 10.2. Thess. 3.6.1. Cor. 11.19.2. Cor. 6 17.2. Iohn. 1. vers. 10.11.14. Math. 18.17.
that if a Catholike doe marrie with an Heretike, though the mariage doe hold, yet the Catholicke commiteth thereby a deadlie sinne, by reason of the great daunger of infection with either Schisme, or Heresie, that may come thereby vnto him. And the Parents,
 Gardians, Tutors, Executors, and all others that be anie furtherers thereof, or might haue let it by lawfull meanes, and did not, but consented thereunto, doe also sinne deadly. For such mariages be prohibited by diuers auncient Holie Councels: And sithence in the Holie Scriptures wee be very earnestly commaunded to auoide the company of Heretikes, and neyther to eate with them, nor to receaue them into our house, nor yet to say Aue vnto them: but to account them as Ethnikes, and Publicanes: muchlesse is it lawfull for a Catholike to haue, or promise to haue such a continuall conuersation, familiaritie, dwelling, eating, and lying in bed together with an Heritike, as man and wife by mariage doe solemnly promise to haue during their liues: Whereby the Catholike should be in great daunger with all his children and houshold to be infected with Schisme, and Heresie: or els (in case both the husband and his wife be zealous each of them in the profession of their own Religion) there will then ensue great contention, quarrels, enmity, yea, perhaps fighting, and murdering al^o betweene them and their children, seruantes, kindred, and friendes, for diuersitie of Religion, and manifold other quarrelles, that will incidentlie growe therevpon.

If he haue endangered himself to offend Almightie God, by doing, or counsailing anie thing, whereof he doubted whether it were a deadlie sinne, or no.



THE II. COMMANDEMENT. Thou shalt not take the name of thy Lord God in vaine.
If he haue sworne falslie,Of swearing. knowing that it was false in deed, or doubting whether it were so, or no: or els if he tooke no great care, whether that which he sware were either, trew, or false.
If by swearing he hath promised anie thing that is lawful, and hath not fulfilled his promise, or had not any intention to performe it at the time when he sware.
If he sware threatning his Children, or seruants, not minding to do as hee sware: that is also a deadlie sinne. Neuertheles if afterwardes it shall be thought better to pardon, and shew mercie to them, than rigour, and seueritie, he is not bound to fulfill his oath.
If in swearing he hath threatned such as were not his seruants, to doe any thing against them that was a deadlie sin: this is a
If he haue sworne neuer to doe some good deed: (as neuer to lend, neuer to trust, neuer to say or heare Masse, neuer to preach, neuer to receaue a Priest into his house, and such like:) this oath bindeth not. No more
 more doth this that followeth, to wit, if he sweare to commit some euill fact.

^udic. 11. ^ers. 30. Math. 14.7.9. Act. 23 12. Concil illerden. Can. 7. Conc^l. Toletanum. 8. Can. 2. S. Ambros. lib. ^. de officiis. Vide Summam. S. Thome. 2.2. quest. 89. artic. 7. and quest. 98. art. 2. in responsione ad primum argumentum. Quod ille qui ^utat sefactu^um aliquid illicitu^, iurando incurrit pe^iuriu^, propter defectum iustitiae: sed si non impleat quod iurauit, in hoc pe^iuriu^ non incurrit: quia hoc non erat tale quid, quod sub iu^amento cadere posset. Et Siluester. Tit. de iuramento quarto. Numer. 1. Quod iurans de mortali, peccat mortaliter, iura^do, and serua^do. Et vide Summulam Casetani, de peccatis. Tit. periurium. Et Soto, de i^stitia, and inre: lib. 2. qu. 4 artic. 3. Et Naua. in Manuali confessariorum. Cap. 12. Nu^. 3.
Note that (as it appeareth in Ieremy. cap. 4. vers. 2.) three things be required in euery oath to haue it lawfull: to wit, Trueth: Iudgement and Iustice: And in case any of these three doe want in an oath, it is a sinne.


And note likewise, that by daily experience we see, that many simple ignorant persons are foulie deceiued with the like absurde erroneous opinion as wicked King Herod was, who (as it appeareth in the Ghospell) was per^waded, that it is lawfull to performe an vniust oath: and that a man is as well bound to performe an vniust oath, as a lawfull oath, whereas all Learned Diuines doe vniformely agree, according to the Holy Scriptures, and the iudgement of the auncient Councels and Fathers, That an oath ought neither to be any impediment to hinder any vertuous Act, nor any bond to furder any wicked Act. And therfore if in the heretical country of Germany, an oath be ministred vnto me, to present truely the names of all Catholickes within such a parishe, towne, or sheire, and the intention of ministring this oath, is to know therby tho^e Catholickes, and so to punishe them, by imprisonment, or banishement, or by execution of some penalty or forfeiture vpon them for their Religion: First if I take this oath to doe so vniust an Act, the verie taking of the same wicked oath beeing contrarie to Iustice (as the learned Schoolemen tearme it) Secundum quid periurie in me: Albeit I haue a purposed minde to present truely the names of al the Catholickes. And the reason why it is thus tearmed periury, is for that the oath beeing taken to doe an Act against Iustice is applied vnto an euill matter,
 which I am bound by the Lawe of Charity vnder paine of incurring a deadly sinne vtterly to detest, withstand, and falsifie. And therefore, sith by the Lawe of Charity I am bound to doe contrary to my saide oath, and in no wise to performe it, but to make it a false oath, it is all one, as if I had ^worne falsly: I meane heereby, it is as heinous a deadlie sinne, as if I had sworne with a mind not purposing to performe my oath.


Secondly, I am not bound to performe that vniust oath, but I am bound to breake it: sith by performing that vniust oath I should also committe an other deadly sin, by beeing an occasion and meane that Catholikes should be vniustly punished by heretickes: which is against Charity.


Thirdly I am not bound to performe that vniust oath: because I should thereby shewe my selfe to be a fauorer and aider of heretickes, in furdering of their heresies.

Let him in like manner accuse himselfe, of the oaths of cursing, and banning, (which are verie common:) As, a vengeance take me, or such a kinde of death chaunce vnto me: of these must he accuse himselfe, if he be faultie therein.
If he be accustomed to sweare oftentimes: the which is a verie perillous thing, by reason of the great danger wherein he liueth to sweare sometimes falslie.
If he haue omitted to rebuke or correct his Children, or seruants, when he vnderstood that they were accustomed to sweare, or to lie.

If he were the cause that others should sweare falslie, (as in suborning false witnesses, or any of the Iurie to giue a false verdict:) or that an other should not fulfill the lawfull oath which he hath sworne.

Note, that in this our wicked age generallie throughout England, and especially among Free-holders,
Lodouicus Granatensis in 3. Concione de penite^tia. S. Thom. Quodlibet. 1. quest. 9. artic. 18. Soto, de Iustitia, and iure. lib. 8. que. 2. art. 3. in 4. conclusione. Silnester. Tit. Periurium. numer. 2.
that be empaneled vpon enquestes, periurie is accounted a light offence, and is commonly required by one friend of another in ^utes of Law. wheras S. Thomas, and this godly author F. L. de Granada, and other learned Diuines doe affirme, that if we haue regard only to the kinde of the sinne of periurie, and to the obiect of it, it is a more grieuous deadly sinne than murder. Because the sinne of murder is directed against men, but the sinne of periurie is directed against Almighty God, whome the periured per^on calleth to be a witnesse of his falshoode. In consideration whereof, the holy auncient Pope Eutychianus required, that the very same penance should be enioyned for periurie, as was for wilfull murder. And withall, that vice of periurie was accounted ^o horrible, and so greatlie detested by all our Auncient holy christian forefathers,
Concil. Matisco. can. 2.
that in an Auncient Councell it was ordained, that who so solicited any other to giue false witnesse, or to be periured, should neuer be afterwardes admitted to communicate,
S. Chri^ost. Homil. 9. in acta.
and receiue the most blessed sacrament of the Aultar, vntill the very ende of his life. And Saint Chrisostome was so carefull that none of his flock should fall into periury, that he vsed to expell all such out of his Church, and to forbid them all communicating therein, as vsed to sweare vpon light occasions. And would to God, that all Catholicke Bishops and Pastours
 would followe his Godlie example, and then would there not bee so much swearing and forswearing by euery lewd fellow, as we see so vniuersallie vsed in this our corrupt time.
Summa. S. Thom. 2.2. quest. 98. artic. 2. Sebastianus Medic is. in Summa peccatorum part 1. que. 31. Tit. periurium.
And moreouer note, that (as S. Thomas affirmeth) the periured person doth thereby giue to vnderstand, either that almightie God will be a witnes of lyes, and falshood, or that Almightie God knoweth not the truth, and therefore periurie is a great irreuerence, and contempt of Almightie God, and contrarie to the vertue of Religion, whose office is to giue reuerence vnto him. See against periurie, and the wicked custome of swearing. Exod. 20. verse. 7. Leuit. 19.12. Deuter. 5.11. 2. Reg. 21.1. Psal. 14.4. Psal. 23.4. Sapien. 14.25. Ecclesia. 23.9. and 12. Ieremie. 7.9. Zachar. 5.3. Zachar. 8.17. Malach. 3.5. Mat. 5.33.34. 1. Timoth. 1.10. Iac. 5.12.

As touching vowes, if he haue broken any vow.

And note that in this corrupt age manie dissolute Priestes, Monkes, Friers, and Nunnes,
Of vowes. Deuter. 23. vers. 21.22 and 23. Psal. 75.12. Ecclesia. 5. ver 3. and 4. Sap. 8.21. Mat. 19.12. Luc. 11. vers. 9.10. Iohn. 16.23. 1. Cor. 7. vers. 7.32 33.34.37 38. and 40 1. Cor. 10 and 13.
haue most horribly broken their vowes by perswasion of Heretickes, in cloking their sacrilegious adulterie, and incest, with the holy name of mariage: wheras they had vowed before freely, and voluntarily, vnto Almightie God perpetuall Chastitie during their liues, and had married themselues vnto our Sauiour Christ by that solemne vow: by reason of which mariage they are as well barred from all other mariage, as hee that is alreadie married to one wife, which can not ioyne in mariage during her life with an other.


And in case the holy auncient Ecclesiastical Ordinances might haue bin executed in this our corrupt time, that were made for due obseruation of perpetuall continencie in all the Cleargie, to the intent they should (as good Spirituall Pastours
 ought to doe) giue holy example to al their flocke, of mortefying the lustes of their fleshe,
2 Cor. 3. ver. 5. and 6 Phili. 2.13. Phili. 4.13. 1. Timoth. 5. and 12.
and contemning the transitorie earthly riches of this world, and so attend wholy to the seruice of God, by employing their whole mindes, studie, trauell, and time, in continuall Praier, Meditation, Contemplation, Fasting, Watching, Preaching, Ministring the holie sacraments, and in other holy spiritual exercises, without any hinderance therin by the common worldly impediments of Wife, Children, Midwifes, Nurces, Cradelles, Wenches, and so manifolde other worldly appurtenances as be incidently required for the continuall carefull maintenance, and prouision of them, (not conuenient, nor seemlie for Spirituall Pastours,) I am fully persuaded, that our dissolute licentious Bishops and Priests, should not so easily haue beguiled Women to marry with the^, contrary to the Lawes of the Church, as they haue donne.
Concil. Tolet. 3. can. 5. Concil. His. palense. Can. 3. Concil. Tolet. 9. can. 10.
For so much as all such Women were accounted by our auncient Holy Christians Forefathers ^o vile, and infamous, that it was ordained in diuers anncient Holy Councels, that they shoulde be solde for Bond slaues, and that the price gotten for the^ shuld be bestowed vpon the poore. And by another Holy Councel it was also ordained, that their children should neuer inherit any thing that appertained to their parentes, but remaine Bond slaues for euer vnto the same Church, where the Priest their lewd Father committed that scandalous ignominy.

If he haue deferred the fulfilling of his vowe any long time.
If he haue vowed to doe any wicked act or not to doe anie good deed: neither of theise two wicked vowes doe bind vs to the performance of them.

Let him also consider well, if his vow be such as may lawfully be chaunged, that it be done with great prudencie: taking aduise therein of his ghostly Father: and that it be chaunged into some other thing, which is at the least as great as the former, or rather greater: for otherwise the changing of it were not well done, when it may be done in this manner.


THE III. COMMANDEMENT. Thou shalt keepe Holy the Saboath day.
IF HE haue not kept the Sondaies, and Holie-daies, but haue done, or comma^ded to be done any seruile worke vpon the same dayes, vnlesse it were some little thing.
If hee haue omitted to heare Masse throughout vpon euerie Sondaie,Euerie Cbristian is bound to heare Mass euerie Sondaie, and Holie daie in the yeare. and Holiedaie, being not letted by any lawfull cause: it is a deadly sinne.
If he haue not bin at the time of Masse, and other diuine Catholick Seruice, and in Holie places, with such deuotion, and reuerence, as he ought to haue bene. Or if he haue bene there talking, gasing, or laughing: which was otherwise than became him.

If hee haue not prouided that his Children and seruants should heare Masse vppon euery Sondaie, and Holie daie.
Lodouicus Granatensis. in concione. 3. de penitentia. in 3. precept. decalogi. pag. 61.If he haue spent all the whole Sondaie or Holie daie, in pastimes, gaming, and vanities.

Note, that it is very lamentable to consider the corrupt manner that most Christians doe vse in this wicked age in sanctifying the holy Festiuall dayes for whereas they be instituted by Almightie God to this end, not so much that men should sanctifie the Festiuall dayes, as that they themselues should be sanctified vpon these holy dayes, they be so farre off from procuring sanctification vpon these holie dayes, that ordinarily they are worse occupied vppon holy daies, than in other common worke daies, consuming most part of the holy daies in playing at dice, tables, cardes, bowles, etc. and so doe offend Almightie God more vpon holy dayes, than vpon other dayes.

If he haue bin negligent in hearing of sermons: The Author meaneth such sermons as are preached by Catholickes, and not by Schismaticks or Heretickes.
If being excommunicated he haue bin prese^t at Catholike diuine seruice, or haue receaued any sacrament during that time.


THE IIII. COMMANDEMENT. Thou shalt honour thy Father and thy Mother.
IN this Commandement is treated: first, of the dutie, care, and diligence, which
 Children ought to vse towardes their Parents, and Parents towards their Children.
Secondly, of the dutie, which seruantes  doe owe to their Maisters, and Maisters towardes their seruants.
Thirdly, of the charge, which Prelates  and Pastors ought to haue ouer their flock, and parish: and of the dutie which the parishners do owe to their prelats, and pastours.
Fourthly, of the dutie of the wife towards her Husbande: and of the Husband  towardes his wife.
Fiftlie, of the Sonnes in law towardes  their Fathers in law: and of the Fathers in law towardes thier sonns in law. For al this runneth (as it were) by one rule. And here likewise the penitent must examine himself, how he hath behaued himself towards his Elders, and Benefactors.Of the dutie of children.
Now according hereunto, let the Sonne first examine himself: If he haue despised, or not honoured, or haue spoken anie euill wordes by his Father, or Mother.
If hee haue disobeied them in matters that were iust.

But note, that I am not bound to obey my Parents, or Superiours, when they commaund to doe any thing that is vniust, and vngodlie: as to goe to any schismatical seruice,
Act. 5. ver. 29.
etc because I ought chieflie to obey almighty God, and his Lawes and Commandements.


If he haue not succoured his Parents, in their necessitie.
If he haue bene ashamed of his parents, by reason of the basenes of their familie, or poore estate.
If he haue not performed the last wil, and Testament of his Father and Mother.
If he haue wished their deaths, to enioy either their lands, or goods.
Likewise, let the Parents consider: If they haue bene carefull ouer their chidre^ to wit,Of the duty of Parents. whether they haue taught the^ Catholick praiers, and instructed them in the Catholick doctrine. And especiallie to knowe the Apostles Creed: the tenne Commaunde^ments: our Lords praier: and the Salutatio^ of the most blessed Virgin: and whether they haue vsed such diligence and carefull circumspection as they ought to preserue them in this wicked corrupt time from all infection of Schisme, and Heresie.
If they haue reprehended, and chastised them whe^ they did such things as they ought not to haue done: or whe^ they haue kepte vnthriftie and lewd companie.
If they haue kept them ocupied in some kind of exercise, to the end, they should not become idle loyterers, and vagabonds.
If they haue brought them vp with ouermuch delicacie, and pleasure, suffering
 them to haue their owne willes, and to fulfill all their appetites.
In like manner the Maisters must obserue the same towardes their seruants,Of the dutie of Maisters towardes their seruantes. and al others that be vnder their gouernment: especiallie in vsing great diligence, and carefull circum^pection, to preserue them from al infection of Schisme and Heresie, and to haue them instructed in al nessarie Catholicke doctrine.
Let them co^sider also: if they haue prouided competentlie for al things necessarie for them.
If they haue bene carefull to see them cured of their diseases, and haue caused them in their sicknesse to receaue the holie Sacraments.
If they haue suffered them to vse the companie of dishonest men, or women: or to liue in any other deadlie sin, being able otherwise to haue remedied it.

As touching Godfathers, and Godmothers,
Of Godfathers, and Godmothers.
it is diligently to be noted, that according to the iudgement of diuers Councels, and of S. Augustine, and S. Thomas, that who so is Godfather, or Godmother vnto any in Baptisme,
Concil. Arelatens. sub Carolo Magno. Can. 19. Concil. Magunt. sub Carolo Magno. Can. 47. Concil.
taketh vpon them the office of an instructor, that is to instruct their Godchildren in necessarie doctrine of the Catholicke religion. And therfore they be bound to haue a care of their instruction therin, especially if necessitie doe vrge it: As it doth in time and place, where the childe baptised is brought vp among Heretikes, or Schismatickes: but where the Children be brought vp
 among Catholickes,
Collinion. cap: 4. S. Aug. in quodam ser. Pasch. Summa S. Thom. 3. part. quaest. 67. artic. 8.
then may the Godfathers and Godmothers be wel excused of this care, presuming that their Godchildren are then diligently instructed by their christian Catholike Parents. Howbeit, in case at any time they perceiue the contrary, and that their Godchildren doe want a good Catholicke instructor, tha^ are they bound to their power to take care, and to prouide for the saluation of their spiritual children: for they must remember that they be spirituall Parents vnto their Godchildren, and are bound as suerties for the^ in their Baptisme, that they shalbe wel instructed in al necessary doctrine of the Catholicke religion. Many Godfathers, and Godmothers be verie negligent in performing theyr bounden dutie herein, especially in such places as are infected with Schisme and Heresie, and therefore Preachers, and Ghostly Fathers, ought to admonish them thereof.


As touching Gardians of Wardes, etc. it is to be noted,
Of Gardians. Of Wards.
that who so compelleth any of his children or Wardes to marrie with another person against their owne free will committeth a deadly sinne. S. Antoninus. part. 3. Tit. 3. Cap. 4. @. 5. and Nauarr. in Manuali Confessariorum. cap. 25. Num. 8.


And note likewise very diligently, that by the Holie Generall Councell of Trent, all such persons are Excommunicated ipso facto,
Conc. Trid. Sess. 24. de refor. matrimonii. cap. 9. Sebast. Med. in Summ. peccat. par. 2. Pa. 103. and 300. Nauarr. Manuali Conf. cap. 27. num. 150
as doe vse any manner of compulsion vnto anie vnder their gouernment, (as to their Wardes, or any other,) eyther by threatning, or by exacting anie manner of penaltie, or by any other meanes, directlie, or indirectly, vvhereby to compell them to marrie vvith some certaine person, whome they prescribe vnto them. For such couetous Gardians, etc. doe violate and infringe the free libertie that ought to be in the Holie Sacrament of Matrimonie, and doe moste
 horriblie abuse it for their owne priuate luere, and, commoditie, to the vtter vndooing of their Wardes and of them that be married in such forcible manner vnto them: whereof there be very many lame^table experiences in euery sheire of England.

Betweene Stepfathers, or Stepmothers, and Sonnes in law, or Daughters in law, let them consider, if there haue beene betweene any of them any malice, enuie, or euill wordes: or if they haue desired one anothers death, to haue their goods or lands.
Betweene married folke, let the HusbandThe Husband. consider, if he haue euill treated his wife, by word or deed, and if he haue prouided her of all necessaries.
Likewise the wife,The Wife. if shee haue misused her Husband, by disobeying him, or by giuing him any occasion to breake his patience, and to bee mooued to Anger. Howbeit in case the Husband commaund his wife to goe to any Hereticall seruice, or to commit any other deadly sin, she ought not to obey him therein.
If she haue bin iealous ouer him without any iust cause. The subiect must consider,Of the obedience of subiects. Acts. 5. vers 29. if he haue disobeyed his Magistratess or anie of their lawes and Commaundements, being not repugnant vnto any of the commandements of God or of his Catholicke Church.
If he haue despised the Magistrates in his heart.

If he haue murmured or complained of them. If he haue iudged rashly of their doinges to some euill purpose, by saying that they did their things vpo^ passio^s, or sought their owne lucre, and gaine, or some other worldly respect.
If he haue dishonoured either by word or deed, such persons as are placed in gouernment, and office.
If he haue contemned, or not vsed due reuerence vnto aged persons: and if he haue mocked, and iested at them.
If he haue bene ingratful vnto his Benefactors, by forgetting their benefits: or (which is worse) if he haue rendred vnto them euell for good.


THE V. COMMANDEMENT. Thou shalt not kill.
AS touching the Soule: let him first examine himselfe,Of spirituall murder. if he haue spiritually slaine his neighbour, by perswading him to Schisme or Herisie, or by prouoking him, or giuing him anie counsaile, or occasion, to sinne deadlie: which is a sinne of Scandall, or offence.
If he haue accompanied him, or fauoured him, or helped him in doing anie wicked act.

As touching the bodie: if he haue killed,Of bodilie murder. or procured, or desired the death of his neighbour: and if he haue praied vnto God that he might die.
If he haue borne anie deliberate purposed hatred against any man, hauing a desire to be reuenged of him: and how long time he hath continued in this malitious mind.
If he haue refused to speake to any person, to whome he was wont to speake, and hath thereby giuen Scandal, or offence to his neighbour.
If he haue bin any occasion of factions, or haue fauored them.
If he haue threatned any with euil speeches, not being vnder his gouernment.
If he haue forgiuen such persons (at least wise in the Court of Conscience,) as haue humbly desired pardon of him.
If hauing offended others by word, or deed, he haue desired forgiuenes of them, either by himselfe, or by some other: And if he haue made sufficie^t amendes for such iniuries, and offences, as he hath done vnto them.

Howbeit note, that if I haue borne hatred secretly in my minde against another, and haue not made any show thereof by any outward signe, in this case I need not to aske forgiuenesse of him, and
 it is better to conceale it from him,
Ludouicus. Granatensis, ^n concione de peni^entia. in 5. precept. decalogi. pag. 71.
least by discouering it vnto him, he be mooued thereby to conceiue the worse of me, and to suspect at an other time that I doe seeretly beare the like hatred towardes him.



THE VI. COMMANDEMENT. Thou shalt not commit Fornication.
ALbeit that in all sinnes offence may be committed by Thought, Worde, or Deede, yet in this sinne of the fleshe, it doth more vsually happen than in any other. And in what manner soeuer of these three kindes he shall offend, the quality and circumstance of the person with whom he offended ought to be expressed. (As whether it were with a Virgin, or a single loose Woman: or with another mans Wife: or with his neere Kinse-Woman, etc.) according as we haue before declared.
How we may sin by thought.Now according vnto this order: First as concerning Thoughts, let him confesse, If he haue bin negligent in resisting forthwith his dishonest thoughts.
If he haue consented vnto his dishonest thoughtes, desiring to put them in execution, in case he had opportunitie therunto.

If he haue continued any time in taking a lingering delight in his dishonest thoughts being well aduised what he did.
As concerning words: If he haue spoken any filthie and dishonest Words,Of dishonest Wordes. taking pleasure and delight in such kinde of talke.
If he haue solicited others vnto sinne, either by wordes, or letters, or by meanes of some third person.
As concerning Deedes,Of Deedes. and Actes: If hee haue offended in this sinne of the flesh by the actuall doing of the facte indeede.
If he haue sinned by kissing wantonly, or by dishonest touching, either of himselfe, or of any other person.
If he haue willingly procured any pollution.Of Pollution. And if the pollution happened vnto him in his sleepe, then the iudgement thereof (to wit, when it is a sinne) must be according to the cause that went before, and according to the griefe, or pleasure, which he had after the same.
If he, or shee haue donne any thing to prouoke others vnto sinne: as by tricking and trimming themselues wantonly in apparell, by painting their faces, by ietting vp and downe in open places, or by gazing in the streetes, or at windowes, to allure others to beholde them.

If he haue solicited to violate the chastitie of others, by giftes, or by promises, true, or false, or by any other meanes.
If he haue not shunned and auoided the occasions of this sinne of the flesh: as daungerous companie, and conuersation, and dwelling together within one house: which is the greatest of al other occasions.
If he haue read any dishonest bookes, that might prouoke him to this sin of the flesh.
If he haue not armed himself with Fasting, praiers, going to Confession, and receiuing the most Blessed Sacrament of the Aultar, and with other spiritual remedies, when he perceaued himselfe verie much tempted with this sinne of the flesh.
Of Maried folke.Let married folke also Confesse, if they haue not paied the one to the other the debt of matrimoniall Iustice.
If they haue sought by any meanes to hinder the fruite of generation.
If they haue kept the order, and naturall vse, in the act of Matrimonie
If they haue procured any pollution otherwise out of the naturall vse.
If he haue had any carnall knowledge with his wifes kinswoman within degrees prohibited: which is an impediment, that
 letteth the Matrimony, if it happened bebefore the Mariage. But in case it were afterwards, then he cannot require the debt of Matrimonie, without dispensation of his Prelate.


THE VII. COMMAVNDEMENT. Thou shalt not steale.
IF he haue taken any thing appertaining vnto others, either by deceit, violence, vsurie, or Simonie, etc.
If he haue withholden other folks goods or landes, against the wil of the owners, and hath not made restitutio^ of the same.Restitution must be made out of hand. And it is not sufficient to haue a mind to make restitution in time to come, but he must restore out of hand with effect: yea, though he shalbe constrained by reason of the restitution to diminish and abate his countenance, and state: And this must be done out of hand especiallie when the right owner himselfe is in necessitie thereof.Leuitic. 19 vers. 13.
If he haue deteined the wages, which was due vnto his seruants, workfolkes, or other hired persons, against their wills.
If he haue not made restitution of such things as he hath found, or of such things as came to his hands without knowledge of the owner.

If in buying or selling he haue wrought any subtiltie or deceit, eyther in the wares, or in the prices, or els in the weight, or measure.
If he haue bought any thing of such as could not sell it, as of Bondmen, Infants, etc.
Also if he haue taken of them any thing of gift, which they could not giue.
Selling of wares vpon credit aboue the iust price.If in respect only of selling vpon credit he haue sold his wares aboue the iust price, hauing none other lawfull cause to mooue him to doe it, which must be referred to the iudgement of his discreet Ghostly Father.
If he haue occupied together in societie with others as partaker both of losse, and and gaine, reseruing not withstanding his principall stocke to be saued wholly and securely vnto himselfe.
As touching Hunting etc. it is to be noted, that who so entreth into another mans priuiledged Parke or Warren, and killeth therein, and taketh away from thence any Deere, or Conies, against the will of the owner, committeth a kinde of thefte, and is bound to restitution. And the like is of taking away of Doues out of another mans Doue-house, and of Fishe out of another mans
 Fishe-pond, etc. in case it be done against the will of the owners.

AND NOTE also, that who so layeth artificially any corne, or seedes, or other meates in his doue-house, or doe vse any other arte, with an intent to allure thither the Doues out of other mens Doue-houses, and to cause them to frequent his Doue-house, it is also a kinde of thefte, and he is bound to restitution.

If in gamingOf gaming he haue vsed deceit, and gained thereby.
If hee haue plaied for more than was conuenient for his estate.
If he haue plaied with his inferiours for greater summes of monie than they vvere able to play for.
If in gaming he haue sworne, quarrelled, or fought vvith others, or haue giuen anie reprochfull or euill language.
If he be an Officer,Of Office^ let him Confesse if he haue not exercised his office diligently, and faithfully, for which he receaueth fee, or wages, whether he be a Labourer, Butler, Cooke, Ouerseer, or Steward, etc. forsomuch as euery one of these is bound to susteine such losses as shall happen in his office through his negligence.
If he haue the appointing or distribution
 of publike Offices, or Benefices, or of anie other thing, let him Confesse, if hee haue had any respect of persons, by giuing them for worldlie respects, and not according as the lawes of distributiue iustice do require.
If at his suite, or request any Office, or Benefice, haue beene bestowed vpon anie person that was vnworthie of the same.
If hee haue not truely paide his TithesOf Tithes. vnto the Church.
Concil. Ma^unt. Can. ^8 de deci ^^is. Concill. Matisconem: ^^cundum ^an. 5. Con^^l. Trident. ^ess. cap. 12. ^e. Refor^atione. Na^^rr. in Ma^ali Confes^iorum. ^^p. 21. nu^er. 32.And note diligentlie here these terrible wordes of an auncient Councell against such as will not pay duelie their Tithes vnto their Catholicke Pastours, and Curates. Timendum est, vt quisquis Deo debitum suum abstrahit, ne forte Deus per peccatum suum auferat ei necessaria. That is to say: It is to be feared, that who so withholdeth from God his due, least perhaps God will for his sinne, take from him those verie thinges that be necessarie vnto him. And by an other more auncient Councell it was ordeined: that who so obstinatelie refuseth to pay his Tithes to the Church should be separated for euer from the me^bers of the Church. And in like manner it is ordeined by the late Holy Generall Councell of Trent: that who so withholdeth or hindreth the payment of Tythes, should be excomunicated, and not be absolued of that sinne, vnles he make full restitution.
And note, that euen in this our present corrupt time with Schisme, and Heresies, all Catholickes want not good meanes to pay their Tithes duely vnto God, being such a number of poore Catholicke Priestes now in a manner in extreame necessitie, both at home, and abroad, without any manner of maintenance of the landes or liuinges of the
 Church, which were ordeined, not for any Caluinisticall Ministers, but for the prouision of Catholicke Bishops, and Priests, to whom in case they doe now pay their Tithes, doubtlesse Almightie God will not only accept it, but aboundantly reward it, with inestimable graces and blessings both to them, and their posterity. And as for such couetous persons, as haue no due consideration of the present most lamentable extreame case, and necessitie, of poore Catholicke Priestes, I meruaile that they can haue any manner of hope to finde any mercie at Gods hand at the dreadfull houre of their death: sith he promiseth his mercy in his holy Scriptures only vnto such as be mercifull vnto others, saying. Blessed are the mercifull, for they shall obtaine mercy:Math. 5. vers. 7. Math. 25 45. Luke. 6 38. And in another place. Amen. I say vnto you, as long as you did it not to one of these lesser, neyther did you it to me. And in S. Luke he saieth also: With the same measure that you doe meate, it shall be measured vnto you againe. And see also. Mat. 18. ver. 23. Deuter. 5. ver. 10. Deuter. 7. ver. 9. Tob. 4. ver. 7. and 12. Eccle. 4. ver. 10.11.. Prouerbs. 11. ver. 23. Prouerbs. 19. verse. 17.


THE VIII. COMMANDEMENT. Thou shalt not beare false witnes
THIS Commaundement conteineth two great braunches. In the one are the sins which are co^mitted in iudgments by the Iudges, Counsailours, Attourneis, Proctors, Witnesses, Iurors in enquestes, and by the plaintiffe and defendant. And
 in the other branch are conteined slaunders, detractions, grudginges, mockeries, rash Iudgements, suspitions, lies, and flatteries.
As touching the first part, let the penitent co^sider, if he be a Iudge, Counsailour, Attourney, Proctour, witnes, or a Iuror in enquests, and according thereunto let him accuse himselfe of such thinges, as apperteine vnto his office.
As co^cerning the second branch, let him first of all consider, if he haue borne anie false witnes.
Let a woman also confesse, if she being moued with ielosie, or anger, haue spoken any vnsemelie words against an other woman, by saying, that she is an harlot, bawd, witch, or theefe, when she wanteth some things take^ out of her house: for this is likwise a false witnes, when such words are rashly vttered, hauing no sure foundation.
^f detracti^^.If he or she haue spoken euil of any of their neighbours of euil will, and with an intent to doe them thereby any hurt, or displeasure: which is commonly called detraction.

Note, that he that hath defamed an other by any false report is bound to restore his fame againe vnto him:
^to, deiusti^, and iure. li. (...) quest. 6. ^t. 3. Manuali. Nauar. cap. 18. numer. 44. and 45.
by saying vnto them, to whome he made
 that false report, that he reported vntrulie of him. And if need require, he ought to sweare, yea, and bring witnes, wherby to diswade the^ from conceauing euil of the party, who^ he had falsly defamed.

If he haue vtttered any grieuous and secret fault of his neighbour,we may not discouer to others any secret fault of our neighbour though it be true because his good name and fame is thereby hurt vnles We discouer it of charitie to such as may correct him or els do it by due order of lawe. whereby he is defamed: yea, though he spake it not with anie intent to do him any hurt. And albeit that the secret fault which he published of his neighbour were true, yet is he bound to restore vnto him his good name again, which he hath taken away by his vncharitable discouering it to an other.

But note, that in restoring to him his good name againe, he may not say, that he spake falsly of him, when the secret fault was true: but that hee spake euil of him: and let him co^mend him for some vertues that be in him, and talk no more of his secret fault.

Moreouer note, that although the detractor do repent him of his detraction neuer so much, and punish himselfe for the same with neuer so great Fastings,Note, that a detractor is as well bound to make restitution, as a theefe. and other austere penances yet vnlesse he doe his endeuour to restore to the partie whome he hath defamed his good name and fame againe, and withall make him sufficient recompe^ce for the damages, and losses, he hath thereby sustiened, or at least wise content him therein, in case the detractor be able to restore and recompence the same, he shal neuer obteine Pardon of Almightie God of his sin of detraction.
The due consideration whereof is able to make
 euen a stonie heart to burst out in teares, especially if a ma^ haue any taste or feeling in spiritual things, to consider, how this pestilent vice of detraction is so generall among all states in the world: insomuch that (as S. ChrisostomeS. Chrisostome. saith) ye shall rarely finde eyther Layman or Monke wholly free from this vice. And whereas commonly at euery table, and in euery company, little other talke is heard, but backbiting, and lewde reporting of other mens and womens faults, yet it is a wonder to heare of any restitution made by any detractor vnto any per^on of their good name and fame againe: wherefore this godly learned Author F. Lewis de Granada lamenteth verie grieuouslie in one of his Latine Sermons with the consideration thereof:Ludouicus Granatensis in 2. Tom. concionum: dominic. 3. in quad. concio. 3. pa. 418. 422. 423. And affirmeth that he feareth that the greatest number of men and women are damned euerlastingly in hell fire for this sinne of detraction, though they had no other deadlie sinnes besides. And therefore I wish, that the Preachers and Ghostlie Fathers would zealouslie endeuour to perswade all persons to detest and eschew this foule vice of detractio^, especially sithence the infection thereof is so common, and so few make any conscience of defaming their neighbours, and in a manner none at all of restoring afterwardes vnto them their good name and fame againe.
If hee haue hearkened willinglie vnto such persons as haue made any slaunderous reports of their neighbours, or haue prouoked them thereunto, or mainteined the^ therein.
S. Bernard li.2 . de Con^^deratione.And note that S. Bernard saith, that to defame, or to giue eare to another whiles hee defameth his neighbour, whether of the two is more damnable, hee cannot easilie
 affirme. Wherefore when any defameth his neighbour by any euill report, all that heare the backebiter shall doe well to giue apparant signification, either by words, or signes, or at least wise, by holding downe their heads, and by their sad countenances, that they doe greatly mislike with such lewde backebiting talke. And let them endeuour to interrupt or stay the backebiter at the first entry into his backebiting if they can, and to talke of some other new matter. Otherwise,Rom. 1. verse 32. in case they giue any willing eare to the detraction, the hearers seeme to consent to the detractor, and are thereby made partakers of his sinne.
And in regard of these inconueniences, it is also to be noted, that (as the Holy Father Cassianus reporteth)Cassianus Lib. 4. cap. 7. the auncient Religious Monkes of Capadocia deuised the reading of Holie bookes at the time of their refection, not so much for the profit that commeth then by the reading, as for the eschewing of idle talke, which commonly is more rife at that time, than at any other time. And for the same respect the auncient holy learned Doctor S. Augustine prescribeth in his rule to his Monkes, that they should giue good eare vnto the reading of some holy booke so long as they did sit at their refection, vntill they rose vp from thence, and that during all that time they should make no noise, nor haue any talke one with another: the which godlie rule is at this day duely obserued in all Religious Monasteries. And in like manner the auncient Holie Councels of Toledo, and Maguntia ordeined,Conc. Tolet. 3. can. 7. Conc. Magunt. Can. 9. that Priestes should euer haue reading of the holy Scriptures at their tables. And would to God, that Bishops who ought to be a spectacle of obseruing holy Discipline to all the Priestes, and laytie, would not forget their dutie herein: sith the Holie
 Pope Eusebius, and the auncient Holie Councel of Reimes haue so speciallie charged them in this behalfe.Con. Reme^s. Can. 17.
If he haue reported such euill speaches again as he hath heard but lightlie and vainlie reported of others.
If he haue defended the good name and fame of his neighbour, being slaundered by others, when he knew him indeed to be innocent.

Psalm. 81. vers. 4. Pro. 24.11. Summ. S. Thome 21. quest. 70. art. 1 and nota Caietanum in suis Commentatiis.
Note, that if a witnesse may with his testimony deliuer one from an vniust death, or from any infamie, or other great damage, he is bound to giue his testimonie therein, though he be not commaunded by a Iudge to do it. For albeit none is bound to offer him selfe to giue testimony for the condemnatio^ of any person, (vnlesse it be in the crimes of Heresy and Treason) yet is he bound to offer himselfe to giue testimonie for the absoluing, and discharging of an other that is falsely accused, and in daunger to be vniustlie condemned, for want of some testimonie to discouer the truth: or at leastwise he is bound to endeuour what he can that the truth of the matter may be signified to such as may helpe to discharge the Innocent from the false accusation.

If he haue murmured, or grudged, at other mens liues.
If he haue mocked or scoffed, at the natural morall defects of his neighbours.

If he haue iudged rashlieOf rashe iudgment. of the sayings and doings of his neighbours, taking that in euill part, which he might haue taken in goood part: and (which is worse) if he haue reported vnto others such things for certaine as he rashlie iudged in his hart.
If he haue bene suspitious,Of suspitio^. taking occation of euerie ^ight cause to suspect the worse of others.
If he haue sowed discord, and debate,Of making debate. Leuitic. 19. ver. 16. Prou. 6.19. betwene his neighbours, making the one angrie with the other, and vttering vnto the one the faults of the other, wherevpo^ doth commonlie arise great dissention, hatred, and mischeife.
If he haue told any lie,Of lying. either to the preiudice or profit of his neighbour, or in any other respect.
If he haue obteined any thing by false information, which he could neuer haue obteined in case he had disclosed the truth.
If he haue reuealed any secrets to others which were giuen him in charge not to reueale.
If he haue opened other mens letters without their consent.
The ninth and tenth commaundements are comprehended in the sixth, and seuenth, which are declared here before.




Of the seauen deadly sinnes.

I. OF PRIDE.
What Pride is.Summa S. Thom. 22. qu. 162. artic. 1.PRide is an inordinate appetite or desire of a mans own proper excellencie. Out of this sinne many other sins do proceede.
Among which, the chiefest are vaine glorie, ambition, presumption, vaunting, and hypocrisie. Now according hereunto a man may accuse himselfe of euerie one of these kinds in manner and forme folloing.
Of vaine glory.As touching vaine glorie: let him consider wel of himselfe, if he haue bin vaine glorious in naughty matters: as for that he hath bene reuenged, or hath beaten, or dishonored others. etc.
If he haue taken any glorie in thinges that are vaine, and vnworthy of glorie: as of bewtie in the face, comlinesse of body, behauiour of his person, great retinewe of seruants, riches, great possessions, statelie howses, kinred or of such other like matters which are of litle acompt.
If he haue gloried vainly in things that are good, and are worthie of glorie: As of vertue knowledge, and wisdome. The glorie whereof he ought to haue giuen to Almightie God

If he haue gloried in flatterie, or in worldly praises, taking ouermuch contentation, and delight therein, and not giuing the glorie of all to Almigtie God.
As touching Ambition:Of Ambition. let him consider if he haue bin Ambitious, or haue greedily desired or gaped after honor, promotio^, and glorie: or haue done such things to attaine vnto the same, as he ought not to haue done.
If he haue bene so timerous of worldly shame, or infamie,Of feare of persecution for Religion or of the euill will and displeasure of others, that to auoid these inconueniences he hath done such things as he ought not to haue done, or left such things vndone as he ought to haue done.
If for feare of euill speeches he haue omitted to do any good thing: as to confesse his sinnes: to heare Masse: to receaue the most blessed Sacrament: to come vnto Catholicke Sermons: to succour, defend, and honour Catholicke Preists, and religious persons: and to keepe companie with good and vertuous Catholicks, etc.
As touching Presumption:Of Presumption. If hee haue presumed vainelie of him selfe, and taken that vpon him which he is not, reputing himselfe more vertuous, better learned, and of greater witte, and parentage, than he is indeede.

If hee haue presumed much of those giftes, and other thinges which hee hath, and hath not giuen the glorie thereof vnto Almightie God.
If he haue had too great a confidence in his own iudgement, knowledge, or vertue.
If in that respect he would not receaue counsel, correctio^, or chastiseme^t of others.
If in the same respect he haue defended his owne manifest faultes, by going about to excuse his sinnes.
If, for that he would not seeme to be ouercome, he haue obstinately argued and resisted against that which hee knew to be true and reasonable.
If he haue despised, and contemned others, making little account of them, or speaking wordes in contempt of them.
If vpon this presumptio^ he haue iested, and scorned at other mens ignorance and defectes.
Of Hipocrisie.As concerning Hipocrisie: let him consider, if he haue laboured to seeme to be that which he is not, or haue fained himselfe to be more holie than he is indeed, to procure vainelie vnto him selfe the name and estimation of holines amongst men.
Of braging and boasting.Concerning bragging, vaunting, and boasting, let him consider, if hee haue after a vaine
 manner vaunted or praised himselfe, or his owne doinges.
If he haue praised himselfe for any sin he hath committed: as for that he hath dishonoured any woman, or done any iniurie vnto others.
If he haue co^mended himself for a thing which he neuer did, (especially being a sin,) that therby he might seeme a valiant and hardie man, or be the more esteemed.


II. OF COVETOVSNES.
LET him consider, if he haue bin couetous,Of Couetousnes. and nigardlie, or if he haue hoorded vp goods together without a reasonable cause.
If contrariwise he haue bin prodigal, and wasteful.
If hee haue spent more than his abilitie was able to maintaine,Of Prodigalitie. whereby hee is fallen into great necessity, and wa^teth meanes to prouide thinges necessarie for his wife, children, and seruants.
If he haue had a great and inordinate loue towardes money, whereby he hath forgotten almighty God, and such thinges as be requisite for the behoofe of his soule, and hath imployed his whole studie to the increasing of his worldly substance.
If he haue desired another mans death to be his heire, or executor, or to enioy some office, or other co^modity, after his death.
3. Of Leacherie: Of this sinne we haue treated alreadie in the Sixt Commandement.



IIII. OF ANGER.
AS touching Anger: Let him consider first, if he haue bin so angrie with himselfe,Of Anger towardes himselfe. as to wish or desire his owne death.
If being in any rage or furie, hee haue hurt himselfe.
If in his anger he haue giuen himselfe to the Diuell, or cursed himselfe.
Of Anger towardes his neighbour.As touching his Neighbour: If he haue bin angrie with his Neighbour, or disdained him without cause.
If he haue spoken any wordes of anger against him, or giuen him discurteous language.
If hee haue reuiled him with iniurious wordes: as calling him theefe, drunkard, or foole, etc. not being his seruant, or bondman. This is a deadly sinne.
If in his choller and anger hee haue vpbraided him with his faults, and offences, which he hath committed, therby to make him ashamed.
If he haue in his anger vttered the same words, or discouered vnto others the same faults in his neighbours absence.
If hee haue cursed or offered vnto the diuel the creatures of God, or wished vengeance vpon them, whether they were his
 seruants or not: though there be some difference betweene the one offence, and the other.
If he haue beene obstinate, chollericke, wayward, or quarrelling: or haue vsed any vnciuile tearmes in his wordes, and reasonings.
If hee haue executed the anger of his minde against any man, by striking him.


V. OF GLVTTONIE.
AS touching gluttonie: let him consider, if he haue broken any of the Fasting dayes prescribed by the Catholicke Church.
If hee haue eaten flesh vppon any daie prohibited without sufficient cause.
If he haue bin occasion that any other hath broken anye Fasting daye, which they were bound to keepe. This also is a deadly sinne.
If he haue eaten so excessiuely, or such meates, as were hurtfull vnto his health.
If he haue eaten or drunken ouermuch, or oftentimes, or with ouermuch appetite, or gluttonous desire.
If hee haue beene a great louer of such meates as are delicate, and curiouslie dressed,
 and haue bestowed very much therevpon.
Against dronkennes. Prouer. 20. vers. 1. Prou. 31.4. Eccles. ^9.2. Eccles. 51.38. Esaie. 5.11. Osee. 4.^1. Ioel 1.5. Luc. 21. vers. ^4. Rom. 13.^3. 1. Cor. 5.^0. Galath. 5.21. Ephes. ^.18. Concil Magunt. Can ^6.If hee haue willinglie made himselfe druncke, or any other, it is a deadlie sinne.
Here let such take heed, as vse that abhominable drunken custome of Germany, lately come vp, and practised now in many places of England, to carouse and drinke vnmea urably one to another. The which beastlie sinne of drunkennesse (being a voluntary madnes,) is also an occasion of many other deadlie sinnes, that doe consequently follow the same. In consideration whereof, it was ordeined by an auncient Councell, that who so is oftentimes drunken and will not amend, after that he is reprehended for it, should be excommunicated.


VI. OF ENVIE.
^f Enuie.AS touching Enuie: let him consider, if hee haue with a deliberate aduise bin grieued at the prosperitie of others, or because others excelled him in any thing. As if a Courtier should enuie that another should be in greater credit, or fauour than he, or be better preferred, or obteine his suites with more expedition.
If hee haue reioyced at his Neighbours hurt, or aduersitie, or to see him fallen from his wonted credit, and estimation.
If hee haue spoken euill wordes of his neighbour to discredit his person, or his good name, and fame, or to aduance himself,
 by disclosing the faults and defects of others
If he haue discouered any secret fault of his neighbour, to the end, that his defectes being published his credit might be diminished.
If it hath grieued him, when he heard his neighbour well reported of.


VII. OF SLOVTH.
AS touching Slouth:Of Slouth. let him consider, if for slouthfulnesse he haue omitted to doe good workes: as to heare Masse, to say his prayers, especially, when of dutie he is bound vnto them.
If in his praiers, and other good exercises appertaining vnto the seruice of Almighty god, he hath done the same coldly or faintly, and after a light and negligent sort.
If he haue beene inconstant,Of Inconstancy. giuing ouer such good purposes as he intended to do, and leauing of his deuotions, and other holy Exercises, vpon euery light occasion.
If he haue deferred the^ from day to day.
If he haue slept more than is necessarie.
If he haue spent his time lewdlie in vaine fantasticall and wandring thoughts, in idle talke, and vnfruitfull exercises.
If in his troubles and aduersities he haue taken ouermuch griefe thereof.
If on the contrarie part hee haue waxen
 proud, and haughtie aboue measure, with prosperitie, estimation, and good successe, not giuing the glorie therof vnto almightie God.



Of the workes of mercy.
Of spirituall workes of mercie.AS concerning the Workes of Mercy: let him first accuse himselfe, if hee haue beene negligent in the spirituall workes of mercie: especially if hee haue omitted to counsaile, aduise, or reprehend such persons, as hee might haue holpen by some of these meanes, chieflie if they were such, as of dutie he was bound to haue care of.
If when he hath eyther counsailed, or reprehended them, he did it in such anger, and with so little modestie, that hee did more harme than good.
^f brotherly ^^rrection. ^^cle. 17. ^^rse. 12. ^^t. 22.39. ^ath. 18. ^^r. 15.16.17 ^^mma. S. ^^omae. 22. ^est. 33. ar. ^. and 3. and ^^od lib. 11. ^^e^. 10. arti. (...) 13. and ^e Sum^^lam.Note, that the precept of brotherly correction, is a precept of charity, and spirituall almes, and is therefore called a brotherly correction, or admonition, because it tendeth to amend our brother of his sin in a charitable manner: and the order thou must vse herein, is prescribed in the ghospell, to wit. First to admonish thy brother secretly of his sin. Secondly, if he amend not, then to take with thee one or two witnesses. Thirdly, if that notwithstanding hee amend not, then to declare it to the Church: to wit, to the Prelates, or Gouernours of the Church, as S. Chrisostome interpreteth it: But note, that so long as thou hast any probable hope of amending thy brother by secret admonition of him, thou must vse it
 more ofte^ than once,Caietani, de peccatis. tit Correctio Fratterna. and Paulum de Palacio in Math. cap 18. and Stellam in Luc. cap. 17. Et Nauarr. i^ Manuali Confessario Cap. 24. Numer. 12.13.14. and cap 18. Num. 56 Proue. 24.1 Eccle. 11.7. Iac. 3.2. Prou. 24.1^ 1-Tim-5.2^ Prouerb. 9. vers. 7.8. Prou. 15.1^ Prou. 17.1 Prou. 29.2 Eccle. 1.1 Eccle. 3. Eccle. 20. Prou. 31.4 2. Thes. 5.1 Psa. 140.5 1. Cor. 4.1 Gal. 6.1. 1. Tim. 5.1 2. Tim. 2.2 for preseruing his good name and fame: Because wheras the sinner incurreth two euils by his sinne, the one is hurt of his conscience, and the other is hurt of his fame, if thou canst repaire the hurt of his conscience without hurting his fame thou oughtest so to doe: But in case thy secret admonition doth not preuaile with him, then sith the hurt of his conscience is the greater euill, the same ought to be preferred, and holpen, although it be with the hurt of his fame. But note also first, that thou must not vse this brotherly correction, or admonition vnto any, vnlesse thou be verie certaine, that they are guiltie, and thou art not bou^d to vse it, when thou haste but a suspition therof, albeit it be with coniectures. Secondlie note, that the sinne of thy brother which is to be thus brotherlie corrected, must be a sinne, whereby he is in danger to perish, I meane a deadly sinne: for in veniall sinnes, (as S. Iames saith) vve doe all offend. Thirdly note, that a publike sinner is publikelie to be corrected, and reprehended for his sinne, as S. Paule affirmeth. Fourthly note, that thou art not bound to correct the sins of such persons, as thou haste no hope that they will be reformed and amended thereby: as the sinnes of such vvith vvhome thou haste no conuersation: for it is likely, that they vvill giue no eare vnto thee. Neyther yet art thou bound to correct or admonish such persons of their sins, as in thy opinion are carefull of their consciences, and be therefore likely to repent and amend of themselues. Fiftly note, that thou must seeke good opportunitie of time and place to vse this brotherly correction. and in any wise to admonish him charitably as thy brother, and not as an enimie: otherwise doing it vvithout discretion, thou shalt doe more hurt than good.

Sixtly note, that if another hauing knowledge of that sinne be more apt and likely to admonish him of the same sinne, than thou art, and is disposed therunto, thou maiest then omit this brotherly correction, and admonition.
If he haue not had compassion of so many miseries, calamities, rebellions, sects, and heresies, as do at this day trouble all Christendome: And if he haue not praied vnto Almighty God for redresse of them.
^f Corporal ^orkes of ^ercie.As touching the corporall works of mercie: let him consider, if he haue holpen his Neighbours in their troubles, and necessities. And if hee haue giuen Almes to the poore, according to his abilitie.
If he haue bin cholericke with them, or murmured against them, or giuen them euill answeres, as being too much molested by their importunitie: or if he haue disdained, or mocked them.


Of other Accusations more particular.
AFTER these Accusations, which are common to all kind of persons, there be other speciall Accusations, which apperteine vnto diuers kindes of States, or persons: as to Bishops, Curats, Priests, Religious Munkes, Friers, and Nuns, Lawiers, Iudges, Sergeants, Counsailers, Officers, Atturneys, Proctors, witnesses, Iurors, gouernours of Cities, Stewards of copy holds,
 or other segniories, Phisitions, Marchants, House-houlders, or such like: the which kinds of persons ought to accuse themselues, after these general accusations, of such matters also, as do appertaine particularly vnto the charge of their estates, and Offices.
The Prelates, (to vvit Bishops,Bishops and Curates. Pastours, and Curates) that haue charge of soules, ought to accuse themselues, if they haue not bene resident, and of the little regard and care, they haue had to instruct and profit their flocke, with Catholicke doctrine, prayers, and good example of life.
See the godly decrees in the late holy Generall Councell of Trent,Concilium Generale Trident. Sess. 5. de Reformatione. cap. 2. and Sess. 24. de Reformatione. Cap. 4. Concil. Generale Lateran. Can. 10. how all Curates are bound to preach themselues, or hauing lawfull impediment to cause others that are meete for the same to preach the word of God to their flocke, at the least all Sondaies, and Solemne Festiuall dayes. And note there also, hovv all Bishoppes are bound to preach them elues, or hauing lawfull impediment to appoint other meete Preachers, to Preach the word of God to the people in their Diocesse, at the least all Sondaies, and Solemne Festiuall dayes, and in the Holy times of Lent, and Aduent euery day: or at the least three dayes euery vveeke. And see the like Decree ordeined in auncient time, in the Holy Generall Councell of Lateran, holden vnder Pope Innocentius the third.
The Priests,Priests. if they haue not said Masse, and other diuine seruice: or haue saide the same negligently, with little reuerence, attention, and deuotion.
The religious persons:Religious persons. if they haue broken
 any of their vowes, or any ordinaunces of their Order.
Note, that by the late Holy generall Councell of Trent,Conc. gener. Trid. Sess. 25 cap 18. de regular. and Monial. al such are excommunicated, as doe by any meanes enforce any virgin, or other woman, against their wils to enter into any Monastery, or to put on the habit of a Religious Nunne, or to be professed.
And likewise all such are excommunicated by the saide Generall Councell, as doe by any meanes hinder without iust cause, the Holy will of any Virgin, or other Woman, from being a Religious Nunne, or from making any vowe for the same.
Sebast. Med. in summa peccat. part 2. pag. 253. Concil. Trid. Sess. 25. cap. 5. de regular. and Monial libNote also, that if any doe enter without necessary cause within the inclosure of Nunnes, albeit it be done vnder pretence of licence graunted by the Ordinarie, and not reuoked, they be Excommunicated. Greg. 13. Extr. de anno. 1575. anno 4. And the Abbesses and Nunnes are likewise Excommunicated by the same Decree, that permitte them to enter. And note, that by the Councell of Trent, the licence of the Bishop or Superior for the same must be obtained in writing: which they may not graunt, but onlie in necessary cases.
The Iudge^:Iudges. If for any worldly respect, as friendshippe, hatred, kindred, feare, subornation, or bribery, they haue not ministred Iustice syncerely, and rightly, or haue prolonged the same, without cause.
The Laweirs,Lawiers. as Sergeants, Counsailours, Officers, Attourneis, solicitours, or Proctours, if for want of sufficient learning, or in other respectes, they be vnmeet to discharge their duties: or if they haue deceiued their clients, by fauoring publickely or secretly their aduersaries: or haue willingly lost or hindered the iust and rightfull cause of the
 the other aduersarie, by vouching false lawes, knowing them to be false, or by friuolous argume^ts cauills, and reasonings, to obscure the same, or by procuring superfluous delaies.
If they haue not bene ^arefull to examin whether their Clientes cause were iust or no.
If they haue gone forewardes, and prosequuted their Clientes vniust cause, knowing it to be vniust, yea, and though at the beginning of the suite they know it not to be vniust, but afterwards whe^ it appeared vnto the^ to be so, if they did then defend the same, it is to be confessed as a deadly sin. For albeit they ought not to discouer the iniustice,Manuale Confessariorum Nauarr. cap. 25. numer. 28. of their Clientes causes to their aduersaries, yet are they bound to giue ouer the defence of them, and to declare to their clientes their opinion therin, and to endeuour to perswade them vnto an honest agreement.
If they haue concealed from their clientes, and not vttered to them the vniustice, and naughtines of their causes.
If they haue taught their clientes to lie, or to vse deceites, and vniust meanes, against their aduersaries: as to bribe the Iudge or vndersherife: to procure the impanell to be made at their particular denomination: to corrupt any of the Iury. to counterfeit false writings: to bring false witnesses, or such like.
If they haue not holpen whe^ they might the iust causes of the poore, being in extreme necessitie:Summa. S. Thom. 22. quest. 71. artic. 1. and. Manuale Confess. Nauarr. cap. 25. numer. 29. I meane, at what time the poore mans life, or vtter vndoing depended vpon the defence of his iust cause, and he wanted helpe therein.
If they haue taken litle care for their Clientes causes, and haue not studied to giue them their best counsail: or if by their default their clients, haue
 taken any preiudice or domage in their causes.
If they haue taken vpon them moe matters than they were well able to dispatch.
A good note for Atturnies.If they haue labour^d, procured, or consented, to prolong and delay their Clients suites contrary to the due order of iustice: or haue not endeuoured to bring them quicklie to an end.
If they haue taken too great fees of their Clients: or haue deceaued them in the accompts of their charges.
If when their clients were willing to fall to agreement, they haue hindered the same or haue perswaded them to continue still in sutes of law.
The Plaintifes if they haue made any vniust demaund, or sought only in their sinnes to vexe and molest the defendante with arestes, sub pena, latitat outlarie, citation: or haue endeuoured by any meanes to delaie their own sutes against iustice: or haue concealed or rent the writings, and euidences, which might disclose the truth of the whol matter. And let both the plaintiffesPlaintiffes. And defendantes accuse them selues, if in the suites betwene them they haue sought contentions, and quarells, or haue refrained to speake one to an other: or if they haue endeuoured to corrupt any of the Iudges,Manu. Conf. Nauarr. cap. 25. num. 31. Sebastianus. Medices, in Summa pec. par. 2 q 40. num. 38. officers, witnesses or Iurors, with letters, Bribes, Fauours, promisses, threatninges, or adherentes. And note, that who so accuseth an other of a false crime, or sueth an other, knowing that his ^ute in law is vniust, is bound to make restitution vnto the other for al his losses, and expenses, susteined thereby.
The witnesses:Witnesses. if vpon their othes they haue not testified the very truth sincerely, and plainly, and that without any deceit, fauour, enmity, feare or slander.Siluester. Tit. Testis. numer. 10. And note, that he that giueth false witnes, is bound to make restitution of al such losses as eyther the plaintiffes
 plaintiffes or defendants haue susteined by meanes of his false witnes giuen. And note also,Manuale co^fessariorum. Nauarr. Cap. 25. num. 45. Soto, de iustitia. and iure. lib. 5. quest 8. artic. 4. that if a witnesse take any rewarde to testifie the truth, he not only sinneth, but is also bou^d to make restitution thereof to him that gaue it him. Howbeit, he may take the expenses of his iournie, and recompence for all his losses susteined thereby. But Iurors in Enquestes cannot require any recompence for their expenses or losses thereby, because they are bound by the tenor of their freehold to serue their prince: and countrey (as it were iudges of the fact) therein.
The Phisitians:Phisitians. let them accuse them-selues: first,Siluester. tit. Medicus numer. 1. Sebastianus medices in Summa peccatorum. part. 2. quest. 39 in littera. M. num. 53. fol. 117 Manuale Confessariorum. Nauarr. Cap. 25 numer. 60.61.62.63.64. if they prescribe medicines without suff^cient knowledge in phisicke, though the Phisitian haue taken the degree of a Doctour of phisick Secondlie: if they follow not the precept^ of phisicke, vnlesse it be in some diseases which they can cure by long experience: howbeit they must not vse anie maner of inchauntment, or witch-crafte therein. Thirdly: if they neglect to studie, or to visite their patientes in their need. Fourthly: if they Presume to prescribe medicines for a disease before they knowe the disease. Fiftly: if when they dout of some medicine whether it will cure a disease they doe notwithstanding giue it to their patient, either to trie an experience, or to gaine thereby, or not to seeme to be ignorant in Phisicke. Sixthlie: if they giue to their patients such things as they know wil hurt the^, albeit they do earnestly request it. Seuenthly: if they forsake their patientes before they ought, that they either dye, or their sicknes is prolo^ged. Eightly if in da^gerous sicknes or diseases they cou^sel not their patie^ts to confesse their sins to their gostly father before they apply any medicines vnto the^, according as they be commaunded by the
 Holie Generall Councell of Lateran.Council. Generale Lateran. Canon. 23.Sebastianus Medices, in Summa peccatorum. part. 2. pag. 118. And note, that a Solemne Ecclesiasticall ordinance was published anno Domini. 1566. whereby al phisitians are straitlie prohibited to visit their patientes three daies together, vnlesse they haue before confessed their sinnes to their Ghostly Father. And in ca^e the Phisitians doe visitt them contrary thereunto they commit a deadly sinne, besides incurring diuerse other penalties pre^cribed in the said Ecclesiasticall ordinance. Ninthlie: if they prescribe or giue any thing to a woman with childe to destroye it, and to cause her to trauaile before her time. Tenthlie: if without iust cause they graunt to such as are weake of body to breake the Fasting daies, and to eate flesh in Lent or vpon other daies prohibited. Eleuenthly: if they counsaile their patients to to doe any act whereby they shall commit a deadly sinne: as to haue carnall copulation when they be vnmaried, or to be drunke^, etc. Twelfthly: if they require too exceeding great stipend or fee for their counsaile, and paines. Thirtienthly: if they take a stipend of any priuat person inhabiting in any City, or towne, where they haue an ordinary stipe^d allowed by the same citie, or towne. Fourtienthly: if they giue not freely their counsaile and paines vnto such sicke perso^s as be very poore. Fiftienthly: if they appoint the sick person to buy moe medicines than he needeth, vpon any compact betwene them, and their Apothecaries.
The Apothecaries:Apothecaries. let them accuse themselues, if in compounding of medicines they put not such things therein as the Phisitian prescribeth, but one thing for an other, or corrupt stuffe, whereby either death ensueth to the sick person, or prolonging of his sicknesse, and disease.

The Marchaunts:Marchants let them accuse themselues of their vnlawfull trafficke, of theyr vniust and deceitfull buying and selling, etc.
In like manner let all other persons accuse themselues in their Confessions, each one according to his state of life.


Generall Aduertisements, whereby to know, and discerne, which is a deadly sinne, and which is a ueniall sinne.
IN all these kindes of sinnes that haue bin here noted, it is needfull to declare, which is a deadly sinne,Wee are bound to confesse all deadly sins. and which is a veniall: forsomuch as we are bound of necessity to Confesse all deadly sinnes, but not veniall sinnes, vnlesse we will: But because this cannot be well declared in few words, it shall suffice for this present to giue some generall aduertisement, concerning this point, leauing the rest vnto the iudgment of the wise and discreet Ghostly Father.
Now to vnderstand which is a deadlie sinne, and which is a veniall sinne, there are wont to be giuen these two Rules following.
The first and most generall rule is,The first Rule. that whatsoeuer is co^trary to Charity, is a deadlie
 sinne. By Charity,Whatsoeuer is contrarie to Charitie is a deadlie sinne. wee vnderstand the loue of God, and of our neighbour: wherfore, according to this Rule, whatsoeuer is against the honour of God, or the profit of our neighbour in any matter of importance, is a deadly sinne.
As to do or speak any thing that may discredit his good name, or fame, or to hurt him in his goods or landes, or such like: for this quencheth Charity, wherein consisteth the spirituall life of the soule. And therfore it is rightly and aptly called a deadly sin, because it taketh away the spirituall life: but whatsoeuer is not against Charity, but only besides Charitie, is a veniall sinne:What a veniall sin is. as idle wordes, which hurt no man: or some kind of little vaine glory, of anger, of negligence, or of glottony, I meane, to eate a little more than is necessarie, or such like.
The Second Rule.The second rule is more speciall: which is, that whatsoeuer is contrarie to any one of the Commaundementes of Almightie God, or of the Catholicke Church, is a deadly sinne. As that which is done contrary to the Commandement, that saieth: Thou shalt not steale:Exod. 20. or thou shalt not commit adultery, etc. Or that which is done contrary to the Commandement of the Catholicke Church: which commaundeth vs to
 pay tithes: to confesse our sins to our own Pastor, or to some other, with his licence, at the least once euery yeare, to receaue the most blessed Sacrament at Easter: to Fast in Lent, and vpon other dayes appointed for Fasting.Summa. S. Thomae. 1. 2. Quaest. 88. Art 6 and 22. qu 66 art 6. in responsione ad tertiu^ argumentu^. Et Nauarr: in Manuali Confes. Cap. 11. Numer. 4. and Cap. 17. Numer. 3. But it is diligently to be noted, that that which is of his own nature a deadly sin, may be a veniall sin, by one of these two waies: to wit, either because the matter is but small, and of little importa^ce, (as if one should steale a cluster of grapes, or a pin, or a point, or such a like triffle:) or because the worke is imperfect, by reason that it wanted a full co^sent, and deliberation: as it may happen in euill thoughts, without any consent giuen thereunto, but yet euil resisted: for which cause, that which of it selfe was a deadly sin, is by the imperfection of the work, no more than a veniall sin. Likewise here it ought to be co^sidered, that there be three kinds of co^mandements:Of three kinds of co^mandeme^ts. wherof some are negatiue: as, Thou shalt not kill, etc. which do bind vs euer, and for euer: that is in euerie time, and at al times: others be affirmatiue, as to giue alms: to haue contritio^ for our sins: to loue almighty God,Summa. S. Thomae. 1. 2. quaest. 100. Art. 10. and 2. 2. quaest. 33. Artic-2. and these do bind vs euer, but not in euery time, and at all times, but onely in time of necessity, and then are we
 bound of duty to doe them.Soto, de Iustitia, and Iure. lib. 2. quest. 3 Artic. 10. There be others, which are compounded both of the one and the other: to wit, both of negatiues, and of affirmatiues: as to restore other mens goods. For this commaundeth to restore, and commaundeth also not to withhold our neighbours goods, and these and such like Commandements doe bind vs to obserue them both manner of waies, to wit: euer, and at all times. And therefore it is not sufficient for him that is in debt, and ought to restore, to haue an intent and purposed minde to make restitution in time to come: but it is necessary that he doe restore forth with: because he ought not to retaine the goods, or landes, which doe belong vnto another, against the will of the owner: the which is a Commaundement negatiue, which bindeth vs euer, and for euer, that is, at all times: wherefore, he that retaineth after this sort the goods or lands of others, let him well consider his owne case, and let him make restitution out of hand, and without all delay, as wee haue declared.




HERE FOLLOWETH A briefe maner of confession, to help such persons as vse to be Confessed oftentimes.


Accipite spiritum sanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata remittuntur eis, and quorum retinueritis retenta sunt. Iohn. 20.22. Multi credentium veniebant confitentes, and annunciantes actus suos. Act. 19.18.



THE III. CHAPTER.
HAVING now treated of Confession, for the behalfe of such persons as doe vse to be Confessed very seldome times in the yeare, it followeth that we do also declare, after what manner such as are commonly Confessed euery weeke, or fourt-night, or very often-times in the yeare,
 ought to prepare and examine them-selues. Among which sort of persons, there be many sore vexed and troubled with scruples, because in examining their consciences, they finde not sometimes whereof to make their confession. For knowing and beleeuing certainely on the one side, that they are not without sinnes, and not finding on the other side at the time of Confession any particularities of them: whereof they might be Confessed, they are in a great perplexitie, and scruple of minde, and doe fully perswade themselues, that they were neuer truely and rightly Confessed.
Causes of scruples in confession.Why this so falleth out, we may assigne two causes: the one is, because it is in deed a very hard matter for a man to know him selfe, and to vnderstand throughly all the secret corners of his conscience: For which cause, the Prophet spake not in vaine, whe^ he saied Delicta quis intelligit? ab occultis meis munda me Domine:Psal. 18.13. and 14. Pro. 24.17. That is to say, who is hee that know^th his sinnes? deliuer me O Lord, from my secret offences. An other cause is, because the sinnes of iust persons (of vvhome the wise man saieth, that they fall seuen times in the day,) are rather sinnes of omitting, than of committing. The which kinde of sinnes are very hard to be knowen.

But for the better vnderstanding of this matter, it is to be noted, that all sinnes are committed by one of these two waies: to wit, either by way of Committing: tha^ is, by doing any wicked deed: as by robbing, killing, committing fornication, etc. Or by way of Omitting: (that is, by leauing some good thing vndone: as for not louing god, not fasting, not praying, not hearing of Masse, etc.) Now, of these two kindes of sinnes, the first, (because they consiste in doing) are very sensible, and easie to be knowen: but the second kinde of sinnes, (consisting not in dooing, but in omitting or leauing vndone,) are much harder to be knowen: because that thing vvhich is not, hath no meane to shew it selfe, for to come to light. Wherefore, it is not to be maruelled at, that spirituall and deuout persons (especially if they be simple,) doe not finde some-times in examining theyr consciences any sinnes, whereof they may accuse them-selues in theyr Confession. For these persons not falling so often into those sinnes of committing,) whereof we haue spoken,) and the other sinnes which be of Omitting, being not easie to be vnderstood, hereof it commeth, that they know not wherof to make their confessio^,
 and therefore are they so grieuously vexed.
Wherfore, for remedy hereof I thought good to ordeine this Memoriall, for the instruction of such persons: wherein is chieflly treated of those kinde of sinnes, which are of Omitting. And because these sinnes may be, eyther against God, or against our selues, or els against our neighbours, I haue therefore deuided the Memoriall into three parts, which doe treate of these three kindes of negligences. Among which negligences, there be manie which sometimes are not so much as veniall sinnes: but yet they are imperfections, and defects, and oftentimes they may be veniall sins. And therefore such as walke towardes perfection, should not whollie pretermit in their Confessions, to accuse themselues of them. Howbeit, this is not conuenient to be done at all times, but at certaine times, (and especially vpon principall Feastes,) for otherwise wee should weary our Ghostly Father ouermuch with the superfluous length of our Confessions: but at other ordinary times, whe^ we come to Confession, euery man may take hys choyce out of these negligences, as he shal think may best serue for the dischargeing of his conscience in that behalfe.


Here followeth the Memoriall, to help such as come oftentimes to confession.
Accusations in the beginning of Confession.
AFTER that he hath sayed his generall Confession,How a sinner may begin his confession. and before hee enter into a particular accusation of his sins, let him accuse himselfe of these foure thinges following.
First, for that hee commeth not so vvell  prepared vnto this Sacrament, and for that he hath not vsed such diligence in the examining of his conscience as hee ought to haue done.
Secondly, for that he hath not such sorrow  and repentance for his sinnes, neyther yet such a firme determination and purpose vtterly to forsake sinne, as hee ought to haue.
Thirdly, for that he came not vnto the  most Holy and blessed Sacrament of the Aultar to receaue the same, with such purity of conscience, and with such reuerence, and deuotion, as became him: and for that hee hath not had after the time of receauing such a close recollection of minde, as was requisite for so high a ghest.
Fourthly, for that hee hath not vsed so  great diligence in the amendment of his life, nor endeuoured to profitt himselfe
 daily more, and more in the seruice of God: but hath rather continued in one verie same luke-warmenes, and negligence, yea and waxed worse, and worse also. These accusations being said, let him begin to accuse himselfe in such order as followeth.


Sinnes by way of Omitting towardes God.
TOWARDES Almighty God we are bound to haue these three Theologicall vertues, Faith, Hope, and Charitie. And as concerning each one of these, a man may accuse him-selfe in this manner following.
As touching Charitie,Charitie. let him accuse himselfe, for that he hath not loued Almightie God with all his hart, and with all his soule, as he was bound to doe: but hath rather bestowed his loue inordinately vpon creatures, and vanities of this world, forgetting his Lord, and Creatour.
As touching Faith,Faith. let him accuse himselfe, if hee haue not had such a stedfast, and firme Faith, as hee ought to haue had: and if hee haue not banished out of hys minde with all speed all such fantasies, and thoughtes, as whereby the diuell endeuored to make him stagger in matters of
 Faith, and to swarue from the Catholicke Church.
As touching Hope,Hope. let him accuse himselfe, if in his troubles, and necessities that haue happened vnto him, he haue not had recourse vnto our Lord, with such an assurance, and confidence, as he ought to haue done. And if he haue bin discouraged in his minde, and taken griefe and sorrow for them out of measure: for this proceedeth of the weakenes of his hope, and confidence in God.
As touching Puritie of intention,Puritie of intention. let him accuse himselfe, for that he hath not done the workes apperteyning vnto the seruice of God, with such a pure intention (that is to say, for the loue of God only) as was requisite: but that he did them some-times, as it were for manners sake, and at other times, for custome only: and some-times, because they liked vvell his owne taste, and appetite: or for some other like respectes.
Let him also accuse himselfe,Diuine inspirations. for that he hath bin too slack, and negligent in answering to the inspirations and callings of Almighty God, resisting often-times therein the Holie Ghost, because hee would not enforce himselfe, and take a litle labour
 and trauaile. This is a fault, which is verie spirituall, and secret, and very meete it is, that wee should alwaies haue a conscience thereof.
VnthankefulnesIn like manner let him accuse himselfe, for that hee hath not bin so thankefull for his diuine benefits, as hee ought to haue bin: and for that he hath not rendred due thankes for the same, nor taken such benefit by them, as the rather to loue and serue him the better, vvho is the giuer of all thinges.
Let him likewise accuse himselfe, of his forgetfulnesForgetfulnes. of our Lord, hauing him oftentimes, as it were quite banished out of his heart: whereas we should alwaies haue him in his presence, and set him continually before his eyes.
Impatiency.As concerning patience in aduersitie, let him accuse himselfe, if peraduenture he haue not had ^uch a sufferance in bearing patiently all such aduersities, and troubles as it hath pleased Almighty God to send him, and if hee haue not acknowledged, that they were sent from his hand, for his further commodity: and if he haue not giuen him such thanks, as for the same were due vnto him. This matter may be specified more at large, if his conscience take remorse of any particular thing.

Moreouer, let him accuse himselfe, for that hee hath not behaued himselfe vvith such reuerence and deuotion at Masse time, and other diuine seruice, and in Holy places, especially in the presence of the most blessed Sacrament, as he ought.


Sins by way of omitting towards himselfe.
A MAN consisteth of many partes. For he hath a body, with all his senses, and a soule, with all her appetites, and a spirit with all his powers, which are vnderstanding, memory, and will: And so he may offend against the right gouernment and order, which he ought to haue kept in euery one of these.
First of all, let him accuse himselfe, for that he hath not gouerned his body with such rigour, and seuerity, as hee should haue done, as well in eating, drinking, clothing, and sleeping, as in all other thinges: but hath rather bin very gentle and fauorable towards the same, and a very delicate cherisher of himselfe.
Let him accuse himself, for that he hath not kept both his imagination and senses so closly recollected, and ordred, as they should haue bin: but hath suffered them to range and wander abroad in matters of
 pleasure, and delight: as in hearing, seeing, talking, and imagining of many thinges, which were idle, fantastical, vaine, and nothing to the purpose, the which doe afterwardes hinder the close recollection of the minde, and the attention vnto praier.
Let him accuse himselfe also, for that he hath not mortified his appetites, and resisted his own will, as he ought to haue done: but hath rather followed, and contented the same almost in euery thing.
Let him accuse himselfe, for that hee is not so humble in his minde, and in his workes, as he should be: And for that hee hath not esteemed himselfe for so vile, and miserable, as he is indeed, nor handled himselfe, as such a one hath deserued.
Let him accuse himselfe also, for that he hath bin so flouthfull and negligent in praier, and for that he hath oftentimes giuen ouer, and left off the same, vpon small, and light occasion: and for that he hath not bin at the time of prayer with such a closenes of minde, and diligent attention thereunto, as of duty was requisite.


Sinnes by way of Omitting towards our neighbours.
LET him accuse himselfe: first, for that hee hath not loued his neighbours vvith such
 loue, as hee would looke that others should loue him, according as almightie God hath commaunded.
Likewise, for that hee hath not succoured them in their necessities, with such reliefe, and help, as he should, and might haue done.
Also, for that he hath not taken such pittie, and compassion vpon their miseries, and prayed vnto almighty GOD for them, as he was bound to doe.
Moreouer, let him accuse himselfe, for that hee hath not had, nor felt in his minde such an inward griefe, and sorrow, as hee ought to haue had, for the publike calamities of the Catholicke Church, as Schismes, Heresies, Rebellions, Warres, Sacriledges, etc: which haue beene stirred vp in our vngratious age, by Luther, Zuinglius, Caluin, Beza, and other Heretikes: and for that it hath not grieued him euen at the bottome of his heart, to see so many christian soules daylie deceaued by their diuilish preachings, and bookes.
Furthermore, let him accuse him-selfe, for that he hath not prayed vnto almightie God for the extirpation of all Schismes, and Heresies, and for the conuersion of Heretickes vnto the Catholicke Faith, as he was bound to doe.
Such as haue Masters, and superiours, let them accuse themselues, for that they haue not obeyed the^, and reuerenced the^, as they ought to haue done.
Such as haue children, wardes, schollers, or seruants: let them accuse themselues, for that they haue not instructed and chastised them, and prouided for them all such things as were necessarie, as well for their instruction in the doctrine of the CATHOLICKE Church, and preseruing them from all infection of Schisme, and Heresie, as also for all other vvorldelie necessaries, and for
 for that they haue not bin so circumspect and carefull ouer them, as their duty required: considering that Almighty God wil demaund a straite account of them in this behalfe.


Of Sinnes of committing.
AFter that the penitent hath in this wise accused himselfe of his sinnes of Omitting, then may hee begin to accuse himselfe of those sinnes which are called sinnes of Committing: running ouer the tenne commaundementes, and the seauen deadly sinnes, and accusing himselfe in such of them, as wherein his con^cience shall be most mooued, and prouoked so to doe. And if he will goe more briefely to worke, then may he examine his thoughtes, wordes, and deeds, wherein he shall thinke that he hath offended, and so accu^e himselfe of the same.
After all this, hee must accuse himselfe of all such sinnes, as are commonly apperteyning vnto that state, and office, that he is of* declaring wherein hee hath offended against the lawes and dueties of his state. As for example, if hee be a Religious person, let him accuse himselfe, if hee haue broken his three vowes of Pouertie, Chastitie, and obedience, or any other thing belonging to his Rule. If hee be a Iudge, Sergeant, Counsellour, Atturney, Aduocate, Phisitian, or Merchaunt, etc. let him accuse him-selfe of such thinges as appertaine to his Office. If he be a Prince or Ruler, let him accuse himselfe as concerning his gouernement.
When he hath ended all these accusations, let him then conclude as followeth, saying: As wel for all these sinnes, as also for all others, wherin I haue offended my Lord GOD, in thought, vvorde,
 or deed, I accuse my self to be a most grieuous sinner, and doe acknowledge my selfe to haue offended Amighty God through my default, my great default, yea, my most grieuous default: and therefore I desire you my Ghostly Father, to giue mee absolution and pennance for the same.



OF OVR SATISFACTION. An Explanation of the Doctrine of the Catholike Church, concerning the Satisfaction of penitent sinners, for the Temporall paine remayning sometimes by the iustice of God for the^ to suffer, after that their deadlie sinnes committed after Baptisme, and the euerlasting paine due vnto the same be forgiuen. @. 1.
INTENDING to make an introduction for the better vnderstanding of the Churches doctrine concerning the satisfaction of penitent sinners, I thinke it very conuenient, to giue warning to the christian reader, to take diligent heede of the heretikes common slaunderous and crafty dealing in treating thereof: whereby they haue circumuented great numbers of the vnlearned people, and alienated their mindes from the Catholicke Religio^, to giue credit vnto their new heretical doctrin.
For first in treating in their bookes and sermons of our workes of satisfaction, they make no distinction or difference at all,The deceitfull dealing of heretikes, in treating of Satisfaction. in what state the works of satisfactio^ are done: whether in the state of deadly sin, or in the state of grace, neyther yet doe they distinguish betweene satisfaction for the fault of sin, and satisfaction for the paine of sin: nor whether the workes of satisfaction are to be done for satisfaction of the euerlasting paine, or for
 satisfaction of the temporall paine.Note the Churches doctrine co^cerning our Satisfaction. Whereas the Churches doctrine is, that none of our workes be satisfactory vnto God for any of our deadly sins, vnlesse they be first abolished by the grace of god: because no workes done in the state of deadly sin, (being then done by an enimie of God) can satisfie God. For vnlesse the person be first reconciled and gratefull vnto God, his workes of satisfaction can not be gratefull and acceptable vnto him: but when the workes of satisfaction be done by a penitent sinner in the state of grace, then it is to be presupposed, that the fault of the deadly sin committed by him after Baptisme, and the euerlasting pain due vnto it, be already abolished by the grace of God, by vertue of our Sauiour Christs satisfaction communicated vnto him. And then his good Christian vertuous workes of Fasting, Praier, and almes-deedes; etc. being done by him in the state of grace, (as a member of Christ, and an adoptiue sonne of God,) are vnited vnto Christs satisfaction, and be then very gratefull and acceptable vnto God, and doe satisfie his diuine iustice for the temporall paine remayning for a penitent sinner to suffer, when his sorrow and contrition for hys sinnes is not so feruent, and perfect, as by order of the Diuine IVSTICE is prescribed, and required.
And note well, what I affirme, that these painefull vertuous workes of satisfaction done by a penitent sinner be satisfactory vnto the diuine iustice,Our workes of Satisfaction be onely for the guilt of temporall paine, and not for the guilt of euerlasting paine in Hell. only for the guilt of temporall paine, and not for the guilt of euerlasting paine in Hell, (as the Heretikes doe falsly slaunder the doctrine of the Catholicke Church,) Because the guilt of euerlasting paine euer accompanieth the deadly sin, (as the shadow doth the body,) and is euer pardoned
 vnto penitent sinners at the very same instant whe^ the deadly sinne is pardoned.Vide Concil. Trident. Ses. 6. Cap. 14. and Can. 30. and Ses. 14. Can. 14. and 15. I meane hereby that the euerlasting continuance of the paine is in such wise pardoned in penitent sinners, that it ceaseth to be euerlasting, and is chaunged into a temporall paine onely.
And let no man maruaill, that some times a temporal paine remaineth for a penitent sinner to suffer, after that his deadly sinne,Summa. S. Thome. 3. part. quest. 69. artic. 3. and the euerlasting pain due vnto it, be forgiuen him. For if of original sinne, which is forgiuen by the Sacrament of Baptisme, there doe afterwardes remaine diuers temporall penalties to the person that is sanctified by that Sacrament: the which temporal penalties be sorrow, feare, labour, hunger, thirst, diseases, and euen death it selfe, all which doe trulie vexe and afflict vs, and be after a sort a kinde of temporall paine, that came vnto vs by originall sin:Sap. 1.13. and if of the same original sinne there doe remaine also certaine reliques in them that be Baptised, left by God in them, for their exercise, proofe and merit, as Concupiscence, or fomes peccati, (as the learned diuines tearme it,) which remaineth in our members, striuing against the law of our mind, why should anie christian Maruaill then, that the Church affirmeth, that sometimes a temporall paine remaineth for a sinner to suffer, after that his sinne committed after Baptisme is forgiuen him by his confession in the Sacrament of penaunce.
For otherwise if the sinne be neuer forgiuen before the paine, but that both the sinne and all paine due vnto it be alwaies forgiuen iointly together at one instant, (as the Heretikes affirme,) then would it follow very euidently, that so long as the paine should endure,Note that these Holy men had their sins for giuen them, and yet suffered afterwardes temporall paines for them. so long would the sinne endure also. Wherfore sith Adam, Moyses, Dauid, and
 diuers others suffered for their sinnes committed against God very great temporall paines during al their whole liues, according as by almightie God himselfe was prescribed vnto them, it would then follow hereupon, that their sinnes were neuer forgiuen them vntill the very last end of their liues, and that fro^ the very time they committed their sins vntill they died, they were neuer the true seruants of God, but remained during all their whole liues out of his grace, and fauour. The which false assertion, being so contumelious vnto such Holy men, no christian ought once to imagin, sith the Holy Scriptures affirme, that vpon their repentance for their sinnes they had forgiuenes of them, and were Holy men, and in the fauour of Almighty God, notwithstanding that they suffered afterwards during their whole liues, certaine grieuous temporall paines for their sinnes, according as Almighty God himselfe had prescribed vnto them.
Ezech. 18.20. Deuter 14.16.Againe, it i^ to be noted, that according to the true sence of the Holy Scriptures, all learned Diuines doe agree, that the personall sinne of the Father is not tran^ferred vnto his children, vnlesse they consent vnto the same sinne: But yet they affirme,Exod. 20.5. Ex^d. 347. Numer. 14.33. 1. Reg 2.31. 1. Reg. 3.14. 2. Reg. 12.13. and. 14. Thren. 5.7. that the paine appointed by Almightie God vnto the father for his sinne, is some times transferred vnto his posterity. As appeareth in diuers places of the holy scriptures, and namely where it is affirmed, that God visiteth the iniquity of the Fathers in their children, vnto the third and fourth generation of them, etc. as also in an other place where it is said in the lamentations of the Prophet Ieremie. Cap. 5. verse. 7. Our Fathers haue sinned, and be not, and we haue borne the iniquity of them. And therfore it is a kind of malicious madnes in the heretiks, to affirme so directly, and expresly against the Holie
 Scriptures, that the sinne, and all paine due vnto it, be lincked in such an indissoluble society together, that no guilt of temporall paine remaineth at any time vnto a penitent sinner, after that his sinne is forgiuen him.
Wherefore, as Philippe Melancthon a Luthera^,Melancthon in locis communibus: de Satisfactione See the puritanes second reply against D. whitgifte. pag. 172. in his booke of common places, and likewise the Puritane Caluinists, in a late printed Inglish booke haue hereupon recanted, and written very earnestly against the new opinion of their fellow protestants herein, and doe protest, that God oftentimes remitting the faultes vnto penitent sinners, doth neuertheles punish them some times for their faults all the daies of their liues, and not only in their own persons, but some times in their childrens, and in all that belonged vnto them: so my aduise is vnto all other Heretikes to recant their new fond opinion also, and to humble them ^elues vnto the auncient approued doctrine of Christes Catholike Church, and in no wise to presume, to prescribe to almighty God in what maner he should worke, either in giuing of remission of sinnes, or in doing of Miracles, or in anie other of his workes, but to submitte all vnto his Holy will, and ordinaunce: sith what^oeuer he worketh, is freelie and without any necessity. We knowe, that the world and the ornament thereof, are the worke of God, and yet fewe things in it are brought to their last and full perfection altogether at one instant: as we see in herbs, trees, fishes, beasts, and in all other thinges, that doe daylie increase, and decrease. And thoughe it be graunted,Summa. 5. Thome. 3. part. quest. 86. artic. that God in his Miracles, cureth the whole man perfectlie, both in body, and soule: yet maie we obserue, that as touching the circumsta^ce of time, he worketh diuersly therin, as appeareth in sundry Miracles wrought
 by our Sauiour Christ.Math. 8.14. Luc. 4.38.Christ healed some persons whollie at one insta^t and some other in progresse of time.Marc. 8.24. Marc ^.25. For some persons he healed out of hand, and wholy at one instant: as Saint Peters Mother in law and diuers others: And some again he healed not forthwith at one insta^t, but in progresse of time, a: he did the blind man, of whom Saint Marke writeth, that first his sight was restored vnto him imperfectly, and therefore he saied, I see men walking as it were trees: and afterwardes he was fully restored vnto his perfect sight, insomuch as the Holy Scripture saieth, he sawe al things clearely. And in like maner doth Almightie God deale in diuers sorts with penitent sinners, that haue offended him with committing any deadly sin after their baptisme, graunting vnto some of them a more ample pardo^, than vnto others, according to their earnest sorrowe and contrition for their sins, and their charitie and zeale vnto his Seruice, and honour. Wherein there is very great diuersity among penitent sinners. And therefore thoughe almightie God for Christes sake doe freely pardon all penitent sinners their sinnes, and the euerlasting paine of Hell due vnto them: yet some-times he punisheth some penitent sinners afterwardes with temporall punishment for their sinnes when their Conuersion and contrition be not so feruent, and perfect, as it ought to be. And some-times againe, when hee seeth a great feruent compunction and perfect repentance in a sinner for his offence, hee then not onlie pardoneth him his deadlye sinne, and the euerlasting Paine in Hell, due vnto it, but the guilte of all temporall paine also therewith: As it is probablie thought he did vnto Sainct Marie Magdalen and the Theefe vpon the Crosse, who shewed diuers wonderfull and extraordinarie rare signes of meruilous great inward compunction, and sorrowe
 for their sinnes,Few penite^t sinners be so feruent in their co^uersion, and contrition as Marie Magdale^, and other Saincts haue bene. and of a most feruent loue and xeale vnto the seruice and honour of our Sauiour Christ. And would to God, that both I, and all other sinners, would with the assistaunce of his grace earnestlie endeuour to haue such perfecte Contrition for our sinnes as they had, and then should wee not neede afterwardes anie other Satisfaction for punishment of our sinnes, either in this life, or in Purgatorie. But, sith all penitent sinners be not ordinarilie so feruent in their sorrowe and contrition for their sinnes, as they, and diuers other Saincts haue benne, why should others presume to looke for so ample a pardon at God his hand, for their most grieuous sinnes, being not by many degrees so perfectlie contrite, and penitent for them, and consequentlie not so worthie to haue so ample a pardon.
For the verie cause why penitent sinners are ordinarilie bounde by order of the Diuine iustice to doe Satisfaction vnto God for the guilt of temporall paine,Note the cause why p^nite^t sinner^ are ordinar^ly bound t^ doe Satisfa^tion vnto God. remaining for them to suffer, after that their deadlie sinne, and the euerlasting paine in Hell, due vnto their sinne, be pardoned them, is for that very fewe penitent sinners haue so earnest, so feruent, and so perfecte contrition, and compunction for their sins, when they doe repent and conuerte them selues vnto God, as that their contrition, and abhorring of their sinnes, and their conuersion vnto God, doe proceede from them with all their hartes and with all the forces of their souls, in such degree of perfection, as almighty God prescribeth, and requireth according to our possibilitie, hauing a merciful regard therin to the conditio^ of this life, and of our humaine frailty and to the measure of his graces, which he of his goodnes and mercy giueth vnto vs, to strengthen and assist our weak forces in al our spiritual motions and exercises, apperteining
 to the fulfilling of our duty in his seruice
Wherefore, in respect of their imperfect contrition for their sinnes, the iustice of almighty God requireth afterwards of them a temporall punishment, to be suffered either in this life, or in Purgatorie: whereby to reduce them fullie againe vnto the right order of the diuine iustice, vvhich by theyr sinnes they haue transgressed, and broken. Forsomuch (as S. Thomas very learnedly noteth,Summa. S. Thomae. 12. quaest 87. Artic. 6. and 3. part. quaest. ^6. Artic. 4.) the inordinatenes of a fault is not reduced vnto the due order of iustice, but by reco^pensing it with paine: for it is meet by due order of iustice, that he that hath obeyed and followed his owne will, more than hee ought, doing thereby against the vvill of God, should either willingly, or vnwillingly suffer contrary to that which hee would. And when the contrition of a penitent sinner for his sin is not so perfect, as by the iustice of God is prescribed, in regard whereof a temporall paine is required of him. It is certaine, that vntill such time as the same temporall paine due vnto his sin be payed, the sin is not fully and perfectly remitted: for that a sinne includeth in it (reatum culpae, and reatum paenae)(...) sinne in^ludeth in it ^eatum cul^e, and reatu^ ^aenae. the guilt of offence, and the guilt of paine, and vntill both of them be wholly, and fully remooued away from the sinner, the order of the diuine iustice is not fully repayred in him.
And the way to repaire and reduce againe penitent sinners vnto the order of the diuine iustice, when their contrition for their sins is imperfect, is by suffering afterwardes temporall paines, and afflictions: whereby they may as members of Christ, and by vertue of his aboundant satisfaction, and redemption vpon the Crosse, satisfie after a sort, and in their degree, the iustice of almighty God: for such Temporall paines as hee requireth of them
 to suffer, by reason of their imperfect contrition for their sinnes.
And note well, that I say, that such penitent sinners may doe satisfaction vnto God after a sorte, and in their degree, for their temporal pains: and that I say not,Note that penite^t sinners cann^t doe Satisfaction vnto God in a most absolute iust Equality. that they may doe Satisfaction vnto God in a most absolute perfect iust equality. For albeit I graunt, that a christian cannot with equall payment doe satisfaction vnto God for the inestimable great benefits he hath receaued of him: As for his benefits of creation, conuersation, redemption, uocation, and other his manifold benefites: nor for his deadle sinne: and the euerlasting paine due vnto it: neither yet with equiualent paiment for the temporall paine which he is bound to paie: forsomuch as thc Philosophers affirme, we cannot render either vnto God, or vnto our parentes, of whome we haue receued our being, iust and perfect equality of paiment, (as in case I owe tenne pounds, to render iust tenne pounds, or the iust value thereof againe:) yet neuerthelesse, a christian being in the state of grace, may as a member of Christ, and adoptiue sonne of God, by vertue of the grace of God, and of the merit of Christs Satisfaction, make sufficient satisfaction vnto God, with his vertuous painfull workes, according to certaine equalitie (not of value, or of quantity,) but of Proportion.Note that(...) penitent si^ner may do^tisfaction^to God, w^ assistance his grace,^cording(...) certaine^quality o^ proporti^ correspo^ vnto his ability and forces. I meane hereby: that like as God doth towards vs, that which becommeth his goodnes, and omnipote^cie^ euen so we may render vnto him that which our possibility can beare. And in this wise, looke what Proportion there is from the benefites of God, vnto God that bestoweth them vpon vs, euen so the like Proportion of our paiment is required by God, acording to our possibility: wherfore, lik as for the benefits we haue receaued of God, it is sufficient
 for vs to doe Satisfaction vnto him for the iniuries we haue committed against him, according to our forces, and his grace, assisting and strengthening vs for the same.
God requireth no further Satisfaction for vs, but according to the measure and proportion, of o^r forces and his grace, assisting vs therin Genes. 4.7. Ec. 15.14.15.16.17. and 18. Eccl. 31.10. Psal. 31.9. Psal. 80, 11: Psal. 94.8. Ezech. 18.31. Mat. 12.33. Mat. 23.37. Luke. 7.30. Iohn. 19.10. Act. 7.51. Rom. 12.21. 1. Cor. 7.36.37. 1. Cor. 9.17. Ephes. 4.30. Iac. 4.8. 1. Iohn. 3.3 Ad Philemo ^em. 14. Heb. 10.26. ^poc. 3.20. ^poc. 20 17. ^od accept^th our ver^ons actio^s and workes done with his grace as ours, in that hee hath made vs Lordes of them. Mat. 10.20. Rom. 8.26. 1. Cor. 3.9. 1. Cor. 15* 10. 2. Cor. 3.5. 2. Cor. 9.8. Gal. 2.20. and 21. Phil. 2.13 Phil. 4.13. 1. Ioh. 2.29. 1. Iohn. 3.1. and 24. 1. Iohn. 4.16. Note, that God requireth not all such thinges of vs as hee might require. Mat. 19.12. Mat. 19.2^ Act. 4.34.35. 1. Cor. 5.25. 1. Cor. 9.15.16.And this maner of Satisfaction is of such sufficient qualitie, as the goodnes, wisedome, and Iustice of Almightie God (in regarde of the condition of our humaine frailty) hath ordeined, prescribed, and accepteth for sufficient.
And albeit whatsoeuer we giue in Satisfaction vnto God, wee haue receaued of him: yet forsomuch as he hath created vs according to his owne Image, and likenes, and hath endued vs with reason, and free will, that thereby we should be lords of our owne actions, and things, we may therefore giue our actions and things vnto him as ours, in that he of his great clemencie and bountifulnes hath made vs Lords of them, and accepteth them as ours.
And I graunt, that it were very great arrogancy in vs, in case we shuld affirme, yea, or once Imagin that by our owne naturall forces alone we are able to doe Satisfaction vnto God: for that were to incline to the errour of the Pelagians. But it is no arrogancie nor errour at all to saye that after wee be made the Members of Christ, by his grace, whereby our sinnes and the euerlasting paine due vnto them are forgiuen, wee may then doe Satisfaction vnto God, for the temporall paines prescribed for them. Because therein we arrogate nothing properlie vnto our selues, but doe attribute all vnto Christ, our sweete Sauiour, and Redeemer, who giueth vs grace, both to beginne and accomplish our satisfaction. And then we doe satisfaction vnto God, as Members of Christ, not by our spirit, but by the spirit of Christ.

And withall, in the consideration of our Satisfaction, wee must diligently note the wonderfull goodnes and mercie of Almighty God towards vs: in that he requireth not all such things of vs, as he might lawfully require, but hath onlie prescribed and limited vnto vs a certaine measure of bond, as necessarie to our saluation: to witte: the keping of his commaundements, and a fewe other things, without which his commaundementes can not whollie and dulie be kept. And as for the works of perfection, which by way of counsell only are propounded in the gospell vnto vs, though almighty God might haue required them of vs by way of precept, in case hee would haue delt seuerelie with vs: yet such is his vnspeakable goodnes and clemencie towardes vs, that he would not bind vs of necessity vnto them. Wherefore, sith we maie doe some vertuous painfull workes, ouer and besides those that be commaunded vnto vs by Almighty God: for example, we may freelie giue or not giue either half or all our goods or lands to the poore: and freelie fast, and praie, at such times as we are not bound thereunto by precept* and freely absteine from manie things, which are and maie lawfullie be vsed,) therefore with some painful vertuous workes of abstinence, not otherwise required necessarilie of vs by almightie God, wee may do Satisfaction vnto him, for the guilt of temporall paine remaining for vs to suffer, after that the deadlie sinne and the euerlasting paine in Hell is pardoned vs.


An answere to the place of the eightienth Chapter of Ezechiel, alledged commonlie by the Heretickes against our doing of Satisfaction.
 @. 2.
 BVT against this approued doctrine of the catholicke church, the heretikes doe commonly obiect a place of the holy scripture, taken out of the 18. chapter of Ezechiel, where almightie God saieth: If the wicked shall doe penance for all their iniquities, and shall keepe all my commaundements, and shall doe iudgement and iustice, etc. I will not remember their iniquities.Ezech. 18.21.22. Wherupon they argue, that in case God require of a sinner any te^porall paine for his sin, after that his sin is forgiuen him, then he reme^breth the iniquitie of the wicked after his doing of pennance.
Hereunto we make foure answeres.  First, that this  promise is made by almighty God vpo^ this Condition, to wit: If the sinner shall doe penance for his sin: but perfect pennance comprehendeth in it satisfaction vnto God for the sin, therefore the sinner doth not perfect pennance, that satisfieth not for the guilt of  temporall paine due vnto his sin. Secondly we answere,Ezech 18.21. and 27. that a condition is also limited here to the sinner in these words. Si impius custodierit omnia praecepta mea, and fecerit iudicium, and iustitiam: that is to say: If the sinner keepe all my commaundements, and doe iudgement, and iustice: which doing of iudgement, and iustice, is performed by doing of painfull works  of satisfaction. Thirdly we answere, that albeit we admit, that no mention is made here of any satisfaction for sin, yet it followeth not therefore, that no satisfaction ought to be made vnto God for sin^ forsomuch as the Prophet Ezechiel maketh no expres mention here of Faith, or of Hope, or of Charitie: neither yet of many other vertues, which be all very  necessary for the obteyning of life euerlasting. Fourthly we answere, that in that he saieth, he will not reme^ber the iniquities of the wicked, he meaneth that he wil no more account the penitent sinner
 for his enimie. But this promise hindreth not, but that he may punish a penitent sinner after his reconciliation into his frendshippe, though not in seuere maner, with euerlasting damnation, as hee punisheth his enimie, yet in a Fatherly louing maner, with temporal correction, as a Father chastiseth his child for his fault. According as Saint Paule very plainlie affirmeth, saying.Heb. 12.9. Deus flagellat omnem filium quem recipit: that is to say, God skourgeth euery child, that he receaueth. Meaning hearby, that whereas by the Sacrament of Baptisme wee are become the Children of GOD, in case any of his children doe aftewards sinne deadly against him, though he like a most louing Father doe receaue his penitent childe into his fauour againe, and pardoneth him very gratiously the fault of his deadlie sinne, and the euerlasting paine in Hell due vnto it* yet because ordinarile his penitent children conceaue not so great and perfect sorrowe and compunction for their sins as is required for them, (as S. Peter, Mary Magdalen, and other Holie Saints haue done for their sins) therfore (speaking ordinarily) he scourgeth euery child, that hee receaueth, with some temporall paine for his sin.
And according to this exposition, are all other authorities in the holie Scriptures to be expounded, where it is affirmed, that God casteth our sins behind his back: and into the bottome of the Sea,Isay, 1.18. Isay 38.17. faey 44.22. Mich 7.19. etc. For these and other like places be properly referred to the sacrament of baptisme, wherein both the sin, and all paine due vnto it, are altogether remitted: yet in case they be referred to the Sacrament of pennance, then are they to be expounded, that in the iustification of a penitent sinner, Almighty God doth mercifully forgiue all the sin co^mitted by him after his baptisme, without retaining the least parte
 of it. but as touching the paine due vnto it, though hee will not punish his reconciled childe as his enimie, but doth mercifully forgiue him the euerlasting paine in hell: yet to con^erue his iustice, and to make his children more careful from falling into the like deadly sinne againe, hee chaungeth the euerlasting paine, into a temporall paine, and ^o chasti^eth his childe in a Fatherly louing manner, whom hee receaueth mercifully againe after Baptisme into hi^ grace, and fauour. And in this vvise the saying of the Prophet Dauid is verified. Misericordia and veritas obuiauerunt sibi, iustitia and pax osculatae sunt.Psal. 8.11.


That the Heretickes Obiection, that neyther our Sauiour Ch^ist, nor his Apostles, enioyned any worke of Satisfaction vnto sinners for their sinnes comm^tted before baptisme, is no cause, but that Christs Priestes may enioyne Workes of Sat^sf^ction vnto sinners, for the Temporall paine due to their sinnes committed after their baptisme. @. 3,
 AND whereas some heretikes haue ohiected, that forsomuch as neither our Sauiour Christ, nor his Apostles enioyned any ma^ner of Sati^faction vnto sinners for their sinnes, therfore no painful works of Satisfaction ought to be enioyned vnto any christian that sinneth deadly after Baptisme* I answere,  that this is a deceitfull obiection, deuised by the Heretickes, to beguile the ignorant simple people.
And for the better vnderstanding of their deceit herein, the good christian reader must co^sider and note very dilligently, that when any Iewes, TVRKES,Concil. Trident. Sess. 14 Cap. 2. and 8. and Can. 14 and 15. and Se^^. 6. Cap. 14. or other INFIDELS, doe first come to the christian religion, and be baptised, the Catholicke Church teacheth, that all their sins committed before their Baptisme, and all manner of paine due vnto those sinnes be forgiuen them by the Sacrament
 of Baptisme: but in case they sin deadlie after their baptisme, that then the iustice of God, requireth they should be receaued vnto mercie after another manner, and that though vpon their repentance, their deadly sin, and euerlasting paine due vnto it be mercifully forgiuen them, that yet by order of the diuine iustice, when their sorrow, and contrition for their sinnes is not perfect, they must then suffer some temporall paine for the same deadly sin. And certainely by very order of iustice it is meete,The iustice of God requireth more seuerity to be vsed to such as sin deadly after Baptisme, than to such as sin before Baptisme. that such sins as are committed by Infidels before the knowledge of the truth, before the clouds of darknes are expelled out of their minds, before they be deliuered out of the bondage of the diuell, before they haue receaued the Christian faith and religion, before they haue made any promise to Almighty God, not to sin deadly, and before they be adopted to be the sons of God, and incorporated into Christ, as his members by the sacrament of Baptisme, should haue a more ample, and more free remission, with greater mercy and pardon, than such sins as are so vngratefully committed by christians after they haue receaued of almighty God, all these inestimable diuine benefits afore-said. And our Sauiour Christ himselfe hath signified the same vnto vs in the gospell of S. Luke, saying.Luk. 12.47 That seruant that knew the will of his Lord, and prepared not himselfe, and did not according to his will,Summa. S. Thomae. 3. part: quaest. 86. art. 4. ad tertium argumentum and in addit. quaest. 2. art. 6. and tertium argumentum and quaest. 18. Artic. 2. shall be beaten with many stripes: but he that knew not his will, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few. And the reason of this difference is, because in the sacrament of baptisme (in which we are as it were regenerated, and borne a new, as new creatures in Christ) we be incorporated into Christ with a greater coniunctio^ than in the sacrament of penance: and so we receaue of him greater grace in Baptisme, than in Penance.

Mat. 9.9. Luke. 7.47. and 48. Act. 9. Luk. 23.24 Act. 2. Act. 4. Iohn. 8.11.And by this distinction we may easily conceaue the reason of diuers examples specified in the holy scriptures, wherein it appeareth, that greater mercy and pardon hath bin shewed to some sinners, than to others: For whereas wee read in the Holie Scriptures, of Mathew the Publican, of Marie Magdalen the sinfull woman, and of Paule, and of the theefe vpon the Crosse, and of many others to haue bin receaued by our sauiour Christ into hys grace, and fauour, without any satisfaction, and that S. Peter did the like vnto such as were baptised by him, and that our sauiour Christ said nothing els to the adulterous woma^, but go and sin no more, the reason hereof is, because they sinning before Faith, and Baptisme, were after those sins receaued vnto the christian Faith: but shew mee others in the Holie scriptures, that sinned deadly after they had receiued the Christian Faith, and Baptisme, and then shall ye finde it otherwise.
As for example, let vs consider of S. PeterS. Peter. the chiefe of the apostles, doe we not reade in the gospell, that after he had denied Christ, he went forth, and wept bitterly for it?Luk. 23.62 Yea, and though at that time vpon his so bitter weeping and earnest repentance for his sin, he had his sin forgiuen him: yet he wept afterwards so much, and so often for that sin, that as S. Clement his owne scholler writeth of him, hee vsed euer afterwards, vntill his very death, when he heard the Cocke crow to call to minde at that time his denying of Christ, and to rise vp then to weep and to pray. And as S. Peter himselfe was euer thus mindfull of purgeing his own sin past, and still iudged, and punished himselfe afterwards very grieuously for it, with such a continuall austere pennance during his whole life:2. Pet. 1.9. so in his second Epistle he counsaileth very earnestly all christians also
 not to forget the purging of their old sins past.
And we may likewise note, how S. Paule did not receaue againe the incestious Corinthian,The incestious Corinthian. who was a christian, but after his great heauines, and sorrow, and publike reprehension for his sin by many christians: and therefore writing thereof in his second Epistle to the Corinthians hee sayeth. To him that is such a one, this rebuke sufficeth that is giuen by manie.2. Cor. 2.6. Where the Apostle calleth it a rebuke giuen by many to that incestious Corinthian, for that all the christians in Corinth being many did shun from all conuersation and communion with him, which rebuke was very grieuous vnto him, and yet patiently suffered by him.
Now consider here I pray you, doth not the Apostle very plainely signifie in this place,Mat. 3.8. Luke. 3.8. 2. Cor. 7.9. and 10. that the incestious Corinthian had shewed fruites worthy of penance, and suffered punishment enough for his sin, in that with so great long sorrow and heauines of mind for the same, he had bin shunned by many of the Corinthians, and that this being patiently and humbly suffered by him, was a sufficient satisfactio^ for his temporal punishment: and therfore S. Paule required the Priests of Corinth to absolue him,2. Cor. 2.6. Note that penite^t sinners in the Primitiue Church confessed first their sins to a priest, and he afterwardes enioined th^ to doe Pennance for their si^^^s: but he did not absol^e them vntill saying: sufficet ei. This rebuke sufficeth.
And if S. Paul had thought (as the caluinists do) that there is no need for any sinner to suffer at any time, any more paine for his deadly sinne after that it is forgiuen him, why did he not commaund the Priests of Corinth to absolue the penitent Corinthian forthwith: so soone as he heard that hee was sorry and repentant for his sin: especially sith God euer pardoneth the deadly sin forth-with without any delay, vpon a sinners sorrow, and repentance for it: as appeareth in Dauid and in Manasses, and in diuers others? And why did saint Paule delaie
 from absoluing that incestious Corinthian vntill he might say: This rebuke sufficeth that is giuen by many vnto him, to the end that he may be absolued? If the outward rebuking of that incestious Corinthian by many, being added to his inward sorrow, and repentance for his sin, was sufficient for his absolution, then by S. Paule his doctrine somewhat wa^ted before vnto hi^ inward sorrow and repentance for his sin, and that was this outward pennance to be shunned by many christians, from all conuersation and communion with him, vvhich vvas his temporall punishment, and Satisfaction for his sin.


That it appeareth by the p^actise in the Primitiue Church, that the Workes of satisfaction enioined in ancient time by Byshoppes and Priestes vnto penitent sinners, were to this end chieflie, that they should thereby doe Satisfaction vnto Almightie God, for the guilt of the temporall paine remaining for them to suffer for their sinnes committed after Baptisme. @. 4.
SOME of the Heretikes by reading the auncient holie Councels,  and bookes of the auncient holy Fathers, and Ecclesiasticall Histories of Christs Catholicke Church, and finding in them, that in all ages since Christes Ascension into heauen vntill this our corrupt age, penitent sinners haue bin euer taught, and enioyned by the holy Bishops, and Pastors, in all Churches throughout christendome, to doe satisfaction, doe graunt that in the Primitiue Church, and in other ages afterwardes, diuers austere ^atisfactions haue bin enioyned vnto penitent sinners for their publike notorious sins: as appeareth in the auncient Cou^cell of Ancyran, and in the first Councell of Nice, and in diuers other Councels: but they deny that they were enioyned with this intent, to doe any satisfaction thereby vnto God, for the guilt of
 theyr Temporall paine, but onely to satisfie the church, and their neighbours, by doing of publike pennance, whom they had offended, and ^candalized, with their publike notorious sinnes.
I an^were,  that their owne con ciences accuse them, that this is but a deceitfull cauill And I hope in God to make the same very euidently to appeare here to euery discreet christian reader, that is not wilfully blinded and bewitched with theyr new licentious, and carnall Heresies^ for all the ancient holy Fathers of Christs Catholike church, were of this iudgement, (as appeareth not only in their bookes, but also in the auncient Councels,) that such publike satisfactions for publike notorious sins, were done in such wise by the penitents to satisfie the church, and their neighbors, that with al, they were chiefly done to the inte^t that the penitent sinners might doe s ti^factio^ vnto God with the^: as appeareth very plai^ly by the rites, ceremonies, and praiers, with which such publike Satisfactions were done in the primitiue Church For the bishoppe, and cleargie, vsed, when such publike Sati faction^ were performed, to postrate the^ selues vpon the ground and with feruent praiers, and teares, to make humble request (not vnto the people, but) vnto Almightie God, to graunt vnto such publike penitents full pardon of their sinnes. And commonlie they v ed to say the Seauen penitential Psalmes for them.
And for a more euident proofe, that this doing of satisfaction was chiefly intended, and directed to doe thereby satisfaction vnto God, it appeareth not only by the rites and praiers vsed therein, but also by theyr manner of doing Satisfaction. For such publike sinners in the Primitiue church, did not only publike penances for their publike notorious
 sins, but also very many priuate and secret penaunces for them, wherewith they did satisfaction for their temporal punishment in secret wise vnto God only.Concil. Anciranum. Can. 4. And for proofe hereof, when the Auncient Cou^cell of Ancira ordeined, about the yeare of Lord. 308. that such christians as were constrained by the officers of Pagan Princes to offier sacrifice in the temples of Idols,Ibid. Can. 5. and did suppe there among the Infidels, should doe three yeares penaunce. And that such christians as were compelled to goe thither,Ibid. Can. 8 and did not eate there among the Infidels, should doe two yeares penance: and that such christians as yeelding to compulsio^ did the second and third time offer Sacrifice vnto Idolls,Ibid. Can. 9 should doe fower yeares penance: and that such christians as did not only them selues offer sacrifice vnto Idolls, but perswaded other christians also to doe the like,Concil Nicenum. Primum. Can. 11. should doe ten yeares penance: and also when the first Nicen Councell ordeined, that such christians as fell from the christian Religion, and yeelding to become Idolators. either volu^tarily, or for feare of confiscation of their lands, or goods, or for other like daunger should doe seauen yeares penance.Concil. Elibe^inum. Can. 22. and. 46. And when the Auncient Eliberin Councell ordeined, that such christians as fell from the Catholike Church into Heresy should doe ten yeares penance, what learned wise man in reading these decrees of these ancient holie cou^cells can otherwise conceiue, but that the penitents did manie secret penances during the yeares prescribed vnto them to doe penance for these publike sins, besids their publike Penances? But the Caluinists wil say, that they doe not conceaue so, but that the intent of the auncient councells was onlie, that the publike penitents should doe publike penaunces, during al^o those yeares, to satisfie only the Church,
 and their neighbours: and that the penitents did not any priuat secret penances for their publike sinnes during all the yeares of penaunce prescribed vnto them. And this cauiling shift they haue deuised, because in case they should grant, that publike penite^ts did any secret penances also for their publike sins, then were it euident, that those secret penaunces were enioyned them to doe satisfaction onlie vnto God, and not vnto the Church, or their neighbours, who could not be satisfied by any certaine knowledge whether those secret penances were performed, or not.
But before I proceede in the confutation of this new cauilling shifte of the Heretikes, I must needes tel them hereby the way, that they be deceiued in their argument, when they argue, that forsomuch as publike penitent sinners did with their publik penaunces satisfie their neighbours, therefore they did no satisfaction with them to God. I say,Publike penite^t sinners by their publike penaunces did Satisfaction both to God, and the Church. It is a greater difficulty to a sinner to doe Satisfaction publikly tha^ secretly. that this argument wil deceiue none, but the simple ignorant people, being nothing worth in the indiffere^t iudgement of any wise man. Because the publike maner of doing satisfactio^, doth not any thing weaken but much more strengthen, and increase the force of true satisfaction vnto God: in that the, satisfaction which is done, not onlie vnto Godp but ioyntlie there with also in publike wise to our neighbours, is of greater force, and efficacie, than the sati^faction that is done in secret wise vnto God onlie: by reason of the greater difficultie, shame, paine, and griefe, that commonlie synners haue in doing satisfaction publikelie, than in doing it onlie secretlie. And withall it is to be noted, that not onlie the discipline of the Church but the iustice of God requireth also, that such wicked dissolute
 per^ons as are neither ashamed, nor afraide, to sin publikly, to the publik scandal and offence of their neighbours, should do publike penance for it, that thereby they may doe satisfaction both vnto God, and their neighbours together.
And now for an euident confutation of the Caluinistes new cauilling shift, and to proue, that publike penitents in their manner of doing penaunce in the primitiue Church, did not only publike penaunces for their publike sinnes, but very manie secret penaunces also for them, I desire the Caluinistes to read an Auncient decree,S. Leo. pp. 1. ad Rusticum NarBonense^ Episcopum. Epist. 90. Cap. 17. made about the yeare of our Lord. 461. by Saint Leo the Great, the first Pope of that name, wherin it is ordeined that such christians as were onlie present at the Feaste-of the Gentils, and eated of the m^ates offered vnto Idols should be enioined fastings for that grieuous sinne.Concil. Epaunense, tempore Gela^i. sp. 1. Can. 29. Let them read also Concilium Epa^nense? holden in the time of Pope Gelasius, the first pope of that name, wherein it was decreed, that such as fell into heresie, should not be admitted againe vnto the aultar, vntill they had done two yeares pena^ce fasting euery third day. Let them read also Conciliu^ Toletanum. 8. wherein it was decreed, that who so without necessity eated flesh in Lent, should be debarred from receiuing the most blessed Sacrament at Easter, and from eating of flesh that time of the yeare.Concil* Toletanum. 8. Ca^. 9.Concil. Turonense, tempore Caroli Magni. Can. 22. Concil. Cabilonense tempore Ca^oli Magni Let them read likewi e Concilium Turonense, wherein certaine priests be reprehended, for not enioining fastings and abstinence vnto penitente sinners, according to the quality of their sins. Let the^ read also C^ncilium Cabilonense. 2. in the 35. canon, wherein it appeareth, that the vse of flesh, and wine was forbidden vnto penitents. And in the 45 canon of that councell, and in the 2. canon of the Auncient Councel of Laodice, it appeareth al^o, that the vse was to enioine penitent sinners in co^fession
 to say praiers, to giue almes. Moreouer,Can. 22. concil. Cabilonense, tempo e Caroli Magni. can. 35. 45..Concil Laodicoen. cad-2 Concil. Triburiense. Can. 55. 56. 57. and 58. let them read Concilium Triburi^ns^, wherein it ordeined, that if any committed wilful murder, hee should doe very austere penance for seauen years and that for the first 40. daies he should be debarred from entering into the church, and eate nothing els during tho^e 40. daies, but onely bread and salt: and drink nothing els but pure water: and weare no linne^, but onlie in his breeches, or stops: and that after those 40. daies, he should not be admitted to enter into the church during one whole yeare: and that he should absteine during all that time from flesh, cheese, wine and from ale, or bere, except vpo^ sundaies, and holy dayes: and other like penances be enioined to be done in the rest of the Seauen years. And withal let the Heretickes read the 25. and 26. canons of the Councel of wormes,Con. worm. Can. 25. 26. Concil. Magunt. can. 16. and the 16 canon of the Councel of Maguns, holden in the time of the Emperour Ranu^phus, wherein diuers particular penaunces be prescribed for such penitent sinners, as killed either their father, or brother, or any priest. Among other, these priuate and secret penaunces are there enioined the^: to wit, that they should not eat any flesh during their liues: and that they should fast euery day, sauing Sundaies and holie daies, vntil three a clock afternoone, and absteine from wine, and ale, or beere, etc. many other auncient councelles might also be aledged, to proue, that not only publike penances, but also many secret penances were enioined vnto publike sinners to be performed in secret wise, to the end they should do satisfaction thereby vnto God for the gilt of their te^poral paine remaining for them to suffer for ther sins: but these holy auncient cou^cels may suffice to perswad any good christian herein, be hee either learned or vnlearned. Now let the caluinists tel me, for what end
 these auncient councels prescribed vnto publike sinners,Publike sinners were enioyned to do not only publike pena^ces, but also very many priuate and secret pennances. besides their publike Pennances, to doe so many priuate, and secret pennances also for their publike sinnes, in case it were onely to satisfie their neighbours? If the auncient councels had none other intent nor end by their enioyning of publike pennance vnto publike sinners, but onely that they should thereby satisfie their neighbours, vvhat neede had they to enioyne vnto publike sinners, Prayers, Fastings, wearing of Haire-cloth, and other secret austere penances, which were done by the penitentes in secret wi^e from all knowledge of their neighbours?
To satisfie their neighbours only, the penitents needed no more, but some publike externall doing of Pennance, or to haue acknowledged publikely their fault vnto their neighbours, and to desire openly pardon of the^, or of the whole Church, whome they had scandalized vvith their publike deadly sin: and they needed not to be enioyned by the priests do for the same such secret austere pe^nances, of Praiers, Fastings, wearing of haire-cloth, and such like: which were not done publikely, and apparantly to the ope^ sight of ther neighbours, and therefore their neighbours not knowing certainlie whether they were performed or not, could not be satisfied by him.
But to preuent all cauils of the Heretickes, if it may be, what cauils can they possiblie deuise, to shift off the pennances which were enioyned by the priestes in auncient time vnto penitent sinners in confession for their secret sinnes:Secret pennances were enioyned for secret sins to doe thereby Satisfaction vnto God, and not to their neighbours. as for secret murders, secret adulteries, secret theftes, secret periuries, secret slaunders, etc. which deadly sins being done in secret, were vtterly vnknowen to their neighbours, and so they could not be scandalized
 by them, and consequently they needed no satisfaction for them.
Here they must needes graunt, that the pennances enioyned in ancient time by the Priestes vnto penitent sinners in confessio^ for these secret deadly sinnes, were to doe satisfaction vnto God only, and not vnto their neighbours, who were vtterlie ignorant of these secret sinnes.Concil. Cabilonense. 2. Can. 32. As for example, Concilium Cabilonense. 2. holden in the time of Carolus Magnus, ordeined, that penitent sinners should confesse vnto Priestes, not only such sinnes as they committed by external acts of their bodies, but euen such sinnes also as they offended only in their thoughts: as their wicked malicious thoughts of treasons, adulteries, fornications, thefts, reuenge desiring other folkes deaths, or to haue their houses, offices, landes, or goodes, the which being fullie purposed and consented vnto, are grieuous deadly sins before almighty God, albeit they were neuer actually performed. Now the Priests iudging by hearing the varietie of sinnes, (as S. Ierome saieth,S. Ieronim. Super Mat. cap. 16. Concil. laodicen. Can. 2. Co^cil. wormac. Ca^. 7. Concil. Cabilonense. 1. Can. 8. Co^cil^ consta^tinop. 6. Generale. Can. 102.) did (as the holy Councels ordeine) enioyne pennances vnto penitent sinnnrs, according to the heinous qualitie of their sins. And sith the Priestes enioyned praiers, fastings, almesdeedes, wearing of haircloth, and other secret austere penaunces, for publike sinnes, no wise man can then deny, but that they enioyned like secret penauncs also for secret sins of the same kinde, and qualitie, whether they were secretly committed in act, or only purposed and consented vnto in thought. And these secret penaunces were done by penitent sinners to doe satisfaction thereby only vnto God, for their temporall punishment, and not to satisfie their neighbours, who were vtterly ignorant of those secret sins, and so needed no satisfaction for them. And
 told our Lord onlie such sinnes as were confessed vnto him. It appeareth hereby, that Saint Ambrose heard secret confessions of sinnes, made by penitent sinners vnto him alone: and that he kept the sinnes ^ecretly to God, and him selfe only, that were confessed vnto him: and consequentlie, that he would enioyne them to doe secret penaunces for their sinnes: the which being graunted, then it followeth, that they were enioyned to do thereby satisfaction vnto God.Concil Toletanum 1. Ca^. 6. And likewise, when Concilium Toletanum primum o^deined that Religious women should haue no familiarity with their Confessor: as it appeareth thereby that they confessed their sins vnto him. so is it euident also, that the confessions were made in secret, of sins done by religious women in their Monasterie, which is in secret, as of the sins of pride, disobedience, enuie, anger, and of other secret sins, and consequently that their penaunces were both enioyned and performed in secret, to do satisfaction thereby only vnto God.
And here vtterly to stoppe and close vp the heretikes mouthes, and all their wylie deuised cauills herein, let them read an auncient Councell, called Concilium valentinum,Concil Vale^tinum sub D^maso papa Primo. Ca^. 2. holden in Fraunce, vnder Pope Damasus, the first of that name, wherein it was ordeyned, that Religious women that marry after their vow, must doe first Satisfaction vnto God, by doing reasonable pennance for that sinne, before they be admitted to communnicate. Behold here, that by this Auncient approued COVNCELL, Satisfaction is prescribed in expresse wordes to be done vnto God.Co^cil Romanum. 4. sub S^mmacho Papa. And the same is also affirmed in an other auncient Councell holden in Rome.
If I should here al o alledge all the particular sentences out of the bookes of the auncient Holie Fathers that serue for proofe of this point, I should
 neuer make an end. For the learned know right well, that al the auncient Holie Fathers beleeued, and so taught the christian people in their times, in an all churches throughout christe^dome, that penitent sinners ought to do Satisfaction to God, for the guilt of temporall paine, remaining for them to suffer for their sinnes.
Wherefore Iohn Caluin, the father, director, and principall founder of all the Caluinistes new deuised Hereticall Religion, endeuoureth to perswade all that be addicted vnto his new Sect, that the Auncient Holie Fathers of Christs Church haue in all ages erred herein. These be his own verye wordes here following. Pa^um me mouent,Caluini. Institu lib. 3. Cap. 4. Sect. 38. 39. quae in veterum scriptis de satisfactione passim occurrunt. Video quidem eorum nonnullos, dicam simpliciter, omnes fere, quorum libri extant, aut in hac parte lapsos esse, aut nimis aspere and dure locutos. That is to say. As for all those things that are commonlie founde in the bookes of old writers concerning Satisfaction, they little moue me. I see indeed, that manie of them, I will speake plainly, in a manner all, whose bookes remaine, haue either erred in this point, or spoken too crabbedly, or hardlie. Thus farre be Caluins owne wordes. Whereby the godlie discreete reader maie euidentlie see the p^^ud arrogant spirit of this Heretike Caluin. and how contemptuously he decardeth the long app^oued authority, and graue iudgment, of all the auncient Holie ^athers, that haue Gouerned in Christs Church, not onlie since the first sixe hundred yeares after Christes ascention, (as M^ I^w^ll verie politikelie did delude the ignorant people thereby in his Challenge made at Pau^s crosse in London:) but euen all the aunci^nt Holy Bishoppes, Pastors, and doc^ors that haue ben in all ages, during this fifteene hundreth yeares,
 since Christs time, vntill this our corrupt age. And so Caluin would perswade vs, that all the auncient holy Bishops, and Pastours of Christs Church haue in all ages erred in the doctrine of satisfaction, vntill Frier Luther, and he, and Beza, and other proud fleshly Apostatas, and heretikes, brake their vowes and rebelled against the Gouernours of Christes Catholicke Church, and deuised a new licentious fleshly religio^ in this our vngratious wicked time.
I meruaile, that any wise man, that hath any feare of the terrible iudgements of almightie God, and is carefull of his own saluation, will be so foolishly and blindly bewitched by the diuell, or by his minister Caluin, or any other of his ministers, as to preferre the priuate presumptuous opinion of any heretike, before the graue approoued iudgement of all the ancient holy Bishops, Pastours, and Doctors, that haue gouerned in Christes Church these 1500. yeares, and to imagine that almightie God is now towards the end of the world become either a Lutheran, Zuinglian, Caluinist, Puritane, or Anabaptist,Mat. 28.20* Iohn. 14.16 Iohn. 16.13 1. Tim. 3.15 and that he hath broke^ his solemne faithfull promise made vnto his church, and chaunged his euerlasting holy ordinance, and intendeth now to turne heauen into hell, by thrusting out of hys glorious kingdome of heauen, all the auncient holy Bishops, and Pastours, that haue gouerned and taught the christian people in Christes church, by ordinary lawfull vocation and succession, in all ages since Christs time, vntill this our corrupt age, to intrude therein such arrogant apostata heretiks: as Frier Luther, Zuinglius, Caluin, Beza, and theyr fleshly ministers, which being infamous for theyr dissolute wicked liues, are newly and extraordinarily started vp in our time, as false Prophets, and forerunners of Antechrist, and are directed with a
 contrarie spirit, in deuising a new licentious hereticall religion, directly contrary to the holy approued christian religion of all the auncient holie Bishops, Pastours, and Gouernours of Christes Catholicke Church.


That the vertuous painefull workes of Satisfaction, done by penitent sinners, for the guilt of temporall paine, remayning sometimes for them ^o suffer for their sinnes, co^mitted after baptisme, doe nothing derogate from our sauiour Christs Satisfaction, and Redemption, but doe rather very much commend and extoll the same: forsomuch as they deriue and take from thence their value, force, and dignitie. @. 5.
BVT the most common obiection  of the Heretikes, against our doing of paineful vertuous workes of sati^faction is, that forsomuch as our Sauiour Christ hath sati^fied for vs all, and not onely for our sinnes, but for the sins of all the world, as appeareth* 1 Timothie 2.1. Tim. 2. and 1. Iohn. 2.1. Iohn. 2. therefore (say they) the sinner doth iniurie vnto Christes satisfaction vpon the Crosse, in case he go about to satisfie almighty God for his sinnes.
I answere,  that there be two kindes of satisfaction:Two kindes of Satisfaction. one that deserueth remission of sins, and remoueth away also the euerlasting paine in hell, due vnto sinners for their sinnes. And this sati^fac^ion apperteineth to our Sauiour Christ only, as to our only true Messias, who gaue himselfe for vs,Acts. 4.12. Rom. 3.24.25. Rom. 8.32. 1. Cor. 15.3 1. Tim. 2.5. 1. Iohn. 2.1. 1. Pet. 2.24 that he might redeeme vs with his most precious blood from all our iniquities. And this is the onlie full and perfect satisfaction, for all the sins of all mankinde.
There is another satisfaction, called Sacramentall satisfaction: which is onely to satisfie for the guilt of Temporall paine, required by Almightie God of a sinner, after that his sin, and the euerlasting paine due vnto it, are forgiuen him. This Sacramental
 Satisfaction apperteineth ordinarily vnto al penitent sinners, that committe any deadly sin after Baptisme, when their contrition and detesting of their sins for the loue of God is not so feruent, and perfect, as is prescribed and required by the diuine iustice for the same,
The doctrine of Christes Catholike Church, of the sufficiencie of our Sauiour Christs Satisfaction for all sinnes and for all paines due vnto them. Thoughe Christs passion be sufficient in it selfe for the Redemption of all mankind. yet all are not Redeemed by it with effect. Psa. 80.11 Psal. 94.8. Math. 23.37. Act. 7.15. Ephe. 4.30. Heb. 4.7. 1. Iohn. 3.3. Apoc. 3.20. Psal. 61.15. Ro. 10.21. Isay. 65.2. Isay. 49.4.Now whereas the Heretikes doe obiect, that our christian satisfactory workes be iniurious vnto our Sauiour Christes most precious blood, shedde vpon the Crosse for our satisfaction and redemption, it is an impudent slaunder. For al christians know right wel, that the doctrine of Christes Catholike Church is, that our Sauiour Christe shed his most precious blood, not only to redeme all our sinnes but to satisfie also for all paines due vnto them: and that one droppe of this most precious blood was sufficient to redeeme all mankind: and that the merites of our Sauiour Christs passio^, and the price of his Redemption, and satisfaction, be as it were an infinit treasure, purchased prepared and conserued, for the profitte and vtilitye, of all that are borne into this world. Howbeit we must vnderstand likewise, that though it be sufficient in it selfe for the Redemption of all Mankind: yet is not all Mankinde Redeemed with his precious blood efficaciter, that is to say, with effect As we see by the wicked Iewes, Turkes, Sarazens, Heretikes, Schismatikes, and wicked christians: which are all damned, because they harden their harts in their Infidelity, and wickednes, and doe resiste the good inspirations, and callings, which Almightie God sendeth vnto them, and so doe wilfully refuse the frute and benefit of our Sauiour Christs most sufficient and aboundant redemptio^, and satisfaction.
And of this great iniury, and ingratitude our Sauiour Christ complaineth saying, Pretium meum cogitauerunt repellere. That is to say: They haue purposed
 to refuse my price: and in an other place he saieth: I haue spred forth my hand all the day vnto a people not beleeuing, and gainesaying me. And likewise in Esay he saieth: in vaine haue I labored. Without cause, and in vaine haue I consumed my strengthe.
For in very deed, though this most sufficient and infinit treasure of our sauiour Christs passion, and Redemption, be purchased and prepared for the benefit of all mankind: yet good Reader, wee must all remember, that it beginneth not to be eyther mine, or thine, or any others to be saued thereby, vnlesse Christ be made ours, and we beginne to be truly indeed his seruants, his Members, and sonnes howshold. Because the Merites of our Sauiour Christ be not actually communicated but vnto such only, as be made one body with him: I meane,Christes merits are actually communicated to none other but only vnto his members, that be incorporated into him: and no longer, than they continue vnited vnto him by faith and obedience Heb. 5.9. Ezech. 18.26 1. Tim. 4.1. 1. Tim. 6.2^ vnto such persons, as be incorporated into him, as Members vnto their Head. And his Merites are no longer communicated vnto them. Then they continue vnited, and ioyned vnto him, by Faith, and Obedyence. And so Saint Paule sayeth, that Christ was made vnto all that obey him, cause of eternall Saluation. And in case any christians doe by theyr disobedience fall from Christ, and turne vnto the workes of darknes, and of the flesh. Then are they no more partakers of the Merites of our sauiour Christes Passion, and Redemption, vntill by penaunce they be reconciled and ioyned vnto him againe.
VVherefore (good christian Brother) wee must nor flatter our selues, (as the Heretickes, and dissolute Christians doe,) by considering thys truthe onelie, that our SAVIOVR CHRIST hath by shedding his precious blood in his most bitter passion, and death prepared, and offered vnto his father, a most sufficient
 and aboundant Redemption, and satisfactio^ for all the sinnes, and paines, of all mankind, and that his father doth so esteeme, and accept it: but it behoueth vs also to consider,A medicine helpeth not al sicke persons, but such only vnto Whom it is applied. and imprint this truth likewise deeply in our minds, to wit, that like as a generall medicine profiteth not all persons that be sicke, but ^uch only vnto whome it is applied so our Sauiour Christes most suff^cient Redemption, and sati^faction, prof^teth not all persons in the world, but such only, vnto whome it is effectually applied by such holy meanes, as almighty God hath ordeined, and appointed for the same,
Note, that the vertue of the merits of Christs passion, and death, be not communicated to any christian infinitly nor to all Christians in like Degree.And we must likewise consider, that albeit the vertue of the merits of our Sauiour Christs passion and death, be in itselfe infinit, yet is it not communicated to any christia^ inf^nitly, nor to al christians in equall and like degree: otherwise euery christian should be as iust and holy as the most Blessed virgin Mary the mother of God, or of any of the Saintes: yea euery christian should the^ be infinitly iust, and perfect which is absurd, and false. But the vertue of Christs merits is communicated to some christians in more aboundance, and to some in lesse aboundance, according as euery christian is more or lesse prepared and disposed for receauing of the same, by such holy meanes, as almighty God hath ordeined and prescribed.
And by the ordinance of almighty God, the vertue of the merits of our Sauiour Christs Redemption,by what meanes the vertue of Christs Redemption and Satisfactio^ is to be applied vnto vs. and satisfaction, is to be applied vnto vs for remission of Originall sinne, by the Sacrament of baptisme: and for remission of Actuall sinne by the sacrament of pennance: and for obteining of full remission of temporall paines remaining some-times for penitent sinners to suffer, for want of perfitte contrition for their sinnes, it is to be applied by vertuous
 our painful workes of satisfaction: as by Fasting, Praier, almesdeeds, wearing of hairecloth, whypping our rebellious flesh, and other like good vertuous painfull workes, that be of their own nature painfull and irksome to our flesh.
Whereby it appeareth, that all sinnes,Note, that al sins and all paines that be pardoned to sinners are all pardoned by vertue of the merits of Christs Redemption and satisfaction, applied by diuers meanes, vnto them. and also al gilt of euerlasting and temporall paines, that be pardoned vnto sinners, are all pardoned by vertue of the merits of our Sauiour Christs Redemption, and satisfaction, applied by diuers meanes and waies vnto them. And that the merit of Christs suffering and satisfying for vs, is as it were the life and soule of our suffering, and satisfaction, for the guilt of temporal paines. And that al our painful vertuous workes, had benne, as a bodie without a soule, in case our Sauiour Christ had not by his most bitter passion, and death, satisfied for vs. So as our painful vertuous works of sati^factio^, be neither co^trary, nor iniurious, vnto the satisfaction of our Sauiour Christ, (as the Heretikes doe falslie affirme,) but they be vnited vnto Christs sati^faction, and doe take their vertue, value, force and dignity from the same.
And like as notwithstanding the full and perfecte Redemption and Sati^faction of our Sauiour Christ, our faith, and baptisme,Note, that notwithsta^ding Christs Redemption, and satisfaction, diuers things are also required, as necessary to our saluation, as faith baptisme: keping the commaundeme^ts etc. be required also, as necessarie to our saluation, and likewise the due keeping of God his commaundementes, after we be baptized, and iustified: and withal an inward harty repentance in al such as fal into any deadly sinne after their baptisme, etc. and none of all these doe any whitte deminish the miritte of our sauiour Christs sufficient Redemption, and satisfaction, or be in any respect derogatorie or iniurious to the honour or dignity of his most precious bloud shed for our sinnes: euen so also our externall
 doing of pennance for our sinnes, (which is a signe and effect of our inward pennance,) and our painefull vertuous satisfactory workes (which be purified, and fortified in the most precious blood of our sweet Redeemer, and Sauiour,) doe bring no manner of detriment, iniurie, or dishonour vnto our Sauiour Christs merit, and satisfaction. Forsomuch as by the holy iust ordinaunce of almighty God, our painefull vertuous satisfactory workes be required for our te^poral punishment, in regard of the imperfection of our conuersion and contrition.
Note here the reasons, Why paineful vertuous workes of Satisfaction, be necessarily required of Christians, notwithstanding Christs sufficient Satisfaction.And surely, for very good reason, and for the eschewing of great inconueniences, our painefull vertuous workes of satisfaction be necessarily required of vs, by almighty God, notwithstanding our Sauiour Christs sufficient satisfaction: because otherwise most christians would be very carelesse and negligent in doing of good workes, and would conceaue a security and most certaine assurance of theyr saluation, through the sufficiency of our Sauiour Christs satisfaction, and so they would vse, (as very many doe in their corrupt time of Heresie) our sauiour Christs redemption, and satisfaction, as a cloke, to couer their carelesse slouthfull and dissolute wicked liues, and account all good vertuous painefull workes of prayer, fasting, almesdeedes, and all other painefull doing of pennance, and austere vsage and mortification of theyr flesh, to be superfluous, and in vaine.
But the most principall and singular reason, why some satisfaction is required of penitent sinners by vertuous painefull workes, (as by fruites worthie of pennance) is because our sauiour Christes will is, that the merite of his Passion shall be communicated, and applied vnto christians, so far forth,
 as the order of the diuine iustice requireth. And therefore, forsomuch as our sauiour Christ, hath suffered innocently for our offences, his holy will and ordinance is, (according as reason and the due order of iustice requireth,) that wee that haue bin the offenders, and the cause of his most grieuous and bitter Passion, should resemble, and be like in suffering vnto him, who is our head, our maister, our patterne, and exampler. And this resemblance in suffering with him we ought to haue, as a signe of our gratefulnes, loue, and conformity vnto him, which he requireth of vs, as of faithfull obedient members, mortified with Christ our tormented head, and as a testimony of our hatred of all sinne, and of our zeale and reuerence to the iustice of almighty God.
And our Sauiour Christ himselfe hath reuealed vnto vs in his holy scriptures, that if we will be his members, and conforme our selues vnto him, as vnto our head, we must then imitate him in our liues, and beare our Crosse euery day, and suffer vvith him. And therfore he said: Who so will come after me, let him deny himselfe, and take his Crosse euerie day,Luc. 9.23. and follow me. And note well, that he sayed not, let him take vp my Crosse, but his own Crosse.Note that euery member of christ must ioyne his owne Crosse vnto Christes Crosse, by suffering also with Christ. 1. Iohn. 2.6 That is to say: who ^o will haue any benefitt of the merite of Christs satisfaction, let him apply the same merite vnto himselfe, by suffering also with Christ, and let him ioyne his Crosse with Christs Crosse, and vnite his suffering with Christs suffering: because otherwise wee shall not be partakers of his merites, in case we refuse to be partakers of his suffrings. And so saint Iohn sayeth: He that sayeth he abideth in him, ought him-selfe to walke euen as hee walked. And saint Peter explaineth this following of Christ more plainelie, saying: Christo igitur passo in
 in carne,1. Pet. 4.1. and vos eadem cogitatione armamini. That is to say, Christ therefore hauing suffered in the flesh, be ye also arm^d with the same cogitation. And in another chapter he sayeth: For vnto this are ye called, because Christ hath suffered for vs,1. Pet. 2.21 leauing you an example, that ye may follow his steps. Now how must wee follow our Sauiour Christes steppes? certainely, there is none other way (as I haue ^aid) to followe him, but according as he hath reuealed in his holie scriptures: That is, we must imitate him, not as he is God,Note how we must follow our Sauiour Christs steppes. but as he is man: I meane hereby, wee must imitate his holy life, and beare (not his Crosse, but) euen our own Crosse euery day with him, and drink of the bitter cup of his passion, in suffring with him, as conformable faithfull members to our head. And in this wise we shall be made conformable to the image of the sonne of God. Wherefore saint Paule saieth,Rom. 8.29. Whome God hath forknowne, them hath hee also predestinated to be made conformable to the image of his sonne. And in the same chapter shewing the necessitie of our suffering with Christ, to the end we may be also glorified with Christ, he saieth these words. If sonn^s, heires also: heires truely of God, and coheires of Christ,Rom. 8.17. in case yet wee suffer with him, that wee may also be glorified with him. And in his Epistle to Timothie he sayeth:2. Tim. 2.11. and 21. If we be dead with Christ, wee shall liue also together: If wee shall sustaine, wee shall also raigne together. And if it were not needefull for vs to suffer with our Sauiour Christ, as faithfull members with our head, saint Paule would neuer haue said to the Colossians: I reioyce in suffering for you, and doe accompl^sh those thinges, that want of the Passions of Cbrist,Colos. 1.24. in my flesh, for his body, which is the church. Meaning thereby, that albeit our Sauiour Christ (as our head) hath suffered sufficiently, and though there be no want in our Sauiour Christs Passions,
 which he suffered in himselfe, as our head, for our redemption and satisfaction* yet there ramaineth, and wanteth, that the faithfull members of our sauiour Christ doe suffer also with Christ, their tormented head, to the intent they may be like, and conformable vnto him: for otherwise nothing would seeme more deformed (as S. Bernard affirmeth,S. Bernard. Ser. 5. de omnibus sanctis.) than that delicate members should be ioyned and vnited vnto a head pricked, and tormented with thornes, and other most grieuous and painefull Passions. And in this respect S. Paule said to the Corinthians,2. Cor. 4.10 that wee must alwaies beare about in our bodie the mortification of Iesus, that the life also of Iesus may be manifested in our mortall flesh. And S. Paule himselfe endeuoured so earnestly to beare his Crosse euery day with Christ, and to conforme his life vnto the life of Christ, as a true faithfuil member of Christ, that hee protesteth to the Galathians,Gal. 6.17. that he bare the markes of our Lord Iesus in his body. And so ought euery christian endeuour to beare the markes of christ in his body, (by conforming his life vnto the life of Christ,) and to be vnited vnto him.
And when wee be ioyned and vnited vnto our sauiour Christ, as his true faithful members,1. Cor. 6.17 Qui adhaere^ D^mino vnus spiritus est.Gal. 2.20. so long as we perseuer in that vnion with him, all our good thoughts, actions, and workes, are inspired, directed, gouerned, fortified, and sanctified with his holy spirit. And then like as S. Paule said of himselfe, as of a faithfull member of Christ: Viuo autem, iam non ego, viuit vero in me Christus: that is to say, I liue, now not I: but Christ liueth in me: so may all penitent sinners, being faithful members of our sauiour christ, say in like maner of their doing of vertuous painfull satisfactory works for the guilt of their temporall paines: I satisfie, now not I: but Christ satisfieth
 in me.Note that the Satisfactions of the Members of Christ, be Christes Satisfactions. Because the passions and satisfactions of the true faithful Members of Christ, be Christ passions and satisfactions.
For it appeareth in the Holie scriptures, that there is such a strait Vnion and coniunction betwene our sauiour Christ and his Members, that he calleth the sinnes of his Members his sinnes. As in psalme 21.Psal. 21.1. Longe a salute meae verba delictorum meorum. It is also said in Saint Paule to the Ephesians Cap. 21.Ephes. 2.6. Considere nos fecit in caelestibus, in Christo Iesu: That is to say. He hath made vs sitte with him in the celestials in Christ Iesus. For in that Christ our head sitteth there, his faithfull Members are said to fitte there also: And in the actes of the Apostles our sauiour Christ calleth the persecutions of his Members his own persecutions. And therefore he said to Saule that persecuted the christians after his ascention into Heauen, Saule, Saule cur me persequeris?Act. 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Here Saul persecuted not our Sauiour Christ himselfe, but the faithfull Christians his members, and yet our Sauiour Christ accounteth him selfe to be persecuted in the^, he being the lambe (that as S. Iohn sayeth) hath bene slaine in his Members from the beginning of the world.Apoc. 13.8. Mat. 25.40. And so our sauiour affirmeth in saint Mathew, that whatsoeuer is donne to one of his faithfull elected Members, whom he calleth his least brethren is done vnto him.
Note the straite vnion and coniunction betweene Christ, and his true faithfull Members. Eph. 1.23.And after the same manner our satisfactions be Christs satisfactions: for that all the true members, of Christs catholike church are so straitly vnited with our sauiour Christ theyr head, that they together with him are considered as one Mysticall person, and therefore in respect of Christs members, the Church is the plenitude of his person: and
 the passions and sanctifications of Christs members, being dedicated, and sanctified in Christs blood, and sacrifice, make the plenitude of Christs passions, and satisfaction. And so the passions of our Sauiour Christ the head, and the afflictions of his Misticall body the Church, and Members thereof, make one complet Masle of passions, with such great difference for al that betwene the one sort, and the other 'as the high preheminence of our sauiour Christ the Head,2. Cor. 1.5. aboue his Misticall bodye the Church requireth, and giueth. And saint Paul affirmeth, that the passions of Christ did abound in the Corinthians, where he calleth their Passions, the passions of Christ. And Saint Peter exhorteth the christians to reioyce in their communicating (by their sufferings) with the passions of Christ,1. Pet. 4.13. and he calleth these passions, which our Sauiour Christ suffereth in his Members Passiones and Posteriores glorias in Christo: That is to say:2. Peter. 11. the passions and latter glories in Christ.
And in consideration of this straite coniunction and vnion of our sauiour Christ with his Members,Note how one Member of Christ may doe Satisfactorie workes for another. and of the members together among themselues, though one of them can not Merite for an other properly, yet one of them may doe penall satisfactory vertuous works for an other: I meane for the temporall paine required to be suffered by euery member of Christ for his sinne, whe^ their conuersion and contrition be imperfect. Because (according to the article of our creede) there is a-Communion among all the Sainctes. And in respect thereof the prophett Dauid saied to our Lorde:Psal. 118.63. Ro. 15.27. 1. Cor. 12 20. Particeps ego sum omnium timentiu^ te: That is to say. I am partaker of all that feare thee. And the reason hereof is, for that as Saint paull sayeth: though all faithful christia^s are many me^bers of Christ, yet are
 they all but one Misticall body of Christ,Rom. 12.4. and so he calleth them, vnum corpus, and vnus spiritus: that is, one body, and one spirit. And to the Galathians he affirmeth,Ephes. 4.4. that all faithful christians be one in Christ Iesus, and shewing to the Corinthians the cause of this vnion of all faithfull christians in Christ, hee saieth:Gal. 3.27. 1. Cor. 12.13. For in one spirit were we all baptized into one, whether Iewes, or Gentiles, or bond men, or free, and in one spirit we were made all to drinke.
And this communion and participation that is amongst all faithfull christians, as fellow members in Christ, which in our creed is called the communion of saints, is the very ground and foundation, why one of them may (as S. Paule saieth) beare an others burden,Gal. 6.2. and supply the defects of another, so far forth, as apperteineth to the duty of one me^ber of Christ to doe charitably for an other.2 Cor. 8.14 And so saint Paule protested to the Colossians, (vvho were his fellow members in Christ) that he supplied for them in his fl sh^,Colos. 1.24. that which wanted of the Passions of Christ.There is no want in Christs Passions, which he suffered in himselfe, as our Head: but there is wa^t in those Passions of christ, which he dayly suffreth in hys body the Church, and the members thereof. Math. 10.38. Luke. 9.23. Howbeit, God forbid, that any christian should once imagine, that ^aint Paule meant, that there is any manner of want in our sauiour Christs Passions, which he as our head, suffered in himselfe for our satisfaction, and redemption. For Christes Passions were (as I haue said) in that regarde most sufficient, and aboundant. But saint Paule meaneth, that he supplied in his flesh, for his felow members in Christ of the Colossians, in regard of the want of those Passions of Christ, which by his owne ordinance he daily suffreth, and shall suffer to the end of the world, in his misticall body the Church, and members thereof: which by our sauiour Christes owne ordinance, and commaundement, ought to be fellowes of his Passions as they looke to be fellowes of hys glorie: and therefore they ought daily to carry their owne Crosse after Christ, as his
 faithfull Disciples, and drinke of his bitter cuppe,Rom 8.17. 1. Cor 9.27. 2. Ti. 2.11.12 Mat. 20.22 1 Cor. 11.3^. Rom, 2.6. and 8.2. Cor. 5.10. Ephes. 6.8. 1, Pet. 1.^6. Ap^c. 14.13. Apoc. 22.12. and (as saint Paule saieth) ought to iudge themselues before hand in this life, by adiudging to the^ selues some temporall punishment for their sins* as by fasting, watching, praiers, almes-deedes, wearing of hairecloth, whipping their rebellious flesh, etc. and so to preuent, that they may not be iudged for them by almighty God, whose inf^nite goodnesse, mercy, and iustice, be ballanced, and correspondent, in such due order of iust measure one to another, that in no wise hee vvill suffer anie good worke to be vnrewarded, nor any s n vnpunis^ed.
And for a full answere now to the Heretiks,Note diligently this con^^tation of the Hereti^es common deceitfull Argument ag^^nst our doing o^ Satisfaction. Acts. 7.60. Iohn. 17.20.21. Rom. 8.34. Heb. 7.25. 1. Iohn. 2.1. Saint Chri. Ho. 15. ad Rom. Mat 5.24. Luke. 6.28. Luke. 18.1. 1. Thes. 5.25. Colos. 4.3. Ephes. 6.18 1. Tim. 2.1. that doe most wickedly argue against our doing of vertuous painefull workes of satisfaction, affirming them all to be done in vaine, because our sauiour Christ hath satisfied sufficiently for vs: I say, that so they may in like manner argue, that the praiers of all the Holy Martyrs for their persecutors vvere in vaine, and that saint Stephen prayed also in vaine for them that stoned him to death: because our sauiour Christ hath praied sufficiently for al the Elect, and by his praying hath deserued for them all life euerlasting.
And if this cauelling Hereticall argument be admitted, then may the Heretikes argue in like maner, that sith our sauiour Christ, sitting now in heauen at the right hand of his Father, prayeth now sufficiently for vs all, that wee need not therefore to pray now eyther for our selues, or for our persecutors, or one for another, to the end we may be saued, according as our sauiour Christ, and S. Paul, and S. Iames, require of al christians. And what need we then any Churches, or to pray there, or in anie other place, if by our only Faith in Christ, wee be assuredly pertakers of Christs most sufficient praier,, merits, and satisfaction, and neede not to pray,
 merite,2. Tim. 1.3 I^^. 5.16. Act. 15.11 1. Cor. 6.17 1. Cor. 12.3 2. Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.12. and 13. Apo. 22.11 Iohn. 1.16. Mat. 3.8. Rom. 6.19. Rom. 8.10.26. 1. cor. 9.27. 1. co. 11.13 1. co. 15.10 2. co. 4.10. 2. cor. 12.9. Epr. 2.10 Gal. 2.20. Gal. 5.24. and 25. Phil. 2.12.13. Phil. 4.13. col. 1.24. and 29. Col. 3.3. 1. The. 4.8. 2. Tit. 2.21 1. Pet. 2.21 1. Pet. 1.10 1. Iohn. 3.3. Apo. 22.11 Heb. 12.8. or satisfie in any respect for our selues? Yea if Christes sufficiencie doe take away all meanes on our behalfe of application of the merits of hys Passion, and death vnto vs, then what neede haue we of Faith it selfe, or of preaching of the Gospell, or of praier, or of any other vertuous meanes what soeuer: sith one of them is no more derogatorie to the sufficiencie of the merits of Christes Prayers, satisfaction, and redemption, than the others be?
But the good christian reader shall doe well to blesse himselfe euery day from such deceitfull hereticall arguments. And for the confutation hereof, he must vnderstand, that the praiers of our fauiour Iesus Christ are the fountaines, and foundations, and as it were the vniuersall cause, whereby our praiers are meritorious before the diuine Maiestie, vvhich vvithout the merites of our sauiour Christ vvere of no force, nor efficacie. And all catholickes doe plainely confesse, that all the vertue, dignitie, value, and strength of all our praiers, satisfactions, and good workes, doe proceede from the merits of our sauiour Christ: for as saint Iohn sayeth, De plenitudine eius omnes accepimus: that is to say, of his fulnes we all haue reeeaued. Howbeit, we must note withall, (as I haue before declared,) that the sufficiencie of our sauiour Christes praiers, merits, and satisfactions, are by him ordeined for ^uch, only of the members of his misticall body, as will with his grace endeuour to pray, metite, and satisfie with him, according as is required of them, and to make this more plaine by another example, we all know, that our Christ teacheth sufficiently all truth, and keepeth sufficiently all iust persons: but it followeth not thereof, that there ought not to be any Doctors, Pastours, or preachers in Christs Catholicke Church, to teach vs the
 truth, or that we ought not to be carefull for the due custodie of our hart: for that were to make all christians very careles, slouthfull and dissolute in their liues, and not to endeuour to carrie theyr Crosse, and to worke their saluation with feare, and trembling, but to vse Christs Passion as a cloake and excuse of their wilfull negligence, and wickednes. Whereas our Sauiour Christs will and ordinance is, that all christians should with the assistance of his grace concurre with their Godly endeuours to liue as it becommeth his obedient louing children vnder his holy discipline, and seruice. And so S. Paule affirmeth in these wordes. If you be without discipline, whereof all be made partakers, then are you bastards and not children.
And to the intent wee should continuallie exercise our selues, and perseuere in good christian exercises vnder our Sauiour Christs Holy Discipline and Seruice, he hath prepared and ordeined, (as I noted here before,) that the value of his merits and satisfaction should be transferred, not vnto all his faithfull members a like, but diuerslie, in diuers degrees: I meane to some more, and to some lesse thereof, according to the measure of grace, that he bestoweth vpon them: and according as each one of them endeuoureth with hys grace vnder his holy discipline, to be more or lesse conformable vnto him, in imitating his holy life, And hereof it commeth, that like as all the Elect be not iust and vertuous alike,) for all of them be not so vertuous and iust, as our blessed Lady the mother of God,) so shall they be diuersly rewarded by him in his glorious kingdome of heauen, each one according to the measure of his charitie: For as our Sauiour himselfe saieth: In domo patris mei mansiones multae sunt. That is to say,Iohn, 14.2. In the house of my father, there be many ma^sions of felicity, and glory.

Wherefore, of the premisses we may well conclude, that sith the value and merite of our prayers, and satisfactions, done with the grace of God, doe proceed from the merit, value, and d gnitie, of the prayers, and satisfactions of our sweet Sauour Iesus Christ: and sith his holy wil and ordinance is, that the merit of his sufficient and most aboundant redemption, and satisfaction, should be applied, to haue efficacie in vs, by his sacraments: and by our good workes, donne by his g^ace, which is giuen vnto vs by the Merit of Christ it followeth hereupon, that our vertuous painfull workes of Satisfaction be so far off from diminishing, or obscuring the benefit of our Sauiour Christs Satisfaction, and Redemption, that they doe rather very much commende, and extoll the same. For in that that Christs Satisfaction is the foundation, direction, and worker of the merite, vaine, and dignity of all our good christian works, we by our suffering and satisfying for the guilt of temporall paine, prescribed by his owne mercifull and iust ordinance for vs to suffer vnder his holy discipline for our sins, doe thereby execute Iudgement and Iustice, vpon our selues, according as in Ezechiel wee be required: I meane, by iudging our selues, as S. Paule counsaileth vs, and by punishing, and taking reuenge of our heinous sins vpon our selues, that wee may not be iudged and punished for them by Almighty God. And moreouer we testifie by our vertuous painefull workes of Satisfaction,Mat. 10.38. Mat. 16.24. Luk. 9.23. Mat. 20.22. Act. 14.21. Rom. 6.6. Rom. 8.13.17.29. Gal. 2.20. Gal. 5.24. Gal. 6.14.17. Col. 1.24. 1. Pet. 2.21. 1. Pet. 4.1.13 1. Iohn 2.6. Rom. 8.17.29. 2. Cor. 1.7. 2 Tim. 2.11. that wee (according as his faithfull disciples ought to doe) are willing to imbrace the Crosse of Christ, aed to drinke of hys bitter Cup, and to deny our selues, and to mortifie our rebellious flesh, and to carry our Crosse daily and follow him, after his holy example, as he hath commaunded vs, and so doe endeuour with his grace to liue vnder hys holy discipline, and to imitate the painefull steps of his holy life, and to resemble and be made like vnto him in conforming our selues vnto him, by suffe^ing wi^h him, as true faithful members with our head, to the end we may be also glorified with him, knowing most assu^edly by the holy Scriptures, that in case we be partakers of the pa^nefull Passions of our Sauiour Christ, and doe communicate with him therein, wee shall then be partakers of his consolation also.




Of the third part of the Sacrament of Pennance: which is Satisfaction.

CHAPTER. I.
AFTER Contrition, and Confession,Here the Authour himself beginneth to treat of Satisfaction. How Satisfaction is to be made by vs. followeth Satisfaction, (which is the third part of Pennance:) whereunto appertaineth, to make Satisfaction to the honour of Almightie God, for the offences committed against his diuine Maiestie, by taking iust reuenge vpon him, by vvhome the offence was committed. The reason hereof we declared in the other part, speaking of Fasting, the which we will repeate likewise here, because this is also his proper place.
For the vnderstanding whereof, you must consider, that like as a man, that tra^sgresseth the lawes of a common weale, is bou^d to suffer the penalties appointed for the transgressors of the same: euen so likewise, whosoeuer transgresseth the lawes of Almighty God, is bound to suffer certaine kindes of paines, which are by the iustice of GOD prescribed and appointed for the transgression of them. These kindes of paynes must needes be payed, eyther in this life, or in the life to come: That is to
 say either in Hell,In hell with euerlasting paines. or in Purgatorie, or else in this world. In hell they are paid with euerlasting paines, and torments enduring world without end. In Purgatorie they are not p^ied with euerlasting paines,In purgatory with t^mporal paines but with certaine paines that haue an end, and are limited wi^hin a certaine time. Howbeit these paines in Purgatorie, are so terrible, and so vehement, that (as, Saint AugustineSaint Austine. saieth) there is no paine in this world, that may be compared with them: no not all the cruel paines and torments of the Martyrs, which were the greatest in all the world.
Now from these so great and terrible paines in Purgatorie,How wee may be deliuered fro^ the terrible paines of Purgatorie. we are deliuered by iudging and correcting our selues in this life, with Fasting, watching, praier, discipline, and other austere vsage of our body, although these pains be without comparison farre lesse, than those that are suffered in Purgatorie. For whereas in these things, Almightie God hath regard, not so much vnto the greatnes of the paines, as vnto the will of the Sacrifice:A small voluntarie paine in this life, satisfiieth more than many greater paines suffered of necessity in Purg^torie. (for that such paines as a penitent is content to suffer for satisfactio^ in this world, be volu^tary, but in the world to come they are of mere necessitie,) herof it commeth, why a smal pa ne suffered voluntarily in this life, is without comparison
 of more force, and Satisfieth more in the sight of Almightie God, than manie greater paines, that are suffered of necessitie in Purgatorie, in the life to come.  But yee will say, why Sir? If the sacrament of penance be not sufficient in this behalfe, how is it, that the Sacrament of Baptisme is of such force, as it taketh all away, and absolueth a man quite, both from sin, and from all paine? vnto this questio^ I answere? that there is a great difference betweene the one Sacrament, and the other.  For the Sacrame^t of Baptisme is a sprituall birth, and regeneration of the inward man. The difference betweene the operation of the sacrament of Baptisme, and of the sacrament of Pennance.And therfore, like as one thing that is borne a new, leaueth foorthwith the former being which it had, and receiueth an other new being, and nothing remaineth of that, which it had before: (as when of an acorne springeth a tree, the accorne leaueth his former being) euen so when a man is spiritually borne againe in baptisme, hee leaueth forthwith to be that oldma^, which he was before: for he was before Baptisme the son of anger, wrath, and perdition) and after he hath receaued Baptisme, beginneth to be another new man, to wit the sonne of grace, and so by his new spirituall birth, he is free both from sinne,The sacrament of Penance worketh as a medicine. and from all paine. But the SACRAMENT of Pennance doth not deliuer vs from our
 sinnes past, as a regeneration, or new birth, but as a medicine, which some times healeth perfectly, and some times not, but leaueth behinde some remnantes of the former disease, which afterward with continuance of time, and good gouernment, may be worne out, and consumed away. After this sort doth the Sacrament of Pennance sometimes heale perfectly, and deliuer a sinner both from sinne, and paine, when there concurreth with all a verie perfect Contrition, (such as that Contritio^ of Mary Magdalene was,God pardoneth all the sinne by the sacrament of Penna^ce: but not all the paine, by reason of the vnperfect contrition of the sinner.Note this similitude. and of others the like:) but at other times, (when the Contrition is not so perfect,) though it doe then cancell al the sinne, yet doth it not take awaie all the paine: and so that paine which remaineth vncancelled, for want of perfect Contrition, must be purged either in this life, or in the life to come.
Of this we may take an example euen in worldly affaires: For if a Gentleman do commit an offence against his Prince, for the which he deserueth to suffer the paines of death: yet may he afterwardes doe him such, and so great seruices, as he may deserue his Princes grace, and fauour, and receiue a generall pardon, and cleare discharge from all this punishment. Againe his seruices
 may be such, as he shal not deserue so large a pardon, but some what lesse: which may be, to obteine the Princes grace and fauour, and to exchange the punishment of death into some banishment for a time. After this sort we read that King Dauid pardoned his Sonne Absolon.2. Reg. 14. verse. 21. and 24. For when he had slaine his brother Amnon, and had thereby incurred the iust indignation and displeasure of his Father, after three yeares absence, and banishment hee pardoned him for the offence, which he had committed: howbeit with this condition, that he should not enter within his Princely Palace, nor appeare before his royall presence. Now in like manner, when the Contrition and sorrow of the penitent sinner is not altogether so absolute, and perfect, as it ought to be. Almighty God, by vertue of the Sacrament of Pennance, pardoneth the sinne or faulte committed, and withall, the euerlasting paines of Hell, vvhich through his deadlie sinne he had deserued, (yea, and forgiueth moreouer some part of the temporall punishment:) howbeit, hee will not that such a one shall enter forthwith within his heauenly Palace, and haue there the fruition and glorious sight of his Diuine presence, before such time as he be fullie,
 and perfectly purged, either in this life, or in the life to come, in Purgatorie.
In this wise dealt Almighty God himselfe with the same King Dauid:2. Reg. 12. 13. and 14. God pardoned King Dauid his sinne, and yet punished him afterwardes with temporall paine for it, as with the death of his sonne. Num. 20.12. and 24. Moyses and Aaron, had their sin of mistrustfulnes forgiuen them, and yet for their temporall punishment afterwards for the same sinne, they were for euer debarred from entring into the land of promise. whom (in respect of his Confession, and repentance,) he pardoned the sinne of Adulterie, which hee had committed, and restored him againe vnto his friendship, and grace, which through his sinne he had lost: but yet after all this he sent him great afflictions, and calamities, eue^ for a punishment of the self same sin, which he had before pardoned.
But what sin was there euer in the world more freely pardoned, tha^ the sin of Moyses, and Aaron, at the waters of contradiction? the which notwithstanding, though the sinne were first pardoned, yet the punishment, which the diuine iustice had appointed, remained alwaies fresh in execution against them: which was the debarring of those two holy men, from euer entring within the land of promise. Euen so it happneth for the most part in the sacrament of Pennance, wherein through the vertue of Christs Passion, (which worketh in the same,) the sin is pardoned, and forgiuen, and the grace and fauour of Almighty God is obteined againe: but yet the penitent sinner remaineth stil bou^d, through
 the imperfection of his Conrrition and sorrow for his sinnes, vnto certaine degrees of paine, according as the Iustice of Almighty God hath ordeined.
And though there be many kindes of vertuous workes,And although Moyses praied earnestly vn^o our Lord for it, yet could he n^t obteine his request. As appeareth in Deutron^my. 3.23. and 26. which doe help towards the discharging of this paine, yet doe those especially serue for this purpose, which are most painefull, and most irkesome to our flesh. For (as Saint Gregorie saieth,) because the flesh with his appetites and delightes, hath caused vs to sinne, it is reason that the flesh, being well punished and afflicted for it, should disburden vs from the same sin. And sith that to content our flesh, wee haue discontented and offended Almighty God, reason would, that we should discontent and punish our flesh, to pacifie and please Almighty God againe.


Of the Originall cause of our Satisfaction. THE II. CHAPTER.
NOVV that wee doe vnderstand the necessitie wee haue of SATISFACTION, let vs see the ORIGINALL, and beginning of the same: that wee may thereby the better vnderstand,
 after what sort it ough to be done: For the better perfourmance whereof, wee must call to minde, what we haue spoken before in the beginning of this treatise: to witte, that the true repentance and grace of the conuersion of a sinner, is the greatest grace and mercy, that might be graunted in this life.The conuersion of a sinner is the greatest grace, that may bee graunted to a man in this life. For although glorie be a thing farre greater than grace, (forsomuch as the one is only grace begun, and the other is grace consummated:) yet is it a greater grace for Almighty God to plucke, and deliuer a man from sinne, and to set him in the state of grace, than afterwards when he is receiued into grace, to graunt him glory.
Moreouer, like as Baptisme (which is the first gate, and entrance of the Sacraments, and the beginning of mans regeneration,) bringeth with it (so much as vnto it appertaineth) all the vertues and gifts of the Holy Ghost, ioyntly with grace, fro^ whom all these benefits doe proceede: euen so true Pennance, which is the beginning of our Resurrection, bringeth likewise with it all these gifts, and treasures, and especially a new light and knowledge of things spirituall,Note what ^onderfull ^ffectes doe ^me by ^ue Pen^nce. and diuine: (vnto which thinges before that time man was as it were blind, as liuing in the kingdome of darkenesse, and
 shadow of death.) It bringeth also with it, a new Charitie and loue of God, which is the forme of true Pennance, and of al vertues: and it worketh in our soules wonderfull affections, and feelings apperteining vnto this vertue. For as naturall loue is the beginning of all other naturall affections, and passions: euen so the supernatural loue of God is the beginning of all Spirituall affections and feelinges. And the greater that this supernaturall loue of God is in vs, the greater are the spirituall affections, and feelinges, which it worketh in vs. And as the graces of the Conuersions of sinners be diuers, in some greater, (as the conuersion of S. Paule, S. Augustine, and many others,) in others lesser, (as the ordinarie and dayly Conuersions of sinners, are for the most part wont to be: so are the inward affections, and motions, which this vertue of charity causeth, greater or lesser.
Now this vertue (to witte,Note what wonderfull great effects the loue of God, workeeth in a soule. the loue of God,) causeth in the soule so great a repentance, and discontentation, for that he hath offended Almighty God, that a man would rather, that he had suffered a thousand kindes of torments, than to haue displeased such a Lord. It causeth also a verie great feare of the diuine Maiestie, forsomuch
 much as hee seeth that he hath dishonoured, and prouoked him vnto anger, through such and so many offences, that he knoweth, that he hath thereby incurred the indignation of his furie. Moreouer, it causeth him to be very much ashamed to appeare before his diuine presence, euen as a wife, that hath defiled her Husbands bed, and had bin pardoned for her offence, would be ashamed, when she should be receaued againe into his house.Luk. 18.13 Note, that the loue of God causeth a great vehement desire in a soule to doe satisfactio^ vnto our God with due Pennance, and to be reuenged vpon his owne flesh, that was the cause of his offending of God. For such was the shame, which the Publican in the Gospell had, who durst not lift vp his eyes towards Heauen, for very shame, and confusion of himselfe. It causeth in like manner a verie great vehement desire to make Satisfaction vnto ALMIGHTIE God, with due Pennance, for the offence that hee hath done vnto him, and withall, a very great feruent desire to be reuenged vpon him, that was the cause of this offence: (which was his owne proper flesh. For when hee considereth, how his flesh was the thing, which did with her appetites and inordinate delights entice him to stretch foorth his armes vnto the inordinate loue of creatures, and to diuorce himselfe from the loue and obedience of his lawful spouse, and Lord: then is hee kindled in such sort with an extreame
 fury and rage against his flesh, that he could finde in his hart to rent and teare it in peeces, and with a thousand torments to punish it, for that it hath bin the cause of all his woe.Note this similitude. And that thou mayest the better vnderstand al this matter, imagine with thy selfe, what a chaste noble virgin would doe, if, after that shee had bin espoused to some Nobleman, that were of the blood royall, whom she had neuer seene, but only the Espousalles had bin contracted by Ambassadours in the absence of the parties: and the^ some naughty woma^ should beguile her, and make her beleeue, that shee was betrothed to some other man, calling him by the noblemans name, hee being in deed but a base and rascall fellow, and not spouse: and she beleeuing all this to be true, her should yeeld her selfe vnto him, and take him as her Soueraigne Prince, and louing husband. Tel me now, this noble woma^, that shuld thus be beguiled, in case she should afterwardes perceaue, that it vvas that naughty packe, which had so beguiled her, and brought her to so great a dishonor: what (thinke you) would this noble woman doe vnto that vile drabbe? with what words would shee reuile her? what a stomack would she take against her? vndoubtedly
 she would account it but a small reuenge to drink her blood, that had in this-wise dishonored her. Euen so the soule of the co^uerted sinner, whose eies Almighty God hath opened, and giuen a particular and new light, to see so perfectly and clearly, that Almightie God was her true and lawful spouse, and the last end, for which she was created, and to perceiue on the co^trarie part, that by the deceit of this naughty woma^ (which is her own flesh) she hath bene allured to exte^d the armes of her loue towards creatures, and to embrace them with the self same loue, which was due vnto Almightie God alone, and that her own flesh which was the cause of all this adulterie: how can she haue patience to beare with her flesh? how can she refraine, but with all seueritie to punish and afflict her flesh, yea, and to be fullie reuenged vpon it, that was the cause of her so great miseries: Hereof come those cruel and excessiue chastisme^ts, which some penitents are wont to vse in the beginning of their conuersion from their sinful life: whome yee cannot withhold from their sharpe discipline, from grieuous whipping and punishing their te^der bodies, but they will besides the wearing of heir-cloth, vse great fasting, and abstinence,
 watch, and pray along time together, and frequent manie other kinds of spiritual exercises, in such sort, as they are in danger oftentimes to do great outrages vnto them selues, yea, and to cast themselues downe by such excesse into some fiknes, vnles they take good heed, and be wel warie to keep a measure, and to vse therin verie great discretion.
Such was the spirit of pennance, which Holie Iobe declared in these wordes: peccaui, Quid faciam tibi O custos hominum?Iobe. 7. vers. 20. That is to say: I haue sinned: what shall I do vnto thee, O thou keeper of men? As if he should haue said more plainely, according to the exposition of Saint Augustine.Saint Augustine. O Lord I Confesse my sin. And such is the griefe which I take thereof, that I will not refuse to suffer anie kind of punishment for the same. Consider thou, O Lord, whatsoeuer thy will shalbe that I should do, for I am readie to do all such things, as thy will is that I shuld do. I haue nothing to offer vnto thee, but a hart verie prompt and willing to doe whatsoeuer thou shalt commau^d me. If thou commaund me to cast my selfe into the glowing flames of fire, or this my bodie to be rent and torne in peeces, or to suffer any other kind of torme^t (be it neuer so great)
 I haue an hart redy prepared to fulfill thy will. Here I offer my selfe bound both ha^d, and foot, and I lie prostrate at thy feet: I flee not away: I appeale not from thy sentence: neither do I plead anie thing vnto the iurisdictio^ of thy court. I excuse not my selfe. I make no supplication, that thou shouldest discharge me of my punishme^t: but rather that thou maist iudge me acccording vnto thine owne blessed will Be thou the knife, and I will be the flesh. Hacke me, and hewe me, on which side thou wilt, so that thou pardo^ me the grieuous sinnes, which I haue committed against thee.
In like sort did Holie King Dauid also afflict himselfe, when in one of these psalmesPsalme. 37. vers. 9. o^f penance he saied: I am afflicted, and verie much humbled I sighed from the bottome of my hart. O Lord, before thee is al my desire, and my mourning lieth not hid from thee. My hart is troubled within me, my strength hath forsaken me, and now my sight faileth me. In this wise did this holie penitent afflict himselfe: and so should those likewise afflict, humble, and chastice them selues, that haue offended such a most louing Lord. For (as a Holie Father saieth) the soule, that hath against the wil of God forsaken his Creator, and delighted her selfe inordinatlie in creatures, it is meete,
 that she should purge and repaie with voluntarie paines and trauailes, the voluntarie delights, with which she so blnded herselfe.Paine is naturallie due vnto sinne. And forsomuch as paine is naturallie due vnto sinne, (where with the faulte is corrected, and reduced in order) reason would, that he shoud willingly accept, yea, and endeuour to suffer paines, that was so bold, as to commit so many offe^ces against Almightie God. And sith that m^n hath through sinne forsaken the cheffest goodnes (to wit, Almightie God,) and hath exchau^ged him for a vile creature, (which in verie deed is a great iniurie and contempt of the supreme Maiesty of almighty God) it is reason, that he, who hath despised such a mightie Lord, should humblie, despise, and willinglie abase him selfe euen vnto the dust of the earth.
After this sort then do those take paines to make Satisfaction to Almightie God, whose eies he hath opened with his heauenlie lighte: by meanes of which light, they come to vnderstande, the infinite greatnes and excellencie of the goodnes of Almightie God: and in the same they perceiue the greatnes of their owne malice, and iniquitie: and according thereunto they haue a desire
 to make Satisfaction vnto him. For confirmation wherof, as also for our example, and for a confusion of the carelesnes, and tepiditie of our corupt time, I haue thought good to rehearse here a part of an Historie of the rigorous and wonderfull austeritie of certaine holy Penitents, which S. Iohn ClimacusSaint Iohn Climacus. saw in a Monastery. The which Historie this holie Father reporteth, as being a witnes of sight, in a manner in these vvordes following.
A notable Historie written by the auncient holy father, Saint Iohn Climacus.When I (saith he) came first into this Monasterie, I beheld therin certaine things, which neither the eies of the sluggard haue euer seene, neither the eares of the negligent hard, nor yet may it be co^ceiued within the hart of the rechles and careles Christians. I heard and saw words and deeds of such force, that they might haue enforced (if I may vse such kinde of speach,) euen Almightie God himselfe, and incline him vnto mercy. I sawe many of those Holie penitents, which stood the whole night abrode in the aier, watching, and neuer so much as once mouing out of one place. And when sleepe seemed to ouercome them, they stroue, and reuiled them selues with verie iniurious wordes: and so by force they repelled the sleepe away fro^ their h^auy eies, because they would not yeeld vnto their bodies that little rest. Others I sawe standing with their eies fixed towardes Heauen, calling continually
 vnto Almightie God, with teares, and sighes for pardon and mercie. Others contrariewise saied with the Publican, that they were not worthie to lift vp their eyes towards Heauen,Luke. 18. verse. 13. neyther yet to speake vnto Almighty God. And after this sort they held their faces downe to the ground, offering their soules in silence vnto the mercy of God, with out speaking any one word at all, as men that had bin dumbe, full of feare and confusion. There were others cloathed in sacke, and haire-cloath, which were kneeling with their faces bowed downe to their knees, striking their foreheads ofte^times to the earth, with great sorrow, and bitternes of minde. Among these there were some, that had before them the very earth all wette, and bathed with teares. Others there were, which (because they wanted those teares) lamented verie grieuously. Many of them did (as the custome is ouer the graues of the dead) bewaile their owne soules, weeping and lamenting the fall and death of them. Others after the manner of Lyons roared and howled in the bottome of their heartes, yet repressing within them their sorrow and griefe: and sometimes (when they were not able to refraine anie more) they burst out sodainely into grieuous clamours, and dolorous lamentations. I saw certaine of them, who in their iudgements, deedes, and thoughts, were so far distracted from themselues, as if they had bin Images of stone: For by reason
 of their great pensiuenes, they were become in a ma^ner vnsensible of anie thing. And these had their soules, as it were drowned in the bottome of humilitie: and with the continuall fire of their heauines, had alreadie dried vpp the fountaines of their teares.
And alitle after in the saide Historie, this holy Father goeth forward, and saith in this wise: There mightest thou haue seen those Holie penitents, going in a malancholie maner, and loking downe to the earth: who haui^g already co^temned the thoughts of their flesh, mingled the bread which they did eat with ashes and their drinke with teares. There could not be heard among them anie other wordes, than these.

O wretch, that I am! Woe is me most miserable sinner. How iustlie, how iustlie, haue I deserued the wrath and anger of Almightie God. Pardon me, O Lord: Pardon me, O Lord. Manie of them had their tonges hanging out of their mouthes, like vnto wearied dogges, that were tired with ouermuch runing, and halfe dead, and dried vp with extreme thirst Others stood parching themselues at the Sun in the middest of sommer. And others, after a contrarie sort, suffered themselues to freese in the cold and open aier, euen in the middest of winter. Some of the^ tooke a litle water to refresh their tongue, not drinking thereof so much as was necessarie. And others likewise did eate a little bread, and the rest they
 cast from them, saying: that they were not worthy to eate the meate of men, sith they had done the deedes of beastes.


Now among such exercises, what place was there for laughing, or idle wordes, for anger, and malice? Where was there eyther Feasting, or banketting? Who was there, that tooke care how to delight and pamper the bodie with delicacie, and wantonnesse? Where was there so much as one sparckle of vaine glorie? Where were the delicate dishes and deuises of gluttonie? All their studie and care was to cry vnto our Lord both day, and night, and the sound of prayer and Meditation only was heard amongst them. There were some that stroke themselues very mightily vpon theyr breasts as if they had bin knocking at heauen gates,) and cryed out saying.

Open vnto vs, O thou mercifull Iudge, the gate which we haue through our iniquities shut so fast against vs: and other said.Psal. 79.4. Psal. 106.10.Shew thy face (O Lord) vnto vs, and wee shall be saued: an other saied. Shew thyselfe (O Lord) vnto these poore, and miserable sinners, which doe sitte in darkenesse, and in the shdadowe of death: an other saide.Luc. 1.78.Preuent vs (O Lord) speedilie with thy mercie: for we be sore empouerished. Psal. 78. verse. 78. Others said. Shall it happely please our Lorde to shew one daie his ioyfull countenance vnto vs? Or shall wee heare one daie that sweete
 voice, that saieth: vnto those that are imprisoned, Saluation:Esay. 49. verse. 9. and to those that be in darkenesse, receaue ye light.
They had death continually before their eyes, and speaking one to an other they sayed: How thinke yee brethren? What shall become of vs at that dreadfull houre? What shall our end be? Trow yee, that the sentence of our condemnation shalbe reuoked? Or shall our praiers perchance come vnto our Lords eares? And if they doe come, how shall they be receaued? What commoditie shall we haue by them? How much shall they pacifie him? For siih they proceed out of such vncleane lippes, it may be feared, that they shall finde small fauour in his sight. Who can tell, whether perhaps the holy Angels,Mat. 18. verse 10. Heb. 1.14.vnto whose custodie wee are commended, be at this present here about vs, or whether they be departed away from vs, by reason of the great stench of our sinnes? Some of them made answere vnto these demaundes, and sayed: But who knoweth,Ionas. 3.9. Quis scit, si conuertatur and ignoscat Deus, and reuertatur a furore irae suae, and non peribimus? Psa. 110.4. Psa. 144.5.(as those Penitent sinners of Niniuie saied,) whether our Lord will pardon vs, and whether he wil turne himselfe vnto vs, and not suffer vs to perish? Wherefore let vs now take good courage, and perseuere continually in crying vnto him, vntill the end of our liues: For our Lord is mercifull, and will be pacified with our perseuerance. Let vs runne my brethren, let vs runne I say, for it is very needfull, that we runne in all post
 hast, that we may speedily returne vnto the place, from whence we are fallen. Let vs runne alwaies towards that place, and let vs not in any wise pardon this our filthy flesh: but let vs continually be reuenged vpon it: yea, let vs crucifie our flesh, sith that our flesh hath first crucified vs.

Besides all this, what a meruailous thing was it: to behold the forme and euill treating of their owne bodies? They had faces like vnto dead men, and their eyes were sunke into their heades, by reason of ouer much weakenes. Their checkes were dried vp, and parched, and the haire of their eyelids falle^ away, through continuall weeping. Their knees were hardened like vnto Cammels knees, by continuall vse of payer. And their breasts were so galled with continuall knocking, that many of them auoided spittle mingled with blood. These blessed Penitents made their Petition vnto the Father of the Monasterie, (who was indeed a very Angell among men,) that he would fetter both theyr neckes, and handes in chaines, and shackle theyr feet with irons, and neuer to deliuer them from thence, vntill such time as they might be caried vnto their graues: of the which buriall also, they accounted themselues vnworthy.


But when their time of yeelding vp the Ghost approched neere, then was it more terrible to behold. They compassed the bedd of him that lay in dyinge rownd about, and demaunded of him, with
 vehement and earnest requestes, with mourning countenances, and pittifull wordes: saying. How doest thou brother? How feelest thou thy selfe? What saiest thou vnto vs? What hope haste thou? What shall become of thee? Haste thou happilie obteined thy long sute? Art thou ariued at the hauen of Saluation? Haste thou receaued no earnest pennie of thy securitie? Haste thou felt within thy heart any new light? Haste thou heard within thee any voice, that saied vnto thee: Thy sins are forgiuen thee?
Luc. 7.48. Mat. 9.22. Psal. 9.18. Mat. 22.14 Esa. 26.10.
Or: Thy Faith hath made thee safe? Or haste thou peraduenture heard anie other voice, that sayed vnto thee: Let the sinners descend downe into Hell, and all Nations that forget God? Or els: Binde him hand and foot, and cast him into the outward darkenesse. Or: Take away this wicked sinner, that he may neuer see the glorie of Almighty God? What answere makest thou, good brother vnto vs? Tell vs some thing we beseech thee: that wee may vnderstand by thee, what is reserued for vs: For thy sute is now come to an end. And what sentence thou shalt now receaue, shall neuer more be reuersed? but our cause dependeth still as yet, and expecteth for sentence. Vnto these demaundes certaine of them aunswered:
Psal. 23.
Blessed be our Lord, that hath not suffered vs to be cast into our enimies teeth. Others aunswered after a more dolesull sort. Miserable is that soule, that hath not fullie obserued his profession:
 For now shall he well vnderstand, what is prepared for him.


Now, when I had seene and heard all these thinges about mentioned, I was so wholly amazed and astonished within my selfe, that meruaile it was, that I fell not into a great extreame sadnesse, considering the negligence of my life past, and withall the slackenes of my pennance for my sinnes, being compared with the Penance of these Holie religious men.


But besides all this, what shall I say of theyr house, and lodging, in which they dwelled? For it was so foule and obscure, and so horrible and stincking withall, that certainely it was (as they tearmed it,) a very prison indeed: and such a one, as the only sight and forme thereof, was able of it selfe to baue taught a man pennance.

All this peraduenture shall seeme incredible or impossible to them that are negligent, and incredulous: But vnto the true Penitents, and to those that can well conceaue, what heauenly benefits are lost by falling into sinne, it shall appeare right well another manner of matter: For the soule that hath lost the first peace, and amitie, which he had in BAPTISME with Almighty God, and hath broken those couenantes, and promises, which hee had agreed vpon with him, and hath lost the inestimable treasure of the grace and consolations of the Holy Ghost, and hath extinguished
 the fire of Charitie, from whence the sweet teares doe proceed, when he calleth all this to minde, he is then striken and pearced vnto the very heart, with such a sharpe sorrow, and extreame pensiuenes, that he would be content, not only to abide with great patience all these trauailes and paines, but he would also euen rent and teare himselfe in peeces, yea, and crucifie himselfe, if he might lawfully doe it.
In this wise then, these Holy Fathers remembring themselues of their former happie state, in which they liued, and calling to minde those so holy and sweet spirituall exercises, wherewith they were brought vp,Iobe. 29. vers. 2.3. and 4.said with that holy ma^ Iob: who shall giue mee such grace, that I might be now in the same case, as I was in those former daies, when God had me in his custodie, and as in the time of my youth, when God was secretly in my house. When his light shined vpon my head, when I walked with his light in the darke places, when hee washed my feet with milke, and ministred vnto me out of the rocke streames of Oyle?

After this sort each one of them calling to minde particularly all theyr wonted spirituall exercises, and the great fauours, and consolations, which they had receaued of Almighty God, they wept full bitterly, and sayed among themselues: where is that wonted purity of our praier now become? Where is that so great confidence, with which wee were accustomed to pray? Where are
 those sweet teares, which were wont to trickle down in the middest of our afflictions, and griefes? Where is the glory of that most pure chastitie? Where is that faithfull loyalty, and obedience towardes our Prelate? Where is that vertue and efficacie of our praiers? All these thinges are perished, gone, and vanished away like vnto smoke. And whilest they spake these wordes, the sorowe which they conceiued for their losse was so great, and they abhorred themselues so much, that they made their requests vnto Almightie God, that he would send them all kinds of torments in this life, and take reuenge of their bodies, sith they were the occasion of their so great woe, and miserie. Some of them desired, that it might please Almighty God, to send them here in this life fome grieuous disease. Others praied that they might loose their eyes, and sight, and so be made a spectacle of misery to the whole world: Some of them requested, that they might be benu^med, and lamed both of hand and foot, that these present miseries and paines might be a meane for them to escape the miseries and paines which are to come: But I, my brethren, knew not in the world how I could continue so long time among such store of teares. For I continued with them only thirtie dayes, after which time, I returned vnto the Holy Father that gouerned in the Monasterie, and hee perceauing me so much amazed, and altered, vnderstood strait way the cause of my disquietnes, and
 said vnto mee. What is the matter, Father Iohn? Haste thou seene the battailes of those men, that fight so valiantly? Yea Father, (quoth I) I haue seene them indeed: I haue seene them, and do greatly wonder at the sight. And truely I account those far more happie, who after their fall, doe thus sorrowfully bewaile their sinnes, than others that neuer fell, and therefore neuer bewailed, and lamented, as these Penitents haue done. For it seemeth vnto mee, that the falles of these and such others (the graee of God so disposing, and working it,) haue bin occasion of this theyr wonderfull rising againe, and exaltation.


All these in a maner are the wordes of saint Iohn Climacus, who beareth witnes of all these thinges, yea, and of many others also, more wonderfull, and terrible, the which (as he saith,) he saw with his owne eyes.

This auncient History, I thought good  to rehearse in this place for many purposes. First, that wee might be ashamed, and humble our selues, when we see the cold and slacke pennances of our corrupt age, comparing the same with the feruour, and rigorous discipline of those auncient Holy Fathers.  Secondly, that we might see, how far the vertue of Charitie, and the light of the holy Ghost extendeth it selfe, the which is alwaies ready for all the faithfull, as well for them that liued in times past, as also for those, that be aliue at this present, or shalbe
 hereafter, if they endeuour to trauaile and labour in doing of Pennance, as these holy penitents haue done. Thirdly, that by this hope, and example, wee might awake our  selues out of our drowsie and heauie sleepe, and be mooued to take somewhat more paines in doing Pennance for our sinnes, than wee vse to doe: considering what exceeding great labour and paines these holy Saintes haue taken, who had none other bodies, than such as we haue, neither yet any other Lord or helper to stre^gthen the^ therein: for the examples of great acts are declared vnto vs to this end, that wee should not be discouraged to set vpo^ the lesser. True it is, that no man ought to be dismaid, if he do not so much, as these holie Fathers haue done. For like as in a mans bodie therebe manie Members, whereof some be of greater dignitie, and some of lesser:Iohn. 14. As there be diuers degrees of rewards in heauen, so are there diuer degrees of Pennances and liues, i^ this world. and as in Heauen therebe many mansions, and seates, some higher, and some lower: euen so likewise in the Catholicke Church there be diuers degrees of merits, diuers kinds of liues, and diuers sorts of Pennances, which are disposed accordingly for these mansions and seats of the kingdome of heaue^, and so that which is necessary for one kinde of life, is not necessary for another.

Neither is it necessarie, that wee should goe about to performe all those things, which we see to haue bene done by the Saints. For manie of their doings are set foorth vnto vs, rather to be wondred at tha^ to be folowed. For that which beco^meth a Gyant, is not conuenient for a dwarfe: and that which is answerable to a spirit of high and excellent capacitie, is not required in a spirit of base and lowe vnderstanding.


Of three Principall workes, with which we doe make satisfaction vnto Almightie God. THE III CHAPTER.
FOR so much as it is most proper vnto those workes, that are painefull, and laborious, to be Satisfactorie, it is found by the doctrine of the saints, and of the Catholike Church, that there be three kindes of Satisfactorie workes,^atisfacto^ie workes which are, Fasting, Almsedeedes, and praier. For al these workes, besides that they be holie, and vertuous, are also paineful vnto our flesh: and so through the griefe of the paine Satisfaction is made for the delight of sinne.
Moreouer, as in a man there are three principal things with which we doe oftentimes offend Almightie God, to wit, our
 substance, bodie, and soule: euen so reason requireth, that with each of them wee should make satisfaction vnto him: and that with al them we should make a Sacrifice vnto him: the which is done, by theise three forenamed vertues. For by almesdeeds we sacrifice vnto him our substance: by Fasting, our bodies: and by Praier, our souls.
Furthermore, sith that all sinnes are either against God, or against our selues, or against our neighbours: vnto al these three kindes of persons, these three vertues haue particular regard. For Fasting serueth for our selues: our substance for our neighbours: and praier for God.


Of the first satisfactorie worke, which is Fasting. THE IIII CHAPTER.
VVHEREFORE he that desireth earnestly, and withall his hart, to make satisfactio^ vnto Almighty God, must principally exercise himselfe in these three vertues. And first, let him begin with Fasting, the which (as we haue saied) with the griefe of the paine maketh recompence for the delight of sin, and chastiseth the flesh: which for the greater part was the cause of
 al our sinnes. Moreouer, (Saint BarnadS. Barnard. saieth) whilest we by fasting do absteine from things, which be lawfull, we obteine thereby pardon and forgiuenes of things vnlawful. And (as the same Holie Father saieth) Fasting is not onlie a washing a way of our ordinarie sinnes, but also ameane for the extirpation of vices: And it doth not onlie dispose the soule to be apt to obteine pardo^ of the faulte,The fruites of Fasting. but also increase of grace: and not only to cancel the sins past, which we haue co^mitted, but to preserue vs also euen from those which we might commit in time to come. For Fasting (as Petrus de RauennaPetrus de Rauenna. saith) is a fortresse of God, a castle of Christ abulwarke of the Holie Ghost, a banner of faith, ensigne of Chastitie, and a standard of holines. Fasting (saieth S. AugustineS. Augustine.) purgeth the soule, lifteh vp the vnderstanding, subdueth the flesh vnto the spirit, frameth the harte to be contrite, and humble, causeth the cloudes of concupiscence to vanish awaie, quencheth the heats of leacherie, and kindleth the light of chastitie. Fasting is a bridling of our appetites, a mortification of our passions, a discipline of our life, and a temperature of couetousnes. Fasting is the brother of pouertie, the sonne of penance, the Mother of chastitie, the companion
 of praier, the destroier of selfe-loue, the keeper of health, and a most effectuall meane to pacifie the anger of ALMIGHTIE GOD, and to obteine his grace and fauour.Ionas. 3. vers. 10. 1. Reg. 7. vers. 6. Daniel. 1. vers. 8.12. 4 Reg. 2. Exod. 34. vers. 28. Math. 4. vers. 2. Marc. 1. vers. 13. By Fasting the NINIVITES pacified GOD. By Fasting the people of Israell became humble, and were alwaies succoured in their necessities. By Fasting those three young men were defended from the furie of the King of BABILON. By Fasting Elias was taken vp in the fierie Chariot. With fasting Moyses receaued the lawe fro^ God. And with fasting the Son of God prepared himselfe for preaching of the Gospell: not that he had anie need so to doe, but for our example.
Wherefore, he that desireth earnestly to make Satisfaction vnto Almighty God, to be reuenged of his enimies, the flesh, the world, and the diuell, and to enioy all these priuiledges, he must arme himselfe with a couragious and Holie hatred against himselfe, (I meane against his owne flesh,Ezech. 18. vers. 21.27 1. Cor. 11. vers. 31.) doing iustice vpon the same, and chastising it with often fasting, watching, discipline hairecloth, rough aparrel, hard bedding, and with the greatest austerity of life that he may. For by these meanes he shall not only make Satisfaction to Almightie God, but
 he shall also triumph ouer the mightiest of all his enimies, and shall make his bodie, and foule,1. Cor. 6. vers. 15. Rom. 12. a most liuely te^ple of the holy ghost.
But al this ought to be done, with great discretion, and moderation. For we ought in such sort to chastice our enimie, that we kil not the man, and destroy not the bodie, of which we stand in need, for the seruice of Almightie God. For to this end God commaunded in the law,Why salt was commaunded to be offered in al sacrifices. Leuitic. 2. vers. 13. that in al Sacrifices there should be offered vp salt: to signifie vnto vs, the discretion and moderation which we ought to vse in al these spiritual Sacrifices. For want whereof many spiritual persons haue come to such excesse, that they haue ouerthrowne and destroied their complextions, wherby they haue failed in the midst of their iournie. And hereof it commeth, that afterwardes for the recouerie of their health, they were constrained wholy to leaue of al their spiritual exercises, and (which is worse) euen to leaue of that verie vertue of Fasting, which dependeth of the same exercises.


Of the second satisfactory worke, which is giuing of Almes. THE V. CHAPTER.
BVT to the end that this Fasting may be the more profitable vnto vs, it is
 necessary to accompany the same with the works of mercy. For (as S. AugustineSaint Augustine. saieth,) fasting without charity, and almesdeedes, may be likened vnto a lamp without oyle. And the same holie Father saieth in an other place: O my brethre^, giue almes, that your praiers may be heard, and that Christ may helpe you to amend your liues, and graunt you forgiuenes of your sinnes past, and deliuer you from al such miseries, as are to come, and giue you eternal felicity. And to this end saieth likewise Petrus de RauennaPetrus de Rauenna. that although fasting doe take way the infirmities of vices, the passions of the flesh, and the occasions of sinnes yet doth it not giue perfect health, without the ointme^t of mercie, the flood of pittie, and the help of Almesedeeds. Fasting (saith he) healeth the woundes of sinnes:Tob. 4.11. Luke. 11.41. Eccles 4.33. but it taketh not awaie the scarres of them, without the baulme of Mercie. Almesdeeds (saith Holie Tobias) deliuereth from sinne, and from death, and suffereth not the soule to goe into darknes. And Ecclesiasticus saith, that like as water quencheth fire: eue^ so doe almesdeeds quench sins. Vpon such wordes S. AmbroseSaint Ambrose. writeth thus: Great vndoubtedly is the force of Almesdeeds, sith that with the fou^taine of her beneuole^ce it quencheth the flames of sins, and with the
 flood of her bountifulnes it extinguisheth the heat of vices: and that in such sort, that although almighty God be offended, and prouoked to wrath: yet through vertue of Almesdeedes he pardoneth him, whome he determined before to haue punished for his sinnes. And Saint Augustine saieth, that like as the fire of Hell is quenched with the washing of the wholesome water of Baptisme: euen so is the flame of sinnes quenched with Almesdeedes, and workes of iustice. So that the forgiuenes of sinnes, which is giuen once in Baptisme, is daily imparted vnto vs, through the exercises of Almesdeedes, as it were, by an other second baptisme. True it is that the comparison is not alike in al partes: neuerthelesse it maketh very much for the commendation and glorie of almesdeedes, to be likened vnto this heauenly washing, which is the fountaine and gate of life. Wherefore, the Prophet Daniell found none other meane to deliuer the king Nabuchodonosor, from that so terrible sentence, which was thundered against him from heauen, but only to giue him counsaile, that he should leane vnto this holie anchor of almesdeedes: saying vnto him. Take, O King, my counsaile, and redeeme thy sins with almesdeedes, and thine iniquities
 with the workes of mercie bestowed vpo^ the poore. This Prophet knew right well,Dan. 4.24. The great commoditie that co^meth by Almesdeeds Math. 7.2. how much it did import towardes the finding of Mercie in the sight of Almightie God, to vse Mercie towardes men: sith that it is certaine, that, with the same measure, with which we measure vnto others, shall we be measured againe.Mat. 25.35 40.42.43. And therefore in the day of Iudgement, there shalbe verie great reioising for the fulfilling of the workes of mercie: because at that time, these workes shall be the verie balance and measure, wherby the liues of Christians, shalbe examined, and iudged. Whereupon S. Aug.S. August. saith thus. It is writte^: Redeeme thy sins with almesdeedes. And the reason wherefore our Sauiour esteemeth the giuing of Almes so much is, because by them he commeth in the end to reward his Elest, for hee will say: Come ye blessed of my Father,Mat. 25. and possesse the kingdome, which hath bin prepared for you, from the beginning of the world: for I haue bin hungry, and you haue giuen me to eate: I haue thirsted, and you haue giuen me to drinke, etc. As if hee should say more plainely. It is a hard matter to examine diligently your liues, and to vse mercy towards you: but that notwithstanding, enter ye in to the euerlasting Kingdome. For I was hungrie, and yee gaue mee to eate, etc. So that yee enter not into the Kingdome of Heauen, because yee haue not sinned, but because yee haue Redeemed
(...)
 hath: because the one giueth his goods, but the other giueth his heart.
But it is very much to be noted, what S. AugustineS. August. writeth touching this matter, saying:There is no worke of mercy greater, than to pardo^ them that haue offended vs. that although there be many kinds of mercies, by which we may obteine forgiuenes of our sins: yet there is none greater, than to forgiue him from the bottome of our heart, that hath committed an offence against vs. In like manner saieth a certaine Holy Father: O man (saith hee) consider that thou canst not be without sinne. And wouldest thou haue thy sinnes alwaies forgiuen thee? Well then, forgiue others alwaies, as thou wouldest that thine owne sinnes should be forgiuen thee. And if thou wilt so doe: I giue thee thus much to vnderstand, that in forgiuing, and pardoning others, thou giuest pardo^ to thy selfe. The very same doth another Holy Father also say in these wordes. Hee that hath not to redeeme such as be in Captiuitie, nor to cloath the naked, let him endeuour, that he keepe no hatred in his heart against his neighbours: and let him take heed, that he doe not one shrewd turne for another vnto his enimies: but rather let him loue the^, and pray for them and put his confidence in the mercie and promises of our Lord, and him
 say thus vnto him. Giue mee O Lord, because I haue giuen: and forgiue mee, because I haue forgiuen.


Of the third Satisfactorie worke, which is Praier. THE VI. CHAPTER.
PRAIER is more auaileable than all this, not onely to fulfill the third part of Pennance, (which is Satisfaction) but also to attaine vnto the first part, (which is Contrition.) Forsomuch as by meanes of praier, our Lord doth oftentimes powre this spirit of Contrition into the soules of sinners, and by the same doe they also obtaine forgiuenes of their sins: as it apeareth by the Publican mentioned in the gospell, and by the Prodigall Son also,Luk. 18.13 Luk. 15.11 which two by praier obteined the same. In consideration whereof the Prophet OseeOsee 14.3. giueth vs counsaile, that wee should by this meane returne vnto God, saying: Bring wordes with you, and returne againe vnto our Lord, and say vnto him. Take away from vs, O Lord, all iniquities, and receaue our good hearts, and we will offer vnto thee the sacrifice of our lips. With such kind of wordes
 treat without our Lord in praier, and molifie that diuine heart, which is far harder, than any Adamant towardes the proude, and much softer than the molten wax towardes the penitent and humble. But tell me, who hath euer hitherto called vpon our Lord, with this humble and penitent heart, that hath not felt forthwith in his soule the signes and messengers of his clemencie? For so hath hee promised by the Prophet,Ioel. 2.32. saying: Whosoeuer hee be, that shall call vpon our Lord, (in this sort,) shall be saued.
But to the end, that this praier may with more facilitie ascend vp vnto the high throne, it shall be necessarie to ioyne with it those two winges,Fasting and Almesdeeds are the two winges of praier. whereof wee haue already treated: to wit, Fasting, and Almesdeedes For with these winges praier flieth very swiftly, and neuer staieth vntill shee come before our Lord. The reason of this combination and brotherhood is, because mercy bringeth to passe, that our praier commeth not emptie in the sight of Almighty God, and that it may not be tearmed a dry or withered praier. Likewise by shewing mercy vnto our neighbour, wee prouoke almighty God to be merciful vnto vs againe. As S. Iohn ClimacusSaint Iohn Climacu^. saieth in these wordes. If thou be a louer of praier,
 thou shalt likewise be a louer of mercy: for praier will so work, that thou shalt be mercifully heard of Almighty God, because thou haste also heard thy neighbour, for the loue of him: but fasting helpeth praier,Fasting helpeth praier. by disposing a man thereunto: for in disburdening the bodie fro^ the heauie waight of meates, it causeth it to be the lighter to flie a loft. Wherfore the praier of him that fasteth, (besides that it is more Satisfactorie) is also more Spirituall and more pure. For which cause the same Holie Father saieth: that the soule of him, that fasteth, praieth with sobriety, and attention: but the soule of the glutton, and disordered eater, is full of fantasies, and filthie thoughts.
And like as fasting helpeth praier, euen so praier helpeth Fasting. For (as Saint BarnardSaint Barnard. saieth) praier obteineth vertue, and strength, to be able to fast: and fasting procureth grace to praie. So that the strength and power, which a man hath need of to chastice his flesh, is giuen him by the tast and spirit of praier: forsomuch as euery one of these vertues taketh vpon it that part, which apperteineth vnto it, in the Sanctification of man. For (as Saint IeromeSaint Ierome. saieth,) by Fasting the vices of the bodie are cured, and by praier the diseases of the soule.
And
Wee finde then (according as it hath beene declared) that praier besides that it is a worke Satisfactorie, (which is the thing that belongeth vnto this present treatise,) is also a worke Meritorious, Impetratiue, and a causer of deuotion. As concerning that part, that it is Satisfactory, we discharge thereby the debts of our sinnes. In that it is Meritorious, we deserue thereby increase of grace, and glory. In that it is Impetratiue, we obtaine by the same, the thing which we humbly desire. And in that it is a worker and causer of deuotion, we get thereby a new light, a taste of God, a renewing of good purposes, and desires, a peace and quietnesse in our soules, and a strength and promptnes to doe good workes, which is the thing, that is properlie called deuotion.The fruite of praier. These foure so principall fruites doth the vertue of praier bring with it. And therefore it is requisite, that we doe continuallie exercise our selues in the same, with al the perseuerance, and attention, that may possiblie be had.
But because wee shall treate of this vertue of praier hereafter more at large, I will say no more at this present, but referre the Christian Reader vnto the praiers and considerations, which we haue set out, where
 we treated of Contrition. And let him exercise himselfe certaine dayes in the same, both before and after Confession, that by meanes of them, he may stir vp in himselfe a sorrowfull griefe, and repentance for his sinnes, and may also by them make Satisfaction vnto Almighty God, which is the thing that we doe here pretend. And because one of the thinges, that serueth most for this purpose, is the consideration of the benefits of Almighty God, and of our sins, herein ought hee principally to exercise himselfe, according as wee haue in that place declared. And after that hee hath spent some time in those praiers, then may hee passe forwardes vnto other kindes of praiers, and considerations, which are hereafter set forth in the booke of praier: that through varietie of exercises, hee may receaue more light, and more taste, and lesse irkesomnesse in such matters, as appertaine vnto Almighty God.





The third treatise. How wee ought to prepare our selues for the receauing of the most blessed sacrament of the Aultar.


Panis quem ego dabo caro mea est pro mundi vita. Ioh. 6.52
Accipite, and comedite: Hoc est Corpus meum. Mat. 26.26.
Probet aute^ seipsum homo: and sic de pane illo edat, and de calice bibat Qui enim manducat, and bibit indigne, iudicium sibi manducat, and bibit, non diiudicans Corpus domini. 1. Cor. 11.28.29.



Of the preparation which is requisite, before wee come to receaue the most blessed sacrament of the Aultar. THE I. CHAPTER.
HAVING alreadie spoken of the Sacrament of Pennance, it is meete, that we doe now treate of the most blessed sacrament of the Aultar, which is wont to follow
 after it. And here I should first treate of the vertue and wonderfull effects of this most holy sacrament: But for so much as in this matter there is very much to be saide, and the breuity of this Memoriall can not beare so long a discourse: I will therefore treat only of the preparation that is required of those, that come to receiue this most holie Misterie. For this is of so great importance, that looke what preparatio^ shall be made for the receauing of it, such shall the grace be, which shalbe giuen vnto him proportionablie by the same. This Sacrament is of infinite vertue, as well because it containeth in it Christ our Sauiour, God and Man, (who is the fountaine of grace,) as also because by receauing him, there is Communicated here vnto vs the vertue of his Passion, which is of infinite valew.The Sacrament of the Aultar worketh according to the disposition and preparation o^ him that receaueth i^ And for this cause, how much greater the preparation shalbe, whe^ we come to receaue him, so much the greater shall the grace be, which by the receauing shalbe graunted vnto vs. We see, that hee which goeth to fetch water out of the Sea, the greater his vessell is, the more water hee bringeth with him: for as he cannot want water by reason of any scarcitie in the Sea, and yet may want it by reason of the littlenes of
 his vessell: euen so it fareth with them, that come to receaue this diuine Sacrament, which is the Sea of all graces. And thus is that verse of the Psalmesalme. 80 11. here verified, that saieth. Open the mouth of thy hart, and I will fill euerie voide place in the same.
It is also a Rule of Philosophie, that all causes doe worke according vnto the disposition,2. de anima 24. The causes doe work according to the disposition of the subiect. they finde in the matter, or thing subiect. And therefore fire burneth in dry wood, and not in greene wood, by reason that the one is apt to take fire, and not the other. Wherefore, sith that Christ is present in this Sacrament, who is the general cause of all graces, it is certaine that according vnto the disposition he shal find in the soule, that receaueth him, euen so will he worke in the same, and communicate his grace vnto him. This do al those that doe celebrate, and communicate often times, trie to be true by experience. For they proue it daily, that such deuotion and fruit is obteined by this most blessed Sacrament, as the preparation is, wherewith they come vnto it.
And not only the hope of this fruit, but also the feare of our own domage ought to make vs diligent in preparing of our soules thereunto. For it is agenerall Rule in
 all the Sacraments of the law of grace,The Holie Sacraments be hurtfull to them that receaue the^ vnworthily. that they be of exceeding great profit to him, that receaueth the^ worthily, euen so they may be occasion of exceeding great hurt vnto him, that receaueth them vnworthily. And agreable hereunto saieth a Holie Father, that as the Sun, the water, and the aier, doe helpe the plantes to increase, and bring foorth fruit, when they haue life, and are well rooted in the earth, but if contrariwise they be not liuely, and wel rooted, the^ the very selfe same causes and influences do drie them vp, and cause the^ to wither the sooner: euen so likewise this most blessed sacrament of the Aultar, (which is the cause of al graces) maketh those soules, that are liuely, and rooted in Charity, to increase and wax better, and better, but co^trariwise, those soules, that are not so rooted, the oftner they receaue, the more are they blinded, and hardened, and wax worse and worse. And this commeth not by meanes of the blessed sacrament, but through their owne euil preparatio^: the which thing is also very agreeable vnto the nature of this most holy sacrament, (which is indeed the spiritual food of the soule.) For as the corporal meat doth sustaine and nourish mens bodies that are sound, and in health, but causeth great
 hurt to the same bodies, when they are diseased, and full of corrupt humors, (by occasion wherof the Phisitions at such times vse to prescribe vnto their Patients fasting, and keeping of diet,) euen in like manner doth this diuine meate worke: which for this cause is true life to some, and by occasion it may be death vnto others, according vnto the diuersitie of their good, and euill dispositions, and preparations.
But what preparation that ought to be, which is required for the receauing of this so high a Misterie, euen the selfe same Philosphie and naturall order telleth vs. For we see, that naturall formes, the more excellent they be, the more noble disposition is required for the same. As it appeareth euidently in the very same corporall meat, whereof we speake before: the which is first digested and prepared in the stomake, to goe vnto the liuer, and there is disposed with an other more noble forme of blood, to runne to the heart: where it is last of all disposed with an other more noble forme to passe vnto the braine where it receaueth his last perfection. So that in euery one of these three places it is fined, and made more perfect, to attaine vnto an other more Noble forme. And this is done in such order, that the perfection
 of the forme that goeth before, is a disposition for that which commeth after. And that which is the end of the one, is the dispositio^ to the other. Euen so likewise must we presuppose, that this very same order and proportion is required in spirituall matters, and especially in the Sacraments: the which, the more excellent they are; the greater preparation and puritie is required for the receauing of them. For some sacraments are such,The Sacraments the more excellent they are, the greater preparation is required towards the receauing of them. that to receaue them worthliy, it sufficeth only to be sorrowfull and truely repentant for our sinnes, without any necessitie of Confessing them: but rhis most blessed Sacrament of the Aultar, whereof we now speake, is of so great puritie, and excellency, (because it conteineth in it Almightie God himselfe,) that, besides the premisses, it requireth for preparation an other Sacrament, which is the Sacrament of Confession: when there hath bin any deadlie sinne committed before. Yea,Confession is requisite before we Co^municate. and moreouer besides Confession, to receaue it more worthily, it requireth an actuall deuotio^ and reuerence: the which deuotion cannot be had without an actuall attention and consideration of such thinges as appertaine vnto God, and therefore it is meete to sequester from our soule
 for that time all imaginations and cares of worldlie affaires,Solitarines of the soule. to the end, that it maie more freely and without impediment, fixe her mind vpon Almightie God vvhereby it appeareth, that a man should not at that present content him-selfe with going free and clensed from al sinnes, but that he should endeuour also to go free and cleane from all those thoughts, and cares, that might be anie impediment to this attention, and deuotion. The which thing is very liuely represented vnto vs, by that solitarines, which Moises vsed, when he went vp into the hil to speake with Almighty God, vnto whome Commaundement was giue^, that he alone should goe vp to the topp of the mountaine,Exod. 19. and. 24. and that in all partes about the hill there should appeare none other, neither man, nor beast, great, nor small, but only he him selfe alone. And our Lord added also vnto this solitarines a certaine great cloud, and darknes, wherin Moises should enter, and talke with him: to the end, that whilest he was speaking with Almightie God, as well the cloud, as the solitarie place, should take from his sight all that, which was not God. For in this wise ought he to approach vnto this lord, that wil worthily come vnto him: to wit, with a mind so solitary, so closely recollected, so
 forgetfull of al earthly things, and so atte^t and rauished in God, that during that time it might seeme vnto him, that there is none other thing in the world, but onlie God and him selfe. This verie same thing the said Prophet Moises signified vnto vs, by putting of his shooes,Exod. 3. vers. 5. and standing barefoot vpon the ground, when Almightie God appeared vnto him. For whosoeuer will come vnto Almightie God, he must goe likewise barefoot, and stripped cleane naked from al worldlie and transitory affaires. And although this seeme impossible to mans nature, yet vnto Charitie and vnto the grace of God it is not so. For as the spouse saieth in the Canticles:Cant. 8. vers. 6. Loue is as strog as death. So that like as corporal death maketh a man with out sence of al worldly things:The force of charitie, and of the loue Of God. euen so perfect Charitie possesseth in such sort the hart of man, and so tra^sformeth it vnto God, that it causeth it to forgett all other things besides God.
I know right wel, that this death is not for al perso^s, but only peculiar for this heaue^ly spouse, (to wit, for that soule, that deserueth this name and dignitie.) Neuertheles it is required, and commended vnto all persons, for the dignitie, and excellencie of this diuine Sacrame^t: the which as it is the bread
 bread of Angels, so it requireth the purity of Angels for the receiuing of it. But for al that our Lord is well contented, if we haue but some part of that purity: that is to say, if we endeuour to do as much as lieth in vs to haue at that time this forgetfulnes of all things, and this actual deuotion and atte^tion vnto him. And now to treat of this preparation more particularly, I say, that he, that wil come to receaue this most Holie Sacrament, as he ought to doe, must labour to bring with him these things following.


The first thing, that is required in him, that will receaue this most blessed Sacrament: is, to haue a cleane and pure conscience THE II CHAPTER.
THE first thing, that is requisite for the worthie receiuing of this most blessed Sacrament, is, that aman doe acknowledge with all humilitie, that no diligence of men, nor of Angels, is sufficient to make this preparation, vnlesse the ha^d of Almightie God doe come betwene, and doe speciallie helpe vs therein. For as no man can dispose himselfe for the increasing
 of grace, without grace: euen so no man can dispose himselfe to receaue Almightie God worthilie, without the special helpe of God himselfe. And therefore he must be cried and called vpon with humble and feruent desires, that it may please him with his owne hand to cleanse and prepare the house, wherin he himselfe shalbe lodged. We see, that when aking intendeth to lodge in a village, he looketh not that the owner of the house should prouide him a lodging, according as the maiestie of his princely entertainme^t requireth, (because the poore inhabitor of that place is not of ability to do it,) but the king himself sendeth before his harbingers, and purueiours, with such furniture and orname^ts of houshold, as are seemely for his roiall person. The which being so, we haue iust cause to become humble suters vnto our Lord, that sith he wil of his great goodnes, and mercie, vouchsafe to lodge in our cottage, that it may please him, in respect of this benefit, to graunt vs an other benefit, that is, to send the Holie Ghost with furniture of all his vertues and heaue^ly gifts: to the end, that after this sort, through the grace and vertue of Almighty God, the house in which god himself must be lodged, may be decked, and
 prepared. Now that this may be done, as it behoueth the first thing that is requisite thereunto, is cleannes of conscience: that is to say,We must be cleane from all deadly sinne, when we come to receaue the blessed Sacrament. Psal. 15.6. that we goe pure and cleane from all deadly sin: whereof the Prophet speaketh, saying: I will wash my handes among the Innocents, and will compasse about thine Aultar, O Lord? Where first he saieth, that he will wash his hands, (to wit, the sinfulnes of his deedes,) and afterwardes, that hee will approach to the Aultar, that is to say, vnto the table of our Lord. And for this verie cause hath the Apostle threatned vs so terribly, when he saied: Whosoeuer shall eate this bread,Cor. 11.27.29. and drinke the cup of our Lord vnworthily, shall be guiltie of the bodie and blood of our Lord, etc. For not discerning our Lords body. By which words S. Paul giueth vs to vnderstand, that they that approach to receaue this diuine Misterie, being in deadlie sin, doe commit the like horrible offence, as those Iewes did, that Crucified Christ: forsomuch as both the one and the other doe sin against the selfe same body and blood of Christ, though it be after a diuers sort.
Moreouer, what other thing can ensue by ioyning together two thinges,Christ and a sinner can not be ioyned together. which are so contrarie one to the other, as Christ, and a sinner, but the corruption of the one by the other: for things that are a like, may
 easily be ioyned together: as Iron with Iron, and water with water: but things, that are contrarie, (as water and fire,) can by no meanes be ioyned together, but that the one will corrupt the other. Wherefore sith that by meane of this most blessed sacrament, man is ioyned with Christ, what other thing is there to be looked for of this ioyning, but the corruption of the weaker part? How shall the good ioyne together with the euill, the cleane with the vncleane, the humble with the proude, the meeke with the furious, and the mercifull with the cruell. And therefore it is conuenient, that there be some kinde of likenes and resemblance betweene the Christian, and Christ, to ioyne him worthily vnto Christ: all which likenes sin destroieth, whe^ it is not purged by penance. And although all deadly sins do worke this effect,Enmitie and dishonestie are most co^trarie to the sacrament of the Aultar. yet are there two, which doe it chiefly aboue the rest: to wit, hatred, and dishonest vncleane life, the which vices do repugne most particularly against the nature of this blessed Sacrament: For as touching the first, this blessed Sacrament is a Sacrament of loue, and of vnion: forsomuch as in the same the faithfull doe participate of one very same meate, and of one verie same Spirite,
 which maketh al the faithfull one same thing through loue. And to signifie this vnion S. AugustineS. Augustine. saieth, that our Lord instituted this most Holy Sacrament in such kind of thinges, that of many become one, as bread and wine, (for bread is made of manie graines of wheate, and wine of manie grapes,) to giue vs thereby to vnderstand, that this diuine Sacrament, which is ministred in those two kindes, worketh this same effect in al such, as receaue it worthily: That is to say, it maketh of many hartes one hart, by communicating vnto them al one same spirit, when they receaue it. Which thing being so, what can be more absurd, than to come to receaue a Sacrament of vnion with a hart deuided? vvhat is this els,How hatred and enmitie be contrarie to this blessed sacrament. but to desire the Surgeon to close vp the wound, and thou on the other side to labour alwaies to keepe it ope^? surely, it is no lesse absurd for vs to come to receaue this spirituall medicine (which hath uertue to close vp the vvoundes of hatred, and euill vvill, and to ioyne together againe the harts which are deuided,) if we on the other side doe intend of set purpose to resist this benefit, and with particular enmity and dissention to breake the vnion of peace, which this medicine worketh

He then, that will auoide this inconuenience, let him not aduenture to approach vnto this Holy Table, vnlesse he doe first resolue with himselfe to fulfill that Commandeme^t of our Sauiour, where he saith. If thou doe offer vp thine offering before the Aultar, and shalt there remember,Math. 5. that thy brother hath ought against thee: leaue thine offering before the Aultar, and goe first of all, and reconcile thy selfe with thy brother. And after that this is done, thou maiest returne, and offer vp thine offering. Now with this manner of Satisfaction, or at the least with a firme determination to doe the same, (according to the iudgement of a discreet Ghostly Father,) a man ought to come vnto this heauenlie Table: For whosoeuer doth otherwise, vndoubtedly the Maister of the feast will say vnto him. Friend, how haste thou entred in here, not hauing a wedding garment? that is,Math. 22. vers. 12. the vertue of Charitie: which as the Apostle Saint Peeter saieth,1. Pet. 4. vers. 8. couereth the multitude of sinnes. And hee hath good cause to feare, least not hauing what to answere vnto that demaund, the Maister of the feast do command him, (as foloweth in the Gospell,) to be bound hand and foote, and to be cast into the fire. The other sin that is contrary to this most blessed Sacrament, is euerie
 kinde of dishonest filthines,All dishonest filthines of life is contrarie to this blessed sacrament. and vncleannes of life. For this most holy sacrament (which conteineth in it that virgins flesh gathered together of the most pure and virginall entrailes of our blessed Lady) requireth such a passing cleannes both of body and soule, that euen to haue had in a dreame some illusion of the diuell, by dreaming of carnall pleasures,Summa. S. Thom. 3. part. quest. 80. artic. 7. holy men haue thought to be a sufficient cause to stay a man from approaching vnto this diuine sacrament, vnles it be at such a time as whe^ either our obedience or some special and sole^ne feast do binde vs thereunto: or els when a ma^ findeth himselfe no lesse prepared and deuout when it happeneth, tha^ if it had not happened at all. Yea, and S. BernardS. Bernard. counsaileth vs, that when this illusio^ chaunceth, we should abstaine, not only from receiuing the most blessed Sacrament, but also fro^ helping the Priest to Masse: (so great is the puritie and cleannes, which is required for this holy Mistery.)1. Cor. 7.5. and 35. For if to attend vnto praier only, the Apostle willed, that maried folke should abstaine from the company of their wiues: how much more ought they to abstaine, when they come to receaue this diuine Sacrament, where Almighty God is corporally receaued? And if in the old law
 one onely dishonest dreame caused a man to be banished for all the whole day following from the tents,Deut. 23.10. and 14. and company of the people of God: how much more should it now banish him from the Communion, and participation of God himselfe.
It is also meete and conuenient, that we goe cleane and pure, when we come to receaue this blessed Sacrament, not only fro^ deadly sins, but also euen from veniall sins:The cleanes from venial sinnes is meete, for the receauing of this Holy sacrament. Summa. S. The. 3. pa^t. ques. 79. artic. 8 Note, that veniall sins doe quench the feruour of deuotion. Before we doe communicate, it is good to say the confiteo^ etc. We are bound of necessitie to Confesse all deadly sins before we Communicate.Concil. Trident. Ses. 13 cap. 7. and can. 11. For euen this kinde of sins although they quench not the fire of Charitie, yet doe they quench the feruour of deuotio^, which is the most proper preparation that is required for the receauing of this diuine Sacrament. And to the end, that we may be also cleansed of these veniall sinnes, it is meete and conuenient, that before we come to Communicate, there be made some confession of them, or at the least some repentance and sorrow for them, or els some other holy exercises of loue and deuotion: that by these meanes the feruour, and actuall deuotion, which was lost by those sins, may be recouered againe. And whosoeuer doth none of all these, shal not be excused, at the least of a grieuous veniall sin, for this his negligence, and shall loose verie much of the sweetnesse and refection
 of this Holy Sacrament, which is the proper effect, that it worketh in such soules as come to receaue it with this preparation: But he that hath fallen into any deadly sin (besides the repentance spoken of before) is bound of necessity to confesse the same Sacramentally vnto his Ghostly Father, vnder paine of deadlie sin, as it is expresly commaunded in the, Holy Generall Councell of Trent.


The second thing that is required for the receauing of the most Blessed Sacrament, is puritie of intention. THE III CHAPTER.
THE second thing that is required to Communicate worthily, is to haue an vprightnesse and purenesse of intention: that is, to doe it for that end, for which it ought to be done: For sith that the intention is the principall circumstance of all our workes: it is that, which ought principallie to be considered, as in all other workes, so especially in this: least by doing otherwise we should peruert Gods Ordinance, by vsing that thing to one end, which he hath ordeined for an other. And
 to the intent,The diuerse endes and intentions of such as doe communicat. some euell priests saie Masse principallie for gaine. leuit. 10. vers. 1. Numer 3.4. Num. 26.61. that this matter may the better be vnderstood, it shall doe well to declare here, what be the ends and respects of those persons, which doe Communicate either worthily, or vnworthily: that wee may therby more plainely perceaue, what that is, which we ought to folow in this behalfe.
For there be some Priestes, that are moued principally to say Masse for the temporal gaines sake, which they hope to haue by the sacrifice. These may well be resembled vnto Aarons two sonnes, who offered vp Sacrifice vnto Almightie God with other mens fire: For they are moued to celebrate, not with the fire of the loue of God, but with the feruour and greedy couetousnes of money. Wherefore, like as fire issued then out of the Sanctuarie,Leuitic. 10. vers. 2. Numer. 3. vers. 4. and burned those two sons in a moment: euen so these haue good cause to feare, least the like punishment may hapen vnto them.
Others there be,Some do receaue the blessed Sacrament for feare of punishment: but ae christian ought rather to suffer death than to receaue the Caluinists communion. Ester. 1. that come to receaue this most blessed Sacrament, because they cannot otherwise choose, but are constrained thereunto by force, or for feare of punishment, (as many euill Christians vse to doe, when they receaue the blessed sacrament at Easter) who are accustomed to
 come vnto our Lords Table, like men, that were haled thither by the hair of the head, and as though they went to hanging. Such persons should consider, that as no man entered in to king Assuerus pallace, being apparelled with base and vile garments: euen so ought none to enter into this holie pallace, and receaue this diuine Sacrament, with such a base and seruile mind. That which was instituted for loue, ought also to be receaued with loue. For it is not meete, that that should be receaued with a seruile feare, which Almighty God ordeined with a fatherlie loue. And therfore he that entereth after this sort to receaue this most blessed Sacrament, hath great cause to feare, least those wordes of the Gospell (whereof we spake a litle before) be not likewise said vnto him.Mat. 22.12 Friend, how hast thou entred in here, not hauing awedding garment.
There be others also, which come to receaue this Holie Sacrament among the presse of the people for companies sake,Some doe communicate for companies sake. and because they will doe, as other of theyr neighbours and friendes doe, without hauing that hunger, and without procuring to haue such preparation and amendment of life, as is required for the same.
There be also other kind of persons not
 far vnlike vnto these, which are those,Some doe communicate for custome sake. that doe Communicate for custome onely. As some doe, who because they obserue it as a certaine custome to Communicate euerie so many dayes, they come vnto this diuine Mistery, without hauing or procuring such deuotio^, as they ought to haue. The which sort of folks should confider, that although this custome be a good custome, yet this is not a businesse, that ought to be done for custome only, but for the fruite, that is to be looked for hereby, and that with the preparation, which is requisite to be had for the enioying of this fruite.
Others there be likewise,Some doe communicate only to obtaine a sensible deuotion. For wbat end wee must desire sensible deuotion. and spirituall consolations. that come to Communicate with a spirituall greedines: that is to say, with an appetite and desire to feele in this blessed sacrament some sweetnes and sensible deuotion, accounting this as the last end of their receauing, and not directing this kinde of deuotion vnto that end, whereunto it ought to be directed: which is to embrace mortification, and the Crosse of Christ, and to serue our Lorde with greater promptnesse, and better good will.
All these ends and respects of these men are mere ouer-thwart, and as it were certaine false by doores, to enter in and robbe
 like a theefe, and not to receaue the graces of our Lord, as a faithfull seruant ought to do. Let vs therfore enter in by those gates, through which the Saintes haue entred in before vs. And let vs endeuour to bring with vs that intention, which they had. The which was not alwaies after one sort, but after many and diuers sortes, as Saint BonauentureS. Bonauenture. declareth in these wordes.
The affections and intentions of those that come to say Masse, or to Communicate, are manie. Some are mooued with the loue of God:For what good endes many doe communicate.that they may by meanes of this blessed Sacrament, bring ofte^times theyr beloued vnto the house of their soule, and so more sweetly embrace him, and keepe him with the^,  and through this Holy vnion enkindle themselues  the more in his loue. Others are mooued to come thereunto by the knowledge of their owne infirmitie and weakenesse: that they may by the fauour, and help of this Heauenlie Phisition, be cured and  healed of their diseases. Others are mooued therevnto by the vnderstanding of their sinnes and offences: to the end, that by meanes of this diuine Oblation and Sacrifice of health, they may be purged,  and pardoned. Others are brought thereunto through the griefe or vexation of some trouble or temptation: to the end, that by the vertue of him, who is omnipotent, they may be deliuered from their aduersities, and defended from the diuell their enemie:
 Others are moued rather with a desire of some  particular grace: that by meanes of him, vnto whom the Father denieth nothing, they may obteine the thing that they desire. Others are moued  with a thankefull acknowledging of benefits receaued: considering that we of our part cannot offer vnto the Father a thing more acceptable for those benefits which hee hath bestowed vpon vs, tha^ to receaue the Cup of saluation, which he communicateth vnto vs. Others are mooued with a desire  to praise almighty God, and his Saintes: forsomuch as we cannot honour the^ with a greater Honour, than by offering vnto Almighty God of our part in remembrance of the^, this sacrifice of praise.  Others are moued with an earnest desire they haue of their neighbors Saluation, and with a compassio^ of their afflictio^s, and miseries knowing, right wel: that there is nothing more auaileable in the sight of the Heauenly Father for the quicke, and the dead, than the pretious blood of his onely begotten sonne, which was shed both for the one, and the other. Hitherto are the wordes of Saint Bonauenture.
Now he that desireth to know, what is the pure and right intention, which is required for the receauing of this most blessed Sacrament, let him choose which of all these endes he liketh best, and thereunto let him direct his intention. And hee shall
 doe much the better, if he consider first with him selfe al these endes, which are the wonderful fruites of this Holie Srcrament. And setting them al before his eies, let him endeuour by this diuine meane to obteine them all,
Note here the principall end wherfore we ought to receaue che blessed sacrament.How beit the most principal and most proper end of the receauing is, to procure by meanes of this most blessed Sacrament, (wherin Christ is conteined,) to receaue in our soules the spirit of Christ: whereby we may be transformed into him, and liue as he liued, that is to say, with the same charitie, and humilty, patience, and obedience, pouertie of spirit, mortification of bodie, and contempt of the world, as he liued.
For this is to eat and drinke Christ spiritually, when we transforme our selues into him, and do make our selues one same thing with him, by imitation and following of his most holie life, according as he did, that saied:Galath. 2.20. I liue, nowe not I, but Christ liueth in me. vvherefore this ought to be our principall end. And we ought withall to do that thing,Luke. 22.19. and 20. 1 C.or. 11.25.26. vvhich Christ hath commaunded vs to doe: that is to renew in this diuine Sacrament the memorie of his passio^, and to giue him thankes for the inestimable benefit of our Redemption.



The third thing that is required for the receauing of this most blessed Sacrament, is to haue actuall deuotion. THE IIII CHAPTER.
THE third thing that is required for the worthie receauing of this most holy Sacrament, is an actuall deuotion: for it is to be noted, that this most reuerend Sacrament, (as likewise all the other Sacraments,) haue one effect common, and another proper.The co^mon effect of all the sacramentes is to giue grace. But the proper effect of the sacrament of the Aultar is a spirituall refection. The common effect is to giue grace: (which is likewise the effect of all the other Sacramentes of the law of grace) But the proper effect of this most holie Sacrament is that, which the diuines call Spirituall refection: which is a new force and power to be able to doe good workes. It is also a certaine taste and sweetnesse of heauenly thinges, which in this most blessed Sacrament is imparted vnto vs: For like as the corporall meate doth not onlie sustaine the life of the eater, but giueth him also strength and taste in the eating: euen so this diuine meat doth not only preserue the spirituall life by meanes of the grace vvhich it giueth: but it giueth also, by
 the proper vertue of the same, strength to the spirit,Summa. S. Thome. 3. part. quest. 79. Art. 1. in responsione ad secundum argumentum. and delight to the taste. And this delight (as Saint Thomas saieth) is so great (I meane vnto those, that haue purged the taste of their soules,) that no manner of words be able to expresse it Because here is tasted the spirituall sweetnes in the very originall fountaine it selfe, which is Christ our Sauiour, the fountaine of all sweetnes.
Now to enioy this so great a benefit, I say, that there is especially required to be had an actuall deuotion: For sith that betweene the forme, and the preparation for the same, there ought to besome resemblance: certainely, there cannot be any preparation more conuenient to receaue increase of deuotion, than to goe to receaue it with actuall deuotion. As we see by experience, that the best preparation, that wood may haue to take fire; is to prouide, that it be hoat, and drie: which are the properties of the fire it selfe.
And if yee shall demaund of mee, what this actuall deuotion is: I know not how I may better expresse it, tha^ by saying, that it is, as it were, the water of Angels: the which as it is distilled of diuers sweet odoriferous hearbes, so hath it many diuers, and very sweet sauours.What actuall deuotion is. For this deuotion is a
 spirituall affection compounded of other spirituall and holy affections, and desires: wherwith our soule ought to goe well furnished, when it commeth to receaue this most blessed Sacrament. Because (as Saint AmbroseS. Ambrose saith. With what Contrition, and Repentance, with what fountaines of teares, with what feare and reuerence, with what chastitie of bodie, and with what purity of spirit, ought this diuine Misterie to be celebrated (O my almighty God,) where thy flesh is truely eaten, and thy blood truely drunke^: where high thing are ioyned with low thinges, and heauenly thinges, with earthlie thinges: where the Holy Angels are present: and where thou thy selfe art after an inestimable manner, both the Priest, and the Sacrifice. Who can the^ worthely handle this Misterie, if thou Lord, doe not make him worthie?
And to enter more particularly to treat of this actuall deuotion,What manner of actuall deuotion is requesite, when we goe to receaue this blessed Sacrament. that is here required: I say, that to answere on our part vnto that, which the condition and excellencie of this Diuine Sacrament requireth, it is meete, that we goe thereunto, on the one side with great humilitie, and reuerence, and on the other side with great loue, and co^fidence, ioyned with a great desire and hunger of this heauenly bread. Thus doth the excellency of this holy Sacrament, require
 all these kindes of affections, and euery one of these affections haue their proper considerations, whereby they are stirred, and prouoked.

. 5.
How to stir vp in vs feare, and reuerence, whe^ wee come to receaue this blessed sacrament.FOR first to stirre vp a feare and reuerence, a man ought to lift vp his eyes, and consider the high Maiestie, and passing great power of our Lord, who is conteined in this most blessed Sacrament. For vnder that Holy vaile, and vnder those formes, is really present the Maiestie of Almightie God, the Creator, preseruer and gouernour of the whole world: in whose presence the pillers of the heauens doe tremble:Iob. 38. before whome all thinges created doe lie prostrate:I h. 15. and 25. whom the morning stars doe praise, and glorifie: at whose beautie the Sunne and Moone doe wonder: in whose sight the heauenly spirits are not pure: in comparison of whome this so wonderfull frame of the world is no more (as the wise man saieth) than one drop of the morning dew,Sapien. 11. or a graine of a corne waight, that is put in the balance. How the^ can he choose but feare, that seeth so certainely with the eyes of his faith, that hee goeth to receaue into him a Lord of so great Maiestie?

I speake not here now of the greatnes of his Iudgements, and of his iustice, and how much he abhorreth the wicked, and theyr wickednes: but onely of that, which is required for the excellency of so high a Maiestie, to the end that not onely the sinner, but also the righteous may vnderstand, how great cause he hath to be afraid, when he approacheth hereunto. Neither ought any man to thinke himselfe secure, because of the vertue of this most holy sacrament,Iohn. 6.54.56.57.58. 1. Cor. 11.27.28.29.30. 1. Reg. 4. 3. 4. and 10. which is the life of the soule: sith that (as we haue said) it may likewise be by occasion a punishment vnto such, as shall not be well prepared for the receauing of the sa^e. The children of Israel sent for the Ark of the testament, to the end, that by the help of the presence thereof, they might giue battaile vnto the Philistians: seeming to them, that hauing the Arke present in the battaile, they were assured of the victorie The which thing they did not onely not obteine, but were also ouerthrowne themselues, and slaine. And the same holy Arke was take^ from them: yea, and this hapned in such sort, that the losse, which they sustained after the comming of the Ark, was far greater tha^ that which they had before it came: and so, that thing, which they imagined
 should be their helpe, and succour, (hauing consideratio^ vnto the vertue of the arke,) was to their distruction, by meanes of their wicked liues. In like maner it chaunced to Amon,Esther. 7. vers. 1.10. who was so entirely beloued of king Assuerus. This Amon being inuited by Queen Esther vnto a roial feast, conceiued that this was agreat fauour and estimation vnto him. But it proued cleane contrarie. For euen at that verie feast his death was contriued, and he was suddainly take^ from that roial table, and by the kinges commaundement sent to the gallowes. Now for this cause the Apostle crieth out vnto vs,1. Corin 11. ver. 28.29. saying. Let a man examine him selfe, and so eate of that bread, and drinke of that cuppe. For he that eateth and drinketh it vnworthely, eateth and drinketh his own damnation, for not discerning our Lordes bodie. For if the Arke of the olde Testament (which was none other but a Figure of this most blessed Sacrament,) required so great a reuerence: vvhat reuerence is then due vnto this diuine Sacrament it selfe?1. Reg. 6. vers. 19. we read in the Holie Scriptures, that because the Bethsamites did be hold that Arke curiously, Almighty God slew of them fifty thousand men. vvhat punishment then shall those haue, which receaue vnreuerenrly euen him, that was figured
 by the selfe same Ark? whe^ the same Arke went before the children of Israel through the waters of the floud Iordan:Iosu. 3.4. losue commau^ded them to take good heed, that they approached not neere therunto: but that there should be alwaies betweene them and the Arke, at the least the space of two thousand Cubits, least otherwise for their irreuerence almighty God might destroy them. If then so great a reuerence was due to that Ark, which was but a shadow of this most holy Misterie: what reuerence shall be requisite for him to shew, that commeth to receaue within him our Lord himselfe, that was prefigured by that Arke? Especially for him that turneth his eyes into his owne heart, and considereth himselfe, how that by nature he is nothing, and by reason of his offences to Almightie GOD lesse than nothing: forsomuch as sin is lesse than nothing. How iustlie then ought he to feare, that hath so oftentimes procured himself to become nothing, that hath committed so many sinnes, that hath done so many beastlie, and filthie deedes, and so great wickednes and abhomination against Almightie God? How can he but tremble and quake for feare, to receaue so great a Lord into such a heart, that hath so
 manie times bin the denne of dragons, and the nest of serpents, and basiliskes.
With these considerations let a man humble his hart, as much as he can. And let him come, as the prodigal sonne did, vnto the house of his mercifull Father,Luke. 15.^8.19. and 21. cri^ng vnto him, and saying. O Father I haue sinned against Heauen, and against thee. And now I am not worthie to be called thy sonne. Account me therefore as one of thy hired seruants. Let him come with the hart of that Publican in the Gospell, who durst not approach nere vnto the Aultar,Luke. 18.13. nor yet lift vp his eies towards heauen: but standing a far off knocked vpon his brest, saying. O God be mercifull vnto me a sinner. Let him come with that hart, that a woman would come withall, that had plaied a dishonest part against her husband, and hee were contented to pardon her the same offence, and to receaue her againe into his house. Such a woman, if she haue any sha^fastenes in her, dareth not for very shame once to lift vp her eies to look him in the face: co^sidering on the one side how grieuously she hath offended him through her vnfaithful and vnchast behauiour, and on the other side the noble and ge^tle nature of her housba^d, which after so great a fault receiueth her so louingly again into
 his fauour. For in very deed the heauenly spouse doth thus much, and a great deale more, when this most blessed Sacrament he receaueth vnto his table, into his house, and in his armes, the soule, which through sinne hath offended him, and plased the harlot by doing the will of the diuell, and afterwards returneth vnto him. vvith these then and other like considerations, our souls are prouoked vnto humility, and reuere^ce which be requisite, for the worthie receauing of this diuine Sacrament.


. 2.A sinner must consider the goodnes and mercie of God, to enkindl^ alone, and confidence in him self to receaue this blesse Sacrament Math. 9.
BVT our loue and confidence wilbe the more enkindled, by considering on the other side, that as this Lord is great in Maiesty, in Iustice, and in abhorring of sinne so is he also great in goodnes, in mercie, and in compassion towards sinners. For this was the cause, that moued him to co^e downe from heaue^ into the earth, to cloth him selfe with our flesh, to walke in high waies, and common passages, in seeking after the trace of them, to eate in their companie, and to declare,Math. 4. that the helping of them was his foode, and delight. For them hee fasted, walked, sweated, trauailed, vvatched, and sustained infinite
 persecutions, and contradictions of the world For the^ he trauailed and preached in the daie: and for them he watched and praied in the night.Luc. 6. For them he had the doores of his bowels continually open, and that in such sort, that he neuer refused or barred anie of them from him, were he neuer so miserable and abiect accountted of the world. To conclude, he desired so earnestly the redemption and saluation of all sinners, that, to helpe and deliuer them out of thraldome, hee neuer ceased, vntill such time, as he had put him selfe on the Crosse betwene two theeues,Marke. 15. and had there shed for their sakes all the bloud, that he had in his bodie. And being not contented w th all this, least that when the naturall course of his life was ended, we should want such another e^terteiner in his steed, as he was him selfe,) he left and ordeined for vs this diuine Sacrament,Marke. 14. Math. 26. ^uc. 22. wherein he himselfe is present: to the end that all these sortes of men, that haue need of helpe, might haue alwais the same doore, and the same shop ope^ for their succour. So that the selfe same cause, that moued him to suffer death, moued him also to institute this moste blessed Sacrament. For like as loue drewe him downe
 from heauen into the earth, and caused him to deliuer himselfe into the handes of sinners: euen so it is loue also that causeth him to come againe by this meane into the world, and to deliuer himselfe into the same hands, whereby it appeareth, that on his part there was none other cause of this great worke sauing only his passing great Charity: and of our part none other, sauing only our extreame necessitie: on his part onely mercy, and on ours, onely miserie. Hereof it commeth, that this diuine sacrament is a common remedie, both for the iust, and the vniust: because it is not onely a meate for the whole, but also a medicine for the sicke: not onely the life of the liuing, but also the resurrection of the dead.Saint Augustine. For (as S. Augustine saith,) this bread doth not onely sustaine those that be aliue, but also so^etimes raiseth vp the dead. By what pretence then can any man forbid me the participation of this holy Misterie? This is a royall Hospitall founded by the mercy of Almighty God, and endowed with the blood of our sweet sauiour Iesus Christ, for a generall releefe and succour of all such as are sicke, and in necessitie. Why then? shall I because I am diseased account my selfe excluded from the same? No I am rather
 bound the more by the selfe same reason, because I am sicke, to goe thereunto, (if I be desirous of health.) For if I be sicke, there I shalbe healed. If I be weak, there I shalbe strengthened. If I be blind, there I shalbe restored to my sight. If I be poore, there I shall be enriched. If I be humgrie, there I shall be filled: and if I be naked, there I shall be cloathed, and my nakednes couered. This is the thing which they comprehend not, or will not vnderstand, I meane those Christians, which vnder pretence of like excuses doe shunne themselues, and cause others also to forsake the vse of often receauing this most blessed sacrament: not regarding that this diuine Misterie was instituted, not only to be meat for the whole, but also to be a medicine for the sicke: not onely for the consolation, and strengthening of the iust, but also for the remedy and succour of the Penitents: So that hee standeth in greatest need of this holy Sacrament, and feeleth in himselfe greatest weakenes: and therefore he that is weake,^e weake ^e most ^^d of this ^^ly sacra^^^t. can much lesse liue without it, than he that is strong: for the strong may continue a longer time without this help: but he that carieth (as the prouerbe is) his hart in his mouth, and is so feeble, and
 weake, that if he cast his eyes neuer so litle a side from Almighty God, he beginneth forthwith to faint, what refuge shall hee haue, in case he will not help himselfe, with vsing the benefit of this diuine medicine. And for this cause our Sauiour tooke an especiall compassion vpon such kinde of men, when speaking in a figure of this Holy Misterie, he saied.Mar. 8.3. If I suffer them to depart fasting, they will faint in the way. For some of the^ are come a farre off. And vndoubtedly like as they were the^ in greater danger, that were come a farre off, than those that dwelled nearer ha^d, (because their trauaile was the longer,) euen so likewise here, those are in greater perill, that are more feeble, and weake, and haue a greater voiage to trauaile, vntill they come to the perfection of the loue of God. And therefore sith this heauenlie bread was ordeined for the remedy and comfort of such weake persons: it is no rash presumption, but rather a very wholsome counsaile, that he which is desirous to to be holpen, should goe vnto his phisition and vse the benefit of that medicine, which hee for this end, with no lesse loue, than with the expence of his owne blood, hath ordeined for him.
Yea rather one of the greatest sinnes among
 men, and that wherewith they shalbe most burdened at the dreadfull day of Iudgement, shall be for the blood of our Sauiour Christ: that is to say, for that they would not vse those remedies, which by meanes of that most pretious blood were instituted for them. Among which remedies, this most blessed Sacrament is the chiefest. If a King had founded a famous Hospitall, and had therein prouided aboundantly for all necessaries, for the releefe and curing of the sicke, and afterwardes when hee had finished the worke with his great charge and diligence, no sicke persons would vouchsafe to come thither to be cured: would not hee (thinke you) be very much offended thereat, considering, that all his designements and labour were come to none effect? Eeuen so may the king of heaue^ be no lesse offended, if now, after that hee hath prouided for vs with his owne most pretious blood such an excellent remedie as this is, of so great cost, and charge, we will not vse the benefitte thereof. Forsomuch as by the same refusall we make frustrate and vnfruitfull (so much as in vs lieth,) al his purposes, and pain full trauailes. And this is that kinde of offence, which our Lord himselfe hath signified
 in that parable of the supper: where when al things necessarie for the feast were prepared he sent for his ghestes, and they would not come. Against whome he thundred out that so terrible sentence of excommunication, saying. Verilie, I say vnto you, that none of those,Luk. 14.14 which were called shall tast of my supper.
Now this being so,No excuse will serue for not co^ming to this blessed Sacrament with what reaso^ canst thou excuse thy selfe, for not comming vnto this heauenly feast? If thou say, that thou art a sinner: I answere, that hee is no more a sinner, that desireth to be iust, and is hartily sorrie, that hee hath bin a sinner. For (as S. Ierome saieth,S. Iero:) thy sinnes past doe not hurt thee, vnlesse they delight thee. If thou say, that thou art fallen, and ouerthrowne: hee cannot be tearmed ouerthrowne, that is discontented with his fall, and stretcheth forth his hand to be holpen and raised vp againe. If thou say, that thou art vnworthie to receaue so high a Misterie: certainely thou art very much deceaued, in case thou thinke that there is anie man in the world perfectly worthie to receaue such a diuine Sacrament: for euen therfore our Sauiour would communicate himselfe vnto little ones, that thereby the glorie of his bountifull goodnes might theMa^ 1^.14
 more appeare in that he would vouchsafe to communicate him self vnto such kind of persons. So that al this being wel considered, thou shalt most euidently perceaue, that thou hast not offended our Sauiour with thy comming vnto him, but thou hast rather offended him much more by refusing to vse this diuine remedie, which he hath ordeined for thee, and for such as thou art. With these then and other like considerations, our desire to come vnto this most holie Misterie maie be stirred vp.


. 3
How to stirr vp in vs a hunger and desire to receaue this diuine Sacrament. Genes. 3.BVT the third thing, which is the hu^ger and desire of this heauenly bread, is stirred vp, by considering the influences, and vertues, which proceed of this most blessed Sacrament: and the effects, which it worketh in those soules, that receaue it with deuotion. For the better knowledge whereof thou must vnderstand, that as against that first ma^ Adam (who was the beginning and original of all our miseries (almighty GOD prouided an other second Adam to wit, Iesus Christ (who was the beginning of all our felicite) euen so likewise against the poisoned fruit of that tree which
 was the roote of all our mischiefe) he hath prouided the food of this most holie Sacrament, which is the fountaine of all our remedie. Wherefore, in like manner as all the miseries, and calamities that ensued vnto vs, through the disobedience of that first man, were remedied by the obedience of the second man: euen so al those miseries, that came vnto vs by that poysoned meate, are also remedied by this most holy sacrame^t. For it is, as it were, a spiritual treacle, ordeined by the cou^saile of that most wise phisition of the world, for a remedie of the nature of mankind infected with the poison, and hissing of that olde serpent. So that according to this account, whosoeuer will know, how manie those benefites are, that be imparted vnto vs by meanes of this meate, let him first examine with himselfe, how many the miseries were that by meanes of the other meat did happen vnto vs. For so much as al the benefits that are contrarie vnto these miseries, be imparted vnto vs by this diuine medicine. And therefore, like as it was saied of that meate:Genes. 2.17 Iohn. 6.51. In what day soeuer thou shalt eate of that tree, thou shalt die: euen so co^trariwise it was saied of this heaue^ly bread: He that shall eat of this bread, shal liue for euer. Thou seest then
 how this meat serueth directly against the other meate, euen as a medicine ordained against that disease.
This is one meane, whereby wee may partly vnderstand somewhat of the effects of this most blessed Sacrament. The other meane is to consider, what is contained in it: forsomuch as therein is really contained the very flesh of Christ, the which because it is vnited vnto the diuine word, participateth the vertues, and influences of the same. Euen as the hotte glowing Iron being vnited with the fire doth participate the very same properties of the fire it selfe. Wherefore S. Iohn Damascene saith,S. Iohn Damascene. that that diuine word, which giueth life vnto all things, being ioyned to mans flesh, made the same flesh also able to giue life: Whereupon it followeth, that this diuine Sacrament hath all the vertues and effects of Christ, sith that therin is conteined the flesh of Christ: the which being vnited vnto the diuine word, participateth all the vertues thereof.
Now hereby thou maiest easilie perceaue, what that is,The effectes of this blessed Sacrament. which this Lord worketh in thee, when he commeth vnto thee: for hee commeth to honour thee with his presence, to annointe thee with his grace, to cure thee with his mercy, to wash
 thee with his blood, to raise thee with his death, to illuminate thee with his light, to inflame thee with his loue, to refresh thee with his infinite sweetnes, to vnite and wed himselfe vnto thy soule, and to make thee partaker of his spirit, and of all things whatsoeuer hee hath purchased for thee vpon the Crosse, together with the selfe-same flesh, which he here giueth vnto thee.
And so this diuine Sacrament pardoneth the sins past,Note, what wonderfull vertues and effects this most blessed Sacrament worketh in the soule of him that receaueth it worthilie. giueth strength against those that are to come, weakeneth the Passions, diminisheth temptations, stirreth vp deuotion, giueth light vnto faith, enkindleth Charitie; confirmeth hope, fortifieth our frailtie, repaireth our strength, comforteth our conscience, maketh a man partaker of the Merits of Christ, and giueth him a pledge of euerlasting life. This is that bread, that confirmeth the heart of man, that nourisheth the trauailers, that lifteth vp such is are fallen, that giueth strength to the weake, that armeth the strong, that reioyceth such as are sad, that comforteth the afflicted, that giueth light to the ignorant, that heateth such as are but lukewarme, that awaketh the sluggard, that healeth the diseased, and that is a common refuge for all such as are needy, and in distresse.
 Now if the effectes of this most blessed Sacrament be such, and so meruailous, if the bounty and loue of him that giueth the same vnto vs be such, who will not be desirous, yea, and greedie of such inestimable treasures? Who will not haue an appetite vnto such an excellent meat.
We ought not to withdraw our selues from receauing, in consideration of our vnworthines.And although this most blessed Sacrament be of such excellency, and dignity, yet ought not a man therfore to withdraw himselfe from the same in consideration of his owne vnworthines, and pouertie. For (as we haue said before,) for the poore this treasure is prouided: for the diseased this medicine is ordeined: for the needy this prouision is appointed, and for the hungry this meate is prepared. True it is, that it is the bread of angels: but it is also the bread of penitents. True it is, that it is meate for the healthfull: but it is also a medicine for the sicke. True it is, that it is a Feast for Kinges: but it is also bread for poore labourers. True it is, that it is meate for the strong: but it is milke also for the sucking babes. So that for all persons it is all things, and none (be he neuer so imperfect) ought to abstaine from this diuine medicine, if he desire with al his hart to recouer his health againe.Mat. 9.12. Mar. 2.17. The whole haue no need of a Phisitio, but the sicke. And sith for their sakes especiallie
 our Sauiour Christ came into the world, for their behoofe especially hee commeth now in this sacrament. With what hunger the^, with what desire, with what ioyfulnes oughtest thou to expect, and desire his comming: sith he co^meth to bestow vpon thee so many, and so excellent benefits? Consider well the desire, which those auncient Fathers of the Old Testament had of the co^ming of this Lord: when they burst in sunder the heauens with clamours, and exclamations, in requesting him, that he would come.Aggei. 2.8. Desideratus cunctis ge^tibus. Summa. S. Thom. 3. part. quest. 79. artic. 1. Whereupon they called him the desired of all nations. Now if this be the verie same Lord, that is to enter into thy soule, to work the very same effect therin, which he did vnto the world: for as S. Tho. saieth, like as whe^ he came visibly into the world, he gaue vnto the world the life of grace: euen so, when he commeth to the soule by meanes of this sacrament, hee giueth vnto it the selfe same life. Why dost not thou then expect and desire his comming vnto thee in this holy Sacrament with the like desire.Ast. 1. Consider also the great desire that the Apostles had of the co^ming of the holy ghost, and with what earnest praiers, and clamours, they requested and sighed for the same, and hereby thou shalt see how earnestly thou shouldest desire this comming, sith
 that thou hopest to receaue therin the verie same spirit, although it be by an other different manner.
Consider moreouer, what aferuent desire a maried wife ouercharged with children, and brought to extreame pouerty would haue of the comming of her deare housba^d out of the Indies, at whose return she hopeth to receaue all kind of comfort, defence, companie, honour, and remedie of al her miseries? And why doest not thou desire with much more feruent desires the comming of that heauenlie spouse of thy soule, who commeth from rhe celestiall Indies, full fraught with all heauenly treasures, and intendeth to bestow vpon thee much more, than al the whole world is able to giue thee?
These and other like considerations may helpe vs to stirre vp in our soules an acttual deuotion: the which (as we haue saied) is requisite for the receauing of this diuine Sacrament.



That time ought to be taken, to attend vnto the preparation aforesaid, before we come to receaue this most blessed Sacrament.
 THE V CHAPTER.
NOVV that a man maie prepare him selfe after this sort, it shalbe needfull for him to take certaine daies before he come to receaue this most blessed Sacrament: to the intent that in this time he may occupie himselfe, as well in these holie considerations, as in purifiyng and clensing of his conscience, by meanes of examination and repentance for his sinnes, and by a Sacramental Confession of them, vvherin the presumption of some Priestes is very much to be reproued, that doe vse with out any preparation at all, sodainely to go and say Masse, yea, when they haue stood before babling, and lawghing, or haue bene otherwise occupied in worldly affaires, and distractions. So that eue^ with the like careles mind, as they would go to eate a peece of commo^ bread,Such Priests as doe saie Masse without due preparation ttke litle profit thereby. with the same they come vnto our Lordes Table, to eate the bread of Angels, which is very great irreuere^ce* And this is one of the causes, whie after that they haue vsed this diuine medicine so many yeares continually, they are fou^d notwithstanding to haue taken litle profit by the vse therof. For otherwise, if they had so often as they saied Masse, receaued
 great increase of grace, it is manifest, that after saying Masse for the space of twentie yeres, they should haue gathered together a great tresure of diuine graces. The which doth not so appeare, that we may see it: forsomuch as they are alwaies after one like sort: to wit, as sensuall, and as vndeuout, as euer they haue bin before, yea, and oftentimes farre worse. What thing is the^ more to be feared, tha^ to come euery day to the fountaine of grace, to the table of Angels, and to the shop of all heauenly medicines, and yet after the continuance of so many yeares to be as barren, and voide of vertues, as full of frailtie, and humane passions, as euer they were before?
Some euill Christians also are no lesse worthy of reprehension, than these: who, when they haue liued in all kinde of vices, and disorder, doe come at the end of the yeare to Confession, and hauing scarcely well finished their vomite of a thousand kindes of abhominations and sinnes, they runne immediatly after their arising from their Ghostly Fathers feete to our Lordes Table, and there doe eate the bread of angels: for the receauing whereof it were needfull to haue (if it were possible for vs) euen the purity of angels. Now were it not
 a thing conuenient to bestow before, certaine dayes in pacifying of almighty God, and in washing and watering with teares the house, wherein he must be lodged? Were it not reason to celebrate the Vigile before the Feast, and to prepare our selues before hand for so great a solemnity? For if when the people of Israel should receaue the law of God, Moyses commaunded them,Exo. 19.20 14. and 15. that they should prepare the^selues three daies before, and wash their garments, and abstaine fro^ the company of their wiues,Cleannes of body requisite for the more reuerent receauing of this most blessed Sacrament. how much more ought this now to be done, for the receauing of Almighty God himselfe, who is the giuer, not only of the law, but also of grace, which is more than the law? Why will any man then, when as yet the memory of his sinnes past are bleeding fresh, and the stench of so great filthines sauoring so ranke, come so rashly vnto a Mistery of so great purity, and to receaue a Lord of so great Maiestie.
This is a great abuse, and very much vsed of many persons: the which he that would esteeme it as it is, not weighing the matter with the waights of Canaan,Osee. 12.7. (which be false waightes,) but with the waightes of the Sanctuary, (that is, with the iudgment of Almightie God, and of his Saintes,)
 let him read the Sermon of S. Ciprian de Lapsis,Saint Ciprian de lapsis. tnd there shal he see, how this kinde of presumption is reprehended. Where speaking of those Christians, which shortly after that they had offered vp Sacrifice vnto Idols, went to receiue this most blessed Sacrament, he saieth thus. As soone as they returne from the Aultars of Diuels, hauing their handes as yet embrewed and defiled with the handling of prophane Sacrifices, they approach vnto this blessed Sacrament, and standing as yet chewing the deadly morsels of Idols, their throate also as yet stincking of those filthy and pestilent meates, they dare presume to receaue our Lords body, notwithstanding that it is written:1. Cor. 11. He that is cleane from sinne, may eate of this meate, and hee that it otherwise, shall die by eating of the same. These I say, without casting any perill thereof, come to doe violence vnto the bodie and blood of our Lord. This offence is greater, which they doe now commit with their handes, and mouth, than that which they did commit before, when they denied him. Hitherto are the wordes of S. Ciprian. Consider well with thy selfe, if there could be spoken a thing of greater terrour than this.
True it is, that this is in part a kinde of aggrauation. Neuerthelesse wee may vnderstand hereby very well, what this Holie Saint iudged of our rashnesse: which is a
 thing so ordinarie and so continually in vre.
And if thou tell mee, that thou art now reconciled vnto Almighty God by meane of thy Confession, which thou haste made: although this be so indeed, yet is it not co^uenient, that at the same houre, that thou makest an end of vomiting vp thy so great sinnes, thou shouldest goe forthwith to receaue thy maker and redeemer in this most blessed Sacrament: but that thou shouldest bestow some litle time before, in weeping, and sorrowing, and in cleansing thy conscience, that thou maiest afterwardes goe to him with greater puritie. Marie the Sister of Moyses,Num. 12.13.15. for the space of seaue^ daies entered not into the Armie of God, although she were repentant, and had her sins forgiuen her.2. Reg. 14.21.24. Absolon also was three yeares absent, and neuer entred into the royall pallace of king Dauid his father, although he were pardoned for the murder of his brother Amnon. If he then, after that hee was pardoned of his offence, absented himselfe from his fathers presence for the space of three yeares, is it much for thee to absent thy selfe three dayes, which hast offended thy heauenly father much more grieuouslie in crucifying so oftentimes his only begotten son with thy deadly sinnes.

And if thou say on the other side that thou canst not in this meane time absteine so long from sin, and that therefore it is better to goe out of hand to communicat, before that new sins make thee again vnworthy of this diuine Mistery: vnto this I answere, that if thy sins be veniall sins, there is no inconuenience thereby.Prouer. 24.16. septies in die cadit iustus. For the iust ma^ falleth seue^ times in the day, and the remedie of such frailty is very easy: but if thou feare or beleeue, that thou sh^lt in this meane time commit deadly sins: what greater perill or what worse preparation can there be, than thus loosly to go to receaue the most blessed sacrame^t, with such aslippery and vnstedfast co^science, that thou hast no hope to co^tinue so much as 3. daies without a deadly sin? where is here that resolute and firme purpose neuer to offe^d almighty God any more, but rather to suffer most cruel death? where is the loue of God aboue all things, that thou fearest sin aboue al the^?A Christian with the helpe of the Grace of God maie continue a long time with out deadlie sin. the forces of grace are not so weake, neither yet is it so easie a matter to commit a deadly sin, but that if a man of his own parte would ioyne thereunto but a meane diligence, he might for manie daies, and yeares, yea euen during the time of his whole life, liue free from deadlie sinne, being
 assisted and holpen therein with the grace of Almightie God,Sap. 18.21. Math. 19.17. Rom. 8.6. 1. Cor. 3.9. 1. Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor. 3.5. 2. Cor. 9.8. 2. Cor 12.6. Gal. 2.20. 2. phil. 2.13. Phil. 4.23. 2. I^h. 29. 1 Ioh. 3.24. 1 Ioh ^.16. which neuer faileth him, that seeketh for it.
But to binde carnall and sensuall men hereunto, (though it be but for a short time,) it is like, as if one would turne a great riuer out of his naturall course: the which, for that it hath bin open so manie yeres, and hath had his free passage through the same, it is a very hard matter to bring it from thence. And if notwithstanding, that by labour and cunning, it be turned another way, yet so soone as it may get any entrance into the old way, it cutteth, and breaketh wheresoeuer it is able, and returneth againe vnto his former accustomed chanell: Euen so are these kind of me^, which, when they haue bin accustomed to liue so many yeares together in their licentious liberty, doing and saying according to the motions of their vnbridled appetites, and giuing free liberty to their harts to swimme in the chanell of their wanton appetites, and desires: in case he doe afterwardes goe about to change them from their vsuall course of life, and binde them to resist these passionate motio^s, it is so great a torment vnto them, that they see not in the world, how they may leaue their olde bondage,
 but that they must needes returne backe againe to the vsual chanell of their auncient licenciousnes, and therefore they make such post hast to deliuer them selues from that burden, that they maie returne out of hand, and liue in that loose kinde of life, which they haue bene accustomed to liue in.
So that the matter being well examined, the cause of this their hastines appeareth to be, the great torments they abide in binding themselues to be good, and to continue cleare from deadly sin for the space of three daies, such is the euil habite, which they haue taken by their accustomed sinfull life. O ye vnhappie men, how doe ye presume to be saued, and to be companions with those, that doe fight like faithful souldiers accounting it so heauie a burden to carrie about your neckes only three daies the sheild of vertue, and the armour of this spirituall warrfare: sith that (as the Apostle saieth) none shall be receaued but such as fight lawfully?2. Thim. 2.3.
And let no man thinke, that this is contrarie to that, we haue saied before, as touching the confidence, wherwith we ought to goe into this diuine Misterie. For that was spoken to encourage the faint harted,
 and scrupulous, who with ouermuch and vndiscreete feare do abstaine from receauing this most blessed Sacrament But this is here spoken to bridle such as be rash, and ouer bold: not meaning hereby, that they should withdraw themselues from this diuine remedie, but that they should come thereunto with more puritie, and better preparation.
But after what sort this preparatio^ ought to be, besides that we haue saide before, it shall be declared more particularly in the Chapter following.


After what sort we ought to prepare our selues before wee come to receaue the most blessed Sacrament. THE VI. CHAPTER.
HEE THAT desireth to doe his dutie in this behalfe, let him take beforehand some conuenient time, (as wee haue said before) for this preparation. And to speake now more familiarly and particularly with those that vse to frequent this holy Misterie oftentimes,) it shall do well, that as Moyses commaunded the Children of Israel,Exod. 19.10.11. and 12. (as wee haue declared) that they should prepare themselues three daies before,
 to receaue Almighty God,Hee counsaileth vs to prepare our selues three daies before wee receaue this most blessed sacrament. when hee came to giue vnto them the law: euen so let vs in like manner take the same time, and space, to dispose and prepare our selues, for receauing of the same Lord, who co^meth vnto vs, to giue the law, not of death, but of life: not of the letter, but of the spirit, not of feare, but of loue.
And certainely it is a matter very much to be wondered at, to see, what the Holie Scriptures doe witnesse of the great preparation,Esther. 2.12 which the wiues of King Assuerus did make, for to present themselues onely once in the yeare before his presence. For the holy Scripture saieth, that they spent the first sixe monethes of the yeare in annoynting and trimming their faces with a certaine oyle, and the other sixe monethes with I know not what other oyntmentes, and confections. If then such labour and diligence was vsed, to finde fauour in the eyes of an earthly man: what ought wee to doe, to finde fauour in the eyes of almighty God? Was not this one of the chiefest pra^ses which the Angell gaue vnto the most blessed virgin Mary,Luke. 1.30. saying: Thou haste found fauour in the sight of God? Now what were it, if we took the like paines for this dignity, as those wome^ tooke for that
 vanitie? what were it, if all the time of our life were a continuall preparation to come into grace and fauour in the sight of almighty God: sith that all the life time of those miserable women was consumed to come into grace, and fauour in the sight of a man.
But now sith that this is not done in this wise, it shall be expedient, that at the least for these three dayes we doe begin to dispose our selues for the receauing of this great Mistery: doing for our part, what we may possibly doe. And if thou demaunde what this disposition, and preparation should be: I answere, that the chiefest point hereof,How wee must dispose our selues three daies before wee receaue this most blessed Sacrament. is to looke more warily at this time vnto thy selfe, vnto thy words, and vnto thy maner of conuersation: that thou slide not out of the right way, in any thing that may offend the sight of Almightie god, auoyding not only deadly sins, but also euen veniall sins, so far forth as thou art able. And wee must endeuour to preserue our selues, not only from sins, but also fro^ all occasions of sins: as fro^ laughing, talking, vaine conuersation, to be short, fro^ all those things that are seldome times done without sin: So that like as a woma^ which is very trimme and finely arayed, when shee putteth on her best garmentes vpon
 the Holie daies to goe abroad, is verie circumspect, and warie,) as much as she may, that she touch nothing with her ha^ds, that maie spot her apparel: euen so ought we to be more carefull at this time, than at any other, whe^ we doe vse to put on our trimme apparell vpon the holie daies, to receaue the Lord of Angels, and to sit downe, and eat with him at his table.
We must take heed to our tongue. We must keepe our hart from al filthie troublesome and vaine cogitations.And especiallie it behoueth, that at this time we take good heed vnto our tongue, and to be warie, and mindfull, that we lauish not our in vaine or hurtful talke: that by this meanes the gate maie be the cleaner, through which that heauenlie Host must enter into our soules.
And withall it is much more behouefull for vs that we doe keep our hart fro^ all filthie, vaine, and troublesome cogitations. For sith our hart is the priuy bedchamber, wherin almightie God must be lodged: it is not meet, that there should be any thing in the same, that might offend his diuine eies. And forsomuch as the most proper place, wherein this Lord doth dwell, is Peace,Psal. 4.9. In pace in ^id ipsum dormiam, and requies^am. Cant. 1 16. (as the psalme saieth:) reason would, that for that time we should laie a side all troublesome and careful affaiers. For if the bed of this heauenlie bridegrome be strawed
 with flowers, (as the spouse in the canticles saieth: let vs not contrariwise fil it with brambles, and thornes, of such like prophane thoughts. And if necessitie doe constraine vs to treat of these kinde of busines: yet let it be done with such order, and discretion, that our mindes be not fixed thereupon: and so the peace, and tranquilitie or our soule shall not be hindered thereby.
And during these daies it is meet we doe bestow more time in spirituall exercises, as in Meditations, and praiers.Praiers are the incense, where with the house of God is perfumed. For this is the incense, wherewith the house must be perfumed, wherein this heauenlie guest must be lodged, and particularlie it shalbe expedient to occupie our cogitations for these three dayes in those three kindes of considerations, which we me^tioned before: that we may stirre vp in our soules a feare, loue, and hungrie desire of this heauenlie bread.
In these daies also, we maie make our humble praiers vnto the most blessed Trinitie, euery day to one of the three diuine persons that it may please them to giue vs such puritie, and grace, as is requisite for the receauing of this most Holie Sacrament.

And we may also haue recourse particularlie vnto the most sacred virgin Marie, beseeching her by that deuotion, wherewith she conceiued in her virgins wombe the Sonne of Almightie God,Luke. 1. and receaued him in her armes, after that he was borne, that she will obteine grace for vs, that we may worthily receaue him into our soules. And we may request her also, by that deuotion, wherewith she did communicate and receaue the most blessed bodie of her sonne, after his ascention into Heauen: that she wil obteine for vs loue, and grace, that we may in like manner so receaue him. And in making this request vnto her, it shall doe wel to consider the faith, deuotion, loue, teares, and ioyfulnes, wherwith this most holie virgin did communicate, and receaue the most sacred bodie of her sonne so dearelie beloued, and desired, being couered with the vaile of those Sacramental formes, whilest the cleare sight of his beautie was differred. For he that shal consider the passing great faith and loue of this most holie virgin, that is with what stedfastnes and certainety she beleeued, that in the Co^secrated Host was contained the most pretious body of her Son: he that shall well weigh, how great the loue was, that shee bare vnto
 him, and how earnest the desire was, that she had to see him, and to embrace him within her bowels, cannot but feele somewhat of the ioy, and of the great and wonderfull feelinges, and comforts which were in that most holie hart, at what time she receaued the most blessed Sacrament. Let vs therefore demaund of her one sparkle of this deuotion: for this wilbe sufficient to bring vs in such wise vnto this heauenlie Feast, as we ought to come.
The night before we doe communicat,What we ought to doe the night before we receaue the most blessed Sacrament. it shal do wel to refuse our supper (if it be possible,) or at the least to prouide, that it be verie spare, and temperat, and not to keepe conuersation and companie after supper, that our fleepe may be the more quiet and pure, and that we may also be the better disposed by spending some part of that night in these and other like exercises, wherwith our soule may be prepared, and made ready for the feast the next day folowing.
And whe^ we goe to bed, let vs goe with the like care, and diligence hu^bly beseeching our Lord to preserue vs that night fro^ al dreames, and wicked fantasies, and from the illusions and deceits of the deuill: that we way come with the greater puritie of body, and soule, to receaue this most blessed
 Sacrament, and so often as we shall awake in the night,How wee ^ught to be^aue our selues the day that we doe communicate. let vs occupie our mindes with the same thoughts, and praiers as wee did, when wee went to bedd. In the morning, so soone as our eyes be open, let vs remember to embrace the Crosse of Christ, by calling to minde his bitter Passion: in meditation whereof wee ought especially to occupie our selues for that day, considering that passing great loue, wherwith the Son of God offered himselfe for our sakes vpon the Crosse, and held out his naked shoulders, to receaue the lashes, which our thefts had deserued. Let vs also consider and meditate vpon the charitie, wherewith he offereth himselfe at this his table vnto all persons, to be a common remedie of our miseries: For sith that this diuine Sacrament was instituted in memory of the bitter passion of our Sauiour Christ, this is the principall thought, which we ought to haue on our part: that we may in so doing fulfill our dutie in that behalfe, according vnto the intent, and meaning of the testator.



What we ought to doe at the time of receauing of this most blessed Sacrament, and also after that we haue receaued the same. THE VII. CHAPTER.
HAVING alreadie declared, what we ought to doe, before we come to Communicate, I will now brieflie shewe, what we ought to do at the time of receauing this most blessed Sacrament, and what after that we haue receaued the same.
At the time of receauing, when thou mindest to come vnto the Aultar, imagine with thy selfe, that there soundeth in thine eares that voice of the Gospell, which saieth: Ecce sponsus venit, exite obuiam ei. That is,Mat. 25.6. Behold the Bridegroome commeth, go ye foorth, and receaue him. For certainely Almighty God sheweth himselfe in none of the other Sacraments so plainely to be the Spouse of our soules, as in this.God sheweth himselfe to be the Spouse of our soules more clearely in this blessed Sacrament than in any other. Forsomuch as the effect of this most blessed Sacrament, is to vnite the soule vnto him, and to make of them both one self same thing: (which is a spirituall Matrimonie.) Now when thou goest foorth to receaue this Heauenlie spouse, it is very necessarie to consider before with great attention, the manner that
 hee obserueth in his comming, that thy going forth to receaue him, may be agree^ble vnto his comming. He then commeth to thee full of Charity, sweetnes, goodnes, and mercy, saying: that he hath an earnest desire to celebrate with thee this Paschal, wherein the Paschall lamb is eaten.Luk. 22.15 Thou therefore of thy part art bound to goe and receaue him with all the deuotion, loue, feare, and ioy, that is possible: forsomuch as thou goest to receaue the true spouse of thy soule, thy God, thy Creator, thy Lord, and all thy felicitie: wherefore thou oughtest to consider, what great deuotion, and ioy, that holy man S. Simeon had, when hee receaued the blessed Childe IESVS into his armes,Luke. 2 at what time the virgin offered and presented him: fot the seeing of whome only, he desired to liue. For it is very requisite, that he that goeth to receaue, by meanes of this Sacrament, the selfe same Lord, should haue the like deuotion.
Consider likewise, with what deuotion, and ioyfulnes, the Mother of S. Iohn Baptist receaued the blessed Mother of this our Lord into her house, when she vttered those words of so great deuotion: Vnde hoc mihi,Luke. 1.43. vt veniat mater Domini mei ad me? That is. How co^meth this to me, that the mother of my
 Lord, should vouchsafe to come to mee? For it is meete, that thou shouldest receaue the selfe same Lord with the like deuotio^, saying with that holy woman: From whence proceedeth this so great fauour vnto mee, that thou that art the Lord of Angels, and the glory of heauen, shouldest vouchsafe to come vnto me O Father, O Pastor, O Lord, O my God, and all my felicitie, which art not contented to haue created me after thine owne likenes, and to haue redeemed me with thine owne most pretious blood: but besides all this, thou wilt now come vnto me, and abide in me, and transforme me into thee, and make me one thing with thee: as though thou diddest depend of me, and not I of thee! Fro^ whence proceedeth this O Lord vnto me? Is it perhaps in respect of my merites, or because thou wouldest gaine vnto thy selfe any thing that is in me? No assuredly O Lord: bur it commeth of thy goodnes and mercy alonely, whereby thou delitest rather to be with me, tha^ I with thee: For I desire thee, because I am miserable: but thou desirest me, because thou art mercifull. I desire thee, because I would haue one, that might giue vnto me: and thou desirest me, because thou wouldest haue, to who^ thou mightest giue.

And for somuch as thou haste greater desire to giue, than I to receaue, for that thy goodnesse is greater than my necessitie, hereof it co^meth, that thou hast a greater pleasure to come vnto mee, than I vnto thee. And therefore thou haste saied, that thy delightes were to be with the Sonnes of men. For in like manner as the naturall delight of the bird is to flye,Pro. 8.31. Delicie meae esse cum filijs hominu^. and of the Fish to swim: euen so the naturall delight of the chiefest goodnes, is to doe good, and to communicate his goodnes vnto all.
In these and other the like thoughtes, a man ought to occupy his minde, both before hee receaueth, and also after that hee hath receaued this heauenly guest, that he may nourish his deuotio^ with them, which is for this purpose very requisite: but because this Bridegroome is of great dignity, and hath a great delight to see his spouse, shamefaste:We must communicate with ioy, tempered with feare. it is therefore very conuenient, that this deuotion and ioy be tempered with great reuerence and humilitie: considering the excellent dignitie of him, that is receaued, and the worthines of him, that receaueth him.Psal. 2.11 And so shall hee fulfill that saying of the Psalme. Serue our Lord with feare, and reioyce before his presence with trembling. Wherefore it shall doe well, that
 we call to minde those great threatninges, which Almighty God vsed, when he commaunded his people, that they should prepare themselues against the time that hee appointed to giue the law vnto them, how he commaunded, that none should be so bold as to approach neare vnto the Hill,Exod. 19.12.13. where hee spake, neither man, nor beaste, vnder paine that hee, that should doe the contrarie, should be stoned to death. Vnto Aaron also himselfe, (although he were the High Priest, and chosen of God,) and vnto other principall men also, who were licensed to ascend vp into the hill,Exod. 24.1 2.14. and 15 almighty God gaue commaundement, that they should adore him a far off, and that none should approach neere vnto his presence, except Moyses alone. This matter being well considered, let a man shrinke in his shoulders, and humble himselfe in his hart, euen to the dust of the earth, yea, euen to the bottome thereof, when hee commeth to receaue into his body, and soule, a Lord of so great Maiestie.

. 2.
AFTER that he hath receaued this sacred Host,What wee ought to doe after that we haue receaued this let him keepe it a little while in his mouth, vntill it wax moist: that it may by reason of the moysture passe
 downe more easely. For vnlesse this be so done, it chaunceth often times, that it cleaueth vnto the roofe of the mouth, and maketh him so carefull to loose it, that to attend thereunto a man omitteth to occupy his mind in such holie cogitations, as that time requireth.
Let him endeuour, also not to spitt immediatlie after that he Communicated, vnlesse he be constrained of very necessitie thereunto: and then let it be done in a cleane and honest place, where it may not be trodden vpon.
Neither ought he (so sone as he hath receaued) to goe forthwith to breakfast, or dinner, and to eate other meate. For although this be no sinne, yet it is a kind of irreuerence, when the Sacramental formes are as yea entier in his stomake, to burden it immediatly with other meates: especially in that time that foloweth next after the receauing, which is the best time, that is to walk with almighty god, and to imbrace him within his hart.In the end of this third Treatise be diuers praiers and meditation: to be saied both before and after the receauing of the blessed sacrament. Thus ought a man to continue for that time in the church, or wheresoeuer hee doth Communicat, giuing thankes to Almightie God for this diuine benefit and occupying his mind in holie cogitations, and praiers, vvhich we haue set
 forth for this purpose in the fift Trratise hereafter following.
And in any wise let him take heed, that hee doe not, as many vse to doe: who so soone as they haue Communicated, goe out of hand to prattle and laugh with others. This I account to be a great irreuerence, and worthy of sharpe reprehension: for what more rusticall inciuilty may be vsed, than so soone as thou haste receaued such a noble guest into thy house sodainely to turne thy backe, and leauing him without any further entertainement, to babble and talke with others.
Moreouer, Cardinall Caietane saieth,Vide Commentar. Caietani. in Summam S. Thomae. 3 part. quest 79. artic. 1. Iohn. 9.5. that this diuine Sacrament communicateth his vertue vnto the soule, that receaueth it, not only at that instant, when a ma^ doth actually receaue it, but also during all the time, that the Sacramentall formes doe continue whole in the stomacke. So that here may be verified that which our Lord saied: Quandiu sum in mundo, lux sum mundi: That is: Whilest I am in the world, I am the light of the world. And if this be true, as this learned diuine presupposeth, there is great cause why a man should continue during all this time, very closely recollected, and deuout, to the end that it may Communicate this
 heauenly grace vnto him with greater abou^dance:This blessed Sacrament worketh according to the disposition that it findeth in the soule that receaueth it. forsomuch as this blessed sacrament worketh (as we saied before) according vnto the disposition, which it findeth in the soule of the receauer. And because the principal dooers whereby oftentimes the influences of the holie ghost doe enter into vs, be the vnderstanding, and the wil: (for this blessed Sacrament giueth to the vnderstanding a greater light, and to the will a greater feeling of such thinges, as appertaine vnto Almightie God, than they had before:) it is not meete, that these two so principal gates should be shutt vp at this time. And yet are they vndoubtedlie shut vp in that man, whatsoeuer he be, that doth willingly occupy his mind at that present about other maters. And forsomuch as this is one of the principal fruites of receauing this most blessed Sacrament, and one of the best morsels of this Heauenlie Table, it were a thing farre dissonant from reason that now when the expences are alreadie laied out, and this diuine meat receaued, he should depart at this time whe^ he should be opening the bosome of his soule, to receaue the fruite of his preparation, and of this most Holie Sacrament.
Wherein is best to occupy our minde after the time of receauing this most blessed Sacrament.And if thou demaund of me, in what exercises
 thou maiest best occupie thy selfe at this time: I say, in the praises and exercises of the loue of God. For (as Saint Barnard saieth) here are the embrasings: here are the kisses of peace, which are much sweeter than any honie, and honie combe. To be short, here is the sweet vnion of the soule with the heauenly Bridegroome, and therefore at this time ought those holy aspirations to be chiefly exercised, which be nothing els but acts of Charity, and veheme^t burning desires of that chiefest goodnes: such as that holy Prophet had, when he said: I will loue thee O Lord my strength, etc.Psal. 17.1. Psal. 41.3. And when he said: As the Hart thirsteth after the fountaines of waters, euen so doth my soule thirste after thee O God, etc.
At this time likewise it behoueth vs to giue thankes vnto Almighty God for all his benefits, and especially for this most inestimable benefit: wherein is giuen vnto vs the giuer himselfe, and the Lord of all goodnes, and that thou maiest the better vnderstand, what thou art bound of dutie to doe in this behalfe: call to minde that Commaundement, which almighty God gaue vnto Moyses, after that hee had sent downe Manna to the Children of Israel,Exod. 16.32.33. where he saied, that hee should take a golden
 vessell, and fill it full with Manna, and so set it within the Arke of the Testament, and it should be keapt and preserued there for euermore: to the end, that al their posterity might vnderstand, with what kind of meat he had fedde their forefathers for the space of fourty yeares in the wildernes. Now tell me what comparison is there betwene that Manna, which was a corruptible meat,Iohm. 6.50.51. and this most Holie Sacrament, which is the meat of euerlasting life? If Almighty God then required such thankes, and remembrance for that corruptible meate: what will he require for this meate, which is the meate of life, yea, and life euerlasting? certainely this matter cannot be expressed with anie kind of wordes.
In this day likewise a man ought to be so carefull and watchfull ouer him selfe, as it is requisit to be ouer such a solemn lodging,Psal. 98. hauing now receaued within him euen Almightie God him selfe. And if the prophet Dauid saied, that he reuerenced the place, whereupon the feete of God had stood: reason would, that vpon this day a man should beare a kind of reuerence vnto his hart, wherein he hath receaued almightie God him selfe. This reuerence ought to be directed in such sort, that during
 that day there enter nothing therein (so far as we possibly may, that is not of God, and in this day especially he ought to close vp as it were the mouth of his ouen, that the feruor of deuotion issue not out,The spirit of deuotion is very delicate. which the fier of the loue of God hath kindled within him: considering how delicate the spirit of deuotion is: the which departeth from vs very lightly, and returneth not againe, but with a great difficulty. After this sort this Holie Sacrament shall cause vs to goe al these daies very circu^spect, and closly recollected, as well before, as after receauing. For like as the Sunne giueth light to the world, not only when it riseth, but also an hower before it appeareth, and an other hower after his going downe: euen so the Sunne of iustice, which is conteined in this most Holie Sacrament, doth not onlie illuminate our soules at the time of receauing him, but also both before and after we haue receaued him: before the receauing, with the hope to receaue him: and afterwardes with the remembrance of the benefit receaued.
That we may doe this with the greater facility, here are set forth certaine Praiers, and Meditations, as well in the end of this Treatise, as also in the fifte Treatise of this Memoriall,
 the which may help vs very well for this purpose, if wee read them with all the deuotion, and close recollection of our mindes that is possible for vs to haue, marking diligently what we reade, and staying most vpon such places, as wherein we shall finde our selues best instructed.



Of the vse of the Sacraments, and of the great profit that commeth vnto vs by the often frequenting of them. THE VIII. CHAPTER.
NOVV that I haue treated, in what manner wee ought to prepare our selues for the receiuing of this most blessed sacrament: I will briefly speake of the profit and commodity, that may come vnto vs by the vse of the Sacraments, if we shall worthily frequent them.
And for the better vnderstanding hereof, it must be considered, that the Sacramentes of the law of Grace, be as it were certaine conduit pipes from heauen, by which the graces of the holy ghost are co^ueied vnto vs:The Sacraments of the new Testament are conduit pipes whereby the grace of God is conueied vnto vs. the which doe originallie proceed and take their first beginning out of the fountaine of the side of our Sauiour Christ. And therefore, he that goeth to Communicate,
 ought (as S. ChrisostomeS. Chrisost. saith) to make account, that hee goeth to put his mouth vnto the wound of his pretious side, and to drinke out of the same the water of life. The Sacramentes are medicines, and remedies, to cure our frailty, and weakenes: the which was well known to him that was sent vnto the world as a Phisition to heale the same, and therefore he knew right well, how to prouide such thinges, as were requisite for the curing of such diseases: for it was not reason, that being so many kindes of medicines to cure our bodies,Our soules be subiect vnto sinnes, as our bodies are vnto diseases. there should be none to cure our soules: sith they be no lesse subiect vnto diseases, than our bodies, and it importeth vs to be no lesse carefull to seeke remedie for the curing of them, but rather so much the more, by how much our soules are of greater excellencie, than our bodies. For this end therefore were the Sacraments of the law of Grace, instituted: that being (as it is) a perfect law, it is meet, it should fullie prouide for all such thinges, as be necessary for our saluatio^. And for this cause there are many Sacramentes, as there be many and diuers diseases of our soules.
And not only the Sacramentes of their part doe help in this behalfe, but also that which wee doe of our owne part, for the
 worthy receauing of them. For he, that goeth to make his confession, doth first of all accuse himselfe of his sinnes past: and repenteth that, which he hath done: and humbleth himselfe at his Ghostlie Fathers feete, as vnto the vicare of Christ: and desireth pardon and absolution of his sins: and purposeth fully an amendment of them: and there finally he is receaued of Almighty God againe, and by the handes of the Church reconciled vnto him. The which all doth helpe vs verie much to the well framing and due ordering of our life. For it maketh a man to keepe an exact account with his conscience, considering that he must so often times render an account thereof in Confession, being in that respecte, as one that walketh betwene two walles, in such sort, that he can not slippe out of the way, neither on the one side, nor yet on the other: liuing with such a circumspection and care of him selfe, by reason of his Confession past, as also of his Confession to come, that he dare not so easily tread awrie, for to committ any one deadly sinne.
For this purpose then the Sacrament of confessso^ helpeth very much:Often Confession is very requisite for the due ordering of our life. the necessity whereof me^ should more clearely perceaue
 if they would at the least make the like estimate of spirituall matters, as they doe of te^porall: For tell me, why is it necessary to dresse vp thy garden continually, to sweep thy house euery day, and to wash thy shirt euery weeke? Is there any other reason, but because each one of these thinges are ordinarily made foule? Now then, if, whilest we liue in this wicked world, the purity of our soules be so often times spotted, and defiled with sinne: vvhy doe wee not seeke to haue an ordinary remedie for the same, sith that the danger is so ordinarie? Why doe wee not endeuour to wash our soule euery weeke, as we doe our shirt: sith that the cleannesse of the one, importeth more than the cleannesse of the other, by how much more our soule is of more value than our shirt?
We see also, what an ordinary care the mariners haue to pumpe out the water, which the shippe gathereth in continually and this they doe especially, when it raineth. For otherwise, in case they should not so doe, the shippe would drinke in so great a qua^tity of water, that it would sinke to the bottome, and be vtterly destroied. Now if the venial sins be so ordinary,Veniall sinnes like vnto dropps of water, that fall into the shipp. that we commit euery day, the which are as it
 were litle droppes of water, that fall into the ship of our soule,) and these do dispose vs vnto deadly sins, wherewith this ship sincketh, and is drowned: were it not expedient to seeke alwaies for the remedy of these smaller sins, least we fall into greater sinnes, whereby all is lost?
We see likewise, how nature prouideth often times for bodies, that are subiect to grosse, and naughtie humoures, to haue some issue, whereby they are purged: by meanes whereof they liue in health, which otherwise were not able to liue. And therfore the phisitions wil not stop those issues though they can very well doe it, because they wil not take from them this remedy. Now that, which nature hath found out in this case for the remedie of our bodies, the same hath the grace of God prouided for the remedy of our souls: that, wheras there doe breed within them so manie corrupt humours of sinnes, they should haue a remedie to purge them, which is, the issue of Confession, by meanes whereof our soules are purged of al the sinful corruption, that is ingendred in them.


Of the effects of the most blessed Sacrament of the Aultar. . 1.
IN this wise our soules are purged, and doe recouer health by the Sacrament of Confession. But this health and life is preserued by Co^municating of the most blessed Sacrame^t of the Aultar:The propertie of the Sacrament of the Aul^ar is to susteine the spirituall life. the which was instituted for that end in the forme of meate. For as it is the property of meat to susteine the corporall life, euen so it is the propertie of this most blessed Sacrament to susteine the spiritual life, (which consisteth in Charity:) that this vertue of Charity faile not in vs through the great contradictions, which it abideth in this world.Iohn. 6.55. Summa. S Thome. 3. part. quest. 79. art. 1. The effect of the Sacrament of the Aultar. Wherefore our Sauiour saied, that his flesh was truelie meat, and his blood truely drinke. Vpon which wordes the Holie Fathers doe commonlie say, that al the effects, that the corporall meate worketh in the bodies, the same doth this diuine meat worke spirituallie in our soules. For this most Blessed Sacrament susteineth vs in the spirituall life: it delighteth the inward tast: it restoreth the supernatural forces: it repaireth
 the vertue, that was weakned: it strengthneth a man against the temptations of the enimie, and causeth him to encrease euery day more and more, euen vntill he attaine vnto his due perfection, if he himselfe through his own default do make none impediment therein.
And if thou demaunde, how it is possible, that a substance, and corporall meate should worke such a spirituall effect, as to preserue and increase Charitie, and to sustaine a man in the spiritual life: I answere, that the cause hereof, is the vertue supernaturall of the Sacraments, which almighty God hath instituted for a remedy of our weakenes, and would that vnder the corporal and visible signes, and formes, they should work inuisible effects: as it is clearely seene in the water of Holy Baptisme, vvhich in washing the body outwardlie, washeth the soule also inwardly, and putteth it in state of grace. The very same effect doth this most blessed Sacrament of the Aultar worke in his manner,The blessed Sacrament of the Aultar is the greatest of all the Sacraments. in that, that it is a Sacrament, and the greatest of all Sacraments. But besides all this, it hath also two great prerogatiues aboue all the other Sacraments: by meanes whereof it worketh this effect in a more high degree.
 The one is, for that therein ioyntly vvith the flesh of Christ, there is present the soule of Christ, and the eternall word of the liuing God, and the life of all thinges: the which entreth by meanes of this sacrament into the soule of him that doth communicate, and worketh in the same, this so wonderfull effect, as to giue him the spirituall life. Wherefore, like as a Phisition, that will cure a sicke person with some medicinable powder, mingleth, and vniteth the same with a little stilled water, and giueth it him to drinke, to the end that the water which is liquid and thin, may carrie the medicine through out all the vaines of the body, (where it must worke his operation:) euen so hath this heauenly Phisition ordeined, to vnite the diuine word vvith his humane flesh, to the end hee might by this meane enter into men, which are of flesh, and work in them this kind of health, and life. And besides this, not onely the diuine word of it selfe, but the very flesh also which he hath vnited vnto him, doth participate this same vertue: and so the flesh as the instrument and meane of the Godhead to worke by, is the cause of life, as we haue declared before: and therefore our Sauiour whe^ he had restored the Princes daughter of the
 Synagogue to life againe,Mat. 9. Marck. 5. Luke. 8. commaunded meat to be giuen vnto her, to the end that the life, which he had giuen her by his vertue, might be preserued with meat: giuing vs thereby to vnderstand, that it is likewise expedient, that vnto those soules, which are raysed againe by the vertue of Almighty God, (who worketh in the Sacrament of Confession,) there should be ministred this diuine meat: to the end that the spirituall life, which is restored by one Sacrament, might be preserued by the other.
Whereby wee may perceaue, how necessary these two Sacramentes are for the spirituall life: the one to giue it, and the other to preserue it.The profit of often confession and communicating. Wherefore, he that desireth to obteine this spirituall life, must vse to Confesse himselfe oftentimes: and he that mindeth to preserue it, must also Communicate oftentimes.
And because there are so few in this corrupt age, that doe Confesse their sinnes, and Communicate oftentimes, therefore are there so many, that die spiritually. And this is also the cause, why the fire of Charity, wherein the spirituall life consisteth,The cause why charity is so cold in our dayes. is so generally quenched: because there be so many, that will not helpe themselues with
 these defensiues, and remedies which Almighty God hath ordained for this ende. For (as the learned diuine Cardinall Caietan saieth very well,Vidi commentar. Caietani, in summam. S. Thomae. 2. 2. quest. 24. art. 7.) Charity in this world is out of her naturall place,Charity in this world is out of her naturall place. (which is heauen:) where being in the presence of the chiefest goodnes, shee burneth without ceasing in the loue of him: but in this world Charitie is, as it were, a stranger and Pilgrime, and as one that is foorth of her naturall country where she hath a thousand thinges, which are contrary vnto her. Wherfore she hath need of great helpes, preseruatiues, and defensiues for her conseruation. We see that a droppe of water, that is cast into the Sea, endureth for euer: because it is in his naturall Element, wherin it is preserued with the other water, which is of the same nature that it is of. But cast the same vpon the ground, and it will be quickly dried vp, by reason of the naturall drinesse of the earth, which is contrary to the water. A Cittie likewise that is scituated in the hart and middle of a Kingdome, standeth safe from enimies, and hath no need of Souldiers or garrisons to defend it: but the Citty, that is on the frontieres of a Kingdome, if it be not well walled, yea, and defended with diligent watch and ward, in time it will be lost. Now
 in the like danger is Charity in this world: where she is out of her naturall country, and where shee hath many enimies, against whome that mighty Emperour, (who perceaued this right well,) hath prouided for her defence, and preseruation, this most Holy Sacrament, whereof those wordes of the Psalme may be vnderstood very aptly,Psa. 22.5. Parasti in conspectu meo me^sam aduersus eos qui tribulant me. which say: Thou haste prepared a Table in my sight O Lord, (which giueth me vertue and strength) against them that persecute me. Now if euery one of vs be subiect to the assaults of these enimies: what shall we be able to doe without the helpe, and succour of this Table, which Almighty God hath prouided vs for this end? Woe be vnto them, saieth S. Bernard,8. Bernard. that are called to doe the workes of the mighty, and doe not eate the meate of the mightie. But who be they that are called to doe the workes of the mightie, but such as did vpon the day of their Baptisme declare themselues to be the souldiers of Christ, and enimies of Sathan, and of all his pompes? And what is that meat, that giueth stre^gth against these enimies, but this most blessed Sacrament of the Aultar, whereof S. ChrisostomeS. Chrisost. saieth, that it maketh me^ to become Lyons, casting forth fire out of their mouthes, against such as resist them. Hereof
 it co^meth, that where the Prophet Dauid saieth (according to our translation,Psal. 77.25) Man hath eaten the bread of Angels: S. Ierome hath translated it:Panem Angelorum manducauit homo. Man hath eate^ the bread of the mighty: For certainly, such is the blessed Sacrament, which by that meat was prefigured.
The matter then standing thus, that holy Father S. BernardS. Bernard. might well bewaile the state of many persons, who being called vnto this daily battaile, and hauing no better weapons for their defence, than very often to Confesse their sins, and very often to receaue this most blessed Sacrament, will not helpe themselues with the same. Of which negligence what other thing can ensue, but the fall and death of so manie soules, as we daily see before our eyes? For in the Primitiue church through the force and vertue of this diuine sacrament (which was ministred so co^tinually:Often receauing of the most blessed Sacrament maketh a man more zealous and constant in the defence of the Catholicke Religion.) the christians preuailed against all the furie and rage of the Tyrants, and willingly yeelded their liues for iustice sake. But now a dayes alas, our weakenes is so great, that wee dare not scarcely speake one silly word in defence of iustice, and of our Catholike religion. He therefore, that in the middest of so many deaths and da^gers, desireth to haue remedy,
 let him come vnto this Heauenly Table, and feed himselfe with this bread of the Mighty: and let him endeuour to follow, not the errors of this corrupt age, but the godly examples of the deuout and auncie^t Christians in times past, if he intend like a valiant souldier to fight lawfullie, and to be crowned with them.2. Tim. 2.5.


An answere to the vaine obiections, of certaine neglige^t and slouthfull Catholikes, where with they vse to excuse their slacknes, in comming so seldome times to confession, and to receaue their maker and redeemer in the most blessed Sacrament of the Aultar. . 2.
SOME men there be, which being giuen to carnality, and pleasure, and to liue licenciously, according vnto their own appetites, and willes, doe vse to make this obiection.  To what purpose is it, say they, to haue so oftentimes Confession, and Communicating: sith it is sufficient to Confesse our sinnes, and receaue the blessed Sacrament once in the yere,  as the Church hath commaunded? These kinde of men that
 say thus, doe neither know the diseases of mans nature, neither the vertue of this heaue^ly medicine, nor yet the necessity, which we haue of the same. If a man were sicke, but only once in the yeare, then (I graunt) it were sufficient only once in the yeare to vse these remedies. But if all the life of ma^ be a continuall web of diseases, if we be so oftentimes vexed with the heat and fire of couetousnesse, with the swelling of pride, with the impostumes of enuie, with the itching leprosie of leachery, with the ca^kred wounds of our enmities, and hatreds, with a lothsomnes vnto spirituall exercises, with an insatiable hunger vnto carnall thinges: why shall wee tarrie vntill the end of the yeare, our diseases being quotidian?Confession taketh away the sinne, but not the roote of the sinne, which is the euill custome, and habite, in sinnes. why shal we slacke to seeke for the remedies of them so long a time? medecines are wont to haue but weake operations, when they are laied to old festered sores. And although the Sacrament of Confession doe cure our sins wholly, yet doth it not wholy take a way the rootes of them: which are the euell customes, and habites, in which we haue beene so long time exercised, and accustomed, the which are very hard to be cured.
What man is he, that when his house is
 on fire, or whilest his enimies are breaking downe his wall, will stay and tarrie vntill the end of the yeare, to prouide then a remedie? Now if the flesh doe burne with so many flames of couetousnes, as it hath inordinate appetites: and if the diuels which be our deadly enimies, doe make a continuall battery at the wall of our hart (against whome there is not a more mightie remedie, and defence, than the frequenting of the Sacraments:) why doe we linger vntill the end of the yeare, before we vse this remedy, the danger being so dayly as it is? Vndoubtedly whosoeuer he be, that maketh this delay, he knoweth not the dignitie of his soule: hee vnderstandeth not the malice and peruersitie of his flesh: he considereth not the vertue and efficacy of the Sacraments, neither yet the end, for which they were instituted: for it is very certaine, that the Sacrament of Confession was no lesse institued to cure the soules, and the blessed Sacrament of the aultar to nourish them, than the corporall medicine to cure the sicke bodies, and bread to nourish them.
And if thou say, that at the end of the yeare Almighty God pardoneth thee euery thing: yet what wilt thou say vnto me of the tyranie of thy wicked custome,
 which remaineth still rooted in thy soule? What wilt thou say vnto mee of thine offences committed against Almighty God, (which thou mightest haue eschewed,) which are of greater waight, than the losse of a thousand worlds? What wilt thou say of thy other sinnes, that ensued after thy former sinne? Saint GregorieS. Gregorie. saieth, that the sinne, which is not cured by pennance, pulleth immediatly after it another sinne, with his owne weight. Now were it not farre better to preuent the wounds before hand, than after that they be made, to seek how to cure them? Were it not better for a married wife not to commit Adulterie at all, than after that it is done, to haue her fault pardoned of her husband.Generale concil. lat. sub Innocentio. 3. Can. 21. How wee must vnderstand the Commandement of the Church, to co^municate at the least once in the yeare, and that at Easter.
And admit that the Church do not binde vs to communicate any more tha^ once in the yeare: yet thou must vnderstand, that she did this as a merciful mother, that wold not giue occasion to such as are weake to communicate vnworthily or to breake, her Commandement, by not communicating at all, as some euill christians doe: and therefore she would not make a law to bind vs, but only once in the yeare, and that at Easter. And this she did for the loue and respect, which she had of the weake: leauing on the other side the gate ope^, and the table
 readie prepared all the yeare long, for all deuout Christians.
Others there be, that doe vnderstand this,Of such as are ashamed to confesse and Communicate oftentimes. Iohn. 12.42.43. and know by experience the vertue of the sacraments: but they refuse to come often times to Confession, and often times to Communicate, for shame of the world. It seemeth that these men are like vnto those principall personages of the Iewes, of whome S. Iohn maketh mention: which beleeued in Chtist, but yet durst not confesse Christ for feare of the world. Of whom he saieth,Dilexerunt enim gloria^ hominum magis quam gloria^ Dei. that they loued more the glory of men tha^ the glory of God: But tell me, if thou confesse that this blessed Sacrament was ordeined, and recommended vnto vs by our Sauiour Christ: what other thing is it, to be ashamed to receaue it, but to be ashamed to be thought a good Christian, and the disciple of Christ?Mat. 26.74 75. The very same feare had Saint Peter when he denied Christ: For hee was afraide, and ashamed, to be accounted Christes disciple,Marke. 14.71.17. Luke. 22.61.62. Iohn. 18.25.27. In this wicked age, the profession of the catholike religion is accounted a dishonour amo^g worldlinges. The world hath persecuted our Sauiour Ch^ist, and his Apostles and all the Saints, and is at deadlie foode with all vertuous constant Catholickes, and honoureth politicke Schismatik^ and Atheistes. and therefore it is sayed, that he denied Christ: But now, when our Sauiour Christ reigneth in Heauen, and is adored of the world: yet are men ashamed to doe such thinges, whereby they may appeare to be his Disciples. What is the honour (saith Saluianus) that our Sauiour Christ
 hath among Christians, when a man shalbe the lesse esteemed for being one of his? what greater extremitie could the wickednes of the world come vnto, than to account Religion and vertue to be a dishonour whereas it alone is worthy of honour, and vnto it all lawes both of God and man haue giuen honour.
Thou saiest, that thou art with-holden from this diuine M^sterie by the clamours, and wonderinges of the world: But how commeth this to passe? For if thou confesse that among the three enimies and persecutors of our soules, one of the principall is the world, the which persecuted our Sauiour Christ, and the Apostles, the Prophets, and all the Saintes: what regarde oughtest thou to haue of such a one, as hath done all this, and hath declared, and published himselfe to be thine enimie? Who was euer so madde, as to giue credit vnto the counsaile of his enimie, and to such an enimy, as did continually protest mortall warre against him?
Now then, if this enimie on the one side doe with draw thee from these Mysteries, and on the other side our Sauiour Christ doth call thee vnto them, saying:Mat. 11.28 Come vnto me all ye that labour, and are burdened, and I
 will refresh you: vnto whether of these two callinges it is more reason to harken? If Christ doe call vs, and the world doe call vs:Iohn. 8.34. Rom. 6.16. 2. Peter. 2.19. Galath. 1.10. Si hominibus placerem, Christi seruus non essem. Psal. 52.6. Saint Augustine. in case we follow the world, and forsake Christ: how can we be called the seruantes of Christ? For euery man is his seruante, whose will he fulfilleth, and whome he desireth to please. And so saieth the Apostle. If I should goe about to please me^, I should not be the seruant of Christ. And if the world did call vs to quietnes, and Christ to labour: we might haue some colour of excuse. But it is not so: but rather it is, as Saint Augustine signifieth vnto vs in these wordes. The world crieth, saying I doe weaken. And our Sauiour Christ crieth: I doe strengthen. And yet for all that my miserable soule will rather follow him, that weakeneth, than him, that strengtheneth.
Tell me moreouer, what doe these cries of the world vnto thee? what doe they giue thee? or what doe they take awaie from thee? often times we are like vnto staring beastes, which be afraid of shadowes: and thinges of the aier. The loue of our selues, is the cause and worker of these feares: which would be so assured of al her commodities, that it feareth, not only the very daungers in deed, but euen such also as are fained, and imagined. But put the case that there were
 cause to be afraide indeed, and that the persecutions of wicked men were able to take from vs our bloud, and liues: why should we not be conte^t to abide so small pains, to enioy so great a benefit? what doest thou esteeme this morsell to be ouer deare for that price? the Bere is contented to beare the hiue of bees, and forceth not for the stinging of the bees on euery side of her, so that she may enioy the hony, which is in the hiue. If thou then doest carrie with thee a hiue full of so many treasures, as this Consecrated Host is and a hony comb full of so sweet hony, as the consolation of this diuine meate is: wherefore wilt thou not suffer those stinginges of venemouse tongues, to enioy such a diuine morsell, as this is?
There be others also no lesse worthy of blame, than these are: which for slouthfulnes to prepare them selues to come vnto this most blessed Sacrament,Some, for slouth to prepare them selues, doe not receau^ the most blessed Sacrament. doe refuse to receaue it, yea and to receaue our Sauiour Christ in the same, who is all our comfort, and felicity. But how is it possible, that this should be so? what? dost thou esteeme this treasure to be of so smal account, that thou art loth to take so litle paines, to receaue the same? Consider with thy selfe what
 a far greater estimation the blessed Martyr IgnatiusS. Ignatius. had of Christ: who in one of his Epistles writeth thus. Let Fires, Crosses, Beastes, renting in sunder of my members, and all other paines of the world, yea, and all that the diuels of hell are able to deuise, be heaped vpon mee: so that I may be worthy to enioy Cbrist. Now if this blessed Martyr yeelded himselfe to abide all the torments of the diuels, to haue the fruition of Christ, who is giuen vnto thee in this blessed Sacrament: why wilt not thou yeelde thy selfe to take so little paines, as to come to Confession, and to recommend thy selfe humbly vnto Almighty God, to enioy the selfe same treasure? What greater follie can there be, than for a man to suffer himselfe to die for hunger, because hee will not reach out his hand to take meate, when it is set on the table before him?Pro. 19.24. The sluggard (saith the wise man) hideth his hand in his bosome, and thinketh it a great paine to lift it vp vnto his mouth: what thing can there be more worthy of blame, yea, more abhominable than this? What excuse can hee be able to make before Almighty God at the dreadfull houre of his account, that hath so contemned the remedy, which was freely offered vnto him, because hee would not
 take so little labour as this is, about it?We may not excuse our seldome Communicating with the pretence of reuerence to the blessed Sacrament. The oftener we doe worthily Communicate, the more grace increaseth in vs, and all other vertues that may prepare and dispose vs to communicate with greater deuotion. S. Gregorie.
Neither may any excuse themselues with the pretense of reuerence: by saying, that they doe therefore Communicate very seldome, because they would Communicate with great reuerence. For it is to be noted, that one of the wo^ders of this most blessed Sacrament (among many others) is that although among men much conuersation be an occasion of contempt, yet is it not so here in frequenting this diuine Sament, if it be worthily receaued. For as grace is giuen therein, so the oftener it is receaued, the more grace is giuen. And the more that grace increaseth in the receauer, the more increaseth the loue, the feare, the deuotio^, the reuerence, and al other vertues which proceede of the sa^e grace: the which are the principal preparations, that are required for the receauing of this most Holy Sacrament. Of all which vertues he hath most want, that vseth most seldome to receaue it, and therefore doth he receaue it with lesse deuotion.
This is likewise proued by the differe^ce, which Saint Gregorie putteth betwene the tast of spiritual delights, (such as is the tast of this heauenly meat,) and the tast of worldly and sensual delights: the which differe^ce
 is thus.The difference betwe^ the tast of bodilie delights, and spirituall delights. The sensual tastes and, delight whe^ they are not had, doe cause a desire in vs to haue the^. But after that they be once obteined, then they doe cause a lothsomenes: as it is most euidently seene in a man that is hungry, and in hm, that is filled. But contrariwise, the spirituall delights, when they be not had, are not desired: because they are not knowen. But after that they be obteined, and tasted, then the more they are possessed, the more they are desired, and do cause a more greedy appetite after the^:Eccl. 24.29 To haue earnest desire to receaue this blessed Sacrament is one of the principall preparatio^s for the same according as the diuine wisedome hath protested saying. They that eate me, shall haue the greater hunger. And they that drinke me, shall haue the greater thirst. Now if the desire and hunger of this heauenly bread be one of the principal preparations, that is required for the same: and this desire is increased with the tast and experience thereof: it is a cleare case, that the oftener it shalbe receaued, the more it wilbe desired: and so shall it be also more worthily receaued. vvherevpon it may be consequently inferred,Often receauing worthily causeth more worthy receauing. that the oftener a ma^ doth communicate, the more worthily he shal communicate. But such as doe delay their co^ming to communicate for a long time, as of the one side they are depriued of this succour, and
 remedy, so on the other side they are ouer charged with sins, for lacke of that heauenly meat, and hereof it co^meth, that the longer time it is, before they come to receaue it, the lesse worthily they receaue it, when they come vnto it.Of such as abstaine fro^ receauing, because they are sinners. And if thou aleadge for thine excuse, that thou art a sinner, and very fraile, and therfore vnworthy to receaue this diuine meat: to this I answere, that if thou be not in deadly sin, thou oughtest euen for the very same reason to come and receaue it, by which thou art moued to refraine from it. For this blessed sacrament is a pardon of sinnes, it is a sustenance for the weake, a medicine for the diseased, a treasure for the poore, and a common remedie for all such as be in necessitie. And so was it instituted by our Sauiour Christ, not onlie that it should be a meat for the liuing, and strength for the healthfull: but also that it should be a medicine for the diseased, and a raising vp of the dead: for which cause the holy fathers doe say, that many times, hee that receiueth it, through the vertue of the same, of attrite becometh contrite: which is, as if we should say, of a dead ma^ he beco^eth a liue ma^ Remember likewise, how our sauiour Christ did eat with publica^s and sinners, and how he answered vnto those,Mat. 9.12 13. that murmured at this doing, saying: such as are whole
 haue no neede of a phisition,Marke. 2.17. Luc. 5.31.32. but such as are sicke. And, I came, not to call the iust, but sinners.
It is well done (I graunt) to refraine from this Holy Sacrament for feare. And it is also well done,Summa. S. Thomae. 3. part. quest. 80 art. 10. It is better to receaue this blessed Sacrament for loue, tha^ to absteine from it for feare. 2. Reg. 6. to goe and receaue the same for loue. For both the one and the other is the honouring of God. But, as Saint Thomas concludeth, it is better to goe, and receaue it for loue, than to refraine from it for feare. For, (to speake absolutly) better are the workes, which proceede of loue, than those, which proceede of feare. And agreable herunto we read, that Dauid, whe^ he saw Oza dead for his vnreuere^t handling of the Arke of the Testament, he durst not receaue it into his house: but caused it to be carried into the house of Obededo^. But afterwards, when he vnderstood, how Almighty God had prospered the house of Obededon with abou^dance of riches, being rather prouoked with this good successe, than feared with that punishment of Oza, he resolued to bring it into his owne house, and his hope did not deceaue him.




What the cause is, whie some persons haue so little tast, and deuotion, when they say Masse, or doe Communicate. THF IX CHAPTER.
AS concerning this, that hath bin declared before, there may arise some questions, wherunto it shalbe necessary to make answere. Among which, the first is:  what is the cause, why among so many persons, as do say Masse, and communicate ofte^times there be so few, that doe feele in their souls such spirituall tast, and consolation, as they should do, feeding so ofte^times vpon this heauenly bread? and whie there be others also, that doe not only not feele this, but also (as it appeareth,) doe not profite any thing in vertue, by frequenting this most blessed Sacrament, but doe continue alwaies in a manner after one like sorte.
To the first demaund I answere,  that some times this tast and consolation wanteth, by default of the partie:Note the cause, why many that doe communicate oftentimes, loe not feele any spirituall taste and consolation. For that either he doth not make such due preparation for to Communicate, as he ought to doe: or els liueth not as he ought to liue. And therefore it is no maruaile, if
 such a one feele not that spirituall taste, and consolation, which those men feele, that lead a better life, and come thereunto better prepared, and therefore haue the taste of their soules more pure and sound, which causeth them to haue a more feeling taste of thinges belonging to God.
God withdraweth sometimes spirituall tastes, and consolations from iust persons to exercise the^ in humility.But at other times this spirituall taste and consolation wanteth, not by any default of the person, but by the only will and disposition of almighty God, because it is so expedient for the same person: for like as oftentimes the iust persons find not that tast and consolation in their praiers, which at other times they were wont to finde: the which persons notwithstanding, haue not co^mitted any thing, wherfore they should loose it: (for by this meane almighty God purgeth and prooueth them, he exerciseth and humbleth them:) euen so also the same want of consolation happeneth in receauing the most blessed Sacrament, not for any default of theirs, but onely for their greater spirituall commodity and profit.
At other times this want of spiritual tast and consolation happeneth,^ndiscretion ^n seeking ^or deuotio^. because men know not how to seeke for deuotion with such discretion, as it ought to be sought for: as S. Bonauen.(...). Bonauen. declareth in these words.
 It chau^ceth (saith he) sometimes vnto spirituall perso^s, that the more they labor for the grace of deuotion, (which they tearme sensible deuotion,) the lesse they finde it: and the more speed they make to attain vnto it, the farther off they are fro^ it: as it happeneth vpo^ the principal feasts of the yere, at which times deuotion is most sought for: and especially when they prepare them selues to receaue the blessed Sacrament of the Aultar. And many vpon this occasion are exceeding sad, and pensiue, and of a pusilanimity of mind doe imagine, that peraduenture it is not the will of almighty God, that they being in this case should approch vnto him, or that Almightie God driueth them away from him, as vnworthie to receaue this diuine sacrament: whereupon it chaunceth sometimes, that for this cause they withdraw themselues, and refraine from receauing the medicine and remedy of their health, which is this most holy sacrament. Of the which there may be many causes, some by default of the partie, and some without any defalt of his,Ouer earnest seeking after deuotion hindereth deuotion. by the speciall dispensation of almighty God. But as touching our present matter, one of the most co^mon causes is, when they will seek for deuotio^ vpon such daies with excessiue force, and
 and vehemencie. For by this meane it seemeth, that the soule is depriued of her libertie, and that the force of nature is suffocated, when a man laboureth beyond his reach, to gette out the ioyce of deuotion by way of violence, as it were with wringing and pressing. And if he cannot obteine it foorthwith, as he desireth, the^ is he very much molested, and greiued for it, and beco^eth more hardened, and more vnable for the same. Wherupon it commeth to passe, that the more earnestly he laboureth to gette it, the lesse he obteineth it and the more drie he waxeth: according as it is written.Prouer. 30 83. Who so wringeth the paps ouer much to gette out milke, shall drawe out bloud. We see that the ioice of an orrange or of other things, co^meth not out so pure, when it is squised with ouermuch maine force as when it is wrong with moderatio^, to yeeld so much, as may easily begotten out of it. The like hapeneth to them, that striue in such sort for deuotion. Whereupon it followeth, that the more the harte is at liberty, the more sweete, and more aboundant is the affection of deuotion, and this is the cause why it happeneth, that a- man is more deuout at other times, than vpon high principall Feasts. For it seemeth,
 that vpon these daies we doe enforce, and as it were choke vp the spirit with ouermuch carefulnes, and vehemencie of this desire. But at other times, as the desire is more moderate, so doth the spirit proceede in this exercise with more freedome, and purity by meanes wherof it is better disposed to obteine the deuotion it desireth.
 To the other demaund, which is:Why such as say Masse, and communicate oftentimes doe not profit in deuotion, and in other vertues. Answere. The first cause is the wa^t of due preparation before they come to receaue this most blessed Sacrament. why some that doe say Masse, and Communicate oftentimes we cannot yet see them to haue taken such profit, either in deuotion, or in other vertues: but rather to continue allwaies in a manner in one selfe same slacknes, and negligence: a certaine Holy Father answereth thus. This effect, saieth he (to speake ordinarily) is wont to happen through one of these two causes. The one is, by the default of their euel preparation, as we saied before of the want of deuotion. This is, because they goe to receaue this most blessed Sacrament, not with such a feruour of Charity, and hunger of this heauenly bread, as they ought to doe: but for a kinde of custome, ceremonie, fulfilling of duety, or necessity: and after that they haue receaued it, they set open the gates foorthwith, and vnloose their tongue, and hart, vnto all their appetites, without anie
 reason or restraint at al. So that they neither prepare them selues with such deuotion, as is requisite, before they receaue, nor yet doe they fore-see and take such great care and diligence ouer them selues, after the time they haue receaued, as they should doe. And therfore it is no maruaile if some doe arise from that heauenly table with as litle deuotion, as they went vnto it or at least doe receaue with very litle fruit: for so much as their preparation was so sle^der, before they came vnto it. The which is confirmed by that, which we haue saied in the beginning of this treatise: that is, that all causes doe worke according vnto the disposition, which they find in the matter, or subiect. And so this most diuine Sacrament, which is the fountaine of all graces, doth likewise worke according vnto the disposition, which it findeth in the soules of the receauers. And therefore it worketh lesse in those soules, that are lesse well prepared for the receauing of it.
The second cause is the want of due mortification of our passions.The other cause is, by reason of some secret defects and passions not wel mortified that me^ haue in their soules, the which passions doe hale them, and carry them a way after their appetites: and so they be great lettes and impediments vnto their spirituall
 profitte. As the ouer-much loue of them selues, and of their owne willes, and the delighte and cherishing of their bodies, and senses: the which doe cause them to runne fantastically seeking here, and there, after diuersitie of tastes, and contentations: whereby they doe distracte their mindes vpon worldly affaires, and doe hinder therewith their deuotion, yea, and many times doe vtterly distroy it. These persons are like vnto an earthen vessell, which is not well hardened with fire, and therefore holdeth not faithfully the liquour, which is powred into it: but letteth it runne out through many chinkes, vntill it be altogether spilt, and lost. And this happeneth especiallie to such, as would faine be accounted good fellowes, and doe giue them selues to talking, laughing and vaine conuersation, and to intermeddle in matters litle appertaining vnto them. For al these thinges doe very much disorder the bedde, wherein this Heauenlie Bridegroome should be lodged.God will haue the possession of our hart alone. The friendshippe and fauour of Almightie God is a thing verie Noble, and delicate, and in no wise admitteth anie other competitours: but will possesse the heart alone.



Whether it be well done to receaue the blessed Sacrament of the Aultar oftentimes. THE X. CHAPTER.
FOR somuch as in the former chapter we haue exhorted all Catholicke Christians to frequent the sacrame^ts, and especially the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar: some peraduenture will demaund,  how often this diuine Sacrament ought to be receaued. The answere  vnto this question of the one side is very easy, and of the other side of great difficultie. For if we doe only consider the vertue and efficacie of the Sacrament (forsomuch as our Sauiour Iesus Christ is conteined therein, who is the fou^taine of all graces, and by him is applied vnto vs the vertue of his passion, which is of infinite value) it is a cleare case, that if wee might receaue it infinite times, wee ought so to do: considering that we should receaue so much the more grace, and so much the greater benefits thereby. But on the other side, considering the disposition, and preparation, which this Holie Sacrament requireth, (according vnto vvhich preparation, it Communicateth his vertue, as wee haue declared before, especiallie
 this being a Sacrament, not for the dead, but for the liuing: because the eating therof presupposeth life,) according (I say) vnto this consideratio^, it is not good to Communicate ouer often: but according vnto the preparation that euery one shall haue for the same: In regard whereof there are many things to be cosidered, and respected.
And first of all,Such as be in the Religious state of life haue better meanes to prepare them selues to Communicate oftentimes, than Secular persons haue. a respect herein must be had vnto the state of euery man and woman: For such persons, as are dedicated vnto God, (as Priestes, Monkes, Nunnes, and all other Religious, both men, and women,) haue greater prepartion, (in respect of their state of life,) to come vnto this holy sacrament, because they are not incombred with the affaires, and busines of the world. This I say, as hauing regarde vnto their state of life. Howbeit our Lord doth oftentimes supplie the defect of the state of life, with the aboundance of his grace, the which he giueth to whom he listeth, and as he listeth, in whatsoeuer state of life, a man is called vnto: as we see in Dauid, Abraham, Iob, and other holy Kings, and Patriarkes, which were of great perfection, although their state of life helped them not so much therunto, as the grace of God did. which is able to help more, tha^ al the helps
 of any state of life, be it neuer so perfect.
Likewise a respect ought to be had, that first euery person doe fulfill his bounden dutie in doing the occupations and charges of his state of life,Deuotion ought not to preiudice the bounden duties and charges required in each state of life. wherein hee liueth: that he doe giue himselfe vnto his spirituall exercises in such sort, as that hee leaue not his other bounden duties and charges vndone. As for example: A married woman that hath a husband and children, to attend,The workes of iustice are to be preferred bef^re the workes of grace. and daughters to looke vnto, and a houshold to maintaine, ought so to giue herselfe vnto matters of deuotion, that she omit not her other businesse of dutie: forsomuch as the one is voluntarie, and the other of necessitie: the one of counsaile, and the other of commaundement.1. Reg. 15.22. Eccl. 4.17. Osee. 6.6. And truely one of the principall fou^dations of good life ought to be, neuer to leaue the workes of iustice vndone, for the workes of grace. For as the Prophet saieth: Obedience is better than Sacrifice. And he calleth Obedience, whatsoeuer is to be done of duty, and Sacrifice that which is to be done of will, and deuotio^. The contrarie whereof men are inclined ordinarily to do, because they haue commonly more tast in such thinges, as they doe of their own proper will, than in those, which they doe at the will of others. And looke what I
 haue saied as touching the duty of women towards their children, and husbands, the very same I say is to be vnderstood, as co^cerning the dutie of children towardes their Parentes: especially, when they be poore, aged, or diseased with sicknes. For to help them in their necessities appertaineth to the first Commandement of the second table, which is the chiefest dutie,^ide sumnulam Caietani. Tit. filij peccata. Et vide summam S. Thomae. 2. 2. que. 32 Artic. 9. that we are bound to doe vnto men next after God. The which dutie is also commended vnto vs by that so auncient, and notable example of the Storkes, which d^ vse to prouide, and serue the old Stork^s with great loue, and diligence, in their l^tter yeares, when they are not able to h^lp themselues. Let a man therefore take ^eed that hee doe not so giue himselfe vn^o the vse of the Sacrame^ts, that he leaue vndone thereby his other dutifull busin^^se of so great importance: for if he doe almighty God will not accept his deuotion.
Thirdly,Wee must so accustome our selues to receaue the blessed sacrament. a man must likewise consider the custome, which hee vseth in his receauing the blessed Sacrament oftentimes: for it ought to be such a custome, that he may be able to continue and perseuer therein, and make due preparation accordinglie for the same: For like as trees, that are
 accustomed to be watered, whe^ they lacke their vsuall watering, are by reason of the want of so great and wonted a benefite, in great perill, yea, and sometimes beginne thereby to wither, and decay: euen so the soules that be accustomed to receaue this Heauenly food, are in great ieoperdie, and daunger, when they want this excellent benefit: in so much that some come hereby to faint in their spirituall life, yea, and sometimes vtterly to giue ouer the good pur^ose, and intention, they had before. For ^t is a generall rule, that such weake bodies, a^ are accustomed vnto a wholsome medic^ne, are very soone distempered, when th^y giue ouer the vse of it. And the very sa^e happeneth vnto weake soules, when they giue ouer the continuance of this wholesome medicine through their owne default. Wherefore a man ought in this case to h^ue respect also vnto the commodity, opportunity, and preparation, which he may ha^e for the frequenting of this blessed Sacrament: to the end, that he may appoint him selfe to such a vse therein, as hee may alwa^es continue: least doing otherwise,He writeth thus because in Spaine and Italy, women goe not somuch a broade, as they doe in England. he may happen to faile altogether, when he shal want this inestimable great benefit.

It is also good reason to co^sider, that men may with more liberty and lesse marking or noting of others, goe freely abroade to seeke the Sacraments, and the Priests, to minister the^ vnto them, than women may. And among wome^, those that be of greatest yeares, and most auncient, haue better opportunity, than the yonger sort. For it hath alwaies bene very much commended and praised of al holy men, that yong maidens in their tender and suspiciouse age, should be refrained and kept within doores. For which cause also, in the olde law Almighty God commaunded,Deut. 16.26. that all men should present them selues in the Temple three times in the yeare. But he did neuer bind women thereunto, no not so much as to come once in all their life. For he foresawe very wel, how daungerous it was for them to be gadding out of their doores.Genes. 34.1. The which was tried by experience in Dina the daughter of Iacob: who by her going a braod but at one time only, d^stroied both her selfe, and al that country. Wherefore Saint AmbroseS. Ambro^ not without good cause praised the most Blessed Virgin ^arie. For that she hauing kept herself with^n doores so long time, went in so great last when she went to visit her cosin, Saint Elizabeth.

I speake not this, because I would that young maidens should co^tinually be shutt vp within doores but that they should accustome them selues, so much as is possible to treate with Almightie God at home, and to seeke him within the very corners of their houses, going as seldome abroad, as is possible: vnlesse it be vpo^ such daies, as the Church commandeth, or when they inte^d to receaue this most B. Sacrament: which would be done with this moderation. This I say speaking generally: for there be some yong virgins, in whome such circumstances doe concurre, that in them these inconueniences are not to be feared, and therefore they are to be excepted out of this generall rule.
If we finde ^ur selues ^he better ^y receaui^g ^he blessed ^acrament ^ften times (...) is good to ^ntinue it.Now al these things being well weighed eueryone ought to consider with him self, how it fareth with him by the often receauing of this most blessed Sacrament. For if by frequenting the same, he feele him selfe thereby more deuout, more closly recollected, ^ore circu^spect in his communication, mo^e diligent in doing good workes, more ca^efull and vigilant ouer him selfe, more Maister ouer his anger, and other inordinate Appetites, and Passions, (though he haue not profited so much
 in great quantitie herein,) yet it is an euident signe, that he taketh profit by his often receauing of this most blessed Sacrament. And therefore the more he perceaueth himselfe to haue profited therby, the oftener he ought to frequent the same. So that if he perceaue, that the oftener he frequenteth this most blessed Sacrament, the more he profiteth in the spiritual life, therby he ought in this case, humbly to continue that thing, which hee feeleth to be so profitable vnto him. But in case he cannot perceaue any thing hereof in himselfe,The not profitting by the often receauing is a^ signe of slender preparation. it is a signe, that he taketh little fruit and profit by the receauing of the blessed Sacrament, and it is also a manifest token of his slender preparation, which he maketh, before he come to receaue it. And therefore it seemeth, that either he must make better preparation before he come vnto it: or els he must not vse to receaue it so oftentimes as he hath done.
True it is,The secret operation(...) this bless^ Sacramen^ that somtimes this most blessed Sacrament worketh so secretly, that a man shall hardly perceaue it. For grace commonly worketh, as nature doth, by litle and litle: as it appeareth in a you^g grafted tree, the which though we perceiued not whe^ it did grow, yet we may see afterwardes, that
 it is growen. Wherefore in this case, a man ought not to trust his own iudgement, but to submit himselfe, and his cause into the handes of his discreete, and vertuous ghostly Father, and let him determine the matter: But here it is diligently to be noted, that not only the going forward in vertue is accounted for a profit, but also the not turning backeward: although (as S. Bernard saieth) the not going forward in the way of God is a turning backeward.S. Barnard. The not going foreward in ver^ue is a turning backward. Howbeit for all that, a man may more clearely perceaue when he turneth backeward, than when hee goeth forward. As a stone may more clearely be perceaued, when it commeth violentlie rouling downeward on the side of a hill, than when it is throwen vpward: for generally the encreasing is very hard, and the decreasing very easie. As it is wont to be said in a Prouerbe: It is easier to plucke downe, than to build:) and therefore the decreasing is more plainly to be perceaued: for which cause (I say) that although it doe seeme to a man, that hee goeth not forward in his spirituall voyage by frequenting this most blessed sacrament: yet, if on the other side he doe perceiue,(...) we per^ue that (...) our sel^ne recea^g this. that by his disco^tinuance, and refraining to Communicate, hee doth turne backewarde, falling into many defects,
 and finding himselfe lesse able to with stand temptations,blessed Sacrament, we waxe worse and worse, it is then better to receaue it more often times. more coldly disposed in praier, more vnwilling for obedience, more slouthfull vnto the workes of mercy, more easily prouoked to laughter, and idle talke more prompt to anger, more impatient in his troubles, finally, more careles and negligent in looking to him selfe, when (I say) he findeth him selfe to faile in al these, or in any one of them, by refraining to receaue this most blessed Sacrament, and that it was not so much, when he did frequent the same: it is a signe, that he doth profit by the often receauing thereof: forsomuch as it is some profit to fall into lesse inconueniences.It is some profit to commit lesse sin And that medicine is no lesse necessary, which preserueth vs from sicknes, than that, which increaseth our health. The which is a thing of great comfort vnto all such persons, as doe not so plainely perceaue in them selues the fruit, that commeth by receauing of this most blessed Sacrament.
And although a man see him selfe many times to fall into some veniall sinnes:veniall si^ yet ought he not therfore to refraine from receauing this blessed Sacrament, if he be before repentant for them. For (as S. HilaryS. Hila^ saieth) if the sins be not deadlie, a man
 ought not to withdraw himselfe from the medicine of our Lords body: But this reason doth rather binde vs to come vnto it the more:This life cannot be passed ouer without veniall sins. forsomuch as one of the effects, and vertues of this diuine Sacrament is to remedy veniall sinnes, without which this life can not be passed ouer.
Now these premises being well considered and knowen, euery man may easilie determine with himselfe, how oftentimes it is conuenient for him to come vnto this Heauenlie banket: For to some, it may suffice to receaue vppon the principall Feastes of the yeare:S. Augustine counseleth to receaue this blessed sa^rament e^ery weeke ^nd this ^uthor ^inketh at all lay ^rsons may ^dinarily ^tent them ^ues ther^h, be ^y neuer ^ertuous. to others euery moneth: to some euerie fifteene dayes: to some also euery weeke: as Saint AVGVSTINE giueth counsaile: with the which all persons may content themselues, be they neuer so vertuous, vnlesse there be some particular cause or circumstance, wherefore they should doe it more often: For as there is no rule, that hath not some exception: euen so nothing can be established as perpetuall, that hath not some limitation. And of this mind is S. Bonauenture in a treatise of perfection which he wrote vnto one of his Sisters: wherin he saieth in substance in a maner all that we haue here declared. These following be his wordes.


If any shall desire to vnderstand,
S. Bonauenture.
whether it is better for a man to Communicate often times, or seldome, it seemeth to mee, that in this there can be appointed no generall rule for all persons: forsomuch as the merits of men being diuers, and their purposes and exercises diuers, the workes of the Holie Ghost diuers, and the state of euery mans life being also diuers one from another, there cannot be shaped a Garment, that may fitte euery person. And therefore like as vnto ihe sicke there is not giuen alwaies one kinde of medicine, nor yet in one like quantitie: but the quantitie of the medicine must be applied, and measured according vnto the qualities of the persons, of the diseases, complections, times, and places: euen so likewise the same order ought to be obserued, in receauing the spirituall medicine of this most Holie Sacrament:
Men entangled with worldly cares cannot communicate so often as spirituall men.
For such persons as are entangled with the troubles and cares of the world, cannot so oftentimes ridde themselues from the same, and make preparation to receaue, as those that be free from all these incombrances, and haue dedicated their liues wholly vnto spirituall exercises. And amongest them there are some that are more carefull, and vigilant ouer them selues, and the purity of their Consciences, than others be. Some there be also, that are greatlie inflamed with a feruencie, and desire of this most Holie Misterie.


Others contrariwise are very fearefull, and timorous, when they should communicate: in such sort, that were it not, that they be prouoked thereunto by their conscience, or by custome of Religion, or for feare least they should be the more seperated from Almighty God, by long refrayning from this blessed Sacrament,Note, that S. Bonauenture is here of opinion, that it is ordinarilie sufficient for laie persons to communicate once a weeke.they would Communicate very seldome times: but I am of an opinion, that such persons are hardly to be found (Priests only excepted, whose office is to say Masse,) to whom it were not sufficient to Communicate once a weeke: vnlesse there be some speciall cause, or reason to moue them therunto more ofte^: as some that might happen vnto them, or some principall feast, or some new and vnaccustomed desire to receaue him, who onely is able to temper and coole the feruency and heate of the foule, that hath such a feruent loue vnto him. And because the vehemency of such a feruent heat may be charitably coniectured to come of the HOLY GHOST (when other circumstances doe agree with the same,) it seemeth, that he ought not to make resistance against such a d^sire. The which hath bin seene by experience in some pers^ns, whose whole life was altogether in Christ: and that in such sort, that if they had not bin oftentimes refreshed with the refection of this bread of life, it seemed, that there would haue failed in them euen their very corporall life: as the manifest signes of this their weakenes gaue plaine signification.


And therefore it is very good counsaile for a man to prepare himselfe often-times to receaue the medicine of this holy Sacrament with the greatest deuotion, that he is able: and after that hee hath receaued it, to be watchfull ouer him-selfe with great carefulnes, and diligence. This counsaile appertaineth especially vnto Religious persons which are dedicated unto God: to the end they may procure by this meane that innocencie, and puritie, which is obtained by this diuine Sacrament.

And although a man sometimes be not altogether so deuout, y^t that notwithstanding, (putting his trust in the mercy of almightie God,) he ought to come with all humility vnto this bread of life. And if it shall seeme vnto him, that he is not worthy thereof, he ought to thinke, that the more weak and diseased he findeth himselfe to be, the more it standeth him in hand, to seeke for the Phisitian of his health: sith that (as the heauenly Phisitian him-selfe doth witnesse) the vvhole haue no need of a Phisitian, but the sicke.Math. 9.12.13. Mar. 2 17. Luke. 5.31.32. Neither oughtest thou to thinke, that thou commest vnto Christ to sanctifie him with thy holines: but to the end, that hee may sanctifie thee with his holines.

Neither yet ought a man to be discouraged fro^ receauing this most blessed Sacrament, when hee feeleth not in himselfe such a speciall grace of deuotion, as he would gladly haue, (so that hee doe
 for his part what lieth in him, for the obteyning thereof:) or when eyther at the time of his receauing, or after the same, hee findeth not himselfe so deuout. For many times this is wont to happen by the speciall dispensation of Almighty God for causes, for the which hee is wont at certaine times to depriue such as be his, of this consolation.

All this is written by Saint Bonauenture, whose testimony ought to be of great authoritie with all men: forsomuch as this glorious holy Father was a very excellent man, not only in learning, but also in holines, and spirit, (which in him did excell,) and therfore he wrote and vnderstood very much in this matter.
Wherefore, as well by this, as also by al the other reasons, that haue bin hitherto declared, euery ma^ may easilie perceaue, how little reason those men haue, which being moued with superfluous zeale, doe vnder colour of reuerence condemne, yea and preach also many times, against such persons, as doe frequent the Sacraments: For put the case, that there were herein some excesse, yet being so many other greater inconuenienees in the world to be reprended, mee seemeth they should not waste so many words against this alone. Especially if the matter be wel considered, they shall
 shal find, that there commeth much more hurt vnto the world, by reason of so muuh refraining from the vse of the Sacraments, than by comming ouermuch vnto them: For the better vnderstanding whereof, it is very much to be noted, that (as S. Thomas sayeth,) all morrall vertues, because they consist in a meane, must necessarilie haue two vices contrarie vnto them: the one by excesse, and the other by defect: although they haue not at all times names whereby they may be knowen. Euen so also wee say, that in the vse of the Sacraments, and generally in all spiritual exercises there may be both an excesse, and a defect. Now this then being so,More harme ensueth of ouermuch refrayning fro^ the Sacraments, than of ouermuch frequenting them. if we cast our eyes vpon the greater of these extreamities, we shall finde, that the world is in far worse case by so much refrayning fro^ the Sacraments, than by comming ouermuch vnto them. For admitt there were a faulte in this behalfe, yet who is so blinde, that he seeth not how much greater fault it is for men to absent themselues so long time fro^ the sacraments, wherin almighty God hath put the medicine of our woundes, and the remedie of our soules. What is that,The long absence fro^ r^ceauing of the most blessed Sacrament is the cause of such loose consciences, as be at this day.Christians in the Primitiue church receaued the blessed Sacrament daylie. Act. 2.42. and 46. that maketh men to liue so loose and careles in their consciences, but the long absenting
 themselues from this bread of life? But consider the difference, that is betweene this corrupt age, in which wee doe now liue, (wherein men doe receaue the blessed Sacrament but only once in the yere,) and the deuout time of the Primitiue Church, when the Christians did receaue euery day: and thou shalt thereby perceiue, what difference there is betweene the receauing of the blessed Sacrament oftentimes, and the receauing of it, but onelie once in the yeare.
Wherefore, let him that hath any zeale to God, and to his Catholicke Church, cry out, and bewaile this slackenes, to see men so to draw backward from God, and from all spirituall exercises: forsomuch as this is the principall cause, yea, and the very fountaine of all our euils.
Now therefore, like as those that haue the gouernment of the common weale, alt^ough they know very well, that as well the superfluity of vi^tuals, and of other te^porall commodities, as the want of the same may be hurtfull vnto the common weale, yet doe they employ all their study, that there may be no want, and are neuer discontented with aboundance, (because of want there may ensue farre greater damage,
 than of ouermuch plenty: euen so ought they that haue the charge of the Church, much rather to thinke, how to remedie and prouide for the want of these spirituall victuals, and medicines, than to remedy the ouermuch aboundance of the same. Forsomuch as without comparison, the inconuenience is greater, that commeth of want, than that which commeth of superfluity. Especially considering, that none can be a meete Iudge in this matter, iudging only by the externall doings, vnlesse he see the inward minds withall. And certainely, that man is very rashe, that giueth sentence vpon the cause, hauing not considered the processe. This may suffice at this present for this matter.
Now will I set forth here certaine deuout prayers, and meditations, wherein a good Christian may occupy himselfe both before, and after the receauing of this most blessed Sacrament.



HERE FOLLOWETH A DEVOVT Meditation to be said before the receauing of the Blessed Sacrament of the Aultar, to stirre vp in our soules a feare and loue of this most Holie Sacrament.




VVHO art thou O my LORD, and who am I, that I should be so bolde as
 to approach vnto thee! What is man, that hee should receaue into him Almightie GOD hys creatour! What other thing is man of himselfe, but a vessell of corruption, a Sonne of the Diuel, an inheritour of Hell, a worker of sinnes, a despiser of Almightie GOD, and a creature very weake, and vnable vnto all goodnesse, and verie mightie, and disposed vnto all wickednesse! What is man els, but a miserable creature in all thinges: in his counsailes blinde, in his workes vaine, in his appetites filthy, in his desires inconstant, to be short, in all thinges little, and onely in his owne estimation great? Behold here, O my Lord, what I am! But now, what art thou? Thou art without quantitie great, without qualitie good, without measure wise, and without time euerlasting. Thou art in greatnes infinite, in vertue omnipotent, in wisdome profound, in counsaile wonderfull, in iudgement terrible, and in all vertues perfect, and fully complete. How then may such a vile, and loathsome creature as I am, be so bolde, as to approach vnto a God of so great a Maiestie? The starres are dimmed in thy presence, the pillars of heauen quake before thee, the highest of the Seraphins doe gather in their winges, and account them-selues as it were little flyes, when thou art present. How then dare so vile and base a creature as I am, be so bold as come and receaue thee within him? That Holy man S. Iohn Baptist,Luke. 1.42.43.44. who was sanctified in his mothers vvombe, durst not touch thy head, neyther did hee thinke him-selfe worthie to vnloose the buckles of thy shooes.Luke. 3.16. S. Peter the chiefe of the apostles cryed out and saied: Depart from mee O Lord, for I am a sinfull man.Iohn. 1.27. And shall I be so bold, as to approach vnto thee, being so loden with sins? If those loues,Luke. 5.8. that stood
 vpon the table of the Temple,Reg. 21.46. Exod. 12.11.15. and 20. An interpretation of the maner of eating the Paschal lambe. (which were nothing els, but a shadow of this diuine mistery) could not be eaten, but of him, that was cleane, and sanctified how shall I pre ume to eat the blood of angels being so void of al holines, as I am? the Paschal lamb which was a figure of this most blessed sacrament, Almighty God commaundeth that it should be eaten with vnleauened bread, with bitter lettice, with their shooes on their feete, and with their loins girded. How dare I then presume to come to the true Paschall Lambe without hauing any of these preparations? what other thing is there meant by the vnleauened bread, but the purity of the mind without the leauen of malice? what other thing by the bitter lettice, but the true and bitter contrition? where is the purity of my loines, and the cleannes of my feete, which be the holy desires? I feare, yea, I stand in very great dread, and doubt, how I shalbe receiued at this table, if I want this preparation. From thi^ table was he driuen away that was found not to haue his wedding garment on, (which is Charity:) and being bound both hand and foote, was commaunded to be cast into outward darknes. And what other thing may I looke for,Math. 22.11.12. and 13. if I shalbe found after the like sort at this banket? O ye diuine eies, vnto whom al the secrets of our souls lie open and manifest, what shall become of my soule, if it appeare before you without this garment?The arke of the testame^t was a figure of this m^st blessed Sacrament. Oza. 2. Reg. 6.6. To touch the Arke of the testament (which was but a figure of this Holie m sterie,) was an offence so grieuous, that euen the Priest called Oza, for the only touching of it, was forthwith punished with sodain death. Why shal not I then feare the like punishment, if I shal receiue him vnworthily, who was figured by the same Arke? The Bethsamites did nothing els, but behold the selfesame arke of the Testament
 curiously, when it passed through their land,7.1. Reg. 6.19. and for this their presumption only, the holy scripture saieth, that almighty God slue fiftie thousand persons among them. O what a wonderfull matter is this, euen able to astonishe all the hartes of men. They did not di pise the arke neither did they enterteine it with any euill semblance. No, they reioyced thereat, and ware in a wonderful ioy:1. Reg. 6.13.15. insomuch that they offred vp sacrifice, and yet because they did only behold the Ark curiously, they were plagued with the blood and death of so many persones.
But O most mercifull and dreadfull God, how much greater is thy most Blessed Sacrament than that Arke? How much greater thing is it to receiue thee, than to behold thee? How then, shall not I tremble and quake for feare, when I come to receiue a God of so great maiestie, and Iustice: especially considering, that if I should prepare my selfe for the space of infinit yeares* to receiue this most diuine sacrament only once, and should haue all the purity of the Angels for the same, I should not be worthie to receiue it: how much lesse now, being so euill disposed as I am?
And if I haue such cause to feare, considering the greatnes of thy excellent maiestie, much more ought I to feare considering my sins, and the malice and wickednes of my life? I remember now, O my Lord how many great offences I haue committed against thee in this world. A time there was, (and I would O my most mercifull Lord, that it were not also euen now,) when the thing most forgotte^ and least loued of me was thine infinit beautie: and when the dust of creatures was more esteemed of me, than the treasure of thy grace, and the hope of thy glory mine own desires were the law, and
 rules, whereby I directed my life. All obedience I gaue vnto myne appetites, and I haue made no more account of thee, than if I had neuer knowen thee.Psal. 13.1. I am that foolish person, that said in his hart: there is no God. For in such sort haue I liued a long time, as if I had beleeued, that there were no God at all. I neuer endeuoured my selfe to take paines for the loue of thee. I neuer feared thy iustice. I neuer refrained my selfe from wickednesse in regarde of thy lawes. I neuer gaue thankes (as I should haue done) for thy benefits. And though I knew well, that thou waste present in all places, yet I neuer left sinning in thy presence. Looke vvhatsoeuer myne eyes fansied, I yeelded it vnto them. And I neuer vsed the least inforcement vnto my hart to refraine it from anie one of her delightes. What kinde of wickednesse is there, through which my malice hath not passed? What other thing hath all my life time past beene, but a continuall contradiction and warre against thee, and a renewing of all the martyrdomes and paines vvhich thou haste suffered for mee? How manie times haue I for greedinesse euen of a filthie delight, or els for couetousnesse of a little money, sold thee as another traiterous Iudas? What shall it be then for me to come now to receaue thee, but onely to giue the a kisse of peace vvith the same Iudas, after that I haue fold thee? What other thing did I (at other times when I receaued thee in thy blessed Sacrament, and so soone as I had receaued thee, did forth-with turne to offend thee) but laugh thee to scorne vvith the souldiers, who on the one side kneeled downe, and adored thee, and on the other side smote thee on the face with a reede? How dare I then O my Sauiour, and my iudge, be so bold as to receaue thee into such a
 vile and lothsome lodging? how shall I lodge thy most Holy Body in a bedde of dragons, and in a neast of serpents? For what other thing is a soule full of sin, but a house of diuels, a stable of beasts, a swine stie and doughill of all filthines? how then shalt thou be entertained, O most virginall purity and fountaine of beautie, in such a lothsome place what hath light to doe with darkenes:2. C. 6.14. and what agreement is there betwene God, and Beliall? O sweet flower of the field, and delectable lillie of the valley? O bread of angels, wilt thou now become meate for beasts? Why should this diuine meate be giuen vnto dogges, and this so precious a pearle vnto swyne?Mat. 7.6. Cant. 2.16.17. Cant. 3.9. O louer of pure and cleane soules, which feedest among Lillies vntill the day breake, and the shadowes fade away, what foode shall I be able to giue thee in my hart, where these sweete flowers grow not, but only stinking weeds and briers? Thy bedde is of the wood of Libanon, the pillers thereof be of siluer, the tester of gold, and thy courtians of purple. But in this house of mine there are none of these ornaments. Wherefore, what lodging shall I giue thee, when thou shalt enter into it?Math. 26.59.90. Luk. 23.53 Thy sacred body was shrewded in a cleane wynding sheete and buried in a new sepulchre, where no man was euer laied before. But what part is there in my soule, cleane, and new, where I may lay thee? What hath my mouth bin, but an open Sepulchre, from whence issued out the stench and corruption of my sins. What hath my heart bin, but a fountaine of wicked desires? What hath my will beene, but a house and bedde of the Diuell thyne enimie? Howe dare I presume to approach with these filthie lippes, and vvith this preparation to receaue, and to giue thee a kisse of PEACE?
 There is no part in my soul that is pure and cleane, and that hath not bin many times corrupted with sin, and therefore I haue no new and cleane Sepulchre, where I may burie thee.

The Second part of this Meditation.
O My sweet Sauiour, and Redeemer, I am very much ashamed of my selfe to see in what case I am at this present! I am abashed to see after what sort I goe to be embraced of the ^pouse of heauen, vvho is contented to receaue mee now againe: for so farre doth thy mercy, and goodnesse extend, that thou disdainest not, O king of glory, to receaue againe into thy house, yea, and to take her for thy spouse, that hath bin an outcast, d^flowred, and dishonoured by the diuell that most ba^e and vile ribald. The diuell hath taken away the flower of my honesty: and yet art thou contented euen with the leauings of the wicked enimie.Ieremy. 3.1 Thou sayest, that although I haue played the Harlot with neuer so many Louers, yet if I turne againe vnto thee, thou wilt receaue mee. I acknowledge O Lord, mine vnworthinesse, and confesse thy great mercy: It is that that maketh me now so bold, as to approch vnto thee: in what case so euer I stand. For the more vnworthie I am, the more shalt thou be glorified, for not driuing me away from thee, nor yet disdaining ^o filthie a creature. Thou doest not O Lord, driue sinners away from thee, but thou doest call them, and prouoke them to come vnto thee. Thou art hee that saied:Mat. 11.28 Mat. 9.12.13. Mat. 9.11. Come vnto me all yee that labour, and are loaden, and I will refresh you. Thou haste saied also: The whole haue no neede of a Phisitian, but they that are sicke. And againe: I am not come to call the righteous,
 but the sinners to repentance. Of thee it is commonlie saide, that thou diddest receaue sinners, and eat with them. O my Lord, thou haste not now chaunged the propertie, and condition, vvhich thou haddest then. Wherefore I beleeue, that thou doest euen now call likewise from heauen, such as thou diddest then call here in earth. And therefore, I being now mooued with this thy mercifull calling, doe come vnto thee, sore burdened with sinnes, that thou shouldest vnburden me, and being ouer charged with my miseries, and temptations, I come vnto thee, that thou shouldest giue mee help and comfort. I come as one diseased vnto the Phisitian that thou mayest heale me: and as a sinner vnto the iust, and fountaine of iustice, that thou mayest iustifie me. Thou saiest, that thou dost receaue sinners, and eate with them: and that to be conuersant vvith such is euen thy food. If such guests doe so much delite thee, behold here a sinner, vvith whome thou mayest eate of this meate. I beleeue vvell O Lord, that the teares of that publike sinner Marie Magdalen did more delight thee, than the proude Feast of the Pharisee: forsomuch as thou didest not despise her teares, nor driue her away from thee, for that shee wa^ a sinner: but rather receaue her, pardon her, and defend her, and for a few teares, diddest forgiue her many sinnes. Behold here O Lord, an other new occasion ministred vnto thee of greater glorie: to wit, a sinner with moe sinnes, and fewer teares. That mercifull receauing of that bublike sinner into thy grace: and fauour: was neyther the first nor the last of thy mercies. To many others, of like sorte, hast thou shewed mercy. And manie others doe yet remain for thee to do the like vnto. Let me now (I beseech thee be entred into the number of them and forgiue
 me, who haue more offended thee, and lesse w^pt for mine offences* I haue not so many teares as are sufficient to wash thy feet. But thou hast shed so much blood, as sufficeth to washe awaie all the sinnes of the world. Be not angrie with me, O my God, if being such a one as thou seest me, I dare notwithstanding approch and come vnto thee. Remember, that thou wast not angrie, when that poore woman, which was diseased with the bloodie flux, came and sought vnto thee, to be cured of her disease, by touching the hemme, of thy garment: but rather didest comfort her, saying Haue a good hart daughter,Math. 9.22. Mar. 5.25.27.28. and. 29. thy faith hath made thee ^afe. I therefore being now diseased with an other kind of bloodie fluxe, much more daungerous, and more incurable, than that was, what should I els doe, but repaire vnto thee, to be cured of the same? O my Lorde, thou hast not chaunged the condition, nor the office, thou haddest here in earth, although thou be ascended into Heauen. For if it were otherwise, wee should haue need of an other Scripture, and of another Gospell, that might declare vnto vs the condition, which thou hast there, if it were different from that,Mat. 9.20.21. and 35. Mat. 11.5. Mar. 5.28.29. and 30. which thou hadest here. I read in thy gospel: that all the diseased and miserable persons came to touch thee, because there issued such vertue from thee, as healed them all. To thee came the leopers, and thou didest stretch out thy blessed hand, and make the^ clean. To thee came the blind, the deafe, and such as were sicke of the palsie, and possessed with diuells. To conclude, to thee came all the monsters of the world, and to no one of them diddest thou euer giue a deniall. In thee only is health to be found, and in thee is the remedie of all miseries. And as thou art of power to
 giue health, so art thou no lesse mercifull to be willing to bestow it. Now then whither shall wee goe that be in distresse, but vnto thee?
I know right well, O my Lood, that this diuine sacrament is not only a meate for the whole, but also a medicine for the diseased. It is not only a strength for the liuing, but also a resurrection for the dead. And it doth not only inamorate and delite the iust, but also heale and cleanse sinners. Let euery one therefore approch vnto it as he may, and take such part of it, as apperteineth vnto him. The iust doe come to eate, and to reioyce at this Table: and the voice of their confession and praises soundeth in this diuine banket. I will nowe come as a sinner, and as one diseased, to receiue this cup of my health.Psal. 115.15. By no way may I passe without this diuine mistery: and by no meanes can I excuse mine absence from the ^ame. For if I be sick here shall I be cured. If I be in health here shall I be preserued. If I be aliue here shall I be stre^gthened: And if I be dead, here shall I be raysed vp againe. If I burne in the loue of God, here shall this heate be augmented: and if I be but lukewarme, shall I be made hoate. I will not be dismaid for that I am blind, because our Lord illuminateth the blind nor for that I am fallen because our Lord raiseth them vp againe, that are fallen. I will not hide me from him,Genes. 3.9. as Adam did, for that he sawe him selfe naked: because he is able to couer my nakednes againe: nor for that I am vncleane, and full of sinnes: because he is the fountaine of mercie: neither yet for that I see my selfe in such poore estate as I am, because he is the lord of all things created. I thinke not that I do him any iniury in thus doing but rather that I doe giue him an ocasion of that greater glory
 For the more miserable I am, the more shall the greatnes of his mercie shine in mee, by giuing mee remedy. The blindnes of him, that was blind from his natiuity,Iohn. 9.3. serued to the end, that the glorie of God might the more manifestly shine in him: and the baines of my condition shall serue to this end, that it may appeare, how good and mercifull he is who being of so high a maiestie, doth not disdaine one so vile, and ba^e as I am. considering especiallie, that respect is not here had vnto me, but vnto the merits of my Sauiour Iesus Christ: in respect whereof it hath pleased the Heauenly Father, to take me for his sonne, and to deale with me, as with such a one. Now therefore, I beseech thee, O most mercifull Father of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, that sith the holy king Dauid receiued vnto his table a lame man, because he was the son of his dearly beloued friend Ionathas intending thereby to honour the sonne, not for his own ^ake: but for the merits of his Father, euen so it may please thee, O Heauenly Father, to receiue me vnto thy Holy Table which am a most poore and wretched sinner not for mine own sake, but for the merits of thy dearely beloued frind Iesu Christ, our second Ada^ and true Father, who liueth and reigneth with thee for euer, and euer, world without end. Amen,




Here followeth another deuout Meditation, for one to exercise himselfe withall after he hath receaued the most blessed Sacrament, co^sidering and weighing the greatnes of the benefit receaued. and yeelding most humble thankes vnto our Lord for the same.
IF all the creatures, that be in Heauen and Earth were tongues, and ech one of them should help me, O Lord, to giue thee thankes for the least of thy benefits, certaine it is, that I could not worthily doe it: Seeing then I am not able with so great a company, to giue thee worthy thankes for the least of thy benefits, how may I alone be able to doe it for the greatest? O my God, and my Sauiour, what thankes and praises shall I giue thee, for that it hath pleased thee this day, to visite me, to comfort me, to sustaine me, and to honour mee with thy presence. That holy woman saint Elizabeth, mother of the fore-runner S. Iohn Baptist, replenished with the Holy Ghost, when she saw the blessed Virgin Marie entring into her house, at what time she bare thee in her wombe, being astonished at so great a wonder, cryed out and said: whence commeth this to me,Luk. 1.43. that the mother of my Lord should come vnto me? Now what shall I doe, most vile and wretched worme, the greatest of all sinners: considering, that there is entred this day into my house a Consecrated Host, in which is contained the very same God that came thither? How much greater cause haue I to cry out and say, whence commeth this to me, that not the mother of God, but euen God himselfe, and the Lord of all thinges created, should vouchsafe to come vnto me? To me I say, that haue beene so long time an habitation and lodging of the diuell. To me, that
 haue so oftentimes offended thee. To me that haue alwaies despised thee, dishonoured thee, crucified thee, and giuen thee to drinke so many galles, as the sins haue bin which I haue committed against thee. To be short, to me, that haue shut the gate against thee, and shunned thee, and haue therefore deserued neuer more to receaue thee, sith I haue in such wise contemned thee: neither yet to be admitted any more to thy holy Table, sith I would not come therunto, whe^ thou hast called me. VVhence then commeth this vnto me, that thou, which art the king of kings, and Lord of Lords, that hast no need of any thing created,Esay. 66.1. whose seate is the Heaue^, whose princely foote stoole is the earth, whom all the hostes of Angells doe serue, to whom the morning starres doe sing praises, in whose handes are all the coastes of the earth, thou that sittest vpon the Cherubins, and seest into the most bottomles places that be, euen into things most secret, and hidden, penetrating with thy wisedome from the highest to the lowest, thou that art a Lord of such an incomprehe^sible maiesty, and greatnes, shouldest vouchsafe to come into a place so base and filthie as I am. Wilt thou descend now once againe into Hell? Wilt thou put thy selfe againe into the hands of sinners? Wilt thou be borne againe in a stable among beasts? VVilt thou be swadled againe in a mainger, and laied in straw, and haie? It doth very well appeare, O my God, that thou hast novv the very selfe same hart, thou hadest then: forsomuch as that, vvhich thou diddest once for sinners, the same thou doest also euerye daie for them. If thou shouldest but onlie visitte me after anie other sort in the vvorld, it were vndoubtedlie a poynt of verie great mercie. But now O my sweet Lord, that it hath pleased thee, not
 only to visi^ me, but also to enter into me, to dwel in me, to transforme me into thee, and to make me one with thee, by such a wonderful vnion, as the which deserueth to be compared (as thou thy selfe hast compared it) with that most high and diuine vnion, which thou hast with thy father:Iohn. 6.56.57. for as the father is in thee, and thou in him, euen so hee, that feedeth vpon thee, remaineth in thee, and thou in him:) what thing may there be of greater wonder? King Dauid vvondered at the great estimation that thou madest of man, when he saied: O Lord,Psalm 8.5. what is man that thou art mindfull of him? But how much more wonderfull is this, that almighty God would not only be mindfull of man, but also make himselfe man for mans sake, that he would abide with man, die for man, giue him selfe for meat vnto ma^, and make himselfe one with man? King Salomon wondered, that almighty God would dwell in that Temple, vvhich he had builded in so many years, and vvith so great expenses.3. Reg. 8.27. It is to bee thought saied he, that God will verilie dwell on the earth? If Heauen and the Heauens of Heauens are not able to conteine him: how much lesse able is this house, which I haue built? Novv hovv much more is it to be wondered at, that the selfe same Lord of the Heauens vvill after an other more excellent manner, dvvell in a vvretched soule, vvhich hath scarcely endeuoured to employ one onlie daie in preparing of a lodgeing for him. All creatures vvondered to see God made man, to see him descend from Heauen into earth, to continue nine monthes in closed in the womb of a virgin, and surely they had great good reaso^ to wo^der thereat, sith this was the greatest of al the wo^ders of almightie God, and the best and greatest work of al his benefi^s. But that virginal wombe was replenished with the holy
 ghost. It was more bright than the starres of the Heauens, more pure than the angells of paradise more adorned with vertues and graces than both Heauen, and earth, withall other ornamentes: and therefore it was a lodgeing worthily prepared for almighty God. But that the same Lord should inhabite in my house, which is more dirty than the mire it selfe, more obscure than the night, more filthie, than all the stincking puddles in the world: is not this a matter of great wonder? and admit, that through his infinit goodnes, I am at this presente washed, and cleansed with the water of his grace, and vertue of his Sacramentes: yet not withstanding is it not a wonderfull mercie, that a Lorde of such excellent purity, and cleannes, as he is, shold not disdaine a thing, that hath benne sometimes so filthy and lothsome? it were an offence vnto a great Lord, in case one should serue him at his table with some vessell, that had serued before in some sicke house, to receaue the vomitte of sicke folkes, or other like filthines, although afterwards it were washed very cleane, and made whiter than snowe: because the remembrance of the filthines past it sufficient to cause a lothsomnes in him, that should see it. But, O my Almightie God, and my Sauiour, what greater mercie can there be shewed, tha^ for thee not to loth, that there should be at thy table: among thy other elected vessells, a vessel of corruption, and of al filthines, for thee to eate vpo^? for although it be now clensed with thy grace, yet there continueth the fresh remembrance of sinne, and the abhominable sauour with the reliques of sinne, which after the same sin doe remaine in the soule. vvhy dost thou then consent, that such a stinking vessel, as I am, should be at thy table, and that it should be as it were a pixe to lay this blessed Consecrated
 Host in? let the angels praise thee, and magnifie thee, O Lord, for so high a fauour, for so preat a mercie, and for so excellent a worke, and shewe of thy goodnes. It appeareth right well, that thou art the most excellent and perfect goodnes, sith thou takest so great delight to communicate thyselfe, and sith thou hast deuised such a wonderfull meane to make vs good. It appeareth right well, how passing great thy loue is towards men,1. Cor. 13.5.6.7. and that Charity (as the Apostle saieth) is neither ambitious, nor disdainfull, nor seeketh her owne, in that thou takest no disdaine at so filthy a thing, as the hart of a sinner is.
But how strange a matter shal it seeme, if vnto all this there be adioyned al that also, which this wo^derful diuine sacrament doth worke, and signifie. O how great and how ioyful newes O Lord, doth this reuere^d mistery giue me of thee? such vndoubtedly, as may for their worthines throughlye content and satisfie my hart. This most blessed Sacrament assureth me of thy name, that thou art my father, and not only my father, but also the most sweet spouse of my soule. For I vnderstand, that the proper effect for the which thou hast instituted this diuine Sacrament, is to susteine and delight soules with spirituall delightes, and to make them one with thee. Now if this be so, if it be true also, that the heart is to be iudged by the workes: from vvhat kinde of heart proceeded such a worke as this is? for vnion properly appertaineth vnto such, as are marryed: and cherishinges are not wont to be vsed of the maister towardes his seruant, but of the housband towardes his wife: no cherishings are not wont to be shewed of a father towards his son, vnlesse he be his yo^gest son and very te^derly beloued of his father, for to such a father it
 appertaineth to prouide for his sonne, not onelie of thinges necessarie for to liue, but also of gestes, and other delightfull things, wherewith hee may make him merrie and ioyfull for his recreation. Such an effect of loue as this is, remained O Lord, to be discouered to the world: and this was reserued vntill the time of thy comming, and vntil the preaching of the good tidinges of the Ghospell. So that in other kindes of thy Sacraments and benefitts thou giuest mee to vnderstand, that thou art my King and my Sauiour, my Pastour, and my Aduocate, my Phisitian, my Master, my Tutor, my Redeemer, and my Protectour, finally my Lord, and my God: but in this most blessed Sacrament, (wherein it is thy pleasure by an vnspeakeable wise to vnite thy selfe with my soule, and to comfort it with such meruailous delightes,) thou giuest me most manifestly to vnderstand, that thou art the bridegroome of my soule, that thou art my Father,Gen. 44. yea and such a Father, as doth most tenderly loue his Sonne, as Iacob loued Beniamin aboue all his Children. This giueth mee to vnderstand the effect of thy Holy Sacrament, and these are the good tidinges, which it signifieth to me of thee. There is no doublenes, O Lord, in any of thy workes. Looke what they shew outwardly, the same haue they also within. Wherefore, by this effect I vnderstand the cause: by this worke I iudge thy heart: by this entertainement, and consolation, which thou giuest me, I take information to vnderstand what a louing heart thou bearest towards me. Now then, what greater benefit? what greater grace? what greater loue could there be shewed, than for thee to graunt mee to receaue thee this day O my Sauiour, in this blessed Sacrament? O banket full of ioyfulnes, fountaine
 of delights, veine of vertues, death of vices, bread of life! O medicine of health, fire of loue, refection of spirits, health of soules! O princelie feast, and taste of all felicitie, and heauenly aboundance! What shal I say O my God! What thanks shall I render vnto thee? With what kind of loue shal I loue thee for this so inestimable a benefit, if I meane to answere this loue which thou hast here shewed vnto me? If thou being my Creatour, and my Redeemer, doest loue me in this wise, that am a most vile and wretched worme: why shall not I loue thee, that art the most high, and most noble Spouse of my soule? I will loue thee therefore, O my Lord: I wil desire thee: I will eat thee and drink thee. O sweetnes of loue! O loue of inestimable delight, let my soule eate thee, and let my bowels be replenished with the most pleasant liquour of thy sweetnes! O Charitie! O my God! O sweet honey! O most pleasant milke! O meat most delectable, and meate for the mighty, make mee to grow in thee, that I may worthily reioyce in thee! O satiety and delight of my will! O loue and desire of my heart, why am not I wholly inflamed and burned in the fire of thy loue? why am not I wholly tra^sformed (as the iron in the fornace) into loue, in such sort, that there remaine nothing in me, but only loue? O Diuine fire! O sweet flames! O delectable vvound! O amorous prison, why am not I taken, and fast bounde in this Chaine, and wounded vvith this darte, and burned with this fire, in such sorte, that my bowels may burne, and be wholly consumed in loue? O yee children of Adam. A generation of men blinde, and deceaued: What doe ye? Whither goe ye? What seeke ye after? If ye seek after loue, here is the most sweet,
 the most noble, and the most honourable loue that is in the world. If yee seeke after delights, here be the most pleasant, the most strong, and the most chast delights that may be. If ye seeke after riches, here is the treasure of heauen, the price of the world: and the mayne sea of all goodnnsse. If yee seeke after honour here is Almighty God himselfe, and with him all the Court of heauen, which commeth to visite you. What greater honour can there be, than to haue such a guest in my house, and all the Court of heauen about him? If a King goe in progresse, and doe chaunce to eate in an hostery, it is certaine, that all that house is beset with his Gard, and Nobles, that come to attend vpon him. Wherfore, sith Almighty God by meanes of this blessed Sacrament entereth into my soule, certainly I beleeue, that the day in which I receaue him, all the Court of heauen is about him, waiting vpon him, and adoring him, euen as they adore him in Heauen.

The Second part of this Meditation.
FOrsomuch as I haue beene now admitted into this companie, placed at this Table, receaued into these embracinges, comforted with such delights, bound with so many benefits, and aboue all, taken with such strong bondes of loue, from henceforth, O Lord, I meane to renounce all other delights, and loues for this loue. Now I intend to giue ouer the world quite, and vtterly to forsake all the delights of the flesh. Now I minde to haue no more to doe with the pompe and pride of this world, nor with any other vanities thereof. Auaunt, auaunt, I say, from me, all these counterfet
 and flattering goods: for Iesus Christ my sweet Sauiour, whome I haue this day reeeaued, is onely the true and chiefest goodnesse. He that hath eaten the bread of angels, ought not to eat the bread of beastes. He that hath receaued almighty God in to his house, it is not meet that hee should receaue any vaine thing into the same. If a poore countrie maide, and of base estate, should be maried with a King, shee should forthwith despise her vile and foule garmentes and her wonted rude behauiour, and in each thing should shew her selfe, as were seemely for the wife of such a husband. Wherefore, sith my soule hath this day attayned vnto this high dignity, by meanes of this blessed sacrament. how shall it abase it selfe againe to the vilenes of her old foot-steps, and former corrupt manners? How shall I set open the gate of my hart, vnto any worldly thought, sith I haue reeeaued within mee the Lord and Creator of the world? How shall I giue place to any prophane thing in my soule,3. Reg. 7.8. sith it is now consecrated and sanctified with the presence of almighty God: Salomon would not suffer, that the daughter of King Pharao, being his wife, should inhabite within his house, for that the arke of the Testament had beene in the same a small time, although it neuer came thither afterwardes. Now then, if so wise a King would not suffer that his owne wife, being a wife of so Princely estate, should set her feete in that place where the Arke of God had beene, for that she was of the linage of the Gentiles: how shall I suffer, that any thing of the Gentiles, to wit, any prophane and worldlie affaires should enter into my hart, where God himselfe hath bin? How shall that bed receaue the thoughts and desires of Gentiles, and of worldlie men where God himselfe doth lodge. How shall
 the thoughtes, and desires of gentiles, and of worldly men, vvhere God himselfe doth lodge? Hovv shall that tongue speake any filthy vaine, slaunderous,3. Reg. 8.64 or vnhonest wordes, by which God himselfe hath passed? If the same King Salomon, for that hee had offered Sacrifice in the porch of the Temple, left that porch sanctified in such sort, that it could serue no more to any prophane vse: how much more reason vvere it, that the like should be done of my soule, sith that euen he himselfe, which vvas signified by all the Sacraments and Sacrifices of the Law, hath bin receaued within the same.
Now whereas thou haste left mee, O Lord, so much honoured this day, with this thy visitation, graunt me grace I beseech thee, that I may fulfill my dutie, according as this honor which thou haste giuen me, requireth. Thou neuer gauest honour to any one to whom thou gauest not sufficient furniture of grace to sustaine and maintaine it. Seeing therefore thou haste here honoured mee with thy presence: sanctifie me, I beseech thee with thy vertue, that I may be able to discharge my bounden dutie in this behalfe. For so haste thou done alvvaies in euery place, vvheresoeuer thou haste entred. Thou diddest enter into the Virginall vvomb of thy most holy Mother, and as thou diddest exalt her vnto inestimable glory, so thou gauest her inestimable grace to maintaine the same. Thou being as yet in the same vvombe of thy blessed Mother,Luke. 1.41.42. diddest enter into the house of S. Elizabeth, and there vvith thy presence diddest sanctifie and reioyce her sonne S. Iohn baptist, and replenish his Mother vvith the Holie Ghost. Thou diddest enter into this vvorld to be conuersant vvith men: and as thou diddest honour them vvith thy comming, so diddest thou repaire and sanctifie them
 vvith thy grace. Thou diddest enter afterwardes into hell, and of the same hell thou diddest make a Paradise, blessing them vvith thy glory, vvhome thou diddest honour vvith thy visitation. To conclude, so soone as the Arke of the Testament, (vvhich vvas none other but a figure of this most blessed sacrament) entred into the house of Obededon,2. Reg. 6.11 and 12. thou diddest forthvvith send thy blessing vppon the same, and vppon all his goods, requiting vvith such aboundance the entertainement, and lodging that vvas there giuen thee.
Novv therefore, O Lord, sith it hath pleased thee this day to enter into this poore house of myne, and to be lodged therein. I beseech thee begin novv to blesse the house of thy seruant, and graunt me grace, that I may answere to thi^ honor, in making my selfe a vvorthy habitation for thee. It is thy vvill, that I should be, as that holy Sepulchre vvas, in vvhich thy most holy body vvas laid. Graunt me the conditions, vvhich that Sepulchre had: that I may serue for that end, for vvhich thou haste chosen me. Graunt me that firmenesse of the rocke, that shroud of humilitie, and that myrre of mortification, that I may die to mine ovvne vvill, and appetites, and liue vnto thee. It is thy vvill that I should be as the Arke of the Testament, vvherein thou diddest inhabite. Giue mee grace,3. Reg. 8.9. that like as in that Arke there vvas nothing more principall, than the Tables of the Lavv, euen so vvithin my hart there may be none other cogitation, nor desire, but onely of thy most Holy Law. Thou vvouldest giue mee to vnderstand by this most blessed Sacrament, that thou art my Father, in that thou haste so dealt vvith me, as vvith a sonne, and a son tenderly beloued: vvherefore I beseech thee, giue mee grace, that I may ansvvere to this
 benefit, by louing thee, not only with a strong and constant loue, but also with a tender loue, in such sort that all my bowells may be consumed in thy loue, and that the remembrance only of thy sweete name may suffice to melt and consume my hart, Graunt me also O Lord, to beare towardes thee the spirit and hart of a sonne: that is, the spirit of obedience, of reuerence, of loue, and of confide^ce: to the end, that in all my troubles, and aduersities, I may haue recourse forthwith vnto thee, with such a confidence and assurance, as a fathfull sonne hath recourse to his father, whome he passingly loueth. Besides al this, it hath pleased thee, to discouer vnto my soule in this diuine sacrament the loue of a housba^d towards his spouse, and to deale with me, as with such a one. Graunt me therefore O Lord, the very same hart towardes thee: that I may so loue thee with a faithfull loue, with a chast loue, with an inward loue, and with a stronge and harty loue, that nothing may be able to seperat me at any time from thee. O most sweete housband of my soule, stretch forth, I besech thee, those most sweet and amorous armes, and embrace it in such wise with thee, that I may neuer be seperated fro^ thee, neither in life, nor yet in death. For this vnion sake thou hast ordained this most blessed Sacrament: because thou knowest right well, how much better it is for the creature to remaine in thee, than in it selfe. For in thee it remaineth, as in God: but in it selfe it remaineth as in a fraile creature. A droppe of water, which is by it selfe, with the first wynde dryeth awaie: but being cast into the Sea and vnited vvith his beginning abideth for euer.
VVherefore, O Lorde, plucke mee a way from my selfe and receaue me into thee. For in thee I liue
 and in my selfe I die: in thee I continue, and in my selfe I diminish: in thee I am stable and firme, and in my selfe I am transitory and corruptible. Depart not away from me, O good Iesus, I beseech thee:Luk. 24.29 Tarrie I most humbly pray thee with mee: for it is Euening, and the day is now gone, and the night commeth on a pace: and not one night, but alasse many nightes. to wit, the night of death, of the world, of sin, of tribulation, of temptation, of wildernesse, and of the solitarinesse and absence of grace. All these nightes are comming to fall vpon vs, and to ouerwhelme vs. Doe not therefore O Lord I beseech thee, forsake vs. On euery side light beginneth to faile, and Charitie waxeth cold. and malice increaseth: in somuch that pride, disobedience, Schisme, Heresies, Periurie, Detraction, Leacherie, Glottonie, and all kinde of wickednes doe infect all christian countries more, and more. vvhat shall then become of vs,Ieremy. 6.4 if thou O Lord doe forsake vs? wo be vnto vs, saieth the prophet, because the day is verie much deminished, and the shadowes are waxen greater in the euening. For vvhen the true light, which is the knowledge of God, and of the true felicity) fadeth avvay, then the shadovves of false and transitory felicity seeme great, and so much dignitie. vvherefore O good Iesus my svveete Sauiour, and redeemer,Esay. 5.20 vvhich art the light of the vvorlde. I beseeche thee to remaine vvith vs, that ech thing may appeare in such vvise as it is, and that vvee be none of those, that doe call good euill, and euill good: to vvhom the svveet seemeth bitter, and the bitter svveete. And sith my happe is so good, as to haue thee present this day in my house (vvhereby I haue so good opportunity, as to treate vvith thee alone about mine affaires:) it vvere not conuenient to
 leese this good occasion. I will not leaue thee, O my Lord,Gen. 32.24 and 26. I will wrastle with thee all night, and will not let thee depart, vntill thou haste giuen me thy blessing. Chaunge O Lord mine old name, and giue mee another new name: that is, another new being, and another new kind of life. Make mee lame O Lord of one foote, and leaue me the other whole: that the loue of the world may vtterly faile in me, and thy loue alone remaine whole, and entire: to the end, that all other loues and desires of the world being dead, and extinguished in mee, I may loue thee alone, desire thee alone, thinke vppon thee alone, abide with thee alone, liue to thee alone, fixe all my cares, thoughtes, affections, and desires in thee, haue recourse vnto thee in all my troubles and affaires, and from thee receaue all succour and help: finally, that thou O Lord, maiest be all mine, and I all thine: which liuest and raignest for euer and euer, world without end. Amen.
The end of the third Treatise.





THE FOVRTH TREATISE, wherein are conteined two principall Rules of the Christian life.

THE PROLOGVE.
VVHEN a man is now conuerted vnto Almightie God vvith all his heart, and hath procured the purifying and cleansing of his soule by meanes of these two Sacraments, of the vvhich wee haue treated here before, it remaineth that he doe forthwith applie all his care and diligence to the amendment, and well ordering of his life: whereof we will now treate in the Rules following.Grace proceedeth fro^ lesse perfection to more perfection. And because grace followeth commo^ly the orderly proceeding of Nature, vvhich proceedeth alwaies in her vvorkes from lesse to more: that is to say, from lesse perfection to more perfection:Two Rules of a Christian life. therefore we will likewise proceed in this doctrine, giuing two Rules, and orders of life: the one for such as beginne newly to serue God, and haue a desire to be saued: and the other for such, as doe besides this, desire to increase, and profitt, euerie
 day more and more in the way of vertue.
For the better vnderstanding whereof, it is to be considered, that all this doctrine of good life, the Prophet Dauid hath aptly deuided into two principall parts.Psa. 33.15 Declina a malo, and fac bonum. The one is in not doing euill, and the other in doing good: that is to say, the one in banishing from the soule all kinde of vices: and the other in furnishing and adorning it with all kinde of vertues. This is the clearest, and most perfect diuision, that might be giuen in this matter. For by obseruing of these two points, a man becommeth a new man, and a new creature, destroying with the first part, the Image of the old and earthly Adam, and reforming with the second, the Image of the new Adam, which is our Sauiour Iesus Christ. And withall, by this meane hee commeth to be a man supernaturall, and diuine. For as hee was created for a diuine and supernaturall end: (which is to see Almightie God in his own glorie, and excellency,) eue^ so the life, that disposeth him to this end ought to be also supernaturall, and diuine: sith that (according vnto the Rules of Philosophie,) the end, and the meanes thereunto ought to be of one selfe-same order,2. Phisic. T. 23. and proportion.

And although in the exercise and practise both of life and doctrine,Vices cannot be subdued without the help of vertues. these two thinges goe alwaies ioyntly together, (for vices can not be conquered without the helpe of vertues,) yet to giue more light vnto the matter, and for the plainer distinction of the doctrine, wee will seperate (so much as is possible) the one from the other. In like manner it is meete to be aduertised here, that among such thinges, as are conteined as well in this rule as in al other the like, some are of bounden dutie, and some of will, or of perfection: that is to say, some are of Commaundement, as the Co^maundements of God, and of his Church: and some of Counsaile,Among the thinges that are proposed vnto Christians, some are of commandement and some of counsaile. as all other thinges, that are counsailed vs in the holy Scriptures: the which counsailes doe help vs, for the better fulfilling of such thinges as are giuen vs in Commaundement,Mat. 19.12. Mat. 19.21. Acts. 4.34.35. 1. Cor. 7.25. 1. Cor. 9.15 16. and also to attaine vnto greater perfection. This is very necessary to be aduertised, to the end that a man may vnderstand, what hee is bound to doe of necessity, and what dependeth of his will, and that hee may perceaue in what degree each of these things is required of him, (that hauing this aduertisement he may vse greater diligence in such things, as hee is bound of dutie to
 doe, than in others, which be but only voluntarie,) and that he may also neuer leaue the one vndone for the other, (as wee see some doe:) which is a great abuse and disorder. And for this cause it shall be declared in the beginning of this rule, what wee are bound to doe of dutie, (which is comprehended in very few wordes:) and afterwardes many other things shall be added, which doe help to the fulfilling of them, and to the obtaining of greater perfection. For although the keeping of the Commandementes doe suffice vnto saluation: yet, because in the way of God, a man should neuer take contentation in his owne dooings, nor say, I haue sufficiently performed my dutie: therefore many other thinges shall be here adioyned besides the essentiall things,A man may not take a contentatio^ in his owne doings. for the behoofe of such as haue an earnest desire to profit and increase alwaies more and more in all kind of vertue.
The end of the Prologue.


Here beginnneth the first Rule of a Christian life: wherein is treated of the victorie ouer sin, and of the generall remedies against the same. THF I. CHAPTER.
HE that desireth earnestly and with all his heart to serue God, and to saue
 his soule, must vnderstand, that the principall, and totall summe of all this so great and waighty busines, (in comparison whereof, ^ll other affaires and businesses are of none ^ccount,The foundation of good life, is to haue a firme purpose neuer to commit any deadlie sinne. although they concerne the Im^eriall gouernement of the whole world,) doth essentially consist in one only thing, which is, to haue in his soule, a very firme and determinate purpose, neuer to commit any deadly sinne, for any thing in the world, whether it be lands, riches, honour, ^ife, or any other thing whatsoeuer. And ^ike as the honest wife, and the faithfull Captaine, are fully determined neuer to commit any treason, the one against her husband, and the other against his Prince: euen so a good Christian ought fully to determine with himselfe, neuer to commit this kind of treason against almighty God, which is committed by a deadly sinne.
The reason hereof is,Mat. 22.40 because (as S. Paule saieth) the summe of all Christian religion consisteth in Charitie: that is to say,Mar. 12.33 Rom. 13.10 1. Cor. 13.1 Gal. 5.14. Col. 3.14. 1. Tim. 1.5. 1. Pet. 4.8. in the loue of God, and of our neighbour, against which precept there is nothing directlie repugnant, but only deadly sin. And therfore he that co^mitteth not this sin, doth esse^tially fulfil, and obserue the law of charity.
Againe, it appeareth also vnto vs by the
 answere,Deadly sin is directly repugnant to Charity. Mat. 19.17. Si vis ad vitam ingredi serua mandata. which our Sauiour gaue vnto the young man, that the way and meane to obtaine life euerlasting, is the keeping of the Commaundementes. And it is manifest, that euery one keepeth them, that committeth not any deadly sinne: forsomuch as this sinne is nothing els, but a transgression and breaking of the Commaundements. Whereof it may be inferred, that in this onely pointe consisteth (as wee sayed) essentially the fulfilling of the lawe of God, and the saluation of man: that is, to be most firmely, and stedfastly bent, and determined, neuer to commit any deadly sin:How deadly sins are committed. the which is committed by breaking any one of the ten Commaundementes of God, or of those which the Church commandeth representing his place, the which Commandements of the Church are commonly numbred to be fiue.
And this I say, to the end that the Christian reader may vnderstand, that those seauen, which are commonly called deadly sins,A Rule to discerne a deadly sin. be not alwaies deadly sins, but whe^ it so falleth out, that they transgresse some one of the Commandements before mentioned. As when the glottony is such, that therby he breaketh any fasting-day commaunded by the Church, the vvhich he
 is bound to obserue: or the slouth so great, that by reason thereof hee omitteth to heare Masse, vpon Sondayes, and Holie dayes, according to his bounden dutie: or the anger so great, as that therby he come to speake any iniurious, slaunderous, or contemptuous wordes against his neighbour, and so foorth in all the rest.
This is now the summe of all that whch a Christian man is bound to doe, (being comprehended in few wordes,) and this sufficeth for his saluation.
But because to performe his duty fully in this behalfe, is a matter wherein there be great difficulties, by reason of the great snares and perrils, which be in the world, and by reason of the naughty inclination of our flesh, and the continuall co^bats of our enimie the diuel, therefore a man ought to procure many other vertues and exercises also, which to this end may help him very much, in the which consisteth the keye of all this businesse. And of these wee intend now to treate here, and to note brieflly such thinges as may serue vs for this purpose.

THE I. REMEDY.
AMong which, the first is,How horrible a thing deadly sinne is. to consider deeply with himselfe, what a horrible
 thing a deadly sin is: For the vnderstanding whereof among many other things, it shall help him especially to consider attentiuely the deformity and malice of sinne, the which appeareth in that it is committed against such a Lord, as of whome wee haue receaued such and so many inestimable benefits, and to whom wee are somuch b^und for his so many and so great prerogati^es, and titles. Forsomuch as hee is the Lord a^d King of all creatures, the beginning and end of all thinges, the vniuersall giuer of all goodnes, the maine Sea of all perfections, the Creator, Conseruer, Redeemer, Sanctifier, and Glorifier of mankinde. In respect of which titles, and infinite others besides these, we owe vnto him all the bounden duties, that we are possibly able to giue:In one deadly sinne are spiritually contein^d the def^rmities of all sins. against all which he offendeth, whosoeuer hee be, that committeth any deadly sin: for which cause a certaine Holy Father concludeth, that in one only deadly sin are spiritually contained after a certaine manner the deformities of all the sins in the world. And therefore a deadly sin, saith he, is a kind of spirituall treason:Deadlie sin is a spirituall treason. because thereby a man rebelleth against his King, and Emperour, and yeeldeth vp the keyes of his homage, to wit, his own soule,
 vnto the diuel his enimy, and beco^meth his vassal A deadly sin is also after a sort a Sacriledge:Deadlie sin is sacriledge forsomuch as by committing of it, the liuely temple of our hart is defiled, and prophaned, which was before consecrated, vnto almighty God. It is also after a certaine manner a kinde of Apostacie:Deadly sin is a kinde of Apostacy. for that a man beco^meth therby a runagate, flieing vnto the enimie of God, (which is Satha^,) whose pompes he had renounced before in the holy sacrament of Baptisme. It is also a spirituall Adultery:Deadlie sin is a spirituall adultery. for that the soule which was espoused before vnto God in the sacrament of Baptisme, hath broke^ her promise and loyalty which she did owe vnto him, and hath rendred herselfe vnto al those worldly creatures, which shee hath loued inordinatly. Moreouer it is a kind of theft:Deadlie sin is a kinde of theft. forsomuch as ma^ being part of Gods Tresure, by so many titles, and prerogatiues, as haue bin declared before, hath therby stole^ away out of the seruice of almighty god, vnto whom he did appertaine by so many iust titles. Finally, forsommch as in God alone are al the dignities and titles of honour, that are found in al creatures of what co^dition soeuer they be (and that exceeding the^ al infinitly:) it folowerh, that the offending of god alone co^prehendeth all the wickednes, that can be imagined in all the offences of the
 world, yea, and that also infinitely. For which cause with very good reason a holie doctor crieth out against sinne, saying thus O euell vnknowne.What sin is O irreuerence of Almighty God. Thou art the despising of his Maiestie, the contempt of his mightie power, the death of vertue, the enimie of grace, the depriuation of the chiefest felicity, the bereauing of eternal blis, the obscuring of the vnderstanding, the preuarication of the will, the poison of the diuel, the fetters of Hell, the destruction of the world, the waie of perdition, the death of him that sinneth, the seede of Satan, the gate of Hell, the follie of men, the nette to intrappe those that be tempted, the pestilence of soules, the imitation of euel spirits, the horrible darkenes, the intollerable stench, the most beastly filthines, the extreme vilenes, the most raging beaste, the most grieuous domage, and to conclud, the vniuersall cause of all euels.
This is one of the principal Considerations, that may moue vs to co^ceiue a depe hatred and abhorring of sin: to the attaining wherof al the other considerations, which we haue declared before in the second treatise of pennance, may also helpe vs. As to consider, how much is lost by sinne, and
 how greatly Almighty God doth abhorre it,Occasions of sinnes are to be eschewed and how passing great iniury is done thereby vnto Almighty God, with all the other considerations, which are there set foorth to moue vs to sorrowe, and detestation of sinne, which serue no lesse for this place, than for that: howbeit we thinke it not needeful to repeate them here, forsomuch as they be there alreadie treated of, and set out at large.


THE II. REMEDY.
THE second helpeth likewise hereunto, which is to be wary and circumspect in eschewing with wisedome and discretion, the occasions of sinnes, as gaming, euell companie, daungerouse conuersatio^, much talking, and especially the beholding of women, and familiarity with them, yea, though they be good, and honest. For if a man be become so fraile and weake through sinne, that he falleth of him selfe from his own proper state, and sinneth without any thing that prouoketh him outwardly thereunto: what will he doe, when an occasion and opportunity shall plucke him by the sleue, alluring him with the presence of the thing set before his eies, and with an opportunity of sinne, sith it is a verie
 true saying which is commonly reported: that the iust man sinneth by reason of the cofer set open before him? wherfore, let him that is the true seruant of God endeuour at al times to auoide al these kinds of occasions, holding it an assured ground, that (speaking ordinarily) we are no further good, but so far foorth, as we doe eschew and auoide the occasions to be euell. Let him remember that DauidDauid. was a verie Holy man,2. Reg. 11.2. and yet the sight of a woman, and the opportunity he had to sinne, sufficed to throwe him downe into so great wickednes, that he sorrowed, and lamented for it, yea, and that very grieuosly, all the daies of his life. Let him call to mind also his sonne Salomon,Salomon. who was the wisest of al men, and so greatly in the fauour of God, that he was called by name the beloued of God:2. Esdras 13 26. Exod. 34.15. 3. Reg. 11.2 Let all Ca^holickes ^ake heede ^y this ex^mple from ^arrying ^ith an ^ereticke ^hich is a ^adlie sin. and yet euen he likewise vpon the selfe same occasio^ was vtterly ouerthrown. For whereas our Lord had commaunded the Iewes, that they should not mary with strange women, because they should not peruert them, and cause them to adore their Idoles, he not withstanding, presuming of him selfe, that he was far of from that danger, married with many of them: by whose perswasions he was entised to adore
 their Idoles, yea, and to build the Temples,3. Reg. 11.5.7. and 8. (a thing very horrible to be spoken,) for the which offence both he and his kingdome also came to ruine, and destruction. Wherefore, sith the occasion of sinne was of such power with these two men the one being so holy, and the other so wise: who is he, that dare assure him selfe vnlesse he do auoid the occasions of sinne?
Auoide therefore, O my Brother, the occasions of sinne, euen as well as the sinne it selfe.Occasion of sinne is as well to be eschewed as the sinne it selfe. And if the desire and appetite of the occasion shall prouoke and allure thee thereunot: then say thus vnto thy selfe: what? If I can not now ouercome the appetite and desire of this occasion: how shall I be able to ouercome the daunger, that will follow thereupon, after that the appetite shalbe armed and fortified with the selfe same occasion? Moreouer, let him consider also that it is a tempting of God, for a man to put him selfe in dau^ger without any necessitie: and that he is not worthy to haue the help of God that endeuoreth not, (so much as for his part lieth in him) to deserue rhe same.
But among these occasions of sinne,Lewd company is to b^ eschewed. one of the most ordinary is the company of lewd persons. For the world frameth so
 at this present, that a man can hardly step one foot, but they be still at his elbow: and therefore he that is desirous not to offend God, let him endeuour to eschew the conuersation of these companions, sith this is one of the greatest plagues, that is at this day: For surely, neyther doth the madde dogge, nor yet the venimous viper hurt so much,1. Corinth. 15.33. Corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia mala. Pro. 13.20. Eccl. 13.1. ^ide Psal. 7.26.27. ^um sanctus ^is, and cum ^iro inno^nte inno^ns. Et cum ^ecto ele^us eris, and ^m peruer^ peruerte^. as the company of naughty persons doth. Forsomuch as it is very true, which the Apostle sayeth: that naughty communication corrupteth good manners. Wherefore, let the seruant of God write that saying of the wise man in his heart, where he sayeth. Hee that keepeth company with the wise shall be wise: and he that loueth fooles shall be a foole, as they be. And againe he saieth: He that toucheth pitch shall be defiled therewith: and hee that is conuersant with the proude, shall not be free fro^ pride. This vertue (of eschewing euill company) ought to be sought for with all carefulnes by all fathers and mothers, in the behalfe of their sonnes and daughters: and by schoolemaisters, and maisters for their scholers, and seruants, vnles they will loose their long trauaile and good education of many yeares in a very short time.



THE III. REMEDY.
THE third thing, that helpeth also for this purpose,Resistance of temptations at the first beginning before they take strength in the heart. is to resist in the beginning of temptation vvith very great speed and diligence, and to quench the sparcle of the euill thought out of hand, before it be kindled in the heart. For after this sort a man resisteth with great facility and merite. But in case he make any delay therein, then is the labour in resistance very much increased, and he commiteth therby a new sinne, which is at the least a veniall sinne, yea, and sometimes a deadly sin. Let him remember, that the flame of fire is easily quenched at the beginning, and that the grasse newly pla^ted is easie to be plucked vp by the rootes: But after that the flame is increased, and when the graffe hath once taken root, than will it be very hard to quench the one, and to plucke vp the other. A Cittie may very well be defended, before the enimies haue made their entry into it: but after that they haue once entred in, and are in possession thereof, then it is very hard to driue the^ out of the same. And as a Philosopher sayeth, when a great stone lyeth vpon the top of a mountaine, it is very easie to stay it there from falling.
 But after that it beginneth once to role and tumble downe,Resistance may easilie be made against an euel thought in the beginning. the^ it is a very hard matter to stay the violence and fury of the fall. Whereby it is declared vnto vs, with how much more facilitie an euell thought may be ouercome by a very speedy resistance thereof foorth-vvith in the beginning, than afterwards when wee haue suffered it to take roote, and to be in possession of our hart.
Now the manner and way for the resisting of euill thoughts,The maner how to resist and expell euill thoughts. is to set foorthwith before the eyes of thy soule the figure of our Sauiour Christ Crucified, with all the anguishes, and painefull passion which hee suffered vpon the Crosse, sprinckling all the parts of his body with streames of his most pretious blood, and abiding so many strokes and woundes, as there were giuen him. And with all to thinke with thy selfe, that all this he suffered to destroy sin: and to say from the bottome of thy heart thus vnto him.A prayer a^ainst euill ^houghts. O my Lord, that it hath pleased thee to put thy selfe vpon the Crosse, and to suffer death thereupon, to the end, that I should not sin: and yet notwithstanding all that, shall I now offend thee? Alas, suffer not this O my Lord, euen for thine infinite mercy, and for the pretious blood,
 which thou haste shed for mee. Help mee now O my God I humbly beseech thee, and doe not forsake me: sith I haue none other to who^ I may seek for aid, but only to thee.
Sometimes also it will help very much,The signe of the Crosse made vpon the hart helpeth against euill thoughts. when a man is alone, to make vvith verie great speed the Signe of the Crosse vpon his heart, thereby to driue away from him more easily the naughty inwarde thought with this externall signe.
S. BernardeS. Bernard. writeth of a Religious Nunne in his time, that was accustomed very often to make the Signe of the Crosse, foorthwith so soone as any euill thought did beginne to molest her, and many yeares after that she had bin buried, her graue being opened, they found, that that finger, wherewith she vsed to make the Signe of the Crosse vpon her hart was whole, and no thing at all perished, all the rest of the body being rotte^ and cleane consumed. An other holy father writeth, that there died in the Citie of Argentine a Prior of a Monasterie of the order of S. Dominicke, who had vsed this very same deuotion: and his graue being opened many yeres afterwards, they found as it were engraue^ vpon his breast bone the Signe of the Crosse, and that in such sort, that the foot of the CROSSE was plainely pointed, and
 the three vppermost partes of the Crosse ended in three flower de luces. Whereby our Lord gaue vs to vnderstand by this figure, that the puritie and chastity of that holy soule was preserued in the same, through the vertue of the memorie and signe of the Crosse, which he had made often times vpon his brest, to driue away fro^ him the te^ptations of the enimie. And the same Doctor, that wrote this, saieth moreouer, that he him selfe had seene this wonderfull thing with his owne eies, and that he had trauailed more than fourtie miles onley to see it. Wherfore sith our Lord would giue vs to vnderstand by these two so great wonders, how much he honoureth the^ that doe honour his dishonours, we ought all to take example hereby to doe the like, that so we may by this meane obteine the fauour of this same Lord.


THE IIII. REMEDY.
The examination of the conscience euerie night before a man to goe to rest.IT helpeth likewise very much for a ma^ to examine his conscience euery night before he sleep, and take his rest, and then to cal to minde, wherein he hath sinned that prese^t day in work, word or thought, or els in any other maner. And let him consider particularly, in what kinde of words,Wordes.
 or Communication,Wordes. he hath offended that daie: if he haue spoken anie vntruth: if he haue offered the creatures of God vnto the deuell: if he haue cursed or spoken any slau^derouse, vnsemely, or vnhonest words, or any like thing, as touching his thoughtsThoughts. let him co^sider, with what speed he resisted his euel thoughts, or if he staied, and continued in them, not banishing them immediatly away from him, as the sparcles of Hell fire. Let him consider also,Workes. if he haue fufilled his bounden dutie, according as his state, vocation, and degree requireth: and whether he haue had also due regard vnto his house, and family, and to such other thinges, according as he is bound of dutie thereunto. This counsaile hath bin oftentimes commended vnto vs by many saints and so doth Eusebius EmissenusEusebius Emissenus. in one of his Homilies in these wordes. Let euery man (saieth he) laie out his conscience euery day before the eies of his hart, and let him say to himselfe after this sort. Let mee see, if I haue passed this day without sinne, without enuie, without contention, and without displeasing of any persons. Let me see, if I haue done any thing in the same, that is either for mine owne profit, or for the edifying of others. Well, I remember, that this day I haue tolde a lie, or haue sworne, or haue suffered my selfe to be
 ouercome with anger, or with some disordered appetite: and that I haue not done this day any good at all: neither giuen so much as one sighe for feare of the euerlasting tormentes in Hell. Who is able to bring to passe, that this day might beginne again with me, which now I haue thus consumed in vaine trifles, and idle, and hurtfull thoughts. After this sort, O my brethren, let vs repent, accuse, and condemne our selues before Almighty God, in the secret places of our houses, and of our harts. Hetherto are the wordes of Eusebius Emissenus.
But yet a man ought not altogether to content himselfe with this:How a man ought to discipline him selfe for his sinnes. but he must besides this diligence, adde, and appoint to him selfe some special penance for these kinde of sinnes, to the end, that by this meane he may be the more maister ouer him selfe, and more fearefull, and wary afterwardes to commit the like faults againe. I knewe a certaine man, the which examining him selfe at night, and finding, that he had exceeded his boundes in speaking rashly some cholerick, and vnsemely words, vsed for penance to put a gagge for a certaine space in his mouth. I knewe an other also that vsed likewise to giue vnto himselfe sharpe discipline, as wel for that fault, as for any other defect, wherein he had offended. And so by this meane, besides the
 satisfaction for the offence: the soule remaineth more chasticed, and fearefull, and dareth not to commit the same offence againe.
It shall also profit very much to get euery weeke the maistery of some particular vices,We must not be dismaid how often soeuer we fal but we must endeuour to rise againe. and to cary about him for this purpose some sharpe pricking remembrancer, that may cause him to be the more mindfull of this his inte^t: as to guird his flesh with some kinde of thing, that may paine him somewhat and thereby put him continually in mind of his determinatio^, and prouoke him to be wel aduised in his doings, and not to be vtterly carelesse of him selfe.
And let him not be dismaied,Many times a vice is ouercome after long time which could not before be ouercome Iosuet 15.63. Iudic. 1 21. God sometimes suffereth passion and tempt^^tions to remaine in (...) in vs, for exercise of vertue, and for preseruation of humility. how often soeuer he fall: but rather, if he should fall a thousand times in the day, let him arise a thousand times againe, and put his affiance in the superaboundant goodnes of Almighty God. Neither let him vex him self if he se, that he is not able forthwith wholly to ouercome such passions: for many times that vice is conquered at the end of many yeares, which long time before could not be ouercome. The which commeth so to passe, that we may the better vnderstand, to whome the victory is to be ascribed, and some tmes also our Lord will
 haue some Iebusites to remaine in the land of promise, (I meane some passions or te^ptations to remaine in the la^d of our soule) as well for the exercise of vertue, as also for the preseruation of humility.
And besides this, in the morning when hee riseth, let him arme and fortifie himselfe with praier, and with a new determination neuer to offend any more in such, and such sinnes, as he feeleth himselfe most inclined vnto, and let him endeuour to resist such sinnes especially to the vttermost of his power. And let him there make the greatest prouision, and defence, where hee perceaueth the greatest danger to be.


THE V. REMEDY.
Veniall sins doe dispose vs to deadly sinnes.IT helpeth also very much to eschew (so much as is possible) veniall sinnes, because they doe prepare, and dispose the way vnto deadly sinnes: For in like manner, as those that be fearefull of death, doe prouide with all possible diligence to preserue their health, and to escape from such diseases, as doe dispose to that end: euen so also ought they that desire to escape deadlie sins, (which are the death of the soule,) to eschew likewise (so much as is possible,)
 the veniall sins, which are the diseases,Summa. S. Thom. 1 2. quest. 88. Artic. 3. that doe set open the way for the deadly sinnes to enter in.
I am of this opinion, and doe holds it clearely as an assured ground, that (speaking ordinarily) there was neuer any iuste man, that liued well for any long time, and perseuered in grace, which afterwards did fall into any deadly sinne, vnles hee were negligent in hauing a due regarde to himselfe, and were careles in falling into a number of veniall sinnes: whereby hee weakened the vertue and force of his soule, and deserued that almighty God should somewhat take away fro^ him his helping hand, and so afterwards he might easily be ouercome, when soeuer any temptation came vpon him: For (speaking ordinarily,) no man doth sodainely either mount vp very high, or fall downe very low: but both goodnesse and malice doe increase by little and little. And therefore it is written in Iob, that before the presence of the enimie commeth pouerty: because first of all the soule is impouerished, and weakened with the multitude of negligences, and veniall sinnes: whereby it commeth to fall afterwards into deadly sinnes.
It is also well knowne, that (as our Sauiour
 saieth,Luke. 16.10.) he that is carefull, and faithful in a little it is to be presumed, that he will be likewise faithful in much: and that he, that vseth diligence to eschewe the lesser euils, shalbe the more secure fro^ the greater.Which be veniall sinne.s And by veniall sinnes we do vnderstand in this place, idle talke, inordinate laughing, eating, drinking, and sleeping more tha^ is necessary, and others the like: the which although the hurt they doe vnto vs be not great, yet is the goodnes they hinder vs fro^ very great: forsomuch as they doe hinder deuotion and that feruour of Charity, which maketh a man to liue careful, and diligent, in the seruice of Almighty God.


THE VI. REMEDIE.
Disciplining, and subdewing of the flesh helpeth much vnto vertue.VVE are also much holpen hereunto by the seuere and sharp treating of the flesh, as well in eating, and drinking, as also in sleeping, and clothing, and in all the rest. Forsomuch as the flesh being a fountaine and prouoker of inordinate passions, and appetites, the more feeble, and weake it is, the more feeble, and weak shall the passions also be, which shall proceede of it. For like as the drie, and barren ground bringeth foorth plants, that be likewise weake and barren, and of small substance, but contrarywise.
 the battefull, and fertile ground (especially that, which is well watered, and dounged,) bringeth foorth trees, that be very great, greene, and mighty: euen so the passions, and appetites, which doe proceed from weake bodies, that be weakned and mortified through Abstinence, are of litle force and strength, and therefore be more easie to be subdewed: and contrariwise those passions, and appetites, which do proceed from fatt and delicate bodies, such as are continually glutted with aboundance of meates, and drinkes, are much mightier and harder to subdue. Wherefore he that mindeth to weake^ and subdue these naughty affections, must take great pains to weaken the causes from whence they proceed.
It is also manifest,Our flesh is a great enimie vnto vertue. that the greatest enimie, and resister, that vertue hath, is this our flesh, the which with the force of her appetites, and with a desire she hath to be delicately cherished, and much made of, doth hinder vs from all good exercises, as vvell of praier, reading, silence, close recollectio^ of the minde, fasting, watching, as in all others: wherefore, in case we do accustome our selues to yeeld, and giue place vnto our appetites, vndoubtedly the passage vnto al good exercise wil be stopped vp against
 vs. And contrariwise, if wee doe vse our selues to resist, and gainesay our flesh, and to fight against all the vicious inclinations therof, (this victorie being once obteined, and an habite made thereof, through the continuall vse and practise of this combat,) we shall finde no resistance at all in vertue: For vertue of it selfe is neither hard nor difficult to be obteined, but the difficulty thereof proceedeth from the corruption of our flesh. Now the salt and remedy, that must be vsed,Abstinence the salt to keepe our flesh from putrifying, and breeding of inordinate appetites in it. The fruites ^f absti^ence. to keepe our flesh from putrifying, and to preserue it from breeding of filthy wormes of inordinate appetites, is the vertue of abstinence, or fasting, which doth cure, and drie vp the same, and maketh it obedient to the spirit: For (as a Holy Father saieth,) abstinence chasticeth the flesh, it lifteth vp the spirit, it tameth the passions, it satisfieth for sinnes, and (that which is more to be meruailed at,) it cutteth away the roote of all euils, which is couetousnes. Forsomuch as that ma^, which is contented with a little, hath no cause to desire much. And this vertue of abstinence doth not only deliuer vs from other euils, but also from all the cares, phantasies, imaginations, and disquietnes, which are incident of necessity vnto al such, as liue delicately, and
 doe make much of themselues. And so by abstinence a man remaineth free and at liberty, to giue himselfe wholly to the seruice of GOD. And for this cause were those Holy Fathers of Egipt so much giuen to this vertue: with whom agreed very wel the spirit of the holy father S. Francis, who commended very much the pouerty both of body and spirit: for all tendeth in the end to one conclusion, both the austeritie of the one, and the pouerty of the other.
Now for this cause the true louer of God ought neuer to cease, nor giue rest vnto his eyes, vntill such time, as hee hath attained vnto this degree of vertue: that hee doe handle his body, eyther as a great enimie, and tyrant, (for so it is indeed,) or els as a slaue, a theefe, and as one of euill properties, which must be fed (according to the Prouerbe) with bread and stripes: or at the least, as a Sonne brought vp vnder a vertuous, and discreet Father, not with anie manner of wantonnes, and delicacy, but with all rigour, and seuerity: to whom the father neuer sheweth any cherefull countenance, but rather enforceth his naturall affection herein, for the benefit and commoditie of his child. Now after this sort ought the seruant of God to deale with his body:
 and vntill he thus doe, let him not thinke, that he hath greatly profited in the way of vertue. Happie is he, that hath atteined hereunto, that treateth his body after this sort, that keepeth it thus weakned, weried, and tamed, not giuing it his fill of sleepe, and sustenance that constraineth it by force to be obedient vnto the spirit, and that hath with this manner of discipline conquered euen nature her selfe. For he that doth thus, liueth not now according vnto flesh, and bloud, but according vnto the spirit of Christ: neither fighteth he now vnder the laws, and seruices of nature corrupted, forsomuch as he is become Lord ouer the same: neither yet may he be wel tearmed a mere man, forsomuch as by this meane he is become more tha^ a man. And this being so, thou maiest therby perceaue the destructio^ and ruine of the world at this day, which is bent to none other thing, but to procure by all meanes possible all kinds of pleasures, and delights, and to cherish and pamper vp the bodie with all manner of wantonnes, and delicacie: which is a thing directlye repugnant vnto the spirit of Christ, and to the perfection of a Christian life.



THE VII. REMEDY.
IT helpeth also very much for this purpose, to be very diligent in taking a strait accou^t of our tongue: for this is a part of our body,The tongue is a very hurtfull member. wherewith we doe offend almighty God more often, than with any other part: For the tongue is a very slippery member, which slippeth very quickly into many kindes of filthy cholericke, boasting, and vaine wordes: yea, and sometimes also into lying, swearing, cursing, slaundering, flattering, and such like. For which cause the wise man saieth, that in much communication there cannot want offence.Pro. 10.19 Pro. 18.21. And that death, and life are in the power of the tongue, and therefore it is a verie good counsaile, that whensoeuer thou shalt haue occasion to talke in such matters, and with such persons, as whereby thou haste cause to doubt of some perill, that may ensue thereof, eyther of wrangling, quarrelling, slaundering, bragging, lying, or of vaine glory, etc. thou doe first of all lift vp thy eyes vnto Almighty God, and commende thy selfe vnto him, and say with the Prophet after this sort:Psal. 140. Pone Donune custodiam ori meo, and ostium circunstantiae labiis meis. That is to say. Appoint O Lord, a keeper vnto my mouth,
 and a doore of circumstance vnto my lips. Moreouer whilest thou art in communication, be well aduised in placing thy wordes, (as he that passeth ouer a riuer vpon the toppe of some slippery stones, which are laied ouerthwart the same,) that thou slippe not into any of these perils. But because this matter is very copiouse, it shalbe treated of hereafter more at large in his proper place.


THE VIII. REMEDIE.
The ouermuh loue of visible-thinges hindreth the spirituall life very much.IT helpeth also very much to this end, not to suffer thy minde to be entangled with ouermuch loue of visible things whether they be honours, landes, goodes, children kinsfolke, or frindes etc. Forsomuch as this kinde of loue is a great occasion in a manner of al the sinnes, cares, fantasies, vexations, passions, temptations, and disquietnes that be in the world. And thou maiest behold this as an assured ground, that as Saint GregorieS. Gregorie saieth very well) like as one of the most principall rules of the foulers is, to knowe, to what kind of meate the birdes which they intend to catch, are most affectionated, and therewith to prepare a traine to catch them in the net: euen so the chiefe care of the deuels, our aduersaries is to vnderstand, vnto what kind of thinges
 we are most affectionated. For they know that (as the Poet saieth) euery one carieth with him his affection, and delight:Trahit sua quemque voluptas. and that they may best entrappe vs there, where our hartes are most fixed. I know right wel that men haue reason to gouerne them selues withall:The affections are the feete of the soule. but yet (to speake generally) all doe for the most part followe their affections: which are therefore called the feete of the soule: because they carry her whether soeuer they list. And in this sence S. Aug.Saint Augustine. saieth, that loue is the poyse of the soule, and that whether soeuer this poyse draweth, thither draweth the soule also. So that if the loue be of Heaue^, then the soule draweth also vnto heaue^: but if the loue be of the earth, the^ doth the soule incline vnto the earth. To conclud, looke as the poises, and counterpoises be in the clocke, so are the affections in our hart: the which as they be of greater or lesser force, so doe they moue our hart more, or lesse. And therefore in like manner as he that will set a clocke in order, and frame, must haue his counterpoises in such iust proportion, that they neither be too heauie, nor yet too light, but according as the space betwene hower, and hower requireth: euen so he that will lead his life rightly ordered, and
 gouerned, must endeuour to keepe all his affections in a iust counterpoyse, and measure,Wee must keepe our affections in a iust counterpoise and measure. making an estimate of each thing according as they be, and louing them proportionably vnto the same. And when he hath learned this lesson, let him thinke the^ for certaine, that he hath attained to the highest degree of vertues. Forsomuch as it is euident, that the greatest part of them is employed in weighing and moderating these affections with this manner of measure, and proportion.
And for the better performance hereof, let him endeuour to goe at all times warily in his affaires, with a speciall carefulnes, and attention, and neuer to suffer his heart to fix, and cleaue ouermuch vnto the loue of visible things: but let him rather plucke it backe alwaies with the bridle, when he perceaueth, that it rangeth abroad fantastically: and let him not esteeme things to be of more value, than they deserue to be esteemed:^ow tempo^all thinges ^re to be ^eeemed. that is to say, hee must esteeme them, as thinges of small account, as fraile, vncertaine, and such as passe away in a moment: and let him remoue his heart from them, and fix it wholly vpon the chiefest, only, and true felicity. Hee that shall loue temporall things after this sort, will neuer
 dispaire for the^, when hee wanteth them, neither will he be dismaied, when they are taken from him, nor yet will hee commit such sins as are dayly committed, either to obtaine them, or to encrease them, or else to defend the^. Herein consisteth the keye of all this businesse: for vndoubtedly, hee that hath renou^ced the loue of this world,Hee that hath not renounced the loue of this world, hath not yet begun to be a louer of Christ. Luke. 44.28.29. is well armed against all the craftie assaults of our common enimie: But hee that hath not renounced it, hath not begun as yet to be a true follower of Christ. And this is that, which our Sauiour Christ teacheth vs very deepely, and profoundly by S. Luke saying. Who is he that beginneth to build a tower, and doth not first cast an account, what his charges will amount vnto, to see whether he be able to finish it, that hee be not afterwards laughed to scorne of such as will say: This man hath begun to build, and now is not able to finish it? Or what king goeth to war against another king, and doth not first examin whether he may enter into battaile with 10000. against his enimy, which bringeth with him an armie af 20000. For if he see, that this cannot be done, then will hee endeuour out of hand to send his Ambassadours vnto him, and to treate vvith him for an accorde of peace.
 Euen so in like manner (saith our Sauiour) he that wil not renounce all that he hath, can not be my disciple. But ye will say, to what purpose is this application made with this comparison? For at the first sight it seemeth, that they stand not well together, to wit, to gather riches, and armies and to renounce all that we possesse, the one being a gathering together, and the other a dispersing abroad. But al this notwithstanding the comparison serueth aptly to our purpose. For this heauenlie maister knewe right well, that as the greatnes of an army importeth him much, that wil giue bataile: and as aboundance of monie is necessary for him that will build: euen so doth pouerty, and forsaking of all worldly goods import verie much towards the spirituall building, and warrfaire. For like as a King, the greater army he hath, the greater safty he is in from the force of his enimie:How much p^uertie importeth to a Christian man. euen so the poorer a man is, and the greater want he hath of the goodes of this world, the streighter passage hath the enimy of mankind, and the lesse able he is to assault him. For which cause the blessed Holy man Saint Frauncis, and many other Saints, liued in this world in such pouertie, and nakednes, to the end, that refusing al worldlie
 goods, they haue nothing to do with the world, nor the world with them. But contrariwise, if a man be affectionated with ouermuch loue vnto any thing of the world, forthwith the deuel setteth for him a thousand snares. For if the thing, which he loueth so exceedingly be either promotions, lands, goods, offices, or such like: the deuil representeth vnto his mind a thousa^d waies, and meanes, whereby he may attaine to that thing, which he loueth. Yea, and afterwards, when he hath obteined it, then the deuill sheweth him also as many moe waies, and deuises, whereby he may augment and increase the same: of the which meanes, and waies, some shalbe lawfull,Tbe effectes of Ambitio^. and some vnlawfull. But the force and vehemencie of his loue shall so blind him with the very passion thereof, that it will cause him to account them all as lawfull, and to procure them all through the furie of his passion. And if peraduenture in the prosecuting of these meanes there doe chau^ce (as it doth commonly) some impediments competitors, or sutors, which doe prete^d them selues to sue for the same thing, that he is about to obteine, or doe withstand him in his sute, the^ there ensueth foorthwith, anger, enuie, ra^cour, disdaine, malice,
 sutes in the law, brawlings, reuengements, fighting, to be short, the waues and stormes of all disquietnesse, and cares which doe spring out of this fountaine. So that in the first motion, (I meane, in the loue and desire of worldly things,) is moued that part of our soule, which we call concupiscible, with all the traine of her affections: and in the second motion, is mooued the part called irascible, with all the traine of her affections: which irascible part is (as the Philosophers affirme) the reuenger of such iniuries, as the part concupiscible hath receaued, and with these violent winds are stirred vp such raging tempestes, and great stormes in our soules, that they are thereby turmoiled, and ouerthrowen into a thousand shipwracks, and daungers: for which cause the Apostle saith,1. Tim. 6. that couetousnes is the roote of all euils.Couetousnes the roote of all euils. The which is verified not only in the coueting after money, but also in any other kind o^ couetousnes, when it is excessiue: forsomuch as it is the cause of all these euils, yea, and of many others also. This very thing is signified vnto vs by the parable of the Gospell, which treateth of the guests,Mat. 22.2. that were bidden vnto the mariage feast of the kings son, and came not. Of who^ one made his excuse, for that he must looke to his houshold, and another,
 for that hee had busines: giuing vs thereby to vnderstand, that the inordinate loue of worldly things, plucketh and haleth our heart in such sort after them, as that it maketh vs to neglect and despise al heauenly thinges. Whereby it appeareth, how good cause our Sauiour had to say,Luk. 14.33 that he vvhich had not renounced the loue of worldly thinges, was not his true Disciple. Let a ma^ therfore loue al these things with a moderatio^, and (as the Prophet sayeth) if riches abound with him,Psal. 16.11 Diuitiae si affluant, nolite cor appponere. Good counsaile for me^ of the world let him not set his hart vpon the^. Let him put his whole affiance in Almighty God, and let him expect of him, as of a true father, for help and remedy of all his things. Let him be contented with whatsoeuer almighty God shall send him, and with his state, and degree, wherin he hath placed him, and let him not desire to be in better state, than the will of God is, that he should be. And as for such as doe follow their owne appetites, and doe not obserue this rule, let them be well assured, that they shall neuer obtaine, that vvhich they desire: neyther shall they enioy it, although they obteine it. Yea, and besides al this, they shall fall into many sinnes, and so shal loose not only the benefits of this life, but also euen those of the life to come: For
 which cause Salomon saied. Lift not vp thine eyes vnto riches,Prouerb. 23 vers. 5. which thou canst not obtaine: for they will make themselues winges, as it were of an Egle, and flie vp to heauen.


THE IX. REMEDY.
THE reading of good bookesThe reading of good bookes. is also a great help thereunto, as the reading of naughty bookes is a great hinderance, and impediment: for the worde of God is our light, our medicine, our foode, and our guide. It is that, that filleth our will vvith good desires, and thereby we be also holpen to recollect our mind, when it is much distracted, and to stirre vp our deuotion, when it is most fluggish, and drowsie. Besides all this it putteth idlenesse to flight, which is the mother of all vices,Idlenes is the mother of all vices. as hereafter shall be declared. To conclude, like as the corporall meate is necessary for conseruation of the naturall life: euen so is the word of God necessarie to sustaine the spirituall life: for which cause S. IeromeS. Ierome. saieth, that the foode and sustenance of the soule, is to meditate vpon the law of God both day, and night. For with this exercise the vnderstanding is fed with the knowledge of truth, and the will is also fedde with the loue, and tast of the same. And forsomuch
 as these two be the principall wheeles of this clocke, (which is a wel gouerned life:) looke when these two are duely set in order, and reformed, then shall all the rest, that depend of them, be well framed, and reformed. Moreouer by reading of Godly bookes,The effect^ of reading of godlie bookes. a man seeth his owne defects, he cureth his scruples, findeth remedy against his temptations, learneth many instructions, attaineth vnto the knowledge of many misteries, and is encouraged to followe the examples of vertue, when he readeth the fruites that doe proceede thereof. Wherefore,Pro. 6.20.21.22. Salomon in his Prouerbs commendeth the same verie much vnto vs, saying: O my Sonne, obserue the Commaundements of thy Father, and refuse not to follow the lawes of thy Mother. Carrie them alwayes bound in thy hart, and as a pretious iewell hanging about thy necke. When thou shalt walke abroad, let them also walke with thee. And when thou goest to sleepe, haue them for thy gard. And when thou shalt awake, talke with them: for the Commaundement of Almightie God is a candle, and his law is a light, and the chasticement of discipline is the waie vnto life.
But here it is to be noted,How wee ought to read good bookes to take profit thereof. that this reading
 (if we intend to take profit thereof) must not be a sleighty or negligent careles running ouer of bookes: without due weighing of the same, and muchles for only curiosity sake: but contrariwise it must be ioyned with humilitie, and a desire to take profit thereby: for this kinde of reading of Holy bookes, is very like vnto Meditation,Praier is to be preferred before reading.Hereticall Preachers expounding the Holie Scriptures contrarie to the approued interpretation of Christes Catholicke Church, doe preach the word of the diuel, and not the word of God: because they be directed therein with the spirit of the diuel, and not with the spirit of God. sauing that Meditation maketh a longer stay in thinges, in searching and digesting the^ a longer space of time. The which he that readeth, may and ought also to do: and so shall he take in a manner not much lesse profit by the one, than by the other: forsomuch as the light of the vnderstanding, which by reading of holy bookes is receaued, descendeth foorthwith vnto the will, and vnto all the other powers of the soule, euen as the vertue and motion of the first heauen descendeth vnto all the other celestiall spheares, Loue therefore the reading of holy and deuout bookes: but yet remember withall, to preferre praier before reading. Reade not many thinges at one time, least with ouermuch reading thou doe wearie thy spirit insteede of recreating it. Receaue the word of God alwaies with a spirituall hunger, out of what Catholike Preachers mouth soeuer it shal proceede:
 yea, though hee pronounce, and vtter it both grosely, and rudely. And when thou perceauest, that thou doest heare the same without any taste, then humble thy selfe, and lay the blame, rather vnto thine own tast, than to the rudenes of the preacher, perswading thy selfe, that through thine owne default thou art not worthy to heare it preached after a better sort.


THE X. REMEDY.
IT is also a great help for this purpose,To represent almightie God euer before our eyes. to walke in such sort, as though wee were alwaies in the presence of Almighty God: that is, to behold him present before our eyes, as a witnes of our doinges, a iudge of our life, and a helper of our weakenes: desiring him alwaies (in such sort, as is meete for such a Lord,) with deuout and short praiers, to help and succour vs with his grace that we swarue not in any point out of our way: for thus doth the Prophet Dauid signifie vnto vs, that he did, when he sayed.Psal. 24.15 Psal. 15.8. I haue mine eyes alwaies fixed vpon our Lord, because he will deliuer my feet out of the snare. And in another place: I haue (saith hee) set our Lord alwaies before mine eyes: for hee is at my right hand, that I be not mooued. True it is, that this so continual attentio^ ought to be had, not only vnto Almighty God, but also to
 the ordering and gouernment of our life: and that in such sort, that we may alwaies haue one eie fixed vpon him, for to reuerence him, and to desire him of his grace, and the other vpon our busines, which we haue to doe, to the end, that we omit not our duty in any one thing. And this maner of attention and watchfulnes is one of the principal gouernours and bridles of our life.
But here it is to be noted, that this maner of attention is especially needfull for vs to vse, whensoeuer wee shall goe about anie perillous affaires, whereby we are in daunger to fall into sinne. As when a man leaueth to dwell solitarilie alone with himselfe, and goeth to talke, or to haue anie thing to doe with contentious and wrangling persons: and likewise when we goe to dinner, or supper, or to performe our duty in hearing Masse, or other diuine Seruice, (where there is daunger, least this should not be done with such attention and carefulnes, as is requisite.) for in euery one of these it importeth very much to goe with a minde prepared, and disposed, to preuent such dangers as may happen. And therfore, like as the passengers, when they come to any foule, and dirty waies, doe prepare themselues before hand thereunto,
 and doe tucke vp their garments about them, and doe practise with another manner of diligence, and care, than they were wont to doe ordinarily in plaine, and faire waies: euen so is it also expedient for vs to prouide with an other manner of attention, and praier, when these occasions are ministred vnto vs, than when wee are not troubled with them. And this is likewise seene by experience, that that man is more temperate and modest at the table, that armeth himselfe before hand, against the prouocations of gluttony, than he that sitteth downe without thinking anie whit of the matter. This is an aduertisement, which if it be diligentlie obserued, may cause vs to eschew many sins: according as we are taught in E^clesiasticus,Eccl. 18.20 when he sayeth, that before the disease, wee ought to prouide a medicine: meaning hereby, that we ought to prouide and arme our selues against daunger, before that the daunger happen vnto vs.


THE XI. REMEDY.
VVEE must also flie idlenesse, and slouth, the mother of all vices:Idlenes is the mot^er of all vices. the which is so clearely true,Ezech. 16.49. that among the foure causes noted by the Prophet Ezechiel,
 whereby Sodoma fell into the extremitie of all euils, this he aleadgeth for one. It is also a lesson of those Holie Fathers which liued in the wildernes, that a Monke occupied in some kinde of exercise hath but one onely temptation: but the idle Monke hath very many: because through the gate of idlenes the diuell findeth an open way for all temptations to enter in: So that this matter being well considered, idlenes hath two thinges, for the which it ought greatly to be abhorred of all good men. The one is, for that (as wee haue declared) it openeth the gate vnto all iniquity: and the other is, for that it shutteth it against all goodnes: for sith that no good thing in the world can be gotten without trauaile,No good thing can be gotten without trauaile. and paines, whether it be vertue, science, honour, or riches, it followeth that in that a man is an enimy to trauaile, and labour, he depriueth himselfe of the generall instrument, whereby all good thinges are obteined. The which being so, who will not abhorre that vice, which bringeth with it, two such great inconueniences as these two are? What greater inconueniences can there be in a Citie, than to haue two gates: the one seruing for the receite of all good things, and the other for all such
 things as are noysome, and hurtfull, and that the first gate should be alwaies fast locked, and the second stand co^tinually wide open? What thing can more liuely resemble the state of those, that are damned in the deep pit of hel? Now in such plight is the soul of an idle person, that hath his gate euermore wide open to receaue all naughtines, and shut vp against all goodnes: forsomuch as nature would not, that any thing that is good, should be obteined without taking of pains, whereof the idle person is a deadly enimie.
Wherefore, for this cause let euery ma^ endeuour to frame his life, and dispose the times of the day in such sort, that he be not at any time vnoccupied. Such as be poore artificers, and of low degree, let them keep themselues occupied in their labours, and handie craftes: but such as cannot keepe themselues occupied in such wise, (as gentlemen, studentes, schollers, and such others,) they can haue no exercise more sweet, more profitable, or more durable, (next after their co^ference by praier with almighty God, and gouernment of theyr houshold,) tha^ to bestow the rest of theyr time in reading of good deuout Catholike books CassianusCassianus. writeth of those ancient holie
 Fathers, which liued in wildernesse, that they esteemed this point to be of so great importance for the perseuerance in the obseruation of vertue, and religion, that when some of the Monkes liued solitarie apart from the companie of men, in such sort, that their labours were nothing profitable vnto them, yet did they not therefore giue ouer their labors: and in the end of the yeare they set fire on all such thinges, as they had wrought, to ridde their Celle thereof, and so beganne to worke anewe. He saieth moreouer, that such handie labour hindered nothing at all the vse of their inwarde praier. For with their handes they did worke, and with their hartes they praied vnto Almightie God.


THE XII. REMEDY.
THE twelft remedy is Solitarines, which is the garde of innocency:Solitarines is the garde of innocencie. forsomuch as it cutteth off at one blow the occasions of all sinnes, and remooueth also from our eyes and senses, both the prouocations, and the obiects of th^m. This is a kinde of remedie, which was commended from Heauen to the blessed Holy Father Arsenius,Arsenius. who heard from aboue a voice saying vnto
 him. O Arsenius, flie, keepe silence, and be quiet. By this example wee may perceaue, that the seruant of God ought to procure to be solitary with himselfe alone, and to endeuour to shake off from him by little and little, (so much as is possible,) all visitations, conuersations, complements, and dealings with the worlde: For ordinarily these are neuer without detraction, murmuring, lying, flattering, and other things, which although they be not sinnes, as these be, yet doe they alwaies leaue the soule voyde of deuotion, and full of fantasies, and imaginations, about such thinges as he hath eyther heard, or seene: which at the time of praier doe represent the^selues againe vnto him, and doe hinder the purity of his praier.
And if for want of these visitations,It is lesse in conuenience to be noted of inciuility, than to be corupted with lewde conuersation, and so thereby offend God. and courtisies, any of his friendes shall complaine, and note him as vnciuill, let him suffer this patiently for the loue of God: For it is a lesse inconuenience, that men should be angrie with him, than that Almighty God should be angry with him. And sithence the blessed Matyrs and all other Saints haue done and suffered so many things for the kingdome of heaue^, it is not much for vs to suffer this small trouble for the selfesame cause, especially if we do well
 examine the matter, wee shall finde, that the paine we haue by omitting these visitations, is very small, and the daunger, which otherwise may ensue vnto vs by them, would be very great: for in this corrupt age the world is in such an euill plight, and such is the ordinary talke, and communication, which men doe generally vse, that thou shalt hardly keepe company, or talke with them, without endangering thy selfe to fall into some deadly sinne.


THE XIII. REMEDY.
AND for the better confirmation of this last remedy, I doe adioyne this other which is, that a good Christian must resolue with himselfe vvholly to breake with the world: forsomuch as no man can be ioyntly the friend of God,Mat. 6.24. and of the world, neyther can he please God and the world together,Wee cannot please God and the world together. sith their waies, their orders, their workes, and their intentions be so cleane contrary, and repugnant the one to the other.Esay. 28.20 The bed is strait, saieth the Prophet, and cannot conteine two therein, and the mantle is narrow, and is not able to couer two, to wit, God and the world: for this cause it behoueth, that the seruant of God doe resolue with himselfe, to breake with the world, and abandon it, and not to
 intermeddle with it at all: not forcing what shall be talked of him: sith that hereby hee of himselfe giueth no actiue scandall, or offence, to any person: for if all these feares, and respects be duely examined, and weighed in equall ballance, they wil proue in the end to be but blastes of winde, and bugge-beares to feare young Children withall, which are afraide of euery shadow To conclude therefore, he that maketh any great account of the world, cannot be the true seruant of almighty God. And therefore the Apostle sayeth:Gal. 1.10. Rom. 6.16. If I should please men, I were not the seruant of Christ: For a man is seruant vnto him, whom hee hath a desire to content, and whose will hee desireth to fulfill.


THE XIIII. REMEDY.
BEsides these generall remedies,Other remedies against sinnes. (which are of great efficacy,) there be other three of no lesse force tha^ these are: which be, the vse of the Sacraments, Praier, and Almes-deedes: for the principall remedy that is against sinne, is (as the Apostle saieth) the grace of God.Rom. 5. Almesdeeds doe dispose vs and make vs apt to receaue to receaue the grace of God: and when we be in his grace, then our Almesdeeds doe merite increase of grace. And these three kindes of vvorkes are moste effectuall meanes to obteine this grace: although their manner of obteining be diuers. Because ordinarily the Sacraments doe giue
 grace, Praier demaundeth it, and Almesdeedes doe merite it: Howbeit it is not Almesdeedes only, that doe merite it, but manie other workes with all, although we doe attribute it particularly to Almesdeedes, because it is a rewarde, that answereth vnto the mercie, which we haue shewed vnto our poore Neighbours, whereby we doe also finde mercie in the sight of Almighrie God. And thus doe Almesdeedes serue, not only to make Satisfaction for sins past, but also to helpe, that wee doe not commit other new sins. And therefore Ecclesiasticus saieth,Eccl. 29.16 17.18. that the Almes-deedes of a man, are like vnto a purse of monie, that he carrieth about him, which will preserue the grace of a man, as the light of the eyes, and shall fight against his enimies, more than the launce and the shield of the mighty.
Now as touching the Sacraments, who seeth not, that they are certaine heauenlie medicines, which Almighty God hath ordeyned against sinne.The Sacramentes are heauenly medicines ^rdeined against sin. They be remedies of our frailty, prouokers of our loue, stirrers vp of our deuotion, releeuers of our miseries, and treasures of the grace of God.
Of euery one of these three things there is much to be sayed: but because we haue
 treated already of the Sacramentes in the second and third Treatise of this Memoriall, and of praier we intend to treate in the fift Treatise, and of almes-deedes wee haue treated among the three partes of Satisfaction, as being one of them: at this present therefore I will say no more, but referre the Christian reader vnto those places, and aduertise him, that for this purpose one of the most principal petitions, that he ought to make alwaies vnto our Lord in his praiers should be, that it may please him rather to take him cleane out of this life, and wholly to doe his will and pleasure with him, than to suffer him to fall into anie deadly sinne. And for the greater confirmation hereof, let him demaund in all his praiers, three loues, and three hatreds:We ought to desire of God three loues, and three hatreds. that is to say, the loue of GOD, the loue of paines taking for his sake, and the loue of vertue. Let him in like manner demaunde of him, hatred against sin, hatred against his owne will, and hatred against his owne flesh: (so farre foorth, as these two are the causes of sinne, when they are loued inordinately.) And to mortifie this euill loue, hee ought to require instantly this holie hatred, and to procure that his workes, and seuere disciplining of himselfe may speake
 together with his petition, for herein consisteth the key of all. But of this matter we will treate more at large in the end of this booke.


THE XV. REMEDY.
THOV hast now here, good Christian Reader, these generall remedies against all deadly sinnes: which is a verie great part of the Christian Philosophie) especially ordained for this purpose. There be other particular remedies also against particular vices: whereof at this present, (for that I intend to be briefe) I thinke it nothing needfull to speake: but for conclusion, and better obseruation of all the premisses, thou oughtest alwaies to set before thine eyes, and to haue a singular care and remembrance of foure points: to wit, to discipline thy body, to refraine thy tonge, to mortifie thy appetites, and to haue alwaies thy spirit closlie recollected, and fixed in God: for somuch as with these foure thinges the foure principal partes of a man are reformed, which be, the flesh, the tong the harte, and the vnderstanding: the which being reformed, and set in good order, the whole man is fullie reformed. And so shall wee cease from offending
 Almightie God, which is the marke, that we doe set before vs in this Treatise.



Of the most Common temptations, that doe assault such, as doe but newly beginne to serue God, and especiallie such, as be newlie professed in Religion. THE II. CHAPTER.
VVE are counsailed in Ecclesiasticus,Eccle. 18.20. that we should prouid a medicine, before we be diseased. And all the doctrine of the philosophers doth verie much commend, that a man should be prepared, and in a readines before hand, to the end, that no daungers may assault him, and find him vnprouided.Wee must prepare our selues against temptations. For this cause it shall doe well in the end of this rule, to note briefly certaine kindes of assaults, and temptations, which are wont to trouble such persons, as doe begin to serue God: that they may at the least vnderstand, that they be temptations in deed. For the verie knowledge thereof is a great helpe towardes the conquering of them. For like as the Fouler, when he laieth his snare, prouideth alwaies, that it may not appeare to be a snare, but meate: euen so the DIVELL when hee tempteh
 vs, laboureth so much as is possible, that his temptation may not appeare to be a temptation, but a reasonable motion: For which cause I sayed, that a great part of the victorie ouer a temptation consisteth in knowing, that it is a temptation.
Wherefore, whosoeuer he be, that will enter into this new warfare, let him first of all presuppose, that hee must abide great assaults, and many temptations of the enimie: whereof wee are admonished by the wise man not without great cause. O my sonne saith hee, when thou purposest to serue God,Eccl. 2.1. see that thou liue with feare, and prepare thy soule vnto temptations.
Among these temptations the first is, when we are tempted in matters of Faith:Temptation in matters of Faith. for whereas, a man before the time of his co^uersion, was as it were in a sleepe, as touching the consideration of matters of the Catholicke Faith, now when he newly beginneth to open his eyes, and to see the misteries thereof, he beginneth forthwith (as a stranger in a forraine country) to wauer in such thinges, as are opened vnto him. And this is, by reason of the little light, and small vnderstanding, which hee hath of them. And so it fareth with him, as with a new prentice, that entreth into a rich ware
 house, or shop of some notable Artificer, where hee findeth many sortes of instruments, and tooles, and not vnderstanding to what vse they are made, he gaseth, and wondereth forthwith at euery thing that he seeth, and beginneth to aske questions: wherefore is this? And why is that? Vntill that afterwardes perceauing by vse, to what purpose ech thing doth serue, hee quieteth his minde and is perswaded that such thinges be very necessary, and conuenient, as seemed to him before verie straunge.
There is an other temptation, which is  of Blasphemie.Temptation of Blasphemie. This temptation representeth vnto the minde of a man, when hee is set to meditate vpon heauenly thinges, the shapes of certaine thinges that be filthie and abhominable. For when a man doth withdraw his imagination from the world, being as yet full of the shapes and figures of worldly thinges, he cannot sodainely dispatch away from his minde the shape of such thinges, as hath bin by long continuance imprinted therein: and therefore together with spirituall formes and figures, there are also represented vnto him confusedly certaine carnall, and filthie shapes, which doe torment him very much that is
 troubled with them. The best waie that may be taken to ouercome these temptations, is to make no accou^t of them: forsomuch as they be in deed rather a kinde of frighting, and fearing of our enimie, than anie true daunger in deed.
 An other temptation there is of Scruples.Temptation of scruples. These Scruples proceed of ignorance, which young nouices conceaue of spiritual matters, and therefore they go as a man that walketh in the darke, which doubteth at euery stepp to take a fall. This commeth to passe, especiallie for that they vnderstand not the difference betwene a thought and a consent: and therefore they imagin, that they giue their consent in euery light motion.
 An other temptation there is, which is, to be quickly scandalised and offended at euerie thing,The temptation of scandall. that they see contrary to that, which they themselues haue conceiued in their mindes. For when they begin to open their eyes, and to vnderstand what a worthy thing it is to serue Almighty God, so soone as they come newly to the knowledge thereof, they wonder greatly at the^ that doe the contrary, and are therewith much troubled, and doe disdaine the^. Such kinde of persons haue not as yet knowne
 the greatnes of mans frailty, nor the profoundnes of Gods iudgments, neyther yet haue they attained vnto the vnderstanding of that place of S. Gregory,S. Gregory. where he saieth, that true holines hath compassio^, but feined, or imperfect holines is disdainefull.
An other temptation there is, when a religious  person also taketh a scandall or offence with the lawes, and ordinances of his religion, or profession, and maketh himselfe a iudge, and interpretor in the exposition of such things, as his rule commandeth, giueing rash censure, whether his rule be good or euill, which generally is a temptatio^ of proud, and presumptious wits, and of such as haue more affiance in themselues, than in the experience of their forefathers, which ordeined these rules. This temptation is much like vnto that of the ancient serpe^t, who demau^ded this question: to what purpose hath God co^maunded you not to eat of this tree?Gen. 3.1. Prou. 1.6. wherfore the wise man giueth vs counsaile, that wee should not mislike with the parables of wise men, which are high doctrines, and yet in appearance obscure: for they speak them with great mistery, although we cannot vnderstand the^. The young child, whe^ he learneth first to read, beleeueth whatsoeuer is taught him,
 without demaunding why is this, and wherfore is that? For that is a thing which is knowen afterwards with time. Let a man therefore submit himselfe to other mens aduise, and gouernement, and wholly renounce his owne opinion. And let him liue rather by Faith, and Obedience, than by reason, and say with the Prophet: Vt iumentum factus sum apud te.Psal. 72.23 That is, I am made like a beast before thee. He that doth not thus, shall neuer perseuere in Religion, nor yet haue peace nor tranquility in his hart.
 There is an other temptation, which is, to desire ouermuch spirituall consolations,The temptation of ouermuch desire of spirituall consolations. and to be ouer heauie, and discomfited, when he wanteth them, and to esteeme him selfe better than others, when he hath the^: measuring perfectio^ by consolation, wherin he is greatly deceaued: for this is not the true and certaine measure,Charitie is the measure to iudge perfection. whereby to measure perfection, but Charitie, and next vnto Charitie, the mortification of passions, and the profiting in vertue: which be  signes of the increase of Charitie. Others there be likewise, which when they want spirituall consolations, doe seeke for sensuall consolations: the which is no lesse inconuenience than the former.
 An other temptation is, not to keepe
 secret such visitations, fauours, and graces, as they receaue of Almighty God: but to publish, and disclose that to others which they ought to keepe secret to themselues: and to make them selues preachers, and doctours, before their time, and beginne to be maisters, before they haue bin schollers. And al this they do vnder a pretence of Zeale, and with the shadowe of vertue: not considering, that the frutefull tree must yeeld his frute in time,Psal. 1.3. and that the proper office and duety of a beginner is to laie his finger on his mouth, and to take good heed to his soule.
An other temptation there is, and that  very common: which is,The desire to flit f^om place to place, is a temptation. to be disquieted with the remouing from place, to place: seeming to him, that he may be in some other place much more quiet, and deuout, or els with greater profit, and with more close recollection of his mind.
Such men doe not consider, that by chaunging of places the ayer is chaunged, and not the mind, and that to what place soeuer a man goeth, he carrieth him selfe with him: that is to saie, a minde rent and torne with sinne, (being as it is, a continuall store house of miseries, and troubles:) and that this is not remedied with chau^ging
 of places, but with the burning iron of mortification, and with the oyntment of deuotion. The which deuotion doth alter the mind in such sort, that for the time, that the pleasantnes of this odoriferous sauour endureth, the stincking filth, which issueth from this sinke of our flesh, is not perceaued, nor felt. Wherefore, the best remedy that he can take to fly from himself, is to approch neare vnto Almighty God, and to communicate and be conuersante with him: for by dwelling in him by actual loue, and deuotion, he remaineth forthwith absent and separated from him selfe.
 An other temptation is, when men vpon the feeling of a new tast and feruencie of spirit doe giue them selues vndiscretlie to ouermuch watching,Vndiscret seueritie towardes our selues is a temptation. praier, Solitarines, and Abstinence: whereby they destroie their countenances, their heads, and stomakes, and doe remaine in a manner all their life time afterwardes vnable for spirituall exercises, as I my selfe haue seene in many Religious persons. Some there be also, that fal thereby into grieuous diseases and what with the cherishing, which they haue in the time of their sicknes, and what with the interruptio^ and want of good exercises, which they omit, being thereu^to enforced
 by the disease, of their temptati^ns doe increase in such sort, as they may easily cast of vertue, being so abandoned and spoiled of the aid and strength of deuotion. Others againe being accustomed and inured to delicat cherishing in time of their sicknes, do continue in such euill customes, as they vsed in the same, and (as Saint Bonauenture saieth) do fal by this occasion to loue themselues aboue all measure, and to liue not only more delicately than before, but also more dissolutely, making their sicknes a pretenced colour, to giue long licence to all their appetites, and delicate cherishings.
Some others contrariwise doe offend  through ouermuch discreation,Some refuse to take paines through ouermuch discretion. refusing to doe euery honest worke for feare of perill, saying, that it is sufficient for their saluation to keepe themselues from deadly sins, without vsing of any rigorous discipline, or any other like exercise. Of these kind of men S. Ber.S. Bernard. sayeth thus. This man newly entred into religion, being as yet sensuall, is become discreete, and being but a young nouice is wise, and being as yet but a beginner, is already prudent, it is not possible that such a one should continue any long time in religion.
But the most common temptation of  young nouices newly entered into Religion,
 is to forsake the way, that they haue begun, and to returne againe to the world: for the compassing whereof the deuell vseth a thousand deuises. Sometimes with strong temptations of the flesh, representing vnto the^ the state of mariage, as a sure hauen, and quiet life: which is (to speake the truth) a whirlepoole of continual troubles, and torments: alledging for this purpose the examples of manie Patriarkes, which being maried were Saincts: and bearing them in hand, that they shall finde for that state of life a meete companion, that shalbe of the same intention and mind as they be of, and that they shall bring vp their children in the feare of God. And here will he represent vnto them, what almes they may giue in that state, which they cannot doe abiding in Religion: telling them moreouer that this giuing of almes is a great meane to be assured of the Kingdome of Heauen at the day of Iudgment.
The desire to enter into a more strait religion is some times a temptationSometimes, contrary hereunto, the diuell will goe about to deceaue them with higher imaginations, preferring vnto them other orders of Religion, which be more strait than that, wherein they are entered: and especially the Holie Order of the Carthusians
 The which thing he doth, to allure them out of their Religion with this pretence, that after he hath once entised them out of their religion, he may then take full possession of them, and carrie them vpon his hornes whither he listeth.
Some times also the diuell bringeth them to be in loue excedingly with solitarie life, vsing thereunto the examples, and liues of the Auncient Holie Heremites: to the end that when he hath led them from al company through this solitary walke, hauing them there alone, where they cannot take aduise or counsaile of their Spirituall FATHERS, and CONFESSOVRS, hee may the more easily preuaile against them.
But among all these kindes of temptations, the most daungerous are those,Temptatio^s couered with the cloke of vertue are most daungerous. that come vnder pretence of goodnes, and doe beare a shew of vertue. For such thinges, as be openly naught, doe carrie with them their owne filthines, and superscription, whereby they are knowen, and abhorred: but those thinges, that haue an outward shewe of goodnes, are more perilous: because with this colour, and shew of vertue they may the more easily beguile vs. By which kinde of way our common aduersary
 the deuell preuaileth more, than by any other, in tempting the seruants of God: for whereas he knoweth right well, that they be already determined to abhorre the euill, and to embrace the good: he procureth (if hee may) to giue them to drinke the poyson of sinne mingled vvith this deceitfull honie.Dan. 6.5. In which point hee may well be resembled to those great enimies of Daniel, which being desirous to bring him out of the fauour of king Darius, and so to put him to death, and attempting many meanes in vaine to bring this to passe, in fine they resolued, that they could entrappe him by no deuise, vnlesse it were by meane of transgressing some Comma^dement or statute of the law. And so they did, albeit that this also serued not their turne, because almighty God prouided for his seruant. After this sort doth the Diuell tempt good men ordinarily, and by this way doth he lay snares to catch them, and therefore it is necessary that wee be well aduised, what affection wee beare euen to such thinges,Excessiue affection and loue of good things is to be suspected. as seeme to vs to be good: For although there be no fault in the affection of a thing, yet is there in the excessiue affection thereof. Wherefore, vve ought to suspect euery excessiue, and vehement
 affection: forsomuch as the excesse in euery thing is alwaies to be feared.
These be the most common temptations of such as begin to serue God.Remedies against te^ptations. The remedy whereof is humilitie, submission, praier, confession, and the wisedome of a good Ghostly Father, which is as a good Pylot, whose care must be to guide this shippe with great discreation through the middest of the waues of the tempestious, and stormy Sea of this world, where the furious windes of the malignant spirites doe bluster and blow, and stir vp great tempests and stormes. But aboue all this, Almighty God is our chiefest remedie, who knoweth our weakenes, and helpeth vs with his grace, and deuideth vs from the land of the Philistians,Exod. 13.17. that they may not vex vs ouermuch with their cruell assaultes at our departing out of Egypt: and who suffereth vs not (as the Apostle saieth) to be tempted beyond our power:1. Cor. 10.13. but rather increaseth his grace in vs, when hee seeth vs entring into the battaile. To conclude, the remedies of all these temptations are the very same, which we haue before declared to be remedies against sin. For there cannot be had any other weapons against the temptation of sinne, than such as are vsed
 against the very sinne it selfe. This may suffice as touching the first rule, for such as begin to serue God,
The end of the First Rule.



HERE FOLLOWETH AN Other Rule of good life for such persons, as haue already proceeded somewhat further in the Christian life.


Si quis vult post me venire, abneget semetipsum, and tollat crucem suam quotidie, and sequatur me. Luc. 9.23. Qui dicit se in ipso manere, debet, sicut ille ambulauit, and ipse ambulare. 1. Iohn. 2.6.



Of the end of this doctrine, which is the imitation and following of the life of our Sauiour Christ. THE I. CHAPTER.
FORSOMVCH as there be some persons, which be not contented with the doing of all such things, as they know to be of necessity for their saluation, but will
 endeuour to wade further, and profit more, and more, in the way of vertues: for such it shalbe also necessary to set foorth some instruction, and doctrine: for the which purpose the Rule folowing may very well serue, besides that, which shalbe saied in the end of this Memorial in the s^ue^th treatise.
And because the end of thinges is the rule whereby they ought to be guided: therefore, as in the former rule wee prescribed one end, which was to eschew all deadly sinne: so in this present rule wee minde to assigne another end more high, and of more excellency, which is the imitation and following of the life of Christ, whereunto all the Christian life is ordained, and albeit, that in this second rule certaine thinges of the former rule are repeated againe: yet is not the time spent therein lost, forsomuch as there they be declared as meanes, that serue to eschew sin^, which was the principall end in that place pretended: but here they be repeated for other endes, and according hereunto, they are treated of more particularly.

@. 1.
NOW then to goe forward in this order, the first and most generall instruction, and end of this doctrine, is comprehended
 in these wordes of our Sauiour, to wit: I haue giuen you an example,Ioh. 13.15. that like as I haue done, so ought you to doe: For in like manner as Scriueners that teach their schollers to write, are wont to set before them examples of well chosen letters, to the end that by imitating the same, they may make the like forme of letter, as they would gladly learne: euen so likewise for those that desire to lead a Christian life, it behooueth to set before the^ another most perfect patterne, that may serue them as an example and rule of their life.The perfection of the effect is to follow his cause. For the vvhich there can not be any other more perfect, nor more conuenient, tha^ the life of our Sauiour Christ: (who was giue^ vnto vs in this world, for a Maister and example of vertues.) Forsomuch, as all that he did and saied in his life was for an example and reformation of our life: for it is certaine, that like as all the perfectio^ of the effectes is to imitate their causes, and to be like vnto them: (as we see, that the perfection of the scholler is to imitate and follow his master,) euen so al the perfectio^ of a reasonable creature is to imitate and folow his creator (so much as is possible,) and to resemble, and be like vnto him. Vnto this imitation the same Lord inuiteth vs in all the
 Holy Scriptures.Leuit. 11.44. Leuit. 19.2. Leuit. 20.7. 1. Pet. 1.15 1. Iohn. 3.3. Luke. 6.36. Mat. 5.48. In one place hee saieth: Be yee holy, as I am holy. And in an other place. Be yee mercifull, in like manner as your Father is mercifull. And in another place he saieth: Be ye perfect, in like manner as your heauenly father is perfect.
Wherefore, sith that all the perfection of the creature consisteth in the imitation, and following of his creatour: and to him that will imitate a thing, it is necessarie first to see it,One cause, why God tooke our flesh, was that wee might see him whome wee ought to follow. and because none can see God in his owne nature, and glorie, for this cause (among many other,) the sonne of GOD hath cloathed himselfe with our nature, to the end, that so we might see him, whome we ought to follow: that is, that wee might see him in such manner, as he walked here vpon the earth, and was conuersant vvith men: that wee might vnderstand vvhat wordes he spake, in what workes hee bestowed his time, how he behaued himselfe in aduersitie, and how in prosperity: how being solitarie, and how in company: how with his enimies, and how with his friendes: how with the great, and how with the small: and last of all, to the end that wee might see the excellencie of his vertues, his charitie, his humilitie, his patience, his obedience, his meekenes, his pouertie, his fastings,
 his praiers, his teares, his watchings, his preachings, his labours, and trauailes, the zeale which he had of soules, the loue towardes his neighbours, the rigour and seueritie, which he vsed towards himselfe, and the gentlenes and compassion towardes others. This was one of the causes, why hee came into the world. For to this end God came to make himselfe man, that man might be made God: to the end that man might learne, not only by hearing, but also by sight, and not only by the wordes of God, but also by the examples of God, to liue as God liued. This is that, which the Prophet signified, when he saied: Thy eyes shall see thy Maister,Esay. 30.20.21. and thy eares shall heare the voice of him, that shal admonish behinde thy back, saying: This is the way, walke in it, and turne not aside. neither on the right hand, nor yet on the left. For by meane of this misterie of the incarnation of the Sonne of God, not onely our eares haue heard the doctrine of God, but our eyes also haue seene his person: that is to say, haue seene the word in flesh, and God in man, that ma^ might learne by him how he ought to imitate God, and that he should not mistrust, but that man may be made a God, sith that he seeth God made man.

Now according to this rule, he that shalbe most like vnto Christ in all his vertues, shalbe most perfect,He that shalbe most like vnto Christ shalbe most perfect. and this is that which the Holy Ghost (vvho dwelleth in the hearts of the iust) intendeth principallie to bring to passe: in such sort, as no painter (as a Holy Father saith) trauaileth so much to make the picture like vnto the naturall as he laboreth to make all his Elect like vnto our SAVIOVR CHRIST Crucified: as one that knoweth right wel, that this is the greatest perfection, and glory, that may be attained vnto in this life.
An Obection.But peraduenture thou wilt say. If this be so, how shall I be able to imitate and follow the vertues of the sonne of God? I am a man, and he is God. I am a deepe sea of frailty, and weakenes, and hee a deepe sea of vertue and strength, how can I then lift vp my selfe so high, as to imitate, and follow such a wonderfull great puritie? The answereThe answere. hereunto, my deare Christian brother is,Sap. 8.21. Iohn. 1.16. Act. 15.11. Rom. 7.24.25. Rom. 8.26. 1. Cor. 3.9. 1. Cor. 12.3 13. that in very deed no man is able of himselfe alone to attaine vnto this so high resemblance, and imitation, of the vertues of the son of God, but by the vertue, and strength of the very selfe same spirit of God, which must dwell within him. For this spirit of God was giuen vnto men
 to this end, that by meane of the vertue,1. Co. 15.10 2. Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13. and stre^gth of the diuine spirit, they might liue a diuine life,Note that such christians as haue the Diuine spirit may doe Diuine workes, and lead a Diuine life. and do the works not now of men, but euen of God: forsomuch as they haue the spirit of God. It were not impossible for a man to speake as Tullie spake, if he had the very selfe same spirit, that Tullie had: neither to dispute like vnto Aristotle,Rom. 2.5.10.13.14. 1. Cor. 6.17. Qui adhaeret Domino vnus Spiritus est. Mat. 10.20 Gal. 2.20. Viuo aute^, iam non ego, viuit vero in me christus. 2. cor. 4.10. 2. cor. 12.6. 1. Iohn. 2.6. 1. Ioh. 3.1. 1. Ioh. 3.24. 1. Ioh. 4.16 1. Iohn. 5.3 1. Pet. 2.2 Phil. 4.13 Mat. 19.2 26. Luk. 18.27 Iohn. 3.6. if hee might haue the very selfe same spirit, that Aristotle had. Eue^ so it is not impossible for a man to imitate, and follow (in his manner) the vertues and life of God, whe^ he hath rereaued the spirit of God. It is no new or strange thing, that one thing should participate the nature of an other thing, when they are ioyned together: For so we see, that the vnsauorie meat being seasoned with salt is made sauory, being preserued with hony, it beco^meth sweet, and being dressed with spices it receiueth the odoriferous sauour thereof, and after this maner it is no great matter for a man to become diuine, being made partaker of th^ diuine spirit, to wit, of the spirit of God. Our sauiour Christ signifieth briefly both the one, and the other, whe^ he saith. That which is borne of flesh, is flesh: but that which is borne of the spirit is spirit. In which wordes he declareth plainely vnto
 vs, that it was not possible, that flesh of it selfe alone should be more than flesh: and that it was not impossible for flesh to be made spiritual, being holpen with the vertue, strength, and presence of the Spirit of God.
By participation of the spirit of God, wee become spirituall.Thus now by meanes of the participation of the Spirit of God, (as of an heaue^ly seed) al the sonnes of God are borne. And therefore it is not to be marueiled at, if they as sonnes do resemble their father, and liue a diuine life, after that they haue receaued the spirit of God. As one of the^ beareth witnes,2. Corin. 3.18. saying: we hauing the vaile taken from our face, and hauing receaued in our souls (as in a cleare glasse) the brightnes of God, are transformed into the selfe same image of God, through this operatio^ of his Spirit in vs. Neither is it to be wondered at, that holy men (in their degree) are called goddes, as the prophet Dauid called them,Psal. 81.6. Iohn. 10.34. when he saied: Ego dixi, dij estis, and filij excelsi omnes. I haue saied ye are gods, and ye are all the sonnes of the highest. For it is no matter for such to be made partakers of the name of God, as haue bin partakers of the Spirit and likenes of God.
And this so great dignity the Sonne of God him self came to giue vs: and this was
 the principal cause of his comming. And for this cause did he abase him selfe to become verie man,Why Christ abased him selfe to become man. to the end, that he which is a very man might become God, not by nature, but by gace. And thus our Sauiour Christ is in one respecte the exemplar cause, (as they tearme it) of al our perfection, (in that he hath drawen out and purtraited vnto vs in his most holy life the Image of perfect life:) and he is likewise the meritorious cause of our perfection, in that he hath with the Mistery of his incarnatio^ and sacrifice of his passion purchased for vs this so great and excelle^t dignity.
Now then, let the imitation of the life of our Sauiour Christ be the first lesson of our life, and let it be also the end of all the same. Whereunto the Apostle Saint Peter inuiteth vs, saying. Christ hath suffered for vs,1. Pet. 2.21.22. leauing you an example, that ye should follow his steppes: who neuer sinned, neither was there found any guile in his mouth who, when he was reuiled, reuiled not againe: and when he suffered wrong he did not threaten. The very same is likewise required of vs by Saint Iohn the Euangelist in these wordes. He that sayeth,1. Iohn. 2.6. that he abideth in Christ, ought euen so to walke, as he hath walked. Vpon which words Prosper saieth. What is it to liue, as Christ liued, but
 to despise all prosperity,What it is to liue, as Christ liued. as he despised it? And not to be afraide of aduersity: which he hath patiently suffered? And to teach that which hee taught: to hope for that which hee promised: to doe good to the vnthankefull, not to render euill for euill to the euill speakers: to pray for thy enimies: to haue compassion vpon the froward, and peruerse: to get the good will of thy enimies: to suffer patiently the proud, and last of all,Rom. 8.10.13. (as the Apostle saieth) to die to thy flesh, and to liue only to God.
These things and many other the like, are comprehended in the imitation and following of our Sauiour Christ: But because this lesson is very generall, wee will now proceed to treate particularly of the vse, and practise of vertues, according as vvee promised in the beginning.



Of the exercise and practise of diuers vertues. THE II. CHAPTER.
Charity is the first among all vertues.NOW among these vertues, the first (which is as it were the tree of life in the middle of paradise) is Charitie: vvhose property is to loue God aboue all thinges, with all our hart, with all our soule, and with all our might. This is the first and greatest of all the Commandements. This is the Queene of all vertues: This is the beginning
 and end of all the Christian life.Math. 22.37.38. Deut. 6.5. This is the soule, and life of all our works: without which neyther Faith, nor Hope, nor Prophecy, nor Martyrdome, neyther yet all the other vertues are any thing worth.1. Cor. 13.1.2 3.
For the obteining of this diuine vertue of Charity,How Charitie may be obteined. among many other thinges, are required chiefly three. The first is, to purge the soule of all inordinate appetites and passions, and of all sins,To purge the soule. that do proceed  of them: for the diuine wisdome (as it is written) will not enter into an euill conscience, neyther will it make her abode in a heart subiect vnto sins. Wherefore,Sap. 1.4. such as desire to loue almighty God, let the^ endeuor to sequester them selues from all sinnes: and not onely from all deadly sinnes: but also (so much as in them lieth) euen fro^ venial sins. For in like manner as a glasse, the brighter it is, the more clearely it receiueth the sun beams: euen so the purer a soule is, the more it doth participate of the clearenesse, and bright beames of the loue of God.
The second thing that is requisite for thee obtaining  of Charity, is for a man closlie to recollect himselfeFor a man closlly to recollect himselfe. within himselfe, as often as hee may, and to call to minde all such thinges, as may moue his hart to loue almighty God. The which if he doe, hee shal find that all those causes of loue, that be found in all creatures, are to be found altogether in God alone, yea, and all in the highest degree of perfectio^.

And because the Philosophers affirme, that goodnes is naturally to be beloued,The thinges that doe specially mooue vs to loue God.S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 82. art. 3. and that euery one loueth his owne proper weale, hereof it commeth, that two things doe chieflie prouoke vs to this diuine loue: to wit, the greatnes of the perfections of God, and the greatnes of his benefits. Of the which two pointes wee shall treate hereafter in their proper place. And herewith it is good also, to consider the great loue that Almighty God beareth towardes vs, and what great cause we haue to loue him also, in that he is our Father, our Brother, our King, our Lord, our God, and our last end, (in regard wherof he is called the spouse of our soules) and therefore deserueth to be loued with infinite loue: forsomuch as such loue is due to the last end. Now the consideration of these thinges, the longer and profounder it is, the greater loue shall it cause vs to haue vnto almighty God, whome wee doe in such meditations set before our eyes. And for this cause, he that mindeth to take great profit in the loue of God, must spend a great time in this consideration.
An other meane there is besides this for the obtaining of Charity, which is a shorter, and more compendious meane: that is, when the soule being wounded and preuented
 with the sweet delight of this lord, and inamoured with his so great excellency, demaundeth most instantly and continually of him, who only can giue this treasure of Charitie, that hee will vouchsafe to graunt the same vnto her: seeming vnto her, that it is a shorter, and more speedie way for the obtaining of the loue of God, to demaund it of him, than to straine it out by little and little, and as it were droppe, by droppe, by force of considerations. For which cause such a one accounteth it better to pray than to meditate. And so hee praieth, and maketh petition continuallie with most feruent and burning desires, for this so precious a iewell: for the which purpose it is needfull, that he haue alwaies in a readines some sweet, and louing praiers, wherewith his Religious soule may signifie vnto Almighty God this his desire. Of the which praiers, and of all that apperteineth vnto this vertue of Charity shalbe treated hereafter in his proper Treatise of the loue of God. And be thou well assured, that not one of these praiers, and sighes, shalbe frustrate, and spent in vaine: For sith our Lord is alwaies so liberall, and bountifull in his giftes, hee will graunt thee for thy praiers, eyther new deuotion, or new light,
 or els he will giue thee increase of grace, or drawe thy heart more effectually vnto him, or comfort and recreate thee vvith greater fweetnes, and delite, or els hee vvill giue thee greater force to perseuere and accomplish thy good beginning: wherefore leese not (my good brother) through a little negligence these inestimable benefits, which thou mayest obtaine euery mome^t.
Purity of intention.Vnto this same Charity it doth appertaine also to purifie the eye of our intention in all our workes, pretending therein, not our owne commoditie, and interest, neither yet our owne honour and contentation: but the well pleasing, and contentatio^ of Almighty God. In such sort, that whatsoeuer wee shall doe, (eyther following our owne will, or the will of others) it be done, nor for manners sake, nor for a bare Ceremony, nor for necessity, nor by constraint, nor to please the eyes of men, nor yet for any other interest or commodity of the world, but purely for the loue of God: as an honest woman serueth her husband, not in respect of any dowry, legacy, or other commodity that she hopeth for of him, but for the loue shee beareth vnto him: wherin it is meet, that the soule should be so faithfull and chaste, that like
 as the honest wife trimmeth, and decketh herselfe only to please the eyes of her husband, and not of any other man: euen so must the soule procure the ornament, and garnishing of vertues, onely to please the eyes of Almightie God. Howbeit, I speak not this, as to condemne the dooing of good workes,Psal. 118 112. Esay. 3.10. Ier. 17.10 Mat. 5.12. Mat. 10.42. Rom. 2.6.7. 1. cor. 3.8. 2. cor. 5.10. Eph. 6.8. 2. Tim. 4.8. Heb. 6.10. Heb. 10.35.36. Heb. 11.26 Apoc. 2.23. Apoc. 14.13 Apoc. 22.12 for the reward of life euerlasting, (being rather a holy and commendable thing:) but because the more a man shall turne his eyes from all kinde of interest, and commodity, and the more purely hee shall haue his intention bent to the pleasing of Almighty GOD, the more perfectly shall hee worke, and the more aboundantly shall he merite. For (as Saint BernardS. Bernard. saieth) perfect loue increaseth not in strength through hope, neyther is it dismaied through mistrust: forsomuch as it laboureth not in hope of anie thing that shalbe giuen, neyther doth it cease to labour, although there be no hope of any gift: because it was not the commodity, or interest, that mooued it to take paines, but only loue.
And this pure intention ought a man to haue, not only in the beginning, or end of his workes, but also at the very time, whilest he is in dooing them, he ought to doe
 them in such wise, that he be offering the^ there vnto almighty God, and that in doing them, he be then also actually exercising himselfe in louing of God: so that whilest he is in working, he may seeme no lesse both to loue, and pray, than to work. And after this manner he shal not be distracted in the workes, which he shal doe. For in this wise did the Sainctes worke, and yet not-withstanding were not distracted, when they did worke. So is it spoken of the spouse in the canticles by a figure,Cant. 4.11. that her garments sauoured of incense. Fot by the garments of the soule we vnderstand the vertues,Vertuous workes be the garme^ts of the soule. wherewith she is adorned: and by the incense, which being cast into the fire ascendeth vp on high, and yeeldeth a sweet sauour, we vnderstand praier, which being done here on earth, worketh in Heauen. Now then to say, that the garments of the spouse sauoured of incense, is to say, that she wrought the works of vertues in such sort, that her working apeared as wel to be praying, as working, by reason of the great deuotio^ wherwith she did her workes. We see the mother when she is occupied in washing the feet of her children, or husband, which are come home from farre countries, that she doth both
 loue them, and serue them together, delighting herselfe, and taking great pleasure, and contentation in that seruice which shee doth vnto them. Euen so ought our minde to be affected, when it purposeth to doe any seruice vnto her Creator, and in so doing shall her garments sauour of this spirituall incense.
What worke so euer is thus done, is of great merite:The merite of a good worke depe^deth of the purity of the intention. Mat. 6.1.4 Mat. 19.29 Luk. 6.35. Heb. 6.10. Luk. 21.34. Marck. 1^^ 43.44. Forsomuch as the merite of our workes doth chiefly depende of the purity of our intention, and of the loue, and deuotion, wherewith they are done: wherin it may well be compared vnto money: ^or in money we make not so great accou^t of the number, as of the mettall. Because a little gold is much more worth, tha^ a great quantity of copper. Euen so in good works the multitude of them is not so much to be regarded, as the loue and deuotion, with the which they be done. As it appeareth by the m^te offered by the poore widow spoken of in the Gospell: which was better esteemed, than the great offeringes of many rich men. And so it happeneth that a good worke may be done vvith such a will, charity, and deuotion, that it shall be more valewed in the sight of Almightie God, than many others, that are not done
 after the like manner. So that like as a feruent praier obteineth more of God, than manie others, which are neither hote nor colde: euen so doth a worke done with great feruour, and deuotion merit more, than manie others, which are not so done. The which point ought diligentlie to be marked of those persons, whose states of life doe binde them continuallie to doe good workes, that they take good heede after what sort they be done: and that they presume not in the multitude of theyr workes, but to be carefull to doe them with great loue, and deuotion.
Charity requireth of vs not only to loue God, but also to loue our neighbour for Gods sake.Vnto this same Charitie it apperteineth also not only to loue God, but also to loue our neighbour for the loue of God. For sithence it apperteineth vnto Charity to loue God, and all things that be his: seeing also that one of the principall thinges that belongeth vnto God is a reasonable creature, made after the image and likenes of God, and redeemed with his blood: it followeth hereof, that from the verie same roote and habite, from whence it procedeth to loue God, from thence doth it also proceede to loue our neighbour for Gods sake. As the common saying is with vs in Spayne. He that loueth wel Beltrame, loueth wel Beltraines dogge. And so say the diuines, that
 Charity is one only habite, but that it hath these two acts, the one to loue God, and the other to loue our neighbor for Gods sake. This is the final cause, for which we ought to loue our neighbours. This is also the greatest motiue, why we should loue the^, be they neuer so vnworthy of our loue: for we ought to respect them, and to loue them not so much for theyr own sakes, as for the loue of that Lord, who hath created them, and redeemed them, and hath commanded vs to loue the^ for his sake: for admit that there be no cause in them,For what cause woe should loue our ne^ghbour. wherfore they should be beloued: yet in God there be infinite causes, for the which he deserueth that wee should loue, not only the^, but also euen all the paines and torments of t^e world for the loue of him: so that if there want causes in the perso of our neighbor, for to mooue vs to loue him: yet in God there be manifold causes, both for this, and for much more.
This loue requireth of vs, that we do no hurt nor iniury to any man, that we speak no euil of any person, nor iudge any man. This loue bindeth vs, to keepe in great secrecy the good name and fame of our neighbour: yea, and rather to close vpp our mouthes vvith iron knottes, than
 once to touch him in his good name.
It is not sufficient to do no harme, but it is requisite to do good.And it is not sufficient to doe no hurt to others: but it is also requisite to doe good to all, to helpe all, to giue counsaile to all, to forgiue whosoeuer hath offe^ded thee, to aske pardon of them whom thou haste offended, and aboue all to suffer and beare the grieuances, iniuries, rudenes, simplicity, humors, and conditions of all persons, according to the saying of the Apostle: Beare ye one anothers burden,Gal. 6.2. Mat. 22.37 40. and so shall ye fulfill the law of Christ. This is the thing which Charity requireth: wherein is contained the Law and the Prophets: without which, he that wil goe about to found a religion, sha^l bring it to as little proofe, as hee that would goe about to forme a liuely bodie vvithout a soule, the vvhich implieth a plaine contradiction.

@. 1.
AN other vertue there is, sister vnto Charity,Hope. which is Hope, (howbeit, this vertue could not be in Christ, as Faith also could not be in him, because hee had another thing of greater excellency.) Vnto this vertue of Hope it apperteineth to behold A^mighty God as a Father, bearing towardes him the hart of a Son:Mat. 19.17 For
 in very deede,Luk. 18.19 as there is no good man in this world, that is worthie to be called good, if we compare him with God:1 Reg. 2.1. Mat. 23.9. so is there no Father in earth, that so tenderly loueth those, whome he hath accepted for his sonnes, as Almighty God doth. So that whatsoeuer shall happen vnto a man in this world, be it either prosperity, or aduersity, let him be well assured, that all is for his weale and profit:Mat. 10.29 sith no one sparrow falleth into the snare, vvithout his prouidence. And in all these thinges let him haue recourse foorth-with vnto him,We must repose our confidence and hope in God. with all confidence, opening vnto him all his troubles, and trusting in the passing great bounty of his liberality, in the fidelity of his promises, in the pledges of the benefits, which he hath already receaued, and aboue all, in the merits of his Sonne, trusting assuredly, that although hee be a sinner, and very miserable, yet will Almighty God be mercifull vnto him, and when hee thinketh least of it, then vvill God direct all thinges for his commodi^ie and profit, and that by some such meane, as he little imagineth. And for this purpose let him alwaies beare in minde, that verse of Dauid. I am a begger, and in pouerty:Psal. 39. but our Lord is carefull for me. And if hee will
 read the Psalmes, the Prophets, and the Euangelistes with attention, he shall finde them in like manner all full of this diuine prouidence, and of good hope, wherewith he shal daily take greater encouragement to trust in Almighty God, in all the aduersities, and troubles, that may happen vnto him. And let him be well assured, that he shal neuer haue true peace and quietnes of mind vntill such time, as he hath this maner of security, and confidence. For without this assured. Confidence in God, euery thing will molest, disquiet, and dismaie him. But hauing this Confidence in God, there is nothing, that can trouble him: forsomuch as he hath Almighty God for his protector and defender.


@. 2.
Humility is the roote and and founda^ion of all vertues. Summa S. Thom. 2.2. ^uest. 16.1. ^^rtic. 5. ad ^. Math. 11.9. Caieta^.THE other vertue is Humility, as well inward, as outward: which is the roote and foundation of al vertues. This vertue shined in such sort in the person and life of our Sauiour, that therein especially he required to be followed whe^ he saied: Learne ye of me: for I am meeke, and humble of minde. Vpon which wordes the learned diuine Card^na^l Caietan saieth very well: that in these two vertues, to wit, Humility and meekeness consisteth the principall parte
 of the Christian philosophie. For Humility disposeth our soules to receaue the giftes of God: and meekenes disposeth vs to vse gentle and courteous behauiour in our co^uersation with men.
It appertaineth also to this humilitie,The office of Humilitie. to cause a man to account himselfe to be one of the most vile and abiect creatures of the world, vnworthie of the bread which he eateth, of the earth which he treadeth vpo^ and of the aier wherewith he breatheth. By this vertue a ma^ commeth to esteeme him selfe no better, than a stincking, and abhominable carcasse, stufled full with wormes, the stench wherof he himselfe can not abide: perswading him selfe, that all men doe shut their eies, and stoppe their noses, for that they would not smel the sauour of it, nor see it. Thus, O my louing brother, (saieth the blessed Holy Father. Saint Vincentius) it is meete both for thee,Saint Vincentius. and me, to thinke of our selues: but rather for me, than for thee: because all my life is stinking, and defiled: and my workes ate filthie and abhominable, by reason of the corruption of my sinnes: and (that, which is worse) I feele from day, to day, that this intollerable stench is renued in me.
This stench ought the faithfull soule ^o
 feele in her selfe, with such great shame of herselfe, as being in the presence and sight of Almighty God, whose eyes doe see all thinges most clearely: and as though she were eue^ now presently called to the strait iudgement in the last day, so ought she to sorrow and lament, (so much as she may) for her offences committed against Almighty God, and for that shee hath lost the grace, which she had, when she was washed with the water of Holy Baptisme. And as a man beleeueth, and perceiueth, that he stincketh in the sight of Almightie God, so let him likewise imagin, that he stincketh both before men and Angels, and account himselfe as one scorned, and confounded in the presence of them. And if he will consider what the Maiestie of Almightie God deserueth, and how much hee is bound vnto him, of whome hee hath receaued so many mercifull benefits, and how lewdly he hath answered both to the one and to the other, and how in steede of so dutifull seruices, hee hath done so manie discourtesies, hee shall perceaue that hee hath deserued, that all creatures should rise vp against him, to take reuenge of him: yea, to rent and deuoure him in gobbets: forsomuch as he hath so grieuouslie,
 and iniuriously offended the vniuersall Lord of all thinges. And for this cause let him desire to be spetted at, and despised of all creatures. Let him be willing vvith all patience and ioy to receaue all the despites, reproches, infamies, wronges, and aduersities, that may happen vnto him. And let him take so great contentation therein, as an enimie is wont to doe, when hee taketh reuenge of an other: for so it is reason that hee should take reuenge of himselfe, for that he hath offended Almighty God.
It appertaineth also to this Humilitie, that he haue a mistrust of himselfe, and of al his owne habilities forces, and industries: and that he doe wholly conuert, and stay himselfe in all thinges vpon the armes of our sweet Sauiour Iesus Christ, (who was most poore, dishonoured, contemned, and put to death, for the loue which hee bare vnto him) vntill such time as hee himselfe shall attaine to be also as it were dead in respect of all wronges, troubles, and iniuries, which he shall sufter for Christs sake.
And forsomuch as it is agreeable vnto reason, that the figure of the outward man should be such, as the figure of the inward man is: as the inward man in his thought
 thinketh himselfe to be in the most inferiour, and basest place in the world: so shou^d the outward man endeuour to abase himselfe, following therin the example of Christ, in washing the feet (if it were needfull) euen of all other men, and to procure that his apparel, his gesture, his words his entertainement,Outward Humilitie should answere vnto the inward Humilitie. his house, his table, and all the rest, (keeping herein the lawes of discretion,) be answerable to the inwarde humility: to the end that a ma^ be not different from himselfe, nor double in his doings, and so breake our Lords Commaundement,Eccl. 4.26. where he sayeth: Thou shalt not take a forme contrary to thine owne forme.


@. 3.
VVIth Humility, Chastitie is verie secure,Chastitie ioyned with Humilitie is secure. Mat. 22.30 vvhich is properly the vertue of angels, as our Sauiour affirmeth. And I say that Chastity is secure with humility, because where Humility wanteth, there is Chastity foorthwith in great hazard.S. Anselmus And so saith Saint Anselmus very diuinely, that vvhen pride sufficeth not to destroy Humility, Leachery destroyeth it, and vvhen Leachery cannot destroy Chastity, Pride destroyeth it. The vvhich as it is the moth, and destroyer of all vertues:
 so is it of this vertue most particularly.Pride is the destruction of all vertues. And therefore he that is Chaste in deede, accompanieth his Chastity vvith Humility, to the end hee may so preserue it with the more assurance. It appertaineth also vnto this vertue of Chastity, to haue the minde euen of an Angell, (if it were possible,) and to flie both heauen, and earth, from all communications, sightes, familiarities, conuersations, friendship, or acquaintance, that may be any preiudice to the same: yea, though it be sometimes euen of spirituall persons:S. Thomas. Opuscula. 64. For as S. Thomas saieth singularly wel: oftentimes the spirituall loue commeth to be chaunged into a carnall loue, by reason of the likenes and resemblance, that is betweene the one loue, and the other.
To this vertue of Chastity it appertaineth also,To eschewe euill thoughts. that so soone as any lewd or euill thought commeth vnto the hart of a man, he do forthwith cast it out of him with all haste possible, as if it were a hot burning cole, according as wee haue here before declared. And let him endeuour in this point to be so chast, and so faithfull vnto almighty God, that he would rather plucke his eies out of his head, if it were lawfull so to do, tha^ to behold any thing, wherby he might offend the giuer of the^. And when
 any occasion shall be ministred vnto him to behold any thing, that may moue him vnto vnchaste thoughts, let him mildly say in his hart: O my Lord, I haue no eyes to behold any thing, wherwith I may offend thine eies. I b^seech thee of thy goodnes, that I may not abuse mine eyes, as weapons to offend thee, which thou haste giuen me, and which thou art now illuminating with thy light, to the end they should behold thy workes: whosoeuer shall haue this honest, and carefull regard in the gouernement of his eyes, hee may be well assured, that Almighty God will preserue him, and that thereby he shall escape many battails and perrils, and shall liue in great peace and quietnes.
It is also the part of Chastitie to endeuour that our heart be surrendered, and made subiect vnto almighty God, in such sort, that it beare no inordinate loue or affection vnto any vaine or mortall creature. But let him repute himselfe as one, that were in very deede dead vnto the world, and as though hee were both deafe, and blinde, let him not desire eyther to heare or see any thing, vnlesse it be necessary and profitable vnto him. And it is requisite, that not only his body and minde be chaste, but he must procure also, that
 his eyes be chaste, his wordes chaste, his company chaste, his apparell chaste: yea, his bed, table, and diet chaste, as wee shall declare by and by: for the true and perfect ch stitie requireth that euery thing be chaste, whatsoeuer it be:Temperancy in diet is a great help towardes the the mainteining of Chastity. S. Iohn Climacus. For when one only thing faileth, sometimes it corrupteth the whole.
Vnto this vertue of chastity (among other thinges) it is a great helpe to be temperate in eating, and drinking: for as S. Iohn Climacus saieth) he that would be chaste, and yet pampereth vp his body with delicates, is like one that would driue a dogge a way from him, and yet casteth still bread vnto him, wherewith he causeth the dog the rather to follow him.
Wherefore, to obteine this vertue, let a man be carefull, whilest he giueth sustenance vnto his bodie, that he ouercharge not his stomake and spirite with excessiue eating, and drinking, but that he doe receaue the one and the other with great temperance, and moderation: not seeking therein to delight himselfe with delicates, but only to satisffie the necessity of nature. And although that naturally he take a tast in the meate, which he eateth, yet let him not procure it of his owne parte or take a-pleasure therein: but euery morsell, that he
 shal eate, let him dippe it spiritually in the most precious sauce of the bloud of our redeemer: and that, which he myndeth to drinke, let it taste of the most sweet fountaine of his wou^ds. Let him desire rather to feed vpon meats that be grosse, and of small price, than vpon curious and costly dishes: calling to his remembrance, that our Lord Iesus Christ tasted gaule and viniger for his sake vpon the Crosse. Howbeit, let him consider withall, that he that eateth of grosse and contemptible meats, in case it be done with ouermuch delite, greedines, and gluttony, looseth the value and reward of true abstine^ce: for abstine^ce consisteth not so much in the qualitie of meats, as in the manner of eating them, and as S. Augustine saieth,S. August. it is possible, that a wise man may vse a precious meat temperately, and that an vnwise man may committe a disorder in the eating of grosse meates: because it is not the quality of the meate, that maketh gluttony, but the disorder of the delite, which is taken in the same: So that the true louer of spirituall life ought to make continuall warre with his sensuality, and lust, denying vnto it with discretion such thinges, as it hath a disordered appetite vnto. Howbeit, let him
 chastice his flesh in such sort,Mortification ought to be vsed with discretion. that he ouerthrow not nature: neyther let him marre his complexion with vndiscreet rigour of abstinence, by following herein his owne iudgement only: but in all thinges let him obserue a meane, and holy discretion, suffering himself to be guided by the counsel of such as be wise, and vertuous. By this rule he ought to contemne all vanitie and curiositie, in his apparell, in seruices done to his person, in his lodging, and in all other thinges apperteining to his vse.


@. 5.
AFter this vertue followeth SilenceSilence. as sister vnto her. Silence is the mother of innocencie, the keie of discretion, the companio^ of chastity, the preseruer of deuotion, and the ornament of a new life. Now for the obteining of this so excellent a vertue, the seruant of God must beware, that no hurtfull or dishonest wordes doe passe his mouth at any time. Neither ought he to giue eare vnto such, as doe speake them: but rather endeuour with all discreation to interrupt, and breake of such kinde of speache in the best manner that hee can. Hee ought also to abhorre very much all lying, and all such vvordes as doe sauour of flatterie, or of
 vaine glory. He must not be soure or currish in his communication, but milde, and frendly. His wordes may not be artificially and curiously deuised, but simple and plaine. He must take as good heed as he may of idle talke,Scoffing and gesting ouerthrow deuotion. by reason of the time that is ^ost therein: and much more let him take heed of scoffing, and gesting: for by vsing therof, deuotion vanisheth away, and is in great daunger to be lost.
Well speaking of himselfe, and euill speaking of others are to be eschewed.But the two principall rockes which he ought with all diligence to eschew, are the speaking well of himselfe, and speaking euill of others. And for the more securitie from these daungers, if hee may holde his peace vvithout breach or detriment of Charity, or Obedience, let him in Gods name keepe silence. Marie, hee may not be grieuous, and vnpleasant in his silence, lest thereby hee be irkesome vnto others. And when it is requisite for him to speak, let him abridge hys talke so short as hee may, and let him speake warily, and vvith discretion, and before that he begin to open his mouth, let him resolue with himselfe,Gaine-saying, and obstinacy in reasoning, are to be auoided, vnlesse our silence may be preiudiciall to the glory of God. not to vtter more wordes, than be needfull.
Let him not gaine-say any other man vpon light occasion, neyther yet stand obstinately
 with any man in reasoning: but after that hee hath affirmed his saying to be true once, or twise, if then it be not beleeued, let others thinke what they list, and let him keepe silence, as though hee knew no more of the matter, vnlesse his silence may be notoriously preiudicial to the glory of God. Let him not be peremptory in his owne opinion, nor obstinate in his arguments, and assertions, neyther yet affirme any thing that he knoweth, with ouermuch asseueration, but with modestie, and temperancy, saying: I thinke it is so: or if I be not deceiued, it is thus.
But to the end that hee commit not an errour in this point,What circumstances are to be obs^rued in speaking. (which is of such importance,) not yet offend in barbarisme (as the Gramarians tearme it) in this spirituall language: when he intendeth to speake, let him consider these seaue^ points and circumstances attentiuely.1. The matter whereof hee speaketh. The first circumstance is the matter, whereof hee speaketh: because it is meete, that the co^munication be of matters, that be good, profitable, or necessary, and not of such as be vnseemely, vnprofitable or hurtfull. The second circumstance is the ende,2. To what end hee speaketh. for which he speaketh that it be not for Hyprocrisie, ostentation, vanity, or vaine glorie:
 but with simplicity and plainesse, and for some honest and necessary end. The third circumstance is the maner that hee vseth in speaking:The maner of speaking. that it be not with a thundering voice, neither with ouermuch losenes of speach, nor yet with effeminate nicenes, and affection: but with deliberation, mildnes, and grauity: yea and this also ought to be, not vnpleasant, but tempered with sweetnes, as they say Saint Basills talke was. And especiallie the talke of a woman would be more plaine and more simple. For they say, it must be like vnto water, the which whe^ it is good, it hath no maner of taste at all. Likewise, affected speach is well worthy of reprehension: especially, if it be with an intent, for that he would seeme to be a very wise and discret man, and an eloquent speaker. The which is a great vice in a man, but in a woman verie daungerous The fourth circumsta^ce is of the person,The circumstance of the person that speaketh. Silence is the companion of shamfastnes. that speaketh: because young men may not speake with such liberty, as others may: but rather it is in the^ avery great ornament to keepe silence, which is the companion of shamefastnes. And silence is likewise a very great ornament in yong damosels, and virgins vnto whome S. AmbroseS. Ambrose. saith thus. Co^sider O damsell,
 and haue due regard vnto thyselfe, and what wordes thou speakest: because often times in a yong maiden it is a fault to speake euen wordes, that be good. The fift circumstance is,5. The circustance of the person to whome he speaketh. to co^sider well the person, before whome hee speaketh. For in the presence of very wise and auncient graue men, it is not lawfull nor seemely for euery one to speake, but when necessitie enforceth them, and when they cannot be otherwise excused.6. The circumstance of the place. The sixt circumstance is, to consider the place where we speake: because there be places for speaking, and places for silence:7. The circumstance of the time. Eccles. 5.7. Tempus tacendi, and tempus loquendi. as in the Church, and such like. The seuenth circumstance is, to consider also the time, when he ought to speake. For (as Salomon saieth,) there is a time to keepe silence, and a time to speake. And the obseruing of due times herein is one of the principal parts of wisedome: especially, when we intend to admonish, giue counsaile, or reprehend. For as in euery thing wee ought to seeke for due time, and oportunitie, so ought we especially when we will admonish or reprehend others without regard whereof wee leese altogether the frute of our admonishment. And of him, that obserueth duly this circumsta^ce, the wiseman saieth thus.Prouer. 25.11. To obserue a conuenient time in speaking, is like go^lden apples vpon pillers of siluer.

All these circumstances are very requisite to be well weighed of him, that mindeth to speake without incurring any fault. For whensoeuer he fayleth in any one of them, he shall offend, and breake the due order, and rules required in communication. And because it is very hard for a ma^ not to offend in some one of these defects: therefore it is a very sure remedy to withdraw himselfe into the hauen of silence, where none of these daungers are to be feared.


@. 6.
We ought to mortifie our owne will.NOw when the tongue is in this sort mortified, and gouerned, it remaineth, that he doe mortifie his own proper will, which is another key of good life: for the performance whereof, there is no one thing, that helpeth more than obedience. And therefore one of the exercises that he ought chiefly to esteeme, is the practise of this vertue of mortification, considering that the perfect mortification of our owne will is a most acceptable Sacrifice vnto Almighty God. What thing soeuer is done simply for obedienceObediedce. sake, (although of it selfe it be of small value) yet Almighty God doth magnifie it, and
 reward it, as a thing of great excellencie. And no worke, (be it neuer so great) can be acceptable vnto God, if it be accompanied with the disobedience eyther of Almighty God, or of such Prelates, and Superiours as we are bound to obey: wherefore, let the seruant of God be obedient vnto his Superiours with a chearefull and deuout minde, and honour them in respecte of God: for the honour which they are not worthy to haue in regard of their own persons, they deserue to haue it in respect of theyr office. Let him also be obedient to his equals: yea, and vnto his inferiours also, in such thinges as are lawfull and honest.
Let him be willing and glad, to be reprehended and instructed of what person soeuer he be. And let him not defend him selfe proudly against such as shall reproue him with any cholericke speech: but following herein our Lord and sauiour Christ, let him rather suffer, and holde his peace: vnlesse some notable scandall or offence be like to ensue of his silence. Let him hu^bly submit himselfe vnto all creatures for the loue of God.1. Pet. 2.13 And although hee haue receaued from God great aboundance of giftes, and consolations, yet let him not
 therfore wax proude, neyther yet esteeme himselfe the better in this behalfe: sith that in very deed all goodnes co^meth of God, and only sin he may account for his owne.


@. 7.
Of our behauiour towardes our neighbours.LEt him also learne to suffer vvithout quarelling, or murmuring, whatsoeuer iniuries, contempts, accusations, afflictions and losses, it shall please Almighty God to permit to be layed vpon him. And let him beleeue vndoubtedly, that Almightie God doth send them vpon him by his iust and mercifull ordinance. Wherefore, let him not disdaine, or be angry with those me^, by whose hands they come vnto him: but rather conforming himselfe after our Lordes example, let him shew himselfe meeke, and gentle towards them.
Let him not iudge other men, or measure them according to the miserable, and coruptible apparance of the body,Gen. 3.26. Gen. 9.6. Col. 5.10. 1. Cor. 11.7 but according vnto the incomprehensible dignity of the soule, which is made vnto the image of God. Let him giue no froward lookes to any man, or shew himselfe angry or wayward, or melancholy: but as well in hys conuersation, as in his wordes and answers, let him be affable, and curteous vnto
 all sorts, with a milde and amiable grauity. Let him beare gently with other mens faults. Howbeit, such faults as shall be co^trary vnto the honor of God, let him procure with all diligence to amende them friendlye, eyther by himselfe, or by meanes of others, when there is hope that they may thereby be redressed. Let him hate the sinne in a man,Note. but not the man for the sinnes sake: for man is the handie-worke of God, and sinne is the worke of man. Let him be ready as occasion shall be ministred vnto him, to do good to al men, and no lesse to his euill willers, than to others. Let him take compassion, as well vpon them that doe euill, as vpon them that suffer euill: but especially, let him be moued to take compassio^ vpon the faithfull souls departed out of this life, abiding the tormentes of Purgatory, and let him pray vnto God for them. And to the end that he may the sooner be induced to be sorry for other mens miseries,How wee may be induced to be sory for other mens miseries. let him imagine, that he were himselfe in the place of such, as doe suffer them, and so shall he feele other mens miseries, as if they were hys own. Let him not enuy or grudge against any man. Let him conceaue a good opinion of euery man, and if any naughty suspition
 begin to come into his minde, let him quickly expell it away from him. Let him not despise any man, nor vtterly despaire of any sinner: for he that is at this present an euill man, may through the grace of God, to morrow be chaunged. Let him hold this firme determination in his mind, neuer to iudge any man. Let him endeuour alwaies to interpret the sayings and doinges of others in the best part, hearing and seeing all things with a simple and gentle hart. Let him not be disquieted with the calamities, and miseries, that chaunce in the worlde: but in al things let him put his confidence in the prouidence of almighty God, without which there falleth not so much as one seely sparrow into the net.Mat. 10.29 And vnto the same diuine prouidence, let him boldly recommend both himselfe, and all that hee hath: staying himselfe with an humble confidence in euery aduersity vpon the mer y of so good a Lord. And let him demaund of him help and succour with feruent prayer, according as the Prophet admonisheth vs, saying: Cast thy care vpon our Lord,^sal. 64.23 and he will nourish thee. And although a man be sometimes destitute of inwarde consolation, and thereby grieuously dismayed: yet let him not therefore leaue off
 his holy purpose, but let him perseuere, and continue before our Lord with humility, and confidence, vvithout seeking after vaine consolations to comfort himselfe: for God himselfe will comfort him.
If the vvicked spirit shall put into his minde any peruerse, and abhominable thoughts,Of wicked thoughts. let him make no account of them: but let him with all speede shut vp the eyes of hys soule: for he shal ouercome such conflicts much better by despising, and contemning them, than by considering them, or disputing against the^. Neyther let him thinke, that hee is wounded with those darts, which hee did wholly resist, and quickly expell away from him: for in such a case he committed no sinne, whereof hee hath neede to be Confessed. Forsomuch as wee are bound to Confesse sinnes, and not the temptations of sinnes,Wee are not bound to co^fesse temptations of sinnes.Exo. 20.17 Mat. 5.28. Iac. 1.15. whereunto we gaue no consent. The filthy thoughts doe not defile a man, vnles he take delite in them: for it is one thing to thinke of euill, and an other to consent vnto it. And we know, that many holy Saints did feele sometimes in their flesh great prouocations vnto vices: but yet with theyr reason, and will, they did put them to flight.



@. 8
The Heretikes in reading the Holy Scriptures doe feele tender motions, and consolations in their mindes which are in them hut deceitful illusions of the diuell, and no true deuotion.LET him not thinke, that holines of life consisteth in feeling in the soule great consolation, and sweetnes: neither let him account for a certaine, and secure deuotion that tender feeling and motion of the spirit, wherewith some doe with great facility cause their eies to powre out aboundance of teares: for oftentimes the like tender motions are to be found euen in Heritickes, and Pagans.
The true deuotion is a prompt and readie will, wherewith a man is disposed, and determined to doe euery thing, that is behoueful for the honour and seruice of God. This true deuotion continueth, and preserueth alwaies with his frut, although the soule be drie, and the hart barren. Wherefore Let not the spiritual man couet ouermuch the inward delectation: but let him prepare himselfe with an equall contented mind either to receiue it, or to wa^t it, as it shal please our Lord. If it be his pleasure to comfort him, let him receaue that consolation with all humility, and rendering of tha^ks, and let him beware, that he vse it not for his only contentatio^, neither let him so enioy the benefit of the gift, that thereby he doe forgett the giuer: but let him
 be as pure and simple, as humble, and quiet, when he is visited of Almighty God, as when he is not: for he ought not so much to assure and rest himselfe in the giftes of God, as in the giuer of them, who is our last end. How little so euer the grace be that he receaueth, let him iudge himselfe vnworthy of it: yea, let him rather continually beleeue, that hee deserueth punishment, and not consolations. If in singing the diuine seruice, or praying, hee cannot be so attent, as hee desireth, let him not therefore be discomforted, or dismayed. For euen those prayers, which are sayed with a distracted minde, are frutfull, and acceptable vnto Almighty God, when hee that prayeth, suffereth that distraction against his wlll,In what case praiers saied with a distracted mind are acceptable vnto God. and doth willingly so much as lyeth in him, offering vnto God his good will, and perseuering in his prayers with earnest care and diligence. Therefore let him not be impatient, or disquieted, or trouble himselfe more than is expedient: but yeelding himselfe into the handes of God, let him be of good comfort: forsomuch as God is so good, and mercifull, that hee doth with benignity suffer those, which whe^ they do speake vnto him in their praiers, doe withall wander in their
 imaginations vpon thinges vnseemly for his presence. And let him say thus vnto him.A Praier. Thou knowest O Lord, that my minde goeth wandring vpon many vanities. Haue mercy vpon me most vile sinner that I am. O good Iesu answere for me, and supplie all my defects. I by reason of my frailty, am ready to fall downe: Take thou hold of me, and I shall not fall: but what shall I say, that being so weake and fraile, and falling a thousand ^imes, thou doest neuerthelesse attend for mee?
Let him dispose himselfe, and haue a desire to receaue the blessed Sacrament of the Aultar oftentimes for the glory of God. And if he cannot receaue Sacrame^tally so often-times as hee desireth, let him not trouble, and disquiet him-selfe therefore: but conforming himselfe vnto the will of our Lord, let him prepare him-selfe to receaue it spiritually: for nothing can hinder him, but that he may haue accesse vnto our Lord, and receaue him spiritually, yea, if hee will, euen a thousand times euery day.


@. 9.
9. To examine ^isr consciences euerie night.LEt him call himselfe to a reckoning euery night, and take a strait account, how he hath spent that day, according as
 we haue before declared. And this done, let him settle his body in his bed in a comly and honest manner there to sleepe, and take hys rest: and let the sleepe take, and find him (if it may be) whilest he is thinking sweetly vpon Almighty God. And let him lodge and conserue his deuout, and louing desires in such sort, that hee may returne vnto the^ againe when he shall awake. And in the morning so soone as hee awaketh, let his hart forthwith thinke vpo^ God: and let him direct his first thoughtes and wordes vnto him, saying vvith the Prophet: O God my God,Psal. 62.2. vnto thee doe I awake euen from the breake of the day And a little after let him say.Psal. 62.7.8. In the morning will I thinke vpon thee, because thou hast bin my helper.
After this sorte must a man prepare himselfe to receaue and continue the grace and deuotion, which should neuer be intermitted. Howbeit, if by reason of the confusion, and wandering of his spirit, hee cannot freely turne himselfe vnto Almighty God, or if in his sleepe hee shall be troubled vvith any filthy or naughtie dreames,When we awake, wee must be sorry for our filthie dreames, and abhorre the^. let him not therefore be dismaied, neither yet vex himselfe beyond measure: but so soone as he awaketh, and returneth
 to the vse of his reason, let him abhorre the filthines of his dreame, and with patience and humility abide the trouble, which he hath sustained.
Wee must eschew both great and small negligences.Let him eschew not only grieuous sins, but also small negligences, (and that with all diligence, and carefulnes: for if he will not keep himselfe from all that which displeaseth Almighty God, and from all that which hindereth or diminisheth his loue, he shall not obtaine perfect purity, and quietnes of minde: for although these negligences be but light, yet may they by making so little account of them, become great: for there is no enimy so litle, which being contemned may not worke a great displeasure. Wherfore S. GregoryS. Gregory. saith, that it chaunceth sometimes, that the daunger of small offences is more perilous, than of the greater: forsomuch as the great sinnes, the more clearely they are knowen, the more easie they are to be ame^ded: but the small offences, the lesse they are knowen, the lesse they are auoyded, and therefore may worke vs the greater displeasure.
Howbeit, let not a man mistrust, when hee hath committed any of these sinnes, neyther yet flie out of hand from the presence
 of Almighty GOD: but let him returne vnto him humbly, and confidently, and treate with him, as touching the offence, which he hath committed, and of his ingratitude, sorrowfully bewailing, and lamenting, for that he hath offended so good a Lord. And let him not onelie fasten his eyes vpon his owne extreame misery: but let him consider withall, the passing great aboundance of Gods mercy: the which cannot want to those that doe turne vnto him with all their hart, and for full Satisfaction and amendment of his sinnes, let him offer vnto God the Father, the most holy life, and bitter death, of his onely begotten sonne, our sweet Sauiour Iesus Christ. And let him most hu^bly demaunde of the same his only sonne, that it may please him to wash away the spottes of his sins, with the precious blood, which he hath shed for him. This being done, let him haue a good confidence, and continue the remnant of his life with the same intention, courage, and minde, that he had before he fell to sinne.
And let him not be discouraged, nor faint harted, for such defects, and passions,Wee may not be discouraged if wee cannot ouercome some of our defectes, and passions. as hee cannot by any meanes fully conquere in himselfe: but commending them
 to the mercy of Almighty God, and submitting himselfe into his handes, let him perseuere with humility and patience, and neuer loose his hope. And if he fall a hundred times in the day, let him arise a hundred times againe with hope of pardon. And at euery time, let him purpose firmly, and stedfastly with himselfe to be more vigilant, and to take better heede afterwardes what he ought to doe. Howbeit, hee may not put his trust in his owne purpose,Iohn. 1.16. Iohn. 3.27. Iohn. 15.5. Act. 15.11. Rom. 7.24.25. 1. Cor. 15.10. 2. Cor. 3.5. 2. Co. 12.9. Phil. 2.13. Plil. 4.13. Heb. 13.9. Iacob. 4.8. Apoc. 3.20. Ap. 22.17 resolution, and force, but in the only goodnes and mercy of almighty God, and in the help and assistance of his grace, which neuer faileth him, that endeuoureth to do so much, as of his part is required.
The affections of his soule he ought to haue in such sort disposed, and directed vnto God, that God may be to him all in all thinges: and him onely let him behold :n all thinges, and all thinges in him. Let him not fixe hys eyes in them, nor take pleasure in them for their own being: but let him respect them all in God: considering the principall thing, that is in them: which is, that they doe proceede fro^ God, and do represent vnto vs somewhat of him. After this sort the pleasure taken in creatures, shalbe not only more pure, but also
 much sweeter, and greater: Let him recommend all his good workes, and exercises vnto the wisedome of Almighty God, to the end that he may direct them, and make them perfect: and to the same Sauiour, and to his euerlasting Father, let him offer them in euerlasting praise for the behoofe of the whole Catholike Church, that they may be incorporated, and vnited with the most holy workes, and exercises of our Sauiour Christ: for by this meane, our workes and exercises are made most noble: yea, and very acceptable also vnto Almighty God:By Christ our workes are made acceptable vnto God. Iohn. 1.16. Iohn. 8.12. Iohn. 15.5. Phil. 2.13. Col. 2.6. Gal. 2.20. 1. Iohn. 2.6 1. Iohn. 3.3 1. Iohn. 4.9 1. Pet. 2.5. Heb. 13.15 forsomuch as from the Heroycall works of our Sauiour Christ (vnder whose shadow our workes are assisted, and directed, and by hys workes, grace is imparted vnto vs,) our works doe receaue inestimable value: for vvhich cause the Apostle saint Peter counsaileth vs, to offer vnto Almighty God the Sacrifices of good workes, that they may be acceptable vnto him for Christs sake. And thus what thinges so euer hee shall suffer, (be they great or small, internall, or externall,) let him offer them all vnto Almighty God: to the end, that from the value, and dignity of his most holy Passion, they may receaue value and estimation.



@. 10.
LEt him not be ouer hasty or headlong in those thinges which hee intendeth to doe: neyther let him be ouermuch affected vnto them, making himselfe a seruant, and slaue vnto them: but let him endeuour alwaies to preserue his hart in true liberty. Let him not follow the vehement motions of his minde,Wee must not follow the veheme^t motions of our mind. although they be in matters concerning vertue: but with considerarion, and reason, let him prudently be Lord, and gouernour ouer his owne affections, and workes. Let him not perswade himselfe, that those affections, and motions be good: for there is no vertue, that is to be accounted a vertue without discreation.Vertue without discretion is no vertue In so much that euen the very loue of God without di^cretion is hurtfull.
Let him remooue from him with all discretion, what thing so euer it be, that may be occasion to him eyther to loose or to hinder the tranquillity, and quietnes of his minde. And let him vse a speciall diligence to banish away from him the vnbridled passions of anger, of couetousnes, of delite, of feare, of ioy, of sadnes, of loue, of hatred, with the rest: For these are such things as doe principally ouerthrow the peace and quietnesse of the mind. And no lesse care ought he to haue,
 to driue away fro^ him all vaine, and vndiscreet scruples, together with all such superfluous thoughtes, as may trouble the peace and tranquillity of his spirit. Let h^m neuer be ouer carefull for such thinges as may happen vnto him in this world: sith that in time all temporall and vvorldlie things will perish and haue an end: and so all worldly losses are none other but paime^ts before hand. Finally, when hee hath thus seperated both his vnderstanding, and affection from all worldlie, and transitorie thinges: let him gather together all hys forces, and powers within himselfe, and there let him continually Communicate alone with Almighty God.
In ech time and place, let him reuerently consider the presence of almighty God: forsomuch as he is at no time or place absent, but is all in all places.A reuerent r^spect is to be had vnto G^d, as present in euery place. And let him speake vnto Almighty God louingly, as to a friend, that is continually in his company: shewing vnto him his faithfull desires, and feruent affections Let him learne to treate with God, when hee is all alone. For this kinde of familiarity vsed vvith God, shal be greatly for his profit. Let him not be dismayed, and out of hope, when he perceaueth his mind to be variable, or findeth great difficulty in keeping his thoght
 fixed vpon Almightie God, but let him constantly perseuere, and prouoke, and enforce himselfe so oftentimes, as vntil he returne vnto his right course againe. For after that he hath with some trauaile accustomed himselfe thereunto, from that time foreward it shall not only be easie, and delectable vnto him to thinke vpon God, and vpon thinges belonging vnto God, but he shal not stay himselfe somuch as one moment without thinking vpon him. And if he shall perceaue his mind to wander abroad at any time, let him cal it backe againe vnto her former exercise, saying. Where hast thou ben wandering, O my soule? What commodity hast thou gotten by seperating thy selfe from thy Lord, but l^sse of time, and distraction of mind? Take heede least thou become a runnegate, and a vagabonde: which were a thing vnseemely for the spouse of so great a Lord. Let him also set before his eies the Image of our sweet Sauiour Christ, God and man, nailed vpon the Crosse, and imprint the same as deepely as he can within the center of his harte:How wee ought to imprint in our hart the image of Christ Crucified. saluting and doing reuerence with inward deuotion vnto those most holy woundes, which are worthie of perpetuall remembrance. And let him with a louing, and humble boldnes, hyde
 him selfe within them. And hauing his senses wholy occupied about this Sacred Image of the life and death of our Redeemer, there wilbe no place vacant for other strange figures, and imaginations: but it shal driue away fro^ him all maner of fantasies, and vnprofitable thoughts, as one nayle driueth out an other. So as let him alwaies (so much as is possible,) dwell and treate within himselfe, clensing his hart, and driueing a way out of the same all transitorie thinges, and fixing his eies very earnestly vpon Almighty God, who alwaies beholdeth him,, and reasoning continually with him, with sweet and louing wordes. And let him account it for a great losse to be seperated, or wandering,It is a grea^ losse to hau^ our mind distracted from God. (yea, though it be but for a very short time,) fro^ this most chiefe and soueraigne goodnes, in whome are all good thinges.



How a man ought to behaue him felfe, towardes God, towardes him selfe, and towardes hts neighbours. THE III. CHAPTER.
HAVING now spoken of the vertues in general, we will adioyne an other Chapter wherin we mind to treat of them
 more particularly, applying all that hath beene saied hitherto, vnto the three principall bounden duties, wherunto euerie Christian is bound: which be, his dutie towardes God, towardes himselfe, and towards his neighbour. The which duties are those three partes of iustice, wherein the Prophet MicheasMicheas. 6.8. did include the sum of al vertues, when he saied. I will declare vnto thee, O man, wherein goodnes consisteth, and what our Lord requireth of thee, to wit, to doe iudgement, to loue mercie, and to walke carefully with thy God. Of the which things, the first, to wit to doe iudgement, is towards him selfe: the second which is, to loue mercie, is towardes our neighbour: the third, which is, to walke carefullie with God, apperteineth vnto the Seruice, Honour, and reuerence of God.

@. 1.
TO beginne then with the greatest of these bounden duties, it is diligently to be noted, that, like as among precious stones, there are some, which euen of their owne nature, and kinde, are more excellent than others, as the rubies, diamondes, emeralds, and such other: euen so, among vertues, there are some,
 which of their own nature and kinde doe incomparably excede all others. And these be such vertues, as haue their eye and regard vnto God, and be therefore called Theologicall vertues:Theological vertues vnto the which we maie also adioyne the feare, and reuerence of God: and withall Religion: whose office consisteth in the honouring of GOD, with all that belongeth vnto the seruice, and worshippe of God. These are the most principall among al vertues: and not onlie the most principall, but also the stirrers, and prouokers of them. For which cause they be compared with the other vertues, as the heauens with all the other inferiour creatures, which doe depend of their mouing. Wherefore he that desireth to atteine vnto the perfection of a Christia^ life, although he be bound to trauaile vniuersally in all vertues, (for like as it is meete, that al the stringes of a lute be first accorded and tuned, before it be plaied vppon: euen so is it likewise requisit to haue al the vertues for the better ordering, and framing of a good life) yet ought he especially to labor to increase, and profit in these foresaied vertues. For the more he shall profit in them, the greater shall his perfection be. And for this cause I beleeue, that many of
 those holy Patriarkes were so notable in vertue, as Dauid, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and such like: forsomuch as, although they were maried and rich men, and had great affaires, and dutifull cares, for theyr prouisions to attend vnto, yet all that notwithstanding they were most holy men, because they had these most excellent vertues: as it appeared in the Faith, and Obedience of Abraham, and in the loue, submission, deuotion, and confidence, which Dauid had in almighty God, in that he had such recourse vnto him in all hys necessities, and did put such trust in him, as a childe doth in his father, yea, and much more,Psa. 26.10 saying: My father and my mother, haue forsaken me: hut our Lord is carefull for me.
Now to obtaine these so noble vertues, there is none other meane more conuenient for our purpose, than to perswade our selues, and to fixe in our minds with all the hope, that is possible, that Almighty God is our true father, and more than a father: forsomuch as neyther in the hart of a father, nor in the prouidence of a father, neyther yet in the loue of a father, there is any comparable vnto him: for none hath created vs, but he: none desireth more our profit than hee. This being
 once settled in our harts, let vs endeuour alwaies to behold him with such eyes, and with such a hart, as a childe doth his Father: that is, with a louing hart, with a tender hart, with an humble and reuerent hart, with a hart subiect, and obedient to hys holy will, and with a hart full of confidence in all troubles and aduersities, and couched vnder the winges of his fatherly prouidence.
With such eyes and hart ought a man to behold Almighty God, as oftentimes, as he shall call him to minde. The which he ought to doe, as often in the day, and night as he may: to the end, that so he may proceede forward by little and little vvith the help and fauour of God, in procuring, and nourishing this manner of hart in hys soule: according as that holy Prophet did, who sayed. Thy name O Lord, and the remembrance thereof,Esay. 26.8.9. is all the desire of my soule. My soule desireth thee in the night, and in the morning with my spirit, and vvith my bowels I will watch vnto thee.
This kind of affection and hart towards Almighty God cannot be expressed with wordes, nor obtained with our forces onely, and therefore he only knoweth it, that
 hath proued, and tasted it, and hee onely possesseth it, that hath receaued it: wherefore a man ought continually to desire of God this hart towardes him And hee ought to haue a good hope, that hee shall obtaine it, putting his trust in the Princely words of that Lord, that sayeth: If you being naught doe yet know,Mat. 7.11. how to giue good gifts vnto your Children: how much more will your Father which is in heauen, giue a good spirit vnto them that shal aske him. And this is that spirit, of the vvhich the Apostle sayeth:Rom. 8.15. ye haue not receaued againe the spirit of seruitude in feare: but yee haue receaued the spirit of adoption of the sons of God, the which spirit causeth vs to cry vnto Almighty God with all our hart, and to call him vvith open mouth Abba, Father: which is, to haue towardes him this most perfect hart of Sonnes towards their Father, by louing him, reuerencing him, obeying him, and by hauing a recourse vnto him in all our necessities, and reposing our trust in him, as in our true father This hart our Lord promiseth vs by the Prophet Ezechiel,Ezech. 36.26.27. saying: I will giue you a new hart, and will put a new spirit in the middest of you, and will take away from you your stony hart, and will giue you a fleshie hart, and
 will put my spirit in the middest among you, and will prouide, that ye shall walke in my Commaundementes, and keepe my iudgmentes, and put them in practise. And not only this Prophet, but all the other Prophets also with one voice doe promise no one thing more often, tha^ this spirit of sonnes: which should be giuen vnto vs, through the merites of that onlie Sonne of Almightie God.Acts. 1.4. And this spirit he gaue vnto vs especially vpo^ the daie of Pentecost.
And to speake more particularly, the blessed Holy Father S. VincentiusSaint Vincentius. saieth thus. A man ought to haue seauen sorts of affections, and vertues in his hart towards God:Seaue^ sortes of affections towards God. to wit, a most feruent loue, a verie great feare, an humble reuerence, a most consta^t zeale, a giuing of thanks, a mouth full of praises, a ready obedience, and a taste of diuine sweetnes. To obtaine these vertues he must alwaies make his continuall prayers vnto almighty God, saying.

O good Iesu,A Praier. graunt that I may with all my bowels and hart, and with all my strength, most f rvently loue thee, and that I may chiefly feare and reuerence thee, and that I may procure, and be zealous of the glory of thy holie name, in such wise, that whatsoeuer iniury bee done vnto thee,
 may burne and rent my hart. Graunt me also, that I may humbly acknowledge all thy benefites, and that I may with great thankefulnes of mind render vnto thee alwaies thankes for them. Graunt likewise, that I may praise thee euermore both day, and night, saying from the bottome of my hart with the Prophet.Psal. 33.1. I wil praise our Lord at al times and his praises shall alwaies be in my mouth. Graunt me also grace, that I obeying thee perfectly in all thinges, may enioy thy vnspeakeable sweetnes, and delight, that thereby I may increase more and more in thy loue, and in obseruing and keeping of thy holy Commaundementes.



@. 2.
Seuen affections, which a ma^ ought to haue towardes him selfe.HE ought also to haue towardes himselfe (saieth the same Holy Father) seuen other affections, and vertues. Among which the first must be, that he bee confounded and ashamed for the sinnes, which he hath committed. The second, that he doe bewayle his sinnes, and bee grieued at the very hart, for that by them he hath so greatly offended Almightie GOD, and hurte his owne  soule. The third that in this respect hee haue a desire to be despised, neglected, and shunned of all men, as vnworthie of all honour and fauour of men. The
 fourth, that he labour to make leane, and  chastice his body with all seuerity and rigour, as one that hath bin the prouoker and mouer of all those sins, and as a most filthy and abhominable sinke. The fift, that hee  doe conceaue an irreconciliable anger and hatred against all his vices, and against all the inclinations, and rootes of the same, labouring alwaies to cut off, not onlie the bowes, but euen the very roots also of the^. The sixt, that he be alwaies very vigilant  and attent, to gouerne and direct all his workes, and wordes, and all the senses, and passions of his soule, that nothing do withdraw him from the iustice and law o^ God. The seauenth, that he haue a most perfect  modesty and discretion in keeping, and obseruing a temperance, and measure: which is requisite in all thinges, but especially to discerne betweene little and much, and betweene lesse and more: to the end, that there be nothing in him either superfluous, o^ too little, and that hee neyther exceede in superfluity, nor yet haue anie want of things that be necessary.


@. 3.
HEE ought also to haue (as the same Saint saieth afterwardes) seauen other
 speciall affections and vertues towardes his neighbour.Seauen affecti ns. which a ma^ ought to haue towards his ne^ghbour. First, hee ought to haue an inward harty compassion of other mens miseries, wherewith he ought to be grieued, as if they were his owne. Secondly, he ought to haue a charitable gladnes wherewith he must reioyce at the prosperity, and felicity of others, as he would doe  in case it were his owne. Thirdly, he ought to haue a quiet, and setled patience, willingly contenting himself to suffer all vexations, troubles and iniuries, that shall be done vnto him, and ready to forgiue them  with all his hart. Fourthly, hee ought to haue a gentle benigne behauiour and affability towards all men, vsing himselfe in conuersation among them with all curtesie, mildenesse, and gentlenesse, and wishing them all vvell, and making demonstration thereof after this sort in all hys  wordes, and deedes. Fiftly, hee ought to haue an humble reuerence towardes all men, accounting them for hys betters, and submitting himselfe vvith all hys hart vnto all men, as if they were hys very Lords  and Maisters. Sixtly, he must haue a perfect agreement, and concorde vvith all men, to the end, that (so much as in him lieth, and so farre foorth, as it shall please
 God to graunt him,) hee may say one selfe same thing, and agree in opinion with all men, and be perswaded, that all men are euen himselfe, and that hee is all men, and so account the contentation, and desire of all others for his own. Seauenthly,  following the example of our Sauiour Christ, hee ought to haue a ready minde to offer himselfe for all men: that is, hee ought to be prepared to bestow his life for the saluation of all men, and to praie both day and night vnto Almighty God for them, and to endeuour, that they all may be one in Christ, and Christ in them. Howbeit, let him not therefore thinke, that vve binde him here not to auoide the company of naughty persons:When company is to be auoyded. but rather let him vnderstand, that when there be any such, whose company might be occasion vnto him of sinne, or any hinderance of his spirituall exercises, or diminishing of the feruour of Charity, he ought to seperate himselfe from all such companie, as from Serpentes: for there is no cole so glowing hoate, but that being cast into the vvater vvill be quenched: neyther yet so quenched, but that being cast againe among many other burning coales it may be set on fire: but setting this occasion
 aside, the seruant of God ought to be simple in his conuersation with hys neighbours, and eyther to winke at theyr defects, or els, if he must needes see them, then to beare them with patience, or to admonish them charitably, when there is hope of redresse thereby.
But because the roote and foundation of all thes^ vertues, is Charity,Charity is the roote of all vertues. and Mercy towards our neighbours. This is the vertue, wherein he that desireth to please almighty God, ought most to leane vnto, and to exercise himselfe:Iohn. 13.34 35. 1. Iohn. 3.16.17.18. 1. Iohn. 4. 1. Iobn. 4.12.20.21. forsomuch as Charity, and mercy towardes our neighbours is that vertue, which he commendeth most earnestly vnto vs in all the Holy Scrip^ures: for in the seauenth Chapter of the Prophet Zachary, when the Iewes demaunded of almighty God, whether they should fast vpon such, and such dayes, to please him, and to fulfill his law. Our Lord answered and declared vnto them, vvith what kinde of workes they should please him,Zach. 7.9. saying: H^ue yee an eye vnto true Iustice, and mercy, and be yee mercifull euery one of you with his brother. Offend not the widow, orphane, straunger, and poore man. Let no man thinke any euill in hys hart towardes his brother. And doing
 thus ye shall please me, and fulfill my lawe. This matter is in this place verie much commended. But our Lord doth much more extoll it by his prophet Esay,Esai. 28.12. where he saieth. This is my consolation, that ye comfort and refresh the afflicted. For this seemeth to be the chiefest commendation, that might be giuen to this matter, considering that our Lord accounteth himselfe in the place of the poore, and taketh that for his owne refreshing, and consolation, which is giuen for his sake to the wearied, and afflicted.
But aboue al this, I meruaile very much at that, which I read in the sixtenth chapter of Ezechiel: where our Lord rehersing the sinnes, for which that infamous Citie of Sodoma fell into such extremitie of great miseries, abbridgeth them vnto fiue sins, saying.Ezech. 16.49. This was the iniquity of thy sister Sodoma,The sinnes of Sodoma. pride, satietie of bread, aboundance, Idlenes, and that they would not stretch out their handes to succour the poore and needie persons. Now what greater infamy wouldest thou heare of this vice of vnmercifulnesse towardes our neighbours, than to haue Almightie God to place it for the verie last steppe of the ladder, whereby those wretched men ascended vpp to the extremitie
 of so great miseries? In what case now are they that do heape vp duckets, vpon duckets, and angels vpo^ angels, and pounds vpon pounds, and yet all this notwithstanding doe account themselues secure,Let rich me^ note well this point. hauing for theyr companions in this theyr vice the vvicked inhabitantes of Sodoma? These things and other the like doe the Prophets tell vs. But as touching the Gospell, which is the law of loue, what doth it say? What might be saide more in the fauour of this vertue, of being mercifull towardes our neighbours, than for our Lord to lay all the reason, and foundation of his final Sentence at the last day of Iudgement vpon this very point:Math. 25.35.36.40.41.42.43.44.45. Mat. 25.40 to wit, whether they haue exercised the works of mercy or no? What might be saied more than that, which followeth afterwards in the same text: to wit, that, which ye did to one of these my least brethren, yee did it to me? What might be said more, than to put in these two Commandements only,M^t. 22.40 Marke. 12.31.32.33. of the loue of God, and of our neighbour, the summe of the law, and of the Prophets? Againe, in that last Sermon of hys Supper, vvhat other thing commended our Lord more vnto vs, than the Charity and beneuolence towards our neighbours? This is (saith he) my Commaundement,Iohn. 15.12 that yee
 loue one another, as I haue loued you.Iohn. 13.35 And in another place: In this (saith hee) shall all men know, that ye are my Disciples, if yee loue one another. And as though it had not bin enough to recommend this point vnto them in such vehement manner,Iohn. 17.21 he maketh forthwith a prayer to his Father for the obseruation of this law, saying. I beseech thee O Father, that they may be one, as thou, and I be one: to the end, that the vvorlde may know, that thou haste sent mee. By which wordes our Sauiour giueth vs to vnderstand, that the Charity, and loue among ChristiansWhat singular Charitie and loue ought to be among Christians. ought to be so great, and so farre exceeding all that, which may be looked for of flesh and blood, that it may serue for an argument euen to conuince the vnderstandings of men, and to cause them to beleeue, that it is not possible, but that they must needes be Heauenly men, among whom such charitable loue is. All this is to declare vnto vs, how great the Charity and Mercy should be, vvhich we are bound to vse towardes our neighbours: and how we should releeue and succour them in theyr necessities, according as we haue declared before, when we treated of Charity.
For the better obseruation of all these
 thinges aboue mentioned, it is necessarie for a man to haue alwaies his hart carefull, and attent, with a continuall feare and diligence, that he faile not in any one point of this, that hath bin sayed. The which feare ought to be so earnest, so profound, and so continuall, that it neuer suffer a ma^ to forgett, what hee ought to doe: but i^ ought to be a perpetuall stirrer, and prouoker vnto him, to put him euer in mind, for the exercise of all vertues. This carefulnes, and continuall thought, ought a man to haue alwaies with him in the middest of all his affaires: which is that third part, which the Prophet commended vnto vs,Micheas. 6.8. when hee required vs to walke carefullie with God.
These be then, my good Christian brother, the principall vertues of this heaue^ly life. These are the flowers of this Paradise, these are the starres of this Heauen, and these are that image, which we sayed to be reformed, and renued after the likenes of Christ: for the life of a Christian ought to be such,What the life of a Christian ought to be. Esa^. 61.3. Et vocabu^tur in ea fortes iustitiae, plantatio Domini ad glorificandum. that it may be an example of holines, a silent Preacher, a light of the world, an argument and testimony of Faith, and a glasse wherein the glory of Almighty God shineth much brighter, than
 in other creatures: as the Prophet Esaie signified, when he saied. The mighty and iust shalbe called plants, which Almighty God hath planted to be glorified in them.



Of twelue very principall pointes, which the seruant of God ought to obserue. THE IIII. CHAPTER.
FORSOMVCH, as there be certaine persons, that desire to haue alwaies before theyr eyes the principall points of the Spirituall life: therefore I intende briefly to abridge in these two last Chapters the principall thinges, which the seruant of God ought to doe: and those also which he ought especially to eschue and auoide: to the end, that in this briefe Summary hee may see, as it wete in a glasse, what he is bound to doo.
Now as touching the first part: to wit, what hee ought to doe: the first point is, that he endeuour himselfe to goe alwaies in the presence of God. And if he cannot doe this continually, yet let him at the least lift vp his heart vnto him oftentimes both by day, and by night, with briefe louing, and humble praiers and aspirations, desiring him alwaies of his help, and loue;
 as one, that is able to doe nothing without him.
2. That all thinges in this world may be prouocations vnto him to loue God.The Second is, that whatsoeuer he shall heare, see, or read, hee endeuour him selfe alwaies, as the bees doe among the flowers, to sucke out of euery thing some honie to carrie vnto his hiue: to wit, some deuout and louing consideration, wherewith he may engender, and nourish within him the sweete hony combe of the loue of God, in such sort, that as a great fire conuerteth al thinges into fire, that are cast therein, (whether it be water, iron, or whatsoeuer it bee,) euen so likewise his hart ought to be so inflamed in the fire of the loue of God, that all thinges, that are in this world, of what quality soeuer they be, maie be matter and prouocations vnto him, to loue God.
The Third is, when he shall at anie time commit any defects, or shall fall into any distractions of mind,3. Distraction of mind. let him not forthwith be dismaied, nor giue ouer his Spirituall exercises: but let him returne vnto Almightie God with an humble, and louing conuersion, acknowledgeing his owne great miserie, and the greatnes of the mercie of Almightie God. And let him doe what lieth in him, to
 returne vnto his former state, and to proceede foreward with that he hath begun.
The Fourth is, that he labour to haue a pure intention in al thinges,4. Purity of intention. whatsoeuer he shal doe. For the which it is meet, that he doe aduisedlie ballance and examine all his wordes, workes, and thoughtes, and consider what intention hee hath in the same, and let him endeuour alwaies to rectifie and directe it: offering all that he shall thus doe vnto the glorie of Almightie God, not only once in the day but at all times, so often as he shall newlie beginne to take any worke in hand.
The Fifte is,5. To arme himselfe against all occasions of Anger. that hee endeuour to goe armed, and prepared, (yea, though it be in time of peace,) to receiue with humilitie, mildenes, and patience, all thinges that may of a sodaine be stirred and moued against him. For although anger doe serue somtimes to some purpose, yet surely it is a wonder, if it come to any good end: and it leaueth the conscience alwaies scrupulous and fearefull,Anger leaueth the conscience scrupulous and fearefull. whether it hath exceeded, or not. etc. So that anger is one of those passions, which the seruant of GOD may vvith lesse preiudice vvant. And he that shall conquer this Passion, shall vndoubtedly
 liue in great peace, and tranquility.
The sixt is if he be not a Bishop, Pastor Prelate, or Maister of a household, that he doe alwaies turne awaie his eies from beholding other mens defectes.6. We must looke to our own defects and not to other mens. But let him continually fixe them vpon his owne defects. For the first bringeth with it disdainefulnes, pride, rash iudgementes, disquietnes of conscience, vndiscrete zeale, and other thinges, which doe trouble the mind. But the second bringeth with it confusion of his own conscience, the feare of God, humility, and a close recollection of his mind.
The Seuenth is, that he doe sequester himselfe, not only with his soule, but euen with his body also, from all transitory thinges:7. To sequ^st^^ himselfe from all transitorie thinges. and that he doe approch vnto God with all his hart. For the more hee shall put this in vre, the lesse shal he haue of a man, and shall participate the more of God. For he that loueth these inconstant, and transitorie thinges, will likewise bee mooued and altered with them: But hee that loueth God only, doth participate in his degree of his stabilitie, and firmnes of God. Let him sequester him selfe also from the multitud of businesses and affaires,To eschewe superfluous busines.Ecclesi. 11.10.Fili, ne in multis sint actus tui. yea, though they be not euil, in case they be superfluous:
 forsomuch as these likewise doe distract the minde, and doe not suffer it to rest perfect^y in God.
The eight is, that he fasten his eyes alwaies vpon the life of our Sauiour Christ and vpon his most sacred Passion, conuersation, and doctrine: and endeuour (so much as he may possibly) to imitate, and followe those so notable examples of his vertues:8. To imitate the life of Christ, and his vertuous examples. as his humility, Charity, mercie, obedience, pouerty, austerity of life, contempt of the world, and the loue he had of our saluation, according as it hath bin declared in the begining of this Treatise.
The Ninth is, that he labour alwaies (so much as he may,) to denie his own proper will, resigning it whollie (as those doe, which resigne vp their benefices) into the handes of Almightie God: in such sort, that his own will doe wholly die in himselfe, and that the wil of God only do liue in him: for thus shal God reigne in vs,9. To denie and resigne his owne will. By resigning our will vnto God we cause him to reign in vs.Galath. 2.20. Gal. 3.24. and not we in our selues. The which ought to be done in euery kinde of thing, whether it be aduerse or prosperous, sorrowfull or comfortable, sweete or sower, etc.
The Tenth is, that in all his troubles, cares, and busines, he haue recourse vnto Almightie God humblie, and confidentlie,10. To repose his hope and confidence in God
 with such a spirit and hart, as becommeth a sonne, that hath so mercyfull and mighty a Father: referring euery thing to hys prouidence, and taking them as comming from hys hand, banishing and expelling from himselfe all troublesome thoughtes, and leauing them in the handes of Almighty God.
The eleauenth is, that hee be thankefull vnto Almighty God for all his benefits,11. To be thankfull vnto God for all his benefits. and for each of them, as well great, as small, let him alwaies giue him most humble thanks, not respecting so much the gift, as the vnworthines of the receauer, and the worthines of the giuer, and the loue, wherewith hee giueth it, sith that hee giueth the small benefits with no lesse loue, than the great.
12. To remooue from him al occasions that hinder him from profitting in the spirituall life.The twelfe is, that hee doe cut off, and remoue away fom him with a valiant, and noble minde all such thinges, as hee shall perceaue to be any occasion vnto him of taking lesse profitte in Vertue vvhether they be thinges corporal, or spiritual: as the inordinate loue of some persons, of study, bookes, conuersation, exercises, acquaintance, and familiarity: yea, though they be of spirituall persons, when he shall perceaue, that they doe disquiet his mind
 and withdraw him from his spirituall profitte.


Of twelue kindes of defectes, which ought verie much to be shunned in the spirituall life. THE V. CHAPTER.
MANIE defects there are, vvhich doe hinder the profitting in Spirituall life, and whereby many at the ende of many yeares are the very selfe-same persons, that they were alwaies before. Among which defects wee will note at this present twelue of the most principall: in the which a man ought to looke, as it were in a glasse, that he may the better vnderstand his owne defects, and learne vvhat the cause is that hindereth hys going forward in spirituall life, and so according to the cause prouide remedy for the same.
The first of these defects is, when a man is ouermuch giuen vnto his outwarde affaires, and busines,1. Ouer-much giuen to outward exercises, and busines. and therefore is manie times depriued of inward visitations, and consolations: For a man findeth no thing of that without him, which ought to be sought for within him.
The second is,2. Ouermuch affabilitie and familiarity with many persons.Gal. 1.10. when hee will be ouermuch
 familiar, and affable with all men: whereof ensueth, that he shall not be able to rid himselfe of busines, and company, when it is requisite. And thus doth hee loose his time, and faileth oftentimes in his exercises, for that he will not faile the co^pany of men: whereby it commeth to passe, that the more hee studieth to please men, the lesse he pleaseth God.
The third is, when he is sometimes lesse humble towardes God,3. Presumptio^ and more bold than he ought to be, whereby hee looseth that spirituall bashfulnes which is requisite to be had towardes God: the which bashfulnes is the daughter of humility, and the mother of spirituall profit.
The fourth is, when sometimes he is too rash,4. Precipitation and rashnes in doing the affaires. Pro. 10.^. Qui festinus est pedibus, offe^det. and runneth headlong to his busines without any consideration, being rather lead by some sodaine passion of minde, tha^ by iudgment proceeding of reason, wherby hee looseth the peace, and tranquility of minde, through ouermuch feruour, and disordereth vvith all his owne affaires, through the ouermuch haste hee maketh in doing them: for it is written. Hee that hath light feet, is sure to stumble: wherefore in euerie thing it is needefull to haue alwaies a stayed iudgement, which is the
 faithfull friend, and companion of vvisedome.
The Fift is, that peraduenture sometimes he conceaueth a good opinion, and presumeth some what of himselfe, and of his owne vertues,5. Secret glory and presumption of himselfe, and of his owne vertues. Luk. 18.11 Summa. S. Thom. 2.2. quest. 161. art. 5. ad. 2. 6. albeit that hee himselfe doth not perceaue it: and so with the Pharisee secretly he contemneth others, and esteemeth himself much better: whereby he commeth to want the foundation of all vertues, which is humility.
The sixt is, when he is readie and inclined to iudge others, and to aggrauate,Rash iudgement.Note this well. and condemne theyr doings: wherby he commeth to wax cold in Charity: for the more he doth aggrauate other mens faults, the more he whetteth the knife, where-with he maketh war against Charity: for Charity ariseth partly of a good opinio^, which we conceaue of our neighbours.
The seauenth is, when hee hath as yet a great part of his loue set vpon transitorie things,7. Loue of transitory thinges. and therfore by good consequence, wanteth very much of the loue of God.
The eight is, when he is very slacke, and negligent in the exercise of praier,8. slackenes and negligence in the seruice of God. beginning it with slouthfulnes, prosecuting it with irkesomenes, and finishing it vvithout fruite: whereby it happeneth oftentimes,
 that he is depriued of our Lords visitations, and of the strength and comfort of deuotion.
The ninth is, when he is very slacke, and negligent, about the mortification,9. Slouthful and negligent in mortifying of himselfe. and subdueing of himselfe: whereby it commeth to passe, that hee can not liue vnto God, that liueth to himselfe: neyther can he be tra^sformed into God, who is not yet mortified in himsesfe.
10. Distraction of minde.The tenth is, when his minde is not closly recollected within himselfe: but runneth very much distracted and wandring out of himselfe: whereby it commeth, that he knoweth not so much of himselfe, as is needfull, and so vnderstandeth not how to despise himselfe, neyther yet how to haue an eye to himselfe, as it behoueth him.
11. Ouermuch loue of himselfe, and of his own will and appetite.The eleuenth is, when hee is far in loue with himselfe, and is a great follower of hys owne will and appetite: whereby it commeth that hee cannot denie himselfe, nor imbrace the Crosse of Christ, nor mortifie hys owne nature, and so hee cannot attaine vnto the perfection of the Euangelicall life.
The twelfe is, when he is inconstant, and mutable in such good purposes,12. Inconstancie in his good purposes. as hee determineth, breaking them off quickly vpon
 euery light occasion, that is offered vnto him. Whereby it commeth, that for lacke of perseuerance, (which is the only thing, that bringeth things to an end,Perseuerance bringeth things to an end.Psal. 26.14 Mat. 10.22 Mat. 24.13 Luke. 9.62. 2 Tim. 2.5 Heb. 3.14. Heb. 12.4. Apoc. 2.26. Apoc. 3.21. Apoc. 21.7.) he spendeth all his time in making euer new beginnings, and so encreaseth not, nor taketh any profit in Spirituall life. Such a one may vvell be compared vnto some Vines, vvhich beare Grapes all the yeare long, but neuer grow to be ripe.


The end of the first volume of the Memoriall of a Christian life.
DEO GRATIAS.

