


BEFORE I BEGIN THIS Prognostication, I will let you see, what happened the last yeare.
SOme yeares past, there were the like Prognostications particularly set forth touching the former yeares, and that of the yeare 1622. now present, was entituled the Prophesier, made by Anthonius Maginus, sometime a Mathematician, or Professor therof in the Vniuersity of Bononia in Lombardy, whose learning was well knowne throughout the whole world, and shall yet be more knowne, for that all his foreshewings and Prophesies, are done by the Aspects of the Planets, and the truth of things, although it be a common saying, Almanacks are a sack full of lies, yet wee must not therefore contemne or despise the Art, although that sometimes things may happen amisse: It is not so strange a thing, for it daily happens so to our Countrey-men, when after the Sunne is set, we say wee shall haue faire weather, and it falleth out cleane contrary, both I my selfe and many more with me, know that the holy Scriptures speake thereof: therefore these and the like reasons, doe not make it a bad matter, the worke makes the Master to be commended, and if there be any man, whom in any sort it doth concerne, let him looke it out in the book or Italian Prophesier, last yeare

set forth, and conferre the same with the former times, and he shall finde according to humane wisedome, that it was well done, and more then any other Mathematician of our time euer did. Before we come to the matter it selfe, euery man must generally vnderstand, that when he names such an altitude, we must know, that the length from the East to the West, is vncertainly taken, as in the yeare past, There was a great question made, when he said, out of the North to the South, vnder 44. 45. and 46. dayes, Mars the God of Warre will cause the red Cock to crowe: and that there should be much innocent blood shed: whereby without doubt hee meant France, as in many places it may be shewed, and who was so wise, as to conceiue or once imagine, that there should such an alteration happen in that miserable Countrey of France, speaking also very certainly of the great Warre vpon the borders of the riuer of Rhine, and of Valtolina, as also of the altitude of Leefland, where the King of Swethland had great Warre against the King of Poland, and brought the most part of that Countrey vnder his subiection; and proceeding further, you shall finde that he speakes of the white Eagle, and of them that beare the half Moon in their shield, of the heighths, where the great battailes were fought, betweene the Turke and the King of Poland, that beares the white Eagle, as the Emperour of Germanie beareth the blacke Eagle. Also touching the alteration in Hungariae, it is triple-wise set out, and of the blacke Sea, of the Tartarians, and other Countries there-abouts hee speakes so exactly, as if hee had seene the same before. Whereof before that yeare there was no suspition, he also speakes of some wonders touching the heighth of Bauaria, that

beares a chequer-boord in his Armes: he speaketh further of Bauaria, and if wee looke neerely into the said Maginoes writing: we shall finde wonderfull fore-shewings thereof, but hee saith plainely, that his greatnesse shall shrinke and faile, like a blast of winde before the fire, which as not now seemes not so. In the Countrey of Saxon, there are likewise great alterations fore-shewed, and of the Palatinate most strange things, which shall be esteemed to be as fables; but time will cause it to appeare otherwise.

Of the Warre in the Netherlands.
TOuching the yeare past, what wagers were layd by diuers great personages, that thought they had the world at commaund, they made a full account a truce should longer be made: but to the contrary, all his writings speake of Warre, and that Mars the great man should play his part, which sufficiently appeares to be true. And further, if you looke narrowly into the matter, men may say that he was a Sayler, because he spake much of preparation made by Sea, as well in the Mediterranean as the North Seas, and so forth. He hath also fore-shewed much touching the East Indies, which hath fallen out to be true: for these and other reasons I haue caused his Prognostication for anno 1622. to bee Printed, that all men might know the course of the same.




Here begins the Italian Prophesier or Prognosticator, practised by ANTONIO MAGINO, Professour in the Vniuersitie of the Citie Bononia in Lombardie.

IANVARIE.
THE tenth of December old stile, the Sunne entred into Capricornus, and then the Winter began, which was the 2. of December new stile, of the yeare past, being anno 1621. so that vpon the fourth of Ianuarie we haue the last quarter, and considering all the course of these Winter moneths, we finde that we shall haue a long cold frosty Winter, with much Haile and Snow, and that very thick vnder 52. degrees, but much fauourable windes: In high Countries there shall many people die with cold and pouerty, they that die in Warre shall be free thereof.
The 11. of Ianuarie, with the new Moone vnder the gouernment of Venus and Mercurie, there shall be many Rouers and murtherers seene, whereof men that trauell in France and Germanie, must beware: at that time also many wicked practises shall be inuented, and put in vre in Italy, to bring their neighbours on the hills vnto their ends.
The 19. of Ianuarie the first quarter, many men shall speake of peace, but Mars and Iupiter cannot agree together, because the Sunne is entred into Aquarius, so that the matter is put to Neptune and Mars. It shall be troublesome

to be in high degree, there shall also many bad tydings come abroad, whereby men shall be in great feare of their liues, specially vnder the height of 51. degrees 1/^ ouer Britaine there will be a good Starre seene, as also ouer Denmarke and Sweathland.
The 27. of Ianuarie, the full Moone being in Leo, and the Sunne still in Aquarius, signifies some strange things to happen in the great Water-streame, as also vpon the Rhine, Donaw, Elue in Stlesia, Liffeland, France and Grecia, in Sicilia in the Mediteranean Sea, there shall wonders be heard of, touching great burnings and blood-sheddings; which Mars vpon the 30. of this moneth sore threatneth.


FEBRVARIE 1622.
THE 2. of Februarie shall be the last quarter, the Sunne still in Aquarius, casting great damps and mists ouer Germanie, which will seeme as if they would darken the light of heauen, vnder the same to make some new aliances and contracts: many shall run away to shunne the wrath of God, but they shall be ouertaken by those whom they least suspect, their goods shall be carried into strange Countries.
The 10. of Februarie, being new Moone, Mars and Venus meete, to speake of peace, that hath beene moued in Germanie, which will make much more alteration then was before, small things shall be great.
The 18. of Februarie, the first quarter, Iupiter and Venus were in Taurus, the Sunne in the last of Aquarius, fighting with their beames one against the other, which are certaine tokens of some strange matter, so that all vpright Christians ought to pray vnto God, to beseech

him to withdraw his threatnings from vs.
The 19. of Februarie, the Sunne in Pisces, with much vnwholsome cold South-west windes, contrary to nature.
The 25. of Februarie, with the full Moone Saturne the child eater raigneth, with Venus a light woman, what good these two will procure, the next moneth ensuing will shew.
Vpon the 27. of Februarie, the last aspect of the Planets with Iupiter and Mars, are in Libra, and more shall follow.


MARCH.
THE fourth of March, the last quarter, Sol and Mercurie raigne, the next day in the fourth aspect Iupiter againe with Sol: This signifieth that many Kings and Princes shall meete together, to finde meanes to be quit of this Warre, because their money consumes, but Mars serues not to graunt thereunto, because that already he hath made a contract with Neptunes Fleet, to augment his Treasure.
The 12. of March, with the new Moone, many mens courages will faile, specially vnder the heighth of 40. 41. 42. degrees, Northward of the line, others to the contrary shall be encouraged, that is vnder 51. 52. and 53. degrees: To send a great power to the Seas, the like whereof hath not been seene: as long as the world hath continued, they shall make the new world quake, and seeke to bind the East and the West together; the Rose and the Lilly shall set a root, although it be not seene.
The 20. of March, the first quarter, the Sunne goeth out of Pisces, and leaues the land man in danger.
The 21. of March, the Sunne entreth into Aries or

the Ram, and passeth the Equinoctiall line: then day and night throughout all the world shall be of one length: and this Mathematician saith, that at that time all the Planets goe out of their houses, onely Venus is in her house in Taurus, and Luna in her house in Cancer, so that they two are the Lords of this yeare, Mercurie and Saturnus their coadiutors; this matter being lookt into it, shall be found to be so.
The 27. on Easter day, with the full Moone, there shall many variable windes blow, and it will be cold nights, in that time many shall lustily make preparation for the Warres, not for the Hugonite nor the Papist, but for the Idoll money in the Chest.


APRILL.
THE second of Aprill the last quarter, there shall many hard cloudes with Hayle fall vpon the North Countries, and hee that hath good store of Oates and Horses before hand, shall make good profit of them: there will be bad payment, yet all kinde of Wares shall be well sold, Saturnus and Mars shall consume many, so that Husbandmen shall be forced to runne away with their Cattle and fowles.
The 10. of Aprill a new Moone, the great King of Fowles shall beare fire in his brest, therewith to hurt the Inhabitants in the Alpes, or in the heighth vnder the which the Switzers dwell: but in that time he must be warie, when he flies from his owne nest, that his owne young ones be not hurt, and made slaues. The 6. aspect with Iupiter and Sol are vpon the 11. day, yet in Aries vnder a sheepes clothing, to discouer some secret thing.
The 18. of Aprill the first quarter, the Moone was in

Leo, that signifies some strange thing out of Turkie, and the adherents thereof against the Romane Empire, and the next day vpon the 19. the Sunne enters into Taurus: therefore all Countries vnder Taurus are to beware of themselues, for they shall endure a great blow, such as they shall hardly beare, they are sore threatned by the aspects of the Planets, specially in the West, therefore looke to the winde, it will blow.
The 25. with the full Moone, Sol and Venus were in Libra, then a certaine number of Neptunes Wagons shall goe out of the Thames in England, to seek for the people vnder Taurus, with a great power, so that it seemes that all the Gods in the ayre gather together, onely to see the Sea Nimphes, but their weapons were fearefull: shortly after that, men shall heare a most pittifull complaint, like a womans vice, in the West.


MAY.
THE 2. being in the last quarter, is the holy crosse day, whose vertues are wonderfull, and many times haue done miracles: the other two dayes after Ascention day, Saturne, Sol, Iupiter, Mercurie, and Venus, shall be found in Aries, with diuers aspects; whereby it appeareth, that some great Prince shall vndergoe great danger.
The 10. with a new Moone, Luna will be in the Dragons taile, which signifieth, that many turbulent spirits shall scatter abroad diuers slanderous Libels, in manner of merry songs, but Iustice will finde them out. In our Countries of Europe, there shall be no Ecclipse seene, but vpon the 10. day of May. In Africa, in the 20. degree of Taurus, there shall be a great Ecclipse of the Sunne seene

there: These signes auncient Astronomers haue esteemed to be notable fore-shewings of some alreration.
The 18. the first quarter, in the last Whitson holydayes, there shall strong windes blow in the North quarters; therefore Sea-faring men shall be fortunate that sayle into South and West.
The 20. the Sunne shall enter into Geminie, so that those that are wise, vnder that climate to begin any enterprise, shall be fortunate therein, for their Enemies shall like children runne away in great feare, and giue them gold and siluer, which they shall carrie away for their wiues and children.
The 24. the full Moone, preparation shall be made to enter into the field, that is in the North land, on the other side of the Alpes.


IVNE.
THE 2. of Iune the last quarter, it shall be faire pleasant weather, and men shall seeke to lay swords and nets, to catch others in. There shall be blood-shedding in diuers places. The Turke shall fall vpon the Christians, and driue them to an Vnity, as the Wolfe doth the Oxen: but some will not hearken thereunto, so that great trouble is to be expected, and if hee hath the courage, he shall enter farre into Europa.
The 9. a new Moone, a good courage shall bring many things to light, and if they hap well, it will be much furtherance for his adherents: and in this moneth, as long as the Sunne is in Geminie, the Subiects must be obedient to their Lords, or they will fall into great danger, we shall heare strange things out of Italy.
The 16. the first quarter, you shall haue some speciall

matter out of France and England, in some things good for the East Countrie, and notable things out of India.
The 19. the Sunne is in Cancer, the first aspect in Iupiter and Mars, with many beames, so that it seemes, things will be turned topsie turuie, many men shall be beaten by Mars.
The 23. the full Moone, the Sunne enters into Cancer, which signifieth a great inuasion in the Countries lying vnder Cancer, because that two dayes before, some beames of the Planets shot that way, and also all the Planets at that time haue gathered together in the Sun, vnder the Twins, Leon and the Crab, Venus and Lucifer goe before, in that time, aboue our Netherlands Horison, that is, in the morning before fiue of the clocke, vntill Iuly there shall a wonder be seene, which is not much seene, and shall without doubt produce a new fearefull commet, ere it be long: therefore turne vnto God, and pray that he will diuert his wrath from you.
The 30. in the euening at 6. of the clock the last quarter of the Moone.


IVLY.
THE 8. of Iuly the new Moone, you shall see all the 7. Planets aboue the Horrison, as I said before, you shall also heare of a new manner of Warre, which shall be raised by Mars and Saturnus, which shall send many home without armes and legs, but he that stayes there shall not be hang'd.
The 14. the first quarter, you shall heare many strange things out of Turkie and Poland, and also out of the Grecian Islands, in the way to Constantinople.
Out of France, you shall haue vnexpected things, for ^he furtherance of the North lands, people of meane

quality shall waxe great, and spread their wings like a Pellican ouer her young ones, but before that happeneth you shall heare wonders.
The 20. the Sunne goes out of Cancer, and leaues her subiects in necessity, and that day enters into Leo, vnder whose gouernment all the Countries that beare the Lyon in their shield, shall be victorious. About Bohemia and Silesia, or in the Countries bordering about them, you shall heare of great battailes, that is vnder 46. or 47. degrees, looke in the Card, you shall easily see the places; about that time you shall also haue a great inuasion vnder 50. degrees, which shall make many men flie out of the field from their bad enemies.
The 22. with the full Moone, you shall also haue many fires, and diuers hot diseases, which shall kill and spoile many men.
The 29. the first quarter, the Sunne in Leo, a great man shall be put to shame: and the common saying shall be true, that is, he that seekes to haue all, shall get nothing.


AVGVST.
THE 7 being Sunday with the new Moone, you shal see the Sunne still to be in Leo, and then shall be many Armies in the field, yea, as many as euer were seene in mans remembrance, much fruit shall be spoiled, the small shall beat the great, and make his Subiects rich: therefore looke that you defend an vpright cause, and then you shall be participant therewith.
The 13. the first quarter, many Forts and strong holds assailed and vndermined, pestilence and strange sicknes shall raigne; it shall be hot and dry weather, by reason that the said Planets are very neere to the Sunne, and



haue procured a great operation; also you shall haue great store of Thunder with Earthquakes.
The 19. the Sunne enters into Virgo, or the Mayde, there shall be faire and good fruit in some places, but not so much as the last yeare, but it shall be ripe in good time, that is, where it is not spoiled by the Enemy: vnder Virgo a motion shal againe be made touching peace, and it may possible be effected hereafter, by good reasons alledged.
The 21. with the full Moone, he that protected and vpheld an vniust cause, shall be mock'd by all the world, and his adherents shall be sorrowfull.
The 29. the last quarter, you shall heare strange things out of Barbarie, which before were little thought on, and the like out of Battauia.


SEPTEMBER.
THE 5. of September, with the new Moone, you shall see he that climes high shall be brought low, a strange Cock shall crowe there: there shall be great miserie and pouerty in the hilly Countries, there shall be great pestilence and dearth: therefore watch and pray, for who knowes whom GOD will punish with these plagues.
The 12. the first quarter, you shall see great smokes in the ayre with the burning of some stuffe, as in times past men vse to make Boon-fires for ioyes of victorie, and there shall many be crowned with Lawrell, for the former victories; to the contrary others shall be clad in mourning weedes, to weepe for, and to bury their dead.
The 19. the full Moone, before the Sunne goes out of Virgo, we shall heare of the assembling of many Prin^

to treate of waighty matters, as the Planets sufficiently giue vs to vnderstand.
The 20. the Sunne in Libra, signifieth high water, and low Countries shall suffer great danger, much notable alteration shall be in diuers places, all good for Sea-faring men, that trauaile in strange Countries.
The 23. Haruest shall begin, and it shall be warme and dry, in respect of the reasons afore-said, the Summer fruit shall be good.
The 27. the last quarter, they that haue vsed false waight, shall vndergoe great danger, whereby there will be ill earnings, and bad payments, and may bankerupts.


OCTOBER.
THE 4. of October, the new Moone, you shall see many Ships vpon the water, seruing for the War, there shall be no want of booty nor blowes: The innocent shall endure much wrong, by burnings and other barbarian tyrannies, neuer heard of, extortions, and abusing of women and children.
The 11. the first quarter, there shall be much good Wine found in many places, much better then the last yeare, but the owners thereof shall not enioy them all.
The 19. the full Moone, the Sunne goes out of Libra, some Princes shall seeke so to mittigate matters, that they may be quit of the afore-said Warres, and thereby liue peaceably againe.
The 20. the Sunne in Scorpio, a very bad signe for wounded men, specially for the Spaniards and Italians, for that cold will strike into their wounds, and vnder Scorpio make them die: therefore in that time be gone, as fast as you can.
The 27. the last quarter, there shall come many bad tydings, but it will soone be cold, therefore you Batauians be watchfull, strike with an Angels minde therevpon, for then it begins to be slaughter time.


NOVEMBER.
THE 3. of Nouember, the full Moone, Luna will be in the Dragons head, so that some vnder the height of 50. degrees, that haue Miters on their heads, shall fall into great necessity, after that their Countrey is spoyled and burnt, and their Subiects destroyed, who then shall call for peace, but shall not be heard: these men aforesaid Magino, thinkes that they are Ments, Tryer, and Collen, or some Countries bordering vpon them.
The 3. of Nouember, you shall haue an Ecclipse of the Sunne, which shall not be seene in Europa, but ouer the Indian lands: yet they of Europa must not therefore thinke, that they shall not be participant with his Ecclipse, but must know that the force thereof extendeth ouer the whole world.
The 10. the first quarter, vnder 50 @. degrees, ouer England or Zealand, you shall heare good newes out of strange Countries, and many strange things, but they must be very wary, there will variable windes blow, and high floods rise.
The 18. the full Moone, the Sunne will still be in Scorpio, and in that time much misfortune shall happen, in those Countries where Scorpions are to be found, that is, in Italy, Spaine, Barbarie, and in India, and also hurtfull for the same Nations, in what Countrey soeuer they shall be, by reason of the aspects afore-said.
The 21. the Sunne enters into Sagitarius, vnder his gouernment there shall be great preparation of Warre,

by Neptunes Fleet out of the North, to be made in the South, more then in long time hath been seene, and gathering together vnder 36. and 37. degrees, in the Mediteranean Sea.
The 26. the last quarter, Mars and Neptune, bids many to gest with Powder and Match, there shall be a great battaile by water.


DECEMBER.
THE 2. of December, the new Moone, Warre in the North lands shall lessen, and encrease Southward: there shall also great store of Ordnance be made ready, and preparation of great Ships made, to assaile strange Countries.
The 9. the first quarter, many cold windes shall blow, high floods, signifying a colde Winter, with many stormes of Hayle.
The 17. a full Moone, there shall many things bee practised, and there shal be many Ambassadors sent, to treate of peace: some Princes will sit downe, when they see that Sagitarius hath his bowe still bent, to threaten them with great losse of their riches and blood.
The 21. on Wednesday, the Sunne entreth into the hard headed Capricornus, much addicted to butting, but it shall happen vnder his climate: There shall be wonderfull tydings heard of, and much complaint, out of Germany, Italy, Poland, and other farre Countries.
The 25. the last quarter, being Christmas day, many shall die with cold, because that in the Summers past they could get nothing, by reason of the former Wars. Therefore pray vnto God, that hee by his great power, will make the yeare ensuing better, whereby his name shall be praised, now and for euer Amen.




Complaints made by diuers Nations touching their present state.

The Spaniard speakes.
WHo is like vnto me, in all the world, euen from the East vnto the West, it is but chaffe in respect of fine gold of Peru: behold our power out of our Countrey, which is Naples, Millaen, Sicilia, Corsica, Sardinia, and Malta, and the foot that wee presently haue in the Grisons and Switzerland: the higher and lower Palatinate, with Gulick, Cleaue, and Berghe: also our hereditarie Countries of the Netherlands, with the notable aliance of the spirituality, and the confederates in marriage, as Austria, Sauoy, and the other stand vpon good termes, who hath so many gold Mines and reuenewes as our King: first in Ginnea, and in all the Indies, where gold, siluer, and precious stones are to be found, as well in the Kingdomes of Goa, Sumatra, Borneo, Selebes, Banda; the vnspeakeable Ilands of Molucka, Philippinaes, Manilles, and Iapan, with all the golden Kingdomes of the new world, as Chilla, Peru, Granada, Iucatan, Noua Hispania, and new Mexico: all the notable Ilands of Cuba, Hispaniola, Iaymaca, and Santo Croys, and thousands thereabouts, we rule ouer Brasillia, and the siluer streame, of the Amasons, Rio Grande, Rio de Plato, to the Straights of Magelanus, with the Canaries and the Flemish Ilands, who dares be so bold as to lift vp his head against vs, or point to vs in Spaine, to bid vs milke our Asses, make Fig Frayles, and such like things, all of vs are Knights, and all is ours.



The Italian.
THis pride is not to be borne withall, that we should in this manner suffer the manly members and bodies of our Neapolitanes, Sicilians, Corcicaners, and Sardinians, to be so much bridled, specially we that are Romanes, whose might and dominion caused the whole world to shake for feare, and now by a few Lucitaneans, or bragging Spaniards, to be out-faced: it is too much, Tuscania, Florence, Lombardy, Millaen, Parma, and Mantua, with the two famous Common-wealthes of Venice and Genua, I speake not of Treuisano, Ferara, and Verona, haue thus long beene bewitcht, to suffer these bloody Cullians, which haue not beene knowne aboue 150. yeares past, in such manner to encroach vpon our dominions, vnder pretence of we know not what, I am in doubt it will be our ouerthrow.
If we driue them not out of our borders, for I perceiue that it will come to the same passe that wee were brought vnto by the Gothes and Vandales, that commaunded ouer our Countrey 300. yeares together, and spoyled the same, as by the ruines thereof left; it is yet to be seene, we are not to expect any better then this from the Turke, and that with good reason, because the Spaniard, not long since prepared and made ready his ships in our Hauens, and did some exploits in the Greekish Ilands, belonging to the Turke. Therefore let vs vnite our selues together, and force the Spaniard to leaue our borders, our Countrey is strong enough to defend it selfe, we are enclosed round about by the Sea, and towards France and Germany, we haue the Alpes, which alwayes haue beene our good neighbours, that is, the Sauoyans, Switzers, and Grisons, whom they now fight

withall as Enemies, they say that they are hereticks, and vnder pretence thereof, would pull the stoole from vnder vs: whereunto some of our Countrey men are assistants: therefore rise vp, for it is more then time, make you ready for the Warre, and to speake the truth, I cannot beleeue that there is any of our Nation to be found, that would suffer himselfe to be hang'd or burnt for the confession of the faith.


The Turke.
WE sweare by our God, and Mahomet our great Prophet, that we will not endure the wrong that not long since hath been done vnto vs in Grecia and else where, by certaine Spanish ships, that were prepared and made ready in Italy, and sweare as afore, that before the siluer Moone, shall haue shewed her face with cleare light seauen times: we will teach them to know who is Emperour, though we should make peace with Poland and Persia, and therewith employ our power, of Podolia, Meldauia, Walachta, Bulgaria, Seruia, and all Grecia, with all the Ilands thereof, Nat^lia, or Asia: The borders of the blacke Salt, and Mediteranian Seas: I speake not of Siria, Iudea, Egipt, and Barbaria, and all the rest belonging to the Turkish power, wee will set vpon and assaile all you that are truce breakers, and vtterly root you out, to the last man.


The Polander.
ALas, what doth it auaile vs, that we haue giuen ayde to the Emperour or the Spaniard, whereby wee haue beene forced to sustaine three cruell Warres, that is, with the Swethlanders, Muscouites, and the great Turke, who spoyleth all our land, and if we cannot speedily make peace with the Turk, all our Country will be spoyled*



The Hungarian.
VVE that are Souldiers, and men of courage, comfort our selues in all occurrents that happen vnto vs, vnlesse it be, when men seeke to bring a strange Nation of Spaniards to domineere ouer vs, threatning to deale with vs, as they did in India, with the Country people there: but that is not yet brought to passe, haue we withstood so great a Warre, as all men know: wee will rather with our owne Nation, in steed of suffering our King, to draw backe and giue way, seeke to enlarge our borders, as farre as we finde any Spaniards to withstand vs, and wil set vpon them all as Enemies, and make a prey of their lands and goods, and will rather burne vp our owne houses, and eate our horses flesh, then become Subiects vnto the Spaniards or the Austrians.


The Germanes.
VVHat bad and crafty dealing is this, There comes a hundred thousand diuels, with that blacke company, that are brought into the land by the Spaniards, be it as it will be, Hayle and Thunder consume them all, both Spirituall and Temporall: It is no honour for vs Germanes, to seeke to preuaile by such a company of Rascalls, Pots excrement: a shame take all the villanous Priests men, and their Wallon slaues, was, was, was: cannot we that are Germanes lustily fall together by the eares, and fight, and then againe drinke together and be friends. Was, was, it is to great shame: There is no remedy, but that wee Germanes generally altogether must driue the Spaniards out of the land, or else we shal liue vnder their yoake all our liues long, and euer haue Warre in our Country.



The French-man.
ONe deuill or other heere in our Countrey, hath thrust his sticke into the wheele, seeing that many yeeres together we haue with great vnity tollerated the Religion, and now by meanes of a Spanish Iesuite, this heauie and deadly trouble is raised, whereby many men come to their ends. If all that vngodly company of Spanish brood were in India, wee might be in hope of a peace. It seemes that wheresoeuer the Spaniard comes, Gods blessing is banished farre from thence.


The Switzers and Grisons.
VVHat haue we done? whose Countrey haue wee taken from them? or what riches are here to be found? but onely true Christian blood: God haue mercie vpon vs; for the great and miserable complaints of women and children are exceeding much, they neither spare Catholike nor those of the Religion, in this great extremity: it is vnspeakeable, what barbarous cruelty is at this day vsed here vpon poore oppressed men, by murthering, fleaing, slitting their noses, dismembring their bodies ioynt from ioynt, casting them downe from the tops of hills into the water, ripping of womens bodies, to see the place from whence men come forth; and with a thousand the like vnspeakeable manners of torments and deathes, to kill and destroy the Inhabitants of our Countries, and to driue the rest away, and make the remainer become obedient vnto them: take example by vs, not to trust the Spaniards nor his adherents, but kill, before you are killed, and so you shall haue peace, and doe well.



The English man, Dane, Swetherlander, and Netherlander.
VVEE haue taught this Tyrant partly to know himselfe, and therefore wee gnash our teeth at him, and purpose rather with weapons in our hands, to die then to liue vnder such a Tyrant, or to endure his intollerable yoake: and without doubt, if any of these Nations loue the Spaniard, then for certaine they are of his minde, or at least some of his conquered Bastards, which hee ouercame in the time, that hee was in these Countries, and vnlesse it be the Woolfe, I know no beast, that willingly will suffer another beast to lye in his nest or denne, vnlesse it be a Cucko: we finde some in these Countries, that put their children to Schoole to learne Spanish, in that language to yeeld all honour and curtesie vnto those Signieurs, thereby to make him beleeue, that that honour iustly belongs vnto him, to rule and domineere ouer all Nations, whereof hee perswadeth himselfe to be worthy, and to deserue it. No, no, not so, but keepe the Hollanders, Swethlanders, and Freseland, from yeelding thereunto, and who so euer so withstands the Spaniard, it shall goe well with him, and they shall leaue their children great riches in this world, and in the world to come euerlasting life.



The Indians.
VVE poore Indians can neither write nor reade, and as yet haue not seene many more Christians, but the Spaniards: but none of our Nation wish to enter into that heauen, where the Spaniards said they shall goe, but rather to leape into the burning hill of Vulcan, and to stay there: they haue most barbarously murthered and slaine all our Kings and Princes, and taken away all their goods, and put many thousands of our Indians, by the greatest torments that can be inuented, to miserable deathes, which still is in our mindes: and if once the great Creator that rules the Sunne and Moone, would release vs out of this tyrannie, what greater ioy could there be heard of in India, and wee hope that ere it be long, it will come to passe, for our Prophets haue fore-shewed the same. Signieur, what think you: Is it not time with all speede to smeare your selfe with Hares greace? Yes, yes, yes. Vamos.

FINIS.


