


THE FIRST BOOKE:
OF THE HISTORY
of LEWIS the XI
ISabel of Bauaria,Disinheriting of Charles the Dauphin. an ambitious Princesse,
and a cunning woman, but a
cruell mother,Humane wisdome (...) deceiued in matters which it thinkes i^ hath foreseen^, Charles the 5. had desired to seeke an alliance in Germany for his sonne to fortifie h^m against the English H^ married Isabell daughter to St^phen D^^e or Bauaria, (...) nature ^anded against Charles her sonne to transport he C^owne to strangers. had so great power ouer
the will and weaknes of Charles the
sixt, her husband, as he disinherited
the Dauphin his sonne, and gaue the
Crowne of France to Henry the fift,
king of England his son in lawe, by a
treaty made at Troie the xxi. of May
1420. This declaration, published at
the Marble table, was followed by another
of the Kings Councell, which promised to vse all the seuerities
of Iustice against the Dauphin, to punish him for the murder
of Duke Iohn, slaine at Monstereau.
A murther, which making an altar vnto Mars of all France,
gaue him for offerings, not prodigious showes of vices, but an infinite
number of braue men, worthy of a more happy age, and a
better end. He that knowes not the History cannot vnderstand that
of the warres, which it hath caused betwixt the kings of Fraunce
and the house of Burgundy; nor of those tragicall effects of malice
and hatred, which continued all the raigne of Lewis the xi.
But behold a true Table.
Charles the vi.Charles the 6. going from Mans in Iuly in the extrea^most heat of the day his head being couered with a great hood of scarlet he me^ with a man (...) ^eaded and barelegged, (...) in white rugge at the en^ry of the forest who staying his horse by the reyac^ said vnto him. King ride no farther for thou art betraid. These wordes to a spirit weakened with care, watching, distemperature and distrust turned his braine and made him mad. O what misery did this poore head bring to the whole body of France., for the infirmity and weaknes of his spirit,Distraction of Charles ^he 6.
suffered himselfe to be gouerned by Lewis Duke of Orleance, his
brother, whom he loued dearely. Philip Duke of Burgundy, Vncle
to the king by the father, grew first iealous, then an enemy to this
great authority, and his hatred tooke such deepe roote, as it died
not with him, for Iohn his sonne was his heire, and sware the ruine
of the house of Orleance.
The two factions are framed,Faction of Orleanois and Burgonians. and the heads discouer their
hearts by their deuises, the motto of that of the Duke of Orleance,
was Ie l'enuie, hauing a knotted staffe: that of the duke of
Burgundy was a Ioyners plan with this motto; Ie le tiens: th'one
shewing how he would maintaine his authority, and the other
how he would ouerthrow it. The Duke of Burgundies designes

succeeded, both to the ruine of himselfe and his house: He grounded
himselfe vpon the practice of the Townes, and especially of
Paris, supplanting the Duke of Orleance of allThe credit and confidence which they haue in a man of commandement is the cheife support of his authority, for from thence proceeds the loue of the people which is a buckler vnto the (...), and a st^ong ram^i^e against (...) and wicked. credit and loue,
and seeking to make him hatefull in the speeches, but worse in
the affections of the people, who were otherwise incensed against
him, for some new subsidies which he had raised.
The first effect of this cruell hatred was, that after many combustions,
both within and without Paris,Death of Charles D. of Orleans. and euen then when as
they thought their minds were least inflamed; the Duke of Orleance
returning from the Queenes Palace, where she then lay in,
and hauing past most part of the night by her, on the 20. of Nouember
1407. fell into the hands of xviij. murtherers, which slew him.
It was a spectacle full of pitty, the next day, to see about this
poore sicke King, the widowValentine of Milan widdow to the Duke of Orleance, Charles, Philip, and Iohn her sons. Isab^l of F^ance the Kings daughter, married to Charles, eld^st sonne to the Duke of Orleance, the Kings of Sicile and Nauarre, with the Dukes of Berry and Bourbon demaund iustice of the murther. and her three sonnes, assisted by the
three Princes of the bloud, imploring iustice. They seek out the
crime, but they finde not the offenders: The Duke of Burgundies
hatred is a great presumption, that these were the fruites of his reuenge;The Duke of Burgundy flies into Flanders.
all mens eyes were cast vpon his, which his conscience
made him to hould downe: He drawes the King of Sicile, and the
Duke of Berry apart, and aduowes the fact, he leaues Paris with
fiue more in his company, and recouers his country of Flanders,
in great hast, so as the suspition was changed into apparant proofe.
Sone after heThe Duke of Bourgondy returning into France with a great army carried in a table two lances in saltire, the one hauing a s^arpe head for the warre the other a burrhead for the tourney, giuing the choyce of war or peace. returnes with a mighty army; they that would
haue condemned him,He returnes to Paris. are now forced to seek his friendship: Paris
receiues him as the Demon Gardian of her wals; he maintaines
puqlikely that he had caused the Duke of Orleans to be slaine, to
free the estate from oppressions. A Doctor of the Sorbonne vndertooke
to iustifie him before the Kings Counsell, with so great
impudence and flatterie, as it seemed he would canonize him
before hisFlattery giues honors to mortall men which belong not vnto them Tertullian reprocheth the Pagans of lying and flattery which made them declare men Gods, and Tacitus saith Deum honor Principi non ante habetur quam agere inter homines desierit. Tac. An. lib. 15. The honor of the Gods is not to bee giuen vnto the Prince, vntil hee hath left to liue among men. death, after this followed an accord; by the which
the Duke of Burgundy should for a reparation aske pardon of the
King vpon his knee. The Queene, the Dauphin, the Kinges
of Sicile and Nauarre, and the Duke of Berry making the like request
for him, in the presence of the Children of the Duke of Orleans,
melting with teares, and weeping with sobs, to see the bloud of
their Father put to compromise, and themselues forced to forget
so sencible an Iniurie.
France was presently deuided into two factions of Orleanois
and Burgundians.A league of Armagnacs Th'one taking his fauour and authority from
the ruines and disgrace of the other. The Duke of Burgundy hath the
soueraigne gouernment of affaires, and forceth them of the howse
of Orleans to make an offensiue and defensiue league against that of
Burgundy.League of Orleanois at G^en the tenth of March 1410. the heads were Charles Duke of Orleance and his brethren Iohn Duke of Berry, Lewis Duke of Bourbon, Iohn Earle of Alanson, Francis Earle of Clermont, Bernard Lord of Armagnac, and Charles of Albert Constable of France The heads of the Bourgundy faction were Iohn Duke of Bourgundy and his brethren. Charles King of Nauarre son to Charles the bad, the Dukes of Lorraine, Brabant, Brittaine, the Marques of Pont, the Earles of Neuers, Vaudemont, St. Paul and Ponthure. The name was of Armanacks, the marke a white scarfe:

the cause, the Kinges liberty who was in captiuity vnder the law
and will of the Duke of Burgundy:Challenge sent to the Du. of Burgundy. and to the end the quarel might
be ended with lesse danger, losse of men, and time, Charles Duke
of Orleans sent a challenge to the Duke of Burgundy, to fight a
combate with him, and to be reuenged of his fathers death. The
Duke of Burgundy, who had drawn the Queene vnto his party, had
noe great dificultie to perswade the King, that the designe of the
howse of Orleans was nothing but ambition and rebellion; in denying
him to demaund succors from Henry the fourth king of England.
The Dolphin being of yeares able to iudge of the intentions of
the one and the other,The sonne in lawe against the father in lawe. found that the interest of the house of Orleans
was that of the Crowne, and that the ambition of the Duke of
Bourgondy his father in lawQueene Isabel being banded against her nephewes of Orleans, adhered to the Duke of Burgundy and made the marriage of his daughter Catherin^ with the Dauphin Lewis. was the cheefe motiue of those troubles,
wherefore he vndertooke to crosse his designes and to make a
peace: this soule was seasond with good thoughts at the siege of Burges,
for when they told him that in a salley, which the besieged had
made, some of his seruants were slaine, and that the souldiers dyed
of poisoned waters, he said vnto the King his Father, and the Duke
of Burgundy. That this warre lasted too long, and that he would make
an end of it. Iohn of France Duke of Berry, andEnguerand of Monstrelet notes, in what manner the Duke of Berry came to this treaty, in his armes, notwithstanding that hee was 70. yeares old: (for he llued aboue 80) hauing vpon the^ a Cassocke of purple with a band poudred with marigolds, and so he is painted in the gallery of the ^o^ure. Philebert of Lignac,
great master of Rhodes, employed themselues vertuously to reconcile
the nephewes and the vnckle. The conditions of this peace
were concluded at Burges,Peace of Burges. and sworn in a great assembly at Auxerre,
the names of that fatall faction of Armagnac, and Burgundian
were comprehended in the forgetfulnes of things past, and Philip
Earle of Vertus was married to the Duke of Burgundies daughter.
But all the parts of France recouer not their former health: The
warre renues againe, and the Dauphin is no more for the Burgundian,
whose principall force consists in the sedition of Paris and the
succours of the English, who making their profit of ciuill diuisions,
win the battell of Azingcourt, which was called the vnfortunate
day of the 25. of October, 1415.The battle of Azing-Court. The Duke of Orleans, armed to reuenge
his fathers death and the libertie of his country, was led prisoner
into England, and if religion had not comforted him, he had
no lesse reason then Pompey,The Mitcleniens came to salute Pompey after the battel intreating him to land, which he refused and aduised them to obey the victor, and not to feare any thing, for that Caesar was a iust man, and of a mild nature: and then turning to the Philosopher Cratippus who was also come to see him, he complained and disputed a little with him touching the diuine prouidence, wherein Cratippus yeilded mildly vnto him, putting him still in better hope. to be amazed at the prouidence of
God, which seemeth to fauour the most vniust party, tyranny against
libertie, and couetousnes against freedome:Death of the Dolphin and Duke of Turraine. This losse was
followed by the death of Lewis the Dauphin, and of Iohn Duke of
Touraine, the Kings second sonne.
By the death of these two, Charles Earle of Ponthieu saw himselfe
in the first degree of the Princes of the bloud, and presently
made show that he had been bred vp to apprehend the iniury which
the Duke of Burgundy had done vnto his vncle. All the Princes
and Noble men which had followed the house of Orleans

came vnto him, and among others, the Constable of Armagnac:
but his greatest affliction was, for the vnnaturall hatred
which the Queene his mother bare him, who declared her selfe against
him Regent of the Realme, and was maintained in that quarrel
by the Duke of Burgundy: vnder her was that cruell massacre committed
the 12. of Iune 1418: whereas theAmassacre at Paris vpon the Armagnacks from 4 of the clock in the morning the 12 of Iune vntil the next day 10. of the clock. To note the Constable by the scarse which he carried they flead a bend of his skin and tyed it crosse his body, his office was confirmed to the Duke of Lorraine, and the Chancellors to Eustace de Lastre. Constable of Armagnac
and the Chancellor de Marle were slaine, and the Dauphin ranne
a daungerous fortune, if Tanneguy du Chastel; Prouost of Paris, and
his faithfull seruant had not saued him in the Bastille. Paris saw
it selfe reduc'd to that miserable estate, as it seemed a retrait for
Beares and Tigers.
During this fatall diuision, the English preuailed in Normandy
and Guyenne,Peace treated at Pouilly. and then a peace was treated betweene the Dauphin,
and the Duke of Burgundy; vnder the assurance whereof the
Duke came vnto the Dauphin, being at Montereau Faut YonneThe Dauphin sent Charles of Poitiers, Bishoppe of Valence, to the Duke of Burgundy, to draw him to Monste^cau in Gasteacis, for that he had refused to come by Tanneguy du Chastel: saying, that it were better for the Dauphin to com to Troye. The 10. of Nouember, 1419. he came and was slaine vpon the bridge, which was fortified with 3. barres. The Duke hauing past the first entred into some apprehension of his fortune, and meeting Tanreguy du Chastel, he laid his hand vpon his shoulder, saying: Behold h^m in whom I trust.,
and presenting himselfe vpon his knee, Robert de Loire, taking him by
the arme, sayd vnto him: rise, you are but too honourable; who rising,
laid his hand vpon his sword to drawe it forward, for that it hung
too much back, then said de Loire vnto him; Doe you lay your hand vpon
your sword before my Lord the Dauphin? whereupon Tanneguy du
Chastell stroke him so forceably vpon the face with a battell-axe,
as he made him to fall vpon his knee and cut off his chin, another
thrust his sword into his belly: The body being stript was drawne into
a mill, and buryed the next day.
This death reuenged the house of Orleans, but it gaue so great a
share of the Realme to strangers, as there remained very little for
Charles, who presently after the death of the Duke of Burgundy was
declared by the king his father (at the perswasion of his mother)
vnworthy to succeede vnto the crowne of France.
Hee might iustly haue appealed from these declarations to the
Kings good sence; but seeing him decay daily, and that hee was still
vnder the gouernment of this Medea, he chose rather to appeale to
God,Priuate persons haue many Iudges, kings haue none but God, saies M. Anthony, Dion Nice^s. the Iudge of Kings, and to his sword, lamenting with teares,
drawne from the bottome of his heart, his owne miserie and that of
France.
This disorder,Death of K. Henry the fifth and Charles the sixth, contrary to the reason of nature, and the lawes of the
realme, was followed with strange changes. Henry the fifth dies, and
50. daies after Charles the sixth king of France. Henry the sixth king
of England is crowned at Paris, Charles the seauenth at Poictiers,
there were two kings in one Realm, two parties, two armies, but
the English holde Paris, and the firstIn all factions the authority of the Senate is of great force. Otho, to shew the difference of his partie, and that of Vitellius, said: Nationes aliquas occupauit Vitellius, imaginem quandam exercitus habet, Senatus nobis cum est. Sic fit vt h^c Resp. inde hostes Reip. constiterint. Tacitus Hist. lib. 1. Senate, who thought that
all authoritie and soueraigne command was in effect on their side;
that the king had but the image, some calling him, for pitty sake,
Dauphin of Viennois, and others, in mocking, King of Bourges, or
Earle of Ponthieu, there remaining nothing to make him knowne to

be the fourth sonne of CharlesCharles the 6. had 5. sonnes, Charles, who died of a ^^^sumption, at 9. yeeres, Lewis D. of Guyenne, who died at 19. Iohn Duke of Touraine, married to Iacquet of Bauaria in the yea^e 1404. Charles the seuenth borne in the yeer. 1402. the fi^th was he of whom the Queene was brought to bed, when the Duke of Orleans was slaine. the sixth but a peece of the crowne.
He goes to field weake of all things, of armes, friends, men and
mony, but strong in right and courage to maintaine the quality of
his birth, which the enuy of fortune, and the conspiracie of his enemies
could not take from him; for his mother had brought him into
the world vnder purpleThe Emperors of Constantinople ordained that their wiues should bee brought in bed vnder purple (...) Nicetas lib. 5. and the flower deluce. There is nothing so
powerfull as a good cause maintained with a good sword, nothing
doth so much comfort the soule in aduersity, nor moderate it in
prosperitie, as the iudgement of conscience, when as she feares not
to haue her intentions knowne to God and men.
But seeing himselfe forced to vanquish before he raigne, that victories
depend of the force of Armes, and that the triumphant
Chariot of Mars is not moued but by the force of gold and iron,
Fower things do perpetually follow warre, men, iron, siluer and bread, but of these 4. the two first are the most necessary, for that m^n and iron cannot furnish siluer and bread but bread and siluer may find men and Iron^ that the springs of his treasure are drawne dry, and the royall reuenues
held by his enemies, he procures his subiects to assist him
with taxes.Taxes ordained. The French, who haue alwaies excelled other nations
in fidelitie and deuotion towards their Kings, not knowing what
it is to haue good when they want, did contribute freely and cheerefully
to the necessities of Charles, who like a good Shepheard was
content to fleece his (...) and not to flea them.
France which had beene besieged 70. yeares,Miseries of France last 70. yeares. with the miserie
and calamitie of warre, might well haue beene without this cruell
diuision, which was no other thing then a conspiracie of the ChildrenCiuill warre is a mortall seuer in an estate. This ardent desire in the Graecians to make warre in Greece, is called by Plutarch, a conspiracy against themselues, by the which they staid with their own armes the fortune which led them to the height of felicity, and turned their weapons against their owne bowels., to turne the points of their swords against their owne bowels;
to inuite their Ancient enemies to the funerals of her liberty
and to bring back those cruell and bloudy dayes for the which
England hath giuen to the two Edwards the proud titles of Lightening,Edward the third, and the Prince of Wales.
and Eagle. There was nothing in generall but miseries, confusions,
amasements, and desolation: The pesant being stript both
of flesh and fat had nothing left but bones, and they were bruised.
The Historie admires that euen the cattell hearing the bell, (a signe
of the enemies approch) fledde of themselues to recouer their retreates.
She had so lost her first excellence, as she seemed a building, of
whose beauty no man could iudge, but by the peeces that remained
of her ruines. Vertue and FortuneFor the greatnes and continuance of an Empire, fortune, or to speak better, prouidence and destiny must agree with vertue, Roma vt ageretur sublimibus incrementis faedere pacis aeternae virtus conuenit atque for^una, quarum si altera defuisset, ad perfectam non venerat summitatem. Ammianus. which in the beginning,
had agreed to settle and maitaine her Empire, held no more accompt
of her, and conspired with her enemies to ruine her. And
as too much greefe makes men to loose all feeling, the excesse of
her miseries, which had no ease but custome,Custome is the onely case of ineuitable miseries, and those calamities which are growen into a custome giue some contents vnto miserable men. made the French so
accustomed to the darknes of seruitude, as they grew ignorant of
the light of libertie, and they which were borne vnder the yoke,

did lay a foundation of this forraine domination by the length of
their sufferance.
In this terrible ebbing and flowing of calamities, capable to
make the strongest men faint and effeminate,Great courages grow resolwe against misfortunes, and take aduersi^^^s for exercises of their vertue, others are presently deiected. Tacit. Ann. l. 4 Charles continued
still constant in his resolution, and God did comfort him by the
birth of the Dauphin, at Bourges the sixt of Iuly, 1423. the twentieth 
yeare of his age, the first of his raigne, the nineteenth of his
marriage with Mary Daughter to Lewis Duke of Anjou, and King
of Sicile. The ioy was great: the Historie sayes, they generally
cryed Christmas, an ordinarie cry at publicke ioyes, in those daies.
It is a great proofe of the peoples loue, when as they reioice at their
Princes issue, and hold the want of it a misfortuneIt is a great testimonie of the bounty of a Prince, w^en as they reioyce at the birth of his children, or when as the want of them is accounted amongst the miseries of the co^mon wealth..
They went not to seeke godfathers in the soueraigne houses of
Europe,Iohn of Alancon godfather to Lewis the eleuenth. the ioy past with lesse brute. Iohn Duke of Alencon, first
Prince of the bloud, carried the new Prince to be baptised, and gaue
him the name of Lewis. If they made some scruple to giue him his
fathers or his godfathers name, as it was an old pagan error, that
there was some fatallity in namesThe ancients had great respect to names. They had certaine dares for the impesition and profession of names and feasts which they called Nominales, holding for a good signe the encounter and choise of a goodly name: as Valerius, Saluius, Statorius, and in the leuie of men of warre, the Consul had a care, vt primus miles esset bono nomine. That the for most souldiour should haue a good name., and was then in credit, it may
bee they remembred the captiuitie of King Iohn in England, and
the stormes wherewith his descendants called Charles had beene
shaken.
Ignorance was so bould and generall in those dayes, as all they
that haue dealt in the historie, beeing neither curious nor diligent,
haue not left any mention of the education of the Princes of
France, whereon notwithstanding is grounded the hopes of the
rest of their liues. For such as they haue shewed themselues in
their first inclinations, such are they knowne to bee afterwards.
Seldome do they hate that in the end of their daies which they haue
loued in the beginning. The care of such deere and Important persons
hath alwaies beene very great in the house of France, they suffer
nothing that is pestilent or infectious to approcheThe Egyptians did not suffer any about the Kings children but such as were well bred, and of a generous disposition, they were alwaies serued and followed by their Priests Children, attired in habites fit for their profession, of great modestie and aboue twentie yeares ould, to the end that beeing alwayes guiled by the Ministers of their gods they might bee retained within the bounds of maiestie and vertue. HERODOT.. This spring
must water the whole State, and it is hard for them to erre
and faile among so many examples of vertue, valor, and courage,
which are like whetstones to giue an edge to generous natures.
He gaue such timely proofes, as he made it knowne, that Iudgement
and reason appeared sooner in Kings childrenGreat natures discouer themselues soone. So Plutarch said that Pompey did in the flower of his youth show a venerable greatnes of reall maiestie in his actions and manners. then in others,
that lyllies put forth sooner then common flowers: at the breake of
his morning they saw that which they should expect of him all the
rest of the day.Marriage of Lewis the eleuenth. His Father married him at thirteene yeares to the
Lady Margaret Steward, daughter to Iames the first, King of Scotland,
as King Charles the sixt had married him at eleuen yeares.
The Ambassadors being sent into Scotland to bring this Princesse,
were crossed by the English, being iealous and offended at this alliance,

which renewed and confirmed those which since Charlemaine
Charles the great, Emperor and King of France, hauing bene assisted by Achaius king of Scotland in Spaine against the S^ras^ns, and in Germanie against the Saxons, made an offensiue and defensiue league with him, and gaue him his daughter to wife in the yeare 777. had been betwixt these two Crownes, and put them into a great
apprehension, that whilest they should be busie in France, (wheras
their affayres began to decline) the Scots might trouble them in
England. They offered to yeeld him Barwick and Rosbourg, with
all other places which were in question, if he would dissolue the promise
of this marriage. The estates of Scotland assembled vpon this
proposition.Parlement in Scotland. The Clergie was diuided, most part saying, that it was
iust and profitable, that the refusal would be pernicious, and that to
attaine vnto a good peace with their neighbours, they must not so
much regard things past as the future and the incertainty of euents.
The Nobilitie did couragiously resist the designe of the English, crying
out that their enemies counsell was poison presented in a cup of
gold, a goodly pretext to ruine them, a practise to diuide Scotland
from their ancient friends, and then subiect them more easily to
their enemies.We must not onely consider matter which are past, but those which are also to come. And in truth they to whom fortune hath neuer turned her backed^e not without cause feare the doubtfulnes of variable euens, so as a certaine peace were alwaies to be preferred before a doubtfull victory), for that the first is in our will and disposition, and the last in the hand and power of the immortall god. The words of Hannibal to Scipio. Tit. Li^.
The English being refused of their request they fall to threates,
and declare that they had shipps at sea to stop the Princesse passage.Mary Steward sent into France
This made the King resolue to send her soner then he had intended,
the estates beseching him not to deferre to trust his Daughter to
his Sonne, who trusted them with the guardSt. Lewis being at the holy land escapt a conspiracy made against his person by the King of the Arsacides, it was discouered and preuented by the Scotchmen of whom afterward he made his guard. of his royall person.
She past notwithstanding the ambushes of the English, more by
the prouidence of God, then the foresight of men, for whiles the
English, were busie in fighting with a ship which was lade with wine
for Flaunders, the Scotts vessell past freely and landed the Princesse
at Rochell.Reuenge runnes alwaies against the enemie that hath most offended, and in the contention of three Nations there is alwaies one that saues himselfe, and does his busines. She was conducted to Tours, whereas the marriage
was solemnized the 24. of Iune.Murther of Iames King of Scotland But this ioy lasted not long in
her fulnes, newes comming of the death of the king of Scotland,
being miserably murthered with sixe and twenty wounds by his
Vncle and Cousin, in the sight of the Queene his wife, who presenting
herselfe vnto the murtherers, and making a buckler of her
body to defend her husbands, receiued two wounds.
The thoughts of Lewis were in those dayes more inclined to
Armes then to Ladyes. Nature did dispence them from their seruitude,
and his breeding had diuerted him from all intemperance
which makes men inferior to beasts, and bound him to the exercise
of vertue, which makes Princes superior to Men. He had
learned by the infancie of King Charles the 6.Charles the fift, meaning to try the generous disposition of his sonne, did set a crowne of gold and a scepter vpon a veluet cushion, and on another an helmet and a sword, Charles made choice of the sword and the helmet. his Grand-father,
to lay hould of a sworde as soone as of a Crowne. They did gird
him with it sooner for necessity then to grace him, more to defend
himselfe then to adorne him. So it is fit that a Prince should carry
an honorable markeIn places whereas armes are in a degree of excellencie and necessitie, the Prince and they of his bloud should make great esteeme of them which make profession. of the most excellent and necessary profession
of his estate. He could no more draw it but against the English,
the French and the Burgundians were in the way of an accord.

The Dutchesse of Burgundy,Duches of Bourgundy drawes her husband to the treatie of Arras. Infanta of Portugall, a good
Frenchwoman, was the cheef instrument. She tould the Duke
that he should be generally blamed, if he refused a peace offered
with honor and profit, that indiscretion would not excuse
the repentance of so preiudiciall a refusall. She drew the heart of
this Prince to her intention, making it knowne that burning iron
is not soner quencht in water, then the heat of coller and reuenge
is lost by the perswasion of a milde and moderate spirit, and that
nothing is vnpossible to Princesses of courage, when as their vnderstanding
hath power ouer their husbands.The effects are (...) they (...) good to good and bad to bad. Tamerl^nes wife flaid him long f^^m making warre against Buazet, but being incensed by an iniurious wish which hee had made, shee did animate her husband by an extreame fury against him. Chalcondylas.
By her perswasions the Duke yeelded vnto the Kings youth
the blowe which he had caused to be giuen being Dauphin, and
the excesse of his offence to the greatnes and maiesty of the King,
considering that forgetfulnes is an Antidote against the deadly
poyson of Iniuries, which may ruine the soule when it doth too
egerly seeke reuenge, and that it is a great folly to continue immortall
hatred amongst mortall men.Reuenge continues iniuries and makes them hereditarie. A strange distemperature of men. Quid iuuat tanquam in aeternam genitos, it is indicere breuisfimam aetatem dissipare? Sen. libr. 3. De ira. What doth it auaile to make hatred eternal, and to leade a short life.
The Counsell of Basil imployed it selfe, seeing that whiles France
was not in peace, Christendome should be still in trouble; They
sent two Cardinals to mediate this peace, and to exhort the Kings of
France and England and the Duke of Burgundy to cause their discords
to cease and to accord their wils for the defence of the Church;
To strayne their courages and tackle against the force of the winds
that did shake that vessell; that they should haue pitty of themselues
and of their subiects. The English growing obstinate not to leaue
any thing had no part of this peace. There is nothing so difficult in
a Prince as restitution; they left the Dutchies of Guienne and NormandyKing Charles the seuenth offered to the K. of England the Dutchies of Normandy and Guienne, to hold them by homage of the Kings of Fra^ce as soueraignes, and vpon such conditions as the Kings of England his Aneectors had enioyed them in the beginning.
to the King of England to quite the rest; but the prosperity
of his affaires doth preiudice him of the possession, and the desire to
continue a reueng trouble the soules of so many persons, as reason
had no more commaund,Wilfulnes of the English. opinion held the scepter. A Royalty
endures no equall.
The great God of peace, who is all spirit, all light, all eye, all
seeing, all hearing, allTreaties of peace are concluded when as men hold them broken and impossible: they bee the effects of the eternall prouidence of that great God whom Clement Alexandrious cals (...), totus mens, totus lu^ totus oculus, all minde, all light, all eye. knowing, inspir'd the hearts of these two
Princes with the holy resolution of Concord, and a ful forgetfulnes
of iniuries, so as the Duke seeing the King of England too
difficult made his treaty apart.
They contented in euery degree the interests both of dead
and liuing. The Kinge transported to the Duke of Burgundy the
Townes vpon the riuer of Somme, whereof mention shall be often
made, st. Quintin, Corbie, Amiens, Abbeuille, and others,
vpon condition to redeeme them for the summe of foure hundreth
thousand old Crownes of gould. The marriage of the Earle of
Charolois and of Catharin the Kings Daughter, was the seale
of this treaty.The marriage of the Earle of Charolois with the Kings Daughter was the seale of this treaty, hee was then but two yeares old, and when he come to age he married isabel of Bourbon. The Lady Catherine who was promised dyed at eighteene yeares of age, the 28. of Iuly and was interred at Brusseis in S. Gould.
Charles Duke of Bourbon, and Arthur Duke of Brittany with
the Earle of Richmond Constable of France craued pardon of the
Duke of Burgundy for the death of his father, in the name of King
Charles the vij. It is a cruel thing when he must take a Law from his
inferior, but the good of a peace, and the necessity of the Kings
affaires forced him from all these formalities: without this satisfaction
a peace had not bene made, and it was reason that he
which had done the harme should shew some repentance, and
serue as a table in the history of France, that a Prince which wants
piety towards God and Iustice towards men, falls alwayes into
He that hath pietie, and iustice for the guide of his actions frees himselfe happily from confusion in all sorts of affaires. These bee the glorious titles which Demetrius purchased (...), religious to the gods, and Iust to men. confusion. The Duke said that he pardoned him for the loue of
God, promising him to be his friend, enemy to his enemies, and to
renounce the aliance of England, and the deputies of the Councell
dispenst him of the oath which he had made, not to treat without
the King of England.
This happie and memorable peace,Peace of Arras. sworne the 24. of Nouember
1435. was followed with great blessings for the French, and
great ruines for the English. This was the Comet which threatned
their ruine in France, and which brought the Duke of Bedford vnto
his graue.Death of the Duke of Bedford Regent in France for the English. With the like griefe six dayes after the treatyIsabel of Bauaria contemned of the English and Bourgundian, for whom shee had ^anded her selfe against her sonne dyed at S. Paul house the last of September 1435. she was carried by the Riuer of Seine to S. Dennis, and buried without pomp. Her tombe was built in the same place where her husbands was, and her portrait is yet to bee s^ene in the window of that Chappell. dyed that
old malicious woman the Queene mother, stepmother to the king
and Realme. She wanted meanes to liue before her death, for being
no more assisted by the Duke of Bourgundy, the Duke of Bedford
caused her to fast vpon dayes which were not commanded to
be fasted, lying in Saint Paule house. She had alwaies liued full
of honors and affayres, and now she dyes plunged in miseries and
contempts.
The reduction of Paris was the fruit of the peace, she opened
her gates vnto the King,Reduction of Paris. which shee had shut against him, for
the loue of the Duke of Bourgundy, for she hath dealt with friendships
as with flowers, the new haue alwaies beene most pleasing
vnto her.The King was at Montpelier when Paris was reduc'd. TheThe English were chased out of Paris the 27. of February 1436. where they had entred in the yeere 1420. English depart, the Lillies flourish, and the Kings
will, with the lawes of the Realme are honored there. The King
made his entry, and was receiued as victorious of his enemies by
his valor, and of himselfe by his clemencie, forgetting so many iniuries
whereby the people had incensed him.
Here I seeke the Dauphin and the Historie doth not showe me
him,1437. although it be credible that the father did not forget to haue
him seene in this great occasion in his capitall Citie, no more
then at the assembly of the estates which he called at Orleans. But
I finde him on horsebacke at the age of fourteene yeares, and commanding
the Kings armie before Monstreau Faut-Yonne. Hee tooke
the towne by assault, and the Castle by composition, and made so
good warre with the English that were within it, as they gaue him
thankes in the Kings presence, confessing that hee had giuen them
cause, in admiring his valor, to commend his bounty, to the which
they were bound for their liuesA Prince which saues his life whom he may kil, cannot do any thing that brings him sooner to the height of glory and reputation, nec vlla re propius homines ad deum accedunt quam salute hominibus danda. Cic. Neither is there any thing which makes me^ liker vnto Gods, then by giuing life vnto men..

This first beginning applauded by some old Knights, flattering
this yong Alexander, who beganne to bee discontented for that
his father left him no worke to doe, made him to conceiue better
of himselfe then hee ought. For such flattering opinionsFlattery doth so transport young Princes with a good opinion of what they are, or should be, as it is easily conuerted into presumption, and admits no counsell nor conduct. are fruitlesse
sproutes, and vnprofitable leaues which grow too fast in these
yong plants and in the end kils them.
The Father who had made him Captaine so soon, repented as suddainely,
for he beganne to make showe that hee was not borne to
follow but to goe before. Martin Gouge Bishop of Cleremont,
Christopher of Harcourt, and the Lord of Chaumont make him beleeue
that his valor and courage would not suffer him to stay there,
that the more he should eleuate his trumpet of fame, the farther it
should bee heard: that he could not beginne any exercise of glorie
and reputation toAlexander at 16. yeares of age defeated the Megariens, and was at the battell of Cheronea; wherefore Demosthenes called him child. Hannibal was but eleuen yeares old when hee made open professio^ of armes. Wee must obserue saith Phil. de Commines That all men which haue don gret matters haue begunne very yong. Warre is a science which is not learned by discourse. It is a troublesome practise for him that hath not accustomed it from his youth. Paul: Emil. soone: and that he should not attend vntill that
fortune tooke him by the hand to lead him to the Empire of men,
but he should goe and meete her.
These Councellers were spirits that were not capable to command,
nor to be commanded, and which could not liue vnder that
great rigor of the Kings authoritie,Bad counsell giuen to Lewis. who knowing his humors allowed
him not what he desired, and made him giue eare to such
as found no other course for their greatnes; and who assured him
that there was no other way for his rising then to absent himselfe
from the presence of his father. An aduise which could not bee
commended, but by such to whom all wickednes is commendable.
For of badde counsels, such as was neuer giuen by men that were
Integrity, or fidelitie, sufficiencie or wisedome, are the two principall qualities of good counsellors: they add a third which depends of the precedent, to haue his heart free from passion and priuate interest. wise, discreete, and without any priuate interest (three rare qualities,
but necessarie for him that takes vpon him to counsel another)
the worst and most pernicious is that which deuides the Sonne from
the Father, and withdrawes him from the dutie wherewith hee is
bound by the lawes of nature and religionThe commandement of the Childrens dutie was halfe written in the first table, which regards Gods right, and halfe in the second table, wherein are comm^ndements which concerne our Neighbours, as beeing partly diuine and partly humane., nothing beeing able
to extinguish this bond, free this seruitude, nor dispence him
from the obedience due to the fathers commandements, how seuere
and difficult so euer.
The Duke of Bourbon,1411. who would make his profit of this diuision
betwixt the father and the sonne,Charles Duke of Bourbon. and who was discontented
to see the King contemne and reiect the Princes, to fauour
priuate men, practised this diuision. The Dauphin, who was bred
vp in the Castle of Loches, vnder the charge of Iohn Earle of
MarchThe Earle of March was gouernour to the Dauphin. He wrought meanes to get out of his hands and to bee at libertie. They said then that King Charles should not haue married him so soone to entreat him like a child., saw him carried away by the bastard of Bourbon, and
was content to goe and to be ridde of his gouernor, who suffered
him to enioy conuenient libertie, thinking it vnfit to treat the
first sonne of France seuerely, being now great and married.
Hee was led to Moulins, whereas the Duke of Bourbon attended

him. Thither came the Duke of Alencon and Chabannes Earle of
Damartin, beeing incensed for that the King had called him Captaine
of Bandilieres. These were men who after the peace of Arras,
like vnto some after the treaty of BretignyWhen as treaties of peace are concluded, they must prouide for the retreat of forraine troopes, el^e they wil ouerrun the Prouinces. After the treaty of Br^tigny in the yeare 1360. the English trooopes did ouerr^n and spoile France, and defeated them that sought to stop their violenc^s at ^regnay neere to Lyon., did ouercome and
spoyle all the whole country, leauing the peasant nothing but his
shirt. There imbarked in the same ship the Earle of Vandome,
the Earle of Dunois, Bastard of Orleans, and the Lord of
Chaumont, Tremouille, Boucicaut and Prye. There resolution
was not to yeelde him vntill that an order were setled in
France, the Princes in Authoritie, and the malecontents in fauour.
If their intention had appeared in her true and naturall forme,
her deformitie had displeased all the world, for it was nothing but
a meere conspiracie of great men, who abusing the youth of this
Prince, ingaged him in an vnnaturall ingratitude, and thought to
make him greater then eyther nature or God himselfe had yet ordained,
that vnder his shadowHe that wil enioy the shadow of his Prince must reioyce at his greatnes, so as it be not raised vppon a foundation of Iniustice and ingratitude., they might liue at their ease, and
make their profit of the publicke ruines. To giue some forme to
this illusion, they deuise supposed members, and giue it for a face
theAll deformities and imperfections are so foule being seene bare, as like vnto them that haue both their armes and ^egs cut off make other of Iron^ or wood, euen so they that haue had deseignes do couer them with some goodly pretext. maske of reformation of disorders, protesting that they had
no other intention but to settle the Dauphin, to the end that all
things might bee done by his authoritie, with the aduise of the
Princes of bloud.
They had sought to imbarke the Duke of Bourgundy with them,Duke of Burgundy refuse to enter into the league.
but he who would not reuiue a quarrell, if not altogether quencht,
yet at the least smothered: And knowing the folly of this designe,
sent them word that he would liue in peace, and that at the end
of the course whereinto they were entred, there was an ineuitable
downefallof rash designes we may easily foretell the^ vnfortunate euents* and hopes whcih haue vniust foundations cannot long continue.: That they should doe wisely to returne into the way
which they had left, for that they more they went into this, the
more they should wander: that of all the miseries that would fall
abundantly vpon them, they should not beHe that is the cause of his owne misery hath small reason to complaine and few men pitty him. lamented of any, for
that they were knowne to bee the causers: That although there
were some disorder in the state, yet could it not be so great as that
which should grow by this diuision, and France should be little beholding
for her help to those which had made her so sicke to cure
herIt is a desperatee cure when as healt^ must be beholding to siicknes and peace to Ciuil warre.; for that neither the disordred gouernement of affayres, nor
the vaiust commandement of the Prince would not cause so many
ruines and inconueniences as disobedience and rebellionRuines and miseries grow not by them that command but by such as obey. Obedience hath made Estates to prosper and florish vnder vniust and ti^ranous comm^n ^ement^. The common weale of Spa^ta was happy, not for that their Kings commanded wel, but for that this subiects obeyed well. Theopompus.: That
for his part he could not seperate himselfe from the King his Lord,
without forsaking himselfe: That his armes and forces were alwaies
at the Dauphins commandement, so as his designes were
not disauowed, and that he would more willingly employ himselfe
to bring him to his fathers presence then to withdraw him.

The Princes of this league were very sorrie for this declaration:
For they considered that if they could haue kindled a hatred betwixt
these two houses, they would haue beene more violent, and
yet they made this yong Prince beleeue, by reasons, fuller of oftentations
then truth,Letters of Lewis to the good Townes. that all would doe well. They dissembled the
In enterprises of (...) ^onsi^er the ground and iustice of the cause, rather (...) the issu^ and successe. The Romans had this glory neuer to enter into it wrongfully. They did not so muc^ glory saith Titus Liuius in the prosperous successe as to hau^ begu^ it vppon a reasonab^e and lawfull occasion. Iniustice of this warre, and flatter him with sweet hopes of the euent:
They write letters in his name to the townes of Auuergne,
and other prouinces whereas they thought these designes would
be well liked of, and this Innouation pleasing.
But they were reeeiued of the wise with more amazement for
this defection, then desired to adhere vnto them, and although
there be no cause so bad but it findes some refuge, and some one
to fauour it, and that which is held a crimeAll the actions of men are taken by two ends, some commend them others blame them, Coesar is commended for that he attempt^d against the liberty of Rome. Brutus i^ blamed who opposed himself to his deseignes to reuenge his contries libert^es. Some blame Cateline for that hee would haue done, and others commend Caesar for that hee did. in some is commended
by others, as a publique seruice, yet all the townes did abhor
this rebellion. They held it impossible that such a diuision could
prosper, and that France would bee made a Theatre of a new Tragedie:
that the reasons, whereof they did ground it, were like vnto
false stones which haue some transparant shining like vnto fire, but
they haue neither the vertue nor the hardnes.
They found not any spirit well setled that would follow them, but
euery man stopt his eares at the first brute, as if they had been inchantments. All were amasedAn vniust and rash enterprise strikes horror into good men, who foresee the miserable euents at the ignorant vulgar holds them fauorable they must stop their cares to their first pr^positions, for if they enter into the soule (...) it with confusion* Claudendae sunt aures malis voelbus et quidem p. imis. Nam cum initium fecerunt admissaeque sunt p^us audent. Sen. at their boldnes, and euery man said
that fury would draw these wilde Bores into the toyle, and that the
Foxes craft would not free them from the snare.
The Nobility of Auuergne giue them to vnderstand, that if
the Kinge came into the Country,The declaration of the nob^lity of Auuerg^e. they could doe no lesse then to
open their gates. This name of Kinge, and such a King against
wh^ they could not arme but the reliques of his victories who had
made so great proofes of his valor and courage, made the most
mutinous to tremble:A Prince whose great actions purchased the name of valiant and wise is alwaies feared and respected. This authority disperseth all kind of factions and conspiracies when as carelesnes and contempt giues them life, It was an Anuill which would weare all
hammers. Euery man said vnto the Dauphin I am yours without
exception, reseruing my duty to the Kings seruice.
The King could not yet dispatch his affaires with the English. 
The Kinge of England had failed of the assignation made on the
first day of May at S. Omer,The King armes against the Dauphin. to consider of a peace and made himselfe
be sought vnto. This trouble could not be but to the profit of
the enemies of France. He resolued to goe himselfe against this
conspiracy, before that time and the Innouation, the auncient
IdolCaesar blamed the Gaules for a curious de^i^e of Inouations. They are said he, very inconstant in their opinions and most commonly desire change. of the French, had giuen it more force. Hauing fortified the
frontiers against the English he aduertised his sonne of his duty,
but good wordes serue but as oyle to feede the lampe of this
yong Princes desires.
He must vse sharper tearmes to force obedience,Good wordes are of no force, to haue a difficult commandement ^bserued. He that wil be obeyed in rigorous things must vse seueritie and authoritie. So saies Mach^auel in the third of his Discourses. an vnpleasing

commaund requires not milde speches. He came to Poietiers,
he sent to the Duke of Bourbon to deliuer him his sonne, and to
the Duke of Alencon to yeeld him his Townes of Niort and St.
Maixant, and to both of them to yeeld an account of those combustions,
to come vnto him, and to call their fidellity vnto them.
They were farre of, this storme could not hurt them. They were
no Children to be afraid of this thunder.
The Duke of Bourbon would not obey at the first summons
without caution for his obedience. He had rather haue his absence
To flie iudgement is to confesse the fault, but oftentimes the innoc^nt teach no defence against the persecution of one more mightie, but absence. a witnesse against him, then repent him for his presence. He had
a good pawne in his possession, he had Townes and Subiectes
which had sworne to follow his fortune, thinking that the war
being betwixt the Father and the Sonne, all that were actors in
it should gaine by it, at the least they should be free from danger;
for the Fathers bounty would refuse nothing to his Sons humility,
and that oftentimes fidelity was worse rewarded thenThere haue beene ages seene so full of confusion, as they must haue done ill to reap good. If vertue ^ere not of it selfe a great reco^pence to good men, they mig^t haue some reason to repent themselues of doing well, when as their cond^tion is infe^iour to that of the wicked. rebellion.
The Duke of Alencon thought he should alwaies haue Niort
and St. Maixant to make his peace. He had sent la Roche to defend
the Castell of St. Maixant,S. Maixan taken by the King. but the Towne intrencht it selfe and
put it selfe in armes against him. It was presently assisted with
the kinges forces, who sent the Admirall Coitiui and la Varenne
Sene^hall of Poictou thither. The Castell being forced, la Roche
escaped making a shewe to goe for succors, and the Captaines
which he left within it were hanged.
The Kinges forces attempted not any Towne, but they took
it.A Prince that hath to deale with his subiects, performes great matters in time, how diff^cult soeuer. Some endured the Cannon and were spoiled, Rion and Aigues
perces opened their gates at the first summons. Clermont and Mont-Ferrand,
who had neuer giuen eare to the perswasion of the Princes
of the league, receiued the King.
The Estates of the Country assemble at Clermont to order this
diuision,Estates assembled at Clermont. which separating the sonne from the father, diuided one
heart into two. The King thinking it fit that a busines of that importance,
which concerned the safety of them all, should be consulted
of by many,Although that a soueraigne Prince may resolue of any thing of his own motion, yet it is fit hee should commun cate it. So Augustus made a pleasing sweet medl^y, as Dion sait^, of a Monarchie and a popular state. hee appointed this assembly. There they represented
freely the ruines which threatned the Realme, and that
the English had occasion to mocke at the boldnes of the Princes
of the bloud, which had attempted against the head of their house,
and banded the Sonne against the Father. That it was fit euery man
should returne to his dutie, the King by the way of his bounty, and
clemencie, to them that had offended him; by that of iustice to his
estate, to serueTo raign: is to serue. Tiberius comprhend^d the dutie of a Prince in three words, and three kinds of subiects. A good Prince who is ordained for the safety of his subiects, must serue the Senat, serue his subiects in generall, and serue euery priuate man. To serue the Senate is to follow their Councell: to serue all, is to procure the publike good: and to serue euery man, is to do him iustice that demands it. the which hee was ordained of God, as well as
to command: and the Princes by that of obedience and repentance,
with amendment for their faults, that, although the iustest
cause to arme against the Prince were vniust, yet the King should
consider that a great Prince should apprehend nothing more then
to see his subiects ill satisfiedA priuate man is pleased in satisfying himselfe, but the condition of a Prince is bound to content his subiects, and to sa^isfi^ such as are malecont^nt. of his actions.

These reasons pierst the harts of the most distracted. The Princes
fearing to be abandoned,Euery one desires grace of the King. their partie growing weake and decreasing
dayly, they sued for grace vnto the King: Hee offered it them
by the Earle of Eu, who did negotiate their accord, and did perswade
them to goe to Clermont to receiue his commandement:
wherevnto they yeelded, so as they might bee assured. The King
was so good as he gloried to be vndeseruedly offended, by men
who reduced to their duties very profitable; hee gaue a pasport
for the Duke of Bourbon and Alencon, but not for Tremouille,
Chaumont, nor Prye, whom hee held to bee the Authors of this
trouble, and of the assembly at Noion.An assembly at Noion of the Duke of Alencon, Anthony of Chaban^s Earle of Dampmartin, Peter of Am^oise Lord of Chaumont, Iohn de la Roche, Seneshall of Poictou, and of the Lord of Trem^uille. They complaine that
they are abandoned, and inflame the bloud of this yong Prince,
in such sort as seeing the Dukes of Bourbon and Alencon, returne
to conduct him to Clermont, hee swore that hee would not goe,
A Prince must haue care of them that haue followed him. Monstrelet vppon this occasion writes those words. When the Daup^in vnderstood it, hee said vnto the Duke of Bourbon, My faire Gossip, you haue no thankes to tell how the matter was concluded, and that the King had not pardoned them of my houshold. but would seeke to doe worse.
When the King saw that he came not, that the prefixed day was
past, and that the English, who besieged Harfleu, called him into
Normandie, hee would temporise no longer, but suffered his Armie
to spoile the Duke of Bourbons Countrie. His foreward did
besiege and take Vichy. Cusset and Varennes yeelded. The whole
countrie of Rouanna obayed: Clermont and Mont-Ferrant persisted
in their fidelitie, from the which no Towne may in any sort
separateHe cannot be held faithfull, that for any respect w^atsosoeue^ hath ceased to bee so. Senec. it selfe, but it presently looseth the glorious title of
faithfull.
The wilfulnes of this Prince ruined the countrey, euery man
found his desseigne vniust, and the affection he bare vnto his seruants
vniust, the consideration of whom should bee of more force
then that of the publicke good, for the which they might sometimes
straine Iustice it selfe.To obserue Iustice in great ma^te^s, they must sometimes leau it in lesser. Wherefore the Duke of Bourbon and
Alenccon perswaded him to submit this affection to the Kings will,
and the interest of his seruants to his discretion, intreating the
Earle of Eu to bee a meanes that the king would be pleased that
might bee done at Cusset, which was not performed at Clermont.
The King grants it:The Da^phin restored to fauour. They come, and present themselues vnto
him, bending their knees thrice vnto the ground before they approch,
beseeching him to pardon them. This humilitieHumilitie only pleades for great pe^sons. Monstrelet speakes in this sort of this pardon. Being come into the chamber where the King was, they kneeled thrice before they came vnto him, and at the third they intreated him with great humilitie to pardon them his indignation. did wipe
out of the kings heart the feeling of such sensible offences. Hee
imbraced them, and said vnto the Dauphin, Lewis you are welcome,
you haue stayed long: goe and rest you, we will talke to morrow
with you.
But hee protracted no time to reprehend the Duke of Bourbon,Repreh^nsion of the D. of Bourbon.
drawing him a partGreat men will be praised in publike and reprehended in secret. he put him in minde of his faults, hee
notes him the place and the number, being fiue, hee reprocheth
vnto him the iniustice and indiscretion of a designe which sought
to put the father vnder the sonnes gouernment; adding that if that

loue and respect of some did not withhold him, hee would make
him feele his displeasure.
What could hee answere? The very feeling of his fault did
presse him. The offender must yeeld to the iustice, and the Innocent
to the force of the stronger. He renues all the vowes of his
obedience, and affection, and submits his will vnto the kings, hee
commends his bountie, so apparant by the number of his offences,
and so necessarie for them that had offended, whose preseruation
did serue as an increase to his glorie, and a trophee to his
clemencieThey to whome the Prince giues life, liue not but to the glorie of his clemencie..
The next day the Dauphin presents himselfe vnto the king,
who did not entreat him as nurses doe children which flatter
them when they fall. Hee did let him vnderstand that his fall
had carried him to the ineuitable ruine of his honour and fortune,
if the bountie of a father had not as much will to retire him, as
the iustice of a king had reason to punish him: In a word, he said
he would cease to be a good father vnto him, if hee did not begin
to be a better sonneHee that is good must striue to be bette^, for when hee doth not begin to g^ow bet^er, the^ he ends to be good.: and that he desired not to be held good, for
not punishing the bad.
The Dauphin assuring himselfe of his fathers bountie and clemencie
speakes no more but for his seruants,The Dauphin will not leaue his seruants to whom safe conducts
had beene refused. The king declared that they had made
themselues vnworthy of his grace; that they had deserued to bee
made an example to others, as the authors of this rebellion, which
had made the wicked impudent, and brought good men to despaire:
Yet there must bee a distinctionA Citizen of Sparta (...) Ch^rilaus highly co^mended for (...) bounty. And how, s^id hee, can hee bee good, seeing hee is not seuere vnto the wicked. It is as great crueltie to pardon all the world, as not to pardon any. Senec. made betwixt the effects
of clemencie and bountie, that for their punishment he was contented
not to see them, and that they should retire themselues vnto
their houses.
The Dauphin held firme against these torrents of his fathers choller,
and lets him know that if there be no grace for his seruants, he desires
not any for himselfe. From this opinionOpinion is the falling sicknes of the minde: that is the Caue which co^taines the wind^ f^om whence the tempests of the minde come, that is to say, disordinate passions. which is they Caue
from whence the windes issue which torment his soule: or rather
from the impression which his seruants had giuen him, that in being
resolute he should haue whatsoeuer hee desired,Opinion causeth terrible motions in the soule. he drew this
yong and rash speech: I must then my Lord returne, for so I haue
promised. To whom the King answered coldly. Lewis goe if you
will, the gates are open for you, and if they were not wide enough I would
cause sixteene or twenty fadome of the wall to be beaten downe, to make
you a greater passage: I am your father, your will depends vppon mine.
The fathers will i^ soueraigne ouer that of the Sonne. The power of the Father was in old time absosolute among the Romans, Persians, and Gaules ouer the liues, deaths, goods, libertie, actions, and honor of their children. I finde it very strange, that you haue ingaged your word without
knowing mine, But it imports not: The house of France by the grace of
God is not so vnfurnished of Princes, as it hath not some that will shew
more affection then you haue done to maintaine her greatnes and
honor.
This yong Prince desired rather to bee held a bad Sonne then
a bad master.Wilfulnes of the Dauphin. Wee must beleeue that these clouds did not breake
without some raine, and that this fire of choller, and loue, was

not quencht without teares. The Duke of Bourbon, who knew how
to distinguishKings are offended when the subiects wil haue their children march equally with them. The high Priests in the beginning of the yeare made publike prayers for the health and prosp^ritie of the Emperor. Tiberius blamed the^ sharply, for that they had added the names of Nero and Drusus his successors, hearing it impatiently to see you^h march equall with his age. Aequam adolescentes Senectae suae impatienter indoluit. Tacit. betwixt the authoritie of the one, and the age of
the other, and would not that there should remaine any conceit
in the Kings minde, that this wilfulnes was supported by his Councell,
at the same time tooke the oath of Allegeance, promising to
leaue the Dauphin, and all intelligences and leagues contrarie to
his Maiesties seruice.
The Dauphin could doe no lesse then apply himselfe to the obedience
and humilitie which God and Nature had ordained him.He humbles himselfe.
The King kept him neere him, changed all his officers, except
his Confessor and his Cooke, set good gards about him, that
no bad thing might enter into his eares,Hearing is the entrie vnto the Soule, good or bad Counsells haue no other passage. When the gardes of these gates are wonne they triumph ouer the sort. Ad summam sapiens eris fi clauseris ^ures, quibus ceram parum oft obdere, Firmiori spissamento opus est, quam vsum in sociis Vlissem ferunt. Senec. and hee caused them
to be obserued that came neere him, to the end hee might call
them to an account for the bad Impressions they gaue him.
He gaue him men,The King reformes the Dauphins house better knowne and recommended for their
wisedome and Integritie, then for their cunning and subtiltie,
Good men are alwaies necessarie about Princes, they must chase away factious spirits, who are more fit to disorder then to settle affaires. It is also good to haue them that are cunning and politicke, to imploy them against deceiuers. commanding them to haue a care of this yong Prince, who was
of a good disposition, but very tractable, and might easily bee diuerted.
Many vitious inclinations creepe into mens mindes,
whereof wee must no more blame Nature, then the Vine, when
as the Wine growes sower, or Iron when it rusts. How good
soeuer the disposition be, it corrupts and is spoiled if it be not entertained,
and education doth alwaies frame men after her owne
fashion, notwithstanding any lets of Nature.
They that are about this Prince,Hee is watcht least he fall. by the Kings commandement,
keepe him so short, as notwithstanding that Will be a prerogatiue
of humane libertie,The will which is in her libertie, and depends onely on the power of reason, a^mes at things which are desirable and to be affected. The name of vertue among the Grecians came from that of desire, for that it is properly and chiefly to be desired. hee durst not will any thing contrarie to his
dutie; And for that the Dukes of Alencon and Bourbon had promised
by the treatie to yeelde vp vnto the King the places which
they held, they hauing no other securitie but the Kings word, and
clemencie, the Armie was not dismist before that all was executed:
Which beeing done a Peace was proclaimed, and this reuolt
(which they called the Praguerie) supprest in lesse then nine
monthes.
The Dauphin remained still neere the King, he serued him, and
followed him in diuers occasions. It was an incomparable happines
It is a great contentment for a King to come to that age to fashion his successor, and to make him partaker of his experience and authoritie. for him, to see his way made vnto the Crowne, and to learne
how to liue vnder so good a father.Parts which frame a Prince. The practise of warre vnder the
conduct and instruction of so valiant a Captaine, and so wise a
King, the essentiall parts which frame a Prince, counsell, force, reputation,
The same things which support the frame of an Estate, as Councell, force, and reputation, are the essentiall parts which fashion a Prince. Councell teacheth him the true formes how to raigne well; force consists in the (...) of six conditions which make him mighty, the which are, to to haue his estate louing great, armed, rich and setled. Reputation is the glorious brute and of that efficacie as opinion giues it credit and respect amo^g other Potentates. and the instruments to raigne, which be, first knowledge,
to looke into the nature of subiects; secondly, wisedome to giue

them fit lawes; thirdly order of armes; fourthly the art to make
warre; fiftly, industrie to maintaine peace; sixtly, diligence to
foresee accidents; seuenthly, meanes to amplisie his Empire;
eighthly, iudgement to know the iealousies and interests of States;
ninthly, dexteritie to temporise inconuenients; tenthly, quicknes
to resolue; eleuenthly, celeritie to execute; twelfthly, constancie
in matters resolued; thirteenthly, force in aduersitie; foureenthly,
moderation in prosperitie; fifteenthly, and so firme a knowledge of
diuine things, that superstition make him not fearefull, nor libertie
rash.
He led him to the siege of Pontoise, the Accademie of the most
memorable exploits which had bin seen in those times.Siege of Pontoise. The English
hauing indiscreetlyEue^y man commits errors, the Fre^ch haue, and the English also in the deciding of their affaires. King Iohn refused the offer which the Prince of Wales made him, to yeeld vp all which he had conquered, and the spoile. Hee would beside al this haue the Prince and foure of the chiefe Noblemen of his Armie yeeld at his discretion. This refusall was followed with the losse of a battell, and the taking of the King. King Charles offered the English in the conf^rence at Calais, to leaue them all that they held, in doing him h^mage, they refused it, and had neither the one nor the other. refused the kings offers, who left them the
quiet possession of that which they held in France, reseruing onely
the soueraigntie; were declared enemies to all parts. Paris beeing
freed from their command, desired to see them out of Pontoise,
and therefore they supplied the king with money to expell them.
Behold an armie of twelue thousand men before Pontoise, good
souldiars, and inured to dangers, who could both incounter, and
passe them without feare, and knew better how to dye, then to kill,
the best and onely part of valour.
The approches to Pontoise were not so well garded, but Talbot
enters and relieuesTalbot releeues Pontoise. it both with men and victuals. The Duke of
Yorke, Lieutenant Generall to the King of England, presents himselfe
at Cenery and Hotonuille with 8000. men. He sent a Herald
vnto the King to signifie vnto him, that either he should accept of
a Battell, or raise his siege. In this first furie of the French, there
was not any one but said that it were better to eate rootesPerseuerance forceth places, Caesars souldiours beeing before Duras, they had no bread but a root called (...), they wi^hin the town^ laught at the (...) of the be (...), being so ill furnished. But they told them, that as long as they found such rootes about Duras (whereof t^ere were (...)) they would not dislodge. and
die, then to raise the siege. But the King would not hazard any
thing.
The riuer was betwixt both Armies, the King caused the bridge
at Beaumont to bee garded, the onely conuenient passage for the
enemies Armie. The Duke of Yorke had small boates to passe ouer
his souldiors beneath the bridge towards the Abbey, yet with such
difficultie as ten men had beene able to hinder a hundred. But the
order was so great, and the night so fauourable, as the Armie was
in a manner all past before the Sentinels had giuen the alarum. A
happie passage, and which strooke such an amazement into the
Kings Armie, as the Captaines were more busied to wonder
how the English had past, then to keepe the rest from passingA (...) and admiration are weake Armes to stay as enemie. Tit. Lin. obserues how the Romans passe a riuer whilest that the Spa^iards wonder and consult what they should doe. Qui tumultum iniicere (...) in ipso (...). Tit. Li^. who might haue caused a disorder in the very passage of the riuer..

from constreining him,The King raiseth the siege. seeing there was a riuer betwixt both. He
wanted not-courage, but iudgement to embrace the occasion and
opportunity.Agisilaus being demanded what parls made the commander of an Army excellent and brauc: hee answered, courage against his enemies, and counsell* with iudgement in occasions that a^e offered. He dislodged from Maubuisson, leauing Charles of
An^on and the Admirall of Cottiuy with 2000. men in the fort of St.
Martin, and so retires to Poisy. The Duke of York followes him,
thinking to ingage him to fight, but the King wil not change his
resolution, which was not to giue a battell but to take Pontoise.When as the Duke of York sent to offer battaile vnto the King, hee made no other answer but that seeing hee had such a desire to fight, he should haue (...) belly full and sooner then he looked for.
The Duke of Yorke passeth at Mante to victuall and refresh the
besieged. The King remained, scorned by the English, and contemned
by the Parisians, who repent themselues for the mony they had
giuen him, vnprofitably, for the charges of this enterprise. The greatest
of his Court murmured, for that he had retired so vnseasonably.
He sees his reputation so blemished as he resolues to take the
place, or to dye there: he returnes thither within ten dayes after,
causeth the Towne to be battered in three places, and a breach being
made goes himselfe to the assault, hazarding all for all. He was
forced to play the soldier to be a King: vnles he would of a King
become a soldier, and try how insupportable repentance is, not to
haue done, in an opportunity, that which can no more bee done
when it is past, and how shee scornes at those ouerweaning wits,
which think in all places to ioyne authority to wisdome, imparting
nothing to necessity. The KingesNecessity bindes a Prince to cast ^imselfe int^ dangers. In the wa^re which the Emperor Albert of Austria had against the (...), they demanded of him to whom he would giue the charge of his army: he answered. If any other then my selfe were your Captaine you would no more call me Archduke of Austria AEneas Silu. ^ib. 3. de (...). affaires were not in such termes
as he should be ashamed to be whereas the Cannon might glance
by his crowne,Charles bragd of the wou^ds that he had^receiued in the war and shewed them, Timoth^us an Athenian Captaine said, I was ashamed before S^mon that an arrow came from the walls and fell neer vnto me, for that I had aduanced farther then was fit for a commander of an Army Plut: nor to trouble his thoughtes to consider how hee
should escape out of danger, nor how much it did import that hee
should escape.
The besieged cannot withstand the fury of the assault,Pontosse tak^n by assault. they enter,
they kill the enemies and saue the Cittizen, they heare not those
cruell wordes, let the friend perish with the enemy. Those whom the
fury of armes could distinguish and know for French were saued,
and the English slaine: But it is hard in these encounters, (...)
with fury, and foming with reuenge, to obserue any Image of iustice
in sparing his friend or his host.(...) that great Capta^ne who neuer slew any one vanquished, held him a wicked men, how good a Citizen soeuer that did not spare his friend or his hoste..
They speak of God when they go to a charge or an assault, they recommend
them selues vnto him, they pray vnto him, and they make
vowes. At their returne they speake no more of him then if he had
not beene present. But the first thing and the first action which the
King did at his entry, was to giue God thanks, acknowledging him
the sole author of this victory,The glory of (...) belongs to the God of Batte^^s* The King of france haue alwaies bene carefull of this duty. Phillip Angust^^: after the Battell of Bouines caused the Church of our ^ady of victory to be built (...) vnto Senl^s. K. Lewis the twelfth built a Chappel wheras he won the Battel of Ghiaradadda, vnder the name of St. Marie of victory. King Francis the 1. did the like vpon the place of battel wheras he defeated the Suisses at s. Dona^. without whom he had beene as
much troubled with his owne Subiects, as with the enemy: For the
Duke of Bourgundy was not so well reconciled as he desired not to
raise the greatnes of his house vpon the ruines of the Kings affaires

and the greatest of the Realme had already made secret assemblies
to reforme the disorders whereof euery one had complayned.
He assembled all the Princes,The King rewards his ser^ants. Noblemen and Captaines, he commended
them that had done well,After a victory a Prince must take knowledge of such as haue done him good seruice, honor and recompence valor and blame cowardize. Luce orta (saith Liui. in his 6. Booke) vocatis clafico ad concilium, mili tibus, Manlius primam ob virtutem Jaudatus donatusque. and thanked the^ for the fidelity
and proofes which they had showne, he made many knightes, and
gaue to the Lord of I^longe the place of marshall of France, and a
pension to him that entred first into Pontoise by the breach. If the
History knew his name she would giue him a murall Crowne, and
would doe him the like honor as the Parthians did to him that
mounted first vpon the walls of Seleucia.The names of such as go to apparant dangers for the publicke safety, should not be forgotten in a history, and yet they remaine vnknowne, (...) they be not noted by some other quality then a simple soldier. Plutarch remembers the name of Surena, who first sealed the wall of the great Citty Seleucia, the reason is for that hee was the second among the Parthians next the King..
The King led the Dauphin to Tartas, being assieged by the English,
and then to Limoges, teaching him stil that wisdome and temporising
surmount all difficulties,The Dauphin besiegeth Tartas. and that it is a more excellent
thing to settle his estate in peace then to spoile and wast his enemies
contry. With the instructions and maximes of his father, who had
giuen him in his infancy good gouernours, and in his youth good
councellors.Great Princes hauing had good maisters beeing little, and wise Counsellors being great haue effected great matters.. he made him capable of the actions of a Prince,
to command well, and to cary the commandements of the King
his father into Languedoc, to frustrate the practise of the Earle of
Armagnac.Bastard of Armagnac fauord by Lewis the eleuenth. The BastardThis Bastard was made Admirall of France by Lewis the eleuenth who gaue him the Earledome of Comminge and the gouerment of Guienne: whereof bee disposest Iohn Duke of Bourbon his Brother in law. of this house aduertised him, that the
Earle of Armagnack treated of some alliance with the English. Ielousie
vpon such aduertisements are alwayes excusable, and there
is nothing that doth so much bind the wisedome of Princes, as to
foresee that great houses doe not ally themselues against their liking,
and transport vnto strangers the goods which should remaine
in their estates, which cannot be carried away without preiudice
vnto them. Such practises are more easily preuented then
broken when they are made.
The house of Armaignac is ancient, ritch, and mighty, in Guienne,
and her beginning is found in that of the Crowne ofD. Sancho, surnamed the great King of Naturre, hauing conquered some land in Gascogne on this side the Pyrenees gaue it vnto Garsias his sonne, Earle of Armagn^c in the yeare 1013. he made his second sonne Arnold Garcias ^arfe of Estarac, whose dissent is entred into the house of Foix and a branch of Candalle. Nauarre.
Iohn 4. Earle of Amagnac Constable of France had bought of Iohn
Duke of Bourbon the Earledome of Lisle Iourdain in the yeare.
1421. for 38000. crownes of gold, of 64. to the marke. He had
married Isabell of Nauarre: The greatnes of his house, and that of
his alliance, made him presume, during the troubles of France,
(when as euery man cast his eyes vppon the peeces of her shipwrack)
to qualifie himselfe, Prince by the grace of God, and to seeke
the allyance of the English by the marriage of his daughter. The
King, who made no difference betwixt treason and such allyances,
sent Commissioners to make the Earles processe as guilty of high
treason; hauing offended against the Lawes of FranceMarriages treated with strangers without the Kings permission, haue been dangerous for them that treates it. Valeran of Luxembourg Constable of France was disgract by King Charles the fifth, and King Charles the sixth dislik^ the treaty of the Duke of Berries daughter with the Duke of Lancaster Philistus for this reason was banished out of the estates of Denis King of Sicile which forbids
any Nobleman to make any marriage with strangers without the Princes
consent.

The King sent the Dauphin thither, who besieged Lisle Iordain
and tooke the Earle of Armagnac.Earle of Armagnac a prisoner at Lisle Iourdain. His sonne fled into Spaine, Iohn
de Meaux, second President of the Parlament of Toulouse, had heard
the Earle of Armagnac vpon his practise, and had drawne from
his owne mouth the truth of the principall points. He thought that
he should be quit for this confession,Natures wel bred are ^asily bound by fauors, they would haue cor^upted Lewis. King Charles his father giues him part of the gouernment of the estate and of his affaires, by which meanes he was drawne from thoughtes contrary to his duty and the peace of the estate. and that the President (hauing
no other force then that of Iustice) could do him no great harme,
but when hee saw himselfe a prisoner in the Dauphins power, hee
said that whatsoeuer hee had confest was against his owne conscience
and the truth, hauing onely spoken it with a desire to recouer
his goods which the King had seazed on. After hee had expiated
this offence in prison, the King restored him his liberty giuing the
Earledome of Foix for a caution. The Dauphin at his returne from
this voiage was sent into Normandy with the title of Lieftenant
Generall. But we must obserue that he was twenty yeares old before
he had any gouernment, and that the King gaue it him only to
disappoint the deseignes of such as would haue drawne him elcewhere,
and did busie themselues more then he himselfe did in the
estate wherein he was.
He chased the English from Deepe,The Dauphin take^ Deepe. and this victory did presently
carry the generosity of his courage and the happines of his conduct
throughout all the Prouinces of France, whereas nothing did
diminish the greatnes of this growing reputation, but this reason,
that being sonne to so braue a father it was not strange to see him so
valiant. The French said that the father had need of such a sonne
and the sonne had need of such a father. The King glories to haue
made him with his owne hand and to see his instructions so well
followed, he augments his authority, and praiseth his command,
and sends him into LanguedocThe Dauphin goes into Languedoc, with a thousand Lances whereas
his sword made his way. He staid not his courage at smallA Prince must flye vanity and seeke the eff^ct ^f a so^lid and true glory, nam vt ^^uitatis est in mem aucupart rumorem omnes vmbras etiam falsae gloriae consectari, sic ieiuni est animi lucem splendoremque sugientis, iustam gloriam qui est fructus verae virtutis honestissimus repudiare. Cic. (...) Pis. For as it is a lightnes to hunt after vaine f^me and all the shaddowes of falce glory, so it is a weaknes to refuse iust glory, which is the honeslest fruit of true vertue. matters,
his fall could not be but very high. As hee disdained glory of
smal price, and reputation which cost little, so he did earnestly seek
that which grew from great and goodly actions, and which were
the iust fruites of true vertue.
The English,1443. grown weake, make a truce, during the which Lewis
goes to seeke excercise without the Realme, and becomes head of
the French and English to be reuenged on those who during the
worst estate of his fathers affaires had troubled him, and to fauour
the warre of Sigismond Duke of Austria against the Suisses.The Duke of Austria had married Radigonde of France, eldest daughter to King Charles the seauenth: in fau^ur of this alliance be intreats him to succours him against the suisses.
Hee remembred that the Earle of Montbelliard had entred the
Frontiers of France toward Langres. Hee cries quittance with
him, takes and spoiles Montbelliard and giues the gouernment
to Iohn Thibergea^ captaine of his Archers: He oueruns, the Bishop
of Bassils country, for that he had maintained the party of Amide
Duke of SauoyAmidee Duke of Sauoy in the yeare 1437. retired to Repaille
into a monastery of Moncke; of S. (...); and tooke their (...), A grey gowne, a long Cloake, a grey hood, a short corne^, and a red cap vpon his hood, but vpon his gowne he car^ed a great girdle of gould, and vpon his cloak a Crosse of gould, being accompanied by tw^ty of his fauourits attired like the Monkes. He reserued vnto himselfe the title of the Duke of Sauoy and the soueraigne authority ouer his Estates. He was c^osen Pope at the Council. The election was signified vnto him the 11. of December 1439. He came to Basill the 24. of Iune. was crowned the 24. of Iuly, said his first Masse and made Cardenal^ the 27. of November. He went to hold his sea at Lausa^a 1442. who by the sufferages of the Bishops prelates
and Doctors of the Councill had beene made Pope and named

Foelix the fift, against Pope Engenius, and who before his retreate
into his Monasterie of Ripaille, had done all hee could to fauour
the English.
The Suisses seeing so mighty an enemy at their gates, attend
not vntill he did aduance, but looke which way he would turne
the head of his forces. The Lord of Ramstein receiues him at
Altkilch, a Towne which he held by engagement of the Bishop of
Basill for 12000. florens. The Nobillity of the Country comes
vnto him, and to be reuenged of the people, and to preserue their
howses, they offer him the seruice of their swords. The Armies
vsed incredible inhumanities vpon this poore people, who gaue
the name of Flears vnto the men of WarreThe souldiers who spoiled the frontiers, and the Countryes of Basill and Ferrette at diuers times were allwayes called by one name Schindern, Flears, and by mockery Armeniacken..
The Towne of Bassil knew well that the councill would draw
this storme vpon them,Good order of them of Basill. and that King Charles the seuenth would
reuenge the degradation of Eugenius the Pope: and therefore
they omitted nothing that might serue for their defence and safety:
they made a bulwarke at the Port of Spalen, and rased all that
was about the Towne which might help the besiegers: they appointed
two Bels, one for warre, and the other for fire, by the first
euery one knew whither hee should goe, by the second Churchmen
and Monkes onely were bound to runne to the fire. They
caused a proclamation to be made in the country, that whosoeuer
would bring his goods and prouision into the Towne, the Bourguemasters
would bee bound to restore it againe, or to pay the iust
price, if necessitie forced them to vse itWheras there is concord betwixt the townes and country, not onely of (...) in certaine things, but in all that (...) the common prfit, a for^aine enemie shall finde great difficultie to worke any great effects, for all conspire (...) him..
The house of Austria had cast the Apple of discord among
the Suisses. ZurichSuisses besiege was allyed to Sygismond Archduke of Austria, the
Cantons of Berne, Lucerne, Vry, Suuitz, Vnderual, and Glaris, came
to besiege Zurick, to force them to renounce this allyance. Beeing
at this siege they are aduertised that Iohn of Rechberg in the beginning
of August had surprised the Towne of Bruck, in the Country
of Ergueu, belonging to the Canton of Berne, that hee had committed
great cruelties there, and had sent the spoile by water to
Laustemberg: and the chiefe prisoners to Farnsberg. The common
feeling they had of the priuate offences of their Allies, suffers
them not to dissemble this iniurie. Hee that attempts against the
least Hamlet of this common-weale, giues an Alarum to all the
Cantons: they ranne thither as if the fire had beene in their owne
houses.The Lawe of alliance, which is that of friendship, requires that friends and allies should apprehend (...) imbrace one anothers good or larme. Their duties and interests shoul^ be common, as (...) in the ship of one-common-weale, the which suffers not any one to saue himselfe apart, nor that they which are at the poope should not be moued with the water which enters i^ at the prow. They sent foure thousand men to besiege Farnsberg,
Reekberg, who was within it, let them know vpon their first approches
that he was no man to yeeld. Hee knew well that the Armie of
France was not farre off, and that the Swisses had worke enough
elsewhere.
Burkard Monchen whom the French called Burgo the Monke,

Lord by ingagement of Landsec, was as it were the guide and Marshall
of the Armie. Hee prest the Dauphin to come before Basil,
thinking that at the sight of so many men they would rather seeke
to capitulate then resist:1441 Basill besieged by the Dauphin. for the Armie consisted of 20000. horse:
the Histories of Germanie make mention of 30000. BasilBasill made the first alliance with Bern and Soleure, in the yeare 144^ The house of Austria was offended, say^ng that they did in^ringe the Articles of the golden Bull. sends
speedily to demand succours of the Suissees which were before
Farnsberg. They sent them one thousand and six hundred men,
whom the Siegneur of Halwil cals peasants:Thuring de Halluuil in a letter which he did write vn^o the Marqu^s William, and to the Towne of Zurick the day after the Battell, call^ the Suisses Bauten Pesants. The which were twice
incountred and charged by the Earle of Dammartin, first in the
plaine of Brattelen, when as they thought to passe at the breake of
the day, and the second time neere vnto the Village of Mutents
halfe a league from Basill,Suisses repulse the Earle of Dammartin. but they marched so close, and in such
good order, as it seemed to the Caualery which offered to
charge them, that they went against a rocke, or an armed
wallA Battalion of foote well ordered is called a wall. Antiqui^murum di^erunt pedestrem exercitum Veget. Dion spe^king of the fourth Legion called, Pytique, giues it the title of a warlike wall. (...)..
They of Basill gaue them notice that they should bee carefull
how they did aduance, that it would bee a great rashnes for them
to seeke to force through so mighty an Armie, which held all the
passages. But the Suissees beleeue that the Lion is not so furious
as he is painted: Being incouraged, and glorious of that which had
so happily succeeded, in the morning they will not heare speake of
staying, and much lesse of retyring. The brauest courages shew
themselues in dangers:Not to yeeld, but to resist the sharpest and most dangerous accidents, is a signe of a great courage. Romanum est agere et pati fortia. It belongs onely vnto them to doe and endure
difficult things. They are more inquisitiue of the place where
the enemies are, then of their numbers, and holding all manner of
stay for a kinde of cowardise, they marche directly towards the
Towne, and finding the passage at the bridge stopt, they swimme
ouer the riuer of BisreinThe Townes-men of Basill were in counsell how to draw in their succors without danger. Munster saith that the Suisses beeing vpon a little ^ill, seeing their enemies come vpon them, they repulst them vnto the Hospitall of S Iames..
The Romans would not haue commended this furie; they held
it vnfitting for the greatnes and Maiestie of the Empire, and Emperour
of their armies, to passe riuers otherwise then vpon bridges,
hauing gardes set at eyther endGermanicus said that to wade through riuers did wrong the reputation of a generall of an Armie. Cesar nisi pontibus pre^idiisque impositis dare in discrimen Legiones ha^d Imperatorium ratus.. For this onely reason, and without
any other necessitie Cesar made a bridge vpon the Rhin, and
was nothing amazed at the bredth, swiftnes, nor depth of this riuer^
The Suisses were much troubled with the water and the enemy,
before they could recouer the bankes,Battell of S. Ieams Hospitall. and then by the fauour of a
little Hill they slip into S. Iames Hospitall. They of the Towne, for
that they would not faile to releieue them who came so freely and
generously to their succors, sent forth two troopes to meete them:
but there was an Ambush of eight thousand horses layed for them,
able to haue broken the Battalions of Suissees, if they had beene
as equall in numberThe number of souldiours in a Legion, haue been diuers. In the time of Romulus it was of six thousand foote and 600. horse, of 4000. during the Commonweale. That which Scipio led into Affrike was of 6000. And two Legions in Caesars Armie made not 7000. men. as they did imitate in order the Roman Legions.
They that were in garde in the Towers of the Towne aduertised
them of the danger, and made them returne.

The Suisses had barticadoed themselues in the Church and
Hospitall of S. Iames;Suisses defeated. But the French forced them out by fire.
They fought long at the hedges and walles of the gardens, they
indured three assaults, and repulst the two first valiantly, but they
were charged with great resolution, and at the third they were forced
and all cut in pieces: yet the most miserable sold his skin dearely.
Aeneas SiluiusCommittitur atrox et miserable praelium, exdunturque ex vtraque parto quamplurimi. Horrendum auditu est. Euellebant sanguinolentas ex corporibus suis sagittas Suitenses, ac truncatis manibus in hostes irruebant nec prius amm^m exhalabant, quam occiso^em ipsi occidistent. Erat retro Suitenses murus quidam het^^ sancti Ia^bi, quo illi se tutos ab vna p^te rebantur solumque in fr^nte pugnabant. Sed Teutonic^ qui cum Armeniacis erant intrantes hortum, murum perfodiunt, Suitenseque a tergo feriunt, que res magna causa ruinae Suitensium fuit: pugnatur tum ante tum retro, iam viro vir imminet nee iam eminus sed cominus ferrum stringitur. who was then Secretarie to the Councill, and
afterwards Pope, saith they could not without horror and amazement
behold that cruell butchery of men, in the which the Suisses drew the arrowes
all bloody out of their bodies, and stabd them furiously into their
enemies bowels and so died together. No man was slaine but hee slew.
No man breathed forth his last gaspe without the content of being
reuenged, comforting his death in that of his enemy. The Dauphin
said that he had neuer seene men more furious, more strong,
nor more resolute: there were but sixtene saued, who comming into
the Contry were taken for runawayes which had forsaken the
Camp. And notwithstanding any thing they could alledge yet euery
man said vnto them, they should haue dyed with the rest.
They could not bee held honest men who had brought back their
heads from the danger where their companions, had been slaine, as
Philopemen could not thinke well of him who had fallen aliue into
the enemies hand.Those that fled from a battell were alwayes odious to all nations. These (...) Suisses although they saued themselues with fighting were contemned as Cowards. The name of (...) tiger a forsaker of the campe is a great reproch among the Suisses. The Combat continued ten houres.
Burkard Munch of Landscron Conductor of the Army riding
ouer the place of battell and ouer the heapes of deadmen,Insolence in the victory punished. the Beauer
of his helmet being vp, full of insolence and pride, he said: Here
we hath in Roses,The Annalls of the Bishoprick of Basil report the wo^aes of Burka^d (...) badden vvix in ^osen, or Hie ^^che ich in dcu Ros^a^ten, velchon (...) bor^erten greeet. or as some write, beholding the Castle of Landscorn
and Munchenstien. I set the Rose bushes which my Predecessors
haue planted. A Suisse, lying among the dead Carcases, and
halfe dead, hearing these wordes of crue^l disdaine, striues to get
vp on his knees, and with the remainder of his courage and life
casts a stone, with such violence at his face, as hee ouerthrew him.
He was carried to Landscron and there he died. Another seeing
one of his Companions ill intreated by foure soldiers ran thither;
freed him from the danger, and carrred him away dying vpon his
sholdersErant qua^^or Armeniaci qui Suitensem vnum insequebantu. Iamque illum telo (...) et supra corpus graffa^entor, (...) euis comes ar^ep^a bipenn^ in quatuor illos fertur ex quibs duos obtruncauit, alios vero in fugam dedit, ac deinde ^emianime corpus super humeros recipit et (...) hostibus (...) ad suos AEneas Sil. Munsterus.
It is not certaine how many were in the Suisses Army: Haluuil the
Suisse, saith that they were 4000, the Chronicles of France speake
of 5000. But whatsoeuer it were, neither France nor England had
any great cause to triumph for this Battell: For they lost as many
men as they must kill of the enemies to merit a triumph.A Triumph was not giuen for any victory except they had slaine 5000. enemies, Val^^ius saith. Neither did they giue it vnto the Victors when as the victorie had nad cost much bloud, and therfore Titus Liu^u^ ia his 16. saith, that it was refused to Artillius. The Army
that was before Farnsperg, hearing of this defeat, raised the
(...) and retired.

The Dauphin continued three daies vpon the place of Battell, and
to couer the nomber of men which they had lost, caused them to
be buried in diuers places, as at Arlesheim, Reinach, and Esch: Two
Earles were interred at Montbelliard, two at Isenheim, The grand
Pryor of France was slaine at this Battell, with many other Noblemen.
They of Basill demand leaue to take a view of the dead men
and to buryAmong the Grecians hee that demanded a dead body to bury it, lost the fruit of the victory, end renouned the triumph. Plut. de Niceas and Age^l^us. them, he would not refuse peace vnto the dead, seeing
he was willing to grant it vnto the liuingAeneas said vnto the La^ius, who came to intreat him to haue their dead bodies to bury them, Pacem me exa^^mis and Martis sorte perempti oratis, equidem and (...) concedere velim. you pray to men slaine in the warres I peace should giue, yea willingly I would grant it them that liue., and that there was no
likelihood that he would grow obstinate at the siege of Basil nor against
the Suisses. The begging Fryars were appointed for this act
of pietie. They made three pits to bury them in. There were some
that did breath three dayes after the battell. They found some halfe
burnt in the ruines of the Hospitall, many in the hedges, and a great
number in the Riuer of Birs.
The Dauphin went to refresh himselfe in Alsacea. His Court
was at Ensisheim, and the Armie lodged so at large in the country,
as it held from Montbelliard to Haguenaud.Coun^^l of Basil seekes an accord with the Dauphin. The Emperor
assembled the Princes of the Empire at Ments to consult of the
meanes to expell the strangers out of Germany. The Councill
of Basill sentThe Counci^l of Basill sent the Cardinall of Arles and Bishop of Basill vnto the Dauphin, who did mediate a truce for twenty dai^s. Embassassours vnto him to perswade him not to
trouble the assembly, to the which France was bound for the
peace it had with the house of Bourgundy. His Deputies were at
Basil to vnderstand the will of the Fathers vpon this accord. They
of Berne and Soleure came thither, yet there was nothing concluded
but a truce of some few daies.
The Emperor Frederick, gaue the Dauphin to vnderstand that
if he did not retire himselfe, the Empire would proclaime warre
against him. The Nobilitie of Germanie, who had drawne the
French and English into the country, began to bee weary of their
guests, who dranke their wine without paying, and made vergys of
their Vines. MulhouseMulhouse was sometimes an imperiall ^own, the Bish^p of Strausburge was gouernor, and it was called (...). It allied it selfe with the Suisses in the yeare 1464. and then in the yere 1506. it was made fellowburgis with all the Cantons. Stump. lib. ^. of the Suisses commonweale. freed it selfe from this storme, refusing to
receiue the Dauphins troupes.
When as hee saw that all the Empire began to rise against him,The Dauphin retires into Lorraine.
and that the Suisses were like to haue their reuenge for the battell
of S. Iames of Basill, he went into Lorraine, to see King Charles his
Father who was before Mets, being resolued to reuenge the King of
Sicile, who was much incensed against this Towne, for that they had
fauoured the Earle of Vaudemont against him.
The English who had refused a peace,1445 Truce betwixt Fra^ce and England prolonged. tooke such taste in a
truceA truce is the bait^ and charme of peace. It is in the libertie of Princes to make it, but when as the people (...) therof it is hard to (...). as it was prolonged for fiue yeares. Such as tooke delight
in the publike miseries, for that they were profitable vnto them,
were not content, they would haue the tempest cease, but they
still desired some winde to raise the storme. Wee doe not alwaies
finde spirits of that integritie, but they preferre their priuate profit
before the publike good. Men of this excellencie haue been euer
ingaged in great tempests, the number of them which haue come

to a safe port to make others haue been very small. They grow like
the Phenix at the end of fiue hundred yearesA wise man such as the Stoicks discribe him, neuer was nor neuer will be. Quis sapipiens sit aut fuerit, nec ipsi Stoici solent dicere. Cic. And as great things happen rarely, Seneca saith, that fortasse tanquam Phaenix semel 500. annis nascitur. Sen..
Whiles that Rome was well gouerned, the profession of Armes
was in time of peace for an exercise, and in the time of warre for
necessitie and glorie, euery man returned to his affayres hauing
yeelded an account of his Armes, witnessing still, that hee carried
them not for his owne priuate good, but for the seruice of his
country. The ciuill warres troubled this order, and therefore they
said that Caesar and Pompey were held better Captaines then good
Citizens, and greater in valour then in integritie. France was
neuer fruitfull of such spirits as haue willingly made warre to
haue peace, and haue not troubled the peace to make warreMarshall disciplin should be wel obserued if it did alwaies consist of men who after the war made no difficultie to return to their trades and labour, but the libertie and disorder in warre is so great as it is hard to draw them to the rules of Duty, and therefore warre makes theeues, and peace hangs them..
During this Truce a marriage was made betwixt Henry the sixt
King of England,Marriage of Henry the sixth and Margaret of Aniou. and Margaret of Aniow Daughter to Rene King
of Sicile. The Earle of Suffolk came to fetch her at Nancy, the King
was there present, and the ioy was great: but as any great ioy hath
still some great sorrow attending it, and pleasures strangle when as
they imbrace most straightly.Ioy is commonly the beginning of sorow, at riuers of fresh water die in the salt sea; the sweetnes of life ends with sorrowes that are bitter. King Charles receiued so great an
affliction for the death of the Dauphins wife,Death of Margaret Stuard. and his heauines was
so apparent, as the whole Court did participate thereof.
But there was more then teares to witnesse that hee loued this
Princesse, and that the remembrance of her should not end with
weepingAffection is not tryed by teares onely. To ceace to weepe is not to forget. the remembrance is too short, which lasteth no longer them teares., for he receiued the Princesses of Scotland her Sisters
with all kindes of honor, whom she had greatly desired to see. They
came at the time of her Funerals, and finding themselues, as it were
vnknowne, in a country whereas that which should make them to
be knowne and respected was wanting, they dyed for griefe. All
consolations made their greefes comfortles,We must giue time and ayre to sorrow to euaporate it. In those which are extrem^, it is a part of the griefe to heare of consolations. and made them desire
that the Queene their sister, being in the bosome of the earth,
had them vpon hers. But the King to witnes that the affection which
he bare vnto their Sister was not dead, made them to feele the effects.
He married the one to Francis Duke of Brittaine, and the other
to Sigismond Archduke of Austria.Iohn Duke of Brittanie sent Ambassadors into Scotland to treat the marriage of his Sonne with Isabel daughter to the King of Scotland, at whose returne he enquired what the Princesse was? Who made report, That shee had beautie sufficient, a bodie well disposed to beare children, but shee had no ready speech. To whom he answered, That she was as he demanded, and that he held a woman learned enough, if she could make a difference betwixt her husbands doublet and shirt. Annal. of Aquitaine.
It is impossible to finde truth in an enemies tongue.The iudgement of two Historians of England. Hony how
sweet soeuer it be, is sharpe and offensiue to a mouth vlcered with
passion and slander. Edward Hall, and Grafton, two writers of England,
seeing that their imposture would take no hold vpon the manners
and actions of this Princesse, haue indiscreetly written, that
she was vnpleasing to her husband.Buchanan in the tenth booke of the Historie of Scotland, saith that two Historians of England, hauing as little sufficiencie as modestie, haue beene so Impudent as not finding any thing wherewith to slander this Princes haue said: Ob oris graueolentiam marito fuisse ingratam. But there are records yet to
be seene both in France and Scotland of the griefe which Charles
the seuenth, and the Dauphin his Sonne had for her death, and
Monstrelet speakes as of a Princesse who excelled in beautie both

of minde and bodie. She fauoured the good wits of her age, Alain
Charretier was held at that time one of the first of the Court,
and this Princes did esteeme him so rare, as shee honoured him
with a singular fauour, for passing by a Chamber whereas he slept
vpon a forme she kist him, and to satisfie the amazement of the Ladyes
of her traine she added, I kisse not the man, I kisse the mouth
from whence haue come so many goodly Discourses. Yet it was one
of those mouthes which haue learned to talke and not to bee silentThere is no such itching of the spirit as a desire to write. It is not cured but by silence. Eusenius demanded of Apolonius Thianeus, why hee did not settle himselfe to write, for that said hee I haue not yet learned to hold my peace.. This warlike and Marshall season was debarred both of
learning and learned men: For whereas warre speakes, learning is
silent. The Prouinces, troubled by armes, neither teach nor are
taught, and the money which should serue for the stipend of publicke
Readers is imployed for the musters of souldiersThe Emperor Leon, made an answere to one that counselled him to imploy his treasure in the entertainement of souldiers, vtina^ meis temporibus eueniat stipendia militum in doctores artium absumi. I would it might happen in my time that the stipends of souldiers might bee imployed vpon Doctors of Arts..
The yeares of Truce being expired,The warre renues. the warre was renued with
all violence against the English. The Historie speakes nothing of
the actions of Lewis vntill his retreat into Dauphine, neither are the
causes thereof well exprest. Shee hath well obserued his discontents.
His Father held him somewhat short, and his actions were
not so temperate,The wretched life of a great King. but they gaue him some cause of suspition,
that he had a desire to be masterThe opinions of children should be limitted in that sort, as it is not lawfull for them once to thinke to aduance the time, they must suffer heauen and the order of nature to work..
The King being come to an end of his affayres, would recompence
the troublesome nights which hee had pastA troubled youth requires a quiet age, he that hath liued in the waues, desires to dye in the Port., when as melancholly
had dryed vp his bones; that all his demeanes were engaged;
the chiefe forts of the Realme in the power of the English,
that his table often fayled, and that hee liued in such frugalitie, as
hee had no need of excellent Cookes, such as those of the Romans
were,1446 for they found him not with three or foure Dishes like
vnto Charlemaine, but with a messe of Pottage made with a rumpe
of Mutton, and a couple of Chickens rosted for his whole seruiceThe sobrietie of Charlemaine hath beene commended, he had but foure dishes, hee dranke but thrice and neuer betwixt meales, he did eate some fruits after dinner. Eghinard..
The great toyles which hee had past deserued some good daies,
but he sought them not in his family, nor in his childrenRest after their trauels is iust and lawfull, but it is most sweet in his owne house. And therefore Hercules was represented playing with a little Child. The familie hath cons^iations. Bella plane accinctis obeunda, sed reuertentibus post laborem, quid honestius quam vxorium leuamentum? TAC.. His spirit
plunged it selfe in delights,He giues himselfe to delights. and to Ladies. for the which like vnto another Iupiter,
he transformed himselfe into diuers shapes, vnworthy of his
Maiestie, and although he was impatient of seruitude, as all Kings
be, yet he vowed himselfe to the seruice of Ladies which followed
the Queeene: Aboue all their appeared the fayre Agnes, beautifull
in the flower of her age, and as louely as worthily to bee belouedThe Obiect of Loue is Beauty, and Beautie is the marke of many desires. It is for blind men to demaund why Kings loue fayre things.. She stole the Kings heart, who made her Mistris of the
Castle of beautie, as she was Queene of all the beauties, but
beauty was in her a bad Hostes in a goodly lodging.
The Historie which should not be curious to lay open matters

which are distastfull,Modestie of the History (...) the Kings lo^es. hath beene so carefull of the Kings respect,
and of the honor of this Ladie, as it hath spoken very lightly
of that which in those daies was knowne to all, and published by
few, It onely saith, that for that shee appeared alwaies richly attyred,
was one of the Queenes maides, and that the King saw her oft,
they thought she was wholly the KingsThe fayre are easily suspected of incontiuency for that chastitie and beauty doe not alwaies agree.. That her eyes were the
Altars whereon he made his vowes vnder the vales of Night and
secret.
The Author of the Historie of S. Dennis saith, that by the duty
of his charge (The Historie of France in those dayes was written
by Monkes, as it was at Rome by the High Priests)By the policy of Rome, the charge of the History, and the Anualls did belong vnto the High Priests. Res omnes singulorum aunorum man* dabat literis Pont. Max. Cic. 3. de Orat. Penes Pontifices scribendae Historiae potestas suit. Fla. Vopis.. He informed
himselfe most curiously of his most inward seruants, making some of
them sweare whether the common brute were true, from whom hee had
learned what hee had written. That Charles loued her onely for her
gallant humor, Shee was excellent in many pleasant conceits, but
especially in her speech and incounters, which is one of the gestures
of Loue.
Strangers, whose testimonie in these Occasions is as free from
flatterie as it is subiect to Hatred, haue spoken no more plainely.
Oliuer de la Marche saith, that in the yeare 1444. the Duches of
Bourgundy passing into Flanders saw the French Queene at Chalons.
Where they had great and priuate conference together.
There is some kinde of case in the conference of troubles and afflictions. For they had one griefe and one disease, and there were reasons for
their i^alonsies, for that the King had giuen vnto Agnes de Soret, a
traine comparable to that of great Princesses, and the Duke was very
louing, and had many base children both sonnes and daughters But who
sees not that flatterie hath falsified the Annales of those times? And
that the little which they report is sufficient to assure that Charles
and Agnes knew where to meete and to haue newes one of another;
they were not troubled to write vppon the marbles of Churches
and on the Mercuries of the high waies. Pithius is on the right
hand, and Pithias on the left: Princes who thinke they may say, if it
please it is lawfull, haue sometime greater want of enterprises then
of fortune.
The King, which held a peace miserable which gaue not some
rest, stole some howers in his affayres to imploy them in his loues and
gardeus. He went no farther to seek for palmes and bayes, he would
not haue any but from the hands of this Lady. Shee had a daughter:
Mont strellet saith that she was not auowed,Charlote Base Daughter to Charles the seuenth, and Agnes Sorter, was married to the Earle of Mauleurier, sonne to Peter, or Iohn de Brese, Seneshall of Normandy. and the Author
of Lewis the eleuenths Chronicle, writes that she was married to the
Seneshall of Normandies sonne.
Yong Princes haue alwaies discoursers, which speake of euery
thing, not to dispute thereof but to taxe it, who carrying their
thoughts to the future, neuer speake of the present, but with distaste
and disdainePleasures are enemies to libertie: Wee should bee our owne if they were not ours.. These droanes buz continually about the Dauphins
eares, and raise vp in his soule vnlawfull murmurings against
the Kings delights. They made him beleeue that Charles could
neither loue himself, nor any other, so long as he loued faire Agnes.

The Dauphin could not dissemble his discontent,The Dauphin enemy to fayre Agnes.A malicious spirit looscth no occasions to doe ill, they seeke them. and this cunning
woman, for the safetie of her fortune, did all shee could to
seaze vpon the fathers loue: And that hee should not receiue any
grace but at her discretion, least that her disgrace should grow by
their accord.
The King by the bad offices of this Lady, who incensed the Fathers
wrath against the Sonne, and sought occasions to content
his dislike, who by the iealousie which hee had conceiued, that a
sonne of thirtie yeares of Age did tread vpon his heeles, saw him
no more, but with an eye troubled with way wardnes and despight,
Princes, who haue children growne to age should not vse towards
them the austere grauitie of fatherly authoritie, whereby denying
them the honour of their familiaritie they depriue themselues of
the sweetest conuersation ofPrinces should breed vp their children in a liuely and not a falned and constrainted affection towards them, they may alwaies cause themselues to be feared, but they were better to purchase loue. There are saith Michael de Montagne so many defects in age, so great weaknes and it is so subiect to contempt as the best purchase item make is the affection and loue of his owne: command and feare are no more his armes. life: For whom doe they keep this
loue and proofe of affection? Feare they that it will shorten their
power? and that God and Nature and the Lawes haue not well
prouided to maintaine it? If they haue loued them in their infancie,
when as they could not distinguish of the force and respect therof,
why doe they take from them the knowledge when as age giues
them the feeling, and commands them to yeeld vnto this loue
the tributes of the same loue, feare and obedience? Many young
Princes, dying, haue left vnto their Fathers this troublesome griefe,
nay rather this reproch, that they haue neuer let them know that
they loued them amidst these austere courses. The Dauphin, by reason
of his age and his disposition, being tractable and quick, was
carried to sodaine alterations, during the which hee onely considered
the qualitie of the first Sonne of France, and not the authoritie
of the King,Although the father stray in many things fro^ that which he ought, yet the sones ought rather to think of that which hee is bound to doe rather then of that the father hath not done. nor the reuerence of the Father. R. Gaguin,He strikes her.
writes, that during these impatiencies, he stroke fayre Agnes
at Chinon.
They adde to these discontents an other occasion which made
him leaue the Court. Anthony de Chabanes Earle of Dammartin,
a man valiant, but not able to endure, was in the greatest fauour
in Court, and these fauours had taken such deepe rootesThe fauour of Courtiers must take deepe rooting before it be setled. This seed of a Princes fauour lies long before it springs. It seemes often to flourish when it hath no roof, so as the first paffe of choller or disgrace ouer throwes it. as they
were able to resist the most violent stormes of Enuie: Vertue and
good fortune had alwaies held the helme and sailes of his nauigation.
The troupes which he led had been well beaten vpon the
fronter of Bourgundy. The Dauphin said vnto him by way of iest,
yet without bitternes, (for he knew that this spirit would be easily
moued)Euery iest that containes truth in it offends, although it he spoken by a superiour. The more mens cour ages are raised vp, the lesse they endure, and the longer they remember it. (...) facenis irridete follius quarum apud praepotentes in long^^^ memoria est. Tac. An lib. 5. (...) wont to scoffe at Tiberius, (...) neither did he dwell vpon it, (for iests should end when
as they begin to moue laughter) How now Earle of Dammartin,
by the faith of my bodie the Marshall of Bourgundy hath vnshod you, he
doth contrarie to other Smithes who shooe horses; and he vnshooes them.
You say well answered the Earle, but I haue gotten ten thousand
crownes to make new shooes for my horses.

He was very inward with him, and of that credit, as meaning
to be reuenged of any one that had offended him,Reuenge against the Seneshall of Normandy. he imparted
his deseine vnto him and gaue him mony to execute it.The Chronicle Martinienne speakes plainely of this proceeding. A rack which euery Prince should shun if hee will not make shipwrack of his reputation. To cause an enemy to be slaine is an act of feare and not of brauery. It is a
proud abstinency to refuse his prince, but a great misery when it is
for the recompence of a seruice which subiects the consience vnder
the tyranie of repentance and remorse. Iames of Chabannes
Lord Steward of France blamed his brother for this match making,
by the which he gaue his friends cause to repent themselues
for the esteeme they had made of him.He that doth an act to ruine his reputation, forceth many to repent themselues of the admiration and esteeme they haue had of him.
The King was aduertised, and not able to dissemble an Act
so vnworthy the generosity of the blood of France,Excuse of the Dauphin to accuse Chabannes. which knoweth
not how to shed blood neither for delight nor reuenge, but onely
for necessity,Tyrants saith Seneca shed blood for pleasure, and Kings for necessity. reprehended him bitterly. The Dauphin to excuse
himselfe accused the Earle of Dammartin saying, that it was by
his counsell. The Earle, desuring rather to wrong his fortune then
his honour, did not accord with the Dauphin, but tolde the King
that therein he had but giuen eare and obayed. The Dauphin
seeing himselfe discouered and contradicted, saide vnto the Earle,
reseruing my duty to the King my Lord, you haue lyed. The reproch
of a lye is the most sensible offence that may be done by words, but
it is neither weaknes nor basenes to endure it of his prince, it were
indiscretion to be moued therewith. Yet the Earle of Dammartin
sought to reue^ge those words with this speach. Reseruing the respect
I owe vnto the King, if you were not the Kings sonne, I would make
answer with my person against yours,The Dauphin leaues the Court. but if there be any gentleman of
your howse that will charge me with this matter, I will make him say
the contrary. The King iudging by their countenances the truth of
their intentions, commanded the Dauphin to absent himselfe for
fower MonthesA Prince which hath many Children, great and capable to command, should not keepe them about him: hee must giue them some obiect to consume their ambition: The idlenes of Court giues them vitious inclinations and had deseignes. Wherefore Tiberius absented himselfe Vrbano ^uxu laseiuientem, His spirit began to grow disordered by the excesse of the City and idlenes which make men humerous. from Court and to go into Dauphine. The Dauphin
going out of the Kings Chamber bare headed, and his heart
full of reuenge and collor, spake these words. By this head which
hath no hood I will be reuenged on those that haue cast me out of my
howse. And he kept his word, for he was too true in his threats and
promises of reuenge. He did neuer loue that which he had hated,
and his disposition was far from that generous precept, that wee
must hate to loue more ardently.We must not (...) hate, but we w^st so dispose of hatred, as it may be conuerted into more ardent friendship.
Whether the Kinges iealousie, or the dislike of faire Agnes, the
wordes of the Earle of Dammartin, or spies, or flatterers, had
caused the absence of Lewis, the father bare it with much greefe
and repented himselfe that he had no more regarded his owne age
then the age of his sonne, and that he had neuer showed him his
face but fraught with waiwardnes, not opened his heart but full of
wrath and disdaine.The youth of Primers hath their lawes and priuiledges. The fathers seuerity should not seeke to breake them quite, but to bend them gently. He that had nothing refused to his owne youth, should not deny all thinges to his sonnes.
Time which should haue cured this wound,The Kings griefe for the Dauphins absence. did but augment
the griefe. He is victorious ouer forraine enemies, but he hath in
his heart ciuill war, which is more cruell. He hath giuen peace vnto

France and his soule is in trouble. It was a great griefe not to see
himselfe assisted and serued by a sonne, so great and so valiant, in
those goodly occasions which hee ended so happily, to make all
France French,Battell of Firmigny. The siege of Rone, and the reduction of all Normandy
in one yeare and sixe dayes, hauing remained English the
space of 30. yeares; the battell of FirmignyThe Battell of Firmigni the 15. of Aprill 1450. whereas there were slaine in the place and put into 14. pits 4574. english except 12. or 13. that were prisoners Our Histories report this battel diuersly, we must giue credit to that geadly ould peece of tapestry which is at Fountainble au whereas the whole is represented. A thousand fighting defeated 6000. English. which for the death
of 8. or 10. Frenchmen gaue the victory against the English, of
whom there were 4574. slaine vppon the place: The Conquest
of all Guienne: The siege of Chastillion, whereas TalbotThe English called Iohn Talbot their Achilles. Hee is interred at VVhitechurch to whom they haue giuen this Epitaph. Orate pro anima praenobilis Domini D. Iohannis Talbot quondam Comitis Saloprae. D. Talbot. D. Furniual, D. verden, D. Strange, de Blaemere, at Marescalli Franciae qui ^biit in bello apud Bourdeaur. the 7. of Iuly. 1453. the
Achilles of the English was slaine: whose name doth yet terrifie the
little children in Guienne: The taking of Bourdeaux, with other
great and goodly occasions, which should haue beene as so many
fields of Marathon to Lewis.
The king seeing that he made no hast to returne,Complaints against the Dauphin. grew easily into a
conceit that he had some desseine: he is glad they should flatter his
iudgements and allow of his apprehensions. Princes haue alwaies
about their eares men-pleasers which haue wordes for all incounters,
and know how to make maskes for all faces, and buskins for
all feete. They make complaints vnto him of the rigorous commands
of his sonne, oppressing his people with all sorts of charges
to haue wherewith to maintaine himselfe. They told him that hee
sent aduertisements to the Dukes of Bourgundy,The Counrty of Dauphiny did long feele of the discommodities of the Dauphins abode there, for the King held him short and would not heare of the complaints he made of his necessities, so as for his entertainement he drew rigorous subsideis out of Dauphine. Alencon and
Bourbon, and that he receiued from them; that the cloudes were
gathered together for some great storme. The poore father beleeues all, and feares all, making proofe that there is nothing more
insupportable then the infidelity of his owne blood: and as the Lyon
is neuer mooued more furiously then at the sight of his owne
blood, so when this yong Prince sees his bloudConspiracies which passe beyond the respects of nature are cruell. Of mans blood may be made a most violent poison against man. diuerted from the
veines and spirits which nourish the hart, he enters into extreame
passions of greife, the which he doth hold cruell, for that they do
not cause him to dye soone enough. He is aduertised that the Dauphin
hath sent into Sauoy for men and money.The Earle of Dammartin sent into Sauoy. He sent the Earle
of Damartin to the Duke, to let him vnderstand that he would hold
the succours which he should giue him for an iniury. The Duke
answeredThe Annulles of Bourgandy report that King Charles being at Feurs in Forest, Levvis Duke of Sauoy came to see him, where there were two marriages concluded, the one of the Dauphin and the Lady (...) of Sauoy, and the other of the Lady (...) of France the Kings daughter with Ame Prince of Piemont., That he did not carry his affections against his duty, and
knew how to order his desires to his power, and that he had no other, but
to his maiesties contentment. The Dauphin had married his daughter,
and yet the Kings respect was greater with the Duke then the
consideration of this alliance.
The King sends to the Dauphin to haue him come, and the Dauphin
promiseth at a certaine time, but the terme being come, the
effects of his promise are excuses and delayes. The King sends the
Earle of Damartin to seaze on his person, and the Lord Chastillon

to comand in the Prouince. The dilligence in the execution of this
comandement put the Dauphin in danger to be taken at Oranges,
but hauing made shew to go a hunting he deceiued the ambush
which the Earle had laid for him,The Dauphin did rely in two noble men who did counsell and conduct him. Lewis of Chalons; and Iohn de Lestore a bastard of the house of Armagnac. He was at Oranges when hee was aduertised of the Earle of Dammatius comming. and escaping their snares he
tooke another way, and with sixe or seauen gentlemen recouered
St. Claud. If he had fallen into his fathers collor, hee would haue
vsed him with more rigour then he thought. But he went nor without
making it knowne that hee would one day make the Earle of
Dammartin repent it.The offence which Princes receiue are deeply ingrauen in their memories in brasse, gratia onori vltio in quaestu habetur. The Dauphin had a feeling of that which the Earle of Dammartia did him, in executing his fathers comandements and was reuenged so soone as hee came to the Crowne. And that it was not the respect of his father
made him flye from his fathers wrath, but the very weaknes of
the Earle of Dammartin, saying, that if he had had halfe his forces
hee would haue met him.
Being at S. Claude he (...) vnto the King that he desired, with
his permission,The Dauphin retires into Flanders. and the meanes that he should giue him to make a
voyage against the Turke. It was at such time as all Christendome
did mourne for the losse of that Citty which had beene sometimes
the Metropolitane of the worldAfter the example of Rome, Constantinople was called the head of the world, and new Rome and was honored with the like dignities and prerogatiues lib. 1. de priuil. Vrb. Sid. App. Salue sceptrerum columen, Regins orientis, orbis Romatui, The Emperor Constans nephew to Heraclius, resoluing to restore the seat of the Empire to old Rome, said that they must honor the mother more them the daughter. (...). Zonarasin the life of Constans. and the common starre of the
vniuerse: The Queene of all Realmes, the faire daughter of that
faire mother Rome, the new Rome, Constantinople, which at the
the time of her desolation was nothing but a great masse of stone
made subiect to the Tirant of the East, who hauing filled it with
all impieties and cruelties hath made it the vnexpugnable dongeon
of his tirranny and cruelty. Charles sends word vnto his sonne that
if the desire of glory and reputation carried him to this enterprise, he
had lost great and goodly occasions against the enemies of France,
the Dutchies of Guienne and Normandy hauing beene reduc'd during
his absence: as for the voyage of Turkey he might not vndertake
it vnlesse he were assisted by his Nobility, the which hee had
cause to employ elsewhere.
And to speake the truth Lewis lost much time which hee should
haue imployed to serue the King and the Realme, or to make new
Empires tributary to France. Hee should not haue beene in any
place but in armies, and the father should no more meddle but
with the Counsell of affaires, and to command bonfires to be
made for his sonnes victories: Nature gaue vnto the one wisdome
and experience for his part, and to the other force and execution.Age should resolue and youth execute. The one hath sorce, the other wisdome. (...). Arist. Polit. 6.
Lewis auoiding one danger fell into another, and as Caesar found
himselfe among Pirats thinking to flye from Scilla,He trusts his enemy. so he saw himselfe
at the discretion of the Marshall of Bourgondy, after that he
had escapedthe ambush of the Earle of Dammartin, who loued him
not, and had charged his troupes when as they aduanced vpon the
marches of Bourgundy, whereof the Duke was so iealous as hee
could not endure that the French should approch them, knowing

well that a Prince looseth much of his reputation within, which
doth not stirre when hee is set vppon withoutA Prince which suffers himselfe to bee molested vppon his frontier may also prepare himselfe to endure the contempt of his reputation among strangers, and of his commandements and designes amo^gst his owne subiects. And Caesar commends the Germans, for that they would not suffer any one to approch neere their frontiers.. A power which is
not feared by strangers is not well obeyed by subiects.
But he was in that estate as hee thought it safer to trust his enemies
then his Fathers seruants:Who conducts him into Fladers He is found to plant his foote vpon
the precepts which fortune presents vnto him, and to get out of
this Libia, he trusts himselfe vnto RauensAlexanders armie being in Egipt had Rauens for their guide. Plutarch saith, that they followed the wandring souldiers, and neuer ceast crying and flying about them vntil they had brought them into the right way., he was beaten and pursued
by the Puttocke, the protection was sacred, and it is inhumanitie
to deliuer a suppliant. Wherefore they assured him, and then
they conduct him with safety vnto Brussels.
Duke Philip beeing aduertised of his comming,He is honored as the sonne of France. hee dislodged
from Deuenter, hee sent the Earle of Estampes vnto Louuaine to
meet him, and soone after the Earle of Charalois to accompanie
him. The Duches of Bourgundy, the Countesse of Charolois
and the Lady of Rauestain receiued him at Bruxelles. A day or
two after the Duke arriues, and the Dauphin gets downe the
stairesThe Princes of the bloud of France go equal with others how great and mighty so euer they be. Oliuer de la March saith, that the Duke of Bourgundy went to meet the Emperor Frederick when as became to Bezancon and that seeing the Emperor come a farre of, bee vnc^uered his bead, and approching neere he bent himself downe vpon his saddle powell with all the reuerence that might be. Adding a reason for that he did not light, that he was the third Sonne of King Iohn of France to salute him, for the which the Duke was very sorry, and
held this honour greater then hee should receiue of a Sonne of
France, the presumptiue heyre of the first crowne of the world.
And hee knew well that they that were issued from thence did not
conceiue any thing greater then themselues, and did not humble
themselues to other Princes but by eurtesie.
This Ariuall was in the beginning of the yeare 1456.He is lodged in Gueneppe. The
Duke lodged him at Gueneppe, neere to Bruxells, and sent his Ambassador
to the King to aduertise him thereof, and to beseech him
to pardon Lewis, The King made no other answere, but that the
Duke should haue a care not to feede the Foxe which would deuoure his
hens. Many thought that the Father and Sonne had intelligence
one with another, and that Charles was glad that Lewis should discouer
the desseignes, and obserue the actions of the Duke of Bourgundy
and his sonnes. Whatsoeuer it were, they kept him carefully,
as an hostage of the quiet and prosperitie of their affayresA Prince assureth the treaties and affaires which hee hath with one that is more mighty, when hee can draw into his power some one of his children or his neerest kinsmen. They be gages and hostages which they alwaies respect, and feare to loose..
Time now teaching them that it was more profitable, and more
safe to maintaine themselues in the estate wherein peace had setled
them, then to seeke the increase thereof, which is not done without
paine, nor preserued without danger.
The King beleeuing that if he were prest by necessitie in a forraine
country,He is disposest of his reuenues in Dauphiny? hee would returne the sooner to his fathers house,
went into Dauphiny to seaze vpon the Townes and meanes wherewith
he might be relieued. All men came vnto him, such as had
promised to hold good, said, that they would not offend the Father,
to content the SonneThe people consider but the present, whereunto they accomodate their thoughts and affections, at the sight of their first master they forget the new.. But fearing that the same necessitie
would bring him backe in furie, as he had gone away in choller,
and that he would fortifie himselfe in some place: He assured himselfe

vpon all the passages and frontiers: he did prohibite the gouernors
to receiue him with any strength, and did punish Iames
Caeur, very seuerely, who had subiected his heart, purse, and fortune
to his wils, and had made himselfe too passionate a minister of
his youthfull affectionsIohn de Seres saith that the Signiors of Loudun and S. Pon^ Gentlemen of Viuarez dying very old, said that they had beard, the one of his Vnckle, the other of his Grandfather, both houshold seruants to the Dauphin, that the true cause for the which Iames Coeur was so intreated, was, for that hee had beene too familiar with Lewis, as one of the Ministers of his youthfull delights. Others haue told mee that faire Agnes ^ad ruined him..
Charles Earle of Charolois,He agrees not wel with the Earle of Charolois. the Dukes Sonne, bred vp also as
Lewis in the French libertie more then in a Laconicall disciplineThe laconical discipline saith Plut. was hard and painefull, but it taught childre^ to obey, and therefore Sparta is called the Tamer of men.,
had not alwaies his affections conformable to those of his
Father, neither did he accord well with Lewis: He had been much
gouerned by them of the house of Croui, the which was one of
the most apparant in the country, as drawing their extraction
from the crowne of Hungarie. Lewis a great Prince to insinuate,
did not cease till hee had wonne, and drawne them to his affections.
The Earle of Charrolois found it, and aduertised the
Duke his Father, who would not beleeue it, and if hee did, yet
hee dissembled the beliefe, applying himselfe to the humors of
this Prince, for we must not feede a Lyon, or we must please
himIt is indiscretion to bandy against a power which we haue supported and raised: Aristophanes brings in Pericles ghost aduising the Athenians not to feed the Lyon or to please him..
The Earle of Charrolois from that time frowned at them of
Croui, and there grew so great an Antipathie of wils in the minds
of these two Princes, as all the remainder of their liues they were
but fained friends. They of Croui made an altar of refuge of the
Dauphins fauour, against the Earle of Charalois, and thought
that, notwithstanding that they were great, both in Alliances and
meanes, yet they had need of some greater support, as the heauens
how excellent soeuer they be, haue need of the motion of the
first mouer,Disposition of the Earle of Charolois. besides the Nature and assistance of their owne intelligences.
Lewis could counterfet and dissemble his passions so cunningly,
as the Duke (who had an excellent iudgement) could not
discouer any thing. But the Earle of Charrolois, being of a harsh disposition,
suspitiousSuspition and facillistie is to beleeue all things, Suspitionum and credendi temeritas. Ta^. ruins friendships and the most firmest affections. and boyling, made them of Croui to feele the
indignation which hee durst not euaporate against Lewis who fauoured
them. It burst forth at such time as they setled the estate
of the Earle of Charrolois house. The Duke would haue Philip
de Croui, Sonne to Iohn de Croui, set downe for the third Chamberlaine,
in the absence of the Lord of Auchy the first, and of the Lord
of Formelles the second Chamberlaine. The Earle of Charrolois
entred Anthony Raulyn, Lord of Eimeries. The house was diuided,
some followed the Fathers will, and others the SonnesA controuer sie between two priuate Noblemen, is able to diujde the opinione of a whole Court. That which was betwixt Chimay of Emeries, who should haue the first place in the absence of the L. of Auchy, first Chamberlaine to the Duke, was so affected as the father was for the one and the son for the other.. The Duke
seeing the danger which might grow by this adoration of the sunne
rising, made it knowne that he was both master and father, commanding
his Sonne to bring him the Rowle, and in his presence
cast it into the fire, and then willed him to goe forth. Monstrelet
saith, that the Duke commanded the Earle of Charolois to cause
Croui to martch in his ranke. I will not, answered the Earle, they of

Croui shall neuer gouerne as they haue done, and that the Father (being
offended at an answer so bold and of so little respect) he would haue
fallen vpon his Sonne, but not able to get him he commanded him
to auoid the country.
The Sonne departs full of murmuring and despite, the Father
comming to himselfe and seeing that his Sonne returned not,Displeasure of the Duke of Bourgundy to his Sonne. goes
to horseback all alone, sad and pensiue in a raynie night, rides
through the country, to let the Dauphin know the griefe hee had,
and his Son the choller wherin disobedience had drawen him.Whatsoeuer the Sonne doth yet must the Father alwaies show himselfe a Father, and matters are very foule and strange when as hee is forced to forget the dutie of a Father.. He
lost himselfe in a wood and lay all night in a Collyars cabbin, with
hunger in his belly, and choller in his head. He came the next day
to Seuenbergh, a little towne of Brabant, whereas he found one of
his huntsmen, who conducted him to Guinneppe, where as the
Dauphin (the cause of all this trouble) besought him to pardon
the Earle of Charrolois. The Duke would haue held the refusall
of so iust a request cruell, being made, by, and for a person so neere
vnto him,As it is vnpleasing to intreat a stranger, so is it a very sensible discipleasure to bee refused of his owne., for he could not but loue his onely Sonne, in despight
of his youthfull and wayward affections. He required no other satisfaction,
but that hee should dismisse two seruants William Bithe and
Guiot of Vsie, who retired themselues into France.
Soone after the Earle of Charrolois bred another subiect of choller
in his fathers hart,Wandring of the Dauphin being a hunting. he was come from hunting without the Dauphin,
and had suffered him to wander in a wood, thinking that hee
had been before. When the Duke saw him returne alone, he blamed
him sharpely, and commanded him to goe presently to horsebacke
to seeke the Dauphin. They sought him long by torchlight,
and found him on the way to Bruzells conducted by a
Pesant.The Dauphins wandring was in the night abeue eight leagues from Brussels. The Duke caused him to bee sought for with torches: the next day hee gaue a crowne to the Pesant which had conducted him..
The Duke was exceeding glad to see him returne, for he knew
that he should be alwaies bound to yeeld an account of so precious
agage, and that he might be assured whilest he held him he
might haue what he desired from the King.Birth of Mary of Bourgundy the 13. of Feb. 1457 God sent the Earle of
Charolois a Daughter, for the first fruits of his marriage; the Duke
intreated the Dauphin to christen her Mary. This birth did moderare
the grief which the Lady Isabel of Bourbon her Mother had
conceiued six monthes before, for the death of her Father Charles
Duke of Bourbon.Charles the first Duke of Bourbon dyed in the end of the yeere 1455. he was Sonne to Iohn the first Duke of Bourbon and of Bo^na of Bourgundy, daughter to Philip the hardy. Hee married Agnes of Bourgundy Daughter to Iohn Duke of Bourgundy, and had fiue sonnes, and fiue daughter. His sonnes were. Iohn the second Duke of Bourbon. Lewis, who died yong, Peter Lord of Beauien, Charles Cardinall of Bourbon Archbishop of Lyon, and Lewis Bishop of Liege. The Daughters were (...) Princesse of Orange; Catherine Dutchesse of Gueldres, Margaret, Countesse of Bresse and Dutchesse of Sauoy. Isabel wife to Charles Duke of Bourgondy and Mary married first to the Duke of Calabria, and afterwards to Gaston de Foix.. The King was offended for that hee did not
yeeld him his Sonne, and desired some occasion to let him know
his discontent, the which hee did not dissemble, when as the
Duke sought to punish the Gantois for a rebellion, commanding
him to suffer them to liue in peace, as being vnder his protection.
The Dauphin thought the time of his returne into France long,
and had sworne that he would not make that voyage vntill his Father
were past vnto another world.1459. The first yeare of his abode
there, Charlotte of Sauoy, Daughter to the Duke of Sauoy was

brought to Namur to consumate the marriage which had beene
concluded fiue yeares before.One of the goodliest parts of ciuill society is marrage, the first gate to enter into it is loue, there is none to go out of it but that of death. And for that in the marriages of Princes they regard more the interest of subiect and estates, then their own content, It happens that their loues are not so pure and free. A marriage which being made vnwillingly,
was continued without loue. When the Duke of Bourgundy
gaue the Dauphin his pension of 12000.Birth of the Dauphins sonne at Gnenneppe in Iune 1459. Crownes, Oliuer de
la March writes that it was vpon condition that he should marry her
which shewes that he had no great desire. She was deliuered of a
sonne who was named Ioachim, the Duke of Bourgondy was so
glad of this newes as he gaue a thousand Lyons of gold to Ioselin
du Bois which brought it. He was the Godfather and the Countesse
of Charrolois the Godmother. The Insant dyed presently after, and
left the father very sorrowfull, who being not then in those distrusts
which age brings, desired to see him great, knowing well that the
Children which were borne late are soone Orphlins. The losse of
this infant, which first had giuen him the name of Father, was so
sencible vnto him, as Phillip de Comines saith, that he made a vow
neuer to loue any other woman but his owne wife, and yet in many
parts of his Cronicle we see him among women, we find some
lost, some married, and their husbands from base fortunes raised to
great dignites, with many other actions which argue not a continency
equall to that of AlexanderAlexander being perswaded to see Darius daughters who were faire and yong, made answer, I will haue a care not to be vanquished by woemen seeing that I haue vanquished men., who being a victor would not
see those beauties which might vanquish him: nor to that of CyrusThey intreated Cyrna to see Panthea, which he refused to doe, and being told that shee was very faire, it is, for that reason (said he) I may not see her for if I doe visite her now that I haue leysure, she will bind me another time when I shall be full of affaires.
who would by no meanes see her, who he thought might bind him
to see her more then once.
The King bare the absence of his sonne very impatiently, it was a
thorne in his heart which time could not pull out.Death of Ladislaus King of Hungary. Hee grew sicke,
and his sicknes was seconded by a great affliction, for the death of
LadislausSorrow creepes sodainly amidst ioy, whiles they treat of a marriage at Toure betwixt the L. Magdalen of France, and King Ladislans, his Embassadors receiue newes of his death, on Christmas (...). 1457. King of Hungary, to whom he had promised the lady
Magdalen his daughter. After his recouery he thought that all the
cause of his ill grew from the Duke, whom he accused to haue
drawne away his son, and corrupted his good nature, resoluing to
seeke a remedy rather with deedes then wordes.
He leuied a great army, and no man knew how he would imploy
it, the duke fearing that it was to make some enterprise vppon the
townes of the riuer of Somme, which had beene giuen him by
the treaty of Arras, staid not to demand the reasonIn occasions which presse, we must not loose time with wordes; men of courage should not haue their handes on their tongues but their tongues in their handes., he armes and
goes into Picardy to prouide for the safety of his townes, and to
hinder the Kinges entry with forces.
The King sendes word to the Duke of Bourgondy, that he was in
armes to take into his protection the goods of the Lord of Rodemart,
Princes haue alwaies pretext^ to make warre, and he that wil breake with his friend neuer failes to find occasions. The Duke answered that he was no subiect of France, that his
lands lay in the Dutchy of Luxembourg, that the King should speak more
plainely, and that he desired to know whether the king had a will to keepe
the treaty of Arras or not. The King had a desire to haue his sonne otherwise
then by the hazard of Armes, or breach of a truce, which

cost so much blood and drawn so many Princes into danger.In the assembly of Arras for a peace betweene King Charles the seuenth, and Philip Duke of Bourgundy were present the Embossadors of the Pope, of the Councell of Basill, of the Emperor, and of all Christian Princes. They numbred about four thousand horses He
feared to ingage hmselfe in new miseries and to bring France to
the hazard of shipwrack which she had escaped. He went to the west
of his life, and knew that the greatest of the Realme had their eyes
turned to the East: Age had coold his military heat, the vigour
of his nature was without edge, the blood of his courage was nothing
but slegme:Princes are men, and borne men, wherfore their best qualities and dispostions are mutable and in the and discouer their inconstancie. And although that this first force of his spirits
was not altogether deiected, yet was it much altered, France did
still produce some fantastick humors vnknowne to other Prouinces,
as Egypt doth bring forth Beasts, and Nile Fishes, which are
not found in other countries nor in other Riuers.
The house of Bourgundy had beene so beaten with the like
storme as it desired to continue in this calme,Declar^tion of the house of Bourgundy. the couetousnes of
great men was glutted with the calamities of innocents,The people are for the most part innocent of the causes of warre, and they suffer al the calamities. The couet^usnes of Souldiers is neuer satisfied, but with the miseries of innocents. Calamitatibus insontium expletur auari^a. Tac. lib. 2. the
most greedy of troubles were forced to commend rest. It would
haue seemed hard vnto the subiects to see themselues ouerwhelmed
so suddenly with waues.It is alwaies dangerous to take from the people the ease and commodities wherein they liue. The iudgement of Tiberius was long in suspence before he could resolue to draw the people from the sweetnes of peace to the discommodities of warre. Tac. saith, Populum per tot annos moliter habitum non audebit ad durio^avertere.. The Duke would not leaue a doubtfull
peace with his subiects, he desired to be satisfied of the Kings intention,
saying, that if they forced him to raise an armie, they
should bury him in his armes, that he had no will vnto it vnlesse he
were forced, that the Trumper should make no noise, if violence
were not offered, and that this Eccho should remaine quiet in the
ease of solitarines, but if they moued him hee would not be silent
vntill that they who had caused him to speake did first hold their
peace.
These practises past away, and the King was glad that they
raised no stormes, not holding it reasonable to resolue to warre
more by the occasion which hee had, then by the inconueniences
which he did foreseeAll occasion to make warre should not be rashly nor ambitiously sought for, what shew of profit soeuer they had. It is better to haue a care to keepe subiects in peace, is people townes, and to increase the commerce, so discipline souldiers and together tre^s^re together least he be surprised in necessity.: besides being now opprest, not with yeeres,
but with cares, which seemes to be inseparable accidents of the life
of great men, and the excesse of those pleasures which Nature had
made short, for that they are pernicious, hee suffered himselfe to
be carried away with melancholly and waywardnes, two rockes
against which the vessell suffered shipwracke, Hee grew wayward
after the condemnation of Iohn Duke of Alencon to lose his head
the tenth of October 1458. After which, melancholly and heauines
had seazed on him, hee changed the troubles of his life into a
perpetuall prison at Loches, and gaue his goods to his wife and
childrenIohn D. of Alencon was condemned for that he would have brought the English into France. The cleere sighted said, that his misfortune grew rather from Iealausie, or from the loue which he ^are vnto the Dauphin who gouerned him by his counsels..
The Dauphin being wel aduertised of al that passed at Court, grieued
at the misfortunes of his godfather whom he loued. The desire
to see a change did much disquiet him. Claude of Seyssel Bishop
of Marceilles vnder the raigne of Lewis the twelfth saith, that the

Dauphin and they that followed him, desired nothing more then
his Fathers death: some enquired by Astrologie, some by Negromancie.
He had many politique inuentions to augment his Fathers
cares and caused his suspition to turne into fearesGreat courage should not easily receiue suspitions, and Seneca saith that it is the act of a timerous soule to turne suspition into feare.. He knew
that the Earle of Dammartin was as it were the Kings King, and
he found meanes to bring him into iealousie with the King, whose
braine beeing weake and very moist, did easily receiue such impressions
In matters of state Princes enter easily into icalousies of their most trusty seruants, and suspition is a bone which age of it selfe doth willingly gnaw vpon., He wrote a letter vnto a Lady whom the King loued
and sent it vnto her by a Franciscane Fryer which hee wittingly deliuered
to the Earle of Mayne, enemie to Dammartin, who shewed
it to the KingThe chiefe points of this letter reported by the Chronicle Marti^ienna are, I haue receiued letters from the Earle of Dammartin, whom I make shew to hate. I pray you tell him that hee serue mee still wel, as he hath alwaies done, I will thinke of those matters whereof hee did write vnto me, and hee shall very shortly receiue newes from me.: It was full of termes of so great trust in the Earle
of Dammartin, as the King not considering from whom it came,
nor by whom it was presented, commanded the Earle of Dammartin
to retire himselfe, then being informed by the Dauphins secretaries
that this Prince had no greater enemie, and that he had not
written vnto him, he did easily beleeue that it was an act of his bad
Sonne who had so much troubled him, as it was the ordinary argument
of his complaints. Some few daies before his death hee
recalled him: apprehension bred no lesse amazement in him, then his
life gaue him affliction.
The aduise which a Captaine gaue him that hee could not liue
long,K. Charles resolues to dye of hunger. and that there was a conspiracie plotted against his life, did
so distemper and torment him, as he could not liue without feare
and tremblingThere is no torme^t so much to bee feared as feare, and what auailes it to feare that which is ineuitable? to feare death is to call it, for the feare of death is a perpetuall death.. And imagining that they ment to poyson him,
he depriued himselfe of eating, and brought himselfe to so great a
weakenes, as when they would haue caused him to take any thing
to restore him, the passages were so shrunke, as that which hee
would haue done willingly happened vnto him by force and against
his will, and it may be said that he died of hungerThe Earle of Dammartin who was retired to his house at St. Forgeau came to see the King the day before his death, perswading him to take something, who told him that he would take a Cullis from his hand, if he saw it made, the which hee presented vnto him, but he could not swallow any thing, the conduits were so stopt., the 21.
of Iuly. 1461.
Dying he recommended to the Earle of Dammartin his yonger
Sonne, whom he called the little Lord, to whom hee desired to
leaue the Crowne, knowing the spirit of Lewis to be terrible and an
implacable enemie to his best seruants. God would not suffer him
to trouble the Order of Nature, to reuenge his priuate affections,
nor to runne the fortune of AlphonsoAlphonso beleeuing by the rules of his Astrologie that the youger of his sonnes would be the more capable to raigne, named him his successor, whercat the elder was soineensed as be caused the Father to dye in prison, and slew his Brother. King of Castill, who hauing
preferred the yonger before the elder, forced him to bee a parricide
and a fratricide.
Charles the seuenth was the restorer of France,France hath giuen him the title of Victorious. of a Towne of
Bourges he made a whole Realme, he expeld the English, who of the
whole peece, which they held, kept nothing but Callice. He had the
honor to haue pacified that great and deadly schisme, against the
which were held the Counsels of Constance and Basill. A time of
such strange and terrible confusion as no man could say that Rome

was where the Pope remained, as they were wont to say that
whereas the Emperor was, there was Rome,During the Schisme of three Antipopes they might say Imperiumque suis a sedibus errat. Claud. But they could not say that the authoritie of the church was whereas the Pope remained, for there was a Scisme: as they were wont to say that where the Emperor was there was Rome, (...). Herod. lib. 1. for there was a
Pope in Spaine, one in France, and two in Italy. He ordeined,
by the aduise of the Prelates of France, and caused to bee confirmed
and past at the councell of Basill, the pragmaticke sanctionThe orders which the councell of Basill made for the gouernment and discipline of the Church were not generally receiued, Germany and Italy would none of them. King Charles caused as assembly to be made at Burges, by the aduise whereof they were obserued and published in Parliament the seuenth of Iuly 1438 vnder the name of the Pragmatick Sanction..
With the like zeale as he laboured for the peace of the Church,
he desired to reuenge the iniurie which it had receiued in Asia
and Europe by the armes of Amurath and Mahomet. Pope Nicholas,
and Pius the second, exhorted this Prince, as Elezeus did Ioas, to
shoote his arrowes against the East, but he was so troubled for his
iust defence against his neighbours, as he had no meanes to think
theron.Among the obseruations which they giue for the leuies of Souldiers, they haue respect to the ayre and the place; hot countries produce men of more vnderstanding then courage, and could doe the contrary. A good rule for them that haue diuers prouinces to choose, but to make it generall they must take them where they finde them. They also giue vnto this Prince the honor to haue set an
order for his troupes, for seeing that the number of his souldiers
were so diminished, as his could not equall those of his enemies,
hee made leuies throughout all his villages, taking one labouring
man out of threescore, who were bound to arme and pay him, and
he was freed from taxes. Necessitie, in whose schoole hee had learned
great experience, dispenst with him for the obseruations which
are made in the choice of souldiers. These were called Franke
Archers, who being well led did great seruices, being able to indure
all paine, as beeing bred vp in discommodities and wants,
without cunning or malice. They beganne their profession at the
siege of Vernon. The defects which are obserued in the life of this
Prince, as the griefes of KingsThe raignes of Princes doe not continue and end alwaies as they haue begdnne, The first fiue yeares of Neroes raigne were iust, Constant was good ten yeares, cruell twelue, and prodigall ten., doe not alwaies incounter ends
like vnto their beginnings. His loues and his diuersions could not
hinder it, but that France hath giuen him the well deserued title of
Victorious.
The end of the first Booke.



THE CONTENTS OF
the Second BOOKE.

1 KIng Lewis his going into France, His entrie and Coronation
at Rheims.
2 The Duke of Bourgundy doth him homage, and followes
him at his entrie into Paris: magnificence of the Parisians
vpon this occasion.
3 Estate of the Kings affaires with Pope Pius the second. Reuocation
of the Pragmatique Sanction.
4 Discontent of the Noblemen of the Realme vpon the Kings
first actions. An obseruation of his Humors.
5 His voyage and designes in Brittanny.
6 Oppression of the people, by new inuentions of Subsedies.
7 Strange and furious reuolutions in England betwixt the
houses of Lancaster and Yorke.
8 Edward the fourth expels Henry the sixt King of England.
9 Hee seeks to marry the Queene of France her Sister, and
takes a widdow in England.
10 The King goes to Bourdeaux and there treates a marriage
betwixt his Sister, and the Earle of Foix.
11 Troubles betweene the Crownes of Castill and Arragon. The
Earledome of Rousilion engaged to the King.
12 The Kings of Castille and Arragon referre their differences
to the King.
13 Enteruiew of the Kings of France and Castille vpon the
Riuer of Vidaazo.
14 The King returnes to Paris, redeemes the Townes vpon
the Riuer of Somme and visits the Frontiers.
15 The Duke of Bourgundy comes to the King at Lisle, to

demaund his aduise touching a voyage which he pretended
to make against the Turke.
16 Ariuall of Lewis Duke of Sauoy at Paris.
17 The King declareth his pretentions vpon the soueraigne
rights of Brittany.
18 The Earle of Charrolois stayes the Bastard of Rupembr^
at the Haage.
19 Ambassadors from the King to the Duke of Bourgundy vpon
diuers complaints.
20 The Duke of Bourbon first author of the league of the common
weale. Death of Charles Duke of Orleans.
21 Charles Duke of Berry, the Kings brother, retires into
Brittany.
22 His Letters to the Duke of Bourgundy, and his declaration
vpon the taking of Armes.
23 Death of Pope Pius the second, to whom succeeded Paul
the second, a Venetian.




THE HISTORY
of LEVVIS the XI.
THE SECOND BOOKE.
A Death which brings Scepters and Crownes,1461
doth not alwaies meete with sorrow and
teares. When there is a question of the
succession of the Realme,An heyres teares are sone dried vppe. a desire to raigne
doth presently dry vp the teares which the
law of Nature drawes from the eyesThere is no water whose spring is sooner dryed vp, then that which flowes from a profitable mourning.. Lewis
longed too much to be at home, to be
grieued when as they brought him newes
that Charles the seuenth had quit him the
lodging. Hee had already spent two third parts of his age in
obeying, hee held the rest very short to command and to end at;
in great enterprises worthy of his qualitieLife is very short for great entrriprises; and inconstancie makes it much shorter.. Hee entertained the
Iuie of his hopes in the ruines of this old building: he did not
hope for any light but by the ecclipse of this Sunne, and his
vowes were no let, that his Father was not already among the
GodThe Romans held their Fathers dead in the number of the Gods, and their Images were reuerenced as persons deysied. Wherfore among the predictions which Antonin had of his adoption and successim to the Empire, they note that, In somrio saepe monitus suit penatibus suis Adriani simulacrum inserere. Capitol. Hee was often admonished in his sleepe that hee should place Adrians Image among his boushould Gods..
And what can a Kings eldest Son desire but to raigne? euery obiect
lesse the^ a crown is vnworthy of his birth,Lewis comes into France. but the wishes are vnnaturall
and monstrous vpon vniust effects. To desire for a crownes cause
the death of him of whom he holds his life, is ingratitude and impiety.
The same day that Charles dyed, Lewis was aduertised of his deathThey that haue written that these newes were sent by Charles Duke of Aniou, Father in lawe to Charles the seuenth, are mistaken, both in the name and matter, for Lewis Duke of Anion liued since the yeare 1417..
He went presently to horse to goe into France, fearing least Charles
his brother should make his profit of his absence. The Duke of
Bourgundy and the Earle of Chartolis accompany him with
foure thousand horse, chosen out of the flower of all the forces
of their Estates and the Princes their friends.He makes his entry into Rheims. Hee entred into
Rheims the fourteeene of August,The King arriued at Rheims the 14. August, and caused himself to be annointed the next day. A remarkable diligence. They cannot goe too speedily to so great a Feast. The Duke of Bourgundy being followed by the Earl of Charolois, the Earle of Neuers, the Earle of Estampes, the Duke of Cleues, the Earle of St. Pol, and many other Noblemen, went out of Rheimes to the Abbcy of Saint Thierry to meet the King. being attired in white and crimsin
damask, vpon a white courser caparonessed with the armes of
France. The next day he was anoynted and crowned. The peeres
of the Church were there in person. The Duke of Burgundy Deane
of the peeres. The Duke of Burbon held the place of the Duke of

Normandy. The Earle of Angolesme for the Duke of Guienne.
The Earle of Eu for the Earle of Tholousa. The Earle of Neuers
for the Earle of Flaunders, and the Earle of Vandosme for the Earle
of Champagne.The King is anoin^ed and Crowned.
The ceremony of his coronation was beautified with an other
which they found very new and strange.The King is anointed and Crowned. The King drawing his
sword presented it to the Duke of Bourgundy and intreates him to
make him Knight. He gaue this honour of Knight-hood to an hundred
and seauenteene Gentlemen, the first were the Lord of Beauieu,
Iames of Burbon, the Earle of Geneua, the Earle of Pontieu, the
Earle of Witembergh, Iohn of Luxembergh, and to the Marques of
Saluces Sonne. From the Coronation they went to the Royall
feast, whereas the twelue peeres were set on either side the King.
At the end the Duke of Bourgundy kneeled downe, intreating the
King to forget the iniuries of such as had offended him during his
Fathers raigne.This request is reported by Monstrelet in these termes. When the tables were taken away, the noble duke of Burgundy, vsing his accustomed gentlenes, in the nobillity of his courage, kneeled downe before the King, and intreated him for the honor, passion and death of our Sauior, that he would pardon all those which he held suspect to haue set discord betwixt his father and him, which request he granted reseruing seauen persons He answered there are seauen which I cannot pardon.
Reuenge had mounted with him to the Royall throne, he had
not trod it vnder foote, he carryed it in his head, it was in his mind,
like vnto those starres that were fixed about the pole. Hee findes it
not so sweet to recompence the good as to reuenge the bad. The
King cannot forget the iniuries which they had done vnto the
Dauphin.A royalty should make me^ forget forepassed iniuries. The Emperour Adrian being come to the Empire said vnto his enemy which was before him. Euasisti, thou hast escaped. Quos in vita priuata ^n^micos habuit, Imperator neglexit AE. Spart. And Lewis the twelfth said generously, it is not fit that a King of France shold reuenge the iniuries done to a duke of Orleans.
Two daies after the ceremony of the Coronation the Duke did
him homage for his countries which held of the crowne of France,
and offered him others which he held in Souerainty.The Duke of Burgundy was receiued to fealty and homage by King Lewis the eleuenth and to be Peere and Deane of the Peeres of France, by reason of the D^^^ie of Burgundy the 17. of August. 1461. From Rheims
the King went to Meaux, then to Saint Dennys, and made his
entry into Paris, where they did number twelue thousand horse
which followed him.
All the pompe and magnifficence which was made at this entry
did represent aswell the simplicity and ignorance of those times, as
the greatnesse and State of Paris. Good witts in such occasions
do not represent all things so plainely to the eye, as there doth not
remaine some thing where-with to content curiosity, by the paine
it hath to seeke, and the pleasure to finde and to deuine at the intelligence
of their inuentions. Brokers were then more necessary
then paynters, for they did only set persons of diuers ages and sexes
for all kinds of histories. A Virgin was sufficient to represent the
Citty of Paris, as we finde not any more in bookes, nor in auncient
medalls for Rome, nor Athens; and there were fiue to signifie Paris,
euery one carrying a letter of it name. They were conducted on
horsebacke by a Herald, towards Saint Ladros Church, and there
presented vnto the King. The Cronicle saith, that they had all personages
fitted to the signification of fiue letters making Paris, and that all
spake vnto the King as they were appointed.
The Frontispice of S. Denis gate was beautified with a great ship

in the which were the three Estates in three Persons which made
the Prosopopeia,Ridiculous representations. and Iustce sate in the prow who spake vnto the
King. On the toppe of the Mast there was a Lilly, out of the which
came a King conducted by two Angells. At the fountaine du Ponceau,
they gaue wine and Ippocras to them that past.The Chronicle vseth thee wordes in this place. A little within the Towne at Fo^taine du Ponceau were wild men and women which did fight and made many countenances; and there were also three fair^ maidens representing mermaides naked: where they might see the faire white pap seperated round and hard, which was a pleasant sight* and they had pretty speech^^ and neer vnto them were certaine f^ll Instruments, which made great melody. And to refresh such as entred into the said Towne there were diuers pipes in the said Fountain casting mike, wine and lippocras, wherof euery man dranke that would: And beneath the said Fountain right against the Trinity there was a passion by men without speech, Christ being hanged on the Crosse and the two theeues on the right and left hand. There were
also three Virgins like Mermaides all naked, and at the Trinity was
the passion of Iesus Christ represented by a liuing man, being tyed
vnto a Crosse betwixt two theeues. At S. Innocents Fountaine
there was a Hinde put forth, beeing followed by a great cry of
Hounds and Huntsmen. At the Burchery was the Bastille of Diepe,
as the most glorious trophee of this Princes youth. Passing ouer
the Changers Bridge, which was couered ouer head, they let flye
two hundred dozen of small Birdes.
The King went to pray in our Ladies Church, he supt and lodged
in the Pallace, and the next day he went to the Tournelles in
St. Anthonies street, where hee made a new world, changing his
chiefe Officers, The Duke of Bourgondy and the Earle of Charolois
made a great part of the pompe, they and their traines being
so ritchly appointed, as there were not any more stately. The King
made shew of great loue both to the father and sonne, but there
was so great a diuersity of manners and humors betwixt Lewis and
Charles, as this harmony lasted not long.En^y and Iealousie which trouble great men will not suffer the one to reioyce at anothers good. Themi^tocles not able to indure Cymons prosperity dyed through Impatiencie. Into their most sincerest
affections, Iealousie, which is the poison of friendship, did alwaies
creepe: There was nothing pure nor perfect, the prosperity
of the one was a troublesome crosse vnto the other.
The King came vnto the Crowne like a new heire to his fathers
possessions,Lewis seeks for the rights of the Crown. who doth not so much affect his kinsmen and tutors,
as he desires to see his Registers, examine his accompts, and
know if he doth enioy all the rights of his successions: from these
first wordes they iudge what his designes and actions would be.Not onely by the first actions, but by the first wordes of a P^ince comming to the C^owne they iudge of the future: so the word which Seuer^s spa^e, L^boremas, and that of Pertinax, militem^s, were taken for signes of warre or peace in the Empire. AElms Spart.
The Pompe and magnificence of this publike ioy being ended
the Duke of Bourgondy and the Earle of Charolois tooke their
leaues of the king to returne. The Duke went into Flanders and the
Earle of Charolois to Diion,Death of Mary of Aniou Queene of France. and then to St. Claude, the King
to Ambois to see the Queene his mother, whose dowry he assigned
vppon the County to Xaintonge and the Towne of Rochell: shee
did not long inioy this assignation, passing from this life vnto a
better. Her death aflicted them, who knowing that this King did
all of his owne head, and that he had no other Law then his will,
desired her a longer life, for her presence had been a causey to stop
these torrents.The great name of mother well bred and of vnderstanding is a great restraint vnto a Prince: Tacitus saith that after that Nero had lost his mother he fell to all dissolutions and excesse. Qua^ mal^ co^rcit as qualiscunque matris reuerentia tardauerat. Se^anus did a^so keep Tiberius in awe and the same author saith, that hee gaue himselfe to wicked and vnseemely things, postquam remoto pudore, et metu suo tantum ingenio vtebatur, when as hauing banished shame and feare, hee followed his own wit. It falls out ill with a Prince who sees nothing betwixt
God and himselfe whereof the respect should restraine him,
and be a bridle vnto him. She had endured much before her death.

The Chronicle of Lewis the eleuenth commends her patience vnder
her husbands raigne and humors, but she could not dissemble
the discontent which she receiued at the pleasure of her AugustusThey demanded of Liuia, Augustus wife, how shee had done to win and enioy Augustus. To whom she answered, in doing willingly whatsoeuer pleased him, and dissembling the plesures which he tooke in secret Dion.
As a good constitution of the body doth easily endure both heat
and cold, so the force and vigour of the mind doth without any
great paine resist these crosses and discontents, which are thornes
amidst the roses of marriage. This passion seazing vppon a weake
spirit and without defence, transports it to dislikes and extreame
hatred.
About the end of the yeare he went to Tours, the Earle of Charolois
after his returne from pilgrimage came thither to him;
where after they had spent some daies in the pleasure of hunting,
he had the Commission of Lieftenant Generall in Normandy with
36000. Crownes for his entertainement. This guift was without
asking. The benefits of Princes are sweeter offred then granted. He
had but one third part paid, which defect made him to faile in his
affection, and transported him to other thoughts.Men are more discontented to see themselues frustrated of thinges promised then of those which are but hoped for. In the one there is but mis^ap, and they complaine only of fortune: In the other contempt and they challenge him that hath broken his promise. Hee went to
Rouen to take possession of his gouernment, It was at Tours that
he began to frame his intelligences with the Duke of Brittanny.
These two Princes were yong, both discontented, and they which
know one another, salute a farre off. The Earle of Charolois did
conferre secretly with Romille Vicechancellor and Ambassador
of Brittany, to whom he gaue the seale of alliance wherewith hee
shall be soone reprocht.
Lewis entered into France a friend to all his neighbours. There
was not any but Pope Pius 2Pius 2. called a Councile at Manto^a in the yeare 1459. to consult of the meanes to resist Mohomet 2. who had made great ruines in Hungary, Albania, and Constantinople. who let him know that he could not
be so,Pius 2. presseth the abolition of the Pragmatike Sanction. if the pragmatike Sanction were obserued. To vnderstand
how France hath lost that which she had preserued so deerely, we
must take the discourse somwhat higher. The Pope had called an
Eugenius the 4. in the yeare 1443. gaue the Inuestitiure of the Realme of Naples to Alphonso King of Aragon, with the two Sicities Bartho, Flaccius in the life of Alphonse the 5. Pins. 2. gaue the inuestiture of the Crowne of Naples to Ferdinand bastard to Alphonso King of Arragon, Alexander 6. confirmed it to Alphonso 2. who left it to Ferdinand of Aragon, and he held it when as Charles the eight conquered the Realme. an assembly of Princes at Mantoua, to consult of the meanes to
make warre against the Turke, land to preuent the great deseignes
which hee had against Christendome. King Charles the seauenth
sent his Ambassadors thither, Prelates, Knightes, and Doctors, to
let them vnderstand his intentions for the generall good of the
Church. They made a priuate request vnto the Pope, that if hee
would be pleased to giue the inuestiture of the Realmes of Naples
and Sicile to King Rene, who had beene wrongfully dispossest against
the hereditary rightes of the house of Aniou, the which the
King desired the more earnestly, for that besides the affection of
blood which bound him to loue his kinsman and brother in Law,
he saw that the generall cause of Christendome would bee much
fortefied against the common enemy, for the Duke of Calabria
(the sonne of Renne) entring into the inheritance of his predecessors
propounded to aduance his armes, and to expell the Ottomans
out of the Empire of Constantinople, when as they thought that

the Christian Religion was at her period, and could go no farther.
Albunasat said that the Christian Relligion should last vnto the yeare, 1460. Abraham the Iewe said that in the yeare, 1464. the Iewish religion should bee in her glory and liberity, when as it was most afflicted. An enterprise whereof they had great hope, as well for the generosity
of this Princes courage, as for that he was in an age fit and
capable of such actions whereby the holy Sea might reape great
profit, the possessions depending of his patrimony being by this
meanesrestored vnto him.
The Pope vpon this propositionThis Act was imparted vnto mee by Gaspar Dauvet Siegneur of Marets Stuard of the kings house. The chiefe clauses are reported here in the margent Post qua^ plurimade laudibus Francorum. S. D. N. praeclare dixerat, adiecit etiam loqui in fanorem partis aduersae antedicti. D. Regis Rentai, de gra^di exaltatione ille gitime natorum aliqua in ijs interserendo quae potius tacenda fuisse videntur. hauing made a long discourse
in commendation of the French,The Popes affection to the house of Arragon hee added many things touching
bastards, fauoring couertly those which vsurped the rights of the
house of Aniou, and then falling vpon the decrees of the councile
of Basill and of the Pragimatike sanction, he said, that it was a spot
which did blemish the beauty of the face of France, and vnder
pretext whereof the Authority of the Apostolik Sea was disgrac'd,
the forces of Christian Relligion were weakened, the vnity and liberty
of the Church violated and troden downe, and therefore hee
was forced to speake,Popes threat against France. least his silence should bee reputed a conniuence
or carelesnesse, and that the wound which might bee cured
grew not incurable, and hee should be forced to abstaine from all
intelligence and communication with the French, alledging this
passage of Scripture.Alledging, that it is written in the old law: Surper omnem anima^ quae mortua est non ingredietur Pontifex. The high Priest shall not see a dead soule,
and shall not bee whereas there is sinne, or a perseuerance or obstinacy
in sinne.
At the same time the Pope made a Bull by the which he declared
all appellations to the Councile an execrable abuse, and neuer
before heard of,His Bull against appellations to a councell.This constitution begins thus Execrabilis and pristinis temporibus (...) tempes^ate nostra inoleuit abusus, vt a Romano Pontifice Iesu Christi Vicario, cui dictum est in persona B. Petri. Pasee ones ^eas, etc. and quodcunque nonnulli spiritu^ rebellioni^ imbuti non sanioris c^piditate iudic^i sed commissi enatione pece^t^ ad futurum Concilium prouocare presum^^^. invented by spirits of rebellion, not for any desier
of abetter iudgement, but to escape for sinnes committed, being
a ridiculous thingQuis il Iud ridiculum indicauerit quod^d concilium apell^tur quod (...) est neque seiture quae futurum fit? Pius II. Const. execrabilis. to frame an appellation to a Concile which
was not yet assembled, neither knew they when it would bee, and
that by this abuse the excesse remained vnpunished, rebellion against
the first Sea was supported and all Ecclesiasticall discipline
in confusion, wherefore by the aduice of the Cardinalls and Prelates,
which were then at Mantoua, he did forbid such appellations,
as erronius, detestable and pestilent, and charged them with censures
which receiued the Acts, or did fauour them.
The Kings Ambassadors tooke these words for cracks of thunder
and infalliable threats of excommunication, and hauing reported
them vnto King Charles the seauenth, his councell did beleeue
that he had resolued to curse both the King and his realme, and all
those that should cause the decrees of the Councile of Basill to bee
obserued, wherefore it was concluded that Iohn Dauvet his Attorney
generall in the Court of Parlament, should protest against his
threats, to auoyde the scandales which the Church and Christendome
might receiue, reseruing in all things a respect vnto the holy
Sea, and the obedience which is due vnto the Pope, conformable
to the holy decrees.

That the Pope should bee intreatedSummis desiderus op^at regia Maiestas vt idem, S. D. N. cu^ ^acris generalibus concil^^^ pace^ foneat and suis te^poribus Ecclesia^ Dei salubri^er regere and dirigere curet, sicuti sancti sui pre decestores facere studueru^t, and pace^ et vnirate^ ^nimo da^ seruare querat. and exhorted to consider duly of
the importance of this resolution, before hee did proceed to cut off such a
member from the body of Christendome, and how much it did import
him to keepe peace with the Councils, and not to suffer the vnity of the
Church to be violated at such a time when as all the forces of the infidells
were banded and vnited against her concord.Turkes make their profit of the diuisions of Christendome*
That as the KingIpse enim D. N. Re^ qui semper pa^is vniuersae Ecclesiae desideratissmus est. sicut magnis laboribus et sumptibus pa^^m et vnitatem inter sacra Concilia and ^el. rec. D. Papam Eugeniu^ ac consequen^er D. Nicolau^ successore^ eius prosecutus est vt illi in sede Apostolica pacifici maner e^t sic nunc vehemeter cupit vt sacti simus. D. N. modernus succede^s praefatis Pontificibus pace^ manu te^ere and conseru^re laborer* had labored, more then all Christan Princes, with
much paine and great expence, to mayntaine a peace, and vnity betwixt
the councils and Popes, Eugenius and Nicholas, to the end they might
remaine quiet in their seats. In like manner hee desired that the Pope
should confirme this peace and good vnion, causing those lets to cease
which were against the Cannons of the Pragmatike Sanction, made by a
generall consent, and to consider that such lets came onely from those that
affected more their owne priuat commodities, then the health of soules,
and could not endure that the Popes should march with the Councils in
the vnity of Spirit, as they had in former times done, when as their temporall
care was not so great as it is now, and that they did zealously seeke
the Kingdome of God before all things.To^lat differe^tias quae aduersus Ca^ones vniuersali co^sensu editos per non nulloru^ affectus quae r^^tiu^ plus priuata commoda quam salutem animarum suscitantur, impediuntque ne summi Pontifices cum generalibus co^ciliis in vnitate spiritus ambulent, eorumque decreta seruent, sequantur ac predicent sicut olim profite ha^tur ac promptissime facere solebant, dum non erat tanta commodorum temporal um sollici^^do and ante omnia (...) Dei ^ttentius quae rebatur.
That the King desyred the Pope would call a Council in a place of safty
and liberty, whereas the Pre^ats of the Church, and learned men fearing
God,Mony leuied vnder the pretere of warre and ill imployed* hauing charge to be there, might speake their opinions brotherly
and charitably in tranquility of mind, vpon the occasions which should
be presented, such assemblies being necessary to prouide for meanes to
resist the desseins of the enemies and persecutors of Christian Religion.
For although that vnder this pretext they had leuied great summes of
mony after diuers manners;Diuersae pecuniarum summae modis varus huins rei pretexta hacternus petitae et collatae suat yet Christendome had receyued no ease.
Besides the tenne years in the which the Council of Constans had or dained
that they should hould a councell were expired.
That the King propounded to submit him-selfe to all that should bee
determined and or dayned by the councell, to the end that so good an order
might be setled in the Church, as God might bee better serued and christian
people more edified; And to the end the council might be in all liberty,
it was necessary to chuse a place of easie accesse for all that would come.
That it was not credible (as many haue pretended) that the Pope was resolued to haue it held in the church of St. Iohn LateranVt aut em prefatum concilium rite celebrari possit necessarium est ipsum in tali loco constitui vt omibus pateat plena libertas. Nec creden^um est in veritate subsistere quod no^nulli ferunt S. D. N. velle in Laterano vniuersale concilium celebrare, cum locus ille fere omnibus nationibus Christianorum accessu difficilis sit and frequenter pestibus subditus, Stante que contradictione quam summus Pontifex aduersus canones conciliorum agere videtur, non il^ie esset plena deliberandi libertas, attenta etiam certa Liga quae aduersus Illustrissimum D. Re^atum Regnum Siciliae and suos here des and successor es facta (...) quam and ipse S. D. N. vt dici^ur aperte souer and suttine^ and Ligaeinsdem caput and principalis hetorie asseritur. seeing that
the citty of Rome was of hard accesse, in a manner, for all the nations of
christendome,The Pope a party. and many times subiect to great plagues, besides that, the
chiefe question being touching the contradiction which was made to the
Cannons of councells, their opinions could not be free; and the King was
well aduertised of the league which was made against Rene King of Siciie

and his children, whreof they made the Pope the head.
That when as a place of liberty and safety should be chosen in some other
Prouince, the Pope, if hee thought good, might transport himselfe
thither, with lesse pain then he should receiue if he continued his designe
to go in person into the East for the good of Christendome, or elce hee
might send his Legates as his predecessors had formerly done. That the
last Counsells hauing been held in the townes of Italy and Germany,
Many generall Councels haue beene held in France and we find in the History of the Church the Councell of Lyon 2. Orleans 4. and 5. Tours, Paris, Auuergne. reason would that now it should be held in France, as Pope Nicholas
the fift had promised, and therefore the King offered to prouide
amply for all that should be necessary.
That his Maiesty could not imagine that the Pope by his new
Bull against appellations to the Councill had any thought to interdict
the vse in such sort, as in no case, no not when there was question
to maintaine the Orthodoxall faith, or for the extirpation of
Schisme, or the reformation of the vniuersall Church, in the
head and members, for the wrongs which Popes might doe vnto
Princes and there estates, it might not bee lawfull to flie vnto this
remedyNeque etiam existimandum est ^undem S N D. per littera^ quas Mantuae publicasse fertur que incipiunt Execrabilis et Inauditus etc. voluisse prohibete vt in nullo casu fiue tang at conseruationem Orthodoxae fidei fiue extirpationem Scismatis, fiue vniuersalem reformationem Ecclesiae in capite et in membris super grauaminibus quae per aliquem summorum Pontificum inferri contingeret Principibus liciat quouismodo habere recursum ad iudicium plenarii concilii; cum sub generali prohibitione non veneant ea quae speciali expressione indigerent., seeing that vnder generall prohibitions they could
not comprehend matters which required a more speciall and
perticular expression, and principally those which did regard
the offences of Religion and the vnity of the Church, and which
fauoured Scismes and troubled the vniuersall estate of the
Church.
Wherefore if the Pope attempted any thing against the obseruation of
the holy decrees of the pragmatick Sanction, the King ment to flye to a
Councill,Protestation of the King to fly vnto a Councel.vbi vero idem D.N.S. cui potestas data est in aedificationem non in destructionem eam conuertere vellet contra ipsum D.N. Regem aut viros ecclesiasticos vel etiam seculares ipsius dominii constitutos and sibi subditos and adhaerentes propter obseruationem Cannonum grauare et molestare. Protestor ego Iohannes Dauuet Procurator Regius generalis and in parte specialis nomine antedicto and per notarios subscriptis de talium sententiarum ac censurarum nullitate iuxta canonicas Sanctiones. etc. and vntill it had determined thereof, he protested of the nulity
of all censures, according to the forme of the Canonicall Sanctions,
the which in many cases declared the sentences and censures of Iudges
and Pastors void, yet submitting themselues to the iudgement of the vniuersall
Church.
That if the Pope should refuse, and would deferre the calling of the
Councill, the King declared that he would exhort all Christian Princes,
to labour iointly for this Conuocation, yet hoping that the Pope hauing
duly considered of this iust and necessary instance, would not put him to
that paine.
To make this protestation more sollemne, and to shew that the
King did affect it,France the Sanctuary of Popes and that the Pope should haue a care not to incense
a realme which had alwaies beene the sanctuary and refuge
of Popes,Gregory 3. deman^ed succors of Charles Martel against Luytprand King of Lombards who was forced to yeeld the lands which hee had vsurped of the Church Carol. Sigonius lib. 3. de Regno Italie An. 739. Plat. Pepin his sonne forced Astolpho King of Lombards to restore the sixe gouerments of Rauenna to Pope Stephen ^. and hee made warre against Guai^ier Duke of Aquitanie who vsurped the goods of the Church. Regin. Sigebertus. Charlemaine defended Adrian against Didier King of the Lombards, and restored Pope Leon. C. Volumus 2. Q. i. Adrianus dist. 63. Lewis the gentill and Charles the bald ga^e great succors to Pope Iohn 8. Paul Emilius. Pope Gela^ius 2. went into France to demand succors of Lewis 8. against Henry the Emperor, Platina in Gelatio 2. Innocent 2. and Eugenius the third, being driuen out of Rome came into France, and the Kings of Fra^ce haue the honor to haue restored seuen Popes to their sea^es. And France hath lodged the 70. yeares in Auignon* Paloti de rubros Nauarra. who had neuer found more speedy and better succors

against their enemies then the sword of France, and who haue with
reason called this Realme the admirable quiuer bound to Gods
side, out of the which he drawes his chosen arrowes to shoot them
with the Bow of his mighty arme against Infidells: His maiesty
would that Andrew de Laual, Lord of Loheac Mareschall of France,
should be present with many other men of quality, Stephen Che^alier
Treasurer generall of France, and Iohn Barbin Aduocate generall
in Parliament. It was made in the presence of Iohn, Abbot of
the Monasterie of St. E^oy de braue, of the order of Premontre, and
of Peter Quesnot, pryor of the priory of St. Sauiour, neere vnto
Bray vpon Seyne.
Soone after the new raigne of Lewis the eleuenth made it knowne
that things maintained so religiously by King CharlesCharles the seuenth was made Lord of the obseruation of the Pragmaticke Sanction, and if death had not preuented him, ^ew^s resolued to call an Nationall Councel to haue it better obserued.,Pope Pius the second, exhorts K. Lewis to abolish the pragmatick Sanction. were not
religiously respected by him. The Pope hauing well obserued it,
caused him to be exhorted to respect the holy Sea, and to apprehend
the danger of excommunication. He sent his Nuncio vnto him to
perswade him, and to put him in minde of the name of most Christian,
which his predecessors had carried, and which the Councill
of Mantua had newly confirmed to King Charles his Father.
They found the pursuite of this reuocation more vnfit for Pope
Pius the second,Pius the second d^^a^owes his owne writings. then for his predecessors, for he himselfe had been
the instrument of these Decrees, he had beene present at the resolutions,
hee had written them, and vndertaken the defence of the
Councell of Basill, against that of Eugenius. They did alwaies obiect
vnto his Nuncios that it was a shame to gainesay himselfe, to
ouerthrow the worke of his owne hands, and that Dignities had
changed the Maximes of conscience. Wherefore in the end of
Aprill 1463. he made a declaration containing a great repentance
of that which hee had done in the Councell of Basill against the
PopeThis Bull was directed to the vniuersitie of Collin, to the which he wrot many things against Engenius, ending with these wordes, Haec est nostra sententia filii: haec credimus, and profite^ur: haec iam senes, et in Apostolatus aeque constituti, pro veritate asserimus si qua vel nobis, vel aliis conscripsimus aliquando, quae huic doctrinae repugnent, illa tanquam erronea, and ^uueneli animo parum pensata iudicia reuocamus, atque omnino respu^mus*, and directed it to the Vniuersitie of Collin. He excused
himselfe by his youth, comming but newly from the Schooles, the
force of the perswasions of so many great prelates whom hee saw
banded against Eugenius, the example which had seduced him, and
ignorance which should excuse him, thinking not to erre after so
many great Doctors, and especially of the Schoole of Paris, whose
reputation was then very famous, and of the vniuersities of Germany
Nos homines, and vt homines errauimus, neque imus inficias, multa quae diximus, scripsimus, egimus damnari posse, verum non vt Arrius, ^^thyces, Macedonius, aut Nestorins, and alia blasphemorum turba, ex animo damnatum viam eligim^s, seducti peccauimus, vt Paulus, and ignoranter persecuti fuimus Ecclesiam Dei, and Romanam primamque sedem, propter quod prostrati ante oculos diuinae pietatis, supplices oran^us, Delicta inuentutis me^, ignorantias ne memineris, and pudet erroris, paeniteut fecisse vt male dictorum scriptorumque vehe menter poenitet, plus scripto quam facto nocuim us. Who declared Eugenius vnworthy of Peters chayre, for
that he had broken and hindered the course of the counsell which
he himselfe had called, and refused to approue and effect their decrees.
But that now knowing this Error, he coniured all the world
to note the distinction betwixt Aeneas Stluius, and Pius the second,
betwixt a priuate man and the great Vicar of Iesus Christ, betwixt

the errors of a youth without experience and the thoughts of an
age touched with the Spirit of God: Then hauing made a great
repentance of his opinions, he published his beliefe of the Popes,
Authoritie,Words of S. Bernard. and said of the person of Eugenius the fourth, that
which S. Bernard had said of EugeniusTu es sacer dos magnus, summus pontifex, tu princeps Episcoru^, tu haeres Apostolorum, tu primatu Abel, gilbernatu
Noe, Patriarchatu Abraha^, erdine Melchisedech* dignitate Aaron, auctoritate Moy^es, iudicata Samuel, potetestate P^t^us, Vnctione
Christus. Tu es cui claues traditae, cui oues creditae sunt. Sunt and alijquide^ coeli ianitores, and gregum pastores, sed tu tanto dignius quanto and differentius vtrumque prae illis nome^ haereditasti* Habentilli signatos sibi greges singuli singulos, tibi vniuersi crediti vni sumus. Nec modo ^uium sed et pastoru^, tu vnus omniu^ pastor. Haec Bernardus ad Eugenium 3. scribit, cui suprema^ and omnimodam in ecclesia potestatem concedit, quod ille in tertio testatur Eugenio, hoc nos de quarto, and omnibus aliis Romanis Pontificibus profitemur. the third, Thou art the great
Priest, the Soueraigne pastor, the prince of Bishops, the Heyre of the Apostles,
thou art Abel in primacie, Noah in gouernment, Abraham
in the Patriarchat, Melchisedech in Order, Aaron in Dignitie, Moses
in Authoritie, Samuel in Iustice, Peter in Power, and Christ in vnction.
Notwithstanding all these goodly words and the great reasons
wherewith the Nucios were armed to let the King know the
great wrongs he did vnto himselfe,The ^talians called the Council of Basill a conuenticle to breake with the Pope, in
fauouring the Decrees of a Councell, which Rome held to be but
a Conuenticle, a monopole, and Schisme: They found not any
one in his Councell, which thought it fit to breake such holsome
Decrees, and the King, who had been with King Charles his Father
at the assembly at Bourges, remembred how carefully they had
beene examined, solemnely published, and profitably obserued
fiue and twenty whole yeeres. The Pragmatick Sanction was a
law also for all the accidents of the policie of the Church, a soueraigne
balme for all the vlcers,The summe of the Pragmaticke Sanction. which auarice, dissolution and ignorance
might cause in her members.Frustra i^hiberetur inferioribus, ^^ipse qui alu^s debet esse omnium bonerum and virtutum exemplar, non abstineret. Vt enim ille sanctissimus and doctissimus Leo Papa, inquit* totius familia domini status and or, do nutabit, si quod inquiritur in corpore non inuenitur in capite. Integritas enim praesidentium, salus dignoscitur esse inferiorum. Pragm. Sanct. tit. de collatib.  frustr. And for that they labour
in vaine to keepe the body in health if the head bee sicke, it did
somewhat restraine the Popes authoritie, binding him to hold a
Councell euery ten yeares, and to obserue the Decrees which
should be made, yea that which the councell of Basill had made
touching the Elections, Reseruations, and Collations of benefices.
It did forbid expectatiue graces, and citations to the Court
of Rome, but in certaine great causes, and as for Appellations
they did no more passe the mountaines, the Pope did appoint
Iudges vpon the places for Appellants which depended immediately
vpon the sea of Rome, and as for others they might appeale
to the next superiour.
It tooke from the Pope a great part of the profits of his Chancerie;
forbidding the payments of vacances and Anuates, and reseruing
onely the iust fees for expedition of Buls. Pope Eugenius
considering the consequence of this Decree, sent his Nuncios to
the Councell of Basill, to haue it suspended; but the fathers intreated
him not to suffer such an abuse any longer, then declaring such
as should pay them Simoniacall: it added, that if the Pope did scandalize
the Church, in contemning the obseruation, it should be referred
to a CouncellEtsi quod absit Romanus Pontifex, qui prae caeteris vniuersalium conciliorum exequi and custodire debet canones, aduertus hanc sanctionem aliquid facien. do ecclesiam scandalizet, vt generali concilio deferatur. Caeteri vero pro modo culpa iuxta canonicas sancti. ^nes per suas superiores digna vltione puniantur: Prag. Sanct. tit. de Annat.  Non fiant.. It would not allow the Pope to make Cardinals

after his owne phantasie, but with aduise of the other Cardinals,
that there should not be aboue foure and twenty chosen out
of all the churches of Christendome, to the end the number should
not abase the esteeme of so great a dignitie, which made them
which were aduanced companions to the Pope; and the hinges
whereon the gates of the church were setStatult sancta synodus vt deinceps Cardinalium numerus adeo sit moderatus, vt ne sit grauis ecclesia nec superflua numerositate vilescat, qui de omnibus Christianitatis partibus, quantum fieri commode poterit, astumantur, vt notitia rerum in ecclesia emergentium facilius haberi and super his maturius deliberari possit, sic tamen quod numerum 24. inter eos qui nunc sunt, and ad assume^dos, non excedat. Ita quod de vn^ natione vltra tertia^ partem respectu Cardinalium pro tempore existentium, ac de vna ciuitate et dioe cesi vltra vnum inde oriundum and de ea natione quae nunc vltra tertia^ partem habet vsque ad ipsius tertiae pattis reductionem else ne^queant..The quality of Cardinals.
It would haue them also thirtie yeares of age, lawfull and not
deformed in bodie nor defamed in manners, Doctors, or Licentiates,
in the one or the other lawe, with a rigorous examination,
and that the third, or at the least a fourth part should bee Diuines;
not suffering them to receiue the Nephewes of Popes, or of Cardinals
that were liuing. The congregation of the French Church
being assembled at Bourges found this Article too rigorous. It
did also ordaine due recompences for learning and merit. And that
there should be Prebends in Cathedrall and Metropolitane churches
for Diuines to read and preach, and that graduates should be
preferred to prouisions of benefices. It did not allow that commonalties
or prouinces should bee interdicted for the offences of
priuate men, or of Magistrates, nor that excommunications should
be of force, before the sentence had beene pronounced and published.
It disposed of that which was necessarie for the ornament,
policie, and direction of Diuine seruice, it did punish (but gently)
publike concubinaries, hauing been first aduertised to reform themseluesPublici concubinarii, saith the Councell of Basill, intellige^di sunt non solum hi quorum concubinatus per sententiam aut confessionem in iure factam seu per rei euidentiam quae nulla possit tergiuersatione celari notorius est, sed qui mulierem de incontinentia suspectam tenet and per super^orem admonitus eam non a dmittit. Prag. Sanct.  Publici. tit. de concubinariis..
They were freed for the priuation of the fruits of their
benefices during three monthes. Pope Pius the second was not
to be blamed if he did so earnestly presse this reuocation, and his
Ministers did often solicite the King, filling his conscience with
feare of excommunication, and telling him continually that there
was neither Iustice, necessitie, nor profit, that could giue the title
of a lawe to that which was ordained without authoritie, and
that it was a sinne to subiect his subiects thereunto. The Cardinall
of Albie managed this pursuite: La BalueHierom Garimbert Bishop of Galicia hath written these words of Balue, essendosi infignorito dell animo dele Re, simulamente loteneus in conti^^o disparer con la sede Apestolica per vligar p^i il Papa a riconoscer la Reconciliatione dall opera, and dall autorita sua, per consequente a gratificar lo del capel rosso, come fece. who had great credit
with the King, interposed great difficulties, to make the Pope
know that the effect of his intensions depended of him. But as
soone as he had promised to make him a Cardinall, hee did fit his
head to that hat.
La Balue being of a turbulent Spirit,The Bishop of Eureux vndertakes to satisfie the Pope. being desirous to trouble
the affayres, and to excell rather in Authoritie then merit, went to
the parliament to haue this reuocation passe, S. Roman the Kings
Attourney Generall opposed himselfe, whom they threatned
with the losse of his estate, and to make him repent it. He who
desired that all things should faile him rather then to faile of his
dutie and the dignitie of his charge, said vnto Balue, I had rather

loose my estate, my goods and my life, then to doe a thing contrary to
my dutie and the good of the Realme. What Pris^us HeluidiusPriscus Heluidius was aduised not to come vnto the senate, hee answered, It is in the Emperors power not to make mee of the Senate, but whiles I am a Senator hee shal not let me from going to the Pallace, You shal be suffered, said the other, to goe, so as you speake not. Helu. I wil not speake a word if they demand nothing of mee. But they will aske you. Helu. And I will answere what I shal thinke fit. If you speake, they will put you to death. Heluid. And whe^ did I brag that I was immortall? You shall doe your duty and I mine. It is in you to kill me, and in mee to die without feare, it is in you to banish me and in mee to goe vnto it cheerefully. could haue answered more generously?
The Vniuersitie of Paris made her Remonstrances vnto the king
not to suffer the decrees, conformable to the purest constitutions
of the Church for discipline, pollicie, and libertie, to be broken.
In this great agitation of minde, the Popes Ministers promised
the king that the reuocation of the Pragmatick Sanction
should bee made without preiudice of the ancient liberties of the
French Church, and that the Pope would send a Legate into
France, to conferre the prouisions of Benefices, so as the French
should not be bound to send money to Rome.
The king vpon this assurance consented to the abbrogation.Pragmatick Sanction abolished and dragged through the streets of Rome. The
Cardinall of Alby was sent to Rome with charge to tell the Pope, that the King submitted all the busines of the Church, and the goods
thereof to the Holy Father, to vse in this Realme, prout vellet, as he
pleased, without any regard of the liberties of the French Church. But
being satisfied, he had no care to giue the king that contentment
which hee promised and suffered the patents to bee shamefully
drawne through the streetes of Rome: Behold how choller spares
not euen insensible things. They shaddowed this choller with a
reason that the Pragmatick Sanction was bred in a time of Schisme
and Sedition. The courts of Parliament of France, which haue
the rights of the church as it were in protection, did not allow of
this reuocation, so as it was neuer obserued, and the Clergie did
not obserue the Popes command vpon this subiectIn the beginning of Pope Leo his Bull, wee read this. Licet Pius. 2. Nunci^s ad clarae memoriae Ludouicu^ 11. Franciae Regem Christianissimum destinatis, t^ntis eisdem persua serit rationibus rationibus, vt Rex ipse Pragmaticam Sanctionem tanquam in seditione and Scismatis tempore natam suis patentibus literis abroga^erit, tamen hui^smodi abrogatio nec etiam literae expeditae per Praelatos and personas Ecclesiasticas dictiregni receptae non fuerunt, nec ipsi Praelati and personae Ecclesiast^cae illis parere, nec monitis Sixti, Innocentii and Iulii aures praebere, sed eidem Pragmaticae constitutioni inhaerere voluerint.. The Buls of
Sixtus, the third: Innocent, the eight: Alexander, the sixt: and Iulio
the second were fruitlesse. The Decre of the Councell of Lateran
serued to no purpose, and this Pragmatick Sanction ended not before
the Concordants were past at Bolonia, betwixt Pope Leo the
tenth, and king Francis the first.
They did iudge by the kings first actions,1461. what the manner of
his gouernment would be,The King discontents the Nobilitie. and that he would beautifie the diuinations
of his raigne with other trophies then of clemencieClemencie is the Ornament of the raigne of Kings, they should begin with it. Nouu^ imperium occupantibus vtilis clementiae ^ama. Tacit. lib. 4. Hist.. Hee
disappointed in a manner all the officers and seruants of king
Charles his Father, taking a great delight to vndoe that which hee
had raised, and to raise that which hee had puld downe. He gaue
Berry onely to his brother for his portion, vpon condition that
it should returne vnto the Crowne if he dyed without issue male.
There was a time when as the Kings of France left vnto the Princes of their bloud the proprieties of their portions, Philip of Valoi^ left the Countie of Valois to Charles his younger brother. Philip the Faire was the first that ordained by his C^dicill that the County of Poictou, giuen by him with other lands to his yonger sonne Philip of France, who afterwards was K. Philip the Long should returne to the crowne for wa^t of Heyres male, vpon condition the King which should then raigne should marrie his Daughter. Hee tooke the Seales from Iuuenall of Vrsins, and gaue them to
Peter of Moruilliers. The Duke of Alencon was a prisoner in the

Castle of Loches, whom he set at libertie. Hee caused the Earle of
Dammartins processe to be made, and after that the Court of Parliament
had condemned him to dye, hee gaue him his life, vpon
co^dition that he should imploy the remainder in the Ile of Rhodes
for the seruice of Christendome, and should put in caution: but
not able to find any, hee had the Bastil for his prison, from whence
he escaped in the night by a hole which he had made in the wall, at
the same time when as the Duke of Berry passed into Brittanny.
Taneguy of ChastellTaneguy of Coastel Nephew te him that ^l^w the Duke of Bourgunay was master of the horse to K. Charles the seuenth, hee retired into Brittany where the Duke made him his high steward and Chamberlaine. being discontented for that he was not satisfied
the money which he had aduanced for the funerals of Charles
the seuenth retired himselfe to Francis Duke of Brittany.
This Prince had succeeded to Arthur of Brittany Earle of Richmond
his Vncle,Francis the second Du: of Brittany. and was well informed of the humor and designes
of Lewis, and therefore in the beginning hee sent his seruants
throughout the Realme disguised in the habites of Iacobins and
Franciscans, to moue the people to looke vnto the beginning of
this Raigne, and to coniure them to defend their libertie with
tooth and nayleThe Embassadors of Sparta, beeing sent to Xerxes, said vnto Gidarne who commended the felicity of such as serued the King. If thou didst know Gidarne what libertie were thou wouldest counsell vs to defend it, not with the launce and target onely, but with our teeth and nayles., aduising them that this King entered into the
Realme, as into a countrey of Conquest: that he held all that pleased
him to be lawfull: That he forced great men not to obey but
to serue: The people not to bee gouerned but tiranized, and to
prepare themselues to liue in such sort as they might say they had
not any thing.
Being aduertised of the Duke of Brittaines practises,The Kings voyage into Brittany. he went to
see him, vnder coulour to visit the Church of S. Sauiour of Redon.
Deuotion was the pretext, and a desire to know the Dukes country
and forces the cause of this PilgrimageIt is a great aduantage to know the forces of an estate which one meanes to assaile, and to measure them with his. It was the aduise of Xenophon. Chabrias said that theron consists a part of the Generals dutie.. He was not resolued
to leaue him in peace. He knew well that, three or foure yeares
before, hee had sought to make himselfe a companion to King
Charles the seuenth, hauing refused to doe him homage vpon his
knee, and without his sword for the Dutchie of BrittanieIn the homage which Francis the second Duke of Brittany did vnto King Charles the seuenth at Mo^bason in February 1458. Iohn of Estoteuille said vnto him. My Lord of Brittanie you should put off your girdle, And Chauu^n Chancellor of Brittany answered, He ought not, It were an innouation, he is as he should be.: hee
had also discouered that hee and the Earle of Charolois had giuen
their faith, to runne the selfe same fortune, although that the
remembrance of the Death of the Duke of Orleans his grandfather
by the mothers side, had beene able to disswade him from
the house of Bourgundy, and that it had beene better for him to
ioyne with his Cozens, the Dukes of Orleans, and Angolesme,
and to continue his designe vpon the Duchie of Milan, to recouer
his grandmothers inheritance, whereof Francis Sforce had ceazed
Francis Duke of Brittanie, sonne to Richard of Brittanie, and Margaret of Orleans, Daughter to Lewis D. of Orleans, and Valantyn of Milan had vndertaken to make warre against Francis Sforce. An^al of Brittanie.. The Venetians and Borso of Este Duke of Ferrara gaue eare
to the propositions which they made, giuing hope to assist the
rights of the house of Orleans.
These first years of the Raigne of Lewis were very sharpe, and
those which followed altogether insupportable. Great men were

depriued of their Dignities,Rigor in the beginning of Lewis raigne. and the meaner opprest with great
charges. There was couetousnes for men of merite, and prodigalitie
for the rest.It is good a^ter a prodigall Prince to haue one that is cou^tous, who may restraine those excessiue pr^fusion, he that findes not any thing to giue cannot be liberall. He said he would gather money together to
redeeme the townes vpon the Riuer of Some. He had knowne what
a crowne was worth, and how many peeces would make one: They
that haue past by the indiscretions of necessitie, proceed very discreetely
in their expences. If all the time that hee had beene banished
from the Court, he had no want of necessarie things, so had
he no great abundance superfluous.
His sparing was the lights which swelled by the leannesse of all
the other members. The complaints of the RigorWhen as the people are opprest they dare not accuse the Princes rigor but cast their complaints vpo^ that of the time of the time, became
murmurings against the seueritie of the Prince. Euery one
lamented the Raigne of Charles, and desired rather the end then
the continuance of that of Lewis: Great men beganne to make it
knowne that they could not liue long in that seruitude, and shewing
themselues more sencible of the contemptThe nature of man is more sensible of contempt then of losse. The Senators of Rome were more discontented for that Caesar entred into the Senate without saluting them, then for the enterprise which hee made vpon their libertie. which was
done them, then of the miseries which the meaner sort suffered, yet
they found no better pretext of their priuate interest, then that of
the publike.
The King did not attend the consent of the Realme to haue
money, hee tooke it without asking. They were not tributes of
Loue,Princes finde pleasing names for things which are bitt^r and hard. Edward the fourth in posed vpo^ the Realme of England a tribute which hee called a B^^euolen^^. Euerie one did contribute as hee pleased, and according to his gifts they did iudge of his Loue to the King. He that gaue much loued much. Edward made vse of this tribute against the French and found great succors, Polid. lib. 24. and 26. but of Rigour and constraint, thinking that France was
a meadow which he might mowe at all seasons. A great sedition
troubled the citie of Rheimes, against those which had raised customes.
The Commissaries were slaine and their Commissions
cast into the fire. The King sent Souldiers, disguised like Marchants
and labourers, who entring by diuers ports, ioined with the Lord
of Mouy their commander, who caused a hundreth of the most
seditious to bee hanged, suppressed the seditionThe most frequent and knowne causes of sedition and muten^ gr^w from new charges and excessiue impositions., reuenged the
Kings seruice, and setled his authoritie there, the which had not
beene impugned but for the naturall impatiencie of the people, to
endure that whereunto they were not accustomed.
All France was quiet,Combustions in England. and beheld as from the shore the tempests
which were in England and Arragon. The King was glad to
entertaine the warre farre from him, and to assist the house of Lancaster
in England, and the house of Arragon in Spaine, whiles that
the clouds and windes prepared to draw the storme vpon his owne
head. England for the diuision of the houses of Yorke and Lancaster,
saw at that time such terrible changes and accidents, as it is a wonder
the Realme did not passe vnder some forraine command, and
that they did not cry quittance with him, seeing there is no surer
meanes to ruine an estate then ciuill discordCiuill Diuisions transport and change estates. Spaine vnder the raigne of fourescore and twelue Kings hath beene torne in as many peeces as it hath had Realmes. France hath changed thrice. England hath been commanded by the English, Danes, Saxons, and in the end by the Normans. The Empire hath been past from the East vnto the West* Naples hath been vnder the power of the French, Germans, Arrag^nois, and since of Castitians..
But France had yet so many bad humors in her body as her disposition

was more dying then liuing. When as the English ceast to
afflict her, they began to quarrell and to ruine one another. The
end of forraine warres was the spring and renewing of ciuil, Henry
of Lancaster, sonne to Henry the fift, found himselfe without a
crowne, notwithstanding that in his infancie he had been crowned
with that of France and England. Richard Duke of Yorke, an Ambitious
Prince, and who had both credit, courage,Good things and which are commendable of themselues applied to il are per^itions Sepius industria acvigilancia noxiae quoties parando Regno fingatur. Tac. lib. An. lib.^. industrie and
vigilancie, qualities to bee suspected in an Ambitious spirit, became
head of a great faction, the intentions whereof he couloured
with the onely zeale of the publicke good, to change the bad
gouernement of the Realme, and to deliuer England from the insolencie
of the Duke of Somerset, who alone gouerned the helme of
the affaires, whilest that the King suffered his spirits to be transported,
not to delights and voluptuousnes but to carelesnesAn idle Prince is a waies contemned. Three things saith Ze^ophon make him excell ouer his subiects. (...).. His
carelesse life incensed his subiects hearts, and his idlenes distasted
all men of his raigne. The estate was like vnto a sicke body which
is so prest with his infirmitie, as he is forced to trust him that comes
to let him bloud, and cannot attend the Phisitions which are
farre off,In violent diseases wee may not attend far fetcht remedies. although they answere him that they will come and
cure him.
Such as were discontented with the present,Conspiracy against King Henry the sixt. and desired to see
some change applyed them-selues to the Duke of Yorks desseigns
and intentions, and among others Richard Neuell Earle of Salisbury,
and Richard Neuill Earle of Warwick his brother, who had wisdome
and courrage, rare parties for a great desseigne, and therewith
such great credit among the people, as it was thought that
not any one in England durst doe that which these would vndertake.
The Duke of Yorke hauing cast his bell made the sound
thereof to be generally heard, hee strake such a terror into the
Court, and made the wicked so audacious, as the King (who had
neuer tasted of Domesticke troubles; his spirit beeing like vnto a
shipCourages tried in dangers are to bee commended. A ship is neuer esteemed which hath neuer felt of a storme. which had neuer sailed but in a calme) was amazed and
confounded, and not holding himselfe safe in the Citie of London,
by reason of the inconstancie of the people, and the great credit
which this faction had gotten, resolued to leaue it. The Duke
of Yorke besieged St. AlbonsThe battell of St. Albons began early in the morning and continued vntil 9. of the clock, in the yere 1556 Edmund D. of Sommerset, and Henry Earle of Northumberla^d were slaine., the two armies meet,Henry the sixt defeated and the
Kings is put to rout with the losse of their chiefe commanders.
Hee lamented greatly for the Death of the Duke of Sommerset.
After this victorie the Duke of Yorke, who had made declaration
th^t hee had no other intention then the publicke good of the
Realme, and that his armes were not to offend the Prince, accompanies
King Henry to London as a Conqueror, and freed from
the Rule of the Duke of Sommerset, which shewes that he had not
taken armes but to free the King and the Realme, who was ready to
submit himselfe to the mildest yoake, seeing that hee could not remaine
free.The miseries of ciuill diuision reduced Rome to that estate as hauing no hope euer to recouer her liberty, she sought for nothing but for the mildest ser^itude.. Hee left vnto Henry the name of King onely, for all
the authoritie was in his hands, he gaue to the Earle of Salisbury
the Office of Lord Chancellor of England, and to Richard Neuell

his Sonne the gouernment of Callis. He disposed of publike charges
as he pleased, still giuing them vnto those of his faction. In
the end the king discouers the Duke of Yorkes designe. Queene
Margaret his wife, who had been aduertised thereof, lets him vnderstand
that he did temporise but vntill the partie were made to
ceaze both of the king and Realme, and among his partisans the
king was held but for a Tyrant: As if his Raigne had been by vsurpation
or constraintAmong many differences betwixt a King and a Tyrant they put this, that a King raigns with the loue an^ consent of the people, and a Tyrant rules by constraint..
The king imparted this to his principall seruants,D. of Yorke retires from the Court of England. who were of
aduise to restraine this great authoritie which the Duke of Yorke
had within the Realme; The Duke beeing suddenly aduertised
thereof retired secretly to Wigmore in Wales, Richard Neuell to
his Castle of Midleham in the North Countie, and Richard Earle
of Warwicke to Callis, so as the cruell seditions in England grew
more violent then before, during the which the French spoiled the
coasts of Kent, and Iames king of Scotland, inuited by the same occasion,
entred by Roxborge. The same cause which made this warre
ended itThe sha^pest Ciuill wars are pacified when as strangers meddle to gaine by them. The two parties agree against the third, and although the Prince be offended, yet it is better to remit the punishment.. The king of England let the Duke of Yorke vnderstand
that the ciuill discord and the bad intelligence which was betwixt
them, had opened a gate to the enemies to inuade England; that
the common danger did binde them to vnite their forces to defend
it, and that hee was contented to forget all matters past, vpon
hope of a better conduct hereafter,English cease their ciuill discords to war against the French. excusing himselfe that matters
had not alwaies gone directly, being impossible for a Prince to obserue
all the kinds of Iustice and equitieMany things vniust of themselues are made iust when they are countenanced by necessitie or profit, wherfore Plutark obserues, That if there were question to accomplish al the kindes of iustice, Iupiter himself might not in that case bee a Prince..
The Kings intention was allowed by all men; the Duke of Yorke
being loth to be the author of the ruines of the Realme, declared
that all his affections tended to his greatnes and quiet, and to take
away all occasions of doubt, He came vnto the King to London
with the chiefe of his faction. The feare of a forraine warre quenched
the ciuillThere is no such indiscretion as to hazard ones own to get another mans, and to draw forth the bloud which is needfull for the life of the bodie. It is more glorie for a Prince to maintaine himselfe them to grow great. Preseruation and safety is the essence of an estate, profit it but an accessary. Mens mindes, altered with things past, grew
milder, and all their wills were vnited in one accord for the defence
of the Realme, detesting the discord which had drawne
them into a warre which was not necessarie, nor could bee
happie, and made them a prey and triumph to their auncient
enemie.
But as the fire of sedition is neuer so well quenched, but there remaines
some sparks in the ashes,Troubles renewed in England. which kindle again if they be a little
blowne, and that there be alwaies some which delights in troubles
(for that it is their rest,Seditions commonly are fed and supported by three sorts of men; First, the heads of factions; Secondly, they that cannot liue in safety in the time of peace; Thirdly, they which are out of the presse and find themselues free from dangers.) and in danger for that they come
not neere them, being like vnto those riuers which enter into the
sea and doe not mingle their streames, the Duke of Yorke and the
Earle of Salisburie being retired to their houses after this accord,
were presently forced to leaue them, to reuenge an affront done to
the Earle of Warwick at VVestminster, where he had been set vpon
by the kings guard, and forced to saue himselfe by the Riuer of

Thames with the hazard of his life. They said that Queene Margret
was the author thereof, being very desirous to ruine the Nobility
of England, and to ouerthrow the cheefe howsesA King should maintaine great families, neither can hee suffer the^ to be w^onged, but hee shal weaken the greatnes of his maiesty, wherof the Nobility is the cheese piller. In all estates the Nobles haue beene respected and distinguished from others euen amongst the Thracians; the genl^emen went only vppon horseback and at Rome Noblemens wiues went in Littors. who were
the pillers of the Realme.
The warre began as soone as it was declared. The three Richards
are in field, King Henry hauing leuied great forces comes to York.
Andrew Trollop; who was come from Calleis with the Earle of
Warwick, thinking to serue the King, when as he saw their armes
turned against him, left the Earle of Warwick to follow the King,
who in moment scattered his enemies and forced the Duke of York
to passe into Holland, there to attend vntill his Partisans had raised
the ruines of that party.Battaile before London whereas K. Henry was defeated. Presently after the three heads of the faction
returne into England, with an intent to vanquish or to dye, they
present themselues at the gates of London, they giue and winne a
great Battell whereas the Victors saw tenne thousand men slaine,
and as many prisoners. King Henry, who seemed to haue beene raised
vp to show the inconstancy of Fortune and the misery and vanity
of man, remained at the Victors discretion. The English remembring
that his grandfather had caused King Richard to dye in
prison, began to acknowledge the iudgements of Gods iustice, who
punisheth the Children for the offences of their fathersHenry Earle of Harford and Duke of Lancastre tooke armes against Richard the 2. seazed on him, puts him into the Tower of London and caused himselfe to bee crowned King* and after that he had forced him to resigne the Crowne hee sent him to Langle^, where hee was murthered..
In this great prosperity the make falls from the Dukes face. He
speakes plainely,Duke of York declared Regent. that whatsoeuer he had done was grounded vppon
the rightes of the house of Yorke, the which belonged vnto
him: The Parlament did then consider the iustice not the fortune,
and respected the Maiesty of the King though hee were a prisoner,
intreating the King to rest satisfyed with the Regency of the Realm
and to assure the succession to his house after the death of Henry.
He accepted the declaration of the Parlament, but considering
that Queene Margaret had a great Army on foot, to set her husband
at liberty,Battell at Wakefield. he resolued to fight with her. He gaue her battell
at Wakefield, against the aduise of his Councell, who intreated
him to stay vntill the troupes, which his sonne Edward, Earle of
March, brought him were arriued. Presumption troubleth his spirits,
with a motion contrary to that of Reason, which should haue
diswaded him from fightingThe violence of courage is dangerous vppon the point of a battell, for it darkens the clearenes of Iudgement, and doth easily change it to the trouble of reason and to that perturbation which the Philosoph* call (...) ^ Some haue written that the Queene caused the head of the Duke of York to bee cut off carrying a Crowne of paper: others say it was the Lord Cliffords deed.: for their forces were not equall although
in the courage of the Commanders there was no other
difference but that of sexe. No, no; it shall not be said that the Duke
of York, who had so often fought in France without any other trench or
defence then his owne armes, is shut vp, that he attends a woman and
doth not go forth to fight with her. He spake this and went forth with
5000. men, and met her. The Combate in the beginning was terrible
and furious.The Queen cuts off the Earle of Salisburies head. The Queene shewed her selfe among the troupes,
exhorting the Souldiers to honour and glory. Richard Duke of York
was slaine, and Richard Earle of Salisbury, whose head soon after the
Commons, who hated him, cut off, the which with many others of

the same faction was set vpon the walles of York, to bee a terror
and an example to other Rebells.
After this victory, the Queene, whose courage was eleuated vppon
the apprehension of all sorts of dangers,2. Battell at St. Albons. and who held them
lesse then the captiuity of her husband, resolues to loose her life
or to restore him to liberty. She goes directly to London, and
comming to S. Albons she encounters the Earle of Warwick,
who aduanced to succour his generall, with the same courage that
she had defeated the Duke of Yorke, shee chargeth the Earle of
Warwick, puts him to rout, and frees the King.The excellency of courage shewes it selfe when as the soule is carried beyond all showes and apprehensions of dangers, fortitudo contemptrix est timendorum. Senec. Epi. 89.
Edward Earle of March being aduertised of the death of the Duke
of York his father, refused not to tread in his steppes, and to imbrace
the toile,Edward Earle of March succeeds the Duke of York his father in his authority. from whence he expected his greatnes and glory.
He staid in the Prouince of Wales and expelled Iasper Earle of
Pembrooke. The Earle of Warwick ioyned with him, and with all
their forces he came to London, where he was receiued with incredible
ioy and acclamations. He was one of the goodliest Princes
of his time, and in great reputation, his bounty, courage and liberality,
were powerfull charmes to winne mens hearts, the English
thinking that hauing him they had all, and that their felicity was
tyed to the long continuance of his Raigne.A Prince can desire no greater proofes of the affection of his people, then when hee beleeues that nothing can saile him, so as hee faile not them. From thence are come these goodly acclamations, Augusto Constantine D^te nobis seruent, vestra salus nostra salus, ^od. Theod lib. 7. tit. 20. In te omnia, per te omnia Antonine habemus A El. Lamprid Dion. reports an excellent one (...), we haue all in hauing you. He is proclaimed
King, and for that hee would haue no companion in his royalty,
hee resolues to fight with King Henry, and marched directly to
York, lodging in a little village called Touton. Henry being prepared
to receiue him would not shew himselfe for that it was Palme
sunday, desiring to spend that day in the seruice of God, but the
souldiers seeing themselues so neere would not referre the partie
vntill the next day. They come to hands, the combat continued
tenne howers, and the victory, hauing beene long doubtfull
and in ballance betwixt both Armies, sodainely inclined to
Edward, The King and Queene seeing all their troopes put to flight
they saued themselues in Scotland with their seruantsThe Regent of Scotland led K. Iames the third. to meet with King. Henry the 6. and Q. Margaret. The good reception with the succor which he receiued, caused him to restore Barwick to the Realm of Scotland. and from
thence Margaret passed into France to her father to demand succors.Henry the 6. flies into Scotland.
Edward returned triumphing to London, and caused himselfe
to be crowned King at Westminster the 28. of Iune 1461. he called
a Parlement, where all that had bene decreed by King Henry the
sixt was reuoked. After that Henry had gathered together some
forces in Scotland, he returnes into England, being followed by
a great number of his ould seruants. The Iustice of his cause gaue
him good hopeHee that hath reason on his side is alwaies accompanied with good hope, hee pursues his quarrell with more courage and assurance, be exposeth himselfe to all dangers, and his subiects serue and succour him more willingly, and in all accidents the iustice of his cause doth comfort him. but he was repulsed with great dishonor by Iohn
Marques of Mountague.
King Edward beeing aduertised of the practises of Margaret,
both in France, Scotland and England, to restore her husband
to his crowne, he sets guards vpon the Ports and passages

of Scotland to stop her entrie, but as there is no miserie more
insupportable then the remembrance of what we haue been, King
Henry bare this change of condition so impatiently, as not apprehending
the danger neither of his life nor of his first captiuitie, and
not considering that fortune had neuer done him so much good
but might doe him more harmeMiseries doe but begin when as they seeme to end. There is not any man but may haue more harme then hee hath had good. Neminem eo Fortuna pronexit vt non tantum illi minaretur quantum permiserat. Sen. Epi. 4., he returned into England in a
disguised habite, where hee was discouered, taken, and presented
to Edward,Hen. the sixt put into the Tower of London. who lodged him in the Tower of London. If he had
thought that he had gone forth as hee did to get the crowne, hee
would haue giuen him one of copper made fast to his head with
foure naylesThe Emperor Henry the sixt beeing in Sicile discouer^d some conspiracie against him and his estate. He caused the chief of them to bee apprehended and to punish his ambition, he set a crowne of copper vpon his head, and caused it to be fastened with foure nayles. Nic. li. 2..
Queene Margaret, to effect her designe, had drawne some succours
from Rene King of Cicile her Father. The King lent her
sonne two thousand pound sterling at Chinon, vpon condition
that as soone as King Henry should recouer Callice, hee should
deliuer the gouernment thereof to Iasper Earle of Pembroke, or
to Iohn of Foys Earle of Candalles, paying him moreouer fortie
thousand crownes. But all this preuailed nothing, the King remained
a prisoner, and the Queene had much adoe to saue her
selfe with the Prince of Wales her SonneMonstrellet saith, that Queene Margaret, her Son, and La Varenne were met by theeues, that she said vnto a theefe that met her, bold my friend saue the son of thy King, that shee went to Scluce and from thence to Bourges, and that the Duke of Bourgundy caused her to be co^ducted to her Father. The Princes of the
house of Lancaster retired themselues whether their feete and dispaire
carried them. Some were seene in the Duke of Burgundies
Court in miserie,Misery of the house of Lancaster. begging their bread. Fortune how cruell soeuer
can doe no worse vnto a Prince, then to reduce him to the apprehensions
of hunger,Ph. de Commines saith, hee had seene a Prince of this house of Lancaster follow the D. of Bourgundyes traine and without hose, begging his bread from house to house, and that being knowne they gaue him a small pention to liue on. The beasts are freed from it, The fishes pay
no tribute to passe from Riuers into the sea. Swallowes flying
through so many regions dyed not of Hunger. It is a pittifull thing
that men, and the chiefe among men, haue difficultie to liue, and
to finde what to eate and drinke, and wherewith to cloth themseluesNature comprehends all the necessities of the world in these three words: Non esurire, Non sitire, Non algere, not to be hungry, thirstie, and cold, all the rest is superfluous..
Edward in this great prosperitie of affayres troubles not his
iudgement, but considers that the house of Lancaster was ruined
without hope of recouerie, and the Red Rose withered: That it
was impossible euer to rise againe, if it were not assisted with the
forces of France. Wherefore he desired to make his alliance with
the king, and sent the Earle of Warwicke to demand Bonna of Sauoye
the Queenes sister in marriage.Edward fals in loue with a Widdow. But during this negotiation,
Loue, which may be held a kinde of furie,Loue is put in the ranke of Melancholly diseases and kindes of fury, it peruerts the iudgement, and confounds the good with the euill. for that it troubles the
iudgement, carried the affections of this Prince to the seruice of a
Ladie who would haue held her selfe much honoured to haue serued
the Queene of England, and yet she had the ambition to be so.
Fortune agreed with her beauty. Being widdow to Sir Iohn Grey,
her age bound her to follow rather the life of the Doue then of the
Turtle,The Empresse Barba, wife to Sigismond the Emperor being told after the death of her husband, that she should imitate the Turtle If I must said shee initate beasts why rather the Turtle then the Doue or the sparrow. Aeneas Sil. de dict. Sigismondi et Frederici Imper. for her first marriage had scarce touched the flowers of
her beauty, nor of her youth. Edward did not liue but for her, his

heart receiued no law but from her eyes, to whom he did submit
the full disposition of his fortunes. She being powerfull in the
charmes of loue let him presently vnderstand that she did not accept
of the sacrifice of the hearts of Kings, but of the Altar of honour,
that he might not hope to haue her for a Mistris, if he would
not assure her to make her his Queene.
They that loue ardently are easie and tractable,Hee that loues refuseth not any thing. In loue there is force and pleasure, force constraines the will, and pleasure deceiues the iudgement. they spare
neither wordes nor oathes. Edward transported with this fury, forgets
the sute which he made in France, and changeth all his wills
into the obedience of this Lady, who seeing her selfe to command
ouer the Kinges heart, assures her selfe to raigne soone in his
Realme. He is not capable to refuse her any thing. The wind of
her disdaines, and the couldnes of so faire a mistris may well
quence the fire in the beginning, but being once kindled it giues
it nourishment and increase. In the end Edward promised to make
her Queene, and his promise was presently followed with the consumation
of the marriage, to the great amazement of the Nobility
of England, who thought the King was bewitcht,Beauty and grace are the mighty charmes of loue said Olimpias the mother of Alexander. Loue which growes from amorous drinckes continues not. Plutarch gueth these Epithites (...). short, toublesome, and changeable. And he saith it doth easily change into hatred and disdaine. and wisht him
a more honorable alliance. Lewis tooke it ill, and the Earle of
Warwick was so greeued, as from that time he was wholly the
French Kings, who by his counsell plotted a reuenge which shall
shew it selfe in the yeare one thousand foure hundred seauenty
one.
Marriages and alliances, vnworthy of the greatnes of Princes,
cause murmurings and discontentments in the people.The people which loue their Princes reioyce at their victories and prosperities, They are aflicted at their losses especially if they do any thing which may impaire their honor, as when they treat of alliances vnworthy the greatnes of their houses. Tot luctibus funesta ciuitate p^rs maero^is fu^t: quod Iulia Drusi filia quondam Neronis vxor, dempsit in domum Rubelli^ Blandi, cuius Auum Tiburtem equitem Romanum plerique meminerant. Rome
did mourne generally when as Iulia, daughter to Drusus the sonne
of Tiberius, and widdow to Nero son of Germanicus, married with
Rubellius Blandus whose Grandfather had carried no other title
then of a Knight.
The great Calme which was in France,King Lewis goes into Guienne. did notwithstanding presage
a great storme, and gaue the King meanes to visit some of the
prouinces of his realme; he went to Burdeaux, whereas he treated
of a marriage betweene the Lady Margret his sister and Gaston of
Foix, who was sonne to Elenor of Aragon, daughter to Iohn King
of Aragon and Blanch Queene of Nauarre. He accepted this Alliance
for that this yong Prince was valiant and coragious, and
that the successions of the Crowne of Nauarre, Foyx, Berne, Bygorre,
and other Lands lying in France did belong vnto him. The
Earle of Foyx sent his Ambassadors and Deputies to the King being
at Bordeaux to conclude the treaty.The cheife condition of the Marriage was that the children which should be borne without distinction of mal^ or female should succeed in the counties of Foix and Bygorre.
He past to Bayonne to end a controuersie betweene the 2.
Kinges of Nauarre and Aragon,1462. and Henry King of Castile his Nephew.
A controuersie begun with great spleene, and was continued
with the like, and had not ended without excesse if he had not
dealt in it, for the parties flattered themselues in their pretentions,

were blind in their interests, and found that the obscurenes proceeded
rather from the thing then their owne blindnes. But behold
the causes and the effects. After the death of Charles the third
Charles the third King of Nauarre taking delight to build at Olita died suddenly in September 1425. the threescore and foure yeare of his age, and the thirty nine of his raigne, he was buryed at Pampeluna. King of Nauarre, the Crowne past from the house of France
and Eureaux into that of Castile and Aragon, not without trouble
and discord. Iohn, second sonne to Ferdinand of Aragon, married
Blanch, Infanta of Nauarre, presumptiue heire of the Realme
of Nauarre, and widdow to Martin King of Sicilie, and it was agreed
by a treaty of marriage, that in case she should die before her
husband, hee should raigne the rest of his life in Nauarre after
king Charles the third his father in law.
Of this marriage was borne at Pegna,Charles Prince of Viana born. Charles Prince of Vianna,
a title belonging to the eldest Sonne of the King of NauarreCharles the the third King of Nauarre ereected Viana into a principalitie, and did affect it to the eldest son of Nauarre in the yeere 1421.,
as Dauphin to that of France, The Asturiez in Castille, and Wales
in England. Charles the third, his grandfather, made him to bee
sworne heyre of the Realme by the Estates after the death of Iohn
his Father. Charles being dead, Iohn was declared King of Nauarre
by some, and Blanch his wife was acknowledged Queene by
others, yet both were crowned at Pampeluna.
Iohn had great warres with his brother the King of Castille,Marriage betwi^t the Prince of the Asturies and Blanch of Nauarre.
who did confiscate the lands which he held in Castille, Iohn Earle of
Foyx reconciled them, by a marriage betwixt Henry Prince of the
Asturies, sonne to Iohn King of Castille, and Blanch Daughter to
Iohn king of NauarreBy the constitution of the marriage of this Princesse which was of 42112. Florens of gold, wee may iudge in what estate K. Charles the third had left the Realme of Nauarre.: The marriage was celebrated with great
pompe and solemnitie, but the Prince was vnable to consummate
it; The which the Princesse did long dissemble. Shee had great
cause to complaine of this want, and to wish her selfe to be a widdow
or her husband vnmarriedThe dissembling of couiu^all imperfections is very seemly and especially in a woman, Tullia a great Romane Lady is blamed for her ordinarie complaints and murmuring at her husbands disabilitie De viro ad fratrem de sorore ad viru^, se rectius viduam and illu^ caelibem futurum. Tit. Liu., but like an other Eusebia shee did
long suffer for the disabilitie of Constans, desiring rather to wrong
her youth and beautie, then her modestie.
A while after Blanch Queene of Nauarre died, and king Iohn married
againe with Ione Henriques. Charles Prince of Viana, fearing
that his alliance would keep him back from the hope of raigning,
and from the inheritance of the Queene his Mother, did not dissemble
his discontentA desire to raigne makes the father iealous of the sonne, Plutarc saith in the life of Demetrius, that the greatest and most ancient of all Alexanders successors did glorie that he feared not his sonne, but suffered him to approch neere his person holding a Iauelin in his band., pretending that by the lawes of the
Realme his Father by marrying againe had lost the fruit of the
Crowne. Behold all naturall affection is altered betwixt the Father
and the Sonne. The desire of rule makes them enemies, the
Father growes iealous, and would not suffer his Sonne to come
neere him armed. On the other side, this second wife, seeing her
selfe mother to Ferdinand, did what she could to show that she was
mother in law to CharlesWhat will not an ambitious mother doe and vndoe for her children. D. Ioane lying in the bed of death by reason of a Cankar which did consume her, remembring what she had done to assure the Realme vnto her Sonne, spake often these words with sighes, which are reported in the 21. booke of the history of Spaine. O my Son thou hast cost me deare. For him she had caused Don Charles to bee poysoned., and neuer ceast vntill this young plant
were qu^^^ht by the nipping cold of her bad intentions, seeking
to haue a share in the regencie of the Realme in the absence of the

king who had reuiued the warre in Castille. Hence sprung those
two great factions,Factions of Beaumont and Grandmont. that of Beaumont which followed the intent of
of the Prince against the King, and that of Grandmont which was
for the father against the sonne, so as presently the Realme was diuided
into two kings, and two constables, Lewis of Beaumont Earle
of Lerin was Constable to the Prince, and Peter of Perault was
Constable to the king.
The kings cause, as the better and more iust, remained victorious,
the Prince beeing twice ouerthrowne is forced to flye
to Alfonso king of Arragon, Valencia, Sardinia, Maiorca, Minorca,
and Sicile, hee had recourse vnto his clemencie, and besought
him to pardon him. The king, who could not forget the
loue of a Father vnto him who shewed the dutie of a Sonne, receiues
him, but hee had new aduertisments that hee made secret
practises to trouble him, wherefore he sent him prisoner vnto the
Alferie of Saragossa, from whence hee was drawne by the Cattallans
who tooke armes for his libertie,Charles of N^uarre poisoned by his mother in law. but he went out of the prison
to enter into a graue.Charles Prince of Viana died being forty yeares old, a valiant Prince, a great Historian, a subtill Philosopher, and a good Poet, hee translated Aristotles Ethicks into the Castilain tongue, and hee wrote the History of Nauarre vnto the time of King Charles his Grandfather. For the very day of his deliuerie he was
poisoned and dyed with much repentance for that hee had rebelled
against the king his father.
The Infant Don Ferdinand was acknowledged heyre of the
crowne of Arragon. They of Cattellonia tooke armes to reuenge
the death of Prince Charles. The seditious, who blow the cole of
this desection, said that his soule walked in the night through the
streetes of Barcellona complaining that the Queene his mother in
law had separated it from his bodie, by the violence of poison.
The Queene who was come to Girona saw her selfe besieged with
Prince Ferdinand her Sonne, and the Tower wherein she was retyred
furiously battered. The king seeing this great reuolt of his subiects,
entreates Lewis the eleuenth to succour him with men and
money, hee ingageth the Counties of Rousillion and Sardaigne
vnto him for three hundred thousand crownes.King of Nauarre demaunds succors fro^ the French King. The king sent
vnto him Gaston Earle of Foix, Prince of BerneGaston Earl of Fo^x married the second Daughter of Iohn King of Nauarre and of Queen Blanch his first wife., and sonne in
law to the king of Nauarre, who freed the Queene and raised the
siege of Gironna.
The Cattellanes, nothing tractable to endure the humors of
their Prince, made a proclamation against the king, declaring
him falne from all the authoritie which he might haue ouer them,
and a murtherer of his owne sonne, and violating the lawes of the
country,,They of Cattellonia* decla^ed the K. an enemy vnto the countrey by diuers informations and proceedings against his actions, and the murther of his son, the which they sent to Pope Pius the second. They sent to Henry King of Castile to embrace their
defence and protection, submitting themselues vnder his obedience,
and offering him the crowne of Arragon, beseeching him to
adde vnto the iust title, which their election gaue him vnto the
Realme, the right of Armes, they alone doe purchase Empires,
There are fiue kindes of Titles to Realmes: the first by Armes so Cyrus, Alexander an^ Caesar, made themselues Monarches: secondly, by the grace of God, and in this manner raigned Moses and Dauid: thirdly, by succession: fourthly, by election: and the fist by the nomination of the Prince. Marc. Anthony named Lucius Verus for his successor: Dioclesian Maximinian: and Gratian Theodosius. and being gotten defend and preserue them.
He gaue them for succors two thousand and fiue hundred horse
vnder the command of Iohn of Beaumont Prior of St. Iohn of
Nauarre,The K. of Castill aides the Cattellans. when the French and the Castillians met neere vnto Ixar,

they would not fightNo man can dispose as hee pleaseth of Auxiliary troupes, they haue respects co^trary to the designe of such as imploy them., and the French intreated the king of Nauarre
to take it in good part if they sought rather to end then entertaine
their quarrels.
The Earle of Foix, who was brother in law to the king of Castill,
and sonne in law to the king of Nauarre, disposed the two
Princes to referre themselues to the iudgement of the French
king. They yeelded, sending their embassadors to Baiona, where
the French, king was, an honor pleasing to the humor of Lewis who
would be interessed in all things and very deere to the reputation
of France, which was in possession, not onely to iudge of the controuersies
of forraine crownes, but also to giue kings vnto those
which had not anyThe realmes of Christendome haue taken Princes out of the house of France to raign ouer them. Alphonso son to the Earle of Tollousaraigned in Spaine, the house of Eureux in Nauarre, the Dukes of Normandy in England, they of Aniou at Naples and Sicilie. The Empire of Constantinople was held three yeres by the French. They haue raigned a hundred yeares in Sora Cipres and Palestina. Charlemain and Lewis the gentle haue added vnto the Empire of the Gaules all Italy, Bohemia, Hungarie and Germany. In a word the seat of Popes haue beene in France..
The king of Nauarre went not from Saragossa,Lewis the French K. made arbitrator betwixt the Kings of Castill and Arragon. nor king Henry
from St. Sebastians in the prouince of Guipuscoa; relying vppon
that which their Embassadors treated. The king hauing conferred
of the controuersie betwixt them, and of the causes which had moued
the Cattellans to reuolt, did iudge in such sort as to reconcile
the parties, it was necessarie they should meete and speake together
vpon the frontier. The enterview was at Endaia, whereas the sentence
giuen at Bayona was read by Aluaro Gomes. The Cattellans
were not content with this Iudgement, saying, that as the king of
Castille had abandoned them, so his Embassadors had betrayed
them. The king of Nauarre being offended for that hee was condemned
to yeeld the towne of Estella to the king of Castille,Enteruiew of the Kings of France and Castill. to the
preiudice of the reuenues of the crowne of Nauarre, made the estates
of Nauarre protest of nullity.
King Lewis reaped the greatest profit of this action: for he practised
and drew vnto his seruice some Ministers of these two kings,
and made them his pensionersThe King of Castille suffered himselfe to be gouerned by the great master of Castille and the Archbishop of Tolledo. King Lewis made much of them to be informed of the state of Castille, or at the least to drew them to his deuotion: It is the least a Prince can attend of one that comes to see him.. This assembly did not confirme
the affections which the crownes of France and Castill had had together.
The friendship and alliance betwixt the French and the Cast^llans haue continued long. Vpon which assurance K. Charles the sixt sent his Embassadors to Iohn King of Castill, in the yeare 1418. to (...) succors against the English* The Castillians, who could not lodge at Bayona with the
French without quarrelling, did not forbe are to scoffe at them at
this enteruiew vpon the Riuer of Vidasa.The riuer of Vid^so di^ides the two realmes, the Spaniards hold it is all theirs. The King of Castill past
the Riuer and came vnto the king. The Castillians seeing him attired
in cloth, and very short, with a hat differing from the rest and
for a Iewell an image of lead, imputed it to miserablenes.Apparell doth often minister cause of laughter. The Siciliens did not esteeme of Gilippus their generall seeing him simply apparelled in a poore cloake, wearing long bayre, yet Sy^^^^s saith, that the ancient Kings were knowne and distinguished rather by the minde then the pompe and (...) (...) Syn Orat (...) regno There
are Nations whereas they contemne the Prince, if hee bee not so
gorgeously attired as if he should show himselfe vpon a theater. It is
impossible to abstaine from laughter looking vpon the portraites
of the Emperors of Greece, which are so couered with Pearle and
precious stones, as they can not bee knowne but by their beards.
The French finding also the habites of the Castillians vnpleasing,

their king very hard fauoured, and their manners insolent and full
of African pride. Of all this there could grow no great Alliance,
for such enteruiewes are alwaies noted more by the alienation of
mindes, then by alliances of estates. The two Princes are obserued
by two Nations, that which pleaseth the one disliketh the
other.(...) King, said that hee deserued to be Emperor, and called the Emperor a little man and a (...) Prince. Sa^. lib. 15. They are contemned sometimes euen by them that follow
them, when as they obserue in the other something that is more
gallant.
Thus France fortified and inlarged her frontier with the County
of Roussillion, notwithstanding that it was sufficiently assured on
that side both by the great rampiors which serue for bounds, and by
the weaknesse and barrenesse of those prouinces,An army cannot come out of Spain. on this side the Pyr^ne mountain^s out it will be halfe defa^ed, the Prouinces wher it shall be (...) and by w^tch it shall passe are so ^arren as (...) can hardly feed t^e inhabitants. But she lay open towards the Low-countries, The duke of Burgundy holding
in Picardy, by ingagement, fiue important townes, Amiens, Abbeuille,
St. Quentin, Corbie, and Pontheau, for the summe of 400000.
ovld crownes of gold and of 64. to the marke.
Although the King found not that in his coffers which prouident
and wise Princes should leaue vnto there successors to mayntaine
and assure their estate,Redemption of the Townes vpon the Riuer of Some.As a body cannot moue without si^ewes, so a Realme cann^t maintaine it self without tr^asure. Wise Princes haue alwaies had care to leaue vnto their successor. Cyrus left fifty millions of gold. Tyberius 67. Occhus King of Persia 80. millions, and Dauid 120. yet hee disposeth himselfe to redeeme
them. There was some difficulty on either side. For the king had
no mony, and the Duke had no will to leaue these goodly places.
The Earle of Charolois thinking that his father had beene perswaded
therevnto by them of the house of Croii, held them for his enemies,
and made an assembly against them at Cambrey. The father
supports and countenanceth them, he murmures, and stormes,
and quits them both court and credit, and so retires to Gaunt. The
estates of the countrey depute men capable to restore him to his
fathers fauour, for that this diuision could bring nothing but ruine
to the state, and content to the enemie.A diuision which grows among persons whom Nature hath vnited, giues subiect to (...) enemies to make their profit. ^^^^ratus being in had termes with his children* knew that his (...) he assembled his councell and (...) after this manner. I haue desired to reduce my children to reason and to their duties, but now seeing that they are wilfull and obstinate. I pardon and will doe what they will haue me. Plut.
The Earle of Charolois being accompanied by many Noblemen
of the countrey came vnto the Duke being at Bruges and craued
pardon. His repentance and humilitie would not suffer him
to be refused. They of Croi^ felt the smart, which fals vppon those
that sow diuision betwixt persons so neere allied. When the king
had drawne out of many purses the money necessarie for this redemption,Redeeming of the townes engaged.
he sent it to Hedin, whereas the Duke was, and came
thither presently after himselfe. The Duke intreated him to continue
and confirme the officers which had beene preferred during
the ingagement. The King promised it, but his intention was
not to keepe promise, but so farre forth as the good of his affayres
did permit, nor to assure himselfe in the affection of those which
depended of him of whom he could not assure himselfeMonst^let saith that the King gathered together a greatnesse of treasure (...) for there was (...) Chancerie, nor famous Marchant in France, but he did (...) that commanded for the D^ in the townes redeemed, were put from their places, the Captaineship of (...) which (...) held, and that of Mortague which Hault (...)..

Many things past which the Duke of Bourgundy, beeing impatient,
could not dissemble. He sent Chimay to complaine and to
let the King vnderstand that hee was neither of age nor humor to
be exercised by the continuance of iniuries in the schoole of Patience.
Chimay let the King know that the Duke his master was not
insencible of his actions, and spake of his vertues and courage, as
of a Prince that was inuincible and incomparable, borne of another
fashion then other men, like vnto the Lunarie women of Herodotus.
Herodotus speakes of certaine Lunarie and extraordinary women who layd egges which brought forth men fifteen times bigger then those of the ordinary ^^ature. The which made the King to aske him if hee were of harder
steele then other men? Yea Sir, answered Chimay, for if he were
not harder, hee neuer durst haue attempted to haue nourished you fiue
whole yeares against the threates of a great King such as your father
was.
The Earle of Charolois did not beare this restitution so patiently
as his Father, hee cannot diuert his thoughts. Amiens is
the obiect of his eyes; in his Feasts and Bankets his heart is still
vppon Peleponesus.Cleomenes King of Lacedemonia being at a feast where there were two Orators, one demanded of him which of the two had discoursed best* for my part said bee my mind was vpon Peloponesus. After the King had redeemed the Townes*
ingaged, and changed the officers and Gouernours, which the
Duke had placed there, not being able to trust them, who had bene
made by one, who had giuen so many crosses to France,There is no treaty of accord or alliance that can free the hearts of Princes fro^ the distrust they haue one of another. he would
see Arras, and lighted at the towne gate, going on foot to our Ladies
Church: He remained eight dayes in the Citty, and had some
cause of discontentment, for that they had refused lodging to his
Harbingers, saying that they were not bound by their priuiledges
before that all the Innes were full. Entering, there were many banished
men presented themselues to haue Pardon, but he told them,
that it depended vpon the will of the Duke his Vncle, wherein hee
would not attempt any thing.
He visited the Church and Abbey of St. Vaste: in those times
Kings went to see religious men, for religious men went not out of
their Cloisters to see Kings,The King goes to Arras.Charles the 6. besieged Arras in Iuly 1414. Lewis Dauphin of Vienna his first son was there with the Earles of Orleance, Bourbon, Barre, Bauaria and Charles of Albert Constable of France. The Towne was yeelded by a treaty of peace published on twesday the fourth. of Sept. following. without the Towne hee also saw the
place whereas king Charles the fixth his Grandfather had incamped
and lodged when as he besieged Arras in the yeare 1414.1463. They
obserue that hee would not lodge in the Bishops Pallace, but in
the Officialls house, taking more delight in small lodgings then in
great.
From Arras he went to Tournay where he was met by 3000. men
euery one carrying a Flowerdeluce embroydered,He is receiued with great pomp into Tournay. as a signe that
their heartes were all French: This Towne bragging that they had
neuer knowne any other command then French. There the Lord
of Crouy came vnto the King, who made him Lord Steward of
his howse and gaue him the County of Guisnes. In the beginning
of Lent, and at the end of the yeare, whose beginning was then
accompted from the resurrection, the King went to Lisle, whether
the Duke of Bourgondy came to conferre with him of his voyage
to the holy land.Cr^ysado published against the Turke. Pope Pius the second, continuing the designes of
Calixtus the third, had published a Croysado to releiue the Christians
of the EastCalixtus the 3. perswaded all Christian Princes to make warre against the Turke, he sent Lewis of (...) a ^rier to Vs^m Cas^an King of Persia and Armenia, and to the great Tartar^ hee exhorteth them with such vehemency as they were resolued Platin. Hee inuited all the Princes who imbraced his

designe with such resolution as Mahomet was terrified with the
great preparation.The deuise of this C^oysado car^ied these words Dieu la veut, God will haue it, Mahomet was so amased as writing to Pius the second he said. I am not guilty of the death of Iesus Christ, and do abhorre the Iewes who crucified him. The Pope declared that he would go thither
in person.Croysado published against the Turke. But great Cosmo de Medicis said that it was the designe of
a yong man in a great age. The Kinges of Naples and Hungary
were resolued to accompany him. The Duke of Bourgondy
promised also to be of that party, and demanded aduise and leaue
of the King, who represented vnto him the discommodities both
of his age and voyage, finding him much broken to beginne such a
building.The age must be considered in great and l^ng enterprises. Marcus Cras^us found King Deiotarus in the Realme of Galacia, who being very old built a new Citty, who said vnto him in mockage, O King mee thinkes you build very late, beginning at the last hower of the day. To whom the K. answered sodainely. And you O Captaine came not forth very early to make warre against the Par^hians. Fo^ Crassus was aboue 60. yeare^ old. But the Duke carried his courage beyond all these
difficulties. The king propounded so many vnto him as hee diswaded
him for a yeare, assuring him that after that yeare hee
would giue him 10000. men entertained for foure monthes, to accompany
him. The Duke of Bourgondy, for that hee would not
giue the Pope any subiect of discontent, sent Anthony his Bastard
thither with 2000. men.
The king left the Duke of Bourgondy at Lisle and returned
to Paris.Duke of Sauoy comes into France. He found Lewis Duke of Sauoy the Queenes father at
St. Clou, who was come to see him, and to complaine of Phillip
his yonger sonne, who for that he had a more generous and actiue
spirit then the elder had wonne the heartes of the chiefe of the Noblemen
of Sauoy and of his Subiects:The Duke of Sauoy was a simple and a mild Prince. Amy Prince of Piemont his eldest sonne, was of the same hum^r and had great inclinations to solitari^^s. Phillip his yonger Brother giuing greater impressions of his generosity, and courage was followed, by all the great men of the Country. vppon this complaint the
king commands Pr^^ce Phillip to repaire vnto him,Lewis Duke of Sauoy dyed at Lyon the 24. of Ianuary 1466: his heart and bowels were interred in the Celestins Church which he had caused to be built. His body was carried to Geneua and laid by Ame of Lusignan his wife. and he comes
with speed, beeing arriued hee was sent prisoner to Loches. The
Duke being well satisfied to see his sonne lodged (whereas hee repented
him of his ambitious and extrauagant humors) returned
into Sauoy and two yeares after dyed at Lion, whereas hee attended
the king who was at Molyns. Amy his sonne succeeded
him.
The king being at Paris made it presently knowne that he was
not to indure that which the necessity of time had caused his forefathers
to suffer to the preiudice of the rights of the Crowne, and
hauing prepared his designes, he made choyce of the occasion to
execute them:To haue a will to doe, and disposition to know how to doe, and yet to attend the occasion of well doing it the act of a Prince of great patience and wisdome. he sent Moruillierre, his Chancellor, to the Duke of
Brittaine, to let him vnderstand that if he called himselfe any more
Duke of Brittaine, by the grace of God, if hee continued to coine
any gold,The Duke of Brittaine as a sou^raigne Prince had right to coyne ^^^uer, but that of gold was reserued by treaty to the Crowne of France, the great whereof should bee expres^. Charles the fift gaue it to the Duke of Berry who did coyne peeces of gold stamp^ with a sheepe, which Bodin aff^rmes to be the finest gold that euer was since within this Realme. or if he hindred him from leuying of taxes and from
the collation of Benefices in his country, he proclaimed warre against
him. The Duke being amazed at this demaund, answered
that it was so great and of such importance, as hee could make no
answer without the aduise of his estates, intreating the King to giue
him three monthes respite to assemble them.

But this was to plead law to men that were armed.Po^pey being in Sicile pressing the Mammartines to acknowledge his authoritie they sought to auoid it, pretending that they had priuiledges and ancient Decrees from the people of Rome, to whom Pompey answered in Choller, will you plead law vnto vs who haue our swords by our sides. Plut. The King
had an Army vppon the frontier, The Duke was prest and surprised,
yet resolute rather to loose himselfe then to quit that which
his fathers had purchased for him: wherefore he thought to make
answer vnto the Kings intentions by armes rather then by wordes.
He aduertised the Duke of Bourgondy of the estate of his affaires,
and coniurd him to thinke of their common safety, seeing that the
Kinges designe was to entreat them alike and to ruine them.
Romille Vice Chancellor of Brittanny made many voiages into
Flanders vppon that subiect. The King, who had eyes and eares in
euery place, being aduertised thereof, commanded the Bastard of
RubenpreThe King sent a sea Captaine and the bastard Rube^pre with him into Holland, he landed at the Hage with three others in his co^pany. Hee was examined what hee was and whe^ce he came, but hee made some difficultie to discouer his name and the cause of his co^ming. The Earl of Charolois being their caused him to be apprehended as a Pirate. to passe with a ship along the Coast of Holland to surprise
Rommille, and to bring him vnto him or to kill him.
The Earle of Charolois being at the Hage in Holland,Rubempre staid at the Hage. Rubenpre
lands with three other disguised like a Marchant. The Earle
caused him to be stayed, and gaue it out that he had attempted by
the Kinges commandement to take him or to kill him. At such
time as the Duke was at Hedin with the King, it was generally
bruted, and the king was blamed for this designe in open pulpit
by the Preachers of the multitude, who intermixt their discourses
with matters wherewith they should not meddle.It is an insupportable abuse to make the word of God an instrument of seditio^, to moue mens mindes to follow the passions and interests of the world, beeing onely ordained to guide them in the waies of saluation: Of such Doctors or rather busie bodies, we may say with La^^tantius. lib. 3. cap. 30. Facessant omnes isti qui vitam humanam n^n instruunt sed turbant. Let all these be silent which rather trouble then instruct mans life. Oliuer de la
March the Dukes cheife steward, hauing made many voiages vpon
this occasion, could not hold his peace, but spake what he thought
to the preiudice of the Kings honor. The Duke vppon this aduertisement,
fearing to be staid, parted secretly from Hedin without
the kings leaue or priuity.
The King was offended at this iniury done vnto Rubenpre, and
at the repors which were diuulged vpon his voyage into Holland.Complaints and discontents of the King.
It had been a timiditie both dishonorable and dangerous to dissemble.
In fearefull and induring hum^rs contempt is infallible. They feare not to wrong him who hath no care to reuenge it. He sent Moruillier his Chanceller, the Archbishop of Narbonne
and the Earle of Eu to the Duke of Bourgundy, to complaine
of the detention of the Bastard of Rubenpre, and for that
he had suffered his Maiesties name and respect to bee wronged
publikely and taxt: That Oliuer de la March and a religious man
had spoken il of him, and that the Earle of Charolois had allied
himselfe vnto the Duke of Brittany. These were the complaints
whereon their embassy was grounded.
Moruillier represented the Kings intentions with much bitternes
and passion, quallifying this intelligence of the Duke of Brittanie
and the Earle of Charrolois with no milder name then crime
and conspiracy, adding that he could not conceiue why it had been
made, but for that the Earle of Charolois was discontented for that
his pension was not paid himThe Earle of Charolois was much moued at that word which imputed his discontent to a matter due, which the greatnes of his courage made him to contemne, thinking that Moruillier would inferre thereby that hee could not liue without his pension..

The Earle of Charrolois thinking that his silence would preiudice
himselfe and wrong his friends defence,Impatience of the Earle of Charolois. did still interrupt
Moruilliers discourse. The father, who had bred him vp more to
heare then to speake h, staid his impatiencie to giue Moruillier
leasure to discourse of the Kings complaints with the like heate as
he had begunne them. The Duke hauing heard him with patience,
answered, coldly and wisely, that the bastard of Rubempre
being charged with crimes, had giuen his sonne cause to doubt of
his stay in Holland where hee had been taken, a countrey which
did not acknowledge any other Soueraigne then himselfelaqueline Countesse of Henalt and Holland was wife to two ^usba^ds the Du.^o^ Glocester brother to the D. of Bedford, and the D. of B^abant. Being d^famed for her adulteries shee declared Philip Du: ^f Burgundy heyre to her countries, Henalt, Holland, and Zeland in the yeere 1426. The first cause of the bad intelligence which was betwixt the Burgu^dians and English and reconciled Philip and Charles the seuenth.: That
Oliuer de la March was borne in the Franche CountyOliuer de la March was son to Philip de la March, who serued the house of Bourgundy fifty yeares, and is author of the obs^ruations which are published in his name. and was
not answerable before any Iudges of France: That if he had erred
against the Kings respect hee would cause him to bee punished.
And as for the preacher of Bruges he knew not what was become
of him, and that he was a man of that condition as his conscience
would not suffer him to lay hold of him.
The Earle of Charolois did still interrupt Moruillier in his discourse,
who told him that hee was come to speake to the Duke
his Father and not to him. Whereupon the Earle entreated his father
to suffer him to speake, I haue answered said the Duke for thee,
as in mine opinon a father should answere for his sonne, yet if thou
hast so great a desire, thinke of it to day, and to morrow speake what
thou wilt. He would not haue his sonne carried away with those
blind guides Choller andIa affaires of consequence, and especially when one that is more mighty is to bee satisfied, nothing is to bee answered suddenly nor with choller. They suffer troubled water to settle that it may bee cleare. Choller and precipita^ion are enemies to Counsell. Precipation.
Moruillier persisted in the bitternes of his discourse, forgetting
nothing that might be said to blemish and disgrace a Prince. Hee
shewed that the Bastard of Rubempre had been sent by the King to
stay the Vice-chancellor of Brittanie returning out of England:
That hauing landed at the Hage in Holland, the Earle of Charralois
had been too suspitious. The Duke answered that the Bastard
of Rubempree had been found faulty. As for his Sonne, the
Earle of Charolois, if he were suspicious, hee had it not from him
but from his mother, who was a very suspicious and distrustfull
woman, and yet notwithstanding if hee had been at the Hage at
the passage of Rubempre, he had done no lesse then his sonneD. Isabella, Infanta of Portugal, daughter to the King Don Iohn was married to Philip Duke of Bourgundy in the yeare 1429. and was mother to Charles..
Moruillier co^plained also, that the D. went from Hedin without
taking leaue of the King, and against that which he had promised.
Ha, said the Duke, with some little perturbation and heate, finding
himselfe toucht with the breath of his word.Nothing can be reproched more sensible to a Prince then the breach of his word, who should rather faile himselfe then his promises, wherein he should be (...) lesse i^dicious then constant. I neuer promised any
thing but what I haue kept. And fearing that in speaking this they
should finde that he was moued, he added smiling, that hee had
neuer failed of his word but to Ladies, that hauing promised the
King not to goe from Hedin, he had added this condition if there
came no other newes. That the discouerie of the Bastard of Rubempre
and other important matters had caused him to goe to horse.
Hereunto Moruillier,The D* co^plaines of the Kings breach of his word. seeing you haue alwaies shewed such affection
and goodwill vnto the King, let him not now beleeue the contrarie,
in refusing so small a thing as hee demands. It is true said the Duke I
haue neuer failed in my affection and loue vnto the King, but I may
well say that he hath neuer granted me any thing that I haue demanded,
and hath kept nothing of that which hee hath promised me,Whe^ a Prince hath an opinion not to hold any thing that hee promiseth hee may say that ^e hath put himselfe out of the commerce and negotiation of all sor^s of a^^aires, for no man can treat with him that hath nothing valuable but words. There is nothing but distrust and iealousie of his actions, detracta opinione probitatis witnes
the townes engaged which he should haue suffered mee to enioy during
my life.
And for that Moruillier did still infist to haue Rubempre, the
which was a matter of consequence against the Dukes soueraigne
command. Peter of Goux a knight and master of the lawes, said,
that although the Duke was vassell vnto the King for some lands,
yet he had others that did not acknowledge any other Soueraigne
but himselfe, holding of the simple grace of God who had honored
him as well as the King with the Image of his eternall gouernment
A royalty is the figure of eternall g^uernment and the Image of the Diuine monarchy, And therfore Kings haue been held as the fathers of the people. Aristotle in the third booke of his Pol^^^ckes saith, that a realme is the power of one that doth gouerne the co^monweal^, not seeking his own p^iuat^ profit, but that of his subiects. That the Duchies of Brabant, Luxemburgh, and Lotrech:
the Earledomes of Bourgundy, Henalt, Holland, Zeland
and Namure were soueraigne countries. Yet he is no King said the
Kings Embassadors, to whom the Duke answered, I would haue the
world know that it was mine owne fault if I be not, yet will I not tel how
or by what meanes.
The next day the Earle of Charolois presented himselfe vnto his
Father in the presence of the French Embassadors, kneeling vpon
a Cushion of Veluet, an exemplary act of Reuerence and Humilitie
of a Prince of thirtie yeares old vnto his Father, and which
assures this truth: That who so will be honored of those which be
vnder him, should not faile to respect and honor those that bee
aboue him. The scope of his discourse was to iustifie himselfe for
the taking of the Bastard of Rubempre, and the confederacie betwixt
the Duke of Brittaine and him, wherein hee protested hee
had no other designe then the Kings seruice, and shewing that his
condition had wherwith to content himselfe with his owne, and contempt
of an other mans; there beeing no lesse glorie in the contempt
then in the possession,It is for great courages to contemne Riches. The shortest way to riches is to contemne Riches. It is easier to disdaine then to possesse all. hee added that it was not for any
discontent he had for the taking of his pension from him, for
that, with the fauour of his father, he could liue without the Kings
bounty.
Whereupon,Departur^ of the Fre^ch Embassadors. the Duke intreated the Embassadors to tell the
king that hee besought him not to beleeue any thing lightly against
him and his sonne, and to hold them alwaies in his fauour.An Embassador must neuer suppr^sse words of brauery nor threates which be heares spok^ by the Prince vnto whom he is sent. They
presented a banket vnto the Embassadors, the History saith, wine
and spices. When they tooke their leaues, the Earle of Charolois
spake these words vnto the Archbishop of Narbonna,Phil. de Com. lib. 1. one of the
three Embassadors, recommend me most humbly vnto the Kings good
grace, and tell him that hee hath sought to disgrace me by his Chancellor,
but before the yeere bee past he will repent it.
From these little sparkles grew that great fire of the warre of
the commonweale. The Duke of BurbonneThe visits of great persons are suspitious. Iohn Duke of Bourbon making shew to go see the Ladie Agnes his mother at Bruxells treated the league of the publike weale with the Duke Periculosae su^t secretae coitiones. who was the intellectuall

agent,The D. of Bourgundy comes to see his mother at Bruxells. faining to goe see his Mother at Bruxells, conferred
with the Duke, but did not discouer the secret, saying onely,
that the Princes had no other intent but to present a petition vnthe
king to reforme the disorders of the state and to haue forces
readie, to the end hee might know how many were interressed
in this reformation. Such as entered into this league knew one
another by a silken point which they carried at their girdles.
Although the king had spies in all places yet knew he nothing
of these coniunctions and assemblies. Princes are within and
not aboue the world to see all that was done. They must bee aboue
the heauens to know the ecclipses by themselues and not
descend low to see the effectsThe effects of great designes doe often break forth before the causes are discouered. A vigilant Prince doth alwaies vse peruensions and diuersions.. The league was borne before he
knew the conception, hee did not apprehend that it should show
it selfe on the Burgundians side, for he considered, that although
the sonne were violent and ill affected towards him, yet the father
wanted no iudgement to restraine him, and iudging that
the ayre could not be troubled but towards Brittanie, he assembled
both the Princes of his bloud, and the chiefe of his Noblemen
at Tours about Christmas 1464. and propounded vnto them
the great occasions he had to preuent the designes of the Duke of
BrittanyThe King as Montstrelet saith, made this assembly to co^plaine that the D. of Brittaine had said, that he had a designe to make warre against the Princes and to dispossesse them of their lands..
It was at this assembly that Charles Duke of Orleans could not
forbeare to speake for the Princes of the bloud,See Claud. Saysell in the life of Lewis the twelfth. beseeching the
king not to doubt of their loyalties and affections. The king
was offended at this remonstrance, and reiected it with words
full of spleene, bitternes, and contempt. The Duke of Orleans
being thus roughly handled, and grieued that in an age of threescore
and ten yeares, he was not heard by him whose grandfather
had vouchsafed to heare him in his youth, could not endure them,
not considering that they came from the mouth of his king, who
was not bound to fit them to his humor, and that he must swallow
them sweetly without murmuring, for the demonstration of
the offence doth but augment it. He died for sorrow two daies
after, the fourth of Ianuary 1465. Hee was interred at Bloys, his
bones were carried to the toombe of his Father at the Celestins
at Paris, the 21. of February, 1504. by the commandement of
king Lewis the twelfth his sonne: After the battell of Azincourt he
remained fiue and twenty yeares prisoner in England. The English
would not deliuer this Flower-deluce without ransome, and
to redeeme him the D. of Bourgundy payed three hundred thouthousand
crownes. What a change* Iohn Duke of Bourgundy
depriues Lewis of Orleans of his life, Philip Duke of Bourgundy
his sonne giues libertie to Charles of Orleans, and to make the bond
perfect, he giues him the golden fleece, and marries him to his
Neece Mary of Cleues, shee was the third wife, hauing before his
imprisonment married Is^bel of France, widdow to Richard King of
England, and Bonna of ArmagnacThe afronts which are receiued from great persons must not onely be disgested patien^ly, but also after a constant manner, murmuring auailes nothing. Many haue made of scratchings incurable* wounds, and oftentimes the iniury is doubled, and renewes when as they make it knowne that it is receiued according to the designe of him that doth it.By Mary of Cleues hee had Lewis the twelfth, his onely sonne, and two Daughters. Mary was promised to Peter of Bourbon, and afterwards married to Iohn of Foix Vicount of Narbonne, father to that Achilles of France Gasto^ of Foix Duke of Nemours, and of Germaine, Queene of Arragon. Anne of Orleans was Abbess of Fonteue^aud.

The Duke of Bourbon hauing opened the passage to this designe
of the warre of the common-weale,The Duke of Berry retires into Brittany. they attended no more
but to see the head. Charles of France the Kings brother beeing at
Poictiers, and making show to goe a hunting whiles the king was
in his deuotions, steales away and goes vnto the Embassadors of
Brittaine. Iohn of Rommille, vice chancellor of Brittaine, and Tanequy
of Chastell, who were come to haue a Prolongation for other
three monthes to make answere to the kings demands, carried him
away speedily by the meanes of the Lord of Lescon a Gascoine,
and led him into Brittanie.The King being gone in deuotion to our Lady of Pont in Limosin, the Duke of Berry retires into Brittaine. He was but eighteene yeares old, hee
held life so short, and that of Princes, which liue in subiection so
troublesome, as if he did not speedily know what it was to bee a
master the knowledge would euer come to late. He was welcome,
for this was the firebrand which they must cast to set France on
fire. The Duke of Brittanie promised him the seruice of his person,
and all the succors of his forces.
Hee declared the cause of his departure by letters which hee
wrote to the Duke of Bourgundy, and to the other Princes of their
intelligence. The most apparent was drawne from the bad gouernment
of the affaires, whereof the Princes of the bloudIt concernes the Princes of the bloud to look into the disorders of the estate and to assist the King faithfully to rearesse the^: whiles there is heat in t^is bloud wee may hope for the life and continuance of the body., which
haue the chiefe interest and care of the whole bodie, should apprehend
the dangerous euents, and had subiect to complaine to see
vnworthy men, without honor, or merit, to deale in that which
should passe by their hands, and to leap ouer their heads to great
offices: That his armes and his desires had no other obiect but to
restore order vnto the Realme, and there withall to ease the people
of their oppressions, the which he could not otherwise hope for, but
in making the King know in the beginning of his raigneAt the C^mming of new P^aces they make demands and pursuits for that which they d^sire the rest of the Raigne, for when they are well settled they will no more beare speake. That (...) Petcennius hauing prepared his companions to mutine hee said Quando ausuros exposcere remedia, nisi no^^m et nutantem adhuc Principem vel armis adirent. Tacitus lib. 1. Annal. the extreame
necessity whereinto it was brought. His will was manifested
more amply by his letters to the Duke of Bourgundy which Monstrellet
setts downe in these termes.
Most deere and welbeloued Vncle I recommend me vnto you. I let
you vnderstand that of late I haue often heard the clamors of the Princes
of the blood my kinsmen and other Noblemen of this Realme
in all estates; of the disorder and pittifull gouernment which now doth
raigne by the councell of men, being about my Lord, full of all lewdnes
and iniquity; who for their owne profit and priuate disordered affections
haue drawne my Lord into iealousie and hatred against you, me, and all
the Noblemen of the said Realme, yea against the Kinges of Castile and
Scotland, so long allyed vnto the CrowneThe most ancient alliances of the French haue beene with the Scots and then with the Castilians. The Crowne of France hath had pretentions vpon Castille at the inheritance of the Lady Blanch of Castile mother to St. Lewis. as euery man knowes. In regard
how the authority of the Church hath beene kept, Iustice done and
administred, the Noblemen maintained in their rights and priuiledges,
and the poore people supported and freed from oppression, I write no more
vnto you, for I know you are sufficiently informed, and I am greeued at
the said thinges, as I ought to be, as he whom it doth so neere concerne
as euery man doth know,The Children of one family are interessed in the (...) and the Princes of the bloud in the gouernment of the estate. and desire to prouide for it by the Counsell of

you, of the said Princes and kinsmen and other Noblemen, who haue all
promised to aid and serue me not sparing body or goods for the quiet
of the Realme, and the publick weale thereof, and also to saue my person
which I found to be in danger. For incessantly and openly my said Lord
and they about him spake such wordes of me,The words of such as are neerest vnto a Prince make men iudge of his intentions. The Duke of Berry hearing that the seruants of the K. his brother spake freely against him, thought that their discourses were framed vpo^ his. Good words entertaine friendship and bad dissolues the^. as I might with Reason
haue cause to doubt: I therefore left my said Lord, and am come vnto my
good Cosin of Brittaine, who hath giuen me so good and commendable reception
as I cannot sufficiently commend it, and is resolued to serue me
with body, goods and all his power to the good of the said Realme and publicke
weale. And therefore my most deere and welbeloued vncle, my intention
and desire is to imploy my selfe with you and the said noblemen
my kinsmen, whose counsell I will vse, and not otherwise, to restore and
redresse the said desolate Realme, knowing that you are one of the greatest
of the Realme, whom the good or ill do easily concerne, and Deane of the
Peeres of France,The Duke of Bourgondy is first Peere of France, in this quality hee made a protestation to King Charles the sixth saying that hee might not asist at the iudgement of the K. of Nauarre, vvhich did onely belong vnto the Peeres. a Prince renowned for honor and iustice, as it appeareth
by your great deedes, conduct and gouernment of your great
signories, knowing that the disorders of the said Realme, haue
and doe displease you as reason is: I would desire with all my heart
to haue an assembly with you and other noblemen my kinsmen, that by
your counsell we might prouide for all matters, which for want of order,
Iustice and policy are at this day in all the estates of the said Realme,His designe of arming to reforme disorders. and
for the ease of the poore people,The opression of the people was not great being only for matters which were not accustomed. who can beare no more, and to set such
an order in all places as it may be pleasing vnto God, to the honour, felicity
and good to the said Realme, and to the retribution of honour and
perpetuall commendation of all those that shall imploy themselues. I do
intreat you, most deere and louing vncle, that in this matter, which is
great for so good an end, it would please you to aid and assist me, and to
cause my brother in law of Charolois your sonne to imploy himselfe in my
ayd, as I haue alwayes assured my selfe he will doe: And to the end that
you and I may meet (which is the thing I most desire) for that my intention
is shortly to enter into the Country, and to keepe the fields with the
other Princes and noble-men,The Princes and Noblemen of this party were Charles the Kings brother, Phillip Duke of Bourgondy. Francis Duke of Brittaine. Charles Earle of Charolois. Iohn Duke of Bourbon. Iohn Duke of Calabria. Peter of Bourbon Lord of Beauieu. Charles Cardinall of Bourbon. The Earle of (...), the Duke of Nemours, The Earle of Armagnac. The Earle of Albret^. The Earle of Dammartin. The Earle of St. Paul. The Prince of Orange. The Earle of Newchastell. The Bastard of Bourgondy. which haue promised to accompany
and ayd me. I intreat you that you will be pleased to leuy and draw forces
out of your Country towards France, and in case you cannot doe it, that
you would cause my said brother in law of Charolois to come with a good
power of men, and withall to send vnto me one of your Counsell which
is faithfull to assist for you in all matters which other Princes of the
bloud shall think fit to be done for the good of the said Realme^ And by
whom you may be stil informed of my good and iust intentions, the which
I will gouerne by you and other Princes of the bloud and no otherwise:
And that which my said brother in law in your absence shall doe or say
for the publique good of the RealmeVnder the Consideration of the publique wea^e many which had beene put from their places made vse of their interests. N^w Princes doe commonly f^ile in these changes. If the Prince succeeds a good Prince, whose raigne hath beene iust and happy, then needs no cha^ge, if hee were not so, he must not imploy such as wee his Ministers, and therfore Galba was blamed to haue imployed the chiefe councellors of Neroes cruelties and wickednes. and ease of the poore people, I will
maintaine vnto the death, and thereof you may bee assured. Most deare
and louing vncle let me alwaies vnderstand if there be any thing wherein

I may pleasure you and I will do it willingly, praying God to giue you a
good life and that which you desire. Written at Nants in Brittany the 15.
day of March, the subscription was. Your Nephew Charles: and on
the top. To mine Vncle the Duke of Bourgondy.
Such was the language which they that were about this yong
Prince made him to hold,Death of Pope Piu^ the second. who knew well how to commend the
good, and to excuse and flatter the euill which he did, and who indiscreetly
drew him to designes, whereas the danger was certaine
and the profit doubtfull.
The Pope had made his profit of this diuision, if deathPius the second died at Ancona, Platina saith that bee spake vnto the last gaspe, and dispu^ed long with Lawrence Rouerella Bishop of Fe^ara a learned Diuine, Licerit ne extremam vnctione^ iterare qua semel invnctus fuerat. Dum Basileae pestilentia grauissime egrotaret. Whether hee might reiterate the extreme vnction, wherwith hee had being anointed, being sore sicke of the Plague at Basill. had
not disappointed a desseine which he had to reduce Franc^ wholly
vnder the obedience of the Sea of Rome, and to depriue it of the
rights and priuiledges which doth free it in temporall things, for
in those which concerne the spirituall and orthodoxall Faith, she
hath alwaies been a dutifull and obedient daughter. This Pope
was lamented of all Christendome, for he had great conceptions
for her glorie and libertie in those places where shee was opprest
vnder the tyranny of the Ottomans. Beeing at Ancona to imbarke
himselfe for the voyage of the Croisado, after that hee had giuen
audience to the Embassadors of France and of the Duke of Bourgundy,
who excused themselues that they could not serue in person
in this voiage, a slow continuall Feuer, which had long held him, depriued
him of life. He had no cause to grieue that hee had liued,
for that his life had been honored with so great and worthy actions
as he might rightly say he had not been borne in vaine.
They onely blame him for that being Pope he had contradicted
that which he had written being a priuat person,His birth and fortune with so great Passion,
as hee discribed Pope Eugenius to bee the wickedst man in the
worldAEneas Siluius in the beginning of the second booke of his Comentaries of the Councell of Basill saith that Me^tita est iniquitas Gabriell (Eugenius was called Gabriel Condelmar) et perdidit cum Dominus in malitia sua quosynodali sententia ex Apostolica s^de precipitato factus est Dominus in refugiu^ Ecclesiae suae. And in the end of the first, Necessarium fuit illud decretum ad reprimendam Romanorum Pontificum ambitionem and vt de^^ceps animam a temporalium rerum sollicitudi^e retraherent: and his deposing a profitable and fit action for the church.
He was issued from the Picolhomini, of Sienna, and seeing that his
father had beene expelled the Citie with many others of certaine
families reuolted by the mutiny of the people, he resolued to seek
his fortune at Rome, where shee hath alwaies done great miracles.
He was first of all Secretary to Dominike Grap, and followed him
to Basill, when as he came to complaine that Pope Eugenius refused
him a Cardinals hat, which Martin the fift had giuen him. The
masters pouertie forced him to take another: He placed himselfe
with the Bishop of Noara, but seeing that hee was in like manner
persecuted by Pope Eugenius, hee left him and did serue Nicholas
Cardinall of St. Croix: and followed him to Arras, when as he was
sent by Pope Eugenius to reconcile the French King to the King of
England, and the Duke of Bourgundy.
At his returne finding that he was in no grace with Pope Eugenius,His dignities and commissions.
he came to Basill, where he was imployed in the goodliest
actions of the Councell, he had the charge of Abreuiator, Secretarie,
President in the chamber of the faith,In the Councell of Basill there were foure chambers or foure assemblies which they called four deputations, that of the faith, of Peace, of reformation, and of common affaires. Euery chamber had a president, which was changed euery three monethes. and Orator in diuers

sessions. When there was Question of an embassage to any
Prince or commonweale there was not any one but He fit for it.
He was sent to Amedeus Duke of Sauoy, then to the Emperor Frederick,
to Pope Eugenius, to Philip Vicecount Duke of Milan, and
to Alfonso King of Arragon. It was he which perswaded the Emperor
Frederick to goe to Rome to be crowned there. Frederick
sent him to Sienna to receiue Ellenor of Portugall his wife, and afterwards
into Bohemia to pacifie a controuersie which was
growne, for that the Emperor Frederick did not restore them their
King LadislausThe Emperor Frederick seeing the troubles and schismes in the realme of Hungarie seazed vpon the yong King Ladislaus, and gaue him in charge to Eneas Siluius..
He was sent to the dyet of Ratisbona, whereas Philip Duke of
Bourgundy assisted,His oration to arme against the Turke. he laid open the necessities of a warre against
the Turke with such efficacie and eloquence, as many Princes resolued
to employ both their liues and goods: But these suddaine
resolutions went presently into smoke:Platina saith that all which heard him were wonderfull resolute to this war, Veru^ hoe natura co^per. tum est, eorum animos cito residere quoru^ affectus facile mouentur. But it is found true by nature that their minds are soone changed, whose affections are easily moued. Hee also pacified
a great complaint which Germany made against the Pope,
and the which hath been since continued, the Princes and comminalties
of the Empire being resolued not to acknowledge him
in the policie and direction of spirituall things, if he did not first
grant them the same rights which Italy and France had by the
Pragmatick Sanctions. The Emperor found their first suite iust,
and was soone drawne to yeeld vnto it. Aeneas Siluius changed
his opinion, representing vnto him that there was more honor and
safety for him to haue good correspondence with the Pope, then
to fauour those who would diminish his authoritie whereof the
Emperors were protectors.These complaints were pacified, and reuiued in the beginning of the Emperor Charles the fifths raigne, when as they presented vnto the Popes Legate being at Nuremborg A. Remonstrance vnder this title. Sacri Romani imperii Principum ac procerum grauamina aduersus sedem Romanam.
He was Archbishop of Sienna,His bad affection to Lewis the eleuenth. and after the death of Calixtus
was aduanced to the Popedome in a manner without thinking
of it. Hee began with the assembly at Mantua, whither all the
Princes of the Empire sent their Embassadors. Hee made open
show that he loued not France, as hath beene said, and this affection
continued after the death of Charles the seuenth: forLudouieo Gallorum regi aduersatus est, quod libertatem Ecclesiae minuere conaretur cum ab eo antea Pragmaticam Sanctionem Ecclesiae Romanae pernitiosissimam pestem extorsisset. Platina
saith, that although he had wrested the Pragmatick Sanction
out of the hands of Lewis the eleuenth, yet he did not forbeare to
crosse him, for that hee thought to diminish the libertie of the
Church. Paul the second, called Peter Barbo, a Venetian, succeeded
him.
FINIS.



THE CONTENTS OF
the third BOOKE.

1 THe Wisedome of Lewis the eleuenth vppon the troubles of
the League of the common weale.
2 Hee sounds and discouers the intentions of the King of
England.
3 He labours to deuide the heades of the League and beginns
with his Brother.
4 The order which he set to preserue Paris. He passeth into
Bourbonois, besiegeth Ryon, and treats with the Dukes of
Bourbon and Nemours,
5 Entry of the Duke of Bourgondies army into Picardy, that
of Brittany musters at Chasteaubriant.
6 Battell of Montleherry. The victory is vncertaine and in
a manner equall. The Earle of Charolois is hurt. The place
of Battell remaines to him, with a great disorder of either
side.
7 Obseruations of that which hapned both before and after
the battell.
8 The King passeth the night at Corbeil, and goeth the next
day to Paris.
9 The army of the league lodged at Estampes, whereas the
Dukes of Berry and Brittanny arriue.
10 It passeth the Riuer of Seine and besiegeth Paris.
11 The Princes let the Parisians vnderstand the causes of their
armes and demand a conference. Paris sends her Deputies
to St. Maur.
12 The Kinges army breakes the Conference, and assures Paris,
yet he resolues to graunt all they should demand, and to desperce
this Army.

13 Enteruiew of the King and the Earle of Charolois for a
peace, and the needles feare of the Dukes armie.
14 Supplies of men and money sent by the Duke of Bourgundy to
the Earle of Charrolois.
15 The Kings second meeting with the Earle of Charrolois.
16 Peace concluded and sworne at Bois de Vincennes.
17 The Duke of Berrij is receiued into Roane with the Duke
of Brittanie, and the Earle of Charrolois returnes into Flanders.
18 The King returnes to Paris, and makes the Earle of S. Paul
Constable of France.
19 The Earle of S. Paul cannot liue in peace, and takes for a
maxime of his conduct to entertaine the two Princes in
warre.
20 Discords betwixt the Dukes of Normandy and Brittanie.




THE HISTORY
of LEVVIS the XI.
THE THIRD BOOKE.
WHO so succeeds a good Prince hath a great
aduantage ouer the affections of his owne
subiects,The loue the children for the fathers sake. how rough and difficult soeuer his
raigne be. They hold themselues so much
bound to the fathers bounty,The bounty of a Prince doth so binde the hearts, as euen after his death they yeelde prootes of their affection to thier children, although wicked Cambises was beloued for the loue of Cyrus his father and Co^modus for the respect of Marcus Aurelius. as they doe
patiently endure the sonnes rigor. France
did owe her libertie to King Charles the seuenth,
he had freed her from the miseries of
warre, shee did acknowledge no other restorer then him: This
respect retained many in their obedience and dutie, who suffering
themselues to be carried away with this torrent of the league,Sedition must be bee smothered in the beginning. had
become fooles for company and by infection: For the people is a
sea which moues with the winde, yet neuer followes if some one
goes not before,This beast the people have so many beads, that although it hath great and terrible forces yet it is base and cowardly if it bee not stirred vp and led, vultus sine rectore praeceps, pauidum socors, Tacit. but the number seemed but too great, and it
had multiplied speedily if the Kings wisedome had not foreseene
it. Conspiracie in the beginning is like vnto raine which enters
into a small cranny on the top of the house, and beeing neglected
in the end expels the master thereof. The King did consider hereof,
for being aduertised of his brothers retreat, he knew well that
the partie was made against him if hee did not oppose himselfe:
That what appeared not, might be greater then what was in show,
and that besides the Princes of his bloud, many Catylines
had drunke in the same cup the wine and bloud of this conspiracie.
Euery conspiracie hath crueltie, and bloud hath been taken for the seale and oath that bind the conspirators. Salust saith that Catyl^n mingled wine with bloud in a cup and presented it to his associates, I^de (...) post execrationem omnes degustauissent, sieuti in solemnibus sacris fieri consueuit aperuit consiliu^^^^ His first resolution was to diuide that which hee
could not breake. Hee sent to the Duke of Bourbon to come
vnto him; Who for that hee would vse no dissembling (a great
and powerfull vertue in these corrupted ages) would not disguise
his intentions, nor represent them otherwise in words then they
were in his heart. He was the first mouer of all these spheares, he
had first giuen his voice and vowes to this generall reuolt of

France, he had offered to hang a bell at the Cats necke,In great resolutions there is danger to giue the first voice, and hazard to execute that w^ich is resolued. It is more safe to follow then to leade, Insiita mortalibus natura propere sequi, quae piget inchoare. Tacit. And if they bee reduced to the conduct of an other it must be w^th the restraint of his owne wisdome. Ne consil^is alterius regi recuses, Est illius atque esto tuus, tuumque serua. In poste tuo velle, modum in velle alieno. when
as euery man expected who should dare to doe it, and had more
desire to end then to begin. If hee had made any show of repentance
or feare in this beginning, the rest which had martcht in his
steps would soone haue turned their backes.
He answered that he had the same designe with the other Princes
for the good and profit of the publike weale, intreating the
King to excuse him if hee came not to Court, and for a greater
declaration of his will he ceazed vppon the reuenues of Bourbonois,
and stayed Iuuenall des Vrsines Lord of Traynill, Peter of Oriola,
and the Lord of Crussoll prisoners, making it knowne that
Ambition hath no other Law then the fancie of the Ambitious,
and takes away the maske from all respect. When the King saw
that there was no meanes to reclaime these Princes, and that the
Duke of Bourgundy was in armes, he aduertised all the chiefe noble
men of his Realme, and wrote vnto the Clergie, to the gouernours
of Prouinces,Letters fro^ the K. to the gouernors of the Prouinces and townes. to the Magistrates and townes, who faint
and lose their courage for a little,As a little feare makes the people to faint, so a weake hope makes them returne, by nature they are fearefull and do not think what they shall doe to indure but to flye the danger. that they should not suffer
themselues to bee carried away with the false showes of the enemies
of the estate, who had suborned his brother to ingage
France in those desolations from the which it was but newly freed:
That if they which had suffered themselues to bee abused in this reuolt,
did not bethinke themselues, there wilfulnes would make
them vnworthy the clemencie which he offered them: That with
the grace of God and the fidelitie of his good subiects, hee assured
himselfe to abate and disperse these bad designes.
Then considering that this league did consist of those who had
sometimes called the English into FranceHe that hath two enemies must agree with the one, the better to preuaile ouer the other. The Roma^ns did neuer fight against two; Hercules could not do it. After the Parthian warre they began that of the Marcomanians. They would not breake with Antlochus, who had wronged them before they had ended ^ith Philip. to haue a share of the
shipwracke,The King seeks to the King of England. that the old enemies fauouring the new, he might fall
betwixt the Anuile and the hammer, hee sent to the King of England
dissembling cunningly the wrong which hee had done him,
when as in demanding Bonn^ of SauoyRichard Earle of Warwick was sent into France in the yeere 1464. to demand Bonna of Sauoy in mariage of King Lewis the eleuenth, for K. Edward. The King granted it, but during this negotiati^n the King of England fell in loue with a meane gentlewoman, widdow to one Grey a Knight, Daughter to Richard Riuers, and ^aqueline eldest Daughter to Peter of Luxemburgh, Earle of St. Paul. the Queenes sister for his
wife he had married an other: He intreates and coniures him not
to assist this new rebellion, the which like to a puffe of smoke would
vanish as soone as it should begin to rise.
Edward beeing already engaged to the Duke of Bourgundy let
the King vnderstand that he was a sharer with him.Edward the fourth declares himselfe for the Burgundian Hee sent the
same letters which the King had written vnto him to the Duke of
Bourgundy, promising to assist him as constantly as his forefathers
Edward the third King of England, w^nne the battell of Cressy the 26. of August, 1346. France lost 1500. Gentlemen, all were not slaine, but all were defeated. The Prince of Wales his Sonne wonne the battell at P^icters ten yeeres after, the 9. of September 1356. had done. This young Prince felt a boyling desire in his
heart to performe that in France which other Kings of his name
had done. He was glad to finde without the Iland an exercise for

turbulent spirits to entertaine and quench that furious heate of
fighting.He that commands a warlike Nation must finde exe^cise for his soldiers abroad, if hee will not suffer them to take it at home. There is not saith Tit. Liu. in ^is thirteenth booke an^ great and mighty Potentate that ca^ le^g continue in peace, for if ^ee hath not s^me enemie abroad hee shall finde at home.
He knew well that the Duke of Berry his brother should be the
King of this Tragedie, that they would bring him still vppon the
stage, and make him play all parts according to the humour and
inuention of the Duke of Brittanie, of the Earle of Charolois and
of the Duke of Bourbon: Wherefore hee sought to flatter him,
and to draw him out of the Brittans hands, and to that end hee
went to Angers: there wanted no letters, promises nor good words:
Youth and inconstancie are si^^ers of one m^tber, this young Prince had nothing co^stant in him. faire speeches hurt not the tongue. If the Duke of Berry had not
been well garded and watcht, he had left his friend as suddenly as
he had done his brother.
At Angers hee was aduertised that the Earle of Charolois leuied
men, that the Duke of Brittany armed his subiects, and that
the Duke of Bourbon had declared warre against him in seazing
vpon his seruants, his Townes and treasure. Hee gaue order for
all three, and proceeded therein without precipitation, hee did
marchIn affaires of Importance they must goe and not runne, descend leisurely* and not cast theselues down headlong. Precipitation is a shelfe couered with the slupwracks which shee hath caused in great occasions. but not runne, and did remedie all without disorder: He
commanded the Earle of Neuers, and the Marshall Ioachin to lye
in Picardie: he left Rene King of Sicile, and the Earle of Maine
vpon the fronters of Brittanie, and went himselfe directly to
Bourges, where they would not suffer him to enter, and from
thence vnto Bourbonois, with an intent to set vpon the Duke of
Bourbon, who had first reuolted and was the weakest. In such reuolts
the first blowesTo disperse a fa^^^on speedily, they must first set vppon t^ose that fortifie it. Seianus said that there was not. Aliud gliscentis discordiae remedium quam si vnus alterne maxime pro^pti subuertirentur. Tacit. l. 4. which are giuen vpon the principall Actors,
amaze and humble the rest.
Paris was still in his minde,The Kings care for the preseruation of Paris and that great Citie which gaue a
Law and motion to all the rest was perpetually before his
eyes. He repented him that he had gone so farre offTo preuent small inconueen^es they must not neglect greater affaires. Tiberius said, that an Emperor must not for the Rebellio^ of one town or two, abandon Rome the chiefe of the Empire, and running here and there where the mischiefe raignes, seeme amazed. hearing that
the Armie of the league did march. Hee knew that it consisted of
humors, that in former times shee had raised strange, mutinies,
and that his brother had friends there, the Bourgundian Pentioners,
and the Brittan Intelligences: That it was a bodie so full of
bad humors, as a small matter might alter it.As diseased bodies cannot endure to be toucht, so vlcered mindes are troubled vpon light occasions. Sen. He requests, exhorts,
and commands euery man to haue a care of her preseruation.
And for a greater declaration of his loue to that Citie, he
causeth the Chancellor to tell them that he is resolued to send the
Queene his wife thither to be brought in bed, as the place which
he loued aboue all others in his Realme. If the whole world were
a ring, Paris should be the Diamond.
He went to St Porein to prepare himselfe for the siege of Ryon
whether the Duke of Bourbon was retired.His voiag^ into Bourbonois. The Princes and Noblemen
of the league did succour him with all their forces.If the Duke of Bourbon had been able to ingage the King in Bourbonois, he had giuen the Earle of Charolois meanes to ioine with the Duke of Brittanie, and to effect what they intended. The
Duke of Bourgundy gaue leaue to the Duke of Beauieu, and to

the Cardinall of Bourbon to leuie men in the French county. Hee
was also assisted with the Duke of Nemours forces, and by the Earles
of Armagnac and Albret.
The King beeing at S. Porcin, the Dutchesse of Bourbon, his
Sister, came vnto him, beseeching him not to make triall vpon her
husband what a great King may doe, and to giue him meanes to
shew as great proofes of his resolution to his seruice, as he made
shew to be come to make him feele the effects of his displeasure.
She was so powerfull in her perswasions as the King (who desired
rather to commit his affaires to wisedome then to fortune)A Prince what adua^tage so euer he hath must ^olow that aduise which represents the least danger. It is a great error to shut ones eies to wisedome, and to submit himselfe to the Indiscretion and inconstancie of fortune. was
content not to pres^e the yeelding of the Towne of Ryon to eagerly,Dutchesie of Bourbon obtaines a peace from the King.
and did not seeme very difficult to yeeld to some kinde of treatie,
the which was well sworne but ill performed by the Duke of
Nemours, who hauing the truth of the oath in his mouth retained
the impietie of treacherie in his soule. A defection which the
King will neuer forget, neither shall it bee expiated without the
losse of his head.
The King made this accord to goe speedily to Paris, and to
stand surely vpon the middest of the hide,A Prince must not remaine vpon the fronter of his Estate and abandon the center. Calanus the Gymnosophist, seeking to perswade Alexander to this maxime, caused a dryed Oxe Hide to be layed abroad, setting his feete vppon any side hee remoued him with the other: but being in the midst he stood firme. Inferring that when as Alexander was vpo^ one of the fronters of his Empire, the other mu^ined. Plut, beeing aduertised
that the Earle of Charolois came on, hee sent Charles of Harley
to assure the Parisiens of his comming, and of the accord which
he had made with the Duke of Bourbon and Nemours, the Earles
of Armagnac and Albret. Hee began by them the execution
of the Councell which hee had taken to disvnite and disperse
those heads, and to giue way to those torrents. Without doubt
if he had beene patient to attend their first furies, all had disbanded
more suddenly then they assembledMany which assaile are more mighty then one that is assailed. But if he hath meanes to tempo^ise and to endure their first furie, hee shall preuaile, and the other will be scattred and ruined..
The forces which were soonest ready came from them which
held themselues most wronged. The Earle of Charolois had a
thousand and foure hundred men at Armes,Armie of the Earle of Charolois. euery one of the which
had fiue or six great horses, with eight or nine thousand Archers
chosen out of a greater number; for euerie man would march, but
the best were entertained. In this choise should appeare the loue
they haue to the honor of Armes, and to the good of the State, for
many Captaines haue souldiers to serue the King in his Armies,
whom they would not imploy in their housesIf there bee not choise iudgment and distinction in the leuies of souldi^rs, the Princes seruice cannot prosper. Vegetius imputes the ruine of the Empire to this carelesnes, Huic (saith hee) (...) vbique ab hostibus illatae sunt clades dum longa pax militem incuriosus legit, dum possefloribus indicti tyr^nes, per gratiam aut dissimulationem probantur, talesque sociant Armi^, quales Domini habere facti dicunt. Veget. Lib. 1. cap. 8..
The Duke of Bourgundy caused the Earle of Charolois his son
to march, and at his departure he said vnto him. Goe my Sonne in a
happie hower,Words of the Duke of Bourgundy. and resolue to die rather then to flie, if you fall into any
danger, you shall not be abandoned for the want of a hundred thousand
men. Words of power to giue courage to one that had been borne
without it. Words of infallible assurance spoken from a father,
whose loue admits no comparison, all other friendships are but
winde. He did wisely looke vnto the future, which Princes doe not
alwaies, they doe seldome looke vnto that which shall befall them,

and doe not thinke that great assents haue great downefals. The
E. of Charlois entred into France with an armie of fifteene thousand
men, he besieged Nesle in Vermandois, and tooke it, and past
by Noion and Mondidier. The Earle of Neuers his Cousin found
himselfe to weake to stop his entrie into Picardie, whereas all the
people seemed ready to set vp StatuesThe people follow a victory: They of Samos erected a statue to Alcibiades in Iunos Temple, but when hee was defeated they gaue another to Lysander his enemy. for the Victors, and
to acknowledge him that should be most fortunate or most strong.
The Earle of Saint Pol hauing taken Pont Saint Maxence by
composition, or rather by the trechery of the Captaines which
were within it, the Armie past the riuer of Oyse, and entred into the
Isle of France. The Earle of Charolois carried the title of Lieutenant
generall to the Duke of Berry. These first bruitesIn new occurents reputation hath great effects. In nouis ceptis validissima est fama Tacit. lib 13. gaue great
reputation to his desseins; he made a generall proclamation of liberty,
and exemption from taxes. Hee caused the Rowles to bee
burnt at Laigny, and made a declaration that all should bee free,
causing the salt to be distributed at the Marchants price:He that will draw the people to his deuotion, and build a foundation vpon their loues, must free them fro^ oppressions, for they hold eeuery one that hurts them for an enemy, and neuer iudge of the equity of the warre, but by the good which they receiue. vpon
these proclamations the people thought they should haue an ende
of their miseries, but they were but cries a farre of, and vanished
comming neere, like vnto those noyses which vpon certaine coasts
of the straight of Saint George terrefie those that are a farre of, and
when they come neere they heare not any thing. The Princes of
the League entring into France cryed liberty for the Commonweale,
and exemption for the people, but comming neere to treat
they spake noe more of it.The pretexts of ciuil war are alwaies goodly and plausible, but when they are considered, they vanish and haue noe substance.
Ioachin Rouvant Marshall of France,Marshall Ioachin enters into Paris. did alwaies coast the army,
but a farre of, and hauing noe meanes to attempt any thing neerer,
he cast him-selfe into Paris with a hundred and tenne lances. The
Earle lodged at Saint Denis, whereas the other Princes had promised
to meete him, to consult of their affaiers, his army was lodged
thereabouts. Hee presented him-selfe in battell before Paris, the
amazement was great, and the skirmish terrible euen vnto the gates.
Hauthourdin thought that the towne was to be taken in this amazement
for they began to shut vp their shops. A giddy headed fellow
ranne through the streets crying the enemy was entred, and
withOne word of amazement or bad pr^sage is punishable, this man was whipt through the streets of Paris, the Chronicle saies that the King cried out to the hangman whip him soundly for hee hath wel deserued it. feare many fell into feuers. The King was well serued in this
occasion by the Marshall Ioachin and Charles of Melun.Prrisiens amazed. Many, as
it happens alwaies in ciuill diuisions, played the temporizers, saw
the storme comming, and fitted them-selues for euery Element.
It was thought good not to attempt any thing vntill the Kings
brother and the Duke of Brittaine were come. They march slowly,
and the Earle complained of their stay,Stay of the army of Brittany. saying, that they had broke
their word, for they had promised to be together in armes before
Paris at the feast of St. Iohn. Romille Vice Chancellor of Brittaine
excused his Maister, and filled vp blanks signed to keepe the Earle
in breth, and to giue the Duke time to assemble forces at Chasteaubriant,
where he mustred his armie, obseruing strictly the seuerity
of disciplineIt is impossible in ciuil war exactly to obserue military discipline, if excesse bee punished in one party, the souldi^r who ^^ues nothing but disorder flies vnto the other. Ci^ilibus bellis plus militibus qua^ docibus licer. T^cit. lib. 2. Histo. although it be in a manner impossible in ciuil wars,
whereas the souldiers can doe more then the Captaines.

A resolution being taken to ioyne with the troupes of Brittaine,
the Earle of Charolois seased vppon the bridge of Saint Clou to
passe to Estampes, where a Lady aduertized him that the king had
past Orleans,Battle of Montlehery and came withall speede to enter into Paris: Hee
resolued to attend him, and lodged at Longiumeau, sending the
Earle of Saint Pol to Montlehery where he made choise of a place
of Battell betwixt both. On twesday the 16. of Iuly, the King arriued
at Chastres, he desired to enter into Paris, or to goe out of the
realme,King Lewis the eleuenth said that if hee had not entred into Paris hee had gone (...) seeke succors in Italy of the D. of Milan has great f^iend. It m^y be he w^ld not haue taken so desperate a resolution, but would haue co^sidered that he had to doe with men which would not liue long together without some dispute. if hee might not doe it: And for that he would not hazard
any thing amidest so many discontentments and infidelities, he
had commanded Breze great Seneshall of Normandy not to fight,
who notwithstanding this prohibition, tould one of his friends that
he would bring the two Princes so neere together, as he should be
a very able man that could part them. He was slaine with the first,
and he is produced for an example that seldome doth that succeed
wel which is don against the order and commandement of the Prince.
On the seauenteenth of Iuly the Seneshall presented him-selfe
earlely in the morning vpon the way to Montlehery. The Earle of
Saint Pol, who led the Earle of Charolois foreward, found himselfe
ingaged, and could not turne hed to come to the place of Battle, as
the Earle had commanded him; it was so prest, as if he had made
shew to refuse to ioyne; all had beene in disorder. He put his troups
in battle in a plaine, which is on the side of Chastres, he caused the
heads of wine vessells to be beaten outWine is a dangerous munition, for a day of Battle: The Common-weale of Sparta forbad the vse of it in warre where they must haue a good foote and a good eye, and wine troubles the one and weakens the other. Aristotle saith, either none at all or very little. to make his soldiars drink,
he planted stakes in the front of his Battallions, and put his carriages
behind, hauing the forest of the one side. His Archers left their
horses, and so did their brauest Caualiers, holding this manner of
fighting of the English, for the worthiest proofes of courrage and valour.
The English did alwaies fight on foote. Be^rtrard of Gu^s^lin and the men at armes of his time did the like. The old French Caualary, which hath beene so much esteemed, haue beene in a manner alwaies beaten when they haue incountered foote-men, vnlesse they left there horses, example at Courtraie against the Flemings, at Crecy and Poi^tiers against the English. If he had charged resolutly, the kings forward had bin put to
rout, for when it appeered first, there were not aboue foure hundred
comming downe scatteringly by the vallee of Tourson.Opportunity of fighting neglected. They
might haue beene charged and defeated without all hope of succors,
the way being too narrow for the body of the army which followed,
But the smale skil of the men at armes to mount and descend
(the which horsemen should chiefely practise) made them to loose
much time, for they that had left their horses tooke them againe,
when they considered that they should need them either to poursue
or to fly, and that their courages might be fortefied by that of their
horses.Courage should come from the man and not otherwise; The horse helpes something. The Sarmatians fighting on foote could not finde roome enough to fly, but on horse backe there were none more valiant. In the meane time the Kings army grew great, and the
Earle of St. Pol was sorry that he had so long forborne the charge,
and neglected the aduantageHee that can take the aduantage which the scituation of the place giues him fights happely. Alexander at the Battle of Pyles in Caramania hauing vewed the scituation of the place, said that the victory was infallibly his, and it was true Curt. lib. 3. which the place and time gaue him.
The Earle of Charolois being aduertised that the Kings army
appeared, tooke the Alarum more whotly then the Signior of Contay,
a wise and temperate Gentle-man, had giuen it him, bringing

him this aduertisement.Order of the Battell changed. He forgat the order and changed it, and
gaue not him-selfe time to make fast his caske, comming in all hast
to the Earle of Saint Pol about seauen of the clock in the morning,
where he found his troupes at worke, being sorry it should bee said
his enemies should come sooner to him, then he to them.Some came and tould Philopaemen, the enemies are with vs, to whome he answered. And why say you not that we are with them. Pl^
The skirmish continued aboue foure houres, and gaue meanes
to them that were farre off to come time enough to the feast.Earle of Charolois chargeth the Kings forward. The
Earle of Charolois fearing that the Marshall Ioachin, who was at
Paris, would come and charge him behindA wise Captaine must look as well behind him as forward The words of Sertorius. They say also that a Captaine should haue eies at his backe. resolued to free himselfe
of that which was before him, and to repulse the forward which
appeered beyond Montlehery. Hee charged and beat them into
the village, and caused some houses to be fired, the flame and smoak
whereof beeing carried by the wynde against the French, forced
them to turne their backs, and to recouer a dich, whereas the hedge
gaue them meanes to couer them-selues and to breath.
The Earle of Charolois charged both flanks resolutly, and the
French withstood him and repulst him. The men at armes of Bourgundy
were newly raysed,His horsemen ill trained. capable to see their sheelds a long time
white and without charge,Among the Romans they knew the old men at armes by their shields which were figured, the yong caried them plaine, we finde in the old fables of France and Spaine that new Knights did, in like manner, carry white shields, vntill that some exployt of valour and courrage gaue them meanes to put in some charge. of a thousand and two hundred there
were not fifty that could charge their lances. They put themselues
in disorder, and falling vpon their Archers brake their ranks,This error of the Ca^alerie hath bin after noted. Plutarke saith that Brutus men at armes which were Geules in the Battell against Pompey disordred their owne footmen. The
carriages, where they were intangled among the baggage, and the
stakes which the Earle of St. Pol had planted,Archelaus hauing planted stakes in his campe did so incumber the horses, chariots and Elephants of Sylla, as he defeated them easely. and compassed in by
a troupe of Bourgundians, who beat them downe with battle axes.
The Earle of Charolois had charged with such fury, as his men
were out of breath when they came to ioyne, forgetting the appointed
order to pause thrise.This order hath bin obserued among the ancients to march slowly, making some staies, and not hastely when they go to a Battle. Marcus Crassus in blamed by Plutarke, for that he did otherwise. All that were on the right hand towards
the Castell were put to route by him,French put to rout on the one side and Bourgondians on the othe^ and on the left hand all
that were vnder the command of Rauestein, brother to the Duke of
Cleues, were broken by the French. The Nobility of Dauphine
and Sauoy did the King good seruice, and the Kings presence and
good wordsThe words of a King on a day of battle are burning firebrands; cast into the most frozen harts, There is not faith On^sander, nether trumpet nor drum which doth more incourage them to fight. But they must not vse any great discourses which doe rather coole then comfort. wrought wonders, else all had gone to route.
The first peece of victory was so pleasing to the Earles tast, as to
haue more hee ranne a myle beyond Montlehery after them that
fled,A Generall of an army should not abandon his campe to follow them that fly. Alexander had like to haue miscarried in the last defeate of Darius for hauing followed the chase of his enemies too rashly, he was in great danger. Cyrus had alwaies men appointed to follow them that fled. contemning the aduice of an old Gentleman of Luxembourg
called Anthony the Britton, who held him lost if hee past any
farther.
The French rallied them-selues againe together, to renew the
fight, and to vanquish or loose all. He prest still forward, desiring
rather to repent him of his Fortune, then to haue shame for his
victory.Q. Curtius giues vnto Alexander (...) se brane and hardy wo^ds. I had rather repent me of my fortune, then bee ashamed of my victory.
The Lord of Contay spake more boldly vnto him, and caused

him to returne. Repassing through the village he went to charge a
troupe of footemen; who seeing him come fled. A soldiar let him
know that hee would not giue his life for nothing, striking him on
the brest with his Pert^^isan, whereof hee shewed the marke at night.
Then passing towards the Castell hee saw the archers of the Kings
garde, where at he was much amazed, thinking that the victory had
bin absolutly his, and that there was not any more resistance. Hee
turned on the one side to come vnto the place of Battle, but there
fell sodenly vpon himEuery man runnes where the generall is, euen ashippe wanting a Pylot and hel^e dot^ soone yeeld to the violence of the waues so he that can by pollicy and good aduice finde meanes, to beat the chiefe of his enemies, the rest will soone faint. Polib. lib. 3. twelue or fifteene men at armes,Earle of Charolois hurt and in danger to be slaine or taken. who at
the first slew Philip of Org his Guidon, and hurt him in the throat.
Yeeld my Lord, cryed Captaine. la Hire and Gilbert Grassar wee know
you well enough. The beuer of his helmet being not made fast in the
morning descouered all his face. Hee made noe answer but with
his sword, and this summons to yeeld inflamed his courrage to defend
and free him-selfe. Iohn Cade^ sonne to a Phisition of Paris, big,
heauy and strong (three goodly parts which the History giues him)
being mounted vpon a puissant hors, passeth through them,Oliuer de la Ma^ch calls him Robert Cot^rea^ ^^nne to the Earles Phi^^tion. diuides
them, and saues his maister. This Act of valour and fidelity was
presently rewarded, for the E. of Charolois made him a Knight. He
came to his campeThere is no^ retreat in a day of Battle but to the camp, for ^ee that leaues it hath lost the field. How many armies saith the Consull Paulus ^emilius, haue there bee^^, which hauing had noe good successe in the battle, but bin driuen into their sorts by their enemies, yet ^ sallying forth a^terwards ^ they haue put them to rout who held themselues victors Tit. Liu. lib. 44. all bloudy, and his men repayred vnto him in
small bands and tyred, the footmen complayning that the men at
armes had in the morning dis^rdred them, and troden them vnder
their horses feete,A wounde gotten in a good place is glorious. Baies, chaines no^ grownes are not alwaies carried, but such markes are neuer left at home. Such as beheld Serto^ius who had lost his eye, few with his losse a testimony of his valour. and the Earle seemed much pleased to haue receyued
a hurt on the face for a perpetuall marke of his prowesse.
The French recouered the dich where they had so valiantly contended
and as it were diuided the fortune of the combat. But they
were amazed to see them-selues without a head,Brut of the Kings death and the bruit was
that the King was dead: This brute was grounded, for that the Seneshal
of Normandy, who ware his apparell and armes to confirme
his loyalty,The King grew into some iealousie that the Seneshale of Normandy was of the league, and spake of it, to whome he answered, Si^ to shew what I am, giue me your coate of armes to saue your life, for your enemies seeke but after your person. had beene slaine in the beginning of the incounter,
when as the Bourgondians knowing wel that if the king were ouerthrowne
the rest could not stand, had charged furiously whereas he
shewed him-selfe. This feare augmented the number of the runneawaies;
and made them to fly who should rather want life then
courrage. The Earle of Maine, who was suspected to haue intelligence
with the enemies, and Montauban a Britton led away the
reereward. Their courages fell to their feete: not any one had the
heart to strike stroake in sauing his life to saue his honour.To make a feightlesse dish^norable, it must bee done like vnto the Parthians or Scithians, who shoote in flying, and sauing them-selues speedely they alwaies fight, and so take away the infamy of their flight. Plut. in the life of Crass. The
flight was of eight hundred men, which depriued the King of
the honor of an absolute victory, and of the meanes wholy to ruine
his enemies.
The rest wauered betwixt feare and duty. The King appeared in
this amazement,The Princes presence cheers the soldiers harts. It is the Planet of Mars from whence great courages* borrow the constancy and ass^rance of warlike Vertue. and by his presence gaue courage vnto his men,

who from that time cared more how to vanquish then to liue,
how to fight then to saue themselues. The enemies had more anoyed
them that fled then the rest: as Fortune doth sooner suppresse
them that yeeld vnto her then them that resist.
The Earle of St. Pol leaues the forrest whether hee was retired,
and comes to the place of Battell, with an order befitting men, and
not with violence which is proper to fooles and beasts,To go vnto military actions r^shly and without iudgement is no valour; ^easts and fooles goe (...). That which nature makes proper to valour, turnes to rashaes, i^ reason doth not gouerne. both parties
were so tired as they stood at the gaze. They made some shot
with their great Ordnance.Disorders common in both armies. The Earle had more men in his Army
then the King, but he alone was worth 10000. his presence assuring
that which was much shaken,No good can be expected of an army that is scattered but the Princes presence. In this battel of Mont^berry without the King who animated his me^ with good words all had fled. Phil. de Com. the amazement was great on either
side, a desire to saue themselues from danger did presse the French
as well as the Burgundians, and many did theirOne told Pompey that to come vnto him and to leaue Caesar hee had abandoned horse to whom Cicero said. You haue done more ho^or to your horse then to your selfe to make him know the reproch of flying and desertio^. horses the honor
to remaine in the fight, when as they stale away.
The Earle had none but horsemen, he wanted footmen, slings
For the inhabitants of the Islands Balea^res called now Maiorca and Minorca had been held most cunning with slings Hee sola genti^rm^ sunt, et vnum ab Infantia studium: cibum puer am tre non accipit, nisi quem ipsa monstrante percussit. Flo. lib. 3. cap. 8. or bowmen to dislodge the French from the hedge and ditch:The King retires to C^rbeil. A
hundred men had beene able to force them. He had whole troupes
remaining, neither were the Kinges all broken. If hee had Eagles
remaining, so had hee not to doe with pies,We must alwaies consider in comparing of forces with whom we haue to deale, and not regard the number. Nonius after the Battell of Pharsalia, said vnto Pompey. We haue yet seuen Eagles, that were good said Pompey, If wee were to fight with Parrats or Popingaies. but the night made
them take another resolution. The King was conducted by the
Scottish men to Montlehery, there to refresh himselfe, for hee had
past the day without meat or drinke, as hee had done some nights
before without rest. Hee went to Corbeil to his bed, the Earle
thought that hee would remaine vppon the field, and this beleefe
was confirmed by the light of fiers which hee saw there long after,
for the fire falling into a barrell of poulder had burnt some Cartes
along the hedge.
The disorder was great of either side, as it happens alwaies in
these incounters,Inequality of Recompences after the Battell. sooner seene then foreseene. What victories
were gotten and what battells wonne in those dayes without disorder?
None but the Romans could brag that they neuer committed error is warre. Absit in^^dia verbo. et Ciuilia Bell a sileant, nunquam ab equite hoste numqua^ a pedite, nunqua^ aperta Acie nunquam equis vrique locis labora^imus. Tit. Li^. lib. 9. The king Lost of his horsemen, and the Earle footmen, and
the number of the dead were 3000. Goodmen were honored, cowards
blamed, and runawaies punished. But as Princes are men as
well in the distribution of Cowards as in the distinction of punishments,
In the recompence of merits as well as in punishing of faults Princes doe not alwaies obserue such Iustice and equalitie, but they make it knowne that they are men and no Angels. some lost their offices for flying, who saw others rewarded
which fled twenty miles farther. There was a man of quality noted
in the kings Army, who fled to Lusignan and neuer rested, and a
Bourgundian as farre as Quesnon.
The field was couered with 3600. men slaine.Repast of the Earle of Charolois among the dead bodies. They were faine to
remoue foure or fiue bodies to set the Earle downe vpon two bottells
of straw, and to giue him meat. It was a Princely table, and
a millitary feast, which he should desire, that will iustly and gloriously

carry the title of Generall of an Army.Sobriety is one of the parts necessa^y to the pe^fection of a great Captaine. The frugality of Iulian the Emperour is much commended in the History. Mamertinus in his Panegyric saith that be tooke delight to eat of the prouisions of the Army, to bee s^ruca by the fi^st that came, and to drinke of any cup Gaudebat Castrensi cibo ministro obuio et poculo fortuito. Amian. Marcelinus saith, that hee did sometimes eat such things as would haue dist. fled a Pioner. Et ^mperatori non e^ pediae ciborsi ex ^egio more sed sub columellis tabernacu^is cenaturo pultis pottio p^rabat ex^go^ etiam munifici fastidienda Gregatio Hee that is called
victorious hath nothing about him but bodies dead or dying, among
which there are some that call for drink. What good cheere
could he make in a place all couered with horror, in an vnseasonable
time, and in so generall an amazement? To them that said hee
had the field, and that he held it all night. He had reason (answered
the King) to lye vppon the field seeing he had neither Towne nor Castell
for retreat. A word spoken wittily and to purpose did shew wisedome
necessary in the Generall of an Army, to disguise the aduantages
which the ennemy may haue ouer him, to make them lesse,
and to turne them to another sence then they are commonly
taken.It is an Argum^nt of a settled iudgement to haue w^rds able to disguise accidents which happe, in such sort as the amazement which may grow may bee turned into resolution. The earth trembles, an armie is amazed. See you not said Sempronius Gracchus how our enemies are amazed the earth sha^^es vnder their feet. At the battell of Cerignoles, fire fell among the munition. The great Captaine taking it for a good presage, said. Noi habbiam^ vinto; Id^io e^ annuncia manifestamente la victoria dandoci segno che non ci bisogna piu doperare la^tilleria Guic. lib. 5.
Many thinges obserued in this Incounter shew that executions
are not answerable to Councells,Obseruations of this Battell. and that there is a great difference
to fight by discourse and to command in field. The order of
the battell was changed.The Conduct of warre how discreet and indicio^ soeuer it bee cannot command accidents. But they must haue a care neuer to change the order of the Armie. Philippe of Valois lost the battell of Cr^cy for that he changed the order; the Earle of Alencon tooke it ill that the footemen of Genoua were put in the formost rankes. It was said they should take breath on
the way, and the Earle made them to march speedly through the
Corne, which was high and strong, so as his men were so wearied
as they had more need to lye downe then to stand. And although
the Princes had disputed the victory vnto the last point of valour,
yet knew they not to whom the trophee did belong, and they
might say that the Earle of Charolois had lost the Battell, but
the King had not wonne it.
Night increased the Bourgondians amazement, seeing themselues
to haue no defences nor trenches,Counsells in perplexity. but dead carcasses. They
were in a great perplexity what they should doe, euery man found
difficulties, andFeare is a Christall glasse which represents all things to be greater, more doubtful, and difficult, and holesome counsels are not well executed by men that are troubled and fearefull. Adde this reason of Guicc^ard. Nelle co^e auer^e diuenta ogni di maiore ill timore, et le di^ficulta di chi estato vn^o, In aduerse fortune the feare grows alwaies greater and the difficulties of him that is vanquished. feare made them greater then they were. They
held a Councell along the hedge vppon a peece of timber. The
Lords of Crequy and Hautbourdin, spake of Duke Phillips, the
Earles father, first carying armes at St. Requier, who recouered
the next day that which he had lost the day of Battell, It was to prepare
this Prince to the glorious emulation of his fathers valour
and to bind him not to dislodge. The Earle of St. Pol said that they
must take the way to Bourgondy, and leaue some part of their carriages
to retire more speedily. His reason was grounded vppon the
apparant danger they were in to remaine without victuals betwixt
Paris and the Kings forces: Many were of the same opinion,
and yet they that were sent to take view of the Kings army were not
yet returned, and that their opinions should begin whereas their
reports ended.
It was dangerous to giue aduice in a matter where the issue

might bring reproch to the sincerity of the Councell, for the wisest
aduice doth not alwaies succeed happily,A fatall accident makes a good Counsell to bee blamed and they that iudge by the euents will mock at wisedome which hath bee^e vnf^rtunate, and will commend rashnes which hath succeeded wel. Cauta potius concilia cum ratione quam prospera ex casu placeant. Tac. Lib. 2. Wary Councels with Reason do more p^ease then prospe^ous by chance. and many times rash
Councells fall out well. But it were better to stumble with reason,
then to go firmely with hazard, their opinions were all doubtfull,
and their minds much perplexed.Counsell^ of the Lord of Contay.
The Lord of Contay said that this retreat could not be made
without disorder, that as soone as it should be bruted through the
Army, euery one would grow amazed and flye; that the most diligent
should not goe twenty leagues before he were staid, or slaine.
That the safest course was to passe the night with a good guard, and
at the breake of day march directly to the place where the King
should be, that they must vanquish or dye, and that to leaue the
field were to quit and loose all.The victory belongs to him that keepes the field, although hee had b^ene beaten and broken. Paulus Aemilius speaking to ^is soldiers sai^h. Castris erutus etiams^ pugnando aci^m vicisset pro victo habebatur. Tit. Liu. lib. 9.
This Councell, seeming more generous, and hardy, was commended
and followed by the Earle of Charolois, who commanded euery
man to rest two houres and to be ready at the sound of the
trumpet: Oliuer de la March saith that when Contay had giuen his
opinion, day began to breake. Such as had beene sent to discouer,
bring word that the King was not farre off, and that they had seene
the fiers in his army, they send others, and euery man seemes resolute
to fight, but the greatest part had more desire to fly, and who so
had left to their choise to fight or to fly, or had suffered the^ that fainted
Chabrias not willing to relye vppon his soldiers whom he new to bee n^w caused a proclama^ion to b^e made through the Army, that whosoeuer was ill at ease should lay aside his armes, all the cowards were sick; he vsed them to make a number, but the faction ended hee cassiered them. Poliaenus lib. 4. to lay aside their armes, the Battalions had growne very thin.
In the morning they were aduertised that there was not any one
in the village of Montlhery,Montleherry abandoned. and that all were gone.Agis seeing that they of Argos whom he had vanquished did rallie themselues to come againe to the fight, and that his soldiers were amazed. Courage my friendes (said hee) seeing the Victors are amazed, thinke how the vanquished tremble. Pluarch. They that an
hower before said that they must not presse the enemy, and seemed
much amazed, were the first that cried, go let vs runne after them.
They grew assured and hardy for company; boldnes returned vnto
them after the danger. The day discouered the feares and heauines
which night had concealed. The Earle of Charolois incouraged
euery man. He thought that seeing there was amazement in his army
which he held to be victorious, there was dispaire in the Kings
which he held to be scattered and lost. But such as had lost would
not hazard any more, they murmured against the heat of this
Prince, who was obstinate to fight, and could not retire vppon his
losse, but made himselfe miserable vppon hope of good hap in the
recouery of that which he had lost. AmbitionAmbi^ion is neuer so high^ but she thinkes still to mount: That which seemes to be the top is but a step to her. Cui assecut^ satis fuit quod optanti ^^i^ium videbatur. Sen. sees nothing too
high, neither doth it find any thing too difficult, that which seemes
great in desiring, seemes little when it is in her power.
That which confirmed the courages of the most resolute,Duke of Brittaine expected. was the
assurance of succors from Brittaine, but many thought that this
ill fortune would stay it. The Earle of Charolois entertained them
with the assurances he had of the armies marchingWhen an army or Towne is in expectation of succours they must alwaies assure that it comes, and although they shold haue news to the contrary, yet the commander in his wisdome must giue it out otherwise. Syphax sent word to Scipio that hee could not succor him and and that he was for Carthage. Scipio entertayned his Ambassadors courteously and gaue them presents to make his me^ beleeue that Siphax came, and that his Ambassadors did returne to hasten him. and when hee

had not any, nor other newes, yet matters were reduced to those
termes as he must tell them it was neere. He caused a Frier to make
shew to come out of Brittaine, who said that hee had left the army
so neere as they should see it the same day. But the feare and amazement
was so great as they could not beleeue it. This pollicy
A lie how little soeuer it bee beleeued doth profit much. And newes brought by a person least suspected of lying are soonest receiued, at the least they do for a while suspend their iudgements. if it did not augment the courage, yet did it the patience of them
that were most danted, and the lye did profit for the small time it
was beleeued, the great desire they had to see the troupes of Brittaine
made it be receiued without confideration, as money which
is receiued by esteeme and common approbation, although it bee
not of waight.
The King went from Corbeil to Paris as soone as hee saw what
course the Earle of Charolois tooke, He arriued there on thursday
at night,The King comes to Paris and is feasted. and supt in the house of Charles of Melun his Lieftenant
generall in the Isle of France, this was his triumphing feastThey vsed to prepare a triumphant feast for the victors, whereas the first place did belong vnto him for whom it was made, and the Counsulls were intreated not to be present, for that in their presence this honour could not be giuen to any other. Plut.
where they dranke to his health, as to Iupiter the Deliuerer. The
Assembly of Noblemen and Ladies was great, he related his great
dangers, his diligence and toyle. He drew teares of ioy and pitty
from the hearers, euery man said all is well,The King reported his aduentures, and in so doing spake and declared many goodly words and pittifull, where at all wept aboundantly. Chro Martin. seeing the King is wel.
The health of a good Prince is the health of his Estate, the people said of Alexander Seuerus. Salu^ Roma quia saluns est Alexander. Lamprid. Hee assured all his seruants that he would neuer cease vntill he
had chased all his enemies out of his realme.
Yet his designe was to doe what he could to end it other-wise
then by Armes. He sent the Bishop of Paris to the Earle of Charolois,Bishop of Paris sent to the Earle of Charolois.
to let him vnderstand that he desired to know to what end
he was entred into his Realme with so great a troupe, for that hee
could remember that when as he went into Flanders, in the time of
King Charles the seauenth, his Father, hee was not followed with so
great a traine. He commanded him to let him know the iniustice of
his desseine: That he vndertooke a warre vnder collour of the publik-weale,
to vndermine the whole estate, and to set fire of the house
to driue them out that clensed it: That there was no such Phrensey
as to make ones selfe sick to vse remedies,Peace is sweet after warre, but much more proffitable before. It is better neuer to haue beene an enemy, then to bee reconcyled. being naturall for a sick
man to desire health. But for him that was found to make himself
sicke vpon hope of cure, was folly and madnesse. The Bishop of
Paris went, and hauing represented vnto the Earle of Charolois
the Kings intentions and complaints. Say vnto the King, answered
the Earle (fretting the bitternesse of his ambition with humanity
and myldnesse)Princes desirous to raigne, haue made seruitude sweete with courtesie and mildnesse. By this poysoned myl^nesse Caesar ouer threw the common-wealth of Rome. that I am not come to doe any ill, but to procure the
good of his Realme, hauing liued in such sort with mine army, as noe man
hath occasion to complaine: that being as I am, able to serue and succor my
friends, and to anoy myne enemies, I am not bound to yeeld any other reason
of my desseignes. But not to conceale them from him, I am heere for
two reasons, the one not to fayle of my word to the Princes, which haue

taken armes for the publike good, the other to haue two men which the
King hath fauored and supported against me:Priuat inter^st* are alwaies mingled with the sublike causes of warre. The E. of Charolois was an implacable enemy to the Earle of Neuers and the Lord of Croy; be added this hatred to the causes of war. If I be come well accompanied
it is to defend my selfe in France from that harme which the king
would haue done me in Flanders: That when he came hee was receiued
honorably, richly and quietly, and then was not that done vnto him,
which hee had a will to doe vnto mee: That in a word France had more
need of a warlike and armed liberty, then of a quiet and miserable seruitude.
After the Battell the Earle of Charolois caused the whole army
to bee lodged at Estampes and there abouts.Armes of the League loged at Estampes. The commodity of
this lodging saued that which one more discomodious had lost,^f time and occasion giue leaue to chose a lodging to stay there, they must consider two things, which the ancient Romans haue alwaies obserued in their lodgings. The helthfulnesse of the place for one, and water with commodity of victualls for the other. They knew what places were not helthfull, obseruing their scituation and the co^plexion of the inhabitants.
In this place as the Earle of Charolois spake vnto Mounsieur at a
window, with great attention and affection, a Britton cast a squib
which strooke against the barre where they leaned, and being amazed
at this accident, they thought it done of purpose to hurt them.
The lodging was presently enuironed with souldiers to gard them.
There was a dilligent search made for him that had done it, who
beeing only couered with his inocency, descouered him-selfe and
said that it was but a squib which he had cast to shew them pastime,
wherevpon this great amazement was turned to a iest.
All their forces being vnited they tooke councell how they shold
imploy them. Their opinions were alwaies applyed to their passions
and desseines.Charles the Kings brother weary of the warre. An ordinary mischiefe in enterprises where
there are many commanders.The plural^ty of heads is alwaies rumous and vnproffitable, euery one seekes to prefe^re his owne reasons and counsells. They doe and vndoe indespight on of another. T^ndendo ad sua quisque consilia cum aliud alii videtur. ad inuasione^ lo^um hosti apperiunt. Tit. L^u. lib. 4. That of the duke of Brittain was not
answerable to that of the Earle of Charolois. Monsieur seemed
already weary of the warre, he lamented those that were slaine, hurt
or maymed in the army, which shewed that matters were represented
to his imagination of another collour, in the vndertaking then
in the executing.Matters whe^ they are conceiued and proiected haue an other f^ce then when they are executed. He wisht that they were to begin, greeuing that
they made him the cause of so many miseries,A generous spirit is not sensible of the ruines and desolations which grow by warre and ciuill broyles. The Duke of Berry was heauy seeing so great a number slaine and hurt in the Battell of M^ntlehery. The first slaughters of warre sticke terror into them that haue not seene them. as of humain miseries
the most lamentable is that which proceeds from his fault that
complaines. He had kindled the fire, yet could not endure the flame,
he had begun the tragedy, nay rather a cruell game, whereas men
made but a sport to force, spoyle, burne and kill. He is not esteemed
a soldiar that cannot doe al this in ciuill wars, the most wicked of all
others, whereas by a fatall disorder they saw the fathers bury their
children.When Craesus was prisoner to Cyrus, by this reason that in the time of peace the children buried the frather, and ^n warre the fathers bury their children, be preferred peace before warre. And of all warres ciuill is the most vniust, i^humaine and furious. Summu^ Brute naefas ciuilia bella fatemur. Luc.
These words were well obserued by the Earle of Charolois,King of England sends the garter to the Earle of Charolois. who
from that time perswaded him-selfe, that there would be noe great
difficulty to reconcyle the Duke of Berry to the King his brother,
wherefore he sent vnto the King of England, although he were his
enemy, for that he had fauoured the house of Lancaster, he accepted
the Order of the Garter, which he ware all his life, and sought
his sister in marriage, although hee had noe will to marry her, but

being ingaged in this proposition he was taken at his word, that
which in the beginning was but a meere will, became necessity.
William of Cluny a Prothonotary was imployed in this treaty, as in
many other great occasions, to recompence the which the Duke of
Bourgundy demanded a Cardinalls hat for him, and sent Philibert
Hugonet Bishop of Mascon to Pope Sixtus the fourth, who seeing
the great oppositions which Cardinall Latin of Vrsins made, he fell
into some hope to attayne vnto that dignity, the which he demanded
and obtayned.
A resolution was taken to goe directly to Paris,He that will doe any great effect in an enemies estate, must go directly to the hart, and not busie him-selfe vpon the fronter. the Army
leaues Estampes, passeth by Saint Mathurin of Larchant, and Moret
in Gastionis. These two smale townes were appointed for the
Dukes of Berry and Brittaine. The Earle of Charolois was lodged
at Piguet in a large medow, fast vpon the riuer of Seine. The Marshall
Ioachin and Sale^art could not stop theirIf there bee any thing that doth import in the conduct of an army and binds a generall to be carefull, it is the passage of riuers which may not be waded through, in the which there are a thousand inc^nueniences. Among many meanes which Veg^tius sets downe, hee aduiseth to carry smale boates of one peece, and plankes to ^ay vpon them. Vege. lib. 3. cap. 7. passage, for they had
much Ordinance to make their way, and there were none but some
few horses on the other side to hinder them. In all this he was assisted
by the wise councel and experience of the Earle of Dunois, who
was an Vlisses in pollicy, and an Achilles in valour. Hee caused
small boats and wine pipes to be carried in cartes.
In the midest of the riuer of Seine there was an Iland in the which
he lodged through the fauor of his Canon, remayning there all
night with fifty men at armes,Passage of the army into the Isle of France. and the next day he finished his bridge
vnto the other banke. The building of this bridge brought reputation
to the army, for that Prince seemes either very weake or very
fearefull, which giues an army leysure to make a bridge. As there
is shame not to hinder it, so there is glory to finish it. The Romans
who were rightly borne for the conquest of the world, were so Iealous
of their honor at the passage of riuers, as they neuer passed
ouer their Legions but vpon bridges,To passe riuers without a bridge was held vnworthy the greatnesse and Maiesty of the Roman people. Caesar; Nisi po^tibus presidiisque impofitis dare in discrimen legiones haud Imperatorium ratus^ and after that they had
planted gards vpon the approches. At this passage the army was
fortified by nine hundred horses, led by Iohn Duke of Calabria,
Sonne to Rene King of Sicile, foure hundred Crosbow-men Germans,
and fiue hundred Swisses.The first Swisses which carried armes came to serue the league of the commonweale. Phil. de Commines saith that they wan credit for them that came after, for they behaued themselues most valiantly in all places where they came. They hold that their were an hundred
thousand horse in this army.
They tooke Pont Charanton, whereas the quarters were giuen
vnto the troupes to besiege Paris. The Earle of Charolois and
the Duke of Calabria held all the banke of Seine from Charanton
to Conflans.Disposition of the leagues Armie. The Campe was inclosed with a number of
carts. The Dukes of Berry and Brittaine were lodged at S. Maur,
and all the rest towards S. Denis. The Princes did presently let the
Parisiens vnderstand why they were in Armes, for the which they
gaue such plausible pretexts, and offered so many officesOffers made to a multitude must be of (...) things as please them. They offer offices to the inhabitants of Paris: Phil de Comines giues the reaso^. That offices are more desired in that Citty then in any other in the world, for such as haue them, make of them what they can, and not what they ought, and there are offices without wages which are sold for eight hundred crownes, and others which haue final vvages are sold for more then their wages can amount vnto in fifteen yeares. and
preferments to them that fauoured their designes, as hauing let
them know that they desired to conferre together to consult of the

meanes to reforme the disorders of the Realme, the Citie sent
her Deputies, whereof VVilliam Chartier, Bishop of Paris, was the
chiefe.
There was some Ceremonie vsed in it. The Princes assembled
at St. Maur.Assembly of the league and Deputies of Paris. The Duke of Berry was set in a chaire, the Duke of
Brittanie and Calabria on the one side, and the Earle of Charolois
on the other, with his Cuirasse and a rich mantle ouer it, and
these three stood.If this conuersation had beene suffered, saith Phil. de Com. the Princes might haue said the Towne had beene won, for the people would soone haue turned to their partie, for many reasons, and by co^sequence the whole realme.
Iohn, Bastard of Orleans, and Earle of Dunois, propounded in the
behalfe of the Princes that the designe of their league tended onely
to the publike good, and that it was necessarie to vnderstand one
an other, and to haue free entrie into Paris to treat and conferre together:
that the fittest meanes depended of that Conuocation of
the Estates, intreating them not to bee amazed if they presented
themselues before their Citie in Armes, hauing no other intent
but to cause the King to giue eareMarc Anthonie, saith, that although all sedicious, bee dangerous, yet that is iust and necessary, when the people being opprest dema^ss reliese from the whole congregation of citizens lawfully assembled. to the good and wise counsell
which they would giue him for the publike good of the Realme,
the which they said was ill gouerned, laying many imputations
vpon the King.
If the King,Conference broken by the Kings presence. who was gone into Normandie to raise his troupes,
had not come as a Prince should come to fortifie a people amazed
and wauering, this first conference had giuen the Princes of
the league a great aduantage, for the Citie yeelded to receiue
them and their men, paying and liuing without excesse, but being
arriued, no man durst once speake of a conference or an accord,
and such as delt in it repented themselues, beeing forced to depart
the Realme. The Bishop of Paris liued in disgrace with the King,
It was not a cloudWhen Athanasius was banished by the Emperor Iulian, he said vnto his friends that came to sorow with him in this disgrace Courage my children this is but a little cloud which wil vanish presently. Nic. lib. 10. c. 19. to passe with the first Sunne-shine, for his darknesse
continued his whole life, and the King shewed some feeling
thereof after his death, hauing caused his Epitaph to bee altered.
He was content to haue kept Paris from fayling, and would
not search out too curiously neither the names nor the number
of those that had mannaged this designe.Neuer saith the Sigr of Hail la^ did the Parrisiens hold the better partie, neither did they euer any thing well but this time; for they were for the King whome they supported and relieued. He considered that in
so great a Citie there must needs be some bad spirits,There is not any Citie saith Tit. Linius which hath not bad Citizens, but the multitude is alwaies ignorant and grosse. and that in
publike offences the number takes away the punishment. Hee let
the most capable vnderstand that he was King, and that he had no
need to haue the Princes come in Armes to reforme his Estate,
that none of them could loue his subiects so much as himselfe, that
by the grace of God he was the father, and to let them know what
they might hope for of the mildnes of his raigne, the Parisiens priuiledges
did abolish the impositions raised since the raigne of king
Charles his father.Normans will liue at discretion within Paris. True it is the Parisiens could not well agree
with the souldiers that were within the Citie,Townes besieged haue many times suffered more by them within it then by the enemie. Such was the estate of the Lu^^^^ans de^^^ded by the Epir^ts. Tit. Liu. lib. 8. the chiefe garrison
was of Normandie, who would liue in Paris as in a country of

conquest, threatning to doe any thing, and they were not fearefull
to any but to their hosts.There can be no great expla^s expected against an enemie from a soldier that is insolent and insupportible to his host, as were they of Vitellius, whom Tac. cals Hospitibus tantu^ metuendos. The Bourgesses were mooued and prepared
for their defence, as well against them within, as their enemies
abroad. The people hold all them for enemies that trouble
them, and know not how to endure: they of Paris were not then
so apt to suffer, as they haue been a hundred and fiftie yeares after,
for the first daie that the Princes armie appeared before the citieA people shut vp is subiect to loose patience, and to reuolt againsth* s^prince when bee sees the enemie to spoil^ his possessi^ns abroad, and that ^e is torme^ted by the^ within that gard him. Wherefore he must be kept in awe by two meanes, vigour and mildnes, by the scare of worse and hope of better..
The King telling certaine Bourgesses that were in guard at St. Antonies
gate, that the Bourgundians should not annoy them as they
had done, a Proctor of the Chastelet hauing more feeling of the
wine that was lost, then of the bloud that was spilt, answered, Yea
Sir, but they gather ourThe vines about Paris were gather^d the first daics of the siege, before September, although the gropes were not r^ps. The Chronicle saith that the wine was very small, and that they called it wi^e of the Bou^gondians yeare. Vines and eate our grapes, and we cannot help
it. It were better replyed the King, that they eate your grapes, then to
come and take the siluer which you haue hidden in your sellers. Paris
hath alwaies loued her ease, and to take her gaine from herGreat townes are not kept in obedience and awe but by the mea^es which the people haue to gaine. Cleon could do much in Athens, for that hee flattered the common people, vsing them like an old man and giuing them stil some meanes to gaine Plur. in the life of Niceas. were
to draw her out of her Element. They are prompt vppon the
first terrors, and are sooner sicke of opinion then effect, more things
amaze them then hurt them.
The Armie shewed it selfe euery day as it were in Battell in that
great plaine towards St. Anthonies, and to make it seeme greater
the horse-boyes tarried not at home, but some seemed gallant,
whom hunger tormented, and many had winde in their bellies as
well as in their heads. It was obserued then for a strange thing
that the armie which thought to famish Paris,Paris famisheth the Ar^^ie which would haue fami^hed it. had beene famished
without Paris: so commodious is the situation of this Citie and
was so well chosen by her first founders.The first care of them that build Citties, is for the Commodity of victualls: The Ingenor Democrates perswaded Alexander to build a towne vpon Mont Ath^s. Alexander commended this designe, but how said he shall the Inhabitants liue, wherewith Democrates was confounded, and Alexander mocking his Architector, built Alexandria neere vnto the sea, and the Riuer of Nil. Phil. de Commin^s obseruing that the siege had caused no dearth of victuals in Paris and that the Citty did furnish them aboundantly admires the scituation. The King who in the
guiding of this Ship hath his eyes alwaies lift vp to heauen and
his hands at the helme, was more resolute to defend himselfe then
to attempt any thing, yet hee made a trench from Charanton beneath
Constans with a little fort at the head of it, where hee lodged
foure thousand Archers, with some Ordinance, which made
the Princes to keepe their chambers, for it played in their quarter.
The Dukes of Berry and Brittanie came in the morning to the Earles
lodging to hold a Councell, where they dined and departed not
but by the fauour of the night.
This was all that the King did, for hee held it not fit to hazard
any thing, hee knew this great and gaping breach would exhale
contagious vapors, that it would not be closed vp with the death
of one man alone, but would swallow a million, that he had rather
saue his subiects then vanquish his enemies.A Prince should alwayes haue in his mind, euen in the heat of Combats, that royall saing of Scipio which Anthony the Gentle did so much esteeme. Se malle vnum seruare Ciuem quam mille hostes occidere. Iul. Capitoll. So great a conspiracie
would that choller should straine the sinewes of his soule,
and that hee should refuse peace to them who demanded nothing

but warre, but he represented vnto himselfe the deadly bitings of
incensed necessitie; that the bloud which should bee spilt in this
warre flowed from his veines, that the blowes would fall vppon
his members, and vpon part of his bowels: That it is a goodly
thing to suffer himselfe to bee vanquished, when the victorie is
dangerous to the victor.
Hee resolued to make their Camels drinke the water which
them selues had troubled. They propounded a peace with goodly
conditions. The Princes make show that they desired not warre
but for the publike quiet, and to liue without wrong. They made
many truces to treat that, they which lasting but little was not
much distinguished from warre,A short truce fauours more of war then peace. Ign^uum tempus, nec p^ce laetu^, nec bellis exercitum; Cognatae induciis Insidie sunt. as the middest doth alwaies
leane more to one of the extremes then to the other. The treatie
was begun by diuers, but the King ended it, who one morning
came by the riuer to Conflans.
Before he went out of the boat hee said vnto the Earle who attended
him on the banke.Enteruie^ of the King and Earle of Charolois. Brother doe you assure me that? to whom
the Earle of Charrolois answered, I as a brother.The word of an enemie is a dangerous assurance, K Lewis the eleuenth had no other to goe into the Princes Army which were iust against him. If there co^fidence hath vndone some, it hath bin successefull to others, and Scipio Africanus went vpon this assurance to Siphax, who although he were abaroarian and a cruell enemie to the Romane name, yet the mildnes and generositie of Scipio made him a friend. Ladislaus King of Bohemia went freely to Mathias King of Hungary his capitall enemy, to end controuersies which could not be determined at Olmutz, and they became great friends. Dubrau. lib. 2^ He receiued the
King with much respect, and the King spake vnto him with great
mildnes, which made his heart apt for any impression, so great is
the force of words, and so well hee could handle his tongue, the
which he vsed as a pensill for all coulours.
He that will haue effects according to his owne heart, must not
spare words to his liking that may giue them. Mens spirits are gouerned
by words, as a ship is gouerned by the helme, and a horse
by the bit, and wee cannot say what power the sweetnes of words
haue ouer the minde of man.Words are the Instrument by the which the minde of man is animated, thrust forward and held backe. A Prince that knowes how to vse them hath a great aduantage in all that he treates, and when it is acompanied with such sweetnes as grauity is not wronged, it workes what it lists in the hearts of men. The King, framing his speech to
this tune, said vnto the Earle. Brother I know that you are a Gentleman,
and of the house of France: why my Lord, answered the Earle. For
that, said the King, When the foole Moruillier spake so boldly vnto you,
you sent me word that I would repent the words hee had spoken before
the yeare were past, you haue not failed, and before the time. The King
spake these words with a countenance so free and full of affection,
although his heart were full of indignation and spleene, as the Earle
tooke delight in it. He disauowed Moruillier, and tooke the seales
from him. Princes play with their subiects, and disauow them
when as their negotiations are not answerable to their hopes.
He did walke long by the riuers side, betwixt the Earle of Charolois,
and the Earle of St. Paul, and heard their Intentions.The King who thought nothing wel done if he were not an Actor, went to the Earle of Charolois, preferring the necessity of his affaires, before the consideration of his quali^^, for he held that the honor and glory of an action depended on profit. Yet they had deputed som^ of either side to treat: For the King were imployed Charles of Aniou Earle of Maine. The Signeur of Pressigny President of the Acounts and 10. Dauuet President of the Parlament of Toul^s^. For the Princes the D. of Calabria, the Earle of Dunois, and the E. of St. Paul. The
Earle of Charolois demanded the Dutchie of Normandie for the
Duke of Berry, and the riuer of Somme for himselfe, little for the
publike, and much for priuate men. The King told him plainely
that he would neuer consent to dismember the Duchie of Normandie,

but he was content to restore him the Townes of Somme:
and finding that the Earle of St. Paul was the Oracle of the Counsels
and will of this Prince, he offered him the office of Constable.
By these offers the strict bond of this league began to be dissolued,
for there is nothing so fast bound but it is vndone when as one
string begins to slip. The King did and spake all things so cunningly,
mingly offers with threats, and curtesies with braueries, as the
Earle applied himselfe to his intentions.
The day after this first conferenceThis conference of the King and the Earle was the end of the war. It was not thought fit the King should seeke vnto the Barle, but to do his busines hee past all formalities, and would not comit that to hope which he might doe by discretio^. What doth it import to ascend to any place, to vse staires of wood, or ston, or whether the key bee of gold or iron, so as it open., the Earle of Charolois mustred
his Armie,Muster of the leagues Armie in view of the King. whether the King came with thirty or forty horse,
commending those goodly forces. The Earle of Charolois speaking
vnto them vsed these words. My masters you and I are for the
King our Soueraigne Lord, to serue him when soeuer hee shall haue
need of vs.
The Kings offers bred a iealousie betwixt the Princes of the
league, euery man cared for his owne affaires. The Earle of Charolois
saw one day vpon his conferences and propositions three
Councels and three bands, whereat hee was discontented, saying,
that there should not be any thing secret in his presence: During
these conferences and enteruiewe. Isabell of Bourbon Countes^e
of Charolois died, the Earle mourned, and the King did comfort
him. This death gaue some more facilitie to the peace, for the
marriage of the Earle with the Lady Anne of France, the Kings
eldest Daughter, was propounded, with the transport of the Counties
of Bry and ChampagneIn marriages of the daughters of France, Kings haue somtimes giuen money, and sometimes lands of the Crowne vpon condition they should returne. Charles the fift gaue to his two eldest daughters a 100000. franks of gold, and to the rest 60000. Charls the sixt gaue eight hundred thousand to Isabell married to Richard the second King of England. King Iohn gaue the Contie of Somiers in Languedoc to Isabel his daughter, married to the Duke of Milan. Lewis the yong gaue to Margaret his daughter married to Henry the third King of England the Contie of Vexin. for her dowrie and preferment,
which the Kings Predecessors had neuer done in marrying their
daughters. The Earle of Charrolois affected nothing more, but
vpon the doubt which was made vnto him of the alienation of
these two Prouinces, he sent William Hugonet, and Iohn Carandolet
to Paris, to know if these two peeces might be seperated from the
Crowne. The King gaue them all the assurances they could desire,
but he shewed that his intent was not to lodge his daughter in a
house which he could not loue.
The conditions of the accord being treated after this manner
with the Earle Charolois, as hee who had all the power in his
hands, euery man stood vpon his gard. The Earle was aduertised of
the kings designes, and there was still some one which discouered
the Earles vnto the King.In ciuill warres Councels are not secret, and the most hidden are diuulged, euery one hath some friend on the contrarie partie. A page came at midnight to the riuer
side crying, that they should be set vpon by all the forces that were
in Paris.Dukes of Berry and Brittanie armed once during this warre. This cry gaue so hot an Alarum, as no man doubted it.
Monsieur and the Duke of Brittanie shewed themselues armed,
which else they had neuer done, and so past through the armie, to
finde the Earle of Charolois, and the Duke of Calabria, who had
sent skouts to discouer, These men troubled with the darknes of
the night, and the generall feareCaesar sent Consydius at the break of day to discouer the enemy, and going, feare surprised him, so as he returned, with all speed, and although hee had not seene any thing yet hee said that the enemy had already gotten the top of a mountaine wheras Caesar ment to lo^ge, and that hee knew that by their Armes and Ca^^s, and with knowldege of the Gaul^s. Caesar ^ib. 1. of the wars of Gaule. beeing neere vnto Paris tooke

thistels for the pikes and lances of an Armie put in Battell, and so
returned sweating, to tell them that all Paris came vppon them.
Iohn Duke of Calabria came vnto the Dukes standard, who
like a couragious Prince, beleeuing that which hee desired, spake
after this manner. Now we are come to that which we haue alwaies desired,
behold the King and all the people sallied out of the Cittie, and
marching, as our skouts report, and to the end euery man may haue courage,
euen as they sallie out of Paris, wee will measure after the Cittie
Ell, which is the greatest measure.
The Duke of Bourgundy vppon some aduertisement that the
Duke of Berry and Brittanie might make their accord apart, as
the Kings designe was onely to diuide them, he held it not fit to
leaue his Sonne in that Estate as he should bee forced to doe any
thing vpon necessitie,He that suffers himselfe to bee surpris^d by necessitie, d^th no more any thing freely, his councels and actions sauor of a troubled iudgement. and that if he were fortified with men
and Armes, he should keep his confederates in awe,Succors of men and money sent to the Earle of Charolois. and make
his conditions more assured.To make a peace honorable and with aduantage, it must be done in arms and that hee whom they will wrong may say boldly, I will not doe it. He sent him a hundred and twenty
men at Armes led by the Lord of Saueur, a thousand fiue hundred
Archers, and sixscore thousand crownes, the which would
haue made him more difficult in the Treatie, if they had come before
the conclusion.
It had been concluded that Monsieur should resigne Berry vnto
the King,Dutchie of Normandie giuen to the Kings brother. and haue the Duchie of Normandie, and that Iohn Duke of
Bourbon should enter into the Castle of RouenThe Duke of Bourbon entr^d into Rouen by the Castle, the widdow to the signior of Brezay S^n^shal of Normandie fauoured this entrie, contrary to the ^ing^ intention. The Bishop of Bayeux, and Iohn Hebert Generall of the Finances of France aduanced the same designe. All offended the K. and repented the displeasure they had done him. during the treatie,
but hee entred also into the Towne. When as the King saw
that the Normans had allowed of this change without those difficulties
and moderations which he expected, he sent word vnto the
Earle of Charolois that he desired to meete with him neere vnto
Con^^ans. Hee came, and the King said vnto him, that the Peace
was made seeing his Brother was in Rouen. This did so please the
Earle of Charolois,Earle of Charolois in a danger not foreseene. as vnwittingly hearing and speaking with affection
of this accord, hee found himselfe at the entry of the Bulwarke,
which was at the end of the trench which the King had caused
to be made, by the which they might enter into the Towne.
The long black cloake which he carried for the losse of his wife, seemed
in a manner to mourne for his libertie.
He was much amazed, but hee dissembled his feare and his amazement
all hee could, fearing that if the King perceiued it, he
would hold himselfe wronged, and it may bee proceed farther.
The chiefe men that were in the Armie held their master lost, and
represented vnto the^selues that which had hapened to his Grandfather
at Montrea^ Faut Yonne.Ani^iury must bee dissembled when as he that receiues it is not in case to reuenge it, and that he is in da^ger to receiue a greater if hee make show of it. So Agripina seemed not to perceiue that Nero would haue slaine her. Choller forced the signior of Neufchastell,
Marshall of Bourgundy, to vse these words. If this foole
and mad man hath vndone himselfe, we must not follow him, nor ruine
his house nor his fathers affaires, let euery man thinke of his owne
safety and of an honorable retreat: No man can hinder vs from recouering
of the frontier.
The ioy was exceeding great when they saw him returne. This
Marshall seeing him, said vnto him, that he was not at his seruice

but by loane, so long as his father liued.A young Prince must bee reprehended by such persons whose age, experience, and authoritie giue power to speake freely, but the acknowledgement of the error must cause the reprehension cease, the which must not be done publikely, least it breed contempt, and that they which should bee confirmed in an opinion that their commanmander hath nothing imperfect, grow doubtfull of his conduct. So all hold speeches and free aduertisements to a delicate Prince, that cannot endure to be grieued by hearing, are dangerous. Chide mee not, answered
the Earle.Heacknowledgeth his error and is ashamed. I confesse my great error but I found it so late as I was neere
vnto the Bulwarke. The Marshall of Bourgundy added, you haue
done it without me. The Earle of Charolois held downe his head
and made no answere, for that which he had done exceeded the
bounds of all iudgement. The King was commended to haue dealt
so iustly, and the Earle of Charolois to haue committed himselfe
so freely into a strongers hands.
The conditions of the peace beeing all concluded, the King
gaue to the Earle of Charrolois the Castle of Bois de Vincennes
for his assurance, promising to come thither the next day. Hee
came, where also were the Dukes of Berry and Brittanie and the
Earle of Charolois, the ports were well garded, and the approches
fortified, and the King was in the like feare in the Castle, as
the Earle of Charolois had beene in the Bulwarke. Euery man
thought that the Publike weale,Treatie of peace concluded at Bois de Vincennes. which had beene so much exalted
in this league, should be preferred before all other conditions of
the Treatie. But it is a folly to thinke that what is desired of many
can succeed, when it depends of the affections of few men,
Matters done hardly succeede but according to the intent of the first mouers. Priuat interests and designes bande against publike intentions, and seldom is it seene what all desire is executed by few. which haue diuers designes. They talked thereof when as all
was done. The Earle of Charolois had the Townes of either side
the riuer of Somme, Amiens, St. Quentin, Corbie, Abbeuille, the
countie of Ponthieu, Dourlans, St. Requier, Creuecaeur, Arleux,
Monstreuil, Croton, and Mortaigne, to bee redeemed for two
hundred thousand crownes, after the death of the Earle of Charolois.
The King to retire these Townes had nine monethes before
paied foure hundred thousand crownes. Monsieur did homage vnto
the King for the Duchie of Normandy.Election of thirty six D^^uties to consult of the remedies of the commonweale, and the ease of the people, the King promising to co^firme all that should be done by them.
The Duke of Brittaine held some places in Normandy, which he
kept still, for he said he had contributed more, for the charges of the
warre, then all the rest.
The Conuocation of the estates was resolued, and in the meane
time it was held fit to chuse 36. persons,Reformation of the disorders of the realme. of all the orders of France,
to prouide with the Earle of Dunois for the disorder of Iustice and
the reformation of the estate. The King made no difficulty to grant
all they demanded reseruing vnto himselfe the liberty to hinder it.
His intent was to diuide the forces of the league, and then to turne
ouer his bookes of the sword and dagger,The Emperor Caligula had two secret bookes, the one was called the sword and the other the dagger, wherein they were noted that should be put to death with those kind of Armes Suet. cap. 49. where were written in
red letters, their names which had offended him during his retreat into
Flanders, and his fathers raigne, which had followed his brother
and the Princes of the league, and especially they that had receiued
him so easily into Normandy:King Lewis the eleuenth held Normandie the most important Prouince of his Realme, he gaue it to his Brother but to delay him, it was to faire a peece to giue for a portion. Philip de Commines saith, he had seene raised in Normandie fourescore and fifteene thousand pound sterling. for he would not for any thing haue
consented to giue him that Prouince, if he had not beene assured of
their constancy that held the chiefe places.

But the Normans, who did alwaies thinke that their Country did
well deserue a Duke, consented to this change for the desire they had
to haue a Prince, which should remaine within the Prouince. There
were but three which desired rather to leaue their houses then to
change their maister. Iustice had greater power in their soules then
wisedome. The Seneshall of Normandy, the Balyfe of Rouen, and
one named Picard, who was afterwards Generall of Normandy. The
History owes them this testimony of honor,To doe well among men of honor is easie and ordinary but not to suffer himselfe to be transported with the coruptions of the time nor to follow the violent passions of a multitude but to desire the good, to dare vndertake it and to effect it in a bad season, in the which vice is honored with the recompence of vertue, it is an infallible argument of a spirit wonderfully disposed by nature to all good and commendable thinges. the which is the
more considerable, for that there is some difficulties to retire ones
selfe out of a presse that runs headlong, and that the imitation and
example of ill, presents it selfe alwaies with much heat.
At their departure from Bois de Vincennes,Departure of the Earle of Charolois. euery one to tooke his
course, the Dukes of Normandy and Brittaine went to Rouen, the
King did accompany the Earle of Charolois to Villiers the faire.
They lodged together for a proofe of the confidence they had one
of another. The King was the weaker hauing but a small troupe, but
there was order that 200. men at armes should come to accompany
him to Paris. An act of wisedome, as commendable as those of
precedent conferences, and trusts had beene dangerous: for in such
occasions there is nothing more safe then not to giue any aduantage
to his aduerse party to wrong him:All assurances of friendship, faith and promises which may be drawne from an enemy are good and profitable, but by reason of the inconstancy of men and time there is none better, then so to fit himselfe as he may haue noe meanes to hurt him. The Earle of Charolois
hearing thereof was troubled, and caused his men to arme and stand
vpon their gardes,Vppon the suspitio^ which the Earle of Charolois had of this' troupe Phil. de Com. speaketh thus. It is almost impossible that ^. great Noblemen can agree together, for the reports and iealousies which they haue continually: And two great Princes that will entertaine friendship should neuer see one another, but send honest and discreet men, who shall entertaine them, and repaire their errors. Morning being come, the King bad the Earle
farewell, and returning with them that came to fetch him, he freed
him from al subiect to distrust his intentions.
He entred gloriously into Paris,The Kings returne to Paris. to haue so happily calmed the
storme which threatened him, and two daies after his arriuall hee
caused them to feast him at supper in the Townehouse. The greatest
personages were inuited with their wiues, hee thanked the Parisiens
for their fidelity and constancy in so important an occasion: he commended
them that had done him good seruice,It is a great content for good men to see how the Prince esteemes their courage and fidelity. and among others
Robert of Estouteuille, to whom he restored the Prouostship of Paris,
which he had taken away, he hauing held it during the raigne of
King Charles his father. He displaced the first President of NanterreWhen as Lewis II. came vnto the Crowne, he made Helias of Tourette first President, who dyed soone after, and this place was giuen to the President of Nanterre, at the suit of Iohn of Bureau a Knight, Segneur of M^nglat.
and gaue that charge to Iohn Dauuet first President of Tholousa: he
tooke the seales from Moruillier, and restored them to Iuuenall of
Vrsins, from whom he had taken them.
The treatyTreaty of Conflans proclaimed at Paris the 28. of October 1465. signed and sworne was proclaimed, and thereby the
warre for the publicke weale was ended,Contentment of priuat men maks them forget the publike. contenting the interests of
priuate men. The King desired to quench the fire of this deuision rather
with siluer then with blood, and teares of his subiects. To the
Duke of Bourbon was assigned the like pension that he receiued of
Charles the seauenth. Anthony of Chabannes Earle of Dammartin,

was restored to his landes and soone after made Lord Steward of
France, in the place of the lord of Crouy.Ther was neuer so great a marriage but some dined ill, some did what they listed, and others had nothing. Phil de Com. lib. 1. Cap. 14.
Many others suffered themselues to bee vanquished by the King,
thinking themselues more happy to fall vnder his power, then to escape,
Those that were subdued by Alexa^der were more happy (...) they that escaped his power, for these had not any one to free the^ from their misery, and the others were made happy by the Victor Plut. for they were freed from miseries, and such as remained with
the Earle of Charolois could not hope for any great felicity, knowing
his Councells and designes to be vnfortunate, and it seemed his
head was not made but to aflict and ruine his body.Earle of St. Paul made Constable of France. And for that the
Earle of St. Paul was as it were Arbitrator of all the Earles Councels,
the King wonne him, offring him the sword of France, which Valeran
or LuxembourgValeran of Luxembourg Earle of St. Paul was made Constab^e of France. Anno, 1411. two yeares after be y^elded vp the sword to Charles Earl of Albret and Suylly, from whom Ki^g Charles the sixth had taken it. had sometimes carried.
It is the first dignity of all the orders of France,First dignity of the State. hee carries the
sword not in a scabberd behind the King as they do before the Duke
of Venice, to shew that the vse and authority depends of them that
follow it, but naked before the King, who alone commands to draw
it and to put it vp, when he pleaseth, as hauing the only power of the
sword ouer his subiects. That of his Iustice remaines in the hands of
his soueraigne Courts, for the punishment of Crimes wherewith
he meddles not: Iupiter doth not strike, hurt, nor condemne any man.
Not only the Princes eyes but his pictures and his statuesA Prince should abhorre all that is inhumane and cruel. The Emperor Claudius caused Augustus Image to bee taken fro^ the place wheras slaues were punished, which had slandered their Maisters vnder the Empire of Caius or Tiberius, to the end it should not be violated nor behold those punishments. Dion. should
be farre from executions. The Kings of France haue held this course
to reserue vnto themselues pardons, benefits and rewards, leauing
the distribution of punishments to their officers.
Lewis of Luxembourg was declared Constable at the marble table,
he tooke his oath, and his authoritie was verified by the Court of
Parliament. As ArthurArthur of Brittaine was chosen Constable of France, by the suffrages of all the Princes and great Counsell, and although the King was then troubled in his iudgement and the seales of France stampt with the Queenes picture, yet by letters of pr^u^sion. But the keeping of the Kings sword is giuen for the Kings s^rvice, in fealty and homage and to be the chiefe in warre aboue all next vnto the King. of Brittanie Earle of Richmont was the
first whose letters of Constable were there published, so Lewis of
Luxembourg was the first that tooke his oath there. We must not
iudge of a mans fortune by the glorie of such dignities, they bee
peeces of Christall, which as they glister so they will breake. To
hold a man happie that enters into great charges, is to giue the name
of the image to the mettle which is not yet molten. Wee must see
him come, liue and runne to the end of the course, to know what
the issue will be.
With this charge Lewis of Luxembourg was wedded to his own
ruine, and did himselfe adde much vnto it, for notwithstanding
that he were bound vnto the King both by reason and oath,Affection of the Constable St. Paul. yet (as
it is hard but the tree will retaine something of the soyle where it
first tooke rooteStrangers (...) not at the first leaue their affection to their party although they quit it. Solon would not allow a stranger to be a Bourgesse in Athens, if he were not banished from his Country.) the affections of men beeing like vnto a streame
which ouerflowes and waters a field and is nothing the cleerer: He
still kept a naturall inclination to the seruice of his first Prince,
grounding his affections vpon one maxime, in the which hee found
his ruine in stead of greatnes, whereunto he aspired.Theramenes an Athe^^an the sonne of Aignon, for that he was not firme in his opinions, holding sometimes one party, somtimes another, was called Cothureue which is a kind of buskin vsed in Tragedies fit for either foot. Plu^. in the life of Niceas. He thought

to playTheramenes an Athe^^an the sonne of Aignon, for that he was not firme in his opinions, holding somtimes one party, somtimes another, was called Cothureue which is a kind of buskin vsed in Tragedies fit for either foot. Plut. in the life of Niceas. Theramenes in this Tragedie, to remaine a neuter betwixt
these two great Potentates, to make them quarrell when he pleased,
to iudge of the blowes, and to keep himselfe from danger, thinking
to be alwaies supported by the one when the other should seek
to ruine him, and to make both of them depend so vpon his will, as
as hee should prescribe them a lawe of warre and peace when hee
pleased, nt considering that newtrality, which may bee commended
in a prince, when by reason of wisedome or weaknes he cannot doe
otherwise, is meere trechery and treason in a subiect, who can
haue but one maister.
It was a great miserie for him to be betwixt two Princes which
could not agree. He that is in this estate is not like vnto the towne
of Siria,Pliny saith that the towne of Palmira in Syria remained without touch amidst the powers of the Romane and Parthian Empires. which was nothing anoyed being inuironed by the Armies
of the Romans and Parthians. Hee finds his condition oftentimes
like vnto the miserable marriner of Tire, whom one waue cast out
of the ship, and another brought him in againe. His humor did
fauor his bad fortune, wauering alwaies amidst the vncertainty of
his resolutions, and a spirit of contradiction.
When he was freed from one businesse he intangled himselfe with
another,His bad conduct and vnsortunate end. well in France, ill in Flanders, and as the cloudes turne alwayes
either into wind, or to raine, his enterprises ended alwayes
in teares or sighes. In a word he made a trade of the profession of
armes, and did not take them to haue peace, but to make the warre
continue.Whilst that Rome was well gouerned (which was vntill the time of the Gracchi) there was neuer Captaine nor Souldier which made a trade of war, when it was ended euery man returned to his first exercise. A^tilli^s Regulus being Generall of the Army in the last war against Carthage, demanded leaue of the Senate to returne vnto his houses to manure his grounds which his farmors had left wast.
When as he saw that Councells are not esteemed by Princes but
according to the euents,He kindles the firebrands of warre. hee desired to make his to be allowed by
some fauorable occasion. He sees the Duke of Bourgondy busie in
war against them of Liege, he knowes how much the King is offended
at the practises and Intelligences which the Dukes of Normandy
and Brittaine had with his enemie, hee therefore Counsells him to
make warre against them, to make worke in their owne estates, and
to kindle a fire in their owne houses, to the end they should not
haue leisure to cast it against their Neighbours. These two Princes
in the beginning were great friends,Of great friends are made the greatest ennemies; hatred folowes and accompanies friendship. Chilon could him that vanted he had no enemies. That he should also haue noe friends. Plut. but as great hatred growes
from great friendship, they did so iarre in the diuision of the fruites
of the peace, as they continued not long together. The Duke of
Normandies seruants, who had serued King Charles the seauenth,
could not indure the Brittons for companions. The Duke of Brittaine
would bee respected as the instrument of their good fortune.
Seeing these two Princes could not remaine Neighbours, they
would neuer haue beene associated in the Empire.An admirable and sole example of trufriendship. Dioclesian and Maxim. Emperors entred the Empire together, commanded together, and lef^. it with one accord.
The Duke of Normandy was aduertised that the Duke of Brittanie
had a designe not to leaue him, and that the Earle of Dammartin
vndertooke to lead him into Brittaine. Hee was then at
Mont St. Catherines attending vntill the preparation which they
made for his entry were finished, but when hee had sent notice
thereof to them of Rouen, they would not deferre his entry a minute.
They set him on horseback without a foot-cloth, and led him to

the Cathedrall Church in a black veluet gowne, where they sware
obedience vnto him, the Brittons were out of countenance to see
their designes made frustrate. The King made his profit of this bad
intelligence. He came into Normandy,Normandy yeelded to the King. and within few daies forced
his brother to depart. The Earle of Charrolois was much greeued
that this diuision had lost Normandy,Ruines caused by diuision are reparied by co^cord. The Dukes of Normandie and Brittanie c^sidering that they had lost Normandie by their had int^lligence, reconcile themselues. It is imp^ssible saith Phil. de Com. by this diuisi^n that many Noblemen can long liue together, if the^e be not one head aboue them. A Prince hauing command ouer 10000. men, and meanes to entertaine th^, is more to b^e feared then ten all^es and confedera^s hauing euery one six thousand, for that they haue so many things to accord betwixt them, as halfe the time i^ spent before they conclude any thing. for hee beleeued that that
Prouince being out of the Kings handes hee was weakned a third
part. Monsieur had no other refuge then Brittaine, being poore naked
and dispossest, which mooued them to pitty, that were too weak
to releeue him, and support him against a Brother who was so great
and mighty.
The Earle of Charrolois was not long in suspence whether the
King would hold all that he had promised: for hauing sent Imbercourt
and Carondolet vnto him to put him in minde of the promise
of marriage of his daughter, they found that shee was promised to
Peter of Bourbon Lord of Beaujeu. The King told them that hee
would marrie her better cheape then the Earle of Charolois would
take her, and that Champagne and Brie, were too good to bee dismembred
from the Crowne.
If men could iudge as truely as sodainly of all things, What
should remaine for the prouidence of God to decide? Euery man
thought that France would neuer escape this Apoplexie, which if
it did not bring death, would at the least end with a Palsey, but
her destinies were otherwise set downe in the eternall tables of the
great God, the father of time, the true SaturneThe Romans held Sat-rne to b^e the God and father of truth and did sacrifice bare-headed vnto him, to shew that there is not any thing hidden fro^ him. which must bee
worshipped bare-headed, and knowes onely the periods and ends
of Estates. After the glorie, which belongs wholly to his bounty,
We must commend the Kings wisedome and iudgement, who remained
so staied in occasions, where as the coldest spirits would
haue been inflamed to runne vpon their enemies. He plaied Sertorius
against Metellus.Metellus sought onely to fight. Sertorius refusing the Battel cut of his victuals, tooke his water fro^ him, and kept him from forrage. When he thought to march, he staied him, when he was lodged, he annoyed him in such sort as he forced him to dislodge, if he layed siege to any place, hee found himselfe besieged through want of victuals.
France neuer saw so many men assembled to ruine her, but she
shewed that her foundations were good. The forces that were before
Paris were so great and so many as they might well be admired
both of friends and enemies: for it was an apparent demonstration
what this Crowne can doe against the conspiracie of all others.
Yet Paris did feele of this storme long after, and was so vnpeopled
by this warre, and by a plague which happened in August 1467. as
the king to repeople it drew strangers thither with great priuiledges,
as such as had been condemned by iustice,Vnpeopling of Paris. by the assurance of impunitie,
and all, as the Chronicle saith, according to the priuiledge
giuen to all banished men remaining in the Townes of St. Malo
and Valenciennes.
The fidelitie of Paris saued the Estate, for if shee had refused entrie
vnto the king, he was resolued to retire into Suisser-land, or to
the Duke of Milan. It is true that as it happens alwaies in Ciuill

warresIn ciuill wars there are but to many occasions offred to be iealous of them of whose loyalty they sh^ld least doubt. Kinsmen grow faithlesse. Your seruant may be of that party which you feare. M. de M. whereas distrusts and iealousies grow without sowing,
the religion of secrecie was not obserued, for the Princes were aduertised
of all the resolutions that were taken against them, yea of
the time and of the sally which should be made vpon their Armie in
three seuerall places; the first and the greatest towards Paris, the
second towards Pont Charanton, and the third by Bois de Vincennes.
Wherefore all this siege the king was euer in IealousieThey watch in vaine for the safety and defence of a Town besieged, if fidelitie sleepes at the gates, the gard must bee committed to them whose loialtie is well assured.
for that one night he found the Bastille gate open towards the
field. The Chronicle saith it was on Thursday the 29. of September.
He was conceited it had beene done by Charles of Melun,
but he made no shew of it. Wise Princes should not lightly
call in doubt two such deere and precious things, as the reputation
and loyaltie of their seruants.It is hard to repaire and recompence the iniuries done to faith and reputation. Famae et fidei damna maiora sunt qua^ quae estimariqueant. Tit. Liu. Phil. de Commines saith notwithstanding
that the king had not a better seruant that yeere then this
Charles de Melun, and the Chronicle attributes to his care the honor
to haue saued Paris.
The best blowes which were giuen at this siege were drawne
from his head, and from the wise resolution which he tooke, not
to haue any thought but to diuide the company, he had forces sufficient
to fight with all the Princes together without paine or perill,
they had not yet past their Apprentiship in warre. Onely the
Duke of Calabria knew something, hauing learned it vnfortunately
in the warre of Naples. The Earle of Charolois had in his
youth followed his Father in his Armies and Battels, but a long
peace had made him forget more then hee knew. As for the Duke
of Berry and Brittanie, the amazement wherein they were when
as the Canon played vppon their quarter, made it knowne that
warre was not their Element. The Historie hath obserued that after
the Armie had past the riuer of Seine, the Earle of Charolois
and the Duke of Calabria troubled themselues much to haue the
souldiers march in order, and represents them so well armed as
they seemed to haue a great desire to fight. But when it describes
the equipage of the Duke of Berry and Brittaine, it makes a right
Prosopopeia, seruing onely for the number and pompe. They did
ride, saith Phil. de Commin: vpon little nags at their ease, carrying for
the most part but little light Brigandins, yet some said they had nothing
but little gilt nayles vpon Sattin, that they might not weigh, yet I know
not the truth. He that goes to the warre without his Armes shewes
that he hath no desire to come neere blowes.
FINIS.



THE CONTENTS OF
the fourth BOOKE.

1 Entry of Queene Charlot into Paris. She is accompanied by Ame duke
of Sauoy her Brother, and Bonna of Sauoy her sister.
2 Rebellion of them of Liege and Dinand. Their Insolencie against the Duke
of Bourgondy: The seuere punishment of their folly.
3 Death of Phillip Duke of Bourgondy, greatnesse and felicity of his estate,
his bounty and reputation in Europe, his chiefe Actions.
4 Entry of Charles Duke of Bourgondy into Gand, sedition for the abolishing
of customes.
5 Wisdome of K. Lewis the eleuenth to descouer the desseines of the Dukes of
Brittaine and Bourgondy. His Army in Brittany.
6 Newe reuolt of them of Liege. They consult whether they should put their
hostages to death. An Ambassage from the King to the Duke of Bourgondy,
touching that. The taking of the Towne of Liege and the desolation
thereof.
7 The Ganto is acknowledge their errors. The Duke makes his entry there
armed; The King deuides the Dukes of Normandy and Brittaine from all
Intelligence with the Duke of Bourgondy.
8. Enteruiew betwixt the King and the Duke of Bourgondy at Peronne,
his perplexity in the apparant danger wherein he was, he treats with
the Duke of Bourgondy and accompanies him to Liege.
9 The Liegeois beseeged by the King and the Duke of Bourgondy, their
furious sallie they are surprised, spoyled, and slaine.
10 The King returnes to Paris, his wordes leauing the Duke of Bourgondy,
continuation of the warre in the Contry of Liege.
11 A breefe recitall of the chiefe actions, life, and death of Alexander
Scanderbeg King of Albania.




THE HISTORY
of LEVVIS the XI.
THE FOVRTH BOOKE.
PARIS was all in Feasts and Ioy for the happie
successe of the Kings affaires, who had so wisely
pacified the windes which threatened his ship
with shipwracke, but much more for the discharge
which he made of certaine souldiers and
impositions which the people found insupportable.
On Saturday the third of August 1465. the King remitted the fourth peny of the wine to the eight, and tooke away all impositions except of Marcha^dise of the six farmes in grosse These publike ioyes were doubled by the
Queenes entrie into Paris.Queenes entry into Paris. She went by Bote to our Ladies church,
past to the Celistins, and so to the Tournelles. She was accompanied
by the Duke Ame her Brother, and the Lady Bonna of Sauoy
her Sister, married to Iohn Galeas Duke of Milan. The Historie of
these times, as curious to represent the order of Feasts that were
made, as that of Battels,Paul Aemilius obserued a wonderfull order and disposition in feasts, saying, that there was the like suff^ciencie of Iudgement to know how to order a Battell fearefull to the enemies, and a feast p^easing to friends, for the one and the other d^pend of good iudgment, to know how to order things. Plut. as if the knowledge of the one gaue as
great proofe of sufficiencie as the other, reports the magnificence,
and addes that in the house of Iohn Dauuet the first President they
had made foure bathes (they were alwaies acknowledged among
the delights) for the Queene and for the Ladies. Her indisposition
and that of the time would not suffer her to bathe. One of the
bathes was for the Ladies of Bourbon and Sauoy, the other for the
Daughter of the Lord of Monglat, married to the sonne of Nicholas
Balue, brother to the Bishop of Eureux, and Perrete of Chalon
a Bourgesse of Paris. This woman is particularly named in diuers
places of the Historie, and here shee hath her share in the delights
and pleasures of the bathes.
The Duke of Sauoy procured libertie for his Brother Philip,
whom the King married vnto Margarete the third Daughter of
Charles Duke of Bourbon, and of Agnes of Bourgundie, but the
content of his libertie was not of such force in his remembrance
as the distast of his imprisonment, the apprehension whereof made
him to follow the humors of Charles Duke of Bourgundy against

the King. Ame dyed three or foure yeares after in the Towne of
Orleans of a Flix.Ame the third dyed at Orleans about the end of Iune 1471. he left 2. sonnes Philebert and Charles vnder the gouerment of the Lady Yoland of France, Sister to Lewis the eleuenth.
But whilest that France enioyed this quiet, which the King had
purchased in dispersing these terrible windes, her auncient friends
felt the storme, and yet she had no meanes to relieue them, for that
she would not open the wound which began now to close vp, nor
fauour the examples of rebellion against a lawfull Prince.
They of Liege not thinking the warre should last so little betwixt
the King and the house of Bourgundy,Liege Reuolts against the Duke of Bourgondy had done all acts of
hostilitie against the Duke of Bourgundies subiects, preferring alwaies
their owne interestHee that knowes well how much his owne interests concernes him, will neuer haue it march after another mans. before a strangers. The King had promised
them two hundred men at Armes, euery one hauing three
horses at the least, to spoile the country of Henault, and not to treat
any peace without comprehending them.
Vpon this assurance, and a presumption, that their towne was
impregnableThe people do alwaies presume of their forces with an ouer-weening and rashnesse. The Iuhabitants of Nouogarde the chief Citty of Russia said braggingly, Men can do nothing against God nor vs, but Iohn Basileus K. of Muscouy made them to change that language. Crant lib. 13. Vand. cap. 15. and themselues inuincible, they sent a Herald to
Bruxells, to proclaime warre against the Earle of Charolois, and
threaten him with fire and bloud. In his absence the Duke receiued
and read the letters, and then deliuered them againe vnto the Herald,
saying, that his Sonne was in France, and that he should carrie
them vnto him if he list. Hee returned to Liege, from whence
he was presently dispatcht with the like letters against the Duke
himselfe, and all his Allies.
These threats were sodainly followed by the effects, they entred
into the Dukes Contry, with all kinds of outrages and inhumanities.
To commend this Prince or to speak well of the house of Bourgondy,Army of the Duke of Bourgondy against the Liegeois.
were crimes which could not be expiated but by death. The
poore peasants were slaine like sheepe, for no other reason but for
that they are his friends and cannot like of the rage of these wolues.
The Duke armes, and by his commandement the Dukes of Cleues
and Gueldres, The Earles of Nassau and Horne, with the Marquis
of Roselin. They presse these snailes in such sort as they dare not
put forth their hornes of Rebellion, and keepe themselues within
their walles with repentance that they had so soone gone to field
vppon hope that the King (who had then another taske in hand)
would assist them, and that they should not want meanes nor courage
to defend their liberty.Liberty doth animate mens mindes, and fill their harts with courage and valour, that defend it. In the famous Battels of Miltiades, Leonides, and The* mistocles for the liberty of Greece, the nomber hath yeelded vnto Courage.
They of Dinan, subiecte vnto Liege were no lesse mad against
the Duke vpon the newes which ranne, and which was as soone beleeued
as receiued, that the Earle of Charolois had beene defeated
at Montleherry. They made an Image very like vnto the Earle, and
carry it with great shoutes and cries neere vnto the walles of Bouinnes,Indignities and Insolencies of people r^nolted.
where they set vp a Gibbet and hang it thereon, calling him
whom it did represent, Traitor, Vi^laine, and Bastard. The veriest
rascall made the greatest noise. They made also another image for
the Duke the which they did set vppon a high peece of wood, cryng
out See heere the seat of that great tond your Duke. An act which
cannot bee too seuerely punished by iustice, nor remitted by repentance

vppon hope of amendement.In these co^motions there is nothing b^t fury, no courage nor valour. Certatim vt quisque animi ignauus, procax est ore T^cit. Hist. lib. 2.
This furious mockery against the Prince, was followed by all
kindes of cruelty against his subiects of Bouines, who thinking to
aduize these madmen to returne vnto their duties, they first sent the
Herald of their towne to perswade them, and then a little boy with
letters signed. They cut off the head of the first, and ^are the second
in peices. O inconstant people! what is there cruell and barbarous
but thou committest in thy fury?Men would not kill aspicks nor vipers if they might bee tamed and made harmelesse, when there is no hope of amendment Clemency is iniurious, and Iustice alwaies necessary, whereas the publique is wrongd crimes whose Impunity draw on others are irremissible.
The Duke (although hee were exceeding old) thought that
he could not dye honorably vnlesse he were reuenged of the ingratitude
and rebellion of Dinan.The Duke bu^eegeth Dina^, takes it and ruines it. He caused himselfe to be carried thither
in a litter, leading an army of 28000. horse and a great number
of foot, he takes the towne, ruines it and casts 800. of the Inhabitants
into the riuer of MeuzeA Prince should neuer dissemble an open rebellion, for hee that doth not punish a rebell in such sort as he may no more rebell, must be held to haue little witte and lesse courage. and they which did not end their miseries
now in dying remained to dye daily,The miserable man is beholding vnto death, it frees him from miseries. Tamberlan slew as many lepers as he found, that they might haue an end of their miseries, and infect no more by their co^tagion. Calcondile. For the same reason Dracula Prince of Valachia shut a great troupe of Beggers into a ^arne, and set it on fire, hauing made them all drunke. Bonsin. Lib. 3. beeing nothing
beholding to them that meet^ng them suffered them to liue.
The Liegeois apprehending the like vsage yeelded vnto the Duke,
hauing made shew that they would giue him battell,Liegeois giue 50. Hostages. they gaue
him fifty hostages for assurance of the fealty which they promised,
and sixe hundred thousand Florins of the Rhin, paiable in sixe
yeares.
This warre ended, the Duke of Bourgondy ended that of his life,
and changed it into an eternall peace,Death of Duke Philippe. in the 72. yeare of his age,
the 48. of his raigne, the 15. of Iuly in the yeare 1497.Phil. de Commines saith that the Liegeois gaue 300. Hostages, the number was but 50. whereof 32. were of Liege, sixe of Sainctron, or St. Trid, sixe of ^ongres, and sixe of Hesselt. Hee left his
house in the height of felicity, ritch in alliances, honour, friendes,
and reputation, gold in his coffers, and iron to defend it.It is nothing to haue gold if they haue not Armes to keepe it. Craesus shewed his treasure to Solon, who seeing it to be of an infini^e valew, demanded where was the iron and steele to keepe that gold. It was
not an estate gotten by hazard, and increased by iniustice:There are some estates which haue beene begun by hazard, and augmented by iniustice. It had
the foundation of them in the Realme of France, the continuance
seemed immortall.Greatnes of his house. But Architectors dye, and the buildings remaine.
This greatnes did not passe the fourth Male, it was disinembred
into many peeces, the cheefe fell to the house of Austria. He
had three wiues, Michelle of France, daughter to King Charles the
sixth, Bonna of Arthois, daughter to Phillip Earle of Eu, and Isabella
of Portugall, mother to Prince Charles, in marrying of whom
he setled his thoughts for marriage, and tooke for his motto, Autre
N'auray, but he did not forbeare the exercise of his loues, so as his
iniust intemperance begat eight sonnes and foure daughters.
This Prince was valiant and hardy, wherof he made good proofe
in that great and troublesome warre, which he vndertooke against
France, the which continued 82. yeares without respite or truce.
A warre which made mountaines of dead Carcasses, and riuers of
bloud in France, into the which he said he had entred against his
mind, desiring rather to imploy his armes against Infidels, as he did
in the holy League,Iulian Caesarin Cordinall of St. Ange and Legat to the Pope with Ladiflans being at Buda, made a new league among the Christians to ruine the Ottoman name, into the which he had drowne Pope Eugemus the 4. The duke of Bourgundy, the Venetiant and the Gene^^ois. to succour Hungary against Amurath.

He made it knowne by his deuice of many fufills or irons to strike
fire, fastened to a flint which cast forth flames, whereby hee would
say that his humor was addicted to mildnes and to peace, if they
did not force him to warre, as the fufill retaines his flame if hee bee
not toucht, But doth presently thrust it forth when it is strooke. He
liued in such credit and authoritie among the soueraigne Powers
of Europe, that although he carried not the title of a King, yet hee
marcht equall with the greatest Kings, and if hee had would might
haue had his estates erected to a Kingdome. When as Pope Eugenius
the fourth saw that most Christian Princes were banded against
him, hee fled vnto the Duke of Bourgundies protection and
presented vnto him the miraculous Host which is in the holy chappell
at Dijon.
A good Prince beloued of his subiects,His bounty courage and moderatio^. whom hee did not intreat
according to the power which he had ouer themThe greater a Princes power is, the more his liberty should be restrained. The more mighty a Prince is ouer his subiects the more mighty his subiects make the^selues against him. respected
of strangers with whom he could liue, but blamed to haue been the
Instrument of the cruell Tragedies which had beene acted vppon
the Theater of France. He iustified his Armes by the reuenge of
his fathers death, slaine by Charles the seuenth, being Dauphin, vpon
the bridge of Monstreau Faut Yonne. But hee did not reuenge
it vpon the Ladie MichelleThe iniury of kinsfolks to the wife is sometimes reuenged by the husband vpon his wife. The D. of Bourgundy loued not his lesse, notwithstanding that the sight of the Sister did for three yeares together reuiu^ the iniury of the Brother. his wife, Sister to Charles, neither
did he loue her lesse, hauing no intent that innocencie should
be mingled with the memory of the offence.
Charles succeeded him, if the children retaine the complexions
of them that haue put them into the world,Humor and disposition of Charles his sonne. as the graine which is
cast naked into the earth, doth notwithstanding bring forth the
straw, stalke, and eare from whence it came. This Prince beeing
borne of Philip and Isabell of Portugall must needs be of a fantastick
temper. The Father was hardie, the Mother distrustfull, they
wondred how shee could beare him nine monethes in her
wombe, seeing the humor of this Prince could not rest one houre
in a place.
Princes desire to beginPrinces which enter newly into a realm must think that their reputation depends of the beginning. They must giue them selues to such high and eminent Actions, as they may settle a beleefe in their neighbours that they are not onely capable of the fortune which they haue found, and which they hold, but they haue wisedome and courage to augment it with anything that time and occasion shall offer. their raigne by some famous action
wherein their is both hardines and good fortune, they will that all
they doe in the beginning may be a president, for they iudge of
the issue by the entrie.His entrie into Gand. Hee thought that of all the townes in Flanders
there was not any one where hee was so beloued as in Gand,
and therefore he would begin the entrie and visiting of his Townes
there, assuring himselfe that hee should be receiued there with so
great proofes of affection and obedience, as it would bee a lesson
for all the rest to frame themselues to the like dutie. For the
people doe wonderfully desire the first view of their Princes,The peoples hearts are filled with incredible ioy at the sight of their Prince. The law^s haue held it fit to moderate the expences which the excesse of ioy doth breed in such occasions. Si Sacros vultus inhiantibus forte popuilis inferimus, hoc sine immodico pretio nunciari exipique sancimus. L. 1. C. Publicae Letitiae. Lib. 12. and
the Prince should desire that his subiects fly not from him like a wild

beast which comes out of his den, but that they fly before him, as
before some goodly light.
Hee knew not that to demand wisedome of a multitude, is to
seeke it of a mad manTo demaund wisedome of a multitude, is to seek gouernme^t in a mad man* In the common weal of Athens wise men propounded, and fooles determined.: He had forgotten the prouerbe of the humor
of them of Gand, that they loue their Princes Sonne well,
but not their Prince. Whilest that Philip liued, Charles was their
Sunne rising, but the same day that the Sonne entred into the Fathers
place, hee found the change of their affections. Their obedience
was but at discretionInconstancie which is common to people, is more remarkable in them of Gand for the many mu^inies and reuolts they haue made against their Princes. and they thought that he could not
hurt them vnlesse they would endure it.
Being deceiued in his conceit hee entred the Towne of Gand,Custome of the Guntois.
he found the gates open, but their hearts shut to his commandements,
neither did they stay long to let him know it. Duke Phil^p
had made warre against them two yeares, and in the end they were
forced to receiue conditions, which they held very hard, and
withall an imposition vpon the Corne for the charges.Sedition cloaked by Religion. The receit
was made in a little house called the Toll-house. The most seditious
who would eate their bread with all libertie,A multitude neuer remaines long in an estate which seemes vniust and intollerable vnto them, W^ere there is no will there can be no bond. That which is done by force lasteth no longer then the present necessitie Haud credi potest vllum populu^ in ea conditione cuius cum peniteat diutius quam necesse sit mansurum. Tit. Liu. goe not to the Duke
to demaund abolition of this impost, but vnder coulour of a procession
which they made the day after his entrie they take the case
with the bones and relikes of a Saint of their deuotion, come to
this house and strike the case against it, saying that the SaintPeople haue often couered the causes of their mutinies with some respect of religion., to cut off a great circuit of the Procession would passe through the
house, wherewith in an instant they ruined it to the ground. The
rest of the mutines were in Armes in the market place to fauour
the passage of this Saint and to oppose against any one that would
hinder it.
The Duke aduertised of this tumult comes to a house whose
window did open vnto the place,The Duke comes to heare of the sedition. where he spake vnto these mutyns,
and commanded them to carrie the relikes of their Saint
vnto the Church. Some take it vp to carrie it away, and others
hinder it. Hee desires to know what they would haue, and not
any one dares speake alone,In the co^motion of a people if there be not one head that leades them, there is not any one that dayes answere, when the people of Rome rety^ed to the holy mountaine, the Senate sent to know the cause of this retreat. Not any one had the courage to answere: and Tit. Liu. saith, That they wanted not matter of answere, but they wanted one to make the answers. but altogether. They were but
confused complaints and insolent answeres, demanding Iustice against
some priuate men, as in these Commotions there is alwaies
some one charged to be the cause of the publike miseries. He promised
to doe them Iustice, commanding them to disarme and to
retire. But they grow obstinate, and continue their eight dayes,
at the end whereof they present themselues vnto the Duke
demanding that all which the Duke his Father had taken
from them might bee restored, which was the threescore
and twelue banners of their trades, and the renewing of their
priuiledges.
To refuse this was to hazard himselfe to their furie, and they
let the Duke vnderstand that whether hee would or no, the Councels
were taken, beeing resolued to take that which they demanded,

for hee had no sooner spoken the word to grant themThey must somtimes grant vnto the people that which ^hey desire as they doe vnto childre^ (...) cry, and to mad men which rage. But w^en a seditio^ is pacified they take away iustly, which they had allowed vniustly. their
banners,He is forced to grant them what he will take away. but at the same instant they saw them planted on the market
place. Thus the Towne of Gand, from whence the Duke would
draw examples of fidelitie and obedience, seemed to the rest for a
mirrour of reuolt and sedition, for seeing that the Gantois had
sped well with this boldnes, many other Townes did the like, and
slew some of the Dukes Officers, who was forced for the time to
seeme to be ignorantIt is a gracious kind of pardoning not to take knowledge of an offence. of that which these mutyns had done, who
deserued to bee intreated with such rigour, as they should haue
nothing remaining free, but the sights of their repentance.
With the like wisedome and dexteritie as the King had diuided
the forces of the Princes that were in league against him,The King separates the heads of the league.It is an act of great prouide^ce in a Prince to breake off the communication and intelligence which may bee betwixt tow personages which are mighty, and of turbulent spirits. he labors
now to breake their intelligences. He sets such good gards vppon
the passages, as the Duke of Brittanie is forced to cause such as he
sends to the Duke of Bourgundy to passe first into England and
then to Calice. In this great circuit, before their aduertisements
be giuen, the Councels be vnited, the occasions lost, and the
mischiefes without remedie. He hath his eyes open on euery side,
as he is seuerThey must punish crimes when they are committed, and hinder conspiracies in the breeding. to punish crimes when they are committed, so is he
vigilant to breake conspiracies before they bee made. Hee resolues
to plague them one after an other, and to let them know
that he repents soone or late that attempts against one that is more
mighty.
The Duke of Normandie beeing retired into Brittanie bare
and naked, was sufficiently punished with the Councels of his
youth. The Duke of Brittanie held himselfe too weake to support
him against so mightie a brother, the Deputies which he had sent
vnto the King to intreat him and to moue him to pittie, had brought
nothing back but that they saw much discontentment in the King
for that his brother demanded a portion with his sword in his hand.
The King who was then towards Mont St. Michael sent an Armie
of fiftie thousand men into Brittanie.The King sends an Armie into Brittanie. As the Duke of Alencon had
giuen passage vnto the Brittans so his Sonne the Earle of Perch
yeelds the same towne of Alen^con vnto the French, whereat Monsieur
was so offended, as hee called him the right Sonne of his
Father.Infidelitie is so odious, as it makes the Actions of the children which are borne of them which haue beene attained to bee suspected, and suspi^ions in others are crimes in them.
Brittanie was ouerrunne aboue thirty leagues compasse. The
Duke of Brittanie coniured the Duke of Bourgundy to succour
him, but he could not doe it, beeing ingaged with the Liegeois,
who rather tired with warre then vanquished, had made a new reuolt,
and spoiled Liny, vpon the assurance the King had giuen
them of his protection. He had sent them foure hundred lances
vnder the command of the Earle of Dammartin, of Salezard, of
Conyhen,Leigeois supported by the king. and Vignoles, and six thousand Archers. The Constable
of St. Paul came and ioined with them with some troupes.
They played the madde men and did not consider the danger
their hostages were in, whom they had giuen for the assurance of
their obedience and fidelitie. The Duke held a Councell whether

he should put them to death.Consultation to put the Hostages of Liege to death. The question require good deliberation,
for if he had beene constant in his first resolution they
were vndone. And therefore in such difficulties a Prince should
neuer be present to make his opinionWhen as a Prince will do^ any thing by Councell, hee should not bee here, for his pres^nce hin^ders the liberty of their opinions, especially when the question is of the death of any one accused. Tiberius would not that Drusus his Sonne should giue his opinion first in Lepidus cause a^cused of treason. So when Piso was comma^ded to speak his opinion touching Granius Marcellus, being accused to haue set his Statue higher then the Emperours. He said (directing his speech vnto the Emperor, And you Sir in what^ rank will you giue your opinion, for if you speak last I feare my opinion will be co^trarie to yours. Quo loco censebis Caesar, si primus habebo quod sequar si post omnes, vereor ne imprudens dissentiam. knowne, to the end it may
not be followed as a Decree, and that such as will contradict it
may doe it freely. The Marshall of Bourgundy and the Signior
of Contay, concluded to haue them put to death, grounding
their opinion vpon this reason, that so strange a reuolt should bee
extraordinarily reuenged, that these Mutyns were vnworthy of the
Princes Clemencie, and that the bonds whereby they contained
such wilde spirits in their duties, must be taken in the terror of punishments,
^There are crimes as diseaeases which require violent and extraordinarie cures. It is not good alwaies to vse to great mildnes in the peoples folly and madnes. Dennis of Syracusa scorned at that sh^me, saying that the chaines of demands wherewith Estates were bound, are the terror of punishments and Armes. and Armes.
The Innocencie of the Hostages found fauour in the opinions
of the Earle of St Paul, and the Sigr of Imbercourt, who detested
this crueltie against the poore Bourgesses which had willingly sacrificed
themselues for the publike, perswaded the Duke to take
God of his side; this reason was sufficient, and words were superfluous
to oppose against it. But in these occasions, whereas all is
disputable, it is good that the Prince haue more then one or two
of his Councell, to the end that wandring opinions may bee set
right by others, for men are no AngelsThere somtimes escape from the wisest absurd and i^considerate opinions, and therefore the Councell of one ^lone is dangerous, the which must consist of diuers heads. For the spirits of men haue their seasons as wel as their bodies, and the wisest man liuing is not alwaies wise. without passion, they
bring them with them in all their Actions, and sometimes hatred
or enuie, feare or hope; the waywardnes and indisposition
of the person are as it were the moulds and formes of Councels.
Besides there are many which doe not speake but after others.
The mildest and most iust opinion was followed, and the
Hostages sent back to Liege, being aduised not to meddle in the
contagion of the infidelitie of others, and to tell them that if they
abused their Princes clemencie, they should feele his rigour. One
of the assistantsThe Sigr of Co^tay was reputed a wise and discrect Knight, they had neuer noted cr^e^tie nor indiscretion in his (...); and yet hee was (...) for this cruell Councell, and his death they imputed to a iust iudgement of heauen, according to Phil. of Commines. at this Councel foretold the death of the Sigr of
Co^tay within a yeare,Death of the Sigr of Contay. for that hee had concluded the death of the
Hostage, and it was true.
In the meane time the Duke of Brittanie cryed out for succors.
The Duke of Bourgundy sent vnto the King to intreat him to cease
that warre, and to consider that the Duke of Brittanies cause was
his. The King to pay him with the same reason, sent him word that
if hee would leaue the protection of his brother and the Duke of
Brittanie, hee would abandon the Liegeois. The Constable of
St. Paul, and la Balue carried this message, to whom the Duke answered,
that he could not abandon his friends. Nor we ours, replied
the Constable, you choose not, but take all, you will neither haue vs
succour our friends, nor make warre against our enemies. Well, said the
Duke going to horse, the Liegeois are in field, I haue proclaimed warre

The Heraulds which proclaimed this war, carried in the right hand a naked sword, and in the other a flaming torch, a fearefull threat of fire and bloud against them with a naked sword and a flaming torch, I will fight
with them before three daies passe, if I loose the battell you may doe
as you please, but if I winne it, you shall leaue the Brittons in
peace.
The Duke besieged Saintron,Siege of Saintron. the Leigois beeing 30000. came
to succour the besieged, and lodge in a great Village enuironed
with a marish a mile from the Dukes Armie, there they are charged
and repulsed euen vnto their trenches with the shot of Arrowes and
Canon, but when they that assailed had no more arrowes, the Liegeois
recouered courage, charged them with their pikes, and in an
instant slew fiue hundred, and made the rest to wauer betwixt
flight and amazement.
The Duke seeing his foreward turne their backes, caused the
Archers of the battell to aduance, by whom the Leigeois were
beaten and slaine to the number of nine thousand. A number according
to the truth, not to flatterie and passion, which sometimes
makes Gyants of DwarfesThe true number of the dead in a battel is seldome set down, the victors make ^t greater, and the vanquished lesser, and many as Phil. de Co^mines saith, to flatter Princes, for one slaine number a hundred. The number of the dead in the Battell of Marignan was neuer truely knowne. The Fr^ch said that they had cut halfe the Suisses Army in pieces which was of 25000. men. The Suisses say that being returned into their countrey they found but 5000. wanting and that the French had lost more. Gradenic saith, that in al there were 22000. Iustin numbers aboue 15000. Suisses, and Guichardin as many. A varietie which proceeds eyther from error or passion.. The rest retired to Liege, and
if there had not been a Moore betwixt them and the Dukes horse-men,Saintron yeelds to discretion.
yeelded to the Dukes discretion, deliuering ten men to
his Iustice. Whose heads saued the rest, and serued for an example
against their rebellion: He did the like to Tongres which yeelded
vpon the same condition, and in this decimationDecimation was inuented to punish a multitude in such sort, as the fear might seeme generall to all the Offenders, and the punishment to a small number: all felt it not but euery man feared it. some of those
hostages were found which he had sent home.
Hee presented himselfe before Liege,Leige yeelds and demands pardon. one of the mightiest
and best peopled townes of the countrie. The Dukes presence
made some resolue to trust vnto his clemencie, and others to feare
his Iustice. Three hundred of the most apparent of the Citie are
sent in their shirts, bare-footed and bare-headed to craue pardon
for the rest, submitting the Towne vnto his discretion, without any
other reseruation then from fire and spoile.
The Duke who knew that a multitude is sooner vanquished by
mildnes then by crueltie,Nothing is (...) by force. (...) makes ^em wilde, P^^icles woon the people by the eyes and eares, and the belly by Playes, Comedies, and Feasts. granted what they desired, but when
as he sent Imbercourt to enter into it, he found refusall and iniutious
words at the gates, for the inhabitants were not yet well resolued,
and feared that the Duke, whom they had so offended, would not
keepe his word, and that the Towne should bee subiect to the miseries
of fire and spoile. He past the night in great perplexities,
and had much adoe to haue his life and the patience of this people
continue vntill day. Still these mad men came like violent
waues vpon his lodging to cut all them in peeces that were within
it, and did negotiate this accord. Imbercourt busied them with
offers of new conditions, vpon which they entred into new conferences,
In tumultuarie Commotions of a multitude, you must rather seeke to win time then to contradict and contest. Wise men haue fit occasions to diuert and breake these furi^us waues. and then suddenly they runne out of their Towne-house

to the walles, euaporating in iniuries and villanies the heate of
their phrensie against their Prince. Their rage being rather tired
then past, about two of the clocke after midnight they were content
to yeeld, so as they might bee assured from fire and spoile.
Imbercourt assures them that the composition should bee obserued:
vpon this assurance they receiue Imbercourt who seazed vpon
the gates,Walles of Liege beaten downe. and set gards there. The Duke enters in triumph, they
beate downe twenty fadomes of the wall to make a breach, the
Towers beaten downe, the walles opened in diuers places, new
lawes, new Impositions and a new world. ThatA speedy resolution to that which cannot be auoided molifies the paine, and to obay voluntarily is to take away that which is rough and troublesome in seruitude. goodly statue
set vp in the publike place as a marke of libertie was transported
to Bruges for a fatall memory of this desolation, which happened
on S. Martins day. 1467. vpon which were grauen these Verses.

Desine sublimes vultus attollere in auras,
Disce meo casu perpetuum esse nihil:
Nobilitatis ego Leodis venerabile signum
Gentis et in victae gloria nuper eram.
Sum modo spectaculum ridentis turpe popelli
Et testor Caroli me cecidisse manu.

They of Gand became wise at the cost of them of Liege,Gantois profit by them of Liege. and
passing from a forced obedience to a voluntarieThe Earle of Flanders hauing besieged Gand, and refused to take them to mercie, if they came not all ioyntly together barefooted in their shirts to demand it, made the^ resolu to sally out vpo^ him: fiue thousand beeing led by Philip of Artauelle de^eated 40000. men, and entred pel-mel with them into Bruges. The Earle was hidden in a poore womans garret and led out of the Towne in a disguised habit. they found the
yoake more easie. The Duke entred there with great pompe, and
the Gantois acknowledging their fault, went as farre as Bruxelles
to meete him, presenting vnto him the seuenty two Banners of
the trades for the which they had made that famous mutinie after
the death of Duke Philip, and which had beene formerly taken
from them: they submitted their priuiledges to his discretion,
payed 30000. Florins to the Duke, and 6000. to them that were
about him, neither had they so good an issue of their reuolt as in
the time of Arteuelle.s Yet their priuiledges were confirmed, except
that which they call of the Law, by the which of six and twentie
Aldermen they had the election of two and twentie, and the
Duke of foure onely; which caused such ordinarie mutinies and
reuolts in the Towne, calling none to publike charges but such
as were of this furious and mutinous humor, who held the hearts
of the Citizens so diuided, as one should sooner haue ioined together
the peeces of a broken Christall, then the designes of their
mindes. He sent the Banners to Bullen vpon the sea, to accompanie
those which his father had caused to bee layed there in remembrance
of the like rebellion.
Hee made his entrie into Gand armed and victorious.Entry of the D. of Bu^^gundy (...) Gand. The
Kings Embassadors came thither vnto him, to intreat him not to
meddle with the affaires of Brittanie nor Normandie: winter was
spend in these conferences, but the King not able to temporize any
longer, nor to giue time vnto his enemies to ioyne together, enters
into Brittany, and takes Chantoce, with Ancenis. The Duke

of Bourgundy aduanced to S. Quentin to succour his Allies.Treatie of the Duke of Berrie and Brittanie. The
King held them so short as he made them resolue to treat with him,
and laying aside their interest,It is certaine there is not any one of whome we may not obtaine what wee desire, if he bee not thereby interessed howsoeuer the publike be interessed. he drawes from them a renonciation
of all Alliance with the Duke of Bourgundy. Hee would not
haue it said that he was armed to doe nothing, for one enemie hee
makes three. He was wonderfully incensed against the King, who
alwaies prepared him such bankets, and was discontented with
the Dukes of Normandie and Brittanie, who had made an accord
without him, terming them faint-hearted and without iudgement.
The King made him cease his Armes for sixscore thousand crownes
which he gaue him, the which he did accept the more willingly, for
that hee desired to enioy in quiet the first contents of his marriage
with the Lady MargaretMargaret Daughter to Rich: of York and Sister to the K. of England was married to Duke Charles in Iuly 1468. Shee made her entry into Bruges beeing conducted by six Knights, Adolphe of Cleues, Iames of Luxemburg, Anthony Bastard of Bourgundy, Peter of Baufremont Earle of Charny, Philip Pot and Philip of Creuecoeur. of Yorke Sister to King Edward, who was
come to Bruges.
The King sent Cardinal Balue and Taneguy of Chastell vnto him,
to haue his consent vnto an interuiew, thinking that if hee might
speake with him, hee would wholly draw him from the Protection
of the D. of Brittanie, with whom he was discontented, and would
not regard that of the Duke of Normandie which was more hurtfull
then profitable vnto him.
The Duke tooke no taste in this enteruiew, beeing (as he said)
well aduertised that the King had sent his Embassadors to them of
Liege to sollicite them to a new reuolt, Balue and du Chastell let
the Duke vnderstand that the Liegeois had been so handled the last
yeare, as it was incredible they would fall into the like miseries,
and if they had any such desire, this enteruiew of the two Princes
would make them desist. Which reason made the Duke consent to
receiue the King at Peronne. As soone as Cardinall Balue and du
Chastell had acquainted the King with the Dukes resolution, hee
set forward to meete him, and parted from Noion vppon a letter
which the Duke wrote vnto him with his owne hand, for the assurance
of his comming,Error which the K. could not repaire but with danger. stay and returne. An error which was
seconded with many errors,In errors of importance the first step disorders all. It is more easie not to enter then to get forth. One error followes an other, and that of iudgeme^t brings that of the heart. and an error of an ill setled iudgement,
and one of the most remarkable of the life and conduct of
this Prince. He went to se a Prince whom he had newly offended,
what could hee hope for but to see himselfe forced to repayre this
wrong? He had sent men to Liege to make it reuolt, hee should
haue giuen ouer this practise, and consider that if it did succeed,
Peronne should bee an infallible prison to him, from whence hee
should neuer be freed vntill he had done reason vnto the Duke, to
the blemish of his courage and honor.It is a dishonour to bee forced to disauow his own thoghts and intentions. The K. had sent men to trouble the D. at Liege, hee had done it through indiscretion, now he is forced to pacifie it, and to stay the busines more then hee thought to aduance it.
If this consideration were not able to stay his voyage, yet it
should haue bound him to seeke for other assurances then in words
and paper;Two errors the K. committed in the assurance of his person. and remember that he himselfe had not much regarded
that which hee had promised at Constans, that they might yeeld
him the like measure, and that there is nothing so light as an oath,
when as the breach thereof presents some priuate commoditie.
The desire of profit, of reue^ge or pleasure, is the ram which ouerthrowes an oth. Neither of the three doth moderate the paine. The diuine is vndoubted misery to periures, and that of the world is shame. Moreouer hee had no child, and committed his life vnto a Prince,

whose Ambition would haue confounded heauen and earth to
raigne, hee gaue it in guard to him who would ruine his estate,
holding it more commendable to be rash then a coward.The rashnet of a priuat man may be excused when it hath no traine: The life of Sparta depends not vpon that of Calicratidas, but that of a prince which is the spirit that giues life and motion to an estate, is alwaies blamed
It is the second error which he committed in the conduct of his
owne safety for hee had trusted the Princes that were in league
against him,He comes to Peronne to the Duke comming to parle with them at Bois de Vincennes,
who desired to seaze vpon the royall authoritie, and to gouerne
France at their owne pleasures. Hee went thither without any
gards,It is dangerous to trust the faith of a prince who hath been an enemy, hee beeing the weaker. Tosime blames Valeria^ of indiscretion, who went to Sapor with a small troope. being accompanied by the Duke of Bourbon, the Cardinall
his Brother, the Cardinall of Balue, the Earle of S. Paul
and the Gouernor of Roussillon. The Duke receiued him without
the towne, and conducted him to the lodging which he had caused
to bee prepared for him. Presently after arriued the Bishop of
Geneua, the Earle of Bresse, the Earle of Romont, all three brethren
to the Duke of Sauoy, the Marshall of Bourgundy, the
Seigr of Lau, Poncet of Riuiere, and the Siegr of Vrfe, all carrying
St Andrewes Crosse, and in their hearts some apprehension of
wrong.The King had kept the Earle of Bresse and the Signior of Lau in prison, and he had taken Pi^^ll from the Marshall of Bourgundy. The King being aduertised hereof grew very distrustfull,
and had his thoughts troubled and confounded with repentance,
There is not any thing more vnworthy wherinto a Prince may fall then repentance, especially in errors which may not bee twice committed. for that he had not better considered of his voiage. He sent to intreat
the Duke to lodge him in the Castle, for that all these Noble
men that were come did not conceale it that they were his enemies.
The Duke was glad that the King had made choise of the
lodging which he durst not haue giuen him,He is lodged in the Castle. and intreated him not
to doubt any thing.
The two Princes gaue order to their CouncelsPrinces which haue any co^trouersies, should referre them to their Councels, to auoide the bitternes and ^eat wherein to contention may draw them. to consider
of the meanes to end their quarrels. They renewed the
Treatie of Conflans, wherevnto some few things were added
in regard of the Duke. But Monsieurs condition grew better,
for in exchange of the Duchie of Normandie he had. Champagne
and Bry with all the rights, and the Duke of Brittaine entred into
the Treatie as an Allie.
Matters standing vppon these termes, newes came vnto the
Duke that the Kings Embassadors had made them of Liege reuolt,
The Leigeois in this reuolt made more hast then the King expected, for his designes were not yet well digested, and he held them not so able. that they had seazed vpon the Towne of Tongres, imprisosoned
their Bishop, Cousin germaine to the Duke, and slaine fifteene
or sixteene of his Chanons and seruants. The Duke caused
the gates of the Town and Castle to be shut, fayning that some
one had taken a Casket of Iewels: he fortified his guards about
the Castle, and told some of his trustie seruants that the King was
come thither to deceiue and betray him.The K. in a manner a prisoner. Hee was so transported
with Choller, as if the first to whom he reported these newes
would haue cast oyle into the fire,The first motions of Princes in their choller, passe speedily to resolutions of reuenge whe^ they incounter men that comfort and incourage them. and had not rather quencht
then kindled the wood, he had resolued to doe what he had said
against the King. But there were not any but Phil. de Com. and
two groomes of his chamber, who did not aggrauate any thing.

If neuer King of France hath seene the image of feare but vpon
the front of his enemie, it now presents it selfe in the eyes of Lewis,
who stood amazed in a sad mediation of his error, complaining
his misfortune with that of CharlesHubert E. of Vermandoi^ caused Charles the simple to dye in prison. King Lewis his sonne to reuenge this iniury called an assembly of the Princes and chiefe noblemen, and propounded this question which he seemed to receiue from the K. of England, to haue his aduice: What punishment that farmer descrued who hauing inuited his maister to come vnto his house had put him to death. All concluded that the crime was punishable, and Hubert said that hee ought to be hanged, You shall bee (said the King) you haue condemned your selfe. And hee had noe sooner spoke^ the word but hee was hanged. the simple being lodged
at the foot of the Tower where he had beene imprisoned. He made
some offer to pacifie the Duke, and to giue hostage to procure
such satisfaction from the Liegeois as was fit.
He had friends in the Dukes Councell,The aduice of that which was done in the D. counsell, came as it was said from Phil. de Commines. and casting twelue or
fifteene thousand Crownes among them,And he himselfe writes after this manner. The King had some friend which aduertised him that he should haue no harme if he did yeeld vnto those two points, but if he did otherwise, hee thrust himselfe into very great danger. he was by that meanes
aduertised of the Resolutions which were taken: wherof the mildest
and most moderate were not pleasing vnto him. The first opinion
was that they should keep promise with him, so as he would declare
himselfe an enemy to them of Liege. The second that being offended
as he was, it was dangerous to giue him liberty, to reuenge
himselfe, The third that they should send for the Duke his brother,
and the other Princes to consult what was to be done. In the end
they past by this straight, that he was constrained (and it is the
greatest violence that may be done vnto a King) to consent vnto a
a warre against them of Liege, who had relyed vppon his protection.
The Duke continued three dayes in great alterations, and past
the third night in such disquietnes as he did not vncloath himselfe,
but lay downe vppon his bed, then rising sodainly he would walke
and talke to Phillip de Commines, his Chamberlaine, whose integrity
and moderation did serue to calme those violent stormes that
troubled his soule. He was wholly French,Philip de Commines became a Partisan to the King, who drew him into France, gaue him the signory of Argenton in Poictou, and the Seneshalship of the same Country. and from that time
some thought he resolued to retire himselfe into France. But it is not
credible that there was any trechery in him. The vptightnes and
sincerity of his writings frees him from suspition. If he had been blemished
with infidelity and ingratitude, vices which dissolue al humane
society,All the greatest reproches are comprehended in these two wordes, Ingrate and trecherous. Nihil aeque Concordiam humani generis dissociat et distrahit quam hoc ingratitudinis vitium. Sen. the King had not trusted him with so many great and important
affaires.
The Duke went early in the morning vnto the Castell to the King
who was already aduertised of what he would say vnto him, and had
time to thinke of his answer, and to fit it not so much vnto reason as
to necessity,Amazement should neuer bee seene on a Princes forehead. He should be maister of his wordes, but much more of his countenance, for his lookes do often contradict them, and betray the secrets of the heart. and aboue all to carry so euen a countenance, as the
Duke should not discouer that he had any ill game, or that he had any
apprehension to loose, for if he had thought that hee had made
him affraid, he would haue done him a mischeefeMany times a bad designe begun is not ended; when as he that doth it thinkes that he is not discouered. And it is a maxime grounded more vpon experience then Conscience in such occasions, not to do so much, or to do more. all together.
The Duke was accompanied by the Lordes of Crequy, Charny,
and la Roche. He could not by the humility of his wordes, so well

dissemble his proud and threatning gesture,The Duke coniures the King to go to Liege but the trembling of his
voice discouered the motion and storme which choller caused in
his heart: ^ And then there is no great reason in humble wordes and
respectiue countenances when as the effects are contrary, and that
the inferior braues the superior,To what end s^rues respect and humility of wordes, if the action be proud? The day when K. Iohn w^^ taken at the battell of Poict^ers, the prince of Wales serued his maiesty at supper bareheaded. The King intreated him to sit downe. It belongs not to the subiect answered the Prince and yet hee held him prisoner. He demanded of him if he would
hold the treaty and come to Liege, to help to reuenge him and the
Bishop of Liege his kinsman of the Liegeois who by reason of his
comming were reuolted. The King granted it, the Peace was sworne
vppon Charlemaignes crosse, and the whole towne was full of ioy
for this accord: the 12. of October 1468.1468. Oliuer de la March reports
this otherwise then Phillip de Commines. The King (saith he) was
not well assured, but as soone as he saw the Duke enter into his Chamber,
he could not conceale his feare, but said vnto the Duke Brother, I am not
safe in your house, and in your Country; and the Duke answered, yes sir,
and so safe, as if I should set an arrow come towards you, I would put
my self^ before you to preserue you. And the King said vnto him, I thank
you, for your good will, and will goe where I haue promised you, but I
pray you let the peace be presently sworne, betwixt vs. Then they brought
the Arme of St. Leu, and the King of France sware the peace betwixt him
and the Duke of Bourgondy and the Duke of Bourgondy sware the said
peace, and promised to keepe and entertaine it with and against all men.
The next day they parted and came to CambrayNotwithstanding their speeches vnto the Duke of Bourgo^dy that hee should be blamed to break the assurance which he had promised the King, hee still answered. Hee hath promised me, and hee shall hold it, I will make no Conscience to force him. Peter of Goux his Cha^cellor, was one of those which counselled him not to off^nd the King. Oli. de la March. and entred into
the Contry of Liege in the beginning of winter. The King had no
forces but his scottish garde, and 300. men at armes. The Duke held
a Counsell in the sight of Liege, what he should do. Some were of
opinion that he should send back part of his Army, for his forces
were too great against a demantled towne, which could not be releeued,
seing the King was with him. He gaue no credit to this Counsell
and it succeeded well, for he could not be too strong hauing a mighty
King by himIt was neuer a w^se and aduised resolution to hazard all his fortune and not all his forces. and being in danger to loose all if he had been too
weake distrust was auailable.
The Duke commanded the Marshall of Bourgondy who led the
foreward,Siege of Liege. to lodge with in the Citty, either with their wills or by
force. The Pope had a Nuncio within the Citty, to end the Controuersies
which were in a manner perpetuall betwixt the Bishop and
the people, who changing his power and forgetting his duty, vppon
a designe to haue this Bishoprick, exhorted the inhabitants to
defend themselues, and caused them to make a sally with such fury,
as they that were without had no hope to enter but victors.Clearchus made a sally and put all his (...) in battell, then he commanded the gates to be shut and the keyes to be cast ouer the wall, to take all hope of entry from the Soldiers, vntill they had lost or wenne. This
Sally was so vnfortunate, as he repented him of his Councell, and
apprehending the danger, gets out of the towne and flies away, but
he was stayed by the Dukes men, who promised to them that had
taken him to make their profit, vsing no speech to him. But whilst
they contended for their shares in his ransome, they came vnto the
Duke being at Table, who blamed that in publique which he had
commended in secret,Popes Non cio set at liberty. declaring the prize not good: and causing
the Bishop to come vnto him, ^he honored him and caused all his
goods to be restored, leauing repentance vnto the rest, who had

not done that without brute which they should haue doneThere are some things to be done before they aske if they shall doe them. It is the answer which Pompey, supping with Anthony in a ship made vnto an officer, who told him that he had a good opportunity to be reuenged of them, and that if hee would ther should not one remaine. before
they asked leaue.
The marshall of Bourgondy and I^bercourt winne the suburbs
and march directly to the Towne-gate, which stayed not vntill that
necessity should force the Inhabitants to demand a peace in
mourning gownes,Although the Athenians had no reputation of great courage, yet they neuer demanded any accord but in mourning robes prest with extreame necessity. vpon their first approch the Deputies present
themselues to Parle,The beseeged demand a Parle. but hope and desire of spoile would not giue
them hearing. Night surprised the assailants before they were lodged,
and doth so disorder them as they know not whether to goe,
but calling one another in confusion, they gaue courage to the besieged
to make a Salley.Hee that chargeth first by night hath the aduantage for it is alwaies^ presumed that he is the stronger^ flight doth co^monly follow amazement. The night hath no shame. They arme some for feare, others without
feare,Sallie made by them of Liege. and issue out vppon them by diuers places, for their
walles being razed the yeare before, gaue them passage, where they
slew seauen or eight hundred. Foure Can^ons discharged against
the gate along the great street, crye quittance, and keep them from
comming forth, who through fauour of this first Sally had a great
desire.
Yet for all this they that were come forth would not retire into
the Towne, but barricadoed themselues, or as Phillip de Commines
saith, insconsed themselues with wagons which they had wonne,
and remained there vntill day. Iohn de viletteIn sallies the Commander should alwaies stand firme to maintaine the besieged in their duties by his presence, and to fauour their retreat, hauing a care that being repulst the enemy doth not enter pel mel with them. When as they of Liege had lost their head in the first sally, their defence was desperate. the sole Commander
of the people was hurt and slaine. The suburb was kept by the
Marshall of Bourgondy, who had committed a grosse error, hauing
giuen no better order for his lodgingThe first duty of a good Captaine is to know how to lodge his men. For this only respect Hanibal in the iudgement of Phirrhus, was the first Captaine of Greece next to Alexander. a principall part of the duty
of a good Captaine. The Prince of Orange was hurt there, and
in this action the History giues him the glorious surname of a man
of vertue, as it commends the valour of the Lordes of Lau and Vrfe,
and reprocheth the contempt of honor to aboue two thousand
men, who vnder fauour of this night had sacrifized their safeties and
honors to flight.
This first defeat aflicted the Duke, and hee would not that the
King should haue knowne it, if he could haue concealed it amidst
so many passions and diuers Interests.The Dukes troupes ill intreated in the suburbs. Beleeuing that the brute was
greater then the losse, he went himselfe to tell it him. The King was
very glad, but this ioy was more grounded vppon discretion then
iustice, for if the Dukes designes had not prospered, the King had
had cause to repent him, and therefore he did apply his spirit to the
motions of the Dukes, approuing that it is a hard seruitude for a
great man to force himselfe to the humors of his inferiour.
He was aduised to goe and refresh his foreward, plunged in the
mire, besieged with hunger and benummed with cold. The Duke
sent 300. horse with some victualls to refresh them that were ready
to faint,A famished soldier hath neither courage nor force to fight. It was a great negligence in the Dukes Captaines to haue ingaged the soldiers so neere the enemy, and not prouide to make them eat. Asdruball lost his men against Scipio by this defect. Vliffes blames Achilles for that hee would lead his men to the warre before they had eaten. hauing not eaten of two dayes. Hee came also and lodlodged

in the midst of the suburbe, and the King in a farme halfe a
mile off.
This first night about midnight there was a hot alarme although
it were in the heart of a very sharp winter. The King shewed himselfe
vnto the Towne as soone as the Duke,Alarum giuen and the King goes to horse. and they were amazed
at his diligence, the name of King and his presence put the Duke
out of countenance.The Duke saith Phil. de Commines, held not soe good a countenance, as many men wisht, for that the King was present and tooke the word and authority of Command. The Adamant hath no vertue neer vnto the
Diamond, the King would not seeme other then a King, he takes
the word and commands what should be done.It is an act of a great Captaine in accidents not forescene to reduce things speedily into order. No other but he
in so sodaine an accident could haue assured the amazed, and that
with such iudgement, courage and maiesty, as they saw he knew
well that hee was borne to that end, and that in such occasions the
best blowes are drawn^ from the head.In war they do not fight only with the force of Soldiers, but with the Art and wisedome of the Generall. Some cryed they are
heere, others said they come by such a port, the night made all
doubtfull, and aug^ented the amazement. The King commanded
the Constable to goe directly to such a place with such men as hee
had, for (said he) if they come, that is their way. But they saw not
any one, the King retired to his quarter, and the Duke to his.
The next day the King came and lodged in a house neere to that
of the Dukes,The King and Duke lodged together. who fell into such a distrust of this neighbourhood,
as hee lodged 300.This change of lodging and these approches do strangly disquiet the Duke. He feared that the King would cast himselfe into the towne, which had relyed vppon his protection, and that hee had some designe against him, at the least that he should intend to retire before the Li^geois were subdued and punished. men at Armes, and the best of all his troupes
in a barne betwixt them, hauing passages made in diuers places to
issue forth.
The Liegeois fore-seeing that they could not auoid their ruine,
resolue to incounter and meet with Death, to fell their liues as
deere as they could, and to surprise the two Princes in their owne
lodgings whither they might goe of an euen ground, for although
they were both great Captaines, yet had they not cared to intrench
themselues.A remarkable fault in 2. great Captains to haue no tre^ches at the siege of Liege, being doubtful long and difficult. The Liegeois had no head, they tooke hazard and
dispaire for their guides, and therewith the maisters of the two lodgings
where the King and Duke were, their intent being to surprize
them, and to kill them, or to lead them into the Towne before their
men should be able to releeue them.
The night, which is alwaies contrary to these incounters,All Incounters and Combats by night, should bee auoided. Caesar did not vndertake any thing to execute it by night, and Anthony said that if the Ports of Cremona were open, yet would be not enter but by day. was
fauorable to them as assaylants. The order was, that sixe hundred
of their best Soldiers should goe out by the walls,Sally of the Liegeois. and about midnight
march directly to the lodgings of these two Princes, without
any stay, and kill the Sentinells. And that at the same instant the
people should sally forth by the Port, with the most fearefull
cryesCries are profitable in fighting, not in marching, by the cries they haue often iudged of the issue of Battells, as they were more or lesse (...). An vnequall and faint crye hauing pauses, hath often discouered feare, saith Tit Liu. they could make, to giue courage to the execution of this
designe.The King and Duke of Bourgondy in danger to be taken or ^laine.
They goe forth by the breaches of the walles about ten of the
clocke, they take and kill most of the Sentinels, but in steed of going
directly where they were commanded, as they might haue
done without any resistance, they stay at a pauillion whereas the

Duke of Alencon was lodged, behinde the Dukes lodging, and
at the barne which was betwixt the Kings and the Dukes.This error for the trenches put the two Princes in danger to be slaine, they be necessary to hinder the sally of them within, and the succours that come from abroad. Without
all doubt, saith Phil. de Commines, if they had not stayed in these
two places, but had followed those two posts which were their guides,
they had slaine the King and the Duke of Bourgundy, and defeated
the rest of the Armie.
The Duke who resolued to giue a generall assault the next
day, had commanded all his men to disarme and refresh themselues,
and hee himselfe had put off his Cuirasse, which hee had
not done since his arriuall, so sweet and easie great toilesThe heads of an army should be more hardened and laborious then others. Alexander marched often on foote in the head of his Armie, but as Cyrus Father saith, trauels must not bee measured a like in the bodies of them that command, and of their souldiors, neither are they so grieuous to the one as to the other, for that honor maks them more easie vnto a co^mander, for that he knows wel that what hee does shal come to the knowledge of of al the world. Zenop. in Cyroped. are
in great enterprises. The noise which they had made at the Duke
of Alencons pauilion made many to arme,To execute a great designe which requires diligence, they must neuer stay vpon any occasion, vnlesse it be an inui^cible necessitie, by their turning to Alensons Pauillion, they gaue an Alaru^ and awake those whom they had surprised sleeping. yet notwithstanding
the gate and windowes of the Dukes lodging were assailed with
great violence.
In this attempt they vse great Art, some crying, God saue the
King, others, God saue the Duke, and many, God saue the King and
kill, to put the two Princes in distrust, their people into confusion
and to kill one another. Cries which caused more feare in the
Duke then the danger was great, and his seruants knew not to
what partie the King stood affected. The two hostes which led
them were slaine at the first,Valor and fidelity of the Scotishmen. the King came not forth, the Scottishmen
foughtThis was a new recommendation of the Scottishmens fidelitie. An Act which may be compared to that of the Romans which enuironed Crassus, saying, that neuer any Parthians Arrow should touch his person, vntill they had first slaine them one after an other. Plut. valiantly at his feete, and made bucklers of their
bodies, against this inraged multitude, and not knowing any one,
slew as many Bourgonians as Leigeois.Night will not suffer them to distinguish friends from enemies. The blows are for the most part vaine and without incounter, and the most valiant slain by the most fearfull. Tit. Liu. The people which
should haue issued forth by the gate, were kept in, and the rest
were cut in peeces, the King and the Duke talked together beeing
amazed at their rashnes, and finding that if they had beene led
their designe had proceeded farther, and that they had to deale
with men that were more powerfull by despaire then by conduct.
They retired, the Duke hauing an intent to giue an assault,
and the King to be present at it,The K will be at the assault. notwithstanding that the Duke perswaded
him to retire to Namur vntill that the Towne were taken.
The King answered them that spake vnto him, that although hee
doubted of the euent, for that the number of the people was
great, beeing prest by two powerfull and violent motions, despaire,
and boldnes, and had alreadie made knowne how deerely
they would sell their liues,When as a multitude begins to know that matters are reduced to these termes as nothing ca^ happen but misery, they assure the^selues in dangers, they change their boldnes into fury, and their hopes into despaire. yet he would be present with the rest,
and had no reason to goe to Namur. He might haue safely retired,
for he had a hundred Archers, a good number of Gentlemen,
and three hundred men at Armes. Yet for more danger then
hee apprehended hee would not haue made one dishonourable
step. The respect of his honourThere is not any great courage but starts at this word Honor. A Prince must go into all places where his reputation is ingaged. The King saith Phil. de Com. where it co^cerned his honour would not bee blamed of cow^dise. and that great desire of glorie

(the onely Obiect of great spirits) was more deere vnto him
then his life.
About eight of the clocke on Sunday morning being the 30.
of October 1468. the signe for the assault was giuen the inhabitants
hauing no thought that they would trouble their rest on Sunday,
The Earle of Montfort, who was caled Iohn the valiant, D. of Brittany, sent to intreate the Earle of Blois his enenmy, to referre the Battel which hee ment to giue him, vntil the next day, for that it was Sunday, and St. Michels feast, and it was one of those dayes, on the which the Countesse of Blois his wife had forbidden him to fight, but the Earle of Blois would not beleeue any of them, and was slain there. This hapened in the yeare 1364. (a day by the scrupulous of that time held vnfortunate to
fight in) and moreouer much tired, for that euery day they had
beene in gard, and now they were gone to dinner. They were
surprised without any resistance, euery man sauing himselfe either
in the Forrest of Ardennes, or in Churches, he that escaped the
fury of the sword, fell into that of cold and hunger, and all tryed
that in vaineKing Ferdinand going out of Naples with Don Frederic, the Queene his Grandmother, the Princesse Ioan his daughter, and imbarked in the Galleys to recouer the Iland of Ischia, which the Ancients called Enaria, thirty miles from Naples, had no other words in his mouth but this Verse of Dauid saying, That Sentinels and gards auaile not, if God keep not the Citie. men keep the Citie if God take not the care.
The Duke being master of the Citie came and conducted the
King vnto the Pallace. This prince fitting his words vnto the time
and to the Dukes humors, commended his victorie, and spake to
all that past of the Dukes valour and good conduct, who tooke
a wonderfull delight to haue a King for a Panegyrist. The Towne
was reduced to that estate as it might serue to posteritie for an example
not of conseruation,Ruine and desolation of the Liegeois but of extreame miserie. The gates
and walles were ouerthrowne, the ditches filled vp, the priuiledges
reuoked, the lawes changed, and all the Churches (except the
Cathedrall) spoiled. The Duke caused it to bee kept by some of
his houshold, against the souldiers, who sought to force the two
doores. A strange thing to see churchesSeeing that God ought to be feared and worshipped in all places, that which belongs vnto his seruice should also hee religiously respected euen in the Armies. Zenophon saith, that Agesylaus would not allow them to touch any Temples in the enemies country. in daunger among
Christians, whose impieties are such as euen the most Barbarous
Nations doe abhorre them, for they haue alwaies respected holy
places, but it was so peruerse and corrupted an age, as there were
men without soules, and soules without religion.
The Duke not able to restraine this furie slew a souldiour to
make the rest dislodge, all was reduced to a vast and fearefull wildernes.
The Duke repented himselfe of the cruelties which had
been committed in the furie of the Sacke, and offered for an expiation
the St. George wherewith St. Lamberts church in Liege is
at this day adorned. The King, fiue daies after the desolation of a
countrey which relyed vpon the succors of his power, and which
stumbled into seruitude, for it could not goe straight in libertie,
Liberty is to be desired, when as they that will not be subiect to haue meanes to liue free, but as Plato saith Epist. 8. Many haue fallen into seruitude, for that they could not vse their libertie vvell. tooke leaue of the Duke, and told him, that if he had any more
cause to vse him that he should not spare him, but if all were done,
he desired to goe to Paris to haue their Treatie verified, yet hoping
to meet againe the next Summer in Bourgundy. I will said he,The King desires to returne to Paris. that
wee remaine a month together to make good cheere.Princes as all other men are by nature subiect to passions and alterations, and not able to endure the toyle of the body and minde long without tiring, and haue need of some rest and recreation. It is that which K. Lewis the eleuenth in this place cals good cheere. The forme and
manner of his words did much help the matter, for he deliuered
them with an open countenance, and a heart which seemed free,

which did binde the Duke to please him. An Act of incomparable
wisedome, to fit his words and actions for the necessitie of the
time and place wherein he was, and humilitie in these actions doth
no wrong vnto a great Prince,Humilitie abates nothing of a princes greatnes, for either hee that humbles himselfe is inferior, and then it becomes him well, or superior but brought to such a straight, as he is forced to be^d and if he escapes, he greeues not at his humility, although that doe him good who hath intreated him with pride and arrogancy. which knoweth there is no other
meanes to continue with spirits that are insolent of their fortunes,
but dissembling.
The Duke also knowing the humor of this Prince, murmured
still,Treatie made without liberty bindes not. and made his distrust knowne, he did consider that bonds of promises
made by men which cannot say they are in libertie are light,
that force hath no power to prescribe a force sufficiently noted
in the solemne words of the oath wherevnto they desired the King
should consent, that in case of contrauention to the Treatie, all
his subiects should retire from his obedience, and adhere to the
Earle of Charolois. And therefore he would that before the kings
departure, their Treatie should be read and read againe, and all the
points expoundedIn Treaties of peace they must vnderstand one an other well. Al words must be made plaine, and those that are comprehended or excluded expressed. and that vpon all hee declared his intention.
Aduise my Lord if there bee any thing whereof you repent,A breach in the obseruation of forced promises is not dishonorable, and hee wants force that obserues them. it is at
your choise to doe it or leaue it. I desire to adde one Article in fauour of
the Lords of Lau, Vrfet, and Poncet of Riuiere, that they may bee restostored
to their lands and offices, I am content, replyed the King, so as
the Earle of Neuers and the Lord of Croui may bee also restored. The
Duke, who bare a deadly hatred to these two, spake no more of the
rest, and the King declared that he would obserue the Treatie.In Treaties which are made by equals impertinent demands are choked with the like demands.
Hee had so great a desire to be farre off, as to make no stay of
his departure, he made no show of discontent. Hee concealed his
griefe so cunningly as it was impossible to iudge that hee felt any.
The Duke vsed some complements to excuse himselfe for that hee
had drawne him to the warre of Liege.Excuses of the Duke. He had need of very artificiall pouldersWords of excuse and complements in actions which ca^not be excused, are like spices and sauce of a delicat taste to meate which is tainted. to make this sauce pleasing, the gilding tooke
not away the bitternes of these pilles. Hee did accompanie him a
mile; at their farewell, and imbracings, the King to shew his affection
and trust,Words of the K. at his departure. said vnto him; Sir if my Brother which is in Brittanie
were not contented with the portion which I giue him for your sake,
what would you haue me doe: The Duke answered, if hee will not
accept it, I referre my selfe to you two, and care not so as he be satisfied.
These words beeing spoken somewhat roughly were well considered
by the King, who from that time resolued not to lodge his
Brother in Normandie too neere to England, nor in Champagne
too neere to Bourgundy.
The Duke continued the rigour of warre vpon the country
of Franchemont,Warre in Franchim^nt. leauing the Towne of Liege on fire,The Duke appointed three thousand foote to burne the Town of Liege, and to desend the Churches. It was fired thrice, in three seuerall quarters. They reserued three hundred houses for the Priests, with whom many inhabitants lodged. Phil. de Com. not excepting
any thing but Churches and the houses of such as attended
the diuine seruice.Impiety respects sacred things after that liberty hath profaned them. Fab. Maximus hauing spoyled Tarentum and made it desolate, with all kindes of cruelties. When his Secretary came to aske him. What shall we doe with our enemies Gods, he answered, let vs leaue the angry Gods vnto the Tarentins Plut. in Fabio. They respected the Temples after they
had offended him who was worshipped there, by all sorts of impieties.
Whilest that the souldiers warmed themselues at this

fire, the rest endured incredible cold in the Mountaines of Franchemont,
whereas the wine being frozen in the hogs-heads,Sharpe Winter* it was
cut in peeces with Axes, and carried away in hats and baskets
without decrease. Oliuer de la March writes that the Dukes tysan
was frozen in siluer flagons, and that the force was so great
as they brake.
At the same time the death of the King of Albania was spred
ouer all Europe.Death of the King of Albania. Lewis was much grieued, for that hee alone
stayed the Turkes furie, who were cruell scourges to punish the
disorders of that depraued Age. He was the yongest Sonne of
nine children to Iohn CastriotVoysane daughter to the King of the Trib^le^ a part of Macedonie, and Bulgaria, hauing conceiued George Castriote, drempt that shee was deliuered of a serpent, of such greatnes as he spred ouer all Epirus., who commanded at Croy the
chiefe Towne of Albania: who gaue him with his Brethren to Amurath
to assure the faith of his promises, beeing forced to yeeld
vnder the yoke of that command.
Amurath,George Castriot circumcised and caled Scanberbeg. the NabuchodonosorGod hath vsed the power of infidels to punish his people, and by diuers meanes he hath giuen them power to trouble them. He raised Nabuchodonosor to ruine the Israelits, and therefore leremie calls him his seruants, although he were most cruell. of the Israelites, made them all
be circumcised and change their names, George was called Scanderbeg,
that is to say Alexander Lord: and as Alexander he began
betimes to make such proofes of his valourScanderbeg was instructed in all the exercises of war before the force of his body could shew what his courage was. He also learned the Turkish, Sclamonian, Arabia^, Greeke and Italian tongues. as euery man thoght
that his militarie toyles, would make him worthy of that name,
that he would end more Battels in effect then the Princes of his
time had seene painted,When Cicero spake of Po^pey, he said that he had brought more battels to a happy end, the^ others had read in Histories, and conquered more Prouinces then any one before him had conceiued in his wishes, that hee had triumphed almost as many times, as he had followed the warre yeares. that he would winne more victories then
others had encountred dangers. He was Sangiac, the first dignitie
next vnto a Basha, then was he sent into diuers expeditions, and
knowne to be the sole authour of all the good successe which happened
in Greece, Asia, and Hungarie, there being nothing in the
Art of warre, but in the end came to his knowledge.
But this great valour had almost vndone him. Amurath apprehended
it to haue such a Prince neere him; and the enemies
of his courage, but more of his hopes, said that he nourisht a domestick
enemie, to weaken his intentions, and disappoint his intelligences.
He put his Brethren to death, beeing resolued to make
him runne the like fortune, if he had not made it knowne by his cariage
that he had no other thought nor passion but that of his seruice,
and that his FatherAfter the death of Iohn father to Scanderbeg, Amurath seazed vpon the Realme of Epirus, and put a garrison into Croy. Scanderbeg dissembled the griefe of his fathers death, the taking of his estate and the murther of his Brethren and so from that time he resolued to pull that Crowne from Amurath. and his Brethren did reuiue in the affection
which he bare vnto him.Amurath puts Scanderbegs brethren to death. And when as Amurath, to sound
him, had offered him the crowne of Albania, he said, that he preferred
the honour of his seruice, before all the Scepters and Empires of
the world, and that he felt his hand fitter for a sword, then his head
for a Crowne.
This answere pleased Amurath,He grovves fearfull of his valour. but it freed him not from all
his feares which the greatnes of his spirit imprinted in his soule,
as often as he returned from any exploits of war, which were more
admirable then imitable. Wherefore hauing resolued to make
warre against George Lord of MisiaMisia is commonly called by the Turke Segoria, and comprehends Seruia, Bosnia, Russia, and the Prince is called Despote of Seruia. he made him Generall of his
Armie, as well for that he had not any one more capable, as also to

be rid of him, thinking that being forward and fierie by nature, hee
would thrust himselfe into dangers, from which he should not free
himselfe, for his braue and generous Captaine, like an other Cato
Cato as Tit. Liu. saith wold be euery where and execute euery thing in person, sparing himselfe no more then the least of his soldiors, hauing no other aduantage ouer them but the honour of his commandements. would see all himselfe, and had no other aduantage in militarie
labours, then to haue the honor to command them, and to be the
first to execute them. But as often as hee went, so often did Andrinopolis
see him returne laden with honor and victories. A remarkeable
worke of Gods prouidence, to preserue this braue courage
for his seruice.
At length Scanderbeg,Scanderbeg leaues the Turke. who had alwaies the heart of a Christian
and an Albanois, being wearie to liue in the continuall disquiettings
of so many distrusts and conspiracies to kill him, resolues to
quit Amurath,Sca^derbegs retreat was in the year 1444. hee conferred with Huniades of his enterprise that vnder a coulour of making warre against him hee might retire on his side. whereupon hee ioined with Huniades Prince of
Transiluania,He ioynes with Iohn Huniades. and with him defeates the Basha of Romania, who
had fourescore thousand men: he caused his Secretarie to be taken,
and setting a dagger to his throat, forced him to write letters
to the Gouernor of Croy, carrying a commandement in Amuraths
name to consigne the place vnto him.
The Gouernor of Croy obayed and receiued Scanderbeg,Entrie of Scanderbeg into Croy. all
the Infidels were put to the sword, and the Christians preserued,
and such as would become Christians. He besieged the other places
of Albania, and in few daies with much paine and no money,
he recouered his forefathers estate, and made the black EagleThe house of Scanderbeg caried an Eagle sables in a field gules. When as the people of Albania, saw them in his Exsignes, and Standards, they presently renewed the ancient affection they bare vnto their Princes. with
two heads to be seene in all places.
Hitherto hee had fought for himselfe, now he fights for Christendome.
Ladislaus King of Hungary and Poland intreats him
to assist him against Amurath, hee was hindred by HuniadesIohn Despote of Transiluania, otherwise called Huniades, being disco^tented with the King of Hungary, for that certaine places in Seruiae which had bin granted him in reward of his vertue were detained from him, refused passage to Sca^derbeg to ioin with the Christian Army. Despote
of Transiluania, neither did the cause of the warre seeme iust, for
it brake a peace solemnely sworne with Amurath.Battell of Varna. It was decided in
the valley of Varna on the limits of Misia, or Segoria, vppon the
Euxin Sea within foure dayes iourney of Andrynopolis, to the dishonour
of the Christians, who were put to flight, but the triumph
cost Amurath so many men as his ioy was turned to repentance.
If hee made some triumph, Scanderbeg reapt the profit,
for seeing that hee had retired his forces, hee went to field,
These say that Amurath hauing escaped this danger grew more sad then he had been accustomed and being blamed by his followers he answered, I would not win after this manner. Amurath caused a pillar to be set whereas the Battell was giuen, with an inscription of the victory, and at this day the heapes of dead mens bones are to bee seene, which shew that the slaughter had been wonderfull. and made such sharpe warres as the Turke wrote vnto him, rather
to stay his exploites, then to threaten him with reuenge,
and yet his Letters were full of reproches and pride,Letters fro^ Amurath to Scanderbeg. the ordinarie
Passion of an incensed spirit. Hee sweares that if hee
will returne vnto him hee will forget all his offences past, for
that hee is more mindfull of the seruices hee hath done him,
then of his ingratitude: hee offers to leaue him the Towne of
Croy, and the Lands which his Father held, vpon condition
that hee should yeeld vp all the other Townes of Albania and
Misia.

These letters were receiued with that contempt they deserued.
The letters beginne after this manner, Amurath and Ottoman Soueraigne of the Turks and Emperour of the East, sends no salutations to Scanderbeg his ingrateful nurschild. He saith that he knowes not what wordes to vse to him for that hee doth not merit any good for his ingratitude, and a rough and sharp speech would make his arrogant nature more insolent. Scanderbeg thinking that Amuraths feare who grew old, and broken,
had made him to write them, hauing a desire to leaue his Empire
in some safety,Scanderbegs answer. yet he made him an answer, and after that hee
had told him that he should remember the good which he had receiued
from him, if the numbring did not renew the remembrance
of a greater number of ills he concluded with these wordes. Such
fortune as it shall please God to giue vs we will beare: In the meane time
we aske no councell of the ennemy of that we intend to doe, neither do we
sue for peace of you, but hope with the helpe of GodA Christian Prince should not referre any thing to fortune, but to the prouidence of God, who is the only cause of all causes and guids al things after his will, the moouable by their motions, the immoueable by their firmenesse the voluntary by their liberty, and the reasonable by their will. to haue victory ouer
you. Within a while after he was victorious, ouerthrew great armies
which Amurath sent into Epirus, the first led by the Basha Ferise,
and the other two by Mustapha.
He wonne the Battell of Drinon against the Venetians,Battall of Drinon in Dalmatia and vsed
this victory so well, as the Venetians to make him raise the seege
from before Dayne,Dayne is a little Towne planted vppon a high hill, as in a manner all those of Epirus bee, yet the soile of it is fat and the aire good and holsome, they haue store of Venison and bees, and all kindes of trees and fruites. which was in their protection, yeelded that
he should haue a part of the Country of Scutarii which was very
commodious for him.
Amurath besieged Sfetigarde where as Scanderberg flew in single
Combate,Seege of Sfetigarde. Ferise Basha Generall of the Army, yet it was taken
and presently besieged againe by Scanderbeg, but he was forced to
raise the siege,This dislodging was very dishonorable for Amurath, and very glorious for Scanderbeg, who was honored much for it by christian Princes, namely by Pope Nicholas the fift, and Ladislaus King of Hungary. being aduertised that Amurath came into Epirus
with Mahomet his sonne to besiege Croy.
After that his Artillery was cast, the Towne battered, many assaults
giuen and maintained, and the ruines of the Assaylants blowne
vp and laid open, Amurath, tired with the tediousnesse of the siege,
offers to retire and to leaue Albania vnto Scanderbeg, with the title
of a Realme, so as he would do him homage and pay tibute, Scanderbeg,
who held himselfe nothing inferiour to the Emperor, as long
as hee was more powerfullCato reduced to that extremity in Vtica as his friendes aduised him to make an Accord with Caesar. It is for them, said he, to sue that are vanquished, as for me, I will hold my selfe inuinsible, as long as I am stronger in right then Caesar. then hee in the iustice of his armes,
found these offers so contrary to the honour of his religion, as he reiected
them couragiously, saying that hee would neuer indure that
the name of an Albanois should be defamed with such a blemish,
no not if Amurath would giue him halfe his Empire.Death of Amurath before Croy. This answer
with the little likelihood there was to vanquish the obstinacy of the
besieged, did so aflict Amurath as he dyed, complaining of his hard
fortuneAmong the precepts, which be left to Mahomet his sonne, he did often reitterate these wordes with aboundance of teares. That he should neuer contemne an enemy not knowing any thing in all his life whereof he did repent him, and should repent in the other world, but that he had contemned Scandebeg. that after he had giuen subiect to all the world to speake
of his triumphes against the Grecians and Hungarians, hee saw
himselfe now forced to yeeld vp his soule before the walles, halfe
ruined, of a petty Castle,Croy the cheefe Towne of Albania is scituated vppon the top of a mountaine in a manner vnaccessible of euery side. in the view of an enemy which had been
his slaue.

The memory of Amurath past away with his teares. Mahomet succeeded
him, and whilst he studies somthing worthy the beginning
of his Empire, Scanderbeg labours to fortefie CroyCroy the cheefe Towne of Albania is scituated vppon the top of a mountaine in a manner vnaccessible of euery side. and to repaire
her ruines, but Mahomet gaue him no long liberty to do it, for he
presently sent Acmat his Basha to visite him with an Army of 12000
horse. If the number had beene greater it had not serued but to increase
the number of the dead or prisoners, for Scanderbeg hauing
taken the Generall prisoner,They say that Scanderbeg had it in particular in all his incounters and military actions, alwaies to begin his first stratagems of victory with the death of the head, saing, That the head should be first cut off, and the rest of the body will fall alone, and that he knew no kind of liuing creature, that could suruiue the head beeing taken off. a maxime which hee held for the first
of military stratagems,Mahomets Army in Hungary the defeat of the rest was not difficult.
He attempted the siege of Sfetigarde, and after that of Belgrad, the
one and other expedition brought him no profit but repentance,
and notwithstanding that he had the worst, yet he sold Mahomet his
victory so deere as he was forced to say that his Army had nothing
but the name of triumph.Constantinople taken He turned his forces towards Constantinople
where he made the victory horrible, by all kindes of Brutish
and barbarous inhumanities, which caused the most stayed and
modest spirits to bee amazedIf the Infidels prosper, if they raise the^selues vpon the ruines of Christians, yet may wee not murmure against the eternall prouidence, Stay humane rashnes, it is not lawfull to pierce into the secrets of Gods Iudgments, nor to define when, how, nor how long it is fit the wicked should florish. at so visible a testimony of the fauour
of heauen against those whom the eternall Iustice had chosen
to repaire the ruines. The long patience of the Almighty, and his
sufferance of the wicked hath forced many to murmure against his
prouidence, that he doth not cast those roddes into the fire wherewith
he hath scourged his children.The stay of the wickeds punishment doth wrong vnto Gods Iustice. Deus sua sibi patientia detrahit plures enim Dominum idcirco non credunt quia seeulo iratum tam diu nesciunt. Tertul. de pacientiae*
The Conquest of Constantinople made him resolue to ruine Epirus,
but Mahomet sped so ill,Warre renewed in Albania. and was so often beaten, as he sought
a peace or truce of Scanderbeg, during the which, past the troubles
of Naples betwixt the French and the Arragonois. The Venetians
wronged by this Accord, presse them to breake with Mahomet, the
warre is renewed, they fight to maintaine the Christian liberty,All war saith Polybius lib. 11. is made either to preserue liberty, or for feare of falling into seruitude.
and to auoid the Turkish seruitude. Mahomet sent Baillaban, to
whom he promised the Crowne of Epirus,A pittifull atteration of things, to see a Prince who had lately come into Europe with a mighty army, and had refused a short truce unto the Emperor of the Turkes to be now forced in his old yeares to abandon his Country, and to goe farre to see^e for succors, being alwaies accompanied by Langey Arch-Bishop of Durras. so as he could make away
Scanderbeg.
He made foure voyages and was as often beaten, the number
giuing place to valour.Scanderbeg demands succors of the Pope. But in the end Scanderbeg seeing that Croy
could not hold any longer against so mighty an enemy, and that
Albania was all couered with troupes of Infidels, he went away in
a disguised habit to demand succors of the Pope.
Paul the second had no great pitty to see these sad and mournefull
relickes of so many Princes, and of so many heads of Macedon
and of all Greece, nor of the common necessity, and eminent perill
of Christendome. The Venetians apprehended it more sencibly,
and gaue some succours to Scanderberg, with the which and that
which he drew from his Allies of Epyrus, Macedonie, Sclauonia,
and Dalmatia, which might make about 13000. and foure hundred
good men, he returned into Albania and freed Croy, before which
Baillaban was slaine.
Mahomet sent Allibey and Arabey thither with 20000. Turkes, he
had profited little there if deathScanderbeg being ready to take from the Turkes the towne of Valmes lately built by Mahomet, and being come to Lissa,, he fell into a violent feuer. iealous of Scanderbegs glory had
not surprized him by a sicknes not daining to assaile him in armes.
In this indisposition hee assembled his Captaines and recommended
his sonne vnto them,Sicknes and death of Scanderbeg. whom hee would haue conducted into
Pouillia vntill he came to age, leauing him vnder the Venetians,
gouernment: And for his last wordes he said vnto him. That if he
were good he gaue him a Realme most firme and stable, if otherwise very
weake and feeble. yeelding vp his last groanes the 17. of Ianuary,
1467. he gaue an amazement to his enemies.
This Prince with small forces defeated great Armies, who beside
the good qualities of the mind, for Iudgement, Conduct, and
Councell,The Turkes came running about Croy, some horsemen went out of the towne by Sca^derbegs commandeme^t the enemy thinking he had been there in person grew amazed and fledde through the mountaines although they were 15000. horse and left the booty they had taken fro^ the Scutariens. had an admirable strength, of body, comparable only
to that of the ancient Champions,Force and dexterity o^ Scanderbeg. Biton,Biton carried a great Bull vppon his shoulders. Pau^anias. Fusius Saluius went lustily vp a ladder with 200. pounds waight in his hands, 200. at his feet, and as much vpon his shoulders. Plinie. Seruilius did sight 23. times body to body, and was alwaies Victor. Plut. Fusius Saluius, Seruilius.
Talking with Ieams Picenin Generall of the Duke of Calabrias
Army, he did lift him aboue his head, like a child of sixe yeares old.
He had a Cimiterre with the which he had done miraculous deedes
as cutting of the head of a Boare at a blow, and of a wild Bul, which
was famous for the ruines it had done in the Country, hauing hurt
and slaine many that assayled it. This dexterity, force, and agility
of body continued all his life, and exerciseExercise doth continue the dexterity and disposition of the body long, Philopemen of whom Plutarch speakes, was nimble in his age by great exercise. made it in the beginning
of his age in a manner equall to that it had beene in the prime
of his youth.
After the siege of Croy they presented vnto him in chaines, Iouyma
and Hedert the Brother and Nephew of Baillaban, this representing
vnto him the cruelties which they had committed vppon his
subiects, put him into such choller, as hauing not the patience to
attend any other hand, he cut them both asunder by the wast at one
blow. He punished them with the like paine that their Prince did
punish Christians.Mahomet made one man die as it were of two deathes, he made them to be cut off by the wast at a blow, of tentimes it happened that hee dyed of two deathes, for Chalcondile saith, you might see either part liue long after the blow.
During the Truce he had with Mahomet, he sent him this Cymeterre
for that he desired to see it, hauing heard say that with it
he cut any armes asunder. The strongest armes of his Country
would trye if it were true, and finding not the vertue which was ascribed
vnto it, he sent it back againe disdainefully, thanking him
for a thing which he held to haue beene better. Scanderbeg answered.
The vertue of my sword depends of mine owne arme, which I cannot
send him, for that I reserue it against mine enemies.
It was an increase of glory and reputation to the common weale
of Venice to see Kings and Realmes vnder their charge. But at that
time they did an act of prouidenceProuidence is one of the most apparant effect, of wisdome. Prudents postumus dicere prouidentes. which shewes that wisedome
hath long held the helme of that Estate. They did adopt for daughter
of the common-weale the heyre of Marc Cornare, and married
her to the King of Cypres, after whose death and of the after-birth
his sonne, she was acknowledged for Queene, and made present of

her Crowne vnto the Venetians, her fathers by adoption.
From this action followed two diuers effects, the one of great ioy
to the Venetians, the other of extreame afliction to Charlotte of Sauoy
the French Queene, who by this act saw her Brother as it were
exiled from Cipres, and seperated from the Queene his wife. The
History is long and tragicall, but thus in breefe.
By the like accidents that other realmes haue beene made desolate,
the Crowne of Cipres fell from the house of Lusignan,Iames of Lusignam King of Cypres put Peter his brother to death, and being told him that the Genouois were entred into his Pallace with armes, and had some designe vpon his person hee put many innocent Marchants to death a cruelty which made the Signory of Genoua to arme against him. Bolius writes the History at large. in the
which it had long remained. A Fratricide was the cause, for Iames
of Lusignan hauing put his brother to death to raigne alone, added
other violences to this cruelty, which made him odious to the people,
and forced the Genouois to arme against him,Cruelty makes the Princes of Lusignan odious. to reuenge an iniury
done vnto certaine Marchants of their Common-weale. Hee
was dispossest of the Crowne, his brothers Children restored to the
Realme, and he himselfe carried prisoner to Genoua, where he had
one sonne who was King of Cipres,King Iames of Lusignan had one sonne named Iohn or Iames who was K. of Cypres, and Anne married to Lewis Duke of Sauoy, sonne to Amidee, Iohn had one daughter named Charlotte, who was first married to Iohn King of Portugall, and after his death to Lewis of Sauoy. and this sonne one daughter,
whom he left sole heire to the Crowne. She was married to
Lewis of Sauoy, sonne to Lewis Duke of Sauoy, and to Anne of
Cypres Sister to King Iohn.
Lewis imbarked at Venice to passe into Cipres, to take possession
of his wife and Realme. Iames base sonne to King Iohn, Bishop of
Nicosia, past into Egipt to haue succours from the Soldan of Egipt
who made him to be proclaimed King of Cypres,Letters of the Soulda^ to the King of Cipres. prepared a great
Fleet at Sea to goe into Cypres, and wrote in these termes to King
Lewis. Thou art come out of the Westerne parts, to possesse another mans
Realme in the East, and to spoile the heire of his iust inheritance, wh^ch
is in thee a foolish enterprise. The Iland of Cypres is tributary vnto me,
and it belongs to me to dispose, assure thy selfe if thou dost not dislodge
presently thou shalt dye by the sword of Egipt. If thou hast a desire to carry
away thy wife, I am content, vpon condition that thou dost not attend
a second Summons. This barbarous letter deserued no other answer
but by the sword,Perswasions are vnprofitable when as Iustice is inferiour to force. but Iustice being forced to yeeld vnto tirrany,
King Lewis by the meanes of the great maister of Rhodes, let him
vnderstand that by the Christian lawes the Realme did be long vnto
the lawful daughter, that the Bastard was excluded, and that they
pretended not to change any thing of the rights which he had ouer
the Crowne of Cypres as Protector.After that the Christians affaires were ruined in Soria and the East, the Kings of Cypres of the house of Lusignan put themselues vnder the protection of the Souldiers of Egypt. This reason had pacified
him, being resolued to quit the Protection of the Bastard. But Mahomet
sent him word, that it was a thing worthy of his greatnes,
and profitable to their common religion to restore this Prince
to his Estates, exhorting him to remember the iniuries which they
of that Nation, and those of Lewis his house had done vnto the Mahometans,
protesting that if hee had a desire to haue peace with
Christians, he should be sure to haue warre with him.
The assistance which the Souldan of Egypt gaue vnto the Bastard,
was the cause that he was presently acknowledged by them
who could not oppose against his power. He co^manded ouer their
bodies more then their hearts, which being full of feare, were also

so of wishes and desires of his death who made them feare.Feare is a bad gard for them that command. For they that feare studie still how they may be rid of him that keepes them in feare, Quem metuunt oderunt, que^ quisque odiit periisque expedit Lewis
was forced to quit the field, and to retyre himselfe into the Castle
of Cerines, where he was besieged by the Bastard, who seeing
it impossible to take this place, and that all the Princes of Christendome
were offended at this vsurpation, he sent his Embassadors
^ope Pius the second to yeeld him obedience, and to beseech
him to hold him in the ranke of Catholike Kings. The Pope would
not see them, but sent them away with bitter words.
Hereupon Lewis saw himselfe forced to retire to the Duke
his Father,King and Queene of Cypres driuen out of their owne Realme. and the Queene Charlotte to Rome to seeke succors,
but the diuisions of Italy hindred that which they desired, and
stayed her there during the time of Pius the second; of Paul
the second, and of Sixtus the fourth, and Lewis remained at
Ripaille. Pope Pius the secondIt was t^oght that Lewis D. of Saucy had some secret spleene against Pope Pius the second, for that he had been Secretarie to his father when he was but in base condition, and had abandoned him to follow Eugenius his enemie. said, that hee had beene chased out
of Cypres, for that his father had failed of his promise at the assembly
at Mantoua for the holy warre, and that the same Lewis his
Sonne being then neere vnto Mantoua, and hauing not vouchsafed
to see him, and demand his blessing; hee had saied by prediction
vnto the Embassadors of Sauoy, that it would happen his
Sonne would loose the Realme of Cypres, for a punishment of
that the father did, and that one day hee would demand those succors
in vaine from others, which his father had denied vnto the
Church. The Bastard seeing himselfe in quiet possession of the
Crowne of Cypres, remembred that Marc Cornaro, a Gentleman
of Venice, had assisted him in his necessitie, with ships,Good deedes neuer dye in great courages, others forget the good and remember the ill. Quid autem est eo miserius, cui beneficia excidunt, here^t iniuriae. Sen. money,
and Councell,Catherine Carnaro, adopted by the Venetians. and had giuen him meanes to goe vnto the Souldan
of Egypt, hee resolued to marry his Daughter named Catherine,
whom the Senate of Venice after the death of Marc
Cornaro her Father, had adopted as their Daughter. The mariage
was treated with the consent of the Siegneurie, who gaue
her a great dowrie: this marriage was made in the yeare 1466.
Iames King of Cypres fell sicke of a bloudy Flix,, and seeing
that his cure was desperate, hee had not the trouble which great
Princes as well as priuate men haue when they die, to know to
whom hee should recommend his realme, hauing the Senate of
Venice wholly at his deuotion, but it troubled him what his successor
should be, which was yet in the mothers wombe.Princes haue no lesse need then mean persons of strong consolations, to help them to depart the world, and to leaue their affaires in some safety. Mocenigo
assured him that neither the Venetians forces nor his priuate seruice
should neuer faile him. After his death Charlotte demanded
succors of the Venetians, the Duke answered that the Siegneurie
was bound to defend her who was her adopted Daughter, and
that King Iames had instituted her heyre with the fruit in her
womb: That moreouer he wondred that she vnderstood not that
rights of Realmes were debated rather by Armes then by Lawes,
In former times whe^ they haue demanded of conquerors of Prouinces, the titles of their Co^quests, some haue shewed them their Canons, and others their swords. and that the Realme of Cypres had not been solely to her, but
also to the Geneuois, who at that time held a great part.
The widdow of King Iames was presently troubled with new
Combustions within the Realme. A Bishop of the house of the

Gotholans,Tumults in Cypres. who had great authoritie and credit in the Iland, being
Embassador to Ferdinand King of Naples; when as King
Iames dyed, propounded to marry the Bastard of the deceased
King of Cypres. Many were of his partie, but the wiser sort
were contented to passe these rockes with open eyes and deafeeares.
There are some things which are good to be seene, but dangerous to be harkened vnto. They saw the ruines whereinto they did runne, and did not
giue eare to the promises and inchantments that were made them.
The designe of marriage tooke effect,The Cipriots seazed vpon the Kings Palace, and made his base daughter, beeing but six yeares old, sure to King Ferdinands base son; and gaue him the title of Prince of Galilee. but that of the royalty was
preuented by the Venetians, who sent Mocenigo thither. The
courage of the conspirators quailed, their iudgement failed them
at his arriuall, their last refuge was flight. The soueraigne Authoritie
remained peaceably in the Queene, who in acknowledgement
of the succours she had receiued from Venice,Presents of the Queene of Cypres to Mocenigo. presented
Mocenigo with a Target richly wrought, and a standard of the same.
Shee was brought in bed of a Sonne who dyed at the end of
the yeare. By this death shee remained Queene alone vnder the
Protection and defence of the Siegneurie of Venice. Ferdinand
King of Naples seeing that his first designe did not succeed for
the marriage of the Bastard, hee sought the Queene widdow
for his Sonne, imploying in this Treatie Riccius Marineus a Neapolitaine,Ferdinand K. of Naples seeke the alliance of the Queene of Cypres.
a very deere friend to the deceased King, and Tristan Cybellet a Cypriot who had a Sister attending on the Queene.
The Generall of the Venetians Armie beeing aduertised of their
practises, and what they intended, caused them to bee stayed, and
sent them presently to Venice.Tristan fearing some more shameful death poisoned himself with a Diamond which he swalowed drinking salt water after it.
George Cornaro, Brother to the Queene was sent into Cypresi,
to assist his Sister and to dispose her to free her selfe from troubles
and the Realme from danger, in retiring her selfe to Venice,
and leauing the Crowne to the Gouernment of the Siegneurie.
She who had beene bred vp after a royall manner;Queene of Cypres exhorted by her brother to goe to Venice. and who knew
the great difference that was betwixt a Venetians life and that of a
Soueraigne Princesse found this proposition very strange, and the
Venetians ambition vniust to desire to haue Kings and Realmes vnder
their protectionThe highest degree of greatnes and glorie whereunto a popular or an Aristrocraticall Estate may come vnto, is to haue Kings vnder their Domination. The Romans did not disposses Kings of the Realmes they had conquered, and Tacitus giues the reason, v thaberent instrumenta Seruitutis and Reges.. But when her Brother let her vnderstand
that if the Siegneurie of Venice did abandon her protection, as
it might doe if shee did not follow her Councels, shee was in danger
to become a prey vnto the Turke, and to serue as a triumph
and spectacle to the people of Constantinople: That shee should
not relye vpon Christian Princes, who would all loue the Iland and
the Realme rather then her selfe, and she should beleeue that they,
courting her Crowne rather then her fayre eyes, she were to blame
if she did not preferre a quiet life and safe abode before an vncertaine
Royaltie, an assured rest before honor, which was but winde,
and a title which was but a vapor.
To perswade her, the Historie saith, that to the reasons of feare
and danger, he added those of vanitie, adorned with stuffes of immortall
glorie. What greater honor, these are the wordes of G. Cornaro,
and what a nobler commendation can you leave of your selfe hereafter.

then to haue giuen so goodly a realme vnto yourThat spirit is weake which thinkes there are any reasons forcible enough to perswade it to quit acrown. country? and
that they write in the Historie of Venice, that Catherine Cornaro
hath honored and augmented the Venetians Estate with the Realme of
Cypres. Then he represented vnto her the danger and infallible disgrace
of her house,Councels how pure soeuer they be doe still sauour of the passions and priuate interest of them that giue them. if shee did not grant it vnto the commonweale,
for that euerie one would thinke shee had beene diuerted by
her Brother in whom she had great confidence.
These words entred into the Queenes heart and framed a resolution
to goe to Venice and to make a present of her Crowne
vnto the Siegneurie.Resolution of the Q. of Cypres. The Standard of St Marc was set vp in the
Market of Famagosto, and the Realme of Cypres became a Prouince
to Venice.Catherine Cornaro Q of Cypres receiued honorably into Venice by the Duke Augustin Barbarico. Shee entred into the Bucentaure, a honour which neuer had been done to any Venetian woman. The Queene made her entrie into Venice in the
Bucentaure,Entry of the Queene of Cypres into Venice. being honored by the Senators and the great Dames
of the Citie. The Councell of ten presented vnto her ten pounds
waight of gold, and appointed fifty for her entertainment in the
Castle of Azolle vpon the hils of Treuisan.
Thus the Common-weale of Venice purchased a rich Crowne
without any paine, imploying nothing but her wisedome, with
the which shee hath alwaies preferred easie conquests, before the
most glorious, if they were without hazard. It is a curious obseruation
that the Estates doe commonly retaine the humour of
their first founders. The Citie of Rome hath been alwaies possest
with an ambitious desire to raigne, for that her founder was full of
it, who not content to haue recouered the Realme of Numitor
his Grandfather, cast his eyes presently vpon Alba, and vppon
the small Estates which hindred the extention of this first command.
The Estate of Rome increased sodainly as Polibius obserues. The Romanes hauing once gotten the command of all Italy, in a short time they made all the world subiect. (...). Polib. Lib. 7. So as the first profession was Armes, which hath not been
discontinued by posteritie being desirous of glorie and command.
It seemed that all other vertue except militarie had been defended.
Contrariwise the founders of the Common-weale of Venice were
men which had no such ambitious thoughts, but loued peace and
quiet, who being afflicted with the long calamities of Italy and the
inundation of the barbarians, had cast themselues into these Fens
of the Adriatike sea, and seazed vpon many small Ilands which were
caled Venetie, they liued there a time, contenting them with an assured
rest in a place which nature made inexpugnable,The scituation of Venice is by nature inexpugnable, she is garded without walles or garrison, and hath alone for so many ages remained vnuiolated. and which hath
alwaies braued the attempts of the mightiest Princes of the world.
This first inclination not to arme but for their owne defence,
hath made them contemne Armes, and hath made them more
carefull to maintaine themselues in peace, then to inlarge their
Empire. Who so will consider of their first enterprises shall finde
them limitted with a desire onely to maintaine and defend themselues.
The Art of war saith Cardinal Co^tarin, hath been banished out of the Co^monweale of Venice, but it hath bin done inse^sibly within these two hundred yeares, for before they haue been very war like especially against the Genouois. By this contempt of the Art of warre, they are constrained to imploy forrain forces, and they choose not a Captaine amo^g the^. The which they doe, least that priuate me^ hauing forces vnder their co^mand, should attempt something against the state. Their first warres against the French were onely for the defence
of their liberty, when as Pepin K. of France past the mountains
to subdue the Lombards, and when as the Huns came like a violent
floud vpon Italy, only the commonweale of Venice opposed it selfe
like a rampar against these furious inundations, and it is no wonder
if beeing forced to resist such furious attempts shee had noe

meanes to thinke of other Conquests. Iealousie for the command
of the Sea, held it long in quarrell with the Genouois. And as
in her first beginning she had no care but to fortifie herselfe at Sea
against the iniuries of the firme land, so all her Conquests haue
beene by Sea. An error and negligence which some that haue come
after haue better consideredFrancis Foscarin Duke of Venice, was wont to say Che non potea la Republica crescere molto di potenze, se non hauesse nell imprese di Terra impiegate le sue forze: la quale cosa perche no^ haue a prima fatts, pero era stata molto ritardata, et impedita quella grandezza, alla quale, se tale consiglio hauesse preso piu per tempo, po teua caminare felicemente. and haue thought that this Commonweale
had begun too late to inlarge it selfe vpon the maine land, and
to make profit of her neighbours ruynes. The two principall intentions
which shee hath had for the greatnes of her estate, to maintaine
her selfe free, and to become ritch, haue succeeded, for the one
she hath alwayes maintained her selfe strong at Sea, there beeing
no other meanes to anoy her, and she hath continued her traffick,
without the which she could not continue, and this goodly flower of
liberty had been withered by the idlenes of her subiects. The industry
of marchandize should bee no lesse honorable vnto them then
tillages to the old Senators of Rome, and both the one and the other
in their labours and trafficke haue produced famous examples of
publike vertues. We must giue vnto Venice the glory of the best
gouernment of all the Estates of the world, the forme and order of
her politick gonernment is in all parts so well disposed, and obserued,
as this Common weale (amidst so many diuers accidents of
good fortune and bad) was neuer troubled with any discord or domestick
diuision, which haue aflicted Aristocraticall Estates, and
driuen gouernours of Common-weales into such feares and distrusts,
as the Pallace where they haue assembled to resolue of publique
affaires, hath beene often dishonored with the losse of their
liues, or liberties.After that they of Miletum had expelled their tyrants, they setled an Aristocraticall Estate but the people did still muti^e against this kind of Gouernment, and the great men did still liue in such feare as they could not hold a Councell in safety but in shippes. The Lords of Samos were murthered by the people when they were in counsell. Inevitable stormes in estates, which depend
not of the power of one alone, whereas the lesser are alwaies kept
vnder by the greater, and the poore cannot long indure the felicity
of the ritch, who so will keepe the poore people in such obedience
must after the example of Rome allow them a share in the estate.The gouernment of Rome was diuided betwixt the Consulls, Senate and people, with such a conformity of their duties and common Offices, as neuer common weale was better instituted. The power of the one was bridled and restrayned by that of the other. Nulla efferre se pars supra caeteras valet, nequie impotenter superbire, omnia quippe in (...) statu manent, cum aliorum cehibiatur impetus, aliine in se quoque insurgatur perpeuo metuunt.
The Venetians haue made them subiect by meanes very pleasing
vnto them, they haue in a manner the best part of the liberty, and
their pleasures are not limited but by excesse, they do their affaires
quietly, and the Senate hath all the care to maintaine them in liberty
and rest. The greatest disdaine not them that are meaner, they
contract Allyances together, and do not restraine them from certaine
publique charges. There is a great temper betwixt Aristocratia
and Democratia: For the Gouerment retayning little of the one
and much of the other, is freed from disorders and corruptions
which haue alwaies troubled ciuill tranquillity.
FINIS.



THE CONTENTS OF
of the fifth BOOKE.

1 THE King considers of the Preiudice which hee receiues by the obseruation
of the Treatie of Peronne.
2 Assembly of the Estates of the Realme at Tours, by whose aduice
the Duchie of Guienne is giuen to the Duke of Normandie. The Duke
of Bourgundy adiourned to the Parliament at Paris.
3 The Court of Parliament complaines of the reuocation of the Pragmatick
Sanction.
4 Institution of the Order of S. Michel, the first Princes and Noblemen
were honored, and the Knights bonds.
5 Warre resolued by the Estates, and begunne against the Duke of
Bourgundy.
6 A strange change in England. The Duke of Clarence Brother to King
Edward, and the Earle of Warwicke take Armes against the King.
7 Margaret wife to Henry the sixt, the Duke of Clarence, and the Earle
of Warwick come into France for succors.
8 Henry the sixt at libertie, and Edward expelled the Realme.
9 Exploits in Picardie, and warre proclaimed against the Duke of Bourgundie.
10 The Constable perswades him to giue his Daughter to the Duke of
Guienne.
11 Armie of the Duke of Bourgundy before Amiens.
12 A marriage sought betwixt the heire of Castille and the Duke of
Guienne.
13 Birth of Charles Dauphin of France.
14 Practises of the Constable to breake the promises of marriage made in
Castille.
15 Death of Pope Paul the second.

16 New designes to draw the Duke of Bourgundy into the Townes of Picardie.
17 Promise made by the King to restore Amiens, and S. Quentin.
18 Death of the Duke of Guienne, changeth the affaires.
19 Obseruation of the Duke of Guiennes life, and the seueritie of the
King his Brother. Strange death of Gilles Sonne to Iohn the sixt
Duke of Brittany.
20 Troubles in Nauarre, the King sends forces thither.
21 Letters written by the King to the Earle of Lude. Siege of Parpignan:
Peace betwixt the King, and the King of Arragon.
22 Iohn Earle of Armagnac expelled his Country, and the pittifull discourse
of his fortune and death.




THE HISTORY
of LEVVIS the XI.
THE FIFTH BOOKE.
THE Duke of Normandy was no sooner aduertised
that the King had promised by
the Treaty of Peronne to giue him the
Contries of Champaigne and Brie for his
portion but hee presently besought him to
giue him leaue to goe thither, and not to suffer
him to languish any longer, for the enioying
of his rest and quiet, the cheefe part
whereof consisted in not beeing troubled to seeke it.It is a part of rest not to be in paine to seek it.
The King who had promised nothing freely, thought to discharge
himselfe of his promises at a better rate. Hee wonne the Sigr. of
Lescun,He that wil winne a Princes heart, let him first win the cheefe ministers which possesse him, who are as it were the eyes by the which hee seees, and the eares by the which he hears and vndrstands. who was his Brothers whole Councell,The King winnes his Brother by the practise of Odet of Rye. to perswade him
to be conformable to his intentions, and to rest satisfied not with
that which he desired, but with what should be offered him. Yet this
practise was not so secret but the Duke of Bourgondy was aduertised
by the Cardinall Bal^e, a double heart and a turbulent spirit
full of passion, who wrate vnto him that the King treated with his
Brother, that they made no mention of him, and that hee should
looke to his busines. This letter being surprised, lodged him in a
Cage of IronCardinall Balue was co^mitted to prison in Aprill, 1468. The Commission to examine him was giuen to Tanequy of Chastel, gouernour of Roussillon: William Cousinot, the maister of Torsy, and Peter of Oriolo Generall of the finances. for a prison from the which hee was not freed but
by the Popes intercession, and towards the end of this raigne.
These Cages were of his inuention,Wicked and bad inuentions, fall vppon the inuentors, the forger is fettered is fettered in his owne (...), Arantius Paterculus is rosted in his brazen horse. part wood, part iron, and
couered with plates of Iron, so Perillus was rosted in the bull which
he had inuented.
The King being returned into France, whereas they talked of his
indiscretion and great credulity in trusting his enemie, set a good
countenance of it, and made shew that what had beene done at Peronne
had been as beneficiall vnto him as if it had beene resolued,
in Paris,To make shew to doe that willingly which was extorted by force is an act of wisedome, not to loose the credit and opinion which is bad of him, to be aduised a^d alwayes equall. but to put other fancies into the heads of the Parisiens
and other discourses into their mouthes, hee caused a proclamation
to be made by the trumpet, that all birds which are kept in Cages,
as Pyes, Iayes and such like, should bee brought vnto him to

Amboise. They that had the Charge of this commission, should
informe themselues what euery Bird could say, and where it had
been taken and taught.It is good to diuert brues and the peoples discou^ses, but oftentimes if they be not allowed to speake that which is true, they inuent fables which are more preiudiciall. Fractis apud Cremona^ rebus prohibuit per ciuitatem sermones, eoque plutes ac si liceret vera narraturi quia vetabantur, atrociora vulgauera^^. Tac^t. Hist. l. 3. An act of iudgement which did preuent
many inconfiderate speeches,A ridiculous Edict 19. Nouemb. which would haue been vsed against
this Prince, for that he had thrust himselfe so rashly into his enemies
power, and brought himselfe to that estate, as he was like vnto
the Elephant who paies his ransome with the Iuory of his
teeth.
To repaire this error and to preuent his Brother, and the Duke
of Bourgundy of their pretensions, he labours to breake the Treatie,
but he will doe all with solemnitie, and if hee must cast forth
the Thunderbolts of warre, it shall not be done without the Councell
of the Gods,A Prince should not alone* resloue to make war. Iupiter did not cast forth his lightning without the Councel of twelue Gods. The Kings of France did not vndertake any war but with the aduice of the twelue Peeres. imitating the wisedome of his Predecessors,
who did not vndertake any warre without the aduice of a Parliament.
So Pepin past the Alpes to succour the Pope, so he armed against
the Saxons, so hee expelled Gaifre out of Aquitaine, so
Charlemaine went against the King of the Lombards, and the Duke
of Bauaria hauing first acquainted the Parliament with these designes.1468 Conuocation of the Estates at Tours.
To this end he assembled the Estates of the Realme at Tours,
The Estates assemble for one of these three reasons, for the regencie of the Realme, in the Kings minoritie, for the reformatio^ of the realme, and to prouide meanes to succour the necessities of the Crowne. It is a bodie of three Orders and hath been alwaies obserued among the Gaules. the pretext was to preuent the ruines of the Realme, but the essentiall
cause was to resolue two things, a portion for Monsieur,
and the restitution of the Townes vpon the riuer of Some, both
depending vpon this Lawe which is one of the pillars of the Estate.
That the Lands of the Crowne are inalienable, and portions
are not giuen but with condition to returne againe for want of
heires masle.A Monarchy suffers no diuision, nor estimation, for the yongers portions of the house of France are not diuided, but for want of Masles returne to the Crowne.
The tongue hath done great seruices to this Prince in diuers actions,Eloquence naturall to K. Lewis the eleuenth.
in this (yet without any Art or affection)It is necessarie for the Prince to speake well but without affectation, his eloquence should more appeare in the facillitie of his owne nature, then in any curious Art, for there are more parts required to make a man eloquent, then to make a Cuptaine; to know and discourse of particular things we must vnderstand the generall. he strikes fire to
inflame the coldest spirits, to what he will, and speakes to all the
Deputies, and lets euery man know the importance of the Duchie
of Normandie, and the preiudice which other Prouinces receiued
when it was in the power of the English, with the incredible to ile
which King Charles his Father had past to wrest it out of their
hands. That although he did not hold his brother to be of so bad
a disposition as to haue intelligence with them,Importance of the Duchy of Normandie. yet he knew well
that they of his intelligence bad great practises in England, that
he might haue children which should not bee of his humor, beeing
most certaine that the Princes of the same bloud extend their
thoughts farther then they should,Ambition neuer takes root but in hearts that are vigorous, hardy and desirous of innovations. When as it incounters with any preheminence of bloud, or fauour of the people, it is (...) to retaine it. or may goe, aspire to great
matters, and are not content with their condition. That for these
reasons he could not leaue the Duchie of Normandie. That his
promises in that regard should be soundly vnderstood, and that affaires

of State were not managed with such scrupulous considerations.
That hee offered notwithstanding to giue him such a portion
as the Estates should aduise, making them Iudges and Arbitrators
therein, but aboue all he commanded that the lawes of the Realme
should not be infringed.The Realme of France is seated vpon a triangular basis, the Salique (...), the holding of the Estates, and the reuenewes inal^enable.
Hauing thus prepared their minds, he opens the Estates, and came
thither with greater Maiesty then he did euer shew in any action during
his raigne. A Prince cannot adde too much in such great occasions,
for besides that this light doth please, it dazels and transports
mens mindes, he must allwayes hold himselfe in admiration,
it is a toile which is neuer set but some one is taken. His throne was
vpon a stage three foot high, and railed in, containing all the bredth
of the vpper end of the hall, his chaire was of blew veluet pouldred
with flowers-de-luce vnder a cloth of estate of the same, and vpon
three steps. He was attired in a long robe of white Damask imbrodered
thick with fine gold of Cypres, with buttons of gold, and furred
with fables, a little black hat of his head, with a feather of gold. On
either side of him were the Cardinall of St Susanne, Bishop of Angers,
and Rene Duke of Anjou and King of Sicile.At the foote of the Kings scaffold were set. The Vicont of Narbonne, George of Pem (...) the Lords of Tancaruille, Chasttillon, Buell, Longueuille, Lauall, Aigle, C^aon, Cru^^ol, and la Forest
The Prince of Piedmont a yong Infant was vppon one of the
steps,Princes which wer^ about the King. and of either side stood the Earle of Foix, Prince of Nauarre
and the Kings brother in law, with the Earles of Neuers and Eu,
The Earle of Dunois, high Chamberlaine of France, was by reason
of his gowt set vpon a little stoole behinde the King of Sicile,
with many other Noblemen.
There were two other places rayled in, the one in the middest
of the Hall neere vnto the Kings for the Princes of the bloud, the
Constable, the Chancellor, the Patriarke of Ierusalem, the Arch-bishop
of Ierusalem, the Arch-bishop of Tours and other Bishops,
In the second place railed in, were the Marquis of Pont, the Earle of Perche, the Earl of Guise, the Earle of Vendosme, the Earle Dauphin, and the Earle of Montfort. The other being great and spacious which did inuiron the first of
either side, was for the Deputies of the three Estates. Betwixt the
Kings Theater and that of the Princes, were two formes directly
against the King, on the one were the Peeres of France, and on the
other were the Officers of the Crowne.
Euery man being setIt is obserued that the Earle of St Paul Co^stable of France was at the vpper end, and next vnto him Mon^^urde Tray^ell, Chancellor of France, in Crimson veluet co^es, and a little beneath the^ on the same forme, the Archbishop of Tours, the Bishops of Paris, Char^res. Perigueux, Valences, Limogis, Senlis, Soissons, Aire, Anranches, Angoulesme, Lodeue, Neuers, Agen, Cominges, Bayone and others. and all the greatest of the State humbled
before the Prince, like vnto the rods and Maces of the ancient Magistrates of Rome,In the assemblies of the people of Rome, the Magistrates did hold downe their rods and M^ces in signe of humilitie, and spake standing the people being set, shewing that they had no power to command, and all Magistrates dealt by Petition, vsing these words, velitis, Iubeatis. the Chancellor rose from his place and presented
himselfe vpon his kneee on the right side of the King, who
told him in his eare what his intention was.Oration made by the Chancellor. Hee made the Estates
acquainted therewith in a long Oration the Deputies beeing prepared
vpon the Kings instructions finde that they neither could
nor ought to grant vnto Charles of France the Duchie of Normandie
for his portion. It was said that it should remaine vnto the
Crowne, and the King was intreated to maintaine the auncient
lawes of the Realme, concerning his Patrimonie, holy, sacred and

inalienable either by contracts, or by prescription of time, and
against any whatsoeuer, and that the Princes of the bloud should
not therein haue any more fauour nor priuiledge then priuate
men,That which may make an alienation perfect and giue ^ title of iust possession, doth not comprehend those demands which are inalienable and may be reunited, although the alienation were made for euer, and yet the purchaser shall not recouer the price of the thing alienated the King himselfe being bound by oath at his Coronation
not to alienate any thing, and in doing so, to giue vnto his Brother
a portion with the title of a Dutchy or an Earledome the which
should be worth twelue hundred poundes starling a yeare, and a
yearely pension of foure thousand and eight hundred pounds starling,
without drawing it to consequence,This clause of co^sequence was superstuous and shewes from what respect it came. For the portion was so small, as no man would make it a President. There are houses in France, where the yonger sons would not bee so satisfied. for the yonger brethren
of the house of France.
The King gaue the Dutchy of Guienne, besides the riuer of
Charante,Guienne giuen to the Kings Brother the countrie of Agenois, Perigort, Quercy, Xanictonge,
the Gouernment of Rochell and the Bailewike of Auins, hee changed
the Parliament of Guienne from Bourdeaux to Poitiers. This
resolution was carried to Monsieur, and to the Dukes of Brittany
and Bourgundy his confederates, Monsieur was so ill and so desirous
to change the ayre, as notwithstanding that hee found small
profit in the change of his condition, yet would he not refuse it.
the Lord of Lescun perswaded him to reconcile himselfe vnto the
King, and to accept of what he should giue him.
The Estates did also resolue that the Duke of Bourgundy should
be adiourned to appeare in person before the Parliament at Paris,Adiournement of the Duke to the Parliament of Paris.
to doe right vnto the Earle of Eu,Charles of Artois Earle of Eu dyed without children in the yeare 147^ Hee was taken prisoner at the Battel of Azincourt and remained three and twenty years in England. for St. Valery and other lands
which he detained. The King was well pleased with this resolution,
for that he knew well that when the Duke should see himselfe charged
in this manner he would make an answer according to his humorfull
of contempt, and that some grose-headed fellow executing
his commission indiscreetly for profit, would moue him, and prouoke
him to do somthing whereat the Court should bee offended
and vrged to seeke reparation.
The same Court of Parliament sent Iohn Loyselier,Complaints for the Pragmatike Sanction.The Deputies of the Court of Parliament let the K. vnderstand that the abolitio^ of this Pragmatick was shamefull and iniurious, for the Fra^ce had neuer had in like causes Ordinances which had taken their authoritie from the vniuersall all Church. That as long as she had obserued this Pragmatick, she was full of all prosperitie, and feared of her enemies whom she had chased out of Normandie and Guienne, and had seene Prelates of such holines, as they had done miracles. and Iohn
Henry Councellors of inquests, to represent vnto the King, and to the
Estates the great preiudice which France had receiued by the abolition
of the Pragmaticke Sanction, that it was depriued of a rule
which comprehended all the liberties and freedomes of the French
Church approued in the Conciles of Basill and Constance: That
by the cessation of such decrees, France must needs looke for some
great confusion of the Ecclesiasticall Order, and a generall impouerishment
by the transport of gold and siluer beyond the
Alpes. But the King hauing obtained what hee desired against
his Brother and the Duke of Bourgundy, hee carried his
thoughts to other things then to that which the Estates expected
for the good of the publike,In these Estates they did not thinke of the publike good nor of the peoples ease, who complained, for Lewis leuied much more then King Charles. and dismist them giuing order for
the intelligences which hee had vpon Amiens, Abbeuille and St.
Quentin.

Then representing vnto himselfe how much the discontentments
of the great men of this Realme, had ruined his affaires hee
inuented a meanes to vnite their mindes to his will and to keep
them firme by new bonds of honor and fidelitie,Institution of the order of St Michell. the which hee
found in the order of St Michael making it not onely a recompence
for vertue, like to the Consulship of Rome, but a marke of
the Nobilitie of bloud and extraction.The dignity of Consull at Rome, was as Valerius said vnto his soldiers. Premium virtutis non sanguinis, and went to seek out the vertuous in any house and at any age.
Princes should haue things in their meere disposition which
should be out of the commerce of their subiects,1469 and wherevnto
they may not aspire but by the degrees of Vertue. Honors which
may bee recouered for money, are no more honors, for the sale
may make them fall vpon vnworthy heads.The sale of honors makes them to be lesse esteemed, vertue to bee contemned, and sufficiency lesse necessarie, euery one thinking that he may attaine vnto it for money. It is a great disorder
when as such as are aduanced, cannot say that they are bound
vnto their vertue, although they haue glorious shewes, and that is
not held rare which may be recouered for money.Glory is the desire of great courages. Caesar would haue scorned him that should haue giuen him gold, but hee dyed with desire to haue a crown of bayes.
Fortune may impouerish the greatest houses of Christendome,
but the honour which they hold from their Ancestors remaines
for euer, and a branch of Laurell which remaines of their fathers
Crownes, is more deere vnto them then any other thing. Wee see
not any Prince reduced to that necessitie, as hee prefers siluer before
honor. And that King hath no great power in a Realme wheras
they obtaine all for coyne.
The King making himselfe Generall of this Order,The King great master of the order of St Michel. would also
haue them that were neerest vnto him honored.By these orders the Prince becomes a companion to the whole Colledge. Tiberius made an order of Knights which were caled Augustales, and made himselfe, grear master, and to the end it might haue more reputation, hee would haue Drusus his sonne, with T. Claudius and Germanicus his nephews to be of it. Tac. An. Lib. 7. He gaue the first
coller of the Order to Monsieur his Brother, the second to Charles
Duke of Bourbon and Auuergne. Hee thought to draw in the
Dukes of Bourgundy and Brittany, but they would not bee bound
to appeare at the Chapter.
With this Order were also honored the chiefe Noblemen of the
Realme.First knights of St Michel.The ancient order of France was of the Knights of the starre, institututed by King Iohn surnamed the good in the yeare 1351. the 6. of Ianuary, the Knights weare a starre of gold in their hats, and vpon their cloakes, and the deuice was Monstrant regibus Astra viam. A hundred and eight yeares after Lewis the eleuenth made the order of St Michel the 1. of August 1469. A hundred and ten yeares after that Henry the third instituted the Knights of the holy Ghost, and in the yeare 1579. After an Age all things grow old. Lewis of Luxenbourg Earle of St Paul and Constable
of France, Andrew of Laual Lord of Loheac Marshall of France,
Iohn Earle of Sancerre Lord of Bueil, Lewis of Beaumont Lord of
Forest and Plessis, Lewis of Estouteuille Lord of Torcy, Lewis of
Laual Lord of Chastillon, Lewis Bastard of Bourbon Earle of Roussillon,
Admirall of France, Anthony of Chabannes Earle of Dammartin,
Lord Stuard of the Kings house, Iohn Bastard of Armagnac
Earle of Comminges, Marshall of France and Gouernor of
Dauphine George of Tremouille Lord of Craon, Gilbert of Chabannes
Lord of Curton Seneshall of Guienne, Charles Lord of
Crussol Seneshall of Poitou, Taneguy of Chastell Gouernor of the
Country of Roussillon and Sardinia. The King reserued to make
vp the number of six and thirty Knights to his Election at the first
chapter.
The Duke of Bourgundy at the same time receiued the Order
of England; and the Duke of Brittanie that of Bourgundie, the

one instituted by Edward the third:Edward the third instituted the Order of the garter of fiue and twenty Knights, in the yeare 1348. Philip that of the golde^fleece, in the yeare 1428. of one and thirty Knights, Amedee of Sauoy caled the greene Earle, that of Anunciado, in the yeare 1409. of fourteene Knights. the other by Philip Duke of
Bourgundy. As this Order had one head, so had it one certaine
and determinate place, one habite, one marke or Ensigne, of Officers,
one forme of reception, one oath and one rule.
The place was the Church of Mont St Michel,The place for the assembly of the Order transferred since to Bois de Vincennes. as well for that
the place was then noted to haue neuer yeelded vnto that yoake of
the ancient enemies of the Crowne of France, as also for the King
Charles the seuenth, said, that beeing vpon the bridge of Orleans
when he entred with the Virgin Ioan, he saw (not by any fantastical
visions of Southsayers like to CaesarCaesar going to the warre against Popey, a South-sayer came vnto him transported and said. ^ Caesar, thou shalt ouerecome. It was true, and Caesar soone after writing vnto his friends sent them this word. Veni, vidi, vici. but truely) that Arke-angell
fighting on his right hand. Hee appointed seates for the cheefe of
the Order and Knights in the Quier of the Church, with their
Armes aboue their seates.
The habit was a long cloake of white Damaske downe to the
ground,The habit of the order with a border imbrodered with cockle shells of gold interlaced
and furred with Ermines, all of one length and one fashion,
with hoodes of Crimson vellet and long tippets, the hood of the
chiefe of the order was of Murry Skarlet.The Knights a^^ired in this habit, are bound on St Michels Eue to come vnto the Pallace of the chiefe of the Order, to conduct him to the Euensong, and the next day to Masse, whereas euery one offers a pe^ce of gold for his deuotio^.
The marke or enseigne was a coller of Golde,Marke of the order.They are alwaies bound to carry the coller, but when they trauel, remaine in their houses, or goe a hunting, then they may weare the Image of the Order in a silke ryband. in the midest of
which vpon a rocke was the Image of Saint Michael in gold, which
hong downe vpon his brest, all amounting to the value of two hundred
Crownes in gould, without any enamell or inriching with
stones, which coller should be carried daily about their necks vncouered,
vpon paine to cause a masse to bee said and to giue seauen
souz sixe deniers for Gods sake. In armies, voiages and in their
priuat houses it was sufficient to weare the image of Saint Michel
at a little chaine of gould or a silke ryband.
The officers were a chancellorNo man might be Chancellor of this Order if he were not an Ecclesiasticall Prelate, as an Archbishop, Bishop, or some notable dignitie in a Cathedrall or Collegiall Church, or a Doctor of Diuinitie or Canon Law. to keep the seale of the order,Officers of the order.
to carry messages, to make propositions in chapters and Assemblies,
to informe of the Actions of Knights, to admonish and correct,
to gather the voyces in elections, and the proofes of Nobility.
A register to write and inrowle the acts of the Order, all the commendable
prowesses and worthy deeds of the head and knights their
faults, Iustifications, corrections and punishments. A Treasorer
The Treasurer must keep a Register of the guifts and good deeds which the Knights shall doe vnto the Order. which shall haue in his custody the titles, Relicks, Iewells, Ornaments,
Tapistry, and Lybrary of the Order. A King at armes called
Mont Saint Michel who shall haue sixe score pound starling a yeare
pension, to carry the letters and commandements of the Order, to
informe of the prowesses of Knights and to make his report.
The reception and the oth; After the decease of a Knight verified
of his worthy deeds and merits. They proceed to the election
of an other to supply his place, the voyces are giuen and receyued
by writting in open chapter,The voices for the Election of a Knight are giuen in scroules, and put into a basen of siluer which the Chancellor holds. and the Chancellor declares who
hath the greatest number, if the rigour of such informations had

lasted alwaies, time which blemisheth the goodliest actions, and
weakens the strongest lawes, had not altered any thing of the
beauty and integrity of this Order. They had not called it in contempt
a hood for all heads, for Nobility and vertue could not desier
a quallity which brought them more honor and greatnesse, when
as he that merits to be chosen is aduertised of his election, he presents
him-selfe vnto the Chapter, and addressing him-selfe vnto the
King, speakes these words. Sir, or my Lord, if he bee of the bloud.
I haue seene your letters that by your fauour and of your most honored
Bretheren and Champions of the worthy and honorable order of my Lord
Saint Michel,Bond of a Knight receiuing the Order. I haue beene chosenWhen the Knight chosen is absent, the King sends the Herald of the Order vnto him with letters which carry the common consent of the order for his Election, with a Coppy of the Statutes of the order, to aduise if he will enter and bind himselfe by oath to the soueraigne and members of that body. into the order and louing company,
where-with I thinke my, selfe much honored, and doe reuerently and
thankefully accept it, and doe thanke you as much as I may, offering my
selfe ready to obay and to doe all that I ought and may touching the said
order. Where-vnto shalbe answered by the said Soueraigne, being
accompanied by the greatest number of Knights that may be. Wee
and our Bretheren, Companions of the order, for the good renown we haue
heard of your worthy deeds, vertues and merits, hoping you will perseuere
and augment them to the honour of the order and commendation of your
selfe,To defend the rights of the Crowne. haue chosen you to be perpetually, (if it pleaseth God) a brother and
companion of the said order and louing company, wherefore you must take
the othe which followeth. That withall your loyall power you shall helpe to
keepe, sustaine and defendThe Knights owe^ personall seruice vnto the King, in all his enterprises, but wher there is some vrgent ^et. the dignity and rights of the crowne and
royall Maiesty and the authority of the soueraigne of the order and of his
successors Soueraignes so long as you shall liue and be of the order.
You shall imploy your selfe with all your power to maintain the said order
in state and honour and shall labour to augment it,The affairs of the Order. and not suffer it to
decaie, so long as you may preuent it. If it should happen which God
forbid, that any fault should be found in you, for the which according to
the customes of the orderA Knight conuicted of any reprochfull act, is depriued of the order and the Choller taken fro^ him. The causes for which be may be degraded ar heresie, treason and flight on day of Battell. The Knight which is vniustly wronged by the King, and from whom he can obtaine no iustice, Hee must deliuer vp his coller, and leaue the order not offending it in any sort, but taking his leaue honorably. you were to bee depriued, sommoned and required
to yeeld vp the said coller, in that case you send it to the said Soueraigne,
or to the treasuror of the Order,Degradation in Case of offence. and shall neuer after the said
Somation carry the said Coller, and all other paines and corrections
which may bee inioyned you for other lesse offences, you shall beare and
fulfill patiently, and not beare (by reason of the said things) any hatred
against the Soueraigne, Companions and Officers of the Order.
You shall come and appeare in all Chapters,The day after St. Michaells ^east the Chapter of the order should be held, there the Knights are inioyned to keepe the Councellls and corrections secret. All the Knights are commanded to goe forth one after another, the last come going first, and the Soueraigne last. An the Chancellor informes himselfe in taking the other of all the Knightes, and of the Soueraigne himselfe, of the wordes and actions of the Knight that is gone forth, to know if he hath done any thing, Against the honor, renowne, estate and duty of Knighthood. Conuentions, and Assemblies
of the Orders,Assistance at Chapters and obseruation of Orders. or shall send according to the Statutes and Ordinances
of the said Order, and shall obey the Soueraigne and his Deputies
in all reaso^able things concerning the duety and affaires of the same
Order, and shall with your loyall power accomplish all the Statutes,
Poynts, Articles, and Ordinances of the Order, which you haue seene in
writting, and heard read, and doe promise and sweare in generall, as if
you had taken an oath vppon euery poynt in particular.

Which things the said Knight shall promise and sweare in the
hands of the said Soueraigne vpon his faith and honor,The Coller habit and cloke of him, that is to be reciued shall bee ma^e ready, and laid before the Kings s^at, vppon a Carpet of Crimson T^ffata or Sa^ten hanging d^wne at either ^nd, and the said coller and ^obes shall bee perfumed with incense, after that the Preest hath perfumed the Altar. Art. 82. of the amplifying the Statutes of the Order in the yeaar 1476. hauing his
hands vpon the Crosse and the holy Euangill, which done the said
Knight newly chosen, shall come reuerently before the Soueraigne,The Kings words in giuing the Coller.
who taking the Coller of the Order shall put it about his necke,
saying or causing these words to bee said. The Order receaues you into
this amiable company, and (...) token thereof giues you this present Coller
God graunt you may carry it long to his glory and seruice, aduancement
of the holy Church, and increase of the honor of the Order and of your
merrits and good ^ame: In the name of the Father, the Sonne and holy
Ghost, whereunto the said Knight shall say Amen God giue mee the
grace. After which the eldest Knight shall lead the said Knight newly
receiued vnto the Soueraigne, who shall kisse him in signe of perpetuall
loue, and in like maner all the Knights that are present shall
doe the same in order.Bonds of Knights reciprocall.
Besides this the knights are bound to certaine respects one towards
another: They did promise at their entrie into the Order to
serue the King as their head in all occasions both within and without
the Realme, and the King did promise to maintaine them in
their goods,Lewis the el^uenth bound himselfe not to vndertake any warre, nor any other matter of importance without making i^ knowne to the Knights of the order. lands, and estates, as his Bretheren and companions,
and not to attempt any warre without their aduise.
Hee thought to hold those hearts (which had been distracted)
fast bound vnto him, but infidelity was so bold and so contagious,
as all the respects of honor and conscience were too weake to restraine
her from drawing them from their dueties, who say the
lawes of their birth were most bound vnto it. It was a difficult
thing for good men to bridle themselues from running into ill, so
licentious was the time,To doc well when as vertue raignes and good men are honored, is ordinary and easie, but not to suffer himselfe to bee infected with the corruptians of the time, but to haue a good intent and to dare vndertake it and effect it in a bad season* is the true signe of a generous spirit. and so hard a matter it is to do well, when
as euery man glories in doing ill, and that crimes become examples
and customes.
Iohn Duke of Bourbon continued his intelligence with the Duke
of Bourgondy, and aduertised him of what the King practised vppon
the Townes in Picardy. The Constable vsed all his practises
betwixt the two Princes,Intelligences continued betwixt Bourgondy and Bour^on. fearing that if the Kings Choller found
not some subiect to worke vppon abroad, it would fall vppon the
neerest that were about him: That a long peace would cut off the
entertainment of his soldiers, making him vnproffitable to the King
and without reputation in the realme promising vnto himselfe that
whilst the warre continued hee should gouerne all. The perpetuity
of his charge which could haue no other end but with his life, held
him not in those apprehensions, wherewith their mindes are troubled
which hold them as a Wolfe by the eare,Charges which are aboue others should be short least they should grow insupportable and insol^nt. Those which are but temporary hold them that enioy them in ther duties, and the perpetuall makes them forgetfull. Peace alone makes
a ciuill warre in his soule, wherefore he assures the King, that when
he pleased hee would recouer him St. Quentin, by the meanes of
some places which he held about it* and would speedily execute the
intelligences which he had in Flanders and Brabant.

Warre beeing concluded by the Estates at Tours,Wars proclaimed. it was as
soone begun as proclaimed. The Duke being at Gand receiued
the Citation to appeare in person at the Court of Parliament who
caused the Vsher of the Court to be imprisoned, hauing adiourned
him as hee was going to Masse, and beeing madde to see himselfe
made equall to the meanest of the Realme, he resolued to appeare
with his sword in his hand, and to transport the warre as neere his
Iudges as hee could.
The Kings practises began then to breake forth, many declared
themselues French. Baldwine Bastard of Bourgundy retired himselfe
vnto the Kings seruice.The Duke is surprised. The Duke of Brittanie had made an accord
with him.Accord of the D. of Brittanie with the King at Ance^is the 18. of September. 1468. The Duke of Guienne was satisfied, and if hee could
not haue all that hee desired, hee was content with that which did
suffice him.The ease of great Princes must be considered by their co^tent. They haue but too much so as they thinke they haue enough. One demanded of Zeleuchus what Reuenewes hee had, to whom hee answered. As much as I need. Plut. The Constable sent word to the Duke of Bourgundy
that all was lost; that there was no reliefe for him in England, being
fallen into the same convulsions which had in a manner smothered
it in the yeare 1461.
Edward being bound to the Earle of Warwicks vertue for his fortune
made him a sharer,Troubles in England. and gaue him goodly peeces depending of
the Crowne, and the continuation of the gouernment of Calice,
with fourescore thousand Crownes rent to increase his reuenues.
Yet the Earle of Warwick did not hold these recompences proportionable
to his great seruices, beeing moreouer discontented
for that the King hauing sent him into France to seeke the Kings
Alliance by the marriage of Bonna of SauoyThe King of England sent the Earle of Warwicke into France, to demand Bonna of Sauoy daughter to Lewis Duke of Sauoy and the Queenes Sister in marriage. had mockt him in
marrying with Grayes widdow, the which Lewis made sensible to
the Earle of Warwicke to the end this complaint might bee as a
thorne of discontent in his heart.
And as Princes take delight to pull them downe whom they
haue raised and aduanced, and doe not willingly suffer such high
heads of Poppie to grow in their gardens. Edward grew iealous
and an enemie to this great authority which had cherished and made
speed vnder the shadow of his. He brake quite with him, and some
say that hauing attempted against the honour of a Kinswoman of
his,Of wrongs which make the greatest impression in the hart, those which regard ^he honor of L^dies are most sensible. Polidore Virgil w^ites thus of this attempt. Nec abhorret a veritate Eduardu^ tentasse, vt aiunt, nescio quid in domo Comitis, quod ab honestat^ omnino abesset, cum homo esset qui facile puellas oculis adiiceret, easque deperiret. the Earle of Warwick being wounded in so sensible and tender
a part began to distaste the seruice which he did him, and repenting
him of that which he had formerly done, hee retired from
Court into his Earldome of Warwicke,The Earle of Warwick reuolts. whereas his hard fortune
made him know the difference of his friends,In the disgrace and crosses of fortune friends are knowne Namertes answered him that required a rule to know them by. (...) Plut. and where he shews
that a great courage had rather die reuenged, then liue with the reproch
of a wrong or an affront.
The Duke of Clarence the Kings Brother, the Archbishop of
Yorke, and the Marquis of Montague came vnto him. Euery one
brought his complaint with him, and the vlcer he had in his heart
against Edward. The Earle of Warwick represented vnto them
the miserable estate they ranne into, if they did not labour to restore
King Henry to his Fathers throne, and themselues to libertie.
To binde the Duke of Clarence to this designe, hee giues him his

Daughter.He makes a league with the Du^ of Clarence. Proximitie of bloud did sufficiently binde the other
two, being his Brethren, whose friendship he might account among
the sweet fruits of his felicitie.It is a part of the sweetnes and felicitie of life, to see Telemachus recounting his miseries, amo^g which he reports that he is (...). without a bro^^er. Plut. The partie was made and the resolution
taken vpon the consideration of things present and to come,
was that he should goe to Calice, and in his absence they should
make some stirres in the Prouince of Yorke, to the end hee might
haue a subiect to come thither and to arme. The pretext of rising
was for the deniall of some Corne which they of the Earle of
Warwicks faction refused to pay for the entertainment of St Leonards
Hospitall in Yorke, and there were others which did murmure,
giuing it out that what should serue the poore was spent
by great men.Sedition can haue no iust causes, but the most apparant are whe^ as priuate men make their profit of that which belongs to the publike. In a word it is inequalitie and Iniustice.
This refusall did so incense the people,Commotion in Yorkshire. as in a short time there
were fifteene thousand men in armes which marched directly to
Yorke, to haue reason of them which refused to pay what they
ought vnto the Hospitall. But when as they found themselues too
weake,An Armie at the ga^es of London. being a multitude of seditious and mutenous fellowes, who
are naturally cowards, and hauing no Canon to force an entrie,
they past to London to demand Iustice of the King, with torches of
rebellion in their fists.Se^ition is alwaies saint and cowardly, and cowards are euer most seditio^s. Quantu^ ^abes ad ^ustinendum labore^ miles, tanto ad discordias pro^ptior Tac. Hist. Lib. 2.
The Earle of Warwick was no sooner aduertised of these broiles,
but he parted from Calice with the Duke of Clarence, and came
and ioined with this multitude, who wanted not any thing but a
head. King Henries presence and the Earles did countenance the
faction, and increase it with a greater number, with the which he
resolued to giue Battell, to recompence the errors, ruines and occasion
past.Hee that knowes how to giue a Battell recouers ^is reputation, if it were blemished, it restores him if he be ruined, and excuseth all errors which he hath co^mitted in warre, for a Battell won defaceth all misfortunes and reproch of other precedent actions. The Earle of Pembroke, whom the King of England
had sent, not to fight but to punish those rebels was put to
route and they had the victory. Richard Lord Riuers father to
Queene Elizabeth, and his sonne Iohn Wooduille, with some other
Gentlemen lost their heads.
The King sought to make some accord with the Earle of Warwicke,
and vpon the assurance which he gaue him, neglected to
keep good gard in his Campe, the which should not bee omitted
euen among friends. Loue goes naked by day and armed by night,
Crates said that loue went al day naked but at night hee caried a Cuirasse, and that a prince which trusts in the loue of his subiects may by day goe in safety and without feare, but by night he should haue his gard. The Earle of Warwicke hauing obserued this carelesse guard by
his spies he vndertooke to charge him by night,^dward defeated and taken prisoner. with so great aduantage,
as killing all he found in the trenches hee came without
any resistance to the place where the King was, whom he tooke prisoner
and led away. But for that they could not make good vse of
this fortune, they ruined themselues and vndid King Henry, for
whom they had taken Armes: God, who hath a speciall care of
Kings, depriued them of Iudgement, for although they knew well
that it was impossible to settle King Henry peaceably in the Realme
during Edwards life, yet could they not keep him so well but hee escaped,
hauing corrupted his gards with hopes, and goodly promises,
whereof great men are no nigards when they haue need of
their inferiors.
Edward being at libertie, recouers Yorke, where he was receiued
with ioy, which was as great as it was vnexpected. From
thence he went to London to confirme their wils whom his captiuitie
had made to wauer, and considering that victory doth alwaies
fauour them which haue the aduantage both of Councell
and force,A prince hath a great aduantage ouer his enemie when he exceeds him in Armes, and that hee hath the Cou^cels and executions sooner readie then he. he raised a might Armie, and went to seeke out the
Earle of Warwicke,Earle of Warwick defeated. whom he put to rout, and returned triumphantly, the victorie was made famous by the death of ten thousand
men.
Queene Margaret, Prince Edward her Sonne, the Duke of Clarence
and his wife, the Earle of Warwick with their children and
friends were forced to flye. They came to Calice, but the Earle of
Warwicks Lieutenant would not receiue them, nor scarce suffer
them to carrie two bottels of Wine for the Duchesse of Clarence,
who was deliuered of a Sonne whilest the ship rode at an Anchor.
This rudenes and indiscretion did so please King Edward and
the Duke of Bourgundy, as the one sent him authoritie to command
as Gouernor of Calais, and the other a good pension to increase
his entertainement.
The Earle of Warwicke, who was much esteemed in France, and
in great credit with the King, for his worthy deeds which had made
his reputation great and not easie to bee shaken,Reputatio^ is a Colosse which is hardly raised by reason of its waight buy whe^ it is vp it sta^ds firme and supports it selfe by his owne heauines. It is hard to lay the foundation and to raise it, for it can^otlast vpo^ light actions. That of the E. of Warwi^k must needs be great, hauing twise chang^d the estate of Engla^d, and as it were disposed of the Crowne. sent vnto the
King to receiue him. The King seemed to haue a great desire
to see him and succour him. He landed at Diepe, and was conducted
with all his troupe to Amboise. The people flockt vppon the
high-wayes to see those mournefull relikes of Troy. Euery man
had heard speake of the desolation of the house of Lancaster, they
did regard them as Prodigies of fortune whom she had chosen to
be pittifull examples of her inconstancie.
Within six monethes the King gaue them meanes to returne
into England,The K. giue^ succors to K. Henry. with such forces as Edward durst not affront them.
Hee was forced to quit the partie, and seeing how dangerous it
was to stay vntill the Earle of Warwick came vnto the gates of
London, hee retired into Holland to the Duke of Bourgundie,
carrying nothing with him but a hope to returne.It is a poore equipage for a Prince which goes out of his estate with hope to returne, but a retreat of this sort against a Prince that is stronger is honorable Valentinean the second left Aquilea to Maximin and fled into Thessalonica with Iustina his mother where he obtained succors of the Emperour. Theodosius, who restored him to the Contrie. Sigon. Lib. 9. Imp. Occident.
Behold Henry the sixt drawne out of prison and set in the royall
throne,Henry the sixt (...) it l^bertie and Edward expelled. but he continued but six monethes, for Edward being relieued
with ships and men from the Duke of Bourgundy, returned
into England, and presented himselfe before the gates of
London, where he entred victorious. The Duke of Clarence left
the Earle of VVarwickThe Duke of Clarence being in France was sollicited and wonne by a Gentlewoman which came out of England from the King his Brother and he (...) that belong in England he would turne to his side side. King Henry was murthered in the Tower,
his sonne was detained prisoner,Death of King Henry the sixt. and soone after slaine. The Earle
of VVarwicke was slaine vpon the place, and the Queen^ was
a prisoner. Thus the Realme which Edward had lost in eleuen
dayes, was recouered in one, so true it is that Estates change in
a moment,The euersions and conuersions of the estates are most comm^^ty (...). Breui bus momentis su^ma verti possunt. Tac. lib. 8. An. and that it is hard to make good vse of things ill (...).

During these Tragedies, the King who wisht they had continued
longer, the more to weaken the Dukes designes, and to
humble his thoughts, continued the warre which he had begun
in Picardie. The Constable who would needs be a necessarie euill
Hibrea a wise Cittizen of Messala a Towne in Caria said smiling to Eutidianus a man very profitable but difficult and insupportable, in the gouerment of publike affairs, that hee was a necessary euill to the Towne for that no^ man^ could indure him for his roughnes, nor ^liue without him for his good gouerme^t. to these two Princes was glad to let the Duke vnderstand what he
could doe.Amiens and St. Quentin taken. He took St Quentin, Amiens opened her gates vnto
him, Abbeuille (the Cittadell of Picardy) had entred into the
same partie, if Philip of Creuecaeur, Lord of Cordes, had not
entred. The Duke not holding himselfe safe in the middest of the
Constables friends, retyred to Dourlans, and from thence to Arras.
Being there he receiued a letter from the Duke of Guienne containing
these wordes. Labour to content your subiects and then care not
for you shall find friendes. The Duke seeing himselfe thus surprised
and dispossest of the Townes which he did so much esteeme, intreated
the Constable not to presse this warre so hotly, nor to doe the
worst he could, and to consider that the King without any precedent
offence had taken armes, and broken the treaty of Peronne,
before that he had disclaimed his friendship.The Romans before they made war. Renunciabant amicitiam.
Germanicus being wronged by Piso Gouernour of Soria, sent him word that he was no more his friend.
The Constable beeing glad to see the pride of his first maister
humbled,Pollicy of the Constable of St. Paul. makes the danger greater then it was: hee threatens him
with an ineuitable ruine, if he did not open his eyes to those expediments
which he propounded vnto him, letting him know that in
the darknes of his infidelity he did alwaies reserue a good day for
his seruice.I neuer knew (saith Phil. de Commines) that man haue a good end that sought to terrifie his Maister, and keep him in Iealousie.
Yet will he not declare himselfe to be other then a good Frenchman,
for to mannage his busines with honour, the leape was too
dangerous from St. Quintin to Brussels. The passage from one contrary
to another is neuer made without violence,Me^s thoughts passe not sodainly from one extreame vnto an other, they goe by degrees. there must be
a meane betwixt both to vnite the two extreames. He promiseth to
serue the Duke in effect, in seruing the King in shew, and to make
knowne the fruites of his seruice by the bad intelligence and diuision
which hee would still entertaine and was already framed betwixt
the two brethren the King and Mounsire, the only means for
him to be in safety and his estate in peace.The hatred and discord of brethren is the ruine of States all well as of priuate families. This mischeefe hath bin long in the world, the examples are borne with it. And if two brethren could not agree together in their mothers womb, it is no wonder if two brethren being armed quarrell*
But to end this war which was begun, and would continue with
such cruell effects,Hee councells the Duke to giue his daughter to the Kings Brother. against him, there was no other help but to win
Monsieur in giuing him his daughter in marriage: that all his desires
should ayme at this marke as the true end of his contentment,
from the which he might wander by many waies,They say we may come to one end by diuers meanes. But to hit one marke there is but one direction, the straightest lines are the shortest: we may misse by diuers meanes, ayming too high, or too low, on the right hand or on the left. It is euen so in the actions of men. and could not
attaine vnto it but by this Allyance, that if he were so resolued hee
would follow his party, and bring his head to his seruice, with the
Towne of St Quentin and a good number of his seruants, In a word
that he would doe any thing, yea set fire of the Temple of peace,There are seruants ^ound sit for all assaies and without condition. C. Blosius said that he would do all that Tiberius Gracchus should co^mand him, yea hee would burne Iupiters Temple if ^e would Val. Max. lib. 45. 7.
if he pleased.

He should not haue perswaded the Duke of Bourgondy to this
marriage with reasons of feare and amazement. A great courage
doth neuer any thing to shew that he feares. This course was odious
vnto the Duke, but much more vnto the King, being offended that
the Constable would make such an alliance, and not acquaint them
with it, for the same fault a Nobleman, of the same quality and dignity,
lost his head in Spaine.Amongst the causes for the which the Co^stable of A^alos was beheaded at Vailled^lit in the yeare. 1453. They marke for that he presumed to make the marriage of the Sonne of D. Pedro of Portugal without the permission of the K. of Castile his maister.
The Duke had other thoughtes then to marry his Daughter. Many
beleeued that he would not do it whilst hee liued, contenting
himselfe to leaue her pleased in this liberty,Desseins of the Duke vppon his Daughters marriage. to hold many hopes in
seruitude, for he entertained them that might assist him or anoy him
with goodly discourses of this allyance. The Daughters of Soueraigne
houses are not married to all them they are made sure vnto.
When as they wondred why Hercules of Este Duke of F^rrara had married Lucretia daughter to Pope Alexander the sixth, hauing been made sure to three husbands, and was then widdow to Gismond Prince of Bisselli whom the Duke of Valentinois had ^^aine, the only co^sideration of the safety of his estate and of his affaires, tooke away the amazement Guichard. Lib. 5. Princes in marrying do not regard their pleasure, but the necessity
and profit of their affaires.
But seeing the Constable propound no other remedy but this
marriage of Monsieur and his daughter, and that yeelding vnto it
hee should fill the world with a beleefe that hee had consented for
feare of his enemies,A free spirit cannot indure ^o bee forced. Vt in Principa^^ beatis^imum est non cogi ita miserrimum non suaderi. he beganne then to hate him deadly and to
sweare his ruine.
The King who iudged of the future by the knowledge of things
pastThings past carry a light before iudgment, which searcheth into the obscurity of future things. The world goes alwaies after his manner*. There is not anything spoken or done, but hath some ancient example. Thinges goe and come vnder diuers names, and other coullers, ^^ut a wise man doth discern^ them. trusted him no more, for he had discouered that in this war
he regarded his own priuate interest more then the good of his seruice:
that hee had made himselfe the instrument of an allyance,
which was so much the more vnpleasing vnto him, for that hee
ment to keepe him in Iealousie with his brother and to hold his
greatnesse suspect.
Although the Duke of Brittany did still intertaine the Duke
with feares and amazements, sending him word, that the King had
desseins vpon Amiens, Bruges and Brussells, that hee was resolued
to beseege him,These aduertisements were deliuered vnto the Duke of Bourgondy by mouth, by a footman of the Duke of Brittaines. To whom the Duke answered sodainely, that his maister was ill aduertised, and that the Townes whereof he spake were too great to bee beseeged. where hee should find himselfe deceaued, euen
in Gand,The King discouers the Constable. yet hee went to field with his Armie, beeing resolute to
passe the riuer of Somme vppon a bridge which hee had made at
Piqueny, and to fight with the King if hee sought to hinder him.
Hee remained sixe weekes before Amiens saying that hee attended
vntill the King (who was then at Beauuais) should come
and force him to dislodge: But the King, by his temporizing, let him
know that hee did not fight by the fortune of his enemies, but by
his owne.A Prince should not suffer himselfe to be driuento that extremity as his e^nemy should prescribe him a Law, and bind him to fight. Biorix King of the Cimbrians seeing the Consull Marius to lye still offred him Battell: But Marius answered that the Romans were not accustomed to fight at their enemies pleasures. Romanorum reos est suo non hostrium Arbirrio dimicare.
The Towne was fortified with the presence of the chiefe men of

the realme, the Constable, the Lord Steward, the Admirall and
Marshall were within it with one thousand and foure hundred men
at Armes, and foure thousand franke Archers: They had resolued
to sally foorth vppon the Duke, and to ingage him betwixt the king
and them,Se^ge of Amens. but the King would not: his mind was so resolute to end
or to continue the warre, as any wauering might cause his will
tend to the one side or the other.When themind is in suspence betwixt doing and not doing, a small matter turnes the ballance. A l^ght reasonor any president makes the waight, but there is a great difference betwixt the irresolution and suspencion of the mind, which growes by the concurrence and equality of reasons.
When as a mighty Prince doth not all he can vnto his inferiours,
it argues, that eyther hee hath some great desseine to circumuent
him, or that warre is vnpleasing vnto him: Wherefore the Duke
(beeing aduertised that the King had not allowed of this desseine)
sent Simon of Quingey with a letter of six lines written with his
owne hand, in tearmes of great humility and exceeding greefe to
see that warre begun vnder coullor of his seruice to satisfie another
mans passions, adding that he beleeued, if the King had beene well
informed of all things hee would not haue done it. The King who
would not doe all hee could (for oftentimes hee that would haue
all looseth all)A Prince should not desire to haue the extremity of all things. The wise men of Italy say. Volere ostinatamente ill sommo di turte cose. Somtimes in thinking to draw more frute from an occasion then it can in honesty yeeld, it ruines the affaires. tooke delight in this letter, hauing discouered
the practises of his Brother, of the Duke of Brittany and the Constable;
wherefore hee sent backe Simon of Quingey with good
words and granted a truce to the Duke of Bourgondy which sent
euery man home,A Truce granted dissolues the Armies. the King into Touraine, Monsieur into Guienne
the Duke into Flanders, and the Constable to Saint Quentin, where
he still continued his practises, and not onely tormented himselfe
with his owne discommodities, but with that which succeeded happily
to either of these two Princes.A miserable folly and a foolish misery of those which ar not content to torment themselues with their owne miseries, which are but* too great, but they afl^ct the^selues with the felicities of other men.
The King who knew well that the Duke of Bourgondy made his
Brother the packhorse of his passions, sought to put him out of
hope to marry his daughter,Marriage sought in Castille. and perswaded him to seeke the marriage
of the King of Castiles daughter.The K. desired the Marriage of Isabella Infanta of Castile with his brother but she was married to D. Fernando Prince of Arrag^n, King Henry treated for his Daughter D. Ioane Monsieur submitted his
will to the Kings, and Deputies were sent into Castille to King Henry
the fourth. The King had for his part the Cardinall of Alby and
the Lord of Torcy: The Duke of Guienne gaue his procuration to
the Earle of Bolloigne, and to the Lord of Malicorne, to consent
vnto this marriage and had neuer beheld the Bride, Princes drinke
these waters without seeing them.
This poursute was pleasing to the King of Castile, who was offended
that his Sister D. Isabella had married to Ferdinand of Arragon
without his consent,The King sends Ambassadors into Castile* and tooke it for a great honor that shee
whom the Grandes of Spaine held, and who in effect was the supposed
Daughter of Castile, should bee wife vnto the French Kings
brother, hauing no meanes to lodge her in a better house.
Hee commanded the Archbishop of Seuill, the Bishop of Siguenc
and the master of the order of S. Iames, to treat the marriage
with the Embassadors of France. All being concluded, the King
would haue the promises made in a great Plaine,The Princesse D. Ioane was brought into the field by the Marques of Santillana who had her in charge and to whom the King gaue in recompence of his seruice three Townes of the Infantasgo, Al^ocer, Valdolinas and Salmeron. neere vnto the

Monasterie of Paular enual de Locoia in the view of an incredible
multitude which came thither.
The K. hauing renued his declarations against his sister D. Isabella,
and confirmed to his Daughter D. Ioane the title of Princesse and
heire of Castille, the Cardinall of Alby addressing himselfe to the
Queene her mother, besought her to sweare whether D. Ioane were
the Kings daughter or not. She sweare that she was. He made the
like adiuration vnto the King, who affirmed the same. They had
not any need to seeke for the Iewes waters of probationThe Iewes to proue adultery had probation waters as they caled them. The adulterous woman drinking therof did burst The Ge^mans tried if their Children were lawfull making them swim vpon the riuer of Rhin. nor to
make this Virgin swim vpon the Riuer to know the truth of her
birth. And yet vpon this affirmation all the Grandes at that time
kist her hands, and she was againe sworne Princesse of Castille. In
this qualitie the Cardinall of Alby made her sure to the Duke of
Guienne, the Earle of Boulongue promising and receiuing the promises
for him.
Whilest the King laboured to prouide a wife for his Brother,Birth of Charls the 8.
God sent the King a Sonne,Charles Dauphin of France was borne at Amboise the 14 of Iuly, or as the Annales of Aquitaine* report the last of Iune. 1470. Charles of Bourbon Archbishop of
Lion was Godfather, and gaue him his name. This birth reuiued
the King, who began to grow old, his Maiestie was more respected,
factions were weakened, Monsieurs hopes recoyled, and France
wholly preserued by these two great and speciall fauours of heauen,
valor and prosperitie, or vertue and fortune, which haue made her
reputation to passe through so many ages.Valour without the which a great enterprise cannot bee ended, laied the foundation of the Monarchy of France and prosperity with^out the which the best setled estates are not assured, preserues it.
The Constable seeing that by Monsieurs marriage with the
Daughter of Castille,Constables new practises. all his designes vanished into smoke, labors
with all the capacitie of his iudgement to disswade him from this
alliance, letting him know that it was dishonorable by reason of
the vnlawfull birth of Bertraiamina, (for so they called her) and
dangerous for the hatred which he should purchase of D. Ferdinand,
and D. Isabella declared Kings of Castille, with the like Art
he represented vnto him the greatnes he should expect by the marriage
of the Princesse of Bourgundy.Death of Pope Paul* the second. Pope Paul the second died
Paul the second dyed of an Apoplexie, the 28. of Iuly 1471. hauing raigned 6. yeers and ten moneths during this poursuite, and after that he had yeelded vnto it, hee
was sodainly surprised by death hauing held a Consistorie and eaten
two melons at his dinner. His election was as vnexpected as
his death. Cardinall Scarampi who was his enemie,Cardinall Lewis Scarampy Patriarke of Aquilea was enemie to P. Paul the second being yet a Cardinal. Lewis reproched to Peter the sumptuousnes of his buildings, and Peter said that he had rather exceed in that then in dice, playing, wherein Lewis tooke great delight. did in the
beginning of the Conclaue breake off the proposition which was
made, and yet contrarie to the ordinance of elections, the suffrages
agreed vpon the same subiect which they had reiected, and the
contention which had begunne, the Conclaue ended. This Pope
shewed a great generosite, for beeing chosen, and seeing that the
gowt, or rather shame and discontentment hindred this Cardinall
from comming to the adoration, hee went to meete him,
imbraced him, assured him of his loue, and to forget all matters
past.
This Pope augmented the pompe of the Court of Rome, hee
gaue Scarlet foot-clothes to the Cardinals Mules. Platina saith that
he loued not learned men, and called all them hereticks that made

profession; and therefore he supprest the Colledge of Abreuiators
which was full of great excellent spirits. The feeling which Platina
seemed to haue of this iniury did wholly ruine his fortune, in the
affliction whereof he wrote a letter vnto the Pope,^latinas letter had th^se words. Si tibi l^cuit indicta causa spoliare nos ^mptione nostra iusta e^ legi^ima, debet and nobis licere conqueri illatam in^uriam in^^stamque ignomini^m eiecti a te ac tam insigni co^^umelia aff^cti, dilabemur pa^sim ad reges ac Principes eosque adhortabimur vt tibi consilium indican^ in quo potissimu^ rationem reddere cogatis cur nos legitima possessione spoliaueris. full of bitternes
and without respect.
This Pope was also taxed to be very greedy of money,Paul the seco^d a great builder. and not
to haue held the iustest meanes to get it, and yet his magnificence
in the sumptuous building of the Pallace of St. Mark, and in the
reparation of that of S. Peter freed him from blame with such as
know that magnificence is the daughter of liberalitie.
The promises beeing broken in the Castille the poursuite of the
marriage with the Duke of Bourgundies Daughter was followed
by the Constable with great vehemencie, who could not endure
that any other should deale in it. Hee represented vnto him the
greatnes and commoditie of the Estates which this marriage would
bring him after the death of his brother and father in law, and makes
him to apprehend it in such sort, as this yong Prince, who filled not
his fantasie with small imaginations, continued his first poursuite
of an alliance with duke Charles, assuring him that it would produce
great effects for their common fortunes and profit.An apparent and important profit is a great motio^ to diuert the effect of a promise.
The Duke of Brittanie promised vnto himselfe the honour of
the mediation for a matter which did profit few men and offended
many. The King had no desire his brother should be so great.T^e Kings of France haue in former times repented themselues for that they had made their brethre^ so great. Charles the ^ifu gaue to Philip the hardie the Duchie of Bourgundy, which K. Iohn had vnited vnto the Crowne, and ma^ied ^im to the heyre of ^lande^s. The house of Bourgundy grew so mighty as it would equall it selfe with that of France.
The King of England sent often to the Duke of Bourgundy to diswade
him from this alliance, entreating him to consider that the
Duke of Guienne,Designe of the King of England. succeeding the King who had no children, and
holding the countries belonging to the house of Bourgundy, England
did foresee her ruine and destruction.
The Duke of Bourgundy would haue no such sonne in Lawe,
he gaue a desire and appetite to all men with one hand, and tooke
all hope from them with the other, he promised her to all and gaue
her not to any; he made vse of his daughter to entertaine the loue
of Princes, and to passe ouer his affaires with more successe, to repaire
by pollicy the defects he found in his owne strength, thinking
that his weaknes did dispence him of his word, and that fraud was
glorious against his enemies.Deceit which makes an enemy receiue an affront is as commendable as it is to bee blamed when it deceiueth him that is not so declared, whereas they say that fraud is glorious in warre, it is not to be vnderstood in breaking words and promises, but of politick, fained, and artificiall stratagems.
But he had no desire to marry her, propounding vnto himselfe
in this marriage more the aduancement of his owne designe, then
the contentment of his daughter, hee promised her to Maximilian
sonne to the Emperour Frederic,Princes pretending to marry the Daughter of Bourgundy. and inclined much to that party,
to doe his busines in Germany, where he desired to purchase some
credit, for at the same time Sigismond ArchDuke of Austria had ingaged
vnto him for fourescore thousand florins, the Country of
Alsatia and Brisgaeu with the County of Ferette.The Country of Alsatia, Brisg^^, the black Forrest and the Contie of (...) or Forrest. Were ingaged by Sygismond Arch-duke of Austria for 80000. flori^^ vpon condi^ion that the D. of Bourgundy should not alter any thing of the Lawes and Customes of the Country in the yeare 1496 Hee promised

her in like manner to Nicholas sonne to the Duke of Calabria, to
draw him from the Kings allyance, who had promised him his eldest
daughter, To the Duke of Guienne to trouble the Kings of France,
and England, and to Phillip Duke of Sauoy, for an other designe:
Yet the practise was so followed by the Duke of Brittaine and the
Constable, who promised in regard of that marriage to draw him
into Amiens, and S. Quintin as he gaue his word to consent vnto it,
and at the same instant hee assured the King of England that hee
would not doe it, his words vppon this subiect were neuer of one
tune,It was a witty comparison of him that said that mens actions were like notes of musick sometimes in spaces and sometimes in lines, sometimes aboue and sometimes beneath, and neuer or seldom straight for any long co^tinuance. and did not accord with his heart.
The Dukes of Guienne and Brittanie, being well aduertised that
their hopes were crost by the King of England, gaue the Duke of
Bourgundy to vnderstand by their Ministers that without the assistance
of the English, they were strong inough, and had sufficient
intelligence to force the King to doe him right, and that the principal
end of their Armes, being for the publike good of the realme,
they could not haue that successe which they expected imploying
their ancient enemies, and that so long as they had forces and
meanes in France, it was not needfull to seek them in England.W^ilest that wee may passe without succors we should not seek them. Plato in his Lawes forbids to dig for water in a neighbors house before that hee had sought it in his owne.
These words were deliuered vnto him by Vrfe in the behalfe of
Monsieur, Wherevpon the Duke said, to Philip de Commines, Behold
the Lord of Vrfe presseth me to make mine armies as great as I can, and
tels me that we shall doe great good vnto the Realme, doe you thinke if I
enter with the company that I shall lead that I shall doe any good? Philip
de Commines answered smiling. In my opinion no: Then the Duke
said, I loue the good of France better then my Lord of Vrfe thinkes,
for whereas there is but one King I would there were six. He would gladly
haue had the whole peece,Ambition striues to diuide and teare in peeces that which shee can not breake nor carry wholly away. but knowing the impossibilitie,
that the ascent was too steepe, and the top too slipperie hee had
no care but to breake that which he could not wholly enioy.There is not any one of so great a courage, but thinking to make himselfe a King he trembles, the ascent vnto a royaltie is slipperie, the top shaking, and the precipise and fall fearefull.
He prepared great forces, and the King sent his into Guienne, being
incensed that his Brother had restored the Earle of Armagnac
to his lands, which had been confiscate, and hee spoyles both the
one and the other. He wins his cheife seruants the more easely to
chase him out of Guienne. The Duke of Guienne prest the Duke of
Bourgondy to succor him, the Duke sent vnto the King to intreat
him to suffer Monsieur to liue in peace, The King answered that hee
had no intent to alter any thing of his brothers portion, but to keepe
him from attempting beyond his bounds. And behold a remarkable
poynt of wisedome in this Prince, whilest the Duke prepared
his army he sent Peter D'oriole Chancellor of France vnto him, and
the Lord of Craon to make an ouerture of an accord.A Peace treated and a promise made to restore Amiens. A peace was
treated, and the King promised to restore Amiens and Saint Quentin,
the duke was so much greeued for the losse of these two townes,
and had so great a desire to recouer them, as in regard thereof hee
granted whatsoeuer they would.
The hearts of men lie on the left side, they are full of deceit*
Sincerity and freedom is ra^e in mens intentions. They haue reason to say that their wils goe not right. Their harts lye on the left side. Aristotle in his first book of the history of beasts saith that man onely hath his hart on the left side, and all beasts haue it in the middest of their brests. Truth, freedome and loyalty are rare, vnknowne and exiled qualities.

It were basenesse not to dare to be lie his promises, nor to accommodate
his words to profit rather then to Iustice, These two
Princes sought to deceiue one another,It is simplicity to speak all, but it is meere wickednesse not to speake what we thinke. It is a basnesse of the heart when a^ the word belies the thought. the King had no will to restore
any thing, promising vnto himselfe that an infallible accident
would preserue him that which a peace tooke from him. The duke
of Bourgondy wrote vnder-hand to the dukes of Guienne and Brittanie,
that the abandoning of their protection, and friendship, which
he had promised was but fayned, that his affection was alwaies pure
and firme to maintaine them. Neither of them held himself bound
to keepe his word but to effect his businesse, and in this bargaine
they spake not all they thought.
Simon of Quingey, who had commandement to goe vnto the
Duke of Brittaine to renew the hopes and protestations as soone as
the peace should be effected prest the king much to sweare it.Temporising of the King profitable. The
king, who had made profit of the time, deferred it from day to day,
he lick't and fashon'd this little beare at leasure. Quingey who knew
his Maisters mind durst not importune him. The king went slowly,
hee tooke not halfe the winde hee might haue taken to arriue
at a prefixed time at the port of his desseigns, thinking the
winning of time very necessary for him that will effect his businesse,
that it cannot be bought to deere nor too long attended.When as the Barbarians demanded mony of Sertorius going into Sp^ine for his passage through their country, such as were with him grew into choller, saying that is was too great a shame and indignity that a Proconsull of the people of Rome sh^ld pay a tribute vnto those wicked Barbarians, but Sertorius regarded not the shame which they pretended, but answered. That hee bought time, which whosoeuer aspired to great matters, should hold most deere, and so contented the Barbarians with mony, after which he made such speed as he seazed vpon Spaine. Plu. Hee
temporized so cunningly as he at tayned to what he desired. And
behold a post which brings newes that the Duke of Guienne is
dead: a death which changed the face of affaires, and depriued the
Duke of all that he promised vnto himselfe.
It happened the twelfe of May 1471. and the manner so violent
as his members turning contrary to their propper motion by
strange convulsions,Death of the duke of Guienne. wholy disfigured his body, his teeth, haire and
nayles fell off before his death. It was thought to bee by poyson.
Being on a sommers day at Saint Seuere with the Lady of Montsoreau,
the Abbot of Saint Iohn d' Angely (who was one of the Dukes
fauorites) at his after-noones drinking presented a goodly Peache
vnto his Lady, she tooke the one halfe and steeped it in wine, and
gaue the other to Monsieur. Shee dyed soone after, but the Duke
contynued longer, yet so sicke, as his death was bruted the very day
that he had taken this deadly morcell.
If the King were pleased with this death we may gather by the
words which he spake a little before, when as newes was brought
him of the King of Castilles brothers death. He is but too happy to
haue lost his brother. It was Al^onsoD. Alfonso second, sonne to Iohn second K. of Castille and brother to Henry dyed of the plague at Cardegnosa a Bourrough neere to A^ila the fift of Iuly 1468. he was sixteene yeares old, and had bin declared King three yeares before, his death was not without suspition of poyson. who had beene chosen King
by the Castillans and by the League made against king Henry. This
word of Brother was vnto him as a goodly name to signifie a bad
thing, if he wept they were teares of ioy, and if they were not fayned
they were presently dryed vp.
The little care hee seemed to haue to punish such as were accused
to haue poysoned him, confirmed an opinion that he was content,
and made many beleeue that this death came by his commandement,

to assure the quiet of many by the death of one alone.
It is a great misery for a Prince when he sees him-selfe forced to bee cruell vnto his owne bloud, to assure the quiet of his estate. Hee commanded the Bishop of Angers Secretary to bringe him
the proceedings taken before his Maister and Lewis of Amboise vpon
this death, Claude of Seysel in that which hee hath written of the
History of Lewis the twelfth saies vpon this occasion. Many there
are which said, but yet I dare not affirme it, that he caused his said brother
to die of poison, but it is most certaine that he neuer had any confidence
in him whilest he liued, and was not greeued at his death.
The course of his life was so short as fortune had not time to
poursue him long:Obseruations of the Duke of Guyennes life. shee followed him betimes and neuer ceased vntill
he was daunted and deiected finding that misery is the proper
portion of a mans life, yea of the greatest.There is nothing but misery in man hee is borne vnto it. They write that the wives of M^xico when they are brought in bed assu^r their children of their misery in th^se three words. Infant thou art come into the world to endure, suffer, endure and hold thy peace They sing ^his to (...) a sleep. Hee had noe constant
spirit to defend him-selfe from these affronts, he was as tractable to
all perswations, as the King his brother was cunning and stayed.
The History of Brittaine saith that for a truth he had noe courrage,
and that inconstancy did properly belong vnto him. He did dictate
soudenly what he had receiued and allowed.Constancy is the s^ale of Actions: It is of spirits as of bodies, neither the one in reiecting councell nor the other in casting vp meate c^n be nourish^d and entertained. He was not like to
his Father in fortune, nor to his Grand-father in courrage, nor to
his Brother in wisdome. It is a wonder to see how children degenerate,
and how nature delights in these contrary productions, making
cowards, ignorant men, and wicked proceed from the bloud of Princes
which are valiant, wise and good. So vineger comes from wine.A good tree brings not forth bad fr^t^, and ye^ wee see that from ^ood fathers come bad children. The Iewes prouerb is Homets ben iin, v^neger is the son of wine. Natum crebro tanquam ex industria malis ebonis, agrestes ^ doctioribus and ceteris. ^u vic. torin Caliguls.
Impressions were very easie in this lightnesse. The rigor which
King Lewis the eleuenth shewed vnto him, made him giue eare to
such as sought to finde their owne contentments in his discontents.
It is Iniustice in a Soueraigne brother not to prouide for the entertainment
of his yonger, whom he should put in the number of his
forces and felicities. They are of the same bloud and grounded vppon
part and portion of the successiue rights, but they haue neuer
prospered which haue troubled the house for this, and conspired
with the members against the head.
Twenty yeares before this death France had seene a notable example
in Brittaine.Tragicall end of Giles of Brittaine There is no danger to lay the History a little aside.
GilesIohn the fift Duke of Brittaine left three Sonnes, Francis Peter and Giles. sonne to Iohn the fifth Duke of Brittaine, and Brother
to Francis the first, being not well pleased with his portion retired
himselfe to Guildo a Castle neere vnto the sea by Matignon.
The Duke his Brother makes King Charles the seuenth beleeue
that he was there to fauour the English with aduice and intelligence.
Vpon the first suspition of any ones fidelity, they presently ad the communicati^n of friends. They doe exactly reuise actions past which deface or confirme the doubt of the present. A beliefe which might easily bee setled in the soule
of a iealous King, for that this Prince had beene bred vp in England,
and the king had giuen him the Order of the Garter, and the
office of Constable.Proces made to the Prince of Brittany. Vppon this first impression the king sends to
take him, and deliuers him into the Dukes hands, who sends him
prisoner to Chasteau Briant, commanding his Attourney Generall
The Duke demanded of the Atturney Generall what should be done in this processe. The good man answered that he did not see what might be done and that by the custome the elder had no criminall iustice ouer his yonger brother, and that the Duke could not call him to his Iustice. An answer which was more simple the^ true. H^st. of Brit. lib. 11. to make his processe for treason, but there was no crime
nor any accuser.

The hand which had hurt him sought to cure him. The king
beeing informed of his innocencie, laboured for his deliuerance.
The Duke durst not refuse him, but being ready to be set a libertie,
his enemies suppose letters from the king of England, wherevpon
the king changeth his aduice, and causeth him to bee kept
more straightly in the Castle of Touffort. There he is made to languish
and endure greater extremities then those of the Quarries of
Siracusa,The vsage of such as were shut vp in the Iayle of the Quarries of Siracusa was very stra^ght, for they had but two dishfuls of barley, and one of water allowed them by day^ lut. in the life (...) for they refused him water, and if he had bread, they
were the scraps of a poore woman who hearing him cry for hunger
put them in at a window, which was vpon the ditch side. His
gardes who had vndertaken to starue him, seeing it continue to
long,Gilles of Brittany adiournes his Brother before God strangled him. They gaue him leysure to thinke of his conscience,
hee charged a Friar to adiourne his Brother to heauen,
seeing there was no Iustice on earth for his innocencie.Gilles of (...) for (...) speech charged a Friar to goe vnto D. Francis the first, and to tell him in what estate hee had left him, and the miseries he endured by iniustice, that he could haue no right, but referred all to the iudgement of God, before (...) he called him. The Duke
appeared.
Death pulling this thorne out of the kings heart, gaue him
meanes of more rest, if his spirit had been capable of rest. It carried
him into many places,A spirit which is not restrained to certaine designes, liues in continuall disquietnes. Phil. de Commines* speaking of this Prince saies these words. The time that he rested his vnderstanding labore^, for ^e had to doe in many ^aces, and did as willingly busie himselfe with his neighbours affaires as with his owne. and thrust him into sundry designes,
medling with his neighbours affaires as with his owne. True it is
he had great crosses by them that were neerest vnto him.Imprisonmen^ of the Duke of Alencon. Iohn the
second Duke of Alencon, the first Prince of the bloud, was sent prisoner
to the Louure, for conspiring with the Kings enemies, and
at the same time they saw other Princes afflicted with the like Domesticke
diseases. Lewis was nothing sorrie to disquiet them, he
did what he could to fill vp the measure of their cares, hauing no
respect to make enemies, so as they came to his Mill.
Iohn the second King of Nauarre and Arragon had prosperities
and aduersities,Troubles in Nauarre. both publike and priuate, so variable and diuers,
as it could not be said whether he had more of the one then the other,
his youth was tost, and his age was not quiet, but still his
courage remained inuincible in the greatest fury of the storme.They that make profession of wisedome and faint in aduersitie are like vnto Pilots which grow sick during a storme
Charles the onely Sonne and presumptiue heyre of the Crowne
of Nauarre tooke Armes against him to bee King.Charles Prince of Nauarre makes war against his Father. Henry the
fourth King of Castille who had married his eldest Daughter fauored
his rebels of Barcelona, and Gaston Earle of Foix, husband to
Elenor his second daughter, seeing him busied against the Castillans
sought to dispossesse him of the Crowne of Nauarre. D. Pedro of
Portugall was chosen King and dyed at the siege of Tortosa.After that the A^ragonis had declared K. Iohn, vnwort^y the crown, as the murtherer of his own son, they did choose D. Pedro the third Co^stable of Portugal son to D. Pedro D. of ^imbra. Rene
of Anjou Duke of Lorraine and Earle of Prouence, being desirous
to recouer the Title of a king which he had lost at Naples, accepted
the same election by the aduice of King Lewis the eleuenth, and
sent the Duke of Calabria his Sonne into Spaine with French
troupes, which ioyning with them of the countie of Roussillon besieged
Girone.The French besiege Gi^onne.
The Arragonois were beaten and defeated, and the Prince D.

Ferdinand sonne to the King of Nauarre in danger to be taken prisoner.
At the Battell of Denia the Prince D. Ferdinand was prisone^, Roderic of Reb^ledo caused himselfe to ^ee taken in his place, to giue him meanes to escape, and the King redeeme^ him for ten thousa^d florins. Winter came on, the Duke of Calabria retired his troupes
to Perpignan, hee made a voyage into France to haue new forces,
and returned with ten thousand men with the which he forced king
Iohn to raise the siege from before Peralta, the which was wonderfully
prest with their Ordinance, and hauing made a great breach,
the assaylants assured themselues to force it at the firt assault. The
night before it should be giuen, the Duke of Calabria entred with
such furie into their quarters without discouerie, the Sentinels being
a sleepe,It is easie to make a surprise when as Sentinels be a sleepe. The Romans co^sidering that the safety of the Armie or Camp depending of their vigilancy, had cries and trumpets to keep them waking. There were some also that went the round with bels to the same end. Of all which we finde examples in Tacitus Hist. 5. Polibeus lib. 2. stratagem of Clearchus. Thucidid li. 4. as euery man sought how to saue themselues. In combats
by night the amazement is so great as he that begins first wins.
The King fled away bare headed towards Figueres. France made
bonfires for this victorie the which was seconded by the taking of
Girona,Death of Iohn D. of Calabia. but within few daies after they lamented the death of the
Duke of Calabria, who dyed at Perpignan of a pestilent burning
Feuer.
When as the King of Arragon had ended a Ciuill warre against
his subiects, he found himselfe ingaged in warre against the French.
King Lewis the eleuenth being often importuned with the ordinarie
complaints which were made of the insolencies of the French,
The inhabitants of Perpignan intreated Iohn King of Arragon, either to giue the K. other p^wnes for the assura^ce of his money which hee had lent, or to suffer them to retire themselues. which were at Roussillon, and that the inhabitants of Perpignan
being reuolted against the garrison, had forced them to retire into
the Castle, he sent the King word that he should pay him his three
hundred thousand crownes and retire his countrie, or that he should
make him an absolute sale, or giue him caution for the paiment.
The King of Arragon finding either of these conditions verie
harsh, answered that he could not yet vngage the country, and
that it would bee no honour to him to alienate it, being a part of
the Crowne of Arragon, and that it was a matter neuer heard of to
presse a King to gaue Caution, the pawne being sufficient.
The King taking this answere for a refusall, prepared to warre,
and made his preparation slowly, to haue a more speedy victorieHe that will demand any thing of an enemie must not be disarmed, neither must hee prepare hastily to war to vanquish more speedily. Diu apparandum est bellum vt vineas celerius, quia longa belli preparatio celerem facit victoriam. Senec..
With the like care as he armed for an offensiue warre against the
King of Arragon, he gaue order for a defensiue, and to furnish the
Towne of Perpignan with victuals and necessary commodities to
maintaine a siege, and gaue the command thereof to the Lord of
Lude. The Letter which he wrote vnto him vpon that subiect deserues
well to be considered of, beeing drawne from the originall
and full of passages which discouer the humor of this Prince, the
order and conduct of his affaires, and the manner of writing of
those times.
My Lord Gouernor,The Lord of Lude as may be seene by the subscription of this Letter was Gouernor of Dauphine and Chamberlaine to K. Lewis (...). the Earle of Cardonna and the Castellan of
Emposta are arriued at Paris.Kings Letter to the Lord of Lude. I haue sent Monsieur Daire and the Siegr
of Bouffille vnto them, to know and vnderstand of them if they came to
make any good appointment, or whether they came to deceiue mee and to
dissemble. The said Bouffille is returned vnto me, and as farre as they

can finde they bring not any good newes, and their intention is onely to
entertaine mee with words, vntill they haue gathered in their coine.
And therefore I must play Mr Lewis, and you Mr Iohn, and whereas
they seeke to deceiue vs let vs shew our selues more politick then they. In
regard of my selfe I will entertaine them heere vntill the first weeke of
May, and in the meane time you shall part with all the speed you can,
and shall draw together a hundred Lances in Dauphine to lead with you,
and cause them to be led by Monsieur de S. Priet, or by Pouillalier, or by
them both together, that is to say, fourescore Lances by S. Priet, and twentie
by Pouillalier, or all to him alone or to both together, as you shal think
the matter may be best conducted for my profit, for I referre this Article
to you.
I send you a Letter which I write vnto them by Beauuoisin, whom I
charged to tell them and to doe what you shall thinke fit. And for the
paiment of the said hundred Lances,A hundred pound starling. you must speedilie finde a thousand
Liuers to giue them at their departure, for they shall make but a roade
to spoile and burne the corne and then returne, which is ten francks a
month for euerie Lance: And seeing they haue no Archers, and continue
but eight or ten daies, it must suffice them, it is fit to finde a meanes
to recouer the said thousand Francks either by confiscation of Corne or
otherwise. And if it should come to the extremitie that you could not
finde it before you want, take it vppon the accounts of the Treasurer of
Dauphin^, to whom I write expressely: but vse such diligence as the said
men at Armes may part the 25. day of this month, and if you take any
money vp in Dauphin^ I will repay it. My Lord Gouernor, the greatest
seruice you can doe me is to vse such speed as you may burne all their
Corne betimes, for thereby they shall be forced to speake plainely.
I haue spoken vnto Captaine Odet Daidre, who is well content to
goe thither, I send him vnto you with his hundred Lances to assist you
to make the spoile, in my opinion when you are all together you are inough.
I send Yuon Diliers vnto Monsieur de Charluz to raise an hundred
Lances in Lanquedoc. I doe also write vnto de Charluz to gather together
of his Franc Archers the neerest to those marches, to the number
of three thousand, and that he cause them to march into Roussillon
with you, and that all be readie to part the 25. of this month of Aprill.
And for the paiment of the hundred Lances of Lanquedoc, and of the
said Franc Archers, I write vnto the Generall and Treasurer of Lanquedoc
that they cause foure thousand Francs to be deliuered vnto them,
that is to say a thousand Francs to the hundred Lances; and to the said
Franc Archers 3000. Francs.
I doe also send Destueille to Monsieur Dalby, who carries a commission
directed to him, to Monsieur Charluz, and to the said Destueille,
and to euery of them, to cause great store of victuals to be carried to
Narbona and other places of the fronter, to the end the men at Armes
may haue no want: but you must haue a care that vnder co^llor thereof
none be carried to Perpignan.
I haue giuen charge to the said Beauuoisien to be gouerned by you,

and in case that Mousieur de S. Priet lead the hundred Lances of Dauphin^,
the said Beauuoisien shall bring vnto me Hardouin de la Iaille,
whom I haue written to S. Priet to send me.
I haue sent vnto you Raoulet of Balparque, and Claux the Canonier
to assist you, imploy them well, and spare nothing. The Seigr of Bouffille
shall part within two or three daies, and in my opinion with those hundred
Lances, with yours, those of Dauphine, Lanquedoc, and of Captaine
Odet, with the three thousand Franc of Archers, you shall haue forces sufficient
to spoile and burne their whole Country, and to take and beate
downe their paltry places, or ruine and burne such as you cannot beat
downe.
I doe also write vnto the Generall, Treasurer and Officers of Languedoc,
that they doe whatsoeuer Monsir Dalby and you shall commaund
them. Beauuoisien shall tell you the rest. Farewell my Lord Gouernor, I
pray you let mee vnderstand of your newes. Written at Senlis the 9. of
Aprill V. Lewis, and vnderneath: N. Tilhart.
The Kings armie besieged ParpignanSiege of Parpignan. D. Iohn King of Arragon
maintained the siege, the Prince D. Ferdinand came to succor him,
and forced the French to retire; Lewis hearing of this shamefull retreat,
commanded his Captaines to returne speedily^, and to take
the place or to die there. The siege continued eight monthes, the
besieged were wonderfully prest with famine, for when as they had
eaten horses, dogs, Cats, and Rats, they deuoured their flesh that
were slaine at assaults, chosing rather to dye after this manner, then
to returne vnder the command of the French.Famine and yeelding of Parpignan. Yet their obstinacy
was no hinderance from letting the K. suffer them to feele the effects
of his Clemencie, receiuing them vpon composition, euen
when as they could no more.The obstinacy and fury of a Town besieged, should not hinder the bounty and clemencie of a Prince. Laurence Palatin of Hungarie, being amazed that the Emperor Sygismond left them their liues and goods, and held them for good subiects whom hee had vanquished, answered in this manner. I kill my enemies in pardoning, and in doing them good I binde them. Aeneas Sit. lib. 3. Com. So the Cont^e of Roussillon remained
to France all the raigne of King Lewis. King Charles his Sonne
restored it to King Ferdinand.Charles the eight yeelded the Countie of Rossi^lon to Ferdinand King of Arragon, and did acquit him of the same for the which hee was engaged, this was in the yeare. 1494. It had cost the King his Father many
men and much money. His Chronicle relates that it was said
in those times, that the Contrie of Arragon was a Church-yard
vnto the French. Philip de Commines saith that in the Contie of
Roussillon there died many good men, for this warre continued
long*
A Peace was mas made betwixt Lewis and D. Iohn King of Arragon
and Nauarre,Embassadors from the King of Arragon sent into France. whose Embassadors being come into France,
were well receiued and graciously vsed by the King, who gaue them
two cups of gold waying fortie markes,As a weake Prince should not make any show of his forces, so hee that is mighty glories to shew what hee can. The King out of one Citie of his realme musters a hu^dred thousand men in Armes, the 20. of Aprill 1470. and esteemed worth three
thousand two hundred crownes of gold, and to the end they might
iudge of the whole peece by a patterne, he caused them to see the
Inhabitants of Paris in Armes, they did muster a hundred and foure
thousand men, the Originall saith they were all in one liuerie in red
Casacks and white Crosses.
The fortune of the house of Armagnac was intangled in that
of Arragon.Iohn Earle of Armagnac expelled his Country. Iohn Earle of Armagnac had married Ioane of Foix
Daughter to Gaston Earle of Foix and D. Leonora of Arragon. This
alliance could not defend him from the indignation of King Lewis

the eleuenth in the furie whereof he found first the losse of his libertie,
then of his goods, and lastly of his life.
The King could not forget with what vehemency he had followed
the Bourguignon party in the war of the Common weale, after
that he had promised to retire himselfe from all Leagues and associations,
contrary to the Kings intentions, nor with what affection
he had followed the youthfull follies of the Duke of Guienne his
brother, who had restored him to his lands, contrary to his commandement.
In the yeare 1469. one called Iohn Bon of Wales in England
brought letters vnto the King, which King Edward had writen to
the Earle of Armagnac,Accused by a welchma^. and the answer which the Earle made him.
The King reading them with the passion where-with he was possest,
and easily beleeuing one man aloneTo draw many heades in question vppon the report of one tongue, is an act of extreame and odious Iustice. Graue militibus visu^ quod in causa falconis multos milites ad vnius serui testimonium occidi preceperat Pertinax Iul. Capitol. to ruine one who was
worth many, and who would cost him much, thought that Infidellity
was noe new thing in a spirit who had already shewed the
proofes, and without further inquisition sends the Earle of Dammarting
with twelue or thirteene hundreth Lances, and with ten
or twelue thousand Franc Archers to seaze vpon the Earles person,
lands and estate.
Being come into the Towne of Rhodets, he put the whole Country
into the Kings hands,His lands put into the Kings ha^ds. changed the officers, and caused a Proclamation
to be made by the sound of a Trumpet, that noe man of
what estate or condition whatsoeuer should advowe himselfe seruant
nor officer to the Earle of Armagnac, nor make any poursute
for him, vpon paine of confiscation of body and goods.There is nothing so powerfull nor fearefull as a publik declaration of the Princes hatred against any one, especially among a people which esteem not their Gouernors but by the authority and credit they haue with their Superior.
In these extremities there is not any man that will willingly loose
himselfe for another. Good men are loth to drawe their friends into
danger. As it is an office of frendshippe to runne into danger for
ones friends, and rashnes to goe into perils without occasion, so
it is cruelty to bring others into danger.
The Earle of Dammartin made booty of all the places and Siegneuries
which did belong vnto the Earle of Armagnac. If he tooke
his part, as some taxed him he did contrary to the duty of a Generall,
who should content himselfe with the glory of the command
and executionThe glory and honor of well executing the co^mandements of his Prince, serues for a booty, in the distributio^ wherof he that commands must consider that there is not any thing for himselfe. Themistocles seeing a great nu^ber of Collers and chains in the enemies Camp said vnto him that did acco^pany him. Take off the^ for you are not Themistocles. and leaue vnto the soldier that which concernes
profit.
The Earle of Armagnac seeing that hee must haue time to cleere
these brutes,He retires to Fonteraby. and that oftentimes Innocency is forced to yeeld vnto
a sodaine euent,We must giue time to broyles to make them vanish away when there is no meanes to resist. Innocency it selfe is troubled when she is surprized. Relinquenda rumoribus tempus, quo senescant innocentes recente inuidiae impares. Tac. An. Lib. 2. was aduised to goe out of the Realme and to retire
to Fonteraby with his wife, being loth that his person should be
at the Earle of Dammartins discretion, who beeing aduertised
of his flight, past on, and seazed vppon the towne of Lestore. The
Court Parliament of Paris vppon the informations of the Intelligences
which the Earle of Armaignac had with the enemies of
the Realme decreed a personall adiournment against him. His

processe was made by reason of his contumacy,The first default was obtained the 24. of Nouember 1469. the second the 19. of February* 1469 the third the 6. of August 1470. and before that the E. of Da^martin had seazed vppon all the County of Armagnac. and by a sentence
giuen the 7. of September 1470. he was condemned to loose his
head. But he was in a place of safety, whereas the sentence could not
be executed, hauing an intent to let them know, which had condemned
him, that he was aliue.
After that he had for two yeares space indured the miseries and
discommodities which they suffer which are expelled from their
owne houses and liue in a strange country, hauing tryed that the
wandring starres were as vnfortunate as the fixed,There is no such sweet abode as ones owne house. They which bold them happy that runne from Prouince to Prouince, are like vnto those (saith Plutarch) which iudge the wandring fl^rres more fortunate then the fixed. and sought by
all meanes to returne into the Kings fauour:Returnes into Guienne vnder the Dukes protection. when as he saw that by
the resolution of the Estates, held at Tours, the Kings brother left
Normandy, and tooke Guyenne for his portion, and that hee was
arriued at Bourdeaux, he thought that he could not find a better refuge
nor portion then with him, he acquaints him with the misery
of his life, which was such, as liuing, his life was nothing but a liuing
death,It is not life to stand al^waies in feare ^ fall in to the handes of a mighty enemy, which hath long armes, Ita viuere vt non sit viuendum miserimu^ est. Cic. and the power which his enemies had against his innocency.
The Duke of Guienne pittied his estate, and gaue him prouision
to be restored to all his lands.
This displeased the King, who saw that the Duke of Guienne ioyning
with them whom hee held enemies to the Crowne, aud continuing
his poursute of marriage with the Duke of Bourgondies
daughter,Army of the King in Guienne. might reuiue the League which he had smothered. This
feareA Prince can make no greater shew that he feares his vassall then when ^hee retires from him. Alexander by bis proclamation gaue leaue to all bannished men to returne into their Contries except the Thebanes, and therefore Eudamidas said that Alexander feared none but the Thebans. Plut. caused him to send 500. Lances with Foot-men and Canon
vnto the fronter of Guienne, deferring a more priuate
reuenge against the Earle of Armagnac vntill another time.
He felt it cruelly after the death of the Duke of Guienne, when
as the King sent the Lord of Beaujeu, Brother to to the Duke of
Bourbon,Seege of Lestore. the Cardinal of Alby, Bishop of Aras, the Seneshals of
Tholousa and Beaucaire, the Lord of Lude, with many other Captaines,
and a great nomber of Soldiers with Artillery, who laid
siege to Lestore and conti^^ed it sixe or seauen monthes.
The Earle of Armagnac sent them his Chancellor being Abbot
of PessantThe Deputies for the Earle of Arma^gnac were the Abbot of St. Denis and Bishop of Lombes, with the Lords of Barbasan, Raulsac and Palmarieux. to tell them that it was not needfull to imploy such
great forces against him,The Earle desires a safe Conduct to iustifie himselfe. that the Kings commandements should
find no resistance in his contry, that all was vnder his obedience and
disposition, yea his person, so as it would please the King to giue
him good security, that he might go vnto him to iustifie his life and
loyalty.
The offers were not accepted,It hath beene alwaies found strange that a subiect whose will should be conuerted into obedience and his reasons to humility, should capitulate with his Prince. The Duke of Nemours, the Earle of St. Paul, the Duke of Brittaine, and the Earle of Armagnac repented it to late the Capitulations of an Inferiour
beeing then more odious then they haue been since with Kings. Al
the Contry was ouerrunne, spoiled and ruined, and yet the Earle
would not suffer his people to defend themselues, declaring alwaies
that he was the Kings seruant, desiring nothing more then to
iustifie himselfe, offering to deliuer vp the Towne of Lestore, and

for a greater declaration of his will, hee caused the white Crosse
and the Armes of France, to be set vpon the Towers and Walles.
The Lord of Beaujeu and the Cardinall of Alby seing that without
hazarding the Kinges forces they might enter the place,Accord made with the E. of ^rmagnac. by an
accord which the King was not bound to keepe,This Maxime That a Prince being forced to make a peace or treaty to his disaduantage may fall from it at his pleasure, had already taken footing in the councells of Princes. they entred into
treaty with the Earle of Armagnac, and it was agreed: That the
said Lord of Beaujeu, as Lieutenant to the King, hauing speciall
power soe to doe, did pardon all crimes and delicts which he might
haue committed against the King, as wel in adhering vnto the Duke
of GuienneThe Earle of Armagnac had followed the D. of Guienne in the warre of the Common weale, and since had termed him selfe his Lieutenant Generall. as otherwise. That noe trouble nor hinderance should
be giuen to himnor his serua^ts going nor comming. That he might
goe safely vnto the King with a hundred or sixe-score Horses, without
Armes to iustifie himselfe of those crimes wherewith he was
charged, according to the offers made by him. That the Lord of
Beaujeu and the Cardinall of Alby should obtaine all Letters and
expeditions necessary for his better assurance. That in the meane
time he might remaine in his Countrey of Gascoine in what place
he should thinke good, except the Towne of Lestore, the which
should be deliuered into the hands of the Lord of Beaujeu.
It was also agreed that in case they gaue him not this assurance,A man of quality should desire nothing more then to make his innocency knowne, and to see himselfe purged from all accusa^ion. For the consideration of their honor many haue desired to be araigned. or
that the thinges promised were not effected, the Towne of Lestore
should be restored vnto him. The Lord of Beaujeu hauing receiued
the Kings commau^dement vpon this accord, and the assurance dema^ded,Lestore recouered by the E. of Armagnac.
he sent it vnto Barran, whereas he then was, by the which it was
granted him to goe vnto the King with threescore horse. But in steed
of going thither, he executed an enterprise, which he had vpon Lestore,
by the meanes of Iohn D. Aymier. The younger brother of Albert
surprised it,In the Earle of Armagnacs defence, it is said, that seeing that the Lorde of Beauieu commaunded him to void the Country, he required him to restore him the Towne of L^store seing that he had not any Town whether to retyre himselfe, and that it was deliuered. and tooke the Lord of Beaujeu with the Noble-men
and Gentle-men that were with him prisoners. D' Aymier was quartred
at Tours, and the younger brother of Albert, being Lord of St.
Basile, lost his head at Poitiers.
Hereupon new forces ar sent to the Cardinall of Alby and to
the Seneshals of Toulouza and Beaucaire to beesiege Lestore. The
siege continued three months, and the Cardinall seeing that force
would not preuale,To make men subiect either force or fraude must be vsed, Sparta was forced by Alexander, Siracusa deceiued by Denis. he added policy, for Townes and Common-weales
loose their liberties and are made subiect by the one or the
other. They propounded againe the precedent condition of the accord.A second accord made with the Earle of Armagnac
The Abbot of Pessans, Bishop of Lombes and Chancelor to the
Earle comes on his part to treat; they granted the assura^ce which he
desired to go vnto the King; a bolition of all thinges past, and of the
seruices which he had done in the Duchie of Guienne against the
King, pardon for the Noble-men and Gentle-men of his party, and of al
that had bene done in the surprise of the Town of Lestore.This treaty iustified the E. of Armagnac if it had bene represented, but it was not seene. They say that the Earles Secretary, who had it in his custody, was threatned to be ^ast into a well, if he deliuered it not to the Cardinall of Alby. In consideration
of this he deliuered vp Lestore vnto the King. The articles
were signed by the Cardinal Ranfort, Balsac, Gaston of Lyon, and Iohn
Daillon Lord of Lude, on Thursday the fourth of March 1472.

In execution of the treaty the Earle of Armagnac deliuered vnto
the Cardinall the Castell of Lestore, caused his men to disarme, and
retired his Cannon, making all the ports to be sett open to the
Kings men.They that trust are easily deceiued. The wise prepare themselues for dangers in assurances. In ipsa securitate animus ad difficilia se preparat. At this entry there was a great disorder, the treaty
was broken,Earle of Armagnac slaine vnder the assurance of a treaty. the Earle of Armagnac was slaine in his house, and cast
naked into the streets, the Townespoiled, the Countesse of Armagnac
carried prisoner into the Castell, and within fewe dayes after
was deliuered of a Sonne before her time, the Castell and walles of
the Towne were razed, and it was fiered in euery place, and in the
end all were intreated with that liberty which the rigor of war permits
against Townes and people that rebell.Razing, burning, and sacking, are the ordinary punishments of rebellious Townes. Alba was razed, Carthage burnt, the V^iens were r^oted out. So we finde in the Roman History vpon the punishment of reuolts and seditions, Muri deiecti senatus abductus.
Charles of Armagnac the Earles Brother was caried prisoner to
the Bastille.Charles of Armagnac a prisoner and mad. This Imprisonment which continued foureteen yeares
bred him wonderfull sorrowes and griefe, and as the passage is not
great from melancolly to madnes, his spirit grew weake, and made
him incapable to rouse the enemies of his howse. They gaue him
certaine Noble-men of the Countrey to be his gouernors.
Many haue written the Taking of Lestore, and the death of the
Earle of Armagnac after an other manner, and such, as if they
which had vndertaken to iustifie his memory had held it true, it
had not beene forgotten in their Apology.The Pagans did so much respect others as they held a Periur^d ma^ to deceiue the Gods. In sui ran^um perinde estimandum, qua^ si Iouem fesellicet, Deorum Iniurias Diis curae. Tacit. The more promises are colored with stra^ge ^aths and misteries, the more they are to be suspected. The Accord made betwixt the K. of Nauarre, and Charles Regent of France, was sworne vpon the Sacrament. They say therefore,
that the Cardinall of Alby entred into some treaty with the Earle
of Armagnac for the assurance whereof he vsed a damnable pollicy,Trechery most damnable. for seeing that the Earle feared to fall into the Kings hands, he
sware his promises by the most sollemne misteries of his Religion,
giuing halfe a consecrated Hoste vnto the Earle and himself taking
the other halfe. That in the meane time the soldiers slipt into
the Towne, and that the Earle, meaning to charge them, fearing
a surprise,Vntill the capitulation be made, all pollicies, all surprises are alowed. They laugh at them who suffering themselues to be surprised in those bargaines, cry out of disloialty. In courses of hostility there is nothing more excellent then deceipte, nothing more safe then distrust. they cryed out for succors, the Kings Armie entred
by the breaches which the cannon had made, the Towne was
spoiled and ruined, all were put to the sword, and the Earle slaine.
The Lord of Beaujeu with the other Gentle-men prisoners were
deliuered.
Such was the Tragicall and fatall end of the Earle of Armagnac.
Fortune, who desired to ouerthrow the greatnes of his house, blinded
his eyes that hee could not apprehend the dangers which did
threaten it. She had not a more powerfull instrument then the hatred
which the King bare him. A hatred conceiued long before, nourished
and augmented, by many free and hardy actions. He was therfore
inuironed with so many perplexities and perturbations as hee
needed no more to let him know her constancy, and to ^make her
not as straw which smoakesAffliction hurts some and ^rofits others, as in the same fire. Auruin rutilat, et palea fumat, et sub eadem tribula stipulae ^o^min^untur, frumenta purgantur. We must not consider that which is indured, but he that indures, and after what manner Tantum interest non qualia sed qualis quisque patiatur. Nam pari modo exagitatum exhalat horibiliter C^num et s^a^iter Fragrat vnguentum. Aug. but as a precious mettall which shines
and is purified in the fire. They were so extreame as if in the beginning

they had let him see the least part, or the choise of a cruell
death, with what a resolution would hee haue imbraced this, to auoid
the miseries of the other? The most violent torments which a
body can suffer are but light scratchings in respect of the burning
wounds of the hearts greefe. His Conscience gaue him deepe ones,
for they write that he had offended not onely the Kings Maiestie by
this third reuolt, but also that of the liuing God by a notable villanie,Incest of the Earle of Armagnac.
marrying with his owne Sister vnder a false dispensation.They say that Ambrose of Ca^bray Feferendarie to Pope Calixtus the fourth gaue this dispensation for money, for the which hee was accused and imprisoned in the Monasterie of Mont Oliuet. A
coniunction as abominable now by religion, as it was in former
times to be desired by the reason of necessitie.Wee reade in the 17. Book of the City of God an excelent passage vpon these incestuous marriages. Commixtio* sororu^ et fratrem quanto sit antiquior compellente necessitate, tant^ postea facta est damnabilior religione prohibente.
Presently after the death of King Lewis the eleuenth Charles of
Armagnac his brother besought King Charles the eight to restore
him to the lands and estats of the house of Armagnac, and to bee
admitted to answer the accusations layed against his brother shewing
that by the seuerity of King Lewis the eleuenth and by the great
credit which his enemi^s had,Memory of the Earle of Armagnac restored. hee could neuer obtaine a safe conduct
to come and iustifie himselfe. King Charles by the aduice of
the Princes, Prelats and other Noblemen of the Realme graunted
it, the third of Aprill 1483. and he was restored to the possessions of
the house of Armagnac. After whose death many pretended the
succession.The Pretendants were Catherine of Alencon Countesse of Laual. Charles D. of Alencon, Charlotte of Armagnac, wife to Charles of Rohan. Alain of Albret. The Cardinals of Luxembourg. Louise of Lyon wise to Charls bastard of Bour ^on Seneshall of Thoulouza. Francis Philebert of Seissell. Afterwards the Court of Parlament by a decree of
the seuenth of September 1510.The Court of Parliament declared the goods of Iohn of Armagnac forfeited to the King, and the seuenth of Sept. 1470. Fortie yeares after on the same day they receiue his heires to purge his crime, and to rasie his memory. receiued them to iustifie the
Earles memory.
Charles Duke of Alencon, whose Grandfather had married the
Earle of Armagnac's Sister, drew his iustificacion from the same
reasons by which he was accused. They said he had receiued Letters
from the King of England, and that Iohn Bon had brought them
vnto the King, with the answere. His innocencie therein was very
apparant, for if he had receiued his letters and would haue made any
answere he would not haue giuen them back vnto the bearer.
They were cunning practises, said the Duke of Alencon, of such as
haue gouerned Lewis the eleuenth to tempt the fidelity of the Earle
of Armagnac and to haue a share in his spoile. That if Iohn Bon
had been a true messenger to the King of England, as he made shew
to be, he had not carried the Letters vnto the king.
That the Earle of Armagnac was naturally an enemy to the English,Earle of Armagnac a great enemie to the English. and being at Font arabic, he carried himselfe in such sort towards
them, as men wondred how he could be banished for fauoring
them.He that will iustifie himselfe must liue in such sort among them where hee is exiled as his Innocencie may be apparent, and his returne more easie. There haue been banished men, who for the Integritie of their liues haue been more happie among strangers then in their owne houses. He would not suffer his seruants to conferre or conuerse
with the English which did trafficke in that Contrie: and it
hapened one day as the yong men of Bayonne were come to dance
before the Countesse of Armagnac, his wife, an English man hauing
a red crosse vpon his brest slipt into the hall, with the people
who are accustomed to follow dances. The Earle who held the
meeting of an English man with a red Crosse for as bad a presage,

as the ancients did a Moore with a crowne of Cypres,The ancient Superstitio^ held it a bad presage to meet with a M^ore, as Plutarque notes in Brutus. The Emperor Seuerus meeting a Moore carrying a Crown of Cypres on his head. Iratus ab occulis remoueri precepit et coloris eius tactus emine, et Corona. commanded
his Gentlemen, namely Carbon and pettie Santignem to
driue him out, and as they ranne after him with their naked daggers,
Mauleon his Stuard stept betwixt them, saying that they were
in a strange countrie, and that the Townes-men might rise against
such an act, which the Earle of Armagnac seeing, he tooke his Stuards
staffe and chased the English man out of his lodging, making
him to leape downe the stayres.
That being parted from Fontarabie, to goe vnto the Duke of
Guienne, by chance he found an English man at the Sea side, whom
he caused to be taken and carried him prisoner to Lestore, onely
for that he was an Englishman.
King Francis the first,King Francis quit his pretensions to the Contie of Armagnac.Marguerite of Orleans or of valois the onely sister to King Francis 1. was first married to Charles D. of Alencon, and next to Henry the second of that name, the 26. King of Nauarre. the first yeare of his raigne, by his letters
pattents giuen at Compeigne in February 1514. resigned vnto the
Duke of Alencon and to the Lady Margaret his wife and their
children, all his interest, vpon certaine conditions, the which happening,
it fell to the house of Albret.
Iohn Duke of Alencon was so wonderfully grieued at the miserable
fortune of the Earle of Armagnac, as all his affections grew
cold to the Kings seruice, and carrying alwaies from that time
this vlcer in his brest he sought the Duke of Bourgondies protection.
All which did but hasten his miserie and the losse of his
libertie.
We must end this discourse with these words, that the reputation
of the seruices of the Lords of the house of Armagnac done to
France against the English, freed him from all suspition of intelligence
with them, being most certaine that they were neuer no
good English men, they haue alwaies resisted them, they haue spent
their liues and goods to expell them out of the realme, and had
detested them, hauing slaine their Predecessors cruelly and inhumainly.
Bernard E. of Armagnac Constable of France for maintayning the quarel of the Crowne, was slaine at Paris, and flead. Hee serued the King so courragiously as all good Frenchmen were called Armagnacs. But such was the misery of the Age as they must aduow
that which was beleeued more by coniecture then by assistance. He
that is held of all men to be wicked, is forced to doe wickedly.
All waters returne into the sea from whence they flow. This
goodly Prouince of Armagnac consisting in the lands which are
called the Counties of Armagnac and Falensac, base Armagnac,
Perdiac, Biran and Baran in the Viconties of Lomagne, Auuillar,
Fesensaguet and Brouliois. In the Siegneuries of Lectoure, Auzan,
the base riuer whereas Castellnau stands, and Malbourquet,
Aure, Magnoac, Barrouce and Nestes is wholly come to the crowne
of Nauarre, vnder the raigne of Henry of Albret King of Nauarre,
Earle of Foix and Armagnac.
FINIS.



THE CONTENTS OF
of the sixth BOOKE.

1 THe Duke of Bourgondies discontent for the death of the Duke of
Guienne.
2 Cruelties committed at Nesle in Vermandois.
3 Memorable Seege of Beauuais.
4 Spoile done by the Duke of Bourgondies Armie in Normandy.
5 The King drawes the Duke of Brittaine from all intelligence with the
Duke of Bourgondy.
6 Ambitious desseines of the Duke of Bourgondy, for the which hee
goes to the Emperour Frederic to Treues.
7 Assembly at Bouuines, and the Resolution taken against the Constable.
8 The King and Constable parle vppon a causey, hauing a barre betwixt
them.
9 New desseignes of the Duke of Bourgondy in Germany.
10 The King stirres vp the Arch Duke of Austria, the Suisses, and some
Townes in Germany against the Duke.
11 Peter of Hagembach, the Duke of Bourgondies Lieftenant, beheaded at
Brissac.
12 Army of the Duke of Bourgondies in the County of Ferrette, and vppon
the fronter of the County of Bourgondy.
13 Places taken and burnt by the Kings troupes vppon the fronter of
Picardy and in Artois.
14 Ambassage sent by the King vnto the Emperour Frederic, who makes
answer by an Apologie.
15 Continuation of the Siege of Nuze: the Constables pollicy.
16 Edward King of England passeth into France, and sends Letters of
defiance vnto the King.
17 Wisdome of the King to auoid this storme

18 The Duke of Burgondy leaues the siege of Nuze.
19 The Constable failes of his promis made to the King of England and the
Duke of Burgundy.
20 Ouerture of a peace betwixt the two Kings, and conferences of their deputies.
21 The King labours to make the Duke of Burgundy vnderstand the Constabels
double dealing.
22 Truce for nine yeares betwixt the two kinges, where-with the Duke of
Burgundy is discontented, and the wordes he had vpon that subiect with
the King of England.
23 Good cheere made to the English at Amiens.
24 Enteruiew of the two Kings vpon the Bridge of Pyquigny to sweare the
peace.
25 Wordes which escaped the King vpon the treatie of the peace.




THE HISTORY
of LEVVIS the XI.
THE SIXTH BOOKE.
IF the death of the Duke of Guienne
had not put this exception into the
Kings mouth, Matters are changed, his
word which wasThe simple word of a Prince bindes him as much as othes doe priua^ persons. Alfo^so Panormi in his life. as much as all the
othes of his religion, bound him to
restore Amiens and St Quentin to the
Duke of Bourgundy. The Duke, who
was then in Ar^ues to recouer them,
seeing that the King had changed his
minde, resolued to loose all, or to
haue all.
Hee wrote vnto the Townes to rise against him, and speakes
more vnworthily of him,Death of the Duke of Guien^e breakes the Treatie. then Artaban K* of Persia did of Tiberius,
Suetonius writes that Artaban railed of Tyberius by his letters reproaching him with his mu^thers, Parricides cowardise and veluptuous^esse, Parricidia, caedes ignauiam and Luxuriam. he exclaimes of him as a Tyrant ouer his subiects, a Murtherer of
his brother, and periured of his promises, and in this fury he begins
to make war by fire, which he had neuer done. A kinde of hostilitie
vnknowne to Christians, and to those generous Nations which carry
not their sword to kill, but in fighting,To spoile the vanqu^shed, to put th^m tora^some* and to wast their countries is the iustice of warre, but this was neuer allow^d ^fter a victorie, w^en as an enemie yeelds. It is a wicked thing saith Plato in his commonweale, to burne, spoile and make one an others countrie wholly desolate, it sufficeth to carrie away their annuall frui^s. and who hold that the
fewer they kill the more there remaine to honour their triumph.
He besieged Nesle in Vermandois,Cruelties committed at the taking of Nesle. into the which the King had
put a Captaine called Pettie Picard with three hundred Archers of
the Isle of France, who defended the Bourguignons assaults valiantly,
but being prest by necessitie, hee accepted of a composition for
himselfe and his men, to depart with their liues and Armes. But
the trecherie was strange beeing followed by an excesse of brutish
cruelty. As soone as the besieged were disarmed, the Bourgundians
^lue them. Euery man thought that the Church should
haue been a Sanctuarie vnto him, euery man ranne thither, and
the souldiers made such a slaughter, as the bloud ranne in all places.
The Captaine and his companions were hanged.

The Duke was no lesse pleased with the bloud then the sacke of
the Towne. Entring into the Church he spake these words more
fitting for a Busiris, then for a Christian Prince, and of the bloud
of the most Christian Kings.In the Chronicle of Lewis the eleuenth these words are read vppon the desolation of Nesle. On Friday the 12. of Iune 1472. the Duke of Bourgundy entred the church on horseback, the which was halfe a foote deep with the bloud of poore Creatures which lay naked and dead there: And when as the said Bourguignon saw them in this maner, hee began to smile and said that he saw a goodly sight, and that he had with him many good butchers. Behold this is goodly, I haue good Butchers.Inhumane words of the D. of Bourgundy.
The griefe for the death of Monsieur, and for the losse of
S. Quentin, transported him to these outrages, which then were
noted by the Cassandras of those times, to bee the chiefe cause
which prouoked Gods Iustice to cut off the course of his daies in reuenge
of innocent bloud.A cruel prince continues not long. The Emperor Anastasius the fourth, was so, and had no religion. In the end an old man with a sower countenance appeared vnto him in his d^eame, and said vnto him, for thy impieties I cut off fourteen yeares of thy (...), and he dyed instantly. Paul Diacre. Lib. 15
As this Princes hart was inflamed with choller, so his cruelties
co^tinued, for hauing caused Nesle to be razed, he presented himself
before Roy, which yeelded without defence. Louiset of Balagny,
Mouy and Rubempre, who had about two hundred Lances, went
forth with the losse of all that was within it. The victors gained by
this bootie aboue an hundred thousand crownes. From thence hee
thought to surprise Beauuais; the measure of the ladders were as ill
taken as his designes. Choller carrying him to rashnes,when as the iud^e^ent is darkened with Ch^ller, Crue^ty makes it to take strange resolutions. Valentinean was cruell because he was cholerick, As soone as any word was spoken crosly vnto him, Choller transported ^im beyond the bounds of reason and was the cause of his death, all his inward parts were found dryed vp and burnt. and that
vnto indiscretion hauing failed in his first designe, he desired, saith
Phil. de Commines, to take it by assault and burne it. He caused them
to discharge two peeces of Ordinance, which made a great hole in
the gate, whereas the besieged defended themselues couragiously,
and in the end set fire of it,Siege of Beaunais. which troubled the assailants, so as they
could not stop the approches towards Paris. An error which ruined
their designe. An error which a Generall of an armie should
foresee, and which had vndone Caesar before Alexia,Caesar wonne great reputation at the siege of Alexia, where he did besiege and was besieged. There were a hundred and seuentie thousand men within the Towne, and three hundred thousand without, yet he kept them from ioyning, and forced the Towne to yeeld. Plut. if he had not
preuented it. An error which was the preseruation of Beauuais, and
did shew the iniustice of the enterprise, and that there is in heauen
an all-seeing eye, which blinds malice. Innocencie were in a hard
case, if wickednes were alwaies accompanied with wisedome, shee
hath more furie and rage, then conduct and resolution to hurt.
These approches remaining free,Succors sent by the K. to Beauuais. the besieged were releeued
with victuals and munition from Paris and Orleans,Orleans relea^ed Bea^^ais with a hundred pipes of wine. Paris with Pioners, Canons, Poulder, Bowes and Arrowes. and with good
numbers of foote and horse. The chiefe honor of these succors is
due vnto the memory of the Earle of Dammartin, and to the Marshals
Ioachim and Laheac, who being followed by many other Captaines
were no sooner entred, but hearing the assault, left their
horses with women which kept them, and went directly to the wals
to repulse the enemies and their assault, the which continued from
seuen of the clocke vntill eleuen before noone, on Thursday the 9.
of Iuly 1472. in the which the Duke of Bourgundy lost fifteene or
sixteene hundred men.
The next dayThe History names them that were at this succors, the Earle of Dammartin, the Marshals Ioachim, and Loheac, William of Vallee, Crusol, Rubempre, Estout^uille, T^rey, Bueill, Salezard, Vignoles and Croy. Captaine Salezard performed a generous Act:

Occasion,Braue exploits of Captaine Salezard.Wee must alwaies watch for occasions and embrace them, Vespasian did often vse the words w^ich Pittacus had taught him, (...) Know the time, they said at Rome, I came in time. As we must not vnder take any thing before an occasion, so we may not let it passe. without the which it is folly to vndertake, and also follie
to let it slip gaue him the meanes. The losse of so many men in
this assault, the expectation and feare of worse had strooke a great
amazement into the assaylants armie. He made a sally at the breake
of day, surpriseth the enemie in his Campe, fires it, kils all hee incounters,
wins two Bombards wherewith the Towne had beene
battered, two Serpentines, one great Canon of Brasse, which they
called one of the twelue Peeres, which the King had lost at the Battell
of Montlehery.
Although that in these occasions many haue no more share in
the paine and perill,An vnprofitable presence ought to haue no share in the glory of a painfull action. then the flye hath in the labour of the Oxe,
or the running of the horse, yet all say we haue pursued, wee haue
vanquished, and euery man ascribes vnto himselfe the best part of
the glory. The men which were at the siege of Beauuais could not
deny it vnto women,Courage of the women at Beau^ais. for they presented themselues valiantly, and
more then manlike vpon the walles, casting wild-fire stones and
scalding oyle and water vpon the enemies. There was to be seene
in the Iacobins Church of Beauuais an ensigne which a woman
called Ioane Foucquet wrested out of an Ensigne-bearers hands who
had gotten to the top of the wall. This did shew that vertue
makes no distinctionIn Platoes Commonweale, women are called to politick and militarie charges. Antistenes did not distinguish masculine from seminine vertues of sexe, and that there are women to bee
found, which may teach men to liue and die.
The Duke of Brittanie had promised the Duke to come before
RouenIf the Duke of Guienne had not dyed, saith Phil. de Com. I beleeue the K. would haue bin much troubled, for the Brittons were ready, and had greater intelligence within the Realme then euer, all which failed by reason of this death. to help him to besiege it.Spoile done to the Duke of Burgundies Armie. The Duke of Bourgundy went,
but hee appeared not, for Monsieurs death had made all his desires
subiect to the yoke of feare and reason, so as he was contented
to burne all that quarter of Normandie, euen vnto the
gates of Diepe.
The same furies of warre which the Duke had caused to be seene
in Normandie were heard vpon the frontier of Champagne, wheras
the Earle of Roussy, the Constables sonne, led them. The Earle
Dauphin of Auuergne did the like in Bourgundy, and in all places
the victory was not famous but by the lamentable estate wherin the
vanquished were left.
The King had affairesThat victory is famous which doth subdue an enemy, and not make him perpetually miserable. The Consull Popelius stript the Ligurians of their goods, and sold them as slaues, hauing vanquished them. The (...) found this Act to be cruell and reuoked all that had been done, concluding Claram victoriam vincendo non saeuiendo in afflictos fieri. Tit. Liu. in diuers places: when as he turned head
against the Duke of Bourgundy, he was sure to haue the Duke of
Brittanie at his heeles, and hauing seperated them with a designe
to pacifie the one and content the other, he sees them vnited againe
to make warre against him. The Duke of Brittanies Embassadors
came vnto the King being at Pont de See, and brought words and
offers of affection and seruice on the Dukes behalfe, who feared
that the King would make some sodaine inuasion,The D. of Brittaine demands a peace. hauing an armie
of fifty thousand men ready to fall vpon his country.
The King with all his forcesA Prince should neuer doe all that be may against his enemies. would not doe what he might doe
against these gyant-like enterprises, reseruing his thunder-bolts to

an other season. The more slowly Princes take Armes, the more
difficult it is to draw them out of armies; hee resolued to vanquish
without fighting, and considering that the Lord of Lescun was the
first linke of the chaine of the Duke of Brittanies Councell, that all
the iudgement, conduct and experience in Brittanie did lye in the
person of this Nobleman,Phil. de Com. speaking of the Lord of Lescun saith, that there was neither iudgement nor vertue in Brittanie, but what proceeded from him. who after the death of the Duke of
Guienne his master had retired himselfe to the Duke of Brittanie;
a good and a loyall French man, who neuer would consent that
the places of Normandie should bee giuen vnto the English, hee
thought that if he could draw him to his seruice, the accord which
he should make with the Duke of Brittanie would be more firme,
and withdrawing him from the Duke of Bourgundies alliance hee
should make him so weake as all his forces would not suffice for his
defence.The King drawes the D. of Brittanie from the Duke of Bourgundies alliance ThereWhen as the Prince hath won him that is in most credit and authoritie with him with whom he treats hee doth worke his affaires safely and with aduantage. is nothing so easie as to bring one whether
necessitie driues him. The Lord of Lescun being won giues the
Duke his master to vnderstand that there is no other safety for his
affaires but the Kings protection. The accord was made so as the
Duke might haue eight thousand pounds starling. The Lord of
Lescun had a pension of six hundred pounds starling, foure thousand
crownes in readie money, the Order of S. Michel, the Earledome
of Cominges, halfe the gouernement of Guienne, the Seneshallships
of Vennes and Bourdelois. The Captainship of one
of the Castells of BourdeauxK. Charles the seuenth hauing taken Bourdeaux againe, he caused two Castles to be built. Castell Trumpet towards the Sea, and that of Du Han towards the firme land. which King Charles the seuenth had
caused to be built, and those of Bayonne and St. Seuert. Essars
and Souppleinuille, instruments of this negotiation, were also rewarded,
Phil. des Essars a Gentlema^ of the house of Brittany had 4000. Crownes giuen and six score pounds star^ing for yearely pension, with the Baillewike of Meaux, and was made Master of the Riuers and Forrests of France. Souppleinuille who did belong to the Lord of Lescun, had six thousand crownes in gift, a pension, and offices fit for his qualitie. the Kings bounty could not suffer any seruice to passe without
recompence.Truce annuall betwixt the King and the Duke of Bourgundy.
The affaires of Brittany being compounded, the King went into
Picardie. It was his and the Duke of Bourgundies custome euery
yeare to make a truce for six monthes, in the beginning of Winter:
during the which there were many voiages and conferences to
quench the causes of warre, which they held to be shut in the Constables
thoughts, who began to stand in feare of the Duke and to
keep aloofe from the King. Philip de Commines saith that the Chancellor
of Bourgundy came to make it, but as it was the first yeare
of his comming to Court, he was not very curious to vnderstand
the truth, the which is drawne out of the Articles that were published
and signed by the Earle of S. Paul Constable of France, and by
Philip of Croy deputed for the King, and Guy of Brunen Lord of
Imbercourt, and Anthony Rollin Lord of Emery for the Duke of
Bourgundy. The Deputies promised to cause this Truce to be ratified
by the first of December, it ended the first of Aprill following,
betwixt which they should meete at AmiensThis assembly was appointed in Amiens the first of December 1472. to treat a peace and the restitution of St Valery which the D. of Bourgundy demanded. to treat a
Peace.
The Constable following the intention of the King his Master,
and that which had been treated with the Lord of Lescun, would
not haue the Duke of Brittany comprehended in the Truce among
the Allies of Bourgundy. The Deputies shewed that the Duke of

Brittany their Ally did relye vpon themTo forget Allies in Treati^s and Accords is an iniury against the lawe of friendship. Vnde maiores cum qui socium fe^ellisles in virorum bonorum numero non puta^^erunt haberi oportere. Cic. our Elders did not hold him worthy to bee put in the number of good men that deceiued his companion. that they could not forget
them in the number of their frends; that he had not disclaimed
their friendship; that they held him yet for their Allie, and that
he had often abandoned them by Letters and words, and yet had
beene firme to them in effect. That youth did inflame his bloud,
but reason did still reclaime him. That the Duke did then name
him among his Allies, leauing it to his choise by the first of February
whether he would be comprehended among the Kings Allies
or the Dukes. There was no remedy. The King would haue
fifteene daies to name his Allies, and eight dayes after to adde such
as he should forget.
The Duke of Bourgundy,Ambitions designes of the Duke of Bourgundy. who would spend the time of Truce
in great imaginations, which filled his head with fumes, and his
heart with perpetuall flames, propounded to allye himselfe vnto
the Emperor. He desired to extend the bounds of his Empire from
one Sea vnto the other, his spirit went still on and neuer lookt
backe.It is an error in Princes that they seldome or neuer look behind the^. They consult vpon the passage, but neuer vpon the returne. Leopold Archduke of Austria talking how hee should passe an Army of twentie thousand men into the Can^on of Su^its. Kune of Stocke his i^ster said vnto him: I will not follow thee thou talkest how thou shalt enter, but thou neuer dreamest how thou shalt come forth. Leopold was defeated a^ Morgarten. Munster. The like was said vnto K. Francis the first by Amaril, vppon his proposition to passe th^ Alpes. He held himself King alreadie of one part of Gaule, hee
deuoured all Germany in Imagination: God had giuen him great
Prouinces which he thought deserued a more stately Title then of
Duke of Earle: for the obtaining whereof hee made a voyage to
Treues to the Emperor Frederi^, hauing made a very sumptuous
preparation for the solemnitie of that publike declaration of King
of Gaule-Belgicke.
He came thither about St Michell in the yeare 1473. the Emperor
went to meet him,D. of Bourgundy goes to the Emperour to (...). conducted him into the Towne, and offred
him his lodging. The Duke was contented to returne and lodge in
a Monasterie without the Towne. To haue that which he pretended
he offred vnto the Emperor the marriage of his Daughter with
the Arch-duke Maximilian his sonne, who succeeded him in the
Empire. It was an Act of wisedome in the DukeA Prince should alwaies prouide that his successor be not vncertaine Ne successor in^erto ^it. This certaintie preuents, practises and partialities., to prouide for
the succession of his Estates, seeing that he had but one daughter,
but it was vanitie to buy the Title of a King so deerely. The crowne,
the Scepter and other royall ornaments were made, there was no
let but in the Emperor why the Duke did not vse them, but hauing
demanded vnpleasing conditions, their enteruiew brake off, and
neither Royaltie nor marriage succeeded.
The Emperor not to delay him and abuse him, refused him the
Crowne sodainely,Although* they hold sodaine refusals to be the best, and that he which denies speedily abuseth least, yet when he that is refused mightie and may be reuenged, they must win time wherewith all things are accommodated. departed secretly from Treues, and imbarked
vpon the Rhin without giuing him any answere,The Emperor mockes at the dukes demand. not thinking himselfe
bound to bid him farewell that was come without his priuitie.
The Duke was left alone with his mouth open to the ayre of his
hopes, swearing by S. George that Frederic should repent it, and that
he would haue by force that which he refused him vpon his intreatie
and merit. They continued a month together, the publike discourses
were of the meanes to make warre against the Turke, the

priuate past about this Royaltie. Thus they parted both as much
discontented, as they seemed pleased at their meeting.Cranzius who writes this enterview hath these wordes. Tandem minori alacritate digresti quam congressi sunt visi, In the end they parted with lesser ioy then they came to gether.
The Duke of Bourgondy visited the Lands that were ingaged vnto
him,The Duke passeth by the County of Ferette. where his soldiers intreated the poore Peasants so cruelly,
as from that time euery man studied how to returne to his first maister:
The Duke was no sooner gone out of Brisac, but the soldiers spoiled the towne, co^mitting a thousand insolencies and bu^nt the Augustins Monastery. Colmar refused to open her gates. He past his Christmas at
Brisac and there ended the yeare 1473. In the beginning of the
next he returned to Montbelliard, from thence to Besancon and
then to Dijon.
The ministers of both Princes foreseeing that whilst the Constable
liued Peace would be vncertaine,1474. and that one and the selfe
same Sunne would see it spring vp and dye, they make religious remonstrances
and full of Conscience vnto their maisters, and dispose
them to a good reconciliation, for the which by their consents
there was a conference appointed at Bouuines,Assembly at Bouines.This Conserence of Deputies for the K. and Duke of Bourgondy at Bouines, in the yeare 1474. was sought by Imbercourt to reuenge the iniury which the Constable had done him at Roy. neere vnto Namur.
The King sent the Lord of Curton, Gouernour of Limosin,
and Iohn Heberge Bishop of Eureux. For the Duke of Bourgondy
came William Hugonet his Chancellour and the Lord of Imbercourt.
The first proposition was to make away the Constable who was
much aflicted for the Duke of Guiennes death, it was the swarme
which gaue him both hony and waxe.A great authority ca^not maintaine it selfe in a season when it is not respected: that of the Constable could not continue but in warre: warre was his element, it entertained his Estats, and made him to bee respected both of the King and the D. of Bourgondy. They held him to be a spirit
of discord from whence came all Inuentions to make peace of no
continuance and warre euerlasting,Resolution taken to do iustice of the Constable. and to maintaine his authority
in Confusion. They said that he was like vnto the bay tree in the hauen
of Amicus which they called mad, for that one branch of it
being put into a ship, all that were in it fell to iarres and deuision.
wherevppon they resolued that who so could first seaze on him,
should put him to death within eight dayes after his taking,
or deliuer him to the other party, to dispose of him at his
pleasure.
The best resolutions vanish away as soone as they are discouered:
The Constable had an inkling of this proposition,Great affairs should be managed with secrecy and iudgement. The resolution taken at (...) against the Constable was not secret, he was aduertised, and by this meanes anoided the storme which threat^ed him, but this was but to deferre an ineuitable mischefe. and assembled
all the trickes and deuises of his braine to breake off this assembly:
he aduertised the King how the Duke had sought him,The Conble creepes into the Kings fauor to draw him
to his party, and of his great attempts to shake his loyalty, and with
what constancy and generosity hee had reiected his offers, hauing
no desire to affect any greatnes more assured nor any assurance more
happy then the seruice of his King, without the which there is not any
thing in the world, that deserued his loue or remembrance; beseeching
him. Not to beleeue the passionsIt is necessary to haue a sound and perfect Iudgment to discerne with what intention aduertisments are giuen, which concerne the loyalty of a man of credit, for oftentimes they are the practises of Enemies to make them frustrate. When a Prince is iealous of his good seruants, he remaines at the discretion of others Zenon vsed this policy against Phalaris. of the Deputies of Bounines,
who set his head to sale to make a cruell sacrifice thereof to the Duke of
Bo^rgondies re^enge, and to satisfie his discontent for that he could not

draw him aliue vnto his seruice, nor perswade him to so base a treason
against his Prince.
The King beleeued him the more easily, for that he knew well that
the Deputies of Bouines were the Constables enemies in particular,
and desired to find their reuenge in his disgrace, with the two
Princes.
The priuateA man that hath power and authority, and aspirces to more cannot indure to bee ^rost or contradicted. Crastus being in an assembly which was held ^or the diuiding of the gouernme^ts of Prouinces, seeing himselfe gainsayed by another, bee flrooke him on the face with his first, and sent him away all bloudy. Plut. hatred grew for that the Constable in an assembly
held at Roy had giuen the lye vnto the Lord of Himbercourt.A lye giuen ^ the Lord ^ Himbercourt. A
man of authority and great dignity will not be contradicted, all the
reynes of patience breake, but truth is so precious an ornament vnto
thersoule, as when it is disroabed thereof it is no more knowne. A
lyar is like vnto a counterfeit peece, no man will take it: and when as
the tongue hath once learned to lye and to gainsay her Conscience,
it is hard to reclaime her. Euery lye, especially in a gentleman, deserues
degradation of Armes for a Month, or bannishment from
Court and algood company for certaine daies.Alfonso K. of Castile sonne to King Ferdinand being at Burgos in the yeare 1368. made an order of Knighthood which he called the order of the hand, wher among other statutes there were three remarkable. That the knight shold bee alwaies true, and that he that should tel a lye, should goe a month without a sword. That a Knight should alwaies haue good armes in his^ Chamber good horses in his stable, a good la^ce at his gate, and a good sword at his girdle, vppo^ pain to loose th^e name of a Knight: That who so had eate^ any stinking things, as Garlick and Onyons should absent himselfe a month from the Court, and not sit at the Knight tables.
Wherevppon the King who considered what force this iniury
might haue with Himbercourt, dispatcht a Gentleman presently
with commandement not to probeed in any resolutions which concerned
the Constable,The Constable gets a sa^e conduct to come vnto the King. whom he commanded to come vnto him and
gaue him all assurances which hee demanded, hee so much desied
to draw him from the Precipice whether his Ambition led
him.
The King came neere vnto St. Quentin, spending the time in hunting
about Noion, Compeigne and la Fere, to busie himselfe during
his expectation of the Constable, who knowing the humor of this
Prince to be full of reuenge and disdaine, and that contrary to the
nature of Caesar hee neuer forgat iniurie, hee did capitulate for his
safety of going and returning with conditions too hardy for a subiect.
His health was in humility, and he sought it in pride,It is a great error in a Prince to intreat a subiect like vnto a Soueraigne Prince. By enteruiewes of such inequalitie, there cannot grow any thing but contempt of the greater and vndoubted danger for the inferior which
made his precedent faults to be more apparant, and the least to bee
reputed great.
They were forced to make a barre vppon a Causey three leagues
from Noyon,He comes vnto the K. vpon a Cauley. toward la Fere vppon a riuer where the Constable
had caused the Foards to be rais^d. This barre did assure that which
was on his side, for the King had twise as many men as hee,
not daring to limit the number of those that should follow his
maiesty.
He came first vnto the Causey, and the King sent Phillip de Commi^es
to make his excuse for that he made him attend. The King came
presently after and found the Constable armed with his Cuirasse vnder
a loose Cassock, and followed by 300. Gentlemen. An act of
a distrustfull spirit and a guilty Conscience.Bodies which are easie to purge are also to cure, but when the humor resists the Phisicke, the cure is very difficult. The Constable was sicke of a burning Feuer of Ambition, the humor which entertained it was pride, insteed of purging it, hee nourished it withall that might augment it, presenting himselfe before his Prince, as before his companion. A vassall should neuer

In certaine Nations barbarously wise, no man how great soeuer presents himselfe before the King but in a tat^ered roabe which couers his good garments, to the end that al the po^pe should remain in the King. shew himselfe with too much pomp or too great a traine before his
Prince. They are well aduised who do therin rather follow the way of
the ancient simplicity, then the new pollicy and vain ostentation which
the flattery of the late-come hath so much commended. But in the
most perfect iudgements we see great imperfections. To stand alwaies
firme and neuer trippe, is an admirable and diuine thing.
The King obserued the Constables brauery, yet made no shew
of it,The King dissembles the Constables pride and insolencie. and for that hee held dissimulation the cheefe of all royall vertues,
he did not forbeare to commend his wisedom and gouernment,
desiring that he should beleeue the contrary to that which his heart
thought.It is a means to reclaime a spirit which hath strayed from his loyalty and du^y, not to seeme to doubt of either of them, a seruant hath been of^times made faithfull in thinking him to bee so. Fiue or sixe Noblemen and Gentlemen which were at this
Parle, grew amazed at his arrogancy, which in the end would ruine
him that did relye vpon it, would ouerthrow this Colosse, and break
it in as many peeces as it had designes.
It was a very sensible discontent vnto the KingIt is a Coros^ue to a great Prince to see a trecherous subiect treat and capitulate with him, like vnto enemies. Tiberius could not indure it in Tacfarinates although hee had great aduantages in Affrike demanding certaine Townes of safety and retreat: he held himself contemned and the Senate of Rome wronged (saith ^acitus) to see that a trecher and a theefe treated with him like a iust enemy. Quod deserto et Predo hostium more ageret. to see that a subiect
who had left him, treated with him like vnto a iust enemy. As he
aduanced on his side of the barre, the Constable did the like to meet
him, and doing his duty to his maiesty he began to make his excuse,
for that the iust apprehension of his enemies bad designes,The Constable excused himselfe for that hee came armed. who were
about his maiesty, and not able to charge him with any crime, charged
him with enuy, had forced him to come in that equipage, and
to seeke a place of safety and an assured traine, least their bad intents
should be more powerfull then his maiesties wisedom and bounty:
That he knew many built their hopes vpon his graue, and the succession
of the office of ConstableMany times great men haue no greater enemies then their great offices and dignities. Those that effect them handie to their ruine My house of Albe (said a condemned Citizen) is the cause of my miseries. A quality which he desired not to hold but for
his maiesties seruice, and to make it knowne that it could not bee conferred
vppon an honester man: That in all thinges which did concerne the
seruice of so great a Prince, and of so good a King, his affections should
be without bounds
The King receiued him graciously, intreated him as his equall,
and seemed not to come with the maiesty of a King.The King receiued him graciously. Hee pastMaiestie must alwaies accompany a Prince, and if he will abate any thing it must not be in publike. The Emperor Adrian was grieued when they tooke from him the content to lay aside Maiestie and be familiar with his seruants. Dyon. the
barre for a greater proofe of his confidence, and said vnto him: That
he was welcome, that he would not haue him returne without all the assurances
that he could desire of his loue: That he would forget all that was
past, and respect him as the man whom hee did esteeme most, and held
most profitable for his Realme, that whatsoeuer hee should do for him
would be lesse then his merit and desire. These words which seemed to
come from the heart and from the purest of the Kings thoughtes, bewitcht
the Constables sences, soe as hee could not consider that
Princes doe couer their disdaine with false and deceitfull imbracings.
The Constable seeing that he had past so many sandes and shelfes
without shipwrack, was nothing the more humble, not caring to
oppose his modestyCurtesie appeaseth hatred, modestie Enuie, Vertue Contempt, and wisedome teacheth to march straight betwixt ennie and contempt. to the enuy of some, nor his discretion to the

contempt of others. He past the barre on the Kings side, followed
him to Noion, and renewes the promises of fidelity which he had made
to abandon all Intelligences and practises which he had with his enemies,
and gaue a promise in writing vnto the King. They were the seals
whereof they spake in those times, and are so often seene in the
History of Alliances and Treaties of Peace. This being done he returned
to St. Quentin* being amazed in himselfe how the King had
so cunningly dissembledThe dissembling of apparant faults and which cannot be disguised is dangerous for a Prince, for he whose fault bee d^ssebles growes more distrustful and feares that it is to take reuenge at a more conuenie^t time which feare makes him resolue to preuent it, Valens hauing discouered some soldiers faults did not punish the^, yet he accused them least that dissembling should make them resolue to do worse. Et ne dissimulans suspect^or foret. so bold an affront.
The King sad that with patience and letting him alone hee would
effect his will. When as resolution and custome incounter with
power and authority, there is nothing impossible. Moreouer a great
courage maisters all, things goe from one extreame vnto another,
that which is raised vp falls, the hard is mollified, the obseure, profound
and secret is discouered, wee must onely win time which doth
dayly produce changes contrary to mens immaginations, yet the
Kings seruants murmured that hee had indured the contempt of a
Vassall. That a subiect, said they, should bee so rash, as to demand
assurance to come vnto his Prince. The SuissesCaesar would not rest satisfied with the Suisses promises without bestages. Diuico one of their Co^manders answered for them that they had learned of their elders alwaies to receiue hostages and not to giue, and that the people of Rome would know what to say. Caes. lib. 1. were greeued (although
ruined and in disorder) to giue it vnto Caesar, saying, that they
had beene accustomed to receiue and not to giue. What Insolency and presumption
after that he had obtained assurance to choose out a place of aduantage
vppon a Causey, garded with soldiars, presented himselfe armed
vnto his maister, and at need three hundred Gentlemen against him,
who had no meanes but by the feesIn France the fees are notable signes of the Princes soueraigne power: they were in former times but for life. Hugh Capet made them hereditary, vpon condition that they should serue in the warre. which they held, and are not entertained
among his men at Armes, but with his money? That a King
should indure a barre betwixt him and his Vassall to talke together, you
will not beleeue it, you that shall liue after vs, and indure the paine of
such an indiscretion. A great Prince, who dares not refuse his subiect any
thing, is faint hearted.To giue all that is demanded is the act of a man that is not of himselfe but depends of another. Mucho pide el loco, mas loco es elque lo da. A feale demands much, but he is more foole that giues it. It is an act of a free courage to refuse somthing
of a great Prince, to know what should be demanded or denyed, and aboue
all not to grant that lightly which being once giuen cannot be recalled,
nor taken away. O Constable, thou hast done, thou hast done so bold an
act, as thou shouldst bee carefull it should not bee knowne that thou hadst
once presumed to think it.
The King dessembled all, and although he would willingly haue
forgotten it, yet he tried how difficult a thing it is not to remember
an offence. He could not loose that which he could not keepe,
and alwaies his memory was full of the portraits of the Causey and
Barre,The King still remembers the Causey and barre. but he would giue the sinner time to repent.As soone as a subiect of quality stra^es from his loue and duty, they must seeke to reclaime him but first by mildnes before rigor. It is good to take time to be aduised. The second thoughts correct the first. They (...) Cecinna for too great heat in the punishing of offences giuing them no time to repent. Proximam quamque culpam antequam penteret vltum ibat. Tacit. Lib. 17. The first offence was punish^d before they could repent. The euent
doth iudge of his Counsell, for by the mildnes of his words, and
his good vsage of the Constable, he kept him from a leape which
he was ready to make vnto the Duke of Burgundies discretion.

Yet the King did study of this insolency. The Constable desiring
rather to erre in aduancing himselfe too much, then too little,We may faite equally in esteeming a thing too much or not enough.
shewed his contentment.Modesty requires that the great contentmens which ar r^ceiued by the (...) good countenance, should not be sh^wed by the excesse of ioy and insolency: the pleasure of the m^^d whic^ is inuisible, should participate of her nature and not be seene. The King kept his discontent secret, and
bridled his choller, vpon this consideration; that a reuenge deferred
may be executed: and being once executed it cannot be recalled.
He keept his designe to be reuenged very secret vnder shewes
of great loue; yet resolued not to dye before he had troden the Constables
pride vnder his feete, and that he had made him stoope, and
eate the ground, and his fingers to remember himselfe of his duty,
and that he must not play with his prince, no not with his picture.Any thing that concernes the Prince, is sacred, it is a crime to touch it without respect. It was a Capitall off^nce to sit neere vnto Augustus statue, and to haue carried his im^ge into any place that was n^t hon^rable. (...) saith. Haec quoque Capitalia eran; circa Augusti simulachrum seruum sedisse vestem mutasse, nummo vel anulo effigiem impressa^ latrinae a^^lupanari intulisse
The Constable on the other side grewe more insolent and glorious,
his seruants said that their master was safe, that in this action
the King had shewed that he feared him, that the storme from which
side soeuer it came, would stil passe ouer his head and neuer hurt him;
that his merits would shield him from al the practises of his enemies
that no man durst attempt against his person, and in a word, that they
could not bee without him. They did not consider that they neuer
sped which striued to go before all men and would not follow any.The torment of an ambiti^ious man is double, he fea^es to come after others and desirs to go before all. Seneca speaks eloquently. Ambitus tumida res est vana, ventosa, nu^lum ha bet termimum: Tam solicita est ne quem ante se videat, quam ne se post alium. Sen. Epist. 4. Ambition is a swelling thing, vaine and windy, it hath no hounds. It is as carefull not to see any o^e before it, as not to see it selfe after any.
At that time there was a truce betwixt the King and the Duke
of Burgundy,New designes of the Duke of Bourgondy the King had no thoughts but to vnite the wills and
affection of his subiects to his seruice, and to punish the obstinate.
The Duke of Burgundy, who had set noe other limits to his ambition,
but the point of his sword, was in Guelderland, a Prouince
which Arnold Duke of Guelders, to punish the vanaturall ingratitue
of Adolph his Sonne, a prisoner at Gand, with a iust exheredation,
had giuen to the Duke at his death.
These designes did rise one vpon another, like mountaines
of billowes which breake of themselues, they were infinit, and the
execution of one was the begining of another, his spiritA spirit which is euery where is no where. To end one designe (...) must not begi^ many. There is a diff^rence betwixt doing many enterprises and many things. wandering
euery where, was neuer setled in any place, he desired that
which he had not so vehemently, and did hope for it so impatiently,
as he did not care for that which he had gotten, he played alwayes
and did not knowe the fortune of the game, yet could he
not retire himselfe.
He had a goodly Armie at that time, of his owne subiects and
strangers English, and Italians: Presumption, which doth alwaies
corrupt the Iudgment, darken reason, blind the vnderstanding,
and stirre vp will against iudgment, made himWhen as Ambition hath placed the seat of his Empire in the ^antasie of a Prince who hath youth, forces and courage, it makes him resolue vpon all sort; of designes, and will not suffer him to haue any bounds (...) measured hopes. imagin that there
was not any greatnes in the worlde that could be comparable to
his. He resolued not to see any thing betwixt Bourgundy and Holland
but vnder his power, he promised all this vnto himselfe in taking
the Countries of Colleyn and Lorraine. He held the County
of Ferrete by morgage from Sigismond Arch Duke of Austria. The

Princes of Germany, who had not said any thing, whilest that this
Prince was busie with his forces along the Riuer of Meuze, could
not now be silent to see him in this designe to passe the Rhin. When
as the forces of a great Prince stirre extraordinarily, then lesse estates
unite themselues closely together.The increase of a warlike Princes estates makes other Princes iealous. To exceed the bounds of his Empire is an alarum to his neighbours. Augustus aduised Tiberius to rest^aine the Romaine Empire within certaine limits: whilst that the Duke of Bourgondy made warre in France the other Princes stood at a gaze, but when b^e discouered his designe to extend farth^r, they sought to hinder him.
The Duke besieged Nuz, and colored his designe with the
pretentions of the Arch-Bishop of Colleyn against the Landgraue
of Hesses Sonne, but there was noe other title but that which
ambition carried on the point of his sword, he had noe other designe
but to block vp Colleyn and to mount vp the Rhin as farre as
Basill.
Many aduised the King to hinder the increase of this Princes
greatnes:1474. the Counsels ^auored of their humors that gaue them,Counsels ^auour of the passions of Councellors. It is discerned in the dis^ases of an Estate as well as in th^se of the body. Tullius Marcellinus being sick of an ineu^ able disease, called his friendes together to determine of his death. Vnusquisque aut q^ia timidus erat id illi suadebat vt ^ibi suasisset, aut qui^ adulator et blandus id confilium dabat, quod deliberanti gratius fore su^picabatur, Sen. Epi. 77. Euery man eyther for that he feared perswaded him that which he himself would haue imbraced or being a flatterer be gaue that Councell which he thought would be most pleasing vnto the party.
the fearefull tould what they would haue done in the like occasions,
flatterers did fit their opinions to his tast. They which marcht
more sincerely; and whose wisdome and experience had refined
their Iudgements, tould the King that he should wish there were
more ambitionAn ambitious enemy must haue more work made him then he can compasse. ^ Max me whereof Lewis the eleuenth made good vse, against Charles D. of Bourgundy. in the Duke then he had, hauing no better meanes
to be reuenged of him then to suffer him to proceed in the tryall of
his designe against Germany, for it was a Rock on the which his
designes would break; that he should finde opposition there, that
hauing taken one place he would attempt an other, and would
neuer be satisfied with one enterprise, that the more he should be
ingaged the further he would ingage himselfe. In a word he would
see himselfe reduced to these tearmas. To imbrace too much and to
hold little.
The King, who knowing well that the Dukes profoundest eares
and cogitations were to drawe the English into France,The Duke of Bourgon dy drawes (...) english into France sought
vnto him for a prolongation of the Truce. Either of them sought to
circumuent his companion,To deceiue an enemy with hopes, and propositions of an accord and Truce is hold wisedome, but the Romans could not allow of any profit which it brought them. Veteres, saith Tit Li^. nouam istam sapientiam improbaba^r, nec astu magis, quam vera virtute bella gessisse ma^^res etc. The ancient did not allow of this new wisedome, neither did our elders make warre more by craft then by vertue. their talke was of Truce, but their
thoughts tended to warre. The Duke prest by the English to come
into France to ioyne his forces with theirs, said, that he could not
yeeld vnto it, excusing himselfe vpon his word giuen vnto the
English.
Vpon this refusall the King prouides him worke of all sides; He puts Rhene Duke of Lorraine in mind of the iniury the Duke
haddone him in holding him prisoner.The King stirs vp enemies against the Duke of Bourgondy Rene incensed with this remembrance,
sent a Herald presently to defie him. In like manner
the King perswaded the Arch-Duke Sigismond to redeme Ferrete
and the Townes of Basill, Strausborug, Colmar and others interessed
in the Duks designes, to furnish the money, to free the Country
from so troublesome a Prince,The King was well serued (...) this negotiation by one called Iulius of Silligny a Suisse borne, he was Bishop of Lyon and afterwards of Grenoble. and themselues from so terrible

a neighbour. By this meanes the Duke was stript of the Prouinces
ingaged, and disappointed of the conqest of Germany, wherof
his people had already made a Mappe.When as Princes make a designe to conquer a Conquer a Contry, they which desire the execution talke of it continually, and represent it in pourtrait. The Atheniens did nothing but talke of the Conquest of Sicile, when as the voyage of Niceas being resolued he did draw out vpon the ground the forme of the Iland, numbred the ports and the meanes it gaue to attempt vppon affrike. Plu. in the life of Niceas. At the same time that
this remboursment was appointed and the money consigned, the
Arch-Duke Sigismond caused Peter Hagembach the Duks Lieutenant
Generall in all the Countries ingaged to be taken prisoner. His
Processe was made by seauen and twenty Iudges, two of ech Town
Strausbourg, Basill, Schletstart, Colmar, Kentzingem, Freibourg,
Neuuembourg, Soleurre, Berne, eight of Brissac, and the President
of Ensisheim. Their proceedings in Iustice was speedy, the
fourth of May they committed him to prison, and put him to the
rack, on the ninth, they brought him before his Iudges, and gaue
him an Aduocate.Death of Peter of Hagembach Gouernour of Ferette. Thy accused him of many violences, insolences,
and concussions, and hauing noe meanes to iustifie himselfe, they
condemned him to lose his head. There was noe help, he must vndergoe
it. He caried for his deuice three Dice, with this Motto
Iepasse.Peter of Hagembach lost his head at Brisach the 9. of May 1474. by torch-light. His Laqueis and seruants carried his deuice of three dice, with this motto Iepasse. At that time this distique was published. Omnis spes fallax, sed fallacissima ludi Hagembach Ich passe, spes stulta fuit,
He past indeede the most cruell in excesse and cruelty,His crimes and iniustice. his cruelty
to men, and his impiety to God, brought him to this scafold
to be a mornfull president of the wretched end of an vnrestrayned,
vniust, and vnsupportable power, and that to commaund people
long and safely it is better to desire to be loued then feared,After that Philip King of Macedonie had vanquished the Citties of Greece, they councelled him to put in good Garisons to assure his Conquest. I had rather, said he, be called gentle for a long time, then Lord for a short. to be
good then mighty.
Lewis made all the instruments of these counsels to worke, he
was the master-whele of these great motions, and thought so to distract
the Duke of Bourgundies mind into diuers parts, as he would
forget the designes which he had in France, and that he should be
at rest whilest his enemie was in troble. The deathThe greatest pollicy of State is that which the most pollitick Romaine Emperour did practise. Pacem in Vrbe, bellum pocull habere. to haue peace in the Citty and warre a farre off. of Hagembach
did much offend the Duke, he commaunded his seruants which
were in Bourgundy to ouer runne the Countrey of Ferrete.
Vpon this commaundement the Marshall of Bourgundy of the
house of Neufchastel,Army of the Duke of Bourgondy in the County of Ferette. one of the foure Ancients of Bourgundy,They haue giuen the honor of antiquity, nobility, valour and greatnes to foure houses of Bourgundy, Vicune, Chal^n, Neufchastel and V^rgy.
came about Montbeliard to haue the place yeelded vnto him, and
towld the Gouernor that if he did not yeeld it, he would bring the
life of the Prince of Wirtemberg into danger, whom the Duke had
caused to be taken neere vnto Luxembourg.Henry of Wirtemberg taken prisoner in the warre in his youth by Charles Duke of Bourgondy in the yeare 1474. Eberhard his vncle held his prisoner in the yeare 1499. Munster saies it was for madnes. He dyed in the yeare 1519. and was father to George Earle of Wirtemberg. He answered that
this Prince was not iustly taken prisoner in any good warre, that
he had Brethren interessed in the guard of the place, and to whom
he was bound to keep it. A braue answere. He that commands a
place should not leaue it, but like an honest man. The bloud of his
children spilt before his face should not moue him.In the yeare 1292. Schane Castille brother to Sancho King of Castille, beseeging Tariffe, sent word to Alfonso, father to G^^ man, Gouernour of the place, that if he yeelded i^ not he would put his onely sonne whom he held prisoner to death: Alfonso answered. I will not faile of my duty for a hundred Children, and if thouthen beest so greedy of the bloud of mine, heere take my sword and vse it. Soone after being at diner with his wife hee heard a great noyse, and supposing it to bee the enemy, he went directly to the wall: where they tould him that they had seene his sonne slaine: I had thought said he that the enemy had bin entred the town, and so returned without any signe of trouble in amasement. An admirable constancy.

They of Basill being aduertised that the Duke of Bourgundy
practised Montheliard to be assured of the passage, sent men thither.
The Marshall of Bourgundie gaue the Contie of Ferrete in
prey to his armie.Laague made against the the Duke of Bourgundy. The Suisses being assembled at Lucerne, could
not suffer their neighbours to be so ill intreated. They declare war
against the Duke of Bourgundy and send him the Pattents which
they call friends briefe, Letters of enemies. The Marshall of Bourgundy
made answere thereunto, and felt the blowes as soon as the
threats.
The first of Nouember the troupes of the Cantons and other
Townes their confederates against the Duke of Bourgundy, came
to Basill which furnished them with Canon and Munition,Hericourt taken by the League. and then
they marched directly to besiege Hericourt, a Towne belonging to
the Marshall of Bourgundy, who presented himselfe with 10000.
men to raise the siege, but hee was repulst with the losse of aboue
two thousand, Stephen of Hagembach, brother to him that was beheaded,
yeelded the place vpon composition to haue his life saued.
Many were carried prisoners to Basill, and burnt aliue, by iudgement
of the Magistrate for crimes which cannot bee too seuerely
punished.There is noe wickednes that is new, but hath some president. In former times wee haue heard speake of all the the disorders and villanies which are now committed by soldiars. The Chronicle of Basill saies, that these men were burnt for Sodomy, forcing of women, and for that they had profancd Churches, and troden the holy Sacrament vnder foot burnt, murthered and sowed vp womens priuy parts.
In those times they made noe warre in winter, the souldiers retyred
to their garrisons, It beganne againe in Aprill the next yeare
very furiously, and the King was forced to enter into it. The Germaines
and Swisses complayned that hee stood gazing on them
that fought:Kings army in the Duke of Bourgundies contry. euery one laboured to ruine the house of Bourgundy,
whose greatnesse made all men enuy, and whose dissipation promised
proffit to many.A mightie Prince that is enuied of many maintaines him selfe hardly, and that state which is least enuied is most durable. The Emperor Frederick put men and victualls
into Nuz, and presents him-selfe with all the forces of Germany to
make the Duke dislodge. The King makes warre against him in
Picardy, Bourgoundy and Artois. The Duke of Lorraine sends him
a defie. The Swisses beseege Pontarlier vpon the riuer of Doux,
they take Blammont, Orbe brings them the Keys, and in two
monthes they become Maisters of nine townes or Castells. The
Bourgoundians burnt, 40. villages about Pourrentru and Montbeliard
and spoyled all the Mountaine.
All this amazed him not, the more enemies the more Triumph.
The greatnesse of his desseignes made all difficulties smale. They
could not represent vnto him so many inconueniences, but hee did
hope for more profit by this Germaine warre.Places take^ by the kings troupes in Picardy. The King tooke
the Castell of Tronquoy by assault: Mondider and Roye yeelded by
composition. Corbie endured 3. daies batterie. Those two townes
were burnt, contrary to that which Phillip de Commines had propromised
them in the Kings name, making the capitulation. It
was not his entent to haue this warre contynue long, but to force
the Duke of Bourgundy to prolong the truce, and to content himselfe
with two or three enemies which hee had without the Realme.
It was not that which the Kings friends desired, for they were discontented
to see him a newter, whilest that he incouraged them to

fight, and this newtrality did not diminish the number of enemies,
nor of friends.Although that neutrality doth not bind friends nor ruine enemies, neque amicos parat, neque inimicos tollit, yet when a Prince hath meanes to be as he may bee (...) he exceeds either in greatnesse and dignity, ^r in force and power the^ that conte^d, he hath alwaies the honour to be arbitrator and iudge. But for petty Princes neutrality is dangerous. They must either bee the strongest or with the strongest. On the other side the Duke of Bourgondy feeling
the secret blowes which the King gaue him, desired rather to haue
him an open enemy. He was also so full of reuenge and indignation
against the King, who had gathered together all the clouds, and
wyndes to raise this storme against him, as hee would rather haue
troubled Hell, then not to let him knowe the fury of his passion. His
resolutions were so strange as they did not promise him other safty
then danger. Danger in the continuance of the seege of Nuz:
danger in a new warre against the Swisses, and danger to serue himselfe
with the succors of England, which he attended impatiently.
The King commanded the Bastard of Bourbon,Bastard of Bourbon makes w^^ in Artois. Admirall of
France, to carry a burning besome into the countries of Artois and
Ponthieu, vpon the aduice which a Lady gaue him,Philip de Comines saith that they gaue credit to this woe man, for she was woma^ of state, but hee commends not her deed, for that, saith he, she was not bound vnto it. Shee receyued great losses in this war, which the King repaired, the which she
repented: for shee was singed in the flames of that fier which shee
her selfe had kindled. At the taking of Arras Iames of Luxembourg,
the Counstables brother, with the Lords of Contay and Caroucy
were taken prisoners.
The King sent Iohn Tiercelin,Ambassage sent by the King to the Emperer Frederick. Lord of la Brosse vnto the Emperor
Frederick, to aduise of the progresse of his forces against the
Duke, and to inuite him to doe the like for his part, that they might
diuide his spoyles betwixt them; the Emperor taking for his part
the Prouinces which depended of the Empire, and the King those
which did hold of his Crowne.
This Ambassador, more faithfull to him that sent him, then pleasing
to him to whome hee was sent, reapt noe great fruits of his
Legation.An apology for an answere. The Emperors answere was by this Apology. Three
huntsmen going to take a Beare which did anoy the country, had
drunke freely vpon credit in a Tauerne vpon an opinion of profit
which they should make in selling the skinne, and their Host increased
their reckning,Example is a very good means to perswade, and may bee framed not onely of things done, but of those that are sayned, as fables bee which delight and instruct Stesiarus vsed the^ in discoursing to the Imeriens, Esope to the Samiens, and Menenius Agrippa to the Romaines. comming neere the caue where they thought to
surpize him, the Beare came out vnto them, and so terrefied them,
as one got into a tree, another fled towards the towne, and the third
not so good a footeman, fell flat on the ground as if he had beene
dead, for he had heard say that this beast pardons dead folks, as the
Lyon doth them that humble themselues. The Beare put his mussell
to his nose and eare, to iudge if he were dead, and thinking him
to be so, for that he held his breth, he left him. Hee that was in the
tree and had obserued all, asked his companion what the Beare
had said in his eare, he tould me said he, that we must neuer make bargin
for the Beares skinne vntill he be dead. Whereby hee would let
this Doctor vnderstand that they must first take the Duke, and then
talke of diuiding his spoile, and that there is noe wisedome which
holds firme when they must resolue vpon that which is to come.It is folly to deliberate vpon things not yet hapened; he that aimes so far off neuer hits the white, we may well foresee diuers accidents, but the variety is so great, as two or three may happen so little foreseene, as they may change all other resolutions.
The Duke contynued the seege before Nuz, meditating furious
reuenges against them that had so ill intreated his subiects. That

great exployt of Arras where hee had lost his cheefe commanders,
did much afflict him, and the mischiefe had bin greater if the Constable
had not moderated it with an apparant falling from his duty
and loyalty to his King, who had commanded him that when as the
Bastard of Bourbon should enter into Artois, hee should beseege
Auennes in Hainault. He spent two or three daies in that seege
very carelesly without watch or gard. If there were courage and
resolution in his troupes,Caesar said that he desired modesty and obedience as much in a soldiar, as prowesse and courrage. Caesar. lib. there was little order and obedience.
He retyred to Saint Quintin,Intellige^ce of the Constable with the Duke of Bourgondy. fearing to loose that retreat, he excused
him-selfe vpon an enterprise which he said he had discouered,
I heard his man my selfe by the Kings commandement, who tould so many apparant signes as he was in a manner beleeued and that one of the^ was suspected to haue said som thing vnto the Constable which he should haue concealed. Phil. de Com. lib. 4. cap. 4. of two soldiers who brag'd that they had beene commanded
and seed to kill him.
Hee remayned at Saint Quentin contynuing the traffick of his
faith with the two Princes. Hee sent the Duke word that he was
very sorry the King made his profit of his absence, and he did aduertise
the King that the Dukes affaires were in good estate, thinking
hee should finde noe other safety then in the feares and alarumes
which he gaue them. But when as he saw that this LyonAduersitie humbles great men and makes them mild, as a quarte^ ague, breaks the fury of a Lion. notwithstanding
any feuer or shaking that he had, grew nothing more
myld, he thought that there was noe meanes for his safety, but to
keepe a loose, and that his last refuge was to relie vpon his first maister,
to whome he had offered entry into S. Quintin, thinking that
his Brother Iames of Luxembourg would goe thether with some
troupes, and not carry Saint Andrewes crosse.
Hee made these bargaines when as feare prest him, and that hee
knew not whome to trust to diuert the Kings desseignes, but when
as the Danger was past he would noe more heare speake of his promises,
and keept both ware and siluer. He abused the Duke of Bourgundy
thrice with such fictions, his brother being taken prisoner at
Arras descouered it so freely vnto the King, as it was a meanes to
moderate the rigorous vsageA gratious and kind vsage maks the misery of a prison more easie and supportable. Plut. in the life of Niceas which a prisoner of that condition
might haue. He was willing to shroud himselfe vnder the Duke of
Bourgondies protection, but he did foresee the storme would be so
great as the leaues of the tree would drowne him that should creep
vnder it. Hee did apprehend nothing so much as the Kings quiet,
and peace of the realme. He gaue aduise vnto the Duke to drawe
in the English to his succor and to reuenge his Iniuries, and vpon
this aduise the English were sollicited very earnestly to passe the sea.
Edward King of England who was in his soundest yeares,Edward K. of England passeth into France. 1475 actiue
and vigorous for a great designe, layes hold of this occasion, in
the which he did hope to recouer the rights which his Predecessors
had purchased for him vpon the crowne of France. He was soone
perswaded to passe the sea, thinking he should haue no more paine
to conquer a part of France, then hee had to reduce all England
vnder his obedience. The remembrance of the succours which
King Lewis the eleuenth had giuen vnto his enemie, added to the
old quarrels which haue made deluges of bloud in this Realme,
would not suffer him to pause and consider of the Iustice or iniustice

Traian said they should neuer enter into an vniust war. He alone of all the Romane Emperors neuer lost Battell. of his enterprise.False Assurances giuen by the Duke a Constable. The Duke of Bourgundy assured him to
ioyne with his forces, the Constable did represent vnto him the
Kings weaknes and wants, offring him. S. Quentin to refresh him.
Behold a great Armie at Douer readie to passe. It did consist of
fiueteene hundred men at Armes, fifteene thousand Archers on
horseback and a great number of foote, all good and resolute souldiours
hauing once continued any time on this side the sea.English very ready to passe into France. It was
in his owne will to make it greater,There are none more simple nor vnhandsome then the English when they passe first, but in a short time they are very good soldiers, wise and hardy. Phil. de Com. l. 4. c. 5. for there is not any enterprise
in England that is seconded with more vowes and voices, then that
which is made against France. All the world runnes vnto it, their
purses are not tyed but with leaues of Leekes, for the King cannot
exact any thing of his subiects but with the common consent of his
Parliament, vnlesse it be when he makes warre in France. True it
is that hauing imployed some part of the money, leuied for this
warre, about the affaires of his house, and finding himselfe scanted,
he inuented a milde course to haue money, calling together the
richest of the Realme, and representing vnto them the greatnes of
his designe, with the glorie and profit which the realme might hope
for, coniuring them to assist him with their meanes, and that in this
occasion he should know them that loued him, although that hee
should be but a dispenser or StuardA Prince is but a receiuer and distributer of the publike money, and they that giue it regard more the publike necessitie then the Princes priuate commodities Aristotle calles, him (...). Custodem dispensatorem vt communium non vt propriorum Polit. lib. 1. cap. 11. A keeper or distributor of that which is common not proper. of that which they should
giue, and he called this Tribute a Beneuolence: some for shame, others
for vanitie, and some through zeale filled his Coffers.
The Duke of Bourgundy sent ships out of Holland and Zeland
to passe the Armie. It made a number of fortie or fiftie thousand
men, and threatned to doe double effects. The Constable gaue
the King to vnderstand that this Armie of strangers should land
in Normandie, and his aduertisement seemed the more credible,
for that the King knew that the Duke of Brittanie had conspired
with the King of Englands designes.
Herevpon there arriued a Herald who brought Letters of defiance
from the King of England,Letters of defiance fro^ the King of England. Letters full of brauerie and boldnes,
and puft vp with the Duke of Bourgundies passion, and the
stileHee brought vnto the King a Letter of defiance from the K. of England in a gallat stile which I thinke was not done by any English man. He required the King to restore him the realme of Fra^ce which did belong vnto him, to the end hee might restore the Church, the Nobilitie and the people to their ancient liberty, and ease them of their troubles and charges, and in case of refusall he protested of the miseries which should follow after the manner and forme accustomed is like cases. CHRONIC. of some bad Frenchman. He demanded the Realme of France
as his ancient inheritance, he declared his Armes to be iust to recouer
it, and to set the French at libertie, and to deliuer them from
the oppressions which they endured.
The Letter being read the King drew the Messenger apart, and
spake vnto him alone with words of such Emphesie as hee left an
opinion in him that the King of Englands enterprise, hauing no
support but the weaknesse of the Duke of Bourgundy, the dissembling
Constable, and the passion of some English, would not finde
any great credit in France, and so he sent him back with a present
of three hundred Crownes and thirty elles of Crimson Veluet, so
full of good will as hee promised not to returne but to offer him a
peace. The Chronicle saies that the King sent vnto King Edward

the goodliest Courser he had in his stable, And after that an Asse,
a Woolfe and a wilde Beare, all signes of affection and of other
thoughts then warre and hatred, for it is as great a testimonie of
friendship to receiue a present as to giue.He that giues, offers friendship, and he that receiues it accepts and binds himself to loue. Wherefore among all the pride of the Romans they haue noted this; to disdaine* the presents which came not from friends. Pharnax sent a Crowne of gold to Caesar, who sent him word that hee should first doe that which hee was commanded, and then send him presents which Roman Emperors after the happy successe of their enterprises were accustomed to receiue fro^ their friends.
This great Prince, desiring rather to saue a Cittizen then to kill
an hundred enemies, was resolued not to hazard any thing but money,
preferring the price of an assured Peace before a doubtfull
victorie, and notwithstanding that his Armie was great and mightie,
being in number aboue an hundred thousand men, yet would he
shew himselfe a HerculesThe Priests of Hercules Temples in Sicile told the Syracusans that they should bee victors if they did not affai^e first, but did onely defend themselues, for that Hercules had preuailed in all his Enterprises defending himselfe when they c^me to assaile him. Plut. rather in defending then assailing. Hee
knew the body was not well purged from those vicious humours:Considerations of the K. to haue a Peace.
that there were yet great windes to raise tempests and Earthquakes,
that France was not without it, like vnto Egypt.
This descent of the English had three great passions to moue it:
Ambition; Reuenge and feare. The King of England commanded
in his Armie, and Ambition commanded the King of Englands
heart, who promised vnto himselfe the conquest of the whole
Realme. The Duke of Bourgundy reioyced to see the English reuenge
his quarrel, as they had before a wrong done vnto his Grandfather.
The Constable thought that he could not otherwise appease
the growing feare, which presented vnto him an infallible
losse both of life and fortune, but in kindling these troubles.
The King found himselfe much troubled to auoide this storme,Wisedome of the King to auoid the storme.
he must needs content these three passions. He had many seruants
of whose fidelitie he did not doubt,It is a great aduantage for a Prince against the discontentment of great men, to haue the hearts and affections of his subiects firme. He may well assure himselfe against few enemies, but against a generall what safety. Quello che ha per nemici pochi facilmente senza and ^olti scandali si as^icura: ma chi ha per nemico vniuersale, non si assicura mai. Guicciard. lib. 11. Cap. 16. He that hath few for enemies, may ea^sly and without any great scandall recouer himselfe, but he that hath a generality for (...) can never be secnred. there was no rebellion discouered
within any townes, yet there were many great men which
promised vnto themselues that the English would take reuenge
of their discontents. He feared that S. Quentin would be a prey to
his enemies. He was no lesse troubled to keepe the Constable from
failing, then to seeke meanes to punish his fault. He sent to haue
him come vnto him,The King sends for the Constable. to ioyne their Councels together; and to
prepare for a iust defence against his enemies, promising to giue
him the recompence which hee demanded from the Countie of
Guise.
The Constable let the King vnderstand that he desired nothing
more then to be neere his Maiestie, to yeeld him the dutie of his
seruice, and to make new vowes of fidelity and obedience vnto him,
so as it would please him to sweare vppon the crosse of St Laud
that he would not doe,Hee will haue the K. sweare for his safety. not suffer any harme to be done vnto him.Constantine would not go to the Court of Michel Paphlagon Emperor of Constantinople before he had made him sweare his safety vpon the wood of the true Crosse, vppon the Image of our Sauiour, and vppon the letter which hee had written. Angarus. Cedren. Ann. Pa. 607.
It is in the Cittie of Angiers where the people hold this old beleefe,
that whosoeuer sweare vpon this crosse and forsweare themselues,
die miserably before the end of the yeare. The King sent
the Constable word that he had sworne neuer to take that oath to

any man liuing, and that there was not any other but hee would
willingly take, although he should relye vpon his word.Princes will be trusted of their word. It is a great rashnes in a subiect to make his Prince sweare, and euery oth as Plutarke saith, is like a torture giuen to a free man.
This refusall did sufficiently discouer the Kings intent, and the
Constable, knowing that hee had once made no difficultie to take
the same oath for the Lord of Lescun, thought that there was no other
safety for him then not to come neere the King, and not to
see him but by his picture.
In the meane time the English armie past the sea, and landed
with so great difficulties as they spent three weekes there, and if it
had incountred any let, with that speed and diligence that the affaires
Caesar being ariued in England, hauing cast another admonished his Lieutenants and Colonels to d^ligence, for sea causes, being very sodaine and mutable, they must be executed in an instant and in the turning of an eye. of the sea, which is sodaine and mutable, requires, it had
been disperst of it selfe. One ship alone of Eu tooke two or three
English.
But the King vnderstood not sea-matters, and they that had
charge of his armies lesse then himselfe. The French haue neuer
done any great exploits by sea, although that their coast be greater
then that of their neighbors, and that it is hard for a Prince that is
not strong at Sea,To bee strong at sea is much more auaileable the ^t land for the getting and keeping of a great estate. The realme of Portugall is growne mighty by Nauigation. The Common-weale of Genou^ had extended her limits farre, is ciuill diss^ntions had not stayed their designes by Sea. euer to ecrease or maintaine his Empire. If
France had tooke delight at sea she had made the Flower-de-Luce
to flourish farre off,The French haue contemned Nauigation. but this contempt of nauall expeditions hath
clipt her wings with the which she should haue flowne so high as
all the world had been amazed. They did beleeue in those daies
that who so was valiant at Land could not be so at Sea. A verie
preiudiciall errour, for a Captaine that hath been accustomed to
fight with the windes, sea and men, will sooner become a Captaine
at Land, where they fight onely with men, then a land souldior will
become a good Sea-man.
When as the King of England was landed at Calice,The D. of Bourgundy is prest by the English. and found
not the Duke of Bourgundy, he held it for a scorne, and euen then
he discouered his weaknes, and sent him word that if he did not
aduance he would force him to thinke of that which hee did not
desire.
Behold this Prince reduced betwixt two extremes, all the wisedome
of man could not shew him a meane. He found it dishonorable
to dislodge from before Nuz, and hee found it dangerous
not to ioyne with the English. God had stroken him with
an amazement for the good of France, for if hee had attended the
English at their passage, and not vndertaken the voyage of Germanie,
those two Armies ioyned together had been able to doe that
which diuided was impossible. When as the King of England prest
him to come with speede, the Emperor offered him battell to make
him raise his seege from before Nuz. At the same time when as both
Armies were in view, and that Albert Duke of Saxonie, who carried
the Standard of the Empire, and Albert Marquis of Brandebourg
prest the Emperor to command a chargr, the Trumpets
whom they attended to giue the signe sounded the publication of
a peace,He is forced to raise the siege of Nuz. the last day of May. The secret Article carried this condition,
that the Duke should giue his Daughter to Maximilian

and declare her heyre of al his Estates, if he dyed without any sonne.
Munster saith that the Emperor for the desire he had of this mariage
did not all the harme he could unto the Duke, and that hee gaue
him ten thousand florins. The Duke said that he did not retire but
to obay the admonition which the Pope gaue him by his Legate,
to whom the place was deliuered, to coulour his dislodging with
some shew, the which was the more troublesome vnto the Duke,
It is a disgrace to dislodg after a long co^tinuance, which alone should force Townes. But he gaue the Duke this contentment that his enemies were not comprehended in this Treatie. A conditionibus Pacis exclusi sunt Lud. Franc. Rex, Sigismundus Exarch. Austriae. Out of the conditions of peace were excluded Lewis the French King. Sigismond Archduke of Austria, Rene Duke of Lorraine and the Suisses. for that he knew the towne was reduced to extremities, hauing
neither patience, not bread, for aboue ten dayes, hauing endured a
whole yeare all the attempts of the assailant, and all necessities
which doe afflict and make desperate Townes which are sharply
besieged.
He came posting with a small traine to Calice,He comes to Calice to the King of England being loth to
let the King of England see into what estate his wilfulnes at this
siege had brought his Armie.The Duke of Burgundies armie had beene weakned at the siege of Nuz with the losse of foure thousand men, the remainders did ouerrunne the countries of Lorraine and Bar whilest with a small traine he went to K. Edward to Calice. The Constable, who had presented a
planke to passe the English into France, now drawes it back. He
had promised that as soone as the Armies were ioyned hee would
open the gates of S. Quentin, and hee shootes at them that approch
by the Dukes commandement. And yet to giue a goodly
name to a deformed thingIt is a great pittie said Cato ((...) his opinion against Catelyue) that wee are come vnto those times where they doe attribute the name of wicked things to good. Salust. in Catel. he seekes to make him beleeue by Lewis
of Creuille whom he sent vnto him expressely, that he had shewed
reason and discretion in the fayling of his word, that if he had
receiued his men without some kinde of resistance he should make
himselfe vnprofitable for his seruice, loose the credit which he had
with the French, and the opinion and esteeme which the King made
of his fidelitie:The Constable assures the Duke of his seruice. That nothing could change his affection, whereof
he would giue him such infallible proofes against all men, and without
any exception, beseeching the Duke that the Letter which he
sent him might serue for an assurance of the same intention to the
King of England. These words vowed and sworne with vehemencie,
held the spirits of these two Princes in ballance notwithstanding
that they doubted the contrarie.There is nothing difficult to beleeue when it is affirmed constantly and boldly sworne by any one, although he were held a deceiuer. The efficacy of an oath if it do not beget credit in the mind, at the least it breedes a suspension and doubt of the contrary. Guiceiardin saies in his first booke. ^o non credo pu^ quasi ^ssere qu^llo che multo e^^icacimentes afferma non faccia (...) negli animi de terminati a credere ill contrarie. I do scarce beleeue it can be, but that which is (...) with great efficacy will breed some doubt and ambiguity even in those mindes that were resolued to bele^ue the contrary.
Charles assured Edward that if they did aduance St. Quentin was
theirs. They that presented themselues first with an opinion to enter,The Constable failes of his promise to the K. of England and Duke of Bourgundy
were forced to returne their backs with speed and retire to the
Armie which followed. The King of England cryed out of treason,
and euen then resolued to be mindfull of reuenge.A failing in (...) and faith is (...) forgotten, and the remembrance hath alwaies for assessors Choller, and Reuenge. Darius for that he would not forget the wrong which the (...) done him, had alwaies a Page (...) ^^uld him in his care when he sale downe to meat. Sir remember the Athenians.
The Duke of Bourgundy gaue excuses and said, that the Constable
had a good intent, and that the place deserued some ceremonies,
that he would not purchase that reproch to haue yeelded
at the first sight of the enemy, and that he knew his humor not to

attempt any thing, but when he may doe it safely, profitably, and
honorably.
He thought otherwise in his heart, and Edward knowing well
that the Constable deceiued them,The K of England repents that he beleeued did not conceale it that the duke
had done him wrong to imbarke him vpon his assurances. The
Duke take his leaue, vnder a pretext to goe fetch his forces, and
retired into Brabant to passe at Mezieres into the Dutchie of Bar.
The King of England did not like of the reason of his sodaine departure,
knowing well that the Dukes affaires were in no good estate,
and might impaire. The English were amazed and discouraged,
as they are commonly which ground their enterprises vpon
the promises and passions of strangers.They that haue needs of forraine succors promise wonders to ingage them, and doe not commonly performe halfe their promises. Their wils wauered betwixt
hope and repentance. For all the Townes whereof they
promised themselues the conquest, and which they had sometimes
held, they had onely Perronne, and that was but by way of passage
to refresh them. The season was incommodious. The Duke
of Brittanie remained quiet to see the game, and who should win.
He had incensed the King too much, who had new drawne, from a
Secretarie of England, two Letters written by Vrse,The Duke of Brittanie promised to loyne his forces with those of England, and to receiue 3000. English. This designe was discouered by two letters written by Vrse, who then serued the D. of Brittany. the one vnto
the King of England, and the other to Hastings his Lord Chamberlaine,
which discouer his practises, and the promise which he
had made to ioyne with the English.
All these reasons make Edward incline to a peace, he hath some
about him would gladly haue re-past the sea: His chiefe seruants
were not very eager of warre, and remembring the entertainment
at S. Quentin, they found that the English were too blame to
trust in the French against the French, and to beleeue that Rauens
will pick out one anothers eyes. The Ceremonie was, who should
speake first, there was not any one betwixt these two Princes that
would attempt this mediation, they thought that hee which should
first demand a Peace had confest himselfe vanquished. There is a
great disparitie betwixt the affaire of Princes and priuate men, their
rules and Maximes are very different, like to the Kings of Thrace,
whose Gods which they serue are not the Gods of the common
people.The dissemblance of the affaires of great men sh^wes it selfe in many respects and ceremonies which are not considered among priuate persons. The King of Thrace is distinguished from his su^iects by the difference of the s^ruice of his Gods, he hath his apart which his subiects are not suffred to worship.
Haward and Stanley,Occasion which caused an ouerture of a Peace. who were neerest about the King of England,
offred an occasion to breake this Ice: They had taken a Groome of
the Kings Armie, who was sent back without ransome, as the first
prisoner of the English. Being at libertie and readie to depart, Haward
and Stanley said vnto him. Recommend vs to the good grace of the
King your Master, if you may speake vnto him. He failed not, and the
King remembring what Garter had said vnto him, found that his
veluet had wrought. These salutations draue him into a great perplexitie.
Whatsoeuer comes from an enemie is to be suspect. He
caused the messenger to be put in Irons, fearing that he was a spie;
he is sounded into, and curiously examined by his most confident
seruants: hee himselfe speakes vnto him, and findes him constant
without varying. This perturbation of minde held him vntill the

next day with the which he sate downe pensiue to his meate.Posture of Lewis the eleuenth, when hee was pensiue. When
as he was in his deepest cogitations, the minde did so neglect the
actions of the bodie and left them in such disorder, as no man would
haue taken him for a wise man.Phil. de Co^. represents in these worlds the grace of K. Lewis, when hee had any fantasie in his head, As soon as he was set at the table and had studied a little as you know he did in such sort as it was very strange to them that did not know him, for without knowledge of him they would haue held him vnwise, but his deeds witnes the contrary.
After that he had been a while pensiue, hee told Philip de Commines
that hee should take away the table, and went to dine in
his chamber, causing the seruant of the Siegneur of Halles to
come vnto him, of whom he demanded if hee would goe into the
King of Englands Armie in the habite of a Herauld. He had bethought
himselfe of this man to whom hee had neuer spoke but
once, and notwithstanding that Phil. de Commines told him that in
his opinion hee had neither stature nor grace, yet would hee not
any other.Iudgement of the King to distinguish spirits He had made choise of him as of a man of good vnderstanding,
and who had, as the Historie saith, a sweet and pleasing
voice. He considered that if the charge hee gaue him did not
succeed, he should quit in disauowing him, and make it knowne
that he was but in a disguised habite like vnto Comediens.They demanded of Polistratidas Embassador of Sparta if he came in the behalfe of the commonweale, or of himselfe, hee answered eloquently. (...). If you
grant me that which I demand, said Polistratidas, I will cause my selfe
to be aduowed, if not, I let you vnderstand, that I haue no charge.
He would not accept this charge for any thing that Philip de Comines
could say or promise him, he fell vpon his Knees as if hee had
beene condemned to die.When as the King thought this man was in a good humour, he sent the master of his horse for the banner of a trumpet, to make him a coate of Armes, for the K. was not curious, nor accompanied with Heralds and Trumpets as many princes be. Phil.: de Com. l. 4. c. 7. The King came and spake with him,
and wonne him at the first word,A Herald sent to the King of England. promising him mony, and the
office of an Esleu in the Ile of Rez. Hee must be attired, and there
was some trouble to make him a coate of armes, and more to send
him away secretly and not to seene, but most of all to instruct him in
that which he should say. His coate of armes was in a bouget behind
his saddle, hauing commandement not to put it on vntill hee
did enter into the English army. Philip de Comines obserues in
this place the little care and curiosity the King had of the markes of
the greatnesse of the Maiesty of Kings, when he saith that there was
not a coate of armes to be found in all his campe, and that they
were forced to make one of the banner of a trompet to attyer this
Herald. Souueraigne powers were neuer without them.Princes haue alwaies had marks of greatnes and maiesty. The Senate ordained foure and twenty Sargents to march before Augustus. Before that the Roman Emperors had fire and a diademe for marks of maiesty, they had maces and rods enuironed with boyes. Excubiae arms cetera Anlae, saith Tacit, watching Armes and the rest of the Court.
Being come into the army, he was conducted to the king of Englands
tent: they demanded of him what he was, whence he came,
and what he would. His coate of armes made answer to the first
demand, and for the rest he said, that he had commandement to speake
vnto the King, and to addresse himselfe to Haward and Stanley. The
King of England was then at diner, in the meane time they made
the Herald good cheere, and then presented him vnto the King
to deliuer his charge.Instructed by the Signeur of Argenton. Wee must stand to that which hee hath
written that did instruct him, and who hath reported it after this
manner.
That the K. had long desired to be in friendship with him; and that the
two realmes might liue in peace: and that neuer since hee was King of

France,The Heralds speech to the King of England he had not made warre, nor attempted any thing against the
King nor the Realme of England, excusing him-selfeThese Prepositions seeme nothing generous, they argue feare and ere vnworthy of a great Prince, who should let his enemies know that he did not demand nor accord any thing by force. But Phil. de Com. excuseth the K. and saith, that: If God had not disposed the King to choose so wise a party, the Realme had been in great danger. Then he addes. Wee had then many secret matters among vs vvhence had sprung great inconueniences vnto the Realme and that sodainly if the accord had not been soon made, as wel from Brittaine as other places. And I verily beleeue by matters which I haue seene in my time that God had and hath a speciall care of this Realme. for that he had
formerly entertayned the Earle of Warwicke, and said that it was onely
against the Duke of Bourgundy and not against him. Hee also let him
vnderstand that the said Duke of Bourgundy had not called him, but to
make a better accord with the King, vppon the occasion of his comming,
and if there were any other that had a hand in it, it was but to repaire
their errors, tending to their priuate ends: and touching the King of
Englands interest they cared not what became thereof, so as they might
make their owne good. Hee also layed before him the time and winter
which approached, and that he knew well he was at great charge, and that
there were many in England both of the Nobility and Marchants which
desired to haue warre in France. And if the King of England should doe
his endeauour to harken to a treaty, that the said king would doe the like,
so as he and his realme should remaine content: And to the end he might
be better informed of these things,Hee demands a pasport for a Conference. if he would giue a pasport for an hundred
horse, that the king would send Ambassadors vnto him well informed
of his will, or if the king of England desired it should rather be in
some Village midway, betwixt both Armies, and that the Deputies of
either side should meet there, he would be well content, and would send a
safe conduct,
Many thought that King Edward would haue said vnto the Herald.
We will talke in Paris.Arsaces K. of the Parthians sent to tell Crassus that if he were sent by the Romans to make warre against him, hee would haue no peace: but if he came of his owne free will to possesse his Contry, that then hee would suffer them to depart with their liues and goods, wherevnto Crassus said brauely. I will make you an ansvver in the Towne of Seleucia: the Parthian Ambassador began to smile, and shewing him the palme of his hand, hee said. Crassus thou shalt sooner see haire grow in this hollow of mine hand, then the Citty of Seleucia in thine. but this first ouerture was so pleasing,Ouerture of a peace betwixt the two Kings.
as he granted pasports for the Deputies of the conference. England
had rather forced then perswaded him to the Chimeras of this war.
He had leuied great summes of money for his passage, the warre
drew them out of his cofers, peace kept them there and added more.
Ciuill warre had so weakened and impouerished England, as at
need they could neither hope for men nor money. Hee had caused
some of the Deputies of the Commons of England to passe with
him,Reasons which perswaded the English to peace. they were already weary of the warre and to lodge after the
manner of Soldiers. These men did allow of this proposition of
Peace, and said that it was iust and reasonable,It is a weakenes in a Prince to make it apparantly knowne, that hee desires a peace. It is indiscretion to refuse it when it is iust. If a Peace bee iust and honest, saith Polibius 4. it is in truth good and goodly: yet must they not doe any thing that is vniust and vnreasonable, nor suffer any shamefull thing to bee done to enioy it. that it were indiscretion to refuse it, and that they should be contented to haue reduced
the French King to seeke a peace with the King of England, for
that a great King cannot humble himselfe more, nor descend lower,
then to seeke his enemy for a peace.
Pasports were dispatcht of either part, and the Deputies entred
into conference in a Village neere vnto Amiens, in view of both armies,
which were but fower leagues asunder. The Bastard of Bourbon,
Admirall St. Pierre: and Heberge Bishop of Ereux for Lewis;
Haward, one Challenger, and Morton who was afterwards Chancelor

of England for Edward. The Ouerture of the assembly was by a
demand of the Realme of France, which the English said did belong
vnto them, grounding their pretensions vppon those of Edward the
thirdEdward the third King of England sonne to Edward the second, and to Marguerite or Elizabeth of France, disputed the Regency and Royalty in the yeare 1328. who as sonne to Elizabeth daughter to Phillip the faire, had
first disputed the Regency, and then the succession of the Crowne,
against Philip of Valois, thinking to ouerthrow the ancient order of
the Salike Law.The Salike law excludes woemen from the succession of the Crowne, it carries these wordes. Nulla portio hereditatis mulieri veniat, sed ad virilem sexu^^ tota terrae hereditas perueniat. Let noe portion of the inheritance come vnto the woman, but let all the inheritance of the land descend vnto the Male. The English from a Generall demand come vnto
a particular, and restraine it to the Dutchies of Normandy and Guienne.
It was answered that as Edward had no interest to the whole,
so his felony had depriued him of the parts.Edward the third did homage to Philip of Valois for the Dutchies of Guienne and Normandy calling him his deere Lord and Cousin, in the Cathedrall Church of Amiens the 6. of Iune 1333.
As the King was resolued not to giue them any land, so would
he not refuse whatsoeuer they reasonably demanded in money,
when there is no question but of money, a Prince should not bee
sparing nor difficult. The safety and felicity of an estate is not measured
by a certaine price.A Prince should not respect money to send away an enemy; and rather then to giue him any part of his estate with the which hee may liue in feare to loose all he should hazard any thing. Hee winkt at all that, as well as at sundry
other formalities which the maiesty of the Crown of France would
not haue suffered to passe in another season, for in all this negotiation
Edward gaue him noe other stile but his Cousin Lewis of
France.
Hee offers them threescore and fifteene thousand Crownes for
the charges of the Army,Articles of a peace betwixt Fra^ce and England. the Crowne being 33. solz a peece; the
marriage of his Sonne the Dauphin with the Princesse of England,
and a Pension of fifty thousand Crownes yearely vntill the marriage
be consummated. These offers were accepted, a Truce was concluded
for nine yeares, and Hostages giuen by the King of England
for the retreat of his army. There was also a Compromise vppon a
penalty of three millions of Crownes to determine and compound
their Controuersies within three yeares by the iudgement of foure
Arbitrators. Charles the seauenth had expelled the English out of
France by the sword, and Lewis hath sent them away with his
penne.Wee come to one end by contrary meanes. Charles the seuenth expelled the English by force, and Lewis with store of crownes. Hanniball by crueltie ruled Italy, and Scipio by mildnes Spaine.
The Constable thought that these mists,The Constable sends vnto the King. entertained by the vapors
of his pollicies would haue lasted longer, and he was much greeued
that the Sun-shine of peace had disperst them. Hee sent Lewis Cre^ille
a Gentleman of his traine, and Iohn Richer his Secretary vnto
the King, to let him vnderstand that he neuer had any designe but
to serue him faithfully, that the proofe or his seruice was the refusall
he had made vnto his enemies of the entry into St. Quentin,The King descouers the Constables double dealing to the duke of Bourgondy but he
was of opinion that they should find some meanes to send back this
storme beyond the Seas.
The King who desired to haue the deceiuer deceiued,Deceiuers are alwaies deceiued. They whom they deceiue watch to requite it, and their owne deceit ruines them. Hanniball after the death of Marcellus wrote to the Salapiens vnder Macellus name (whose seale he had gotten) that he would come vnto their Towne. The next night Crispin Lieutenant to Marcellus, who knew the deceits of Hanniball, gaue notice of his death. Hanniball came to the gates of Salapia, the first ranks who could speake the Roman tongue, demand entrance. The gard being aduertised and making a good shew, suffered six hundred to enter, then letting downe the Port-cullis, they cut them in peeces. Plut. and that
the Duke of Bourgondy should vnderstand how this man cosoned

him with his double dealing, he caused the Siegneur of Contay to
be set behind a portall,The Kin discouers the Constables double dealing to the Duke of Bourgondy he was an affectionate seruant to the Duke,
and then the Kings prisoner. And with him stood Phillip de Commines
to heare Creuilles charge which was nothing else but to yeeld
him an accompt of the voyage which he had made vnto the Duke
to withdraw him from the amity of the English, and that he had so
disposed him therevnto as hee was in a manner ready to charge
them.
Creuille supposing by the Kings countenance and attention that
he tooke delight in this discourse, counterfeited the speech and gesture
and reported the Dukes oath, he stampt with his foot against
the ground and sware by St. George, calling Edward one-eyed white-liuer,
and the Sonne of an Archer, who cairied that name. If Contay
had not seene and heard Creuille, he would not haue beleeued,
that a man of any sence would haue spoke so vnworthily of his maister
and the King faining to be thick of hearing, took delight in the repetition
of the cheefe wordes of this tale, and his heart seeming
full of ioy, gaue courage to Creuille to amplifie this discourse, to
the end that Contay might vnderstand it better,Constables opinion to buy a truce. and know that the
Constable mockt his maister.Florence hath seene the like pollicy. Peter de Medicis to make it knowne that Lewis Sforza Duke of Milan in counselling King Charles to passe the Alpes did not wish him any good successe. He caused the Ambassador of France to stand behind a ha^ging, and saigning himself ill he sent for the Ambassador of Milan, who entring into discourse of the designes of Lewis Sforza his Maister he told all ^e could to make it kn^w^ that the intentions of the French did not concurre with his maisters. Guicciardin To conclude the Constable as Creuille
said, thought it fit they should purchase a truce of the English
and that they should giue them some towne, as Eu and St. Valery.
The King being content with that which hee had heard, tould
Creuille that the Constable should heare from him. He set Contay at
liberty to go and report vnto the Duke of Bourgondy what hee had
heard behind the Portall of the Constables dissimulations, who
sent his Confessor vnto the King of England to aduise him not to
trust vnto the Kings words, nor to attend vntil he did willingly giue
him Eu and St. Valery,The Constable perswades K. Edward not to trust K. Lewis. but to seaze thereon by force, to winter his
troopes, in hope to lodge them better and more at large, and hee
offered fifty thousand Crownes to aid him to make warre. Tell your
Maister, answered the King of England, that he is a deceiuer, that I
repent me not of a peace, seeing he hath repented him of that which he
had promised me. The King notwithstanding to let the Constable vnderstand
that he did esteeme his CouncellsThere are some thinges wherein it is better to bee deceiued then to distrust. The King was well informed of the Constables infidelities, and yet to entertaine him in good humor, and not to giue him occasion to doe worse hee commends his Councells. gaue Eu and Saint
Valery to the King of England onely to lodge in during the treaty,
of Peace. But hee had giuen such order as the English in these
townes were rather in prison then in Garrison.
The Constable by Edwards answer saw himselfe almost in dispair
with more subiect to be amazed how hee liued then to reioyce that
he was liuing, apprehending on the one side seruitude, and on the
other punishment, and seeing no other port in this torment of mind
but death.
The Dukes of Bourgundy and Brittanie were comprehended
in this truce if they would. The Duke of Bourgundy being aduertised
of this Treatie, came from Luxembourg with sixteene horse to
finde King Edward, who discouered in his Cousins face theIt is an extreame misery to stand betwixt 2. great powers and haue no meanes to maintaine himselfe. A little nag betwixt 2. great horses, is alwaies subiect to some stripe. spleene
he carried in his heart, and seeming amazed at this sodaine arriuall

he demanded of him what brought him. I came, said the Duke, to
speake with you: will you, said Edward, that it be in priuate or publike,
wherevpon the Duke, who could not containe his choller, and who
came to speake what he would, not considering that he might he are
what he would not, t demanded of the King of England if hee had
made a Peace. No said Edward, but a Truce for nine yeares, in the
which you are comprehended with the Duke of Brittanie, I pray you accommodate
your selfe vnto it. The Duke replyed in English, which hee
vnderstood and spake. That his Armie should not haue past the
sea for that this Treatie ruined the reputation of the Kings of England,
and that he had need of that Lyons heart interred at Rouen.
Richard the first King of England was called Coeur de Lion he dyed at Osney^, and his heart was interred at Rouen, a reasonable good Poet for these times made him this Epitaph.* Then he addes, I had procured you a good occasion to doe your busines,
which you shall neuer recouer, to get that which belongs vnto you. It was
not for mine owne interest, for I could well passe without it, and to let you
know how little I regard your Truce:Words betwixt the K. of England and the Duke of Bourgondy By St George I will not treat with
the King before that you are returned into England and haue stayed there
three monethes. Edward taking no delight in these words, full of
choller left him there: He went to horseback, and so returned as
he came being well content to haue said that which hee would say
to him, who had not done that which he would doe, and carrying
in his heart a wonderfull discontent that this Treatie tooke from
him the meanes to purchase glorieTo loose the occasion of any great matter by the meane of Armes is a very sensible griefe to a great courage. Epaminondas did shew it in causing his sonnes head to be cut off who had won a Battell, co^plaining that he had depriued him of part of his glory. at the Kings charge, and once
againe to giue him a Battell.
* Viscera Carceolum, corpus fons ser^^t Ebrardi,Et cor Rhotomagum magne Richarde tuum.In tria diuiditur vnus qui plus fuit vno,Nec superest vna gloria tanta viro.
And this other:
Hic Richarde Iaces sed mors si cederet Armis,
Victa timore tui cederet ipsa tuis.
The King fearing that the Duke of Bourgundies choller and
the Constables practises would cause Edward repent, or make him
distrust the expectation of that which had been promised, would
make his proceedings free from all suspition. Confidence is the
true cyment of friendship.Good cheer made to the English at Amiens. The English entred continually in what
troupes they would into Amiens. There were long Tables at the
gates furnished with good meate and delicate wines, and good
companions attended to entertaine all that came. All the Tauerns
and Innes were full. The Marshall of Gie hauing charge to obserue
how the English liued, came one morning into a Tauerne
where they told him they had alreadie made a hundred and eleuen
reckonings,Gran favores comery no escotar. and it was not yet nine of the clock. Among other
commodities the souldiour found it sweet to dine well and not to
pay any thing. It was in the Kings power to cut the throats of nine
or ten thousand, who could neither goe on their legges, nor finde
the gates to returne vnto their quarters, they were so full. They

were content to see them drunke with wine, who would haue been
drunke with bloud. But when they came and told him that it was
dangerous to suffer so many men to enter, he left his howers which
he was saying, and the ceremony of Innocents.The Romans did obserue good daies to assaile but all were good to defend. Macrob. l. Satur. cap. 16. All daies are good
and fit to care for defence and safety.
We must beleeue that which he saies that saw it and hath written
it. The King being vp and saying his howers, one came and
told him that there were at the least nine thousand English in the
Towne. I resolued to aduenture to tell him, and entring into his retiring
place I said vnto him. Sir, although it be S. Innocents day yet
is it necessarie that I tell you that which hath been deliuered vnto mee,
and so acquainted him at large with the numbers that were entred, and
still came, all armed, and that no man durst refuse them the gates, least
they should be discontented. The King was not obstinate, but soone left
his deuotion, and told me that they must not keep the ceremonie of Innocents:
The Christian religion holdes the obseruation of daies superstitious. Eas culpat, saith St Aug. qui dicunt non proficiscat hodie quia praeposterus dies est. It blames them that say I will not goe forth this day because it is ominious. whereby wee may gather that the day whereon the Feast of
Innocents fell was for all the rest of the yeare following superstitiously
ceremonious to this Prince, on which hee would not haue
them speake vnto him of any affaires, Phil. de Commines hauing
been in danger of a disgrace vpon that occasion.
Yet he receiued this aduice in such an humor as he beleeued that
he might referre his deuotion to another time and dispence with it,
to the end that he might prouide that this troupe should retire quietly.The King dines at the gate of Amiens.
He caused his dinner to bee carried to the Porters house, not
to shew his distrust, but to make much of the English which came
in and out. He stayed some to eate at his table, and made others
drinke, and withall prouided for the safety of the Towne, hauing
caused three hundred men to be armed in their Captaines houses,
and appointed some vpon the Portall to obserue the entrie of the
souldiers. The King of England being aduertised of this disorder
sent to intreat the King not to suffer them to enter. That shall not be,
answered the King, but if it please him to send some Archers of his
gard to the Port, they shall let in whom they will. This was done, the
King hauing by his dissembling obtained that which some greater
brute had made difficult.
But Lewis had no money in his Coffers to pay the summes that
were agreed vpon. He found how difficult it is to draw money from
a multitude in an vrgent necessitie.Although they say that a Prince should haue no other treasure then in subiects purses, yet there may fall out such vrgent occasions as if behaue it not in his owne Coffers he is in dangerous estate. His Treasurers refused him,
Paris furnisht this summe vpon assurance to bee repayed within
three monethes. There remained nothing but to choose a place
for the enteruiew of the two Kings.Piquigny noted by the Predictions of England. This was at Piquigny a towne
which the Sibilles of England had long before noted for so great
and happie an action. They made a barre vppon the bridge of the
riuer of Somme, in such sort as they might passe their Armes freely,
yet without any wicket for their bodies, the King remembring
that he had heard say,That which is past teacheth the present. In the like occasion Duke Iohn was slaine at Monter eaufaut Yonne, whether he was come vnto the Dauphin, who since was Charles the seuenth, to treat an accord. that the doore which was left at the Barre
at Montereau Faut-Yonne did serue to aduance the execution
which caused so many calamities in France. For Duke Iohn being

inuited to passe with three more not two paces off receiued the
mortall blow from Taneguy of Chastell.
The 29. of August 1478. the King came first vnto the Barre, for
that he was in his owne house,Enteruiew of the two Kings at Piquigny. and receiued a strange Prince.Many take this ceremonie otherwise, and that it is for the greater Prince not to come first vnto the place, but to be stayed for. He
was accompanied by the Duke of Bourbon, and the Cardinall of
Bourbon his Brother. In these actions of shew hee tooke delight
to haue some one attired like himselfe. Phil. de Commines was so
that day. He had eight hundred men. Edward came thither after,
being aduertised by a Gentleman of the Kings arriuall.
The Duke of Clarence his Brother did accompanie him thither.
The Duke of Glocester would not bee there, for this
Truce discontented him, he had behinde him all his Armie in Battell,
either of them had twelue NoblemenPrinces shold neuer meet at a Parle but with equall assurances of either side. Philip K. of Macedon would not goe to land, but did parle from the prow of his galley with I. F. who was vpon the shore, and beeing demanded by him of whom he stood in feare, I feare not any man answered Philip, but the immortall Gods, but I trust not them I see with you. Tit. Liu. lib. 32. to accompanie him.
There were foure English Lords on Lewis side, and as many French
of Edwards, to see if there were any practise to the preiudice of
their master.
Edward ware a Cap of blacke Veluet,Edward a goodly Prince. with a great Iewell of
stones made like a Flower-de-Luce, a goodly Prince and of a gallant
stature, but began to grow grosse.Phil. de Co^. saith, that Edward was one of the goodliest Princes of that age, but at this enteruiew hee began to grow grosse. Beauty is a qualitie which doth adorne the rest which are necessarie in a Prince. But this is vaine without the rest, it is more fitting for a woman, and serues but to please. Maximin son to the Emperor Maximin was so fair as the women desired to be beloued of him and that hee would make them mothers. Iul. Cap. Comming within two or
three paces of the Barre, he put off his Cap and made two or three
low reuerences before hee came vnto the King who attended him
leaning vpon the barre, after very kinde imbracings, to make the
heart speake by these demonstrations of loue and affection, the
Peace was sworne vpon the Masse-booke and the Crosse.
The King, who knew Edwards humor, fitted his Discourse to entertaine
him with a content which cost him nothing, entermixing
still some merry speech among their most serious affaires. And
for that Edward had youth, beauty and loue in him, hee intreated
him not to returne into England before he had seene the Ladies of
Paris, and that the Cardinall of Bourbon who was their present
should giue him absolution. Edward shewed by his eyes and his
silence that this Sumons was pleasing vnto him. The King prest him
no farther,The King offers that which hee would not haue accepted. remembring that his Predecessors had beene too familiar
there. These two Princes were so cunning as it was hard for the
one to haue any aduantage of the other: the policy of the one appeared
outward and the other kept his close within.Some shew their Art at the first incounter, others hold it secret and there the deceit is not discouered, before one is deceiued. Heerevnto is applyed the controuersie which was betwixt the Foxe and the Leopard for the variety of their skinnes. The Leopard bragd that his was fairest without, being marked with diuers spots, that is nothing (said the Foxe) my variety is within.
They conferred long together to open their hearts one vnto
an other, or rather for Lewis to discouer Edwards thoughts, who
for that he was not like vnto him in iudgement and experience, was
not so warie. The King found that hee had an extreme desire to assist
and defend the Duke of Brittany, and that hee held himselfe
bound vnto it, saying that hee had neuer found a better friend at
need. As for the Duke of Bourgundy hee did not seeme to bee so
carefull of his fortune, for when as the King said vnto him, What
shall wee doe if my Brother of Bourgundy will not enter into the Truce.

The King of England answered.Lewis sou^ds K. Edwards thoughts. I will summon him againe, and if he
will not hearken to it, I referre my selfe to you two.
The Constables fortune remained. In the first conference of
the Treatie, the King of England being highly offended that hee
had fayled of his word, had said that hee could let the King know
his bad seruants, and how to conuict them of treason towards his
Maiestie. The Deputies had not much regarded it, holding it to
be a pollicie to terrifie the King with such practises and Intelligences,
and although there had been some thing, yet the estate of the
Kings affaires did not allow of too curious a search of the fidelity
of his subiects,There are seasons when as it is not good to discouer all diseases to moue humours not to purge the bodie. It was told Pompey that there were amo^g Stertorius papers many Senators Letters, who exhorted him to come into Italy and to attempt against Rome, but Pompey did an Act not of a yong man, but of a graue and setled in^gement, causing all his Letters to be burnt, and not suffring one to be read. Plut. but the King, who contemned not any thing,
thought that it was an Arrow shot against the Constable, and therefore
he desired to be satisfied from Edward, who dissembling not his
great discontentment against the Constable, related vnto him the
whole History of his preuatications, and for proofe thereof deliuered
two Letters into his hands.
After a long discourse, accompanied with infinite shews of loue,
honor, and respect, the two Kings parted. Edward past by the Sea,
leauing Hostages in the delights and feasts of Paris, and the chiefe
Noble men of his Court talked of nothing but the Kings bountie.
The Heralds and trumpets of England at their parting cryed out.
A largesse a largesseLiberalitie is like the Sunne amo^g the other lights of a royaltie. It is the my^rhe which preserues the reputation of Kings incorruptible. for the most noble and mightie King of France.
A largesse a largesse.
The King went to lie at Amiens, by the way he entertained himselfe
with that which he had obserued in this Action, speaking these
words to Phil. de Commines confidently.A wise obseruation of the king. I found the King of England
so willing to come to Paris as it did not please me. Hee is a goodly King,
and loues women much, hee might finde some Mignion at Paris, who
would tell him so many goodly tales as he might haue a desire to returne.
His Predecessors haue beene too much in Paris and Normandie. His
company auailes me nothing on this side the Sea, but on the other side
he is my good brother and friend.
Being come to Amiens, and ready to set downe to meate, Haward,
one of the Hostages, thinking to doe him a great pleasure,
came and told him in his eare that if he pleased he would draw the
King of England vno Amiens, and it might bee to Patis to make
good cheere there with his Maiestie. The King (who hauing saued
the CapitollIt is good to see an enemies back. The Gauls demanded boats to passe the Riuer of Tyber, and the Senate commanded to giue them some, beeing put to rout they assured them the way to saue them. Poli^nus Lib. 2. had no care but to make a large way for the Gaules
to passe) receiued this speech with a good countenance, although
it did not please him; and as if he had thought of other matters,
he began to wash and to speake of other things. Haward remembred
him after supper, hauing not obserued the Kings intention
by the first euasion. The King being prest by his importunity,
said that he was then ready to goe to horse, to see what the Duke of
Bourgundy would doe, and to make him runne the hazard of
Armes, seeing he had contemned the opportunitie of an accord.
They that past the Sea vnwillingly would haue beene glad to
haue found some occasion to haue stayed longer in France, they

had some reason for the good of their estate, and that Paris might
be to London, as Carthage had been to Rome.Estates maintaine the^selues by the common feares and iealousies they haue one of an other. And therfore Scip^o Nasi^a did aduise the^ to preserue Carthage, notwithstanding that she had put the (...) of Rome to comprimise. Ne metu ablato aemula vrbis, luxuriar^ felicitas vrbis inciper^t. Least being freed fro^ the feare of a Citie that was enemy, the Citie in her prosperitie should fall to ^yot. Flor. Lib 2. de Bello Punice. They had such
hot spirits among them, as if they had not some imploiment without
the Iland, they were capable to beginne the Earle of Warwicks
game.
During the Kings abode at Amiens, he was visited by the English,
especially by those that would not returne without some present.The King giues pre^^m^s to the English.
The Duke of Glocester who seemed much discontented with this
Truce, found it good after that the King had giuen him plate and
horses. This Prince did sow euen in barren groundes, the feare of
ingratitude did not stay his handes from giuing vnto them who being
gone neuer gaue him thankes.They doe not forbeare to sow after an ^^n fertill haruest, hee must not leaue to binde one after ingratitude, although the ben^fit perish with the other, he must not suffer it to perish with himselfe. He was very well pleased with
that day, but he was greeued that the King of England had shewed
so much passion for the Duke of Brittaine, for his desire was not to
suffer him in peace.Edward declares the Duke of Brittan^ to be his friend. Hee caused him to bee sounded againe by the
Lords of Bouchage and St. Pierre, but they brought nothing back
but rough wordes, sweating that he would repasse the sea againe, if
they quarreled with the Britton.Besides the bond which K. Edward had to the D. of Brittany, for that hee had assisted him in his greatest necessi^y, he feared to disco^tent him least he should set Henry whom he held prisoner at libertie.
The King seeing that he could not diuide them, thought to make
him a good friend whom he could not declare a iust enemy,Peace betwixt the King and the Du: of Brittany. seing
that he was comprehended in the Truce. Wherefore there was a
Treaty of peace betwixt them, signed and concluded in the Abbey
of Senlis the 16. of October, 1475. published in the Parliament
of Paris, and at the estates of Brittaine.
The King of England was not more content to see his realme againe,
then the King seemed ioyfull to haue sent him out of his
Princes somtimes let slip free speeches in their Cabinets, which are
obserued and reported againe. The King being some dayes after
King Edwards departure with his seruants, reioyced at the happy
successe of his affaires, saying that there was nothing to be compared
to vanquish without fightingThe victorie which costs least bloud is m^st glorious said Alphonso K. of (...). Panorm in his life. and that they which returned
from the place whether they came to make warre without
doing any thing were vanquished.Words escaped the K. vpon the Treatie of Peace. He iested that with wine
and money he had sent away the English. This flowing of words
with more truth then wisedome, came to the hearing of a Gascon
Marchant remaining in England, who was come into the Cabinet
to craue leaue to transport a certaine number of pipes of wine
Impost free.Heard by a Gascon Marchant. The King would haue been glad that this man hauing
seene the Palace of his Councels bare and vncouered, had
been blind and deafe, but he made no shew of it acknowledging notwithstanding
that discretion had not beene arbitrator betwixt his
tongue and heart, that the Marchant had seene and heard too
much,There haue beene Princes which haue put their seruants to death hauing heard wordes the report whereof was dangerous. Alexander dealt therein more discrectly, for finding that Ephestion had seen in his letter an aduice of importance, he only toucht his lippes with his seale without any word speaking, and Lewis de^lt more royally, who bought them at a deer rate which might haue carried words that had escaped him inconsiderately. and that Edward might cause this first flower of Peace,
(which was but in the bud) to wither,Cause not foreseene of a good fortune. if these words were reported
vnto him. He therefore resolued to buy this Marchant vpon some

pretext of seruice. He imployed Philip de Commines who wonne
him, offering him an office in the towne where hee was borne, the
transport of the wines which he demanded, and a hundred pounds
starling to send for his family, but vpon condition that he should
not goe into England, the King condemning himselfe willingly in
the penaltie, for that he had spoken too freely.
The most couragious, but especially the French which were
retired into England blamed this peace. Many held it for a worke
of heauen, saying that it had accomplished the Prophesies which
the holy Ghost had made,Men draw great Predictions from small matters. In the Concla^e held for the election of a Pope, after the death of Paul the fourth a Doue flying rested vpon the Cell of Cardinal Iohn Ange Mediguin who was named Pius the fourth, and it was taken for an assurance of his election. that a white Doue the day of the enteruiew
of the two Kings had sat vpon King Edwards tent, and that
all the noise of the Armie could not driue her away.
A Gentleman Gascon called Bretailles, who serued the King of
England, was discontented at the Peace, and mockt at his iest.
He said that this Doue being beaten with the raine had fallen vpon
this tent as the highest to dry her selfe in the Sunne. He talked
with Phillip de Commines, who knew him and said, You had reason
to laugh at vs. To whom Commines (but not touching that) said.
How many Battels hath your King woon?Wisedome of Phil. de Com. to auoid a needlesse discourse. Nine answered Bretailles,
K. Edward the fourth was in nine Battels fighting on feet to assure the Crown of Engla^d on his head and to ruine the house of Lancaster. And how many hath he lost? one onely, which is that vvhich hee
might haue woon in France, so great a losse as it hath blemished the honour
of nine which hee hath wonne, for this tenth vvas the crowning of
all the rest.
They came and told the King that this Gascon was a free spoken
man, and that in the libertie of his speech he might make his masters
thoughts knowne, and alter the mindes of many. The King
sent for him, caused him to dine at his table, and by his purse stopt
his mouth and made him say as the rest, that the holy Ghost had
made the Peace. In one houre Bretailles setled an assured reuenue
for euer vpon the timiditie of this Prince.We may say of King Lewis as Plutark did of Nicias, he gaue not lesse to the^ that might doe ill, then to those that deserued well, and who were worthy to taste of his bounty, so as his feare was a reuenue and rent vnto the wicked, as well as his bounty was vnto good men.
The Duke of Bourgundy seeing that the King of England was
farre off, began to bethinke himselfe. He had seene the inconstancie
of the English. Contay had represented vnto him that of the
Constable, and the discourse which hee had heard behind the Portall.
All this would not suffer him to grow obstinate against reason,
and moreouer the King is armed against the frontier of Hainault,
who demands it, and offers to doe it, and he hath a liuely
impression of the great perplexitie which an irresolute soule doth
suffer that liues in suspence betwixt hope and feare.Whilst our soules are in suspence betwixt hope and feare, wee doe not enioy the present, and the future torments vs.
Hugonet the Dukes Chancellor sent the King word that if it
pleased him to send his Deputies vnto the bridge,Treatie of Peace betwixt the King and the D. of Bourgundie. mid-way betwixt
Auennes and Veruins, the Dukes should be there to resolue vpon
that which was presented. The King would be present notwithstanding
that his Councell disswaded him, and hee led with him
Haward and Cheney, Hostages which the King of England had left.
One of them being sorrie for the Peace, seeing the Deputies for
the Duke of Bourgundy accompanied with a great number of soldiers
well mounted and armed, said, that if the Duke of Bourgundy

had shewed many such to the King of England, hee had
not so suddenly repast the Sea. Philip de Commines, to whom these
words were spoken, answered not any thing, he had so great patience
in hearing, and such stay in his speech, as it was no paine
for him to hold his peace in occasions where the tongue sometimes
escapes:He that is not patient to hold his peace, can not be discreet in speaking.
The Vicont of Narbonne who had heard them, said, that without
doubt the Duke of Bourgundy had a good number, but the
English had so great a desire to returne into England, as they
were contented with six hundred pipes of wine, and a pension
which the King gaue them. This English man who was much altered
with this Peace, found his griefe doubled with this flout, and
all fuming with choller, hee said, It is true that was told vs, that
you would iest at vs, call you the money which the King giues vs a Pension?,
Euery man giues what names hee pleaseth to things. That which in effect was a pension, the English call tribute. An insupportable word to a free Nation. Saluian lame^ting the condition of the Empire of Rome which payed Tribute vnto the Fre^ch, who had newly seazed vpon G^ul, saith, Aur^m quod pe^dimus munera vocamus, dicimus donum esse quod pretium, et quidam co^di^onis miserimae. The gold we bestow we cal reward, we terme that a gift which is a price, and of a most wre^ched condition. It is a Tribute, and by St George you may speake so much as we shall
returne. Philip de Commines (O the wise man) brake off this Discourse,
and from serious and biting as it was, and might haue been
worse (for the French would neuer haue endured that they should
haue termed France tributarie to England) turned it to a Iest. But
the Englishman was discontented, and complained to the King,
who was much offended with the Vicont of Narbonne, who had
not considered that to bad demands good answeres cost little and
profit much, and that a small matter cals back an enemie who departs
discontented.Words of contempt or mockery inflame mens hearts to other resolutions the^ are expected. Cabades a Captaine of Persia besieging Amida, and finding (...) that the si^ge would be long and difficult, resolu^a to leaue it. The inhabita^ts grown proud thereat, came running to the wa^s, calling him coward, and mocking at his retreat. Wherewith Cabade^ was so incensed as ^e returned, prest, forced, and spoiled the Towne.
The Deputies of either side met, but could not agree, euerie
one seeking to maintaine his owne. The King told his that he would
not haue so many words, and causing the Dukes deputies to come,
he shut himselfe in with them, and before they parted concluded a
Truce for nine yeares, beginning the 13. of September, 1475. and
ending the same day in the yeare 1484. The Duke would haue
Baldwin Bastard of Bourgundy, the Lord of Renty, Iohn de Chata,
and Philip de Commines excluded and to loose the benefit of this
Truce, the which notwithstanding was not so soone published
to saue the Dukes oth, who had sworne not to hearken vnto it so
soone.
As they were vpon the Treatie the King of England, being discontented
that the Duke of Bourgundy treated apart, sent Thomas
of Montgomerie vnto the King, to assure him that be would return
in the Spring with a mighty Armie, to finish the Duke of Bourgundies
ruine, but the King, who loued him well where he was, answered,
that the Truce which was then in question, was no other then
what had been made with him without any alteration, but that
the Duke desired to haue his Letters Patents apart.
Thus a peace was made both with the English and Bourgundians.
These mists which were so thick as there was no hope to see
the Sunne all the day, were disperced in a moment, leauing France
in the same cleerenes that it was before.
The wisemen of those times saw and did acknowledge the particular

care of Gods prouidence ouer this Monarchy hauing by his
singular grace escaped so terrible a storme. It was not the first brunt,
nor the greatest fit which tryed the firmenes of her forces. The
foundations of this Estate are so well layed,Al the estates in the world haue tried her Inconstancie, what are become of the Empires of Assiria, of Persia, of Media, of Egypt, of Iudea, and of Macedon. Quicquid in altum ^ortuna tulit ruitura leuat. Whatsoeuer fortune hath raised on high, is to fall againe. And Plato saies that euery thing is in this world as vpon Euripus, sometimes aboue, sometimes beneath. (...). her lawes haue so
wisely preuented all kindes of accidents, that although there bee
nothing constant in the world, and that nature turnes euery thing
sometimes aboue, sometimes beneath, yet it stands amidst the
greatest shakings, and supports it selfe like a Colosse with his owne
waight. The composition of this body is so strong and vigorous,
as it entertaines it selfe euen with his excesse and disorders: other
Estates with all their good order are not in better case, and the least
disorder they commit brings their life in danger.Plutark said, that the reputation of Sparta was like vnto a body which alwaies tooke a dyet, and which was distempered with the least disorder.
The Kings wisedome was the Instrument of Gods prouidence
to free this Realme from the danger which did threaten it. It is
true that if necessitie, which hath no law, did not excuse the proceedings
of this Prince, and if the honour of the action did not remaine
to him that hath the profit, there might be exceptions taken
to that which the King did to haue this Peace. A wise Prince and
lesse fearefull would haue aduentured a Battell, rather then be subiect
to his enemies pride, but these high and generous formes of
treating are buried in the ruines of proud and triumphant Rome,
and there is nothing remaining but admiration which the History
represents. The Romans neuer receiued condition nor capitulation
As the Romans did neuer receiue offers nor conditions from an enemy, so long as he was armed, so did they neuer goe whether they called them. If thou beest mighty, thou maist force me, if thou canst not, I must goe whether my commoditie leades me. from an armed enemie they neuer made retreat in disorder.
Neuer did Generall of a Roman Armie giue place to any one, were
he a King: Neuer did they in strange Prouinces quit the markes
of their authoritie. Neuer did they allow a stranger, how great so
euer, to enter into their lodging on horseback.When as Tigranes came to Pompey, to yeeld himselfe into his hands, the Sargeants told him that he must light, for that no man was euer seene to enter on horseback into the Romans lodgings. Pl^t. And in a word,
neuer had Prince his minde and resolutions raised to more generositie.
FINIS.



THE CONTENTS OF
of the seuenth BOOKE.

1 THe Constables perplexitie after the peace.
2 The King sends for the Constable.
3 The Constable leaues. S. Quentin, and retires to Mons in Hainault.
4 The King seazeth on S. Quentin, and summons the Duke of Bourgundy to
effect the Article of the Assembly of Bouuines touching the Constable.
5 Hee is deliuered to the King, and conducted to the Bastille, his processe
made, condemned to die and executed.
6 Profit and blame which the Duke of Bourgundy receiued by the Constables
death.
7 Armie of the Duke of Bourgundy in Lorraine.
8 Attempt vpon the Dukes life discouered by the King.
9 Armie of the Dukes against the Suisses.
10 The Kings voyage to Lyon.
11 Siege of Granson. The Suisses giue, and winne a Battell, and recouer
Granson with a great spoile.
12 The Duke seeks vnto the King for a continuance of the Truce.
13 Rene of Aniou King of Sicile comes to the King at Lyon.
14 Duke of Bourgundies Army before Morat, defeated by the Suisses.
15 The Suisses enter into the countrie of Vau, and the Duke retires into the
Franche Conty.
16 Yoland Duchesse of Sauoy the Kings Sister leaues the Bourgundian party.
17 Alfonso of Portugall comes to demand succors of the King.
18 Henry the fourth King of Castille declared vnworthy of the Crowne.
19 Accord betwixt the King of Castille, and the King of Portugall.
20 Affliction, heauines, and griefe of the Duke of Bourgundy after the Battel
of Morat.
21 Rene Duke of Lorraine besiegeth and takes Nancy.
22 Armie of the Duke of Bourgundy before Nancy, and treason of Cont
Campobasso.
23 Defeat of the Duke of Bourgundy and his death, an obseruation of his
courage, and a memorable example of his Iustice.
24 Death of Galeas Duke of Milan.




THE HISTORY
of LEVVIS the XI.
THE SEVENTH BOOKE.
AT the Treaty of Piquigny the Constable
of Saint Paul resembled a Tree beaten
with three contrary winds, which notwithstanding
conspyre all together to
teare it vp by the roote.The Constable in ill terms with all men.Great wits doe often-times commit great errors, and you shall seldome see a great spirit without some medley of f^lly wherof the purest com^s fro^ the finest wisdom, and therefore Thucidides will not haue the choose high aspiring spiriits into the Counceller of Princes nor to the ma^naging of aff^ires, but those that are meane who are lesse obstinate. Hee thought
to make a perpetuall warre betwixt the
King of France, the King of England, and
the duke of Bourgundy, behold he is amazed
to see them reconcyled and against
him. He hath made him-selfe vnworthy
of grace with the first, of succors, and defence with the second, and
of all hope with the third, and in opinion with all three that hee
would play the companionAs it is dangerous to contend with ones equall, so is it mada^sto quarrell with his superior, and to seeke to go hand in hand with him. with them, raise his reputation and
merits vpon the ruine of their affaires, mingle his ashes with those
of their Estates, and eternize his memory not in burning one
Temple alone,Ill with the King. but the Estates of them all three.
The King had done him good, not in respect of his person, but of
the seruices which he might doe him, and when as he saw his affections
altered, his will also grew could, making it knowne that great
hatred proceeded from great friendship.The fauors and benefits of Princes are not for the respect of the persons, but in consideration of seruices and merits which they find in their seruants: when these qualities change, it is not strange if in like manner their fauors and affections alter. Hee could not forget
the practises which hee had made to keepe France in trouble and
combustion; nor the arrogant and insolent shew of armes vpon the
Causey of Compiegne^, nor the letters written to the King, at the
sight whereof he sware his great oath, which hee did neuer violate;
that he should die: Nor so many acts of a spirit which made it selfe
miserable for that he could not beare his felicity.
The Duke had neuer pardoned him the taking againe of Amiens
and Abbeuille.Ill with the Duke. the desire of his reuenge was a riuerReuenge runnes on still although it appeares not, Plutarque compares it to riuers which runne vnder the earth, and afterwards hurst forth with more violence. which
had his course through the rockes of the difficulties of his affaires.

He could not forget his cunning practise, to marry his daughter to
the Duke of Guienne, nor his refusall to receiue his men into Saint
Quentin after that he had caused them to come. Moreouer he was
incensed,Offences often renewed end with immortall paynes. for that he had first made warre in his country by fire
the rest being contented to vse the sword, for whilest he lay incamped
before Amiens, the Constable had made a roade into the country
of Haynault, and burnt the Castell of Seurre, belonging vnto
Baldwin of Lannoy whome the Duke loued.Ill with the King of England. The King of Engla^d was
offended with him, for that hauing councelled and perswaded him
to come into France to tryumph there, hee had returned without
tryumph. All three would rather haue made an other hell then
haue suffered such trecheries vnpunished.
All things seemed to bandie and conspire his ruine, hee could not
keepe himselfe vp firme seeing so many persons about him ouerthrowne.The Constables perplexity after the peace.
It is no wonder not to bee mooued in tra^quillity but we may be amazed to see a man rise when as all others shrinke and to stand firme amongst them that stu^ble Sen. Epist. 73. The disgraces which fortune hath done him in the publike
ruines are augmented by many other priuate crosses: His wife,
the only support of his greatnes, is dead, Iames of S. Paul his brother
prisoner, la Scala his nephewe returning out of England was taken
by the Kings men and found seazed of daungerous Instructions; the
Earle of Roucey his Sonne in the duke of Burbons hands. The Earle of
Dammartin his enemy with the Kings forces neere vnto S. Quentin:
And the Prince of Orange at liberty, carrying the title of Prince by
the grace of God.Ielousie and enuy worke strange di^^emperatures in their mindes which martch hand in hand. The Constable of S^. Paul. could not indure the prosperity of some greate men in court. He is grieued that the prince of Orange is set at liberty for thirty thousand Crownes, and that the king hath suffered him to carry the title of Prince by the grace of God to coyne money and to pardon all offences except heresie and treason. All these things were so many thornes in his bed
to keepe him from sleepe, he doth not dreame, wake nor thinke but
how to stand firme against all these violent stormes of fortunes, but
he seekes to cure his harmesA pernitious remedy to cure one mischiefe with another, and to think to be cured by disorders which caused diseases, the intemperance of the Patien^ causeth the cruelty of the Phisition. by other mischefes. He is like vnto an
earthen vessell which must needes breake if it fall vppon a stone or a
stone fall vppon it.
The nedle of his Compas turnes toward the Kings Clemencie as
to his north. He sends Rapin, his secretary, vnto him with silken words
humble and milde, beseeching him to beleeue that the King of England
and the Duke of Bourgundy desired nothing more then to draw
him to the extremitie of dispayre,The Constable seeks the Kings fauor. and to seeke his safty of them beeing
that he could not finde it with the King. That a desire to bee reuenged
of him who had not offended the^, but in that he had not offended
his maiestie, had giuen way vnto the slanders which had bin
published against him, and fauoured by the il will of his enemies
which were about his maiestie, namely by the Lord of Dammartin
and Lude who did not loue him, and that his heart could not bend
vnto that diuine rule to loue his enemies.To loue ones enemies is a diuine Action, to loue his friendes humane, but to hate his friendes is bruitish. But men are of that disposition, especially great men, they cannot indure the prosperity of their enemies.
Good workemasters know one anothers worke, one line makes
them iudge by whome the picture was made. The King, his craftsmaster
in dissembling, did iudg that whatsoeuer the Constable pretended
to doe was but cou^terfeit,Aristotle speakes of a rock which burnes hauing oyle cast vppon it. that an ambitious spirit dissembles as he list,
It is dangerous to giue credit to the wordes and actions of those that haue any designe, (...) a desire to attaine vnto it makes them to faigne any thing. that a wicked man is neuer worse then when hee will counterfeit to

be good, wherfore all the oyle of his goodlywords doe not allwayes serue to open but to couer the inte^tions. Archidamus sonne to Agesilaus said that sheepe kn^w but one note but Kings had many to vse as they pleased. words did but inflame
the flint of his reuenge the more, and from the concurrence of these
two contraries rose the last tempest which ruined the Constable.
Yet he made shew to approue his Intentions, he said they were good,
and called a secretary vnto him to write a letter,The King sends for the Constable. by the which he gaue
him aduice of all that had past with the English, and that for the troble
of minde wherein he was to dispatch many great affayres he had
greate neede of his head. If he had promised to saue him he would
haue accepted the neck of his promises, he was so constrained to
make an example of the trechery of a bad subiect. Rapin was not
cunning enough to obserue two things which past at this instant.Paul Erizze gouernor of Negrepont hauing yeelded in the yeare 1470. vppon condicio^ that they should saue his head, Mahomet caused him to be sawne in two and when he reproched him with the breach of his word, he said vnto him that the flanks were not comprehended in the promise to saue his hed: Iustinian.
the one was that the king turning to the Lord Haward, deputie for
the King of England, and the Siegneour of Contay, expounding vnto
them the counterfence of this letter saied, I doe not meane that we
should haue his body but his head only. The other was that the Lord of
Lude demanded of Rapine if he knew where his masters ready money
was, a word which should haue condemned the mouth from
whence it came to perpetuall silenceBy the law of the Gymnosophists they that haue once accused the vse of the tongue are condemned to perpetuall sylence. It was sooner deliuered then
considered, there are witts which betraie wisdome and discretion,
their suddainesse stayes vppon the first obiects, they are not allwayes
ready. This speech should haue serued as a Trumpet to giue the
Constable an Alarum, who vnderstanding what Rapine had done
and heard, chose rather to commit his safty to a good place then to
the Kings good words.
He had caused the Castell of Han to be built, and within it a Tower
six and thirtie foote thick,Castell of Han built by the Constable. vppon the porte whereof there was seene
a corde wouen with two tassells hanging on the one side and the other,
and this motto of his humor. Mon Mieux. He assured himselfe
to finde his best alwayes in that place in the worst estate of his fortune,
and from thence hee should see, as from a safe shoare, the
waues and winds play vppon France. But there is no rock nor Acrocorinthe
that can hould at the presence of a Prince which meanes to
punnish the infidelity of his subiect. Against a iust enemie they must
make it knowne that a greate courage hath not lesse Clemencie beeing
discouered, then valour in Armes.Mithridatus king of Bosphorus being defeated and vanquish^d, he intreated the Emperor to make him fire warre, his answere was short and generous. That at Rome there was as much clemency against the vanquished as courage against an armed enemie. But against disloyalltie and
ingratitude all pitty is crueltie. Hee had propounded to retire himselfe
thether, but considering that hee should bee beseeged by the
Kings forces and the Duke of Bourgundies, hee resolues to goe into
Germany to imploy his mony in the pourchase of some place vppon
the Rhine or else to passe into Spayne.Perplexities of the Constable. There was not any Sainct
in paradice in whom hee durst trust. By Sainct Quentin hee had alwaies
shrowded himselfe from the thunderclaps of these two Princes.
By Saint Quentin he did hope to passe without touch amidst so many
arrowes that were shot at him. He would haue kept these Princes
in feare and doubt, and they now driue him into an amazementA dangerous course to keepe his maister in feare and iealousie. Although that euery man (saith Phil. de Com) seekes to free himselfe from suspition and feare, and that euery man hates him that keepes him in it, yet there is not any one that in this point comes neere to Princes, for I neuer knew any but did mortally hate them that would keepe them in feare. and to

the sad thoughtes of his ruine. This Castle of Saint-Quentin was but
a prison vnto him,Great men in the gouerneme^t of publike affaires must make themselus famous and not enuyed by their pride and insolencie. hee neuer heares it named but his soule is tormented.
Hee added to these meditations publike hatred, raysed against him
by the Insolency of his carriage, hauing vsed his great offices to purchase
enuy of the great, and to oppresse the meaner sort, besides the
libells and scandalous songs which had been heard publickly throughout
Paris, the which had had more credit and course beeing prohibited,
then if the reading had beene allowed, for such drogues
do presently loose their sent when they are vented, the trouble to recouer
them augments the currosity. Beeing prest and opprest with
these difficulties, all resolution abandons him, as he had abandoned
himselfe. There was danger in going forth, and danger in staying.
France threatned him with death, England with captiuity, and Flanders
with scorne.
In these trances and amazements which are not so great without
as those which his Conscience giues him inwardly, to see that he is
held of all men asIt were much better not to be in the number of men then to be held among those that are borne for the ruine of the co^mon-weale. borne to the ruine of the Common-weale; he cast
his eyes to that part whereas nature had first opened them,The Constable re^ires to to Mons in Hainault. and desiring
rather to giue himselfe vnto the Duke then to suffer himselfe to bee
taken by the King, hee goes to Mons in Henault, vppon a pasport
which they gaue him, with fifteene or twentie horse; not considering
that the firmest frendship doth not passe the Altars nor the respects
of dutie which we owe vnto superiors, and that in Accidents of
iniustice the proofe isIt is dangerus to trie frends against Princes and lawes. Alcibiades to make this triall one a time called them whom he held to bee his friends and led them one after another into a darke place shewing them the Image of a dead body and saying that it was a man whome hee had slayne, intreating them to helpe to bury him, but hee found but one among them all that would yeeld vnto it and that was Callias. Happy is hee that hath manie friends but vnhappy that hath neede of them. daungerous. He trusted in the Lord of Emery
Balife of Henault his surest frend who commanded there for the
Duke
It is hard to take an old fox,Mucho sabe la Raposa pero mas el que la toma A she Fox knowes much but he more that takes her. but in the end he is taken, and he that
takes him is craftier then the fox. The King knowing that he was out
of his burrow and in the Duke of Bourgundies Cuntrie, caused 800.
horse to aduance with speede towards S. Quentine, to the end hee
might take that place from him and with that all hope to recouer the
Duke of Bourgondies frendship, so as beeing aduertised that the King
was in it, and that he could not haue it from any other hand then from
his,The King seazeth on S. Quentin. he did not remember the Constable, but to remember the reuenge
of the wrongs hee had done him.
The King who would not vse that power vnto the Constable
which heauen hath not giuen to any but to Kings, had no care but
to be ridd of the Constable,The power to saue men from death is so excellent a guist (saith Seneca) as the Gods haue imparted it to none but Princes. he caused the Duke to be summoned
to mainetayne and effect that which had bene concluded betwixt them
vppon that subiect, seeing that he was retired into the Cuntries of his
obedience. This promise bound the Duke to doe Iustice of the Constable
within eight dayes, or to deliuer him vnto the King, who desired
to haue him rather aliue then dead, to vse him at his discretion,
and to make him loose his life as hee pleased, or to leaue it him for his
glory.Euery man that owes his life, liues to his glory that hath giuen it him.
The Duke, who desyred to haue St. Quentin, Han, and Bohain, and
could not haue them but by the performance of this promise, commanded

the figneour of Emery to giue the Constable a gard, and to
command him to keepe his lodging. This was not enough; the King
who would not loose the Constable, to haue the Duke to win him,It is not the meanes to bee rid of a bad seruant to chase him away and to disgrace him giuing him means to remaine with his enemie, but he must be assured of him. If Iugurth had done so, he had escaped the treason of Bom^lcar. Salust
sent the Lord of Bouchages to presse him eyther no dispatch him or
to deliuer him vnto him. Hee had an Army ready in Champagne
ready to suecor the Duke of Louraine if he discontented him by the
breach of promise.
Although the Duke were wholie bent to ruine the Constable, yet
did hee not thinke it reasonable to deliuer him into the Kings hands
who had put himselfe vnder his protection, and therfore he delayed
long the accomplishment of this promise. And on the other side
the Constable, who saw nothing before his eyes but fearfull apparitions,
so as his imagination was continnually troubled with the
imagination of the Kings reuenge and his Conscience finding no satisfaction
When the Conscience is not satisfied, all that seemeth good is bad. It is the priuiledge of a good man to liue in tranq^ility of Conscience. in his fact, he besought the Duke to remember the faith
which he had giuen him, to the which he had cast himselfe as into a
hauen of safety against the long storme of his fortune.
But the Duke, who measured his religion by the ell of his profit,
desiring infinitly to recouer St. Quentin,The Constable deliuered to the King. after some delayes, he commanded
Hugones his Chancellor, and Imbercourt to deliuer him.
These men on the other side being wronged by the Constable, executed
this commandement dilligently. It was a very sensible griefe
In mis^ries the afliction is doubled when (...) he represents vnto himselfe the contentme^t which his (...) shall receiue. Caesar b^ing surprised by Pyrats in Asia, and detained prisoner by them be cryed out aloud. O what pleasure wilt thou haue C^assus when thou shalt heare of mine imprisonment Plut. in the li^e of Crassu^. to see his life and fortune at the discretion and scorne of his enemies,
who led him to Peronne and consigned him to the bastard
of Bourbon Admiral of France and to the Signeour of St. Pierre
who conducted him to Paris. They did not long enioy the content
of this reuenge of their enemy, for the Gantois shall soone after
kill them in view of the Dutchesse of Bourgundy, who shall haue
noe power to saue them.
The vnfortunate Constable,Prisoner in the Ba^^le. clad in a black chamlet cloake lyned
with veluet, mounted vppon a little nag, goes complayning of the
breach of publike faith; as he accused his owne indiscretionA man of courage should do anything to free himselfe fro^ being made an example and the Infamy of publike Iustice. For this respect Eumenes coniured his soldiers to kill him, and spake these braue wordes vnto them. You haue no reason to feare that Antigonus will bee discontented, for he demands Eu^enes dead and not aliue. Or if you will not vse your hands to do this office, vnbind but one of (...) it shall suffice for that effect, and if happily you feare to put a sword into my hand, cast me bound hand and foot vnto wild beasts. and
condemned himselfe alreadie by the feeling of his Conscience, so
his seruants accused him of want of courage for that he had not attempted
some other way rather then that of the Greue. Thereuppon
they made him passe by S. Anthonies gate to enter into the Bastile,
with his hat pulled downe in his eyes to hide his face, being
full of palenesse and shame of so tragicall a condition. Three howers
after that the Dukes men had deliuered him they receiued letters
of countermand, forbidding them to deliuer him, but this defence
came too late.
The eyes of man cannot behold the Sunne firmely, yet they see it in
a bason. It is impossible to comprehend the iudgments of the Sunne
of Iustice, we must consider them in the life and variety of the Constable,

which past like an arrow in the water, as soone as euer he was
prisoner it was sayed that he would neuer come forth, and he himselfe
thought that in losing his liberty he could not saue his life, that
he was a dead man, and that it was a folly to desire lifeHe that will not do any thing wherby it may be knowne dying that hee hath liued, should not desire life. The Troglodytes said, that such a desire of life for one that had done nothing worthy to liue, was an extreame misery. Dio. lib. 3. c. 3. seeing that
in liuing he could not doe any thing to reuiue his reputation.
When he was come into the Bastile he found the Chancellor there
with the first President, and some councellors of the court, prepared
to reuenge the publike iniurie, and to make knowne what the body
feeles when the head is hurtAreius capito said, that it did much import the Common weale to punish them rigorously who had in any sort attempted against the Prince, vnlesse they will say that the Body hath no cause to grieue when the head is wounded. Suet. The Admirall tould them that by the
Kings commandement hee did deliuer the Constable ouer vnto
them, to make his processe with all speede, vppon the letters written
and sealed which the King of England and the Duke of Bourgundie
and Bourbon had sent the which he presented vnto them.The want of rewarding the good is not so preiudiciall to an estate, as the impunity of the wicked.
The Empires of the world martcht vppon two feete, vppon the
recompence of good and the punnishment of ill, and they must goe
streight on the one, and not halt on the other, and yet it is better to
faile on the right foote which is the reward of good, then on the
left which is the punnishment of whomesoeuer. On this foote they
went against the Constable, but somewhat to swiftly. Hee saw him
selfe reduced vnto those termes as they did not regard his seruices
past, but his present offences. He beares this affliction as impatiently,
They carry prosperities insolently and aduersities impatiently which thinke that neither the one nor the other can euer cha^ge. as hee past his prosperities insolently.
They began his processe by his answers. Hee must eyther speake
or beee silent,His processe is made. his words discouer the treason, his silence the Traytor.
There is nothing but pitty to speake for him, and there is not
any to be fou^d for crimes of this sort: His own writings were against
him. He co^fest that to maintaine his office of Constable and trouble
the Kings estate he had alwayes entertayned war betwixt the king, and
the Duke of Bourgundy,His Con^^ssions. and to this effect had giuen him his seale and
promise that when as the souldiers which martcht vnder his commaundement
should be ready to strik hee would cause them retyre.
That seing a marriageHe that desires to continue warre in an Estate, let him follow the Maxime of the Constable of St. Paul, alwaies to keepe the King in bad termes with the neerest of his bloud. As the Princes of the bloud beeing well vnited vnto the Prince make him to bee more assured and redoubted, so when as they are drawne away the state must needs suffer. Hereof we reade two goodly examples, one of Hipparcus in Thucid: the other of Sext Tarquinius in Tit Li^ius. treated and concluded betwixt the Duke of
Guyenne the kings brother and the princesse of Castill he wrote vnto
Msr. aduising him to haue a care* how he proceeded, and as soon as he
should be gone into Spayne to fetch his wife, the King was resolued
to send an Army into the Dutchie of Guienne to dispossesse him, and
to make him miserable, and that if he would giue eare to marry with
the Duke of Bourgundies daughter, he assured himselfe to make him
haue her, so as hee would send his seale to the Duke of Bourgundie,
and that he would passe a procuration to obtaine a dispensation of
the oth for his promse of marriage with the Princesse of Castill.
That the Duke of Bourgundie hauing sent a man expressely to
him to haue his seale, the which he would send to the Duke of Sauoy,
he would that they should paffe to the Duke of Bourbon, to draw
him vnto their league and intelligence against the King, who answered

them that he had rather be as poore as IobThere is no misery comparable to that which treason and infidel^ty causeth: and therefore the Duke of Bourben did rather choose the condition of Iob, then to reuolt against his K. then consent
to their conspiracie, and that the end would be miserable.
That the king hauing commanded him to write to the king of
England, to the Queen, to the Earle of Somerset and to Msr. de Candalles
touching the E. of Warwick, that he had writen quite contrary
to the kings intentions. They desired to heare him touching the
barre and Causey of Compeigne. At that word he found his owne
mistaking, and that the perfection of mans actions depends of well
knowing himselfeThe first precept or rather the summary of the Instructions of the conduct of mans life, is to know himselfe wel. Theron depends the good or bad issues of actions. Heraclitus speaking of a great and high cogitation of his spirit, said that he sought himselfe.. He could not denie but that he had there played
the companion with his master. He confest that when he spake
with the king neere vnto Compiegne, he had caused a barre to
be made betwixt the King and him to the end he might talke in safety,
and yet the king notwithstanding past the barre to imbrace him
and to intreat him to holde his partie, the which he promised and
sware, and notwithstanding two dayes after the Duke of Bourgundy
sent one vnto him to know if he would performe that which he promised
him, and to offer him a pension of a thousand pounds sterling.
That he had writen vnto the Duke of Bourgundie that he could
finde meanes to seaze vppon the king and then kill him or carry him
to any place, and that he would lodg the Quene and the Dauphin
where as they should be allwaies found.
They shewed him the letters which he had written to the king of
England,He acknowledgeth his letters written. and he doth acknowledg them, and if there had bene no
other cryme,Phil. de Commines saith that the hast of this proceeding was sound strange and that the King did much presse the Commissioners. The Historiens haue not well obserued the time but wee may coniectur^ it, in that the Earle of M^rle the Constables sonne sent on the 4. of December a herald called Montioy, who did reside commonly with the Constable to Iohn Ladreche President of the accounts borne in Brabant to intreat him to succour and to stay the Constable if this were the beginning of his ^mprisonment as it is credible, his processe was made in fifteene or sixteene dayes. it had bene sufficient to conuict him. The king did
presse the Commissioners very earnestly, and they proceeded but
slowly in a matter of that weight. The treason being apparent, their
opinions tended to death by the courses of extremitie and of the
highest point of Iustice, and the sentence was pronounced in Parliament
by the President of Popincourt.
It was necessary that the prisoner should heare it in Parliament,Hee is sent for to the Court of Parliament.
and therefore the Siegneur of St. Pierre went early in the morning
to the Bastile to fetch him, comming into his Chamber he demanded
of him what he did, and if he slept? he answered that he had been
long awake but he kept his bed, hauing his head full of fancies. The
Siegneur of St. Pierre told him that the Court of Parliament had
viewed his processe for the expedition whereof it was necessary hee
should be heard. He rose and prepared himselfe to goe vnto the Pallace,
not thinking that from thence he should be led vnto his death.
And for that the Court had ordained that the Seignieur of Estouteuille,
Knight and Prouost of Paris, should accompany him, he grew
into some iealousie that it was to draw him out of the hands of Philip
Hu^llier Captaine of the Bastile, who was his friend, and intreated
him mildly, to deliuer him vnto the Prouost of Paris his enemy, who
he thought by an inhumane voluptuousnesTo laugh at another mans miserie is an inhumaine voluptuousnesse and to weepe at another mans harme is an eternall miserie, receiued great content
at his misery.Hated and detested of the Parisie^s He feared also that the people, who hated him as much

in the end, as they had admired him in the beginning,It is in our selues to be esteemed, or scorned, Neuer ma^ was more contemned in the beginning nor lesse in the ending then Brutus. and had
conceiued an implacable hatred against him, and defamed his reputation
both by writingsIn Iune 1471. the K. by a publike proclamation promised 300. Crownes to him that should discouer the author of Libels that were made against the Constables honor. Henry Mariette who had bin Liefiena^t criminal of Paris, and Peter Mercier a Scholler were committed to prison for that fact, but they were absolued. and wordes publikely, would do him
some outrage as he past through the streetes. The Siegneur of St.
Pierre assured him, and freed him from either feare, telling him that
he went not out of one prison to go into another, and that he would
neuer suffer him to be wronged in his company. Thus he went to the
Pallace on horseback betwixt St Pierre and Estouteuille. Being come
to the staires foot of the Pallace, the Lord of Gaucourt, Gouernour
of Paris, and Denis Hesselin came to meet him, to lead him to
the Tournelle, where he found the Chancellor, who hauing exhorted
him to patience, demanded of him the order of St. Michel. The
Constable took it from his neck, kist it, and gaue it him. He had receiued
it from the Kings owne hand, beeing the third of fourteene
which first receiued it.
The Chancellor did also demand the Constables sword of him,
VVhen men in high degrees are condemned to lose their liues, the death of honor by degradation goes before that of the body by punishment. hee answered that it had beene taken from him when he was committed
to prison. This done the Chancellor retired himselfe and left
the Constable in some hope that iustice would bee satisfied with this
degradation of honor, and leaue him the remainder of his life as a
guift, the which notwithstanding he should neither desire nor accept
being offred, hauing lost that which was dearer then it.There remaines nothing to loose for him that hath lost his reputation. Hee dies too late that suruiues his honor. But behold
the President of Popincourt which pronounceth his sentence
and speakes to him after this manner.His sentence pronounced. The Court hath and doth declare
you guilty of high treason, for the which it doth depriue you of the office
of Constable of France and of all your offices, honors, estates and dignities,
and for punishment it doth condemne you to suffer death, and to
loose your head at the greue, in Paris, it declares all your goods moueable
and immoueable forfeited to the King. And although, considering the
foulenes of the great and execrable crimes of treason which you haue committed,
you should be quartered,By the greatnes of punishments they iudge of the foulnes of offe^ce. Treason and felony haue alwaies beene seuerely punished your foure quarters to bee hanged on
the high waies, and your body on a Gibbet, yet for some considerations
mouing the Court, namely for your last marriage, of which were issued
Children, and other causes, it hath ordained that after publike execution
done of your person, your body shal be laid in holy buriall if you require it.
The Constable with an amazement ordinarie in such strange and
sodaine accidents, and excusable in the most constant men who suffer
death resolutely,Foure Diuines exhort the Constable to dye. and yet abhorre to see it,Nature abhors death. A valiant man goes freely vnto daungers, and yet is moued at them that miscarrie. There are some which receiue the stroake more Constantly the^ they apprehend it. Sene. Epist. 58. answered. Ha God be
praised, behold a hard sentence, I beseech him to giue me the grace to acknoledge
him well this day. They gaue him foure Diuines to comfort
him, but in these extremities consolation is a part of the misery.
They dispose him to vnite all his thoughts to the last and most important
act of his life, to end it to his health,Iustice in destroying the bodie, giues allwayes time to thinke of the health of the soule. At the point of death man sets vp his rest that being lost their is noe more to loose. for it concernes the
losse both of body and soule, Death being a game, which if it be well
played they hazard little to gaine much.

He demanded of the Chancellor if he might not be allowed to receiue
the Sacrament, but it was denyed him,If the Sacrament be denied to them that are condemned by Iustice, the resolutions are drawne from the Coap. Super eo de heret, in 6 and c. question 13. 9. 2. They thought it fit
that a Masse should be said before him, and that at the end they
should giue him holy bread, and so (...) continued with the Diuines,
about the examination of his conscience, till betwixt two and three
of the clocke in the afeernoone, and then hee was carried on horsebacke
to the Towne-house, where hee disposed of that which the
King suffered him to giue by his last will. Hee deuided among the
foure companies of begging Friers threescore halfe Crownes,
which were all the iewells he had sowed in his doublet, whereof the
Hangman thought to make booty.Iohn King of Ha^gary, whom Sultan Soliman made K. of Buda, paying a tribut caused the head of Gritti, sonne to a Duke of Venice, to be cut off. When the executioner had stript him, he found in his breeches a little purseful of precious stones which were valued at 4000. crownes. Paul Iou. lib. 32. Many Princes and noblemen held
it then, and do yet hold it an act of wisedome and foresight not to be
without some peeces of gold, for that they may be driuen to that
distresse, and so ill asisted by their followers as for want of an hundred
Crownes, or much lesse, to stay the bad designe of some desperate
fellow they may sodainely runne into some dangerous fortune.
He had vppon his finger a ring with a small diamond; he intreated
the Bishop of Paris his confessor to put it on the finger of the Image
of our Lady of Paris, and to offer it on his behalfe. He charged
another to giue vnto his Grandchild a stone, which he ware about
his neck, and which resisted poyson, but the Chancellor kept it to
present it vnto the King.
This disposition beeing made they led him to a great seaffold,
from the which they did ascend to an other which was lesse, but
higher, where he should receiue an end of his life,Death is sweet when it is the end and not the punishment of life. And they say it is a troublesome thing to die before one be sick. for a punishment.
Vpon the greater were the Chancellor, the Siegneur of Gaucourt,
and some other of the Kings Officers, all the place, and all
windowes were full euen to the tops of houses. He went vp vnto
the Scaffold with his hands vnbound,He is executed at the Greue. the executioner bound them
with a little cord. They presented him a Cushion of other stuffe
then those be wheron the ConstablesThe Chancellors and Constables of France take their oth vnto the King, kneeling vpon a cushion of veluet, here they offer the Constable one of wooll, with the Armes of the City of Paris. of France take their oth vnto
the King. He remoued it with his foote and set it right, and
then he kneeled downe with his face towards our Ladies Church.
There in the sight of heauen and of two hundred thousand people,
the fire-brand of warre was quencht the 29. day of December 1475
He dyed much amazed but full of deuotion and repentance:He dyed trembling. To
dye trembling after that manner, was not to dye like a man who
had carried the sword of France. The executioner should not
haue been more hardy to strike,In what place soeuer death assailes a generous man hee should die generously. The generosity of courage doth something abate the infamie of the punishment. Rubrius Flauius being condemne thy Ne^o to loose his head, when as the executioner said vnto him that he should stretch forth his neck boldy, he answered. Thou shalt not strike more boldly then I will present my head. then he to offer his neck to receiue
the blow. Thus he, who had no care, nor thought but of diuision,
had his head diuided from his sholders, the which as full of
winde goes into the Ayre, and the bodie fals to the earth: the life
which remained caused some little motion, which makes the
head to moue apart, and the bodie apart, but it is without soule,

for that is not diuided. The Franciscane Friars carried the bodie
to their Church, and they said then vpon the dispute which they
had with the Curate of S. Iohn, at the Greue, that two hundred
Fria^s had had their heads cut off. Wee must conclude this discourse
with so certaine a Maxime as whosoeuer shall affirme it
cannot lye. Neuer any one that dealt craftily with his Prince, but
in the end he was deceiued, and there is nothing more certaine by considerations
of presidents, experience and reason, that who so keepes his
Master in feare forceth him to free himselfe.
This place remained vnsupplyed aboue fortie yeares,Importa^ce of the office of Constable. for the
command is so great ouer all the forces of the Realme, and the
name of such lustre, as if it fals into the hands of an ambitious
man, that is able to make his authoritie march equall with the
Kings, if of a Prince of the bloud, he is the Kings King, if of an
other the Princes and great men of the Realme will not obay him,
and his commandement, as Bertrand of Gueschin said,Ber^rand of Gueschin refused to accept the Office of Constable, for that he was but a simple Knight and dur^t (...) presume to command the kings b^others, C^zins (...) not your selfe by this meanes, for I haue neither Brother, Cozin, nor Nephewes, Earle n^r Baron within my realme, but shal obay you willingly, if any one should doe otherwise, hee should displease me. Froislard. doth concerne
the great rather then the lesse.
The Constables goods beeing forfeited were restored to Francis
of Bourbon Earle of Vendosme marrying Mary of Luxembourg.
Her slender and small stature brought into this house the
smalnes of bodies of those great Princes, who before were of that
goodly and rich stature. The first beauty of men, admired, and
desired in Kings.
As the King had shewed an example of his Iustice in the Constables
death,Duke of Alencon set at libertie. so did hee one of his bounty to the Duke of Alenccon,
The D. of Alencon was co^ducted from the Louure, to the house of Michel Luillier on Thursday the 28. of December 1475 at six of the clock at night by Iohn Harlay Knight of the watch with foure torches, as the Author of the Chronicle doth obserue. whom he suffred to go out of the Louure where he was a prisoner
and to be lodged in a Burgesses house of Paris. The fortune of
this Prince was to be pittied, and the consideration of his birth
bound the Princes to commiseration. Hee was of the bloud of
France, and the house of Alencon was a branch of that of Valois.
Charles of France Earle of Valois had two sonnes. Philip of Valois
King of France, and Charles of ValoisCharles of Valois, Brother to Philip of Valeis King of Fra^ce had four sonnes by Mary of Spaine his second ^ wife. Charles who was a Iacobin, and then Archbishop of Lyon, Peter Earle of Alencon, Philip Archbishop of (...), and Robert Earle of Perch. Earle of Chartres, and
then of Alencon who dyed at the Battell of Crecy. He was father
to Iohn first Duke Duke of Alencon, who married Marry of Brittanie,
and by her had this Iohn the second of that name Duke of Alencon,
his sonne Rene Duke of Alencon married Margaret of Lorraine
by whom he had Charles the last Duke of Alencon married to
Margaret of Orleans, the onely Sister of King Francis the first, and
died without children.
By the Constables death the Duke of Bourgundy receiued
from the King St. Quentin,Profit and blame of the Duke for the Constables death. Han, and Bohain, and the spoiles of
the dead which might amount to fourescore thousand crownes.
He was sorie that he had lost him who had made him haue so good
a share in France. He was blamed to haue giuen him a safe conduit
and thenBehold the iudgment, which the Lord of Argenton makes vpon this deliuerie. There was no need for the D. of Bourgundie who was so great a Prince and of so famous and honorable a house to giue an assurance to the Constable to take him which was a great crueltie, the Battel where he was certain of deth, and for couetousnes. deliuer him,1476. and to deliuer him to him that pursued him
after the assurances of Protection and defence. This breach was
noted for an infallible presage of the ruine of his house.

The Annales of the Franche Contie of Bourgundy adde an
other cause, which was, that the Duke had seazed of a great sum
of money at Aussone, which was leuied by the publication of the
Croisadoe, and appointed for the warre against Infidels. From
that time he approched still neere vnto this precipice, making his
graue in his owne designes, as Silke-wormes die in their owne
workes. Hee began to distrust his owne subiects and to take strangers.
When aA Prince is much weakned that it forced to distrust his subiects, and to imploy strangers, whose obedience, affection, and fidelitie is not tyed to any other respect but their pay. They think they are freed from their saith whe^ as mony failes. Prince is brought to that miserie, all goes to
ruine. He reuiues in his soule all the thoughts which he formerly
had to be reuenged of them that had offended him. He will dispatch
them first whom he holds the weaker, and remembring that
being before Nuz, Rene Duke of Lorraine had defied him, spoiled
the Duchie of Luxembourg, and razed Pierrefort, in reuenge, for
that after the death of Iohn Duke of Calabria and Lorraine,The Duke of Bourgundy declares war against the Duke of Lorraine. hee
had taken him prisoner, he resolued to make him repent it, wherevpon
he armed for the conquest of Lorraine, by the which, besides
the hereditarie Titles of King of Ierusalem and Sicile, which are in
this house, he promised to make himselfe so mighty against the
Germans, as he would make the Emperor repent that hee had denied
him the title of King.
Ambition troubles his imaginations; it represents vnto him all
that in possession which he hath but in hope; he beleeues that all the
ships that goe vppon the sea are his;Ambitions great designes.Ambition represents things as the ambitious man desires or propounds them. It troubles the imagination. Trasillus thinks that a^ the ships which are in Pyrce haue se^sayle for him, he keepes a Register of them, and is sory that his brother Caton seekes to disswade him, for hee is neuer better content then with these imaginations. but as the moone is ecclipsed
when she is full, so fortune, which had so much fauoured him, grew
darke when as he thought it had bene compleat. He thought to haue
his triumphant chariot drawn not by Lions like to Marc Anthony,
nor by Elephants as Pompey, nor by stags like Aurelian, but by Princes
like Sesostris.The insolency of Sesostris King of Egipt in prosperity (...) so great and disordred, as he caused foure Kings to dra^ his Chariot in stead of horse, the one of them fixing his eyes still vppon the turning of the wheele burst out in laughter, and being demanded bg S^sostris why he laught: This wheele (said this poore Prince) turning that vp which was below, makes me remember my Condition, and to thinke that yours may be the like. He is as neere as Sesostris to try the instability of this
wheele, and that the fauours of fortune are no presents but baites.
The Earle of Campobach passing by Lion to goe into Italy had
made offer vnto the king to deliuer vnto him the Duke his master,Attemp^ against the Dukes life discouered by the King
eyther a prisoner or dead, assuring that hee could doe it easily, the
one by poyson, and the other when as the Duke should be riding vppon
a nag to view his Army, as he was accustomed. He discouered
this ingratefull and damnable Intention to Simon of Pauia a Phisition
of Lion, and to St. Pry the Kings Ambassadour in Piedmont. The king
did abhorre and detest such a wickednesse, to the which the generosity
of the bloud of France would neuer haue suffered him to consent
to gaine the monarchie of the world.The answer was noble of Alphonso the first King of Naples to Roger Earle of Pallanza, who offred to kill* the King of Castile. If it were (said he) to be King of all the world I would neuer consent ^o such a wickednes. A prince that seekes to ryd
himselfe of an enemy otherwise then by the course of Armes is wicked.
All treason is cursed and execrable. Hee aduertised the Duke
It is an act of a free and generous spirit to reiect those that offer to betray their maisters. Fabricius sent him to Pyr^us who had offered to poison him. by the Siegneur of Contay, but he contemned this aduice, being
vnable to iudge of the intention of him that gaue it, and thinking

that it was to draw the affection of a profitable and necessary seruant
into iealousie, he seemed to make more esteeme of this Traitor then
he had done euer. The ^ame yeare 1476. in October Iohn Bon a
Welch-man borne, and a houshold seruant to the King, was punished
at Paris, for that he had conspired to poison the Dauphin. He
was condemned by the Prouost of the Kings house to loose his
head: being ready to be executed the King sent vnto him to know
whether he had rather loose his eyes then his head, hee answered
yea: then the executioner put out his eyes and deliuered him to his
wife.
The Duke was then very busie at the siege of Nancy, Campobache,
who was very confident to Rene, disswaded this enterprise. The
Duke not able to taste the reasons which he represented vnto him,
suffred himselfe to be so transported with Choller, as he strooke
him, and yet against all reason and the rules of wisedome, which
doe not allow any trustA man of courage which hath receiued an indignitie or outrage desires to bee reuenged, and doth long harbour this desire in his heart, after which they must discharge him, and n^uer trust him more. It is the precept of Thucidides, whosoeuer finds himselfe vniustly wro^ged by him, that had no occasion, if he can once get from him, he will seeke to haue a more sharpe reuenge then an open enemie. to bee giuen to seruants that haue been
so intreated, he kept him still about him.
He preuailed ouer Nancy, and Lorraine yeelded to the yoke.
This was not sufficient;The Duke of Bourgundy seazeth vpon Lorraine. Ambition prescribed him new designes.
He remembred that whilst he was incamped before Nuz, the
Suisses entring into Bourgundie had taken Blasmont, besieged
Hericourt, and defeated two thousand Bourgundians in Battell.
He remembred the complaints which Iames of Sauoy Earle of Romont,
brother to the Duke of Sauoy, had made vnto him, he desires
to reuenge it in his reuenging humor,Duke armes against the Suisses. and with it the Soueraigne
Maiestie of Princes, which was wronged by the rising of
this people, who being in league to become masters of themselues,
said that the troupe was better kept by many then by one
alone,They that prefer the gouernment of many before that of one, say that a flock is better kept by many dogs then by one alone. They are answered, that a ship which hath many Pilots or Masters is in m^re danger the^ that which hath but one good one. and in lesse then an hundred yeares had extinguished in
their countrie the memory of those which had commaunded
ouer them.
The King coniured him not to trouble himselfe with the conquest
of a countrie where he could not enter the stronger,He seekes to reuenge the Earle of Romon^s wrong. but
with hazard to die of hunger, nor weake but to be beaten, that the
enemies whom he tormented had paine inough to liue in peace,
and that he should seeke some better.Against an enemie that it poore and miserable, there is no great hope of war nor profit. They did councell Iulian the Emperor to make warre against the Gothes. I will said he, haue better enemies, we must leaue them to the Marchants who sell them as they please. Sigonius Lib. 6. Imp. Occid.
The King parted from Tours in the beginning of February,The Kings voyage to Lyon. in
the yeare 1476. he past into Bourbonois and Auuergne, stayed at
our Lady of Puis, from thence to Lyon, and so into Dauphine. It
was to assure his frontier,On that side where a neighbour is armed, they must alwaies prouide for the frontier. the Duke of Bourgundy and the Suisses
being in Armes, and to be neere at hand to see what would bee
the issue of their quarrell. A desire to haue often aduice made
him to erect posts.Posts erected. Hee did much apprehend the Duke of Bourgundies
progresse against the Suisses, the which would haue added
much vnto his power, for he had all the house of Sauoy at his
dispose, and the Duchesse, although she were the Kings Sister, was

most passionate for the red Crosse.The Duke of Bourgo^dy gap't af^er the Duchy of Milan, Rene King of Sicile and Duke of Aniou held the conquest infallible, and therefore hee desired to adopt him for his sonne, and to giue him the County of Prouence. The D. vpon this ^ope had sent Chasteau Guien into Pi^dmont to leuy men, and to make them passe into Prouence. The King of Sicile Earle of
Prouence offred him Prouence. Galeas Duke of Milan was his
Ally. The Princes of Italy were of his intelligence, it was a wonderfull
content vnto him to see so many seeke his friendship,The off^rs of succors of alliance and friendship are pleasing when they may bee forborne. Magnificum. saith Tacitus, Laetumque (...), tis sociorum auxiliis ambiri neque indigere. It is stately to bee offered so great succors from Allies and not to need the^. and
to be able to passe without theirs. The Germans told the King that
if hee did not declare himselfe against the Duke, they would make
an accord with him to make warre against the King.
The King who saw farre of and behind him, thought that his
affaiers could not long prosper, if the Dukes enterprise did succeed
against the Swisses. The Swisses being aduertised of his resolution
to assaile them, they prepared to let him know, that as a desire of
comand was naturall in him,The Swisses craue peace of the duke of Bourgundy. so a resolution to defend them-selues
was also natural vnto them.There are no such people to be found. There were neuer any so simple as to submit themselues volontarily to seruitude without defe^ce or resistance. As it is natural for the Siciliens, saith Hermo. crates, to seeke to domineere ouer those that doe willingly submit themselues, so it is proper for a ma^ to defend himselfe from the iniuries that any one would doe him. Thucid. But to lay al the blame vpon him, they
sent him their deputies to beseech him to leaue them in peace, they
offer to forsake all Alliances which should bee offensiue vnto him,
euen that of France, that their countries deserued not the paines he
should take, for all the spoyle and ransomes his soldiars could hope
for was not worth his horsemens spurres and bits. The deputies of
the Cantons, which were then but eight commonaltiesThe liberty of the Swisses began in the yeare, 1315. by the Allyance of Vry, Schuits and Vnderuald* Lucerne did ascociate it selfe to these Cantons in the yeare, 1332. Zurich. 1350. Zug and Glaris. 1352. Firbourg, and B^rne, 1401. S^leure. 1481. Basill and Schaffosue in the yeare, 1501. App^^zel. 1514. returned
with nothing but words of choller from this Prince who was offended,
both for the succor they had giuen to the Duke of Lorraine,
and for the iniury they had done to the Earle of Romont, hauing
taken from him a cart loden with sheepes skins, so small an iniury
was the ruin of his house, whose most illustrious mark was the Golden
Fleece of a sheepe.
This warre being begun for lesse then figs or raysyns, or the head
of a wild boareSmale matters haue drawne great armies to field. A Swisse named Elico brought figs and raynsis out of Italy to the Gaules, to make them know the abondance and delights of the Contry: vpon which motion the Gaules past the Alpes. The Lombards were inuited by the like allurements. The war betwixt the Etoliens and Arcadiens was long and bloudy for the head of a wild b^are. discharged his first furies vppon Yuerdun,Light occasion of the war against the Svvisses. the
which was taken and recouered againe in few daies, Granson, a town
neere vnto the Lake of Neuf Chastell, was beseeged and defended
onely by foure huundred Swisses of the Canton of Berne, who not
finding themselues strong enough,Army stro^g in men and artillery against the Svvisses. nor the towne to be held against
so great forces (for the Duke had fifty thousand men, and a great
number of ordynance, of diuers sorts)I. de Serres writes that the Duke of Bourgondy had fiue hundred peeces of ordinance of all sorts. The History of the Swisses reports that they tooke in the spoyles, 400. peece^ ^ey. 400 allerlye buchse^ If wee consider the equipage necessary for all this, wee will h^ld it a fable. they abandone it and fire
it, and then retire into the Castell, where they compounded to haue
their liues saued. The Capitulation was not obserued, for the Duke
being incensed that the beseeged had endured many daies seege,Seege of Granson.
caused foure score to be hanged, two hundred to be drowned, and
the rest to be put to ransome: an Act which thrust the other townes
into despaire, and gaue them so much courage, as they resolued
neuer to trust this Princes faith any more, and rather to see themselues
ruined then to yeeld.
Being victor ouer this first resistance, he promised vnto himselfe

the like issue,The Duke shewes all his riches at the seege of Granson. and as he was in the Mountaines, not to fight but to
triumph, he discoursed rather what he should doe after the victory,
then what was to bee done.It is a ridiculous presumption to assure himselfe of that which depends of the inconsta^cy of fortune, Caesar mockt at Pompeys captaines, who talked more how they should vse the victory, the^ ^ow they shold fight. Nec quibus rationibus superare possent, sed quemadmedum vti victoria debeberent, ^ogitabant* Caes. lib. 3. de Bel. Ciuil. His Campe was a generall shew of
the riches and state of his house, the content whereof depended
more of other mens eyes then of his owne. He neuer shewes himselfe
but in rich and stately armes, the pure gould was not more precious.
Hee shewes not himselfe to forraine Ambassadors but glistering
with stoanes, his tents and pauillions were of cloth of gold,
and his mouables inestimable, for there was more in that house then
in three of the greatest of Europe, his equipage was also as rare in
proffitable peeces, as that of Darius was in vnproffitable mouthes:
more fitting for an army of women or of Eunukes.Parmenio writing to Alexa^der of that which hee had found in Darius b^g^age, nu^bers, 300 Curtesa^^ for musick, 46 me^ to make Crownes and garlands of flowers, 270. makers of sau^es, 29. Potters, 40. Perfumers and about, 80. Officers of the Goblet, Athen. lib. 13. ca 30.
The Swisses gather together to succor Granson, thinking that
the beseeged would giue them time. The Canton of Berne sent
eight thousand men,Swisses co^ to succor Granson after the losse. and the rest made tenne thousand, they
came to Neuf Chastell the day of the Composition, which was the
last day of February, 1476. On Saterday the third of March they
went to field with an order seemlie in all things, but very profitable
and goodly for the warre,There is nothing so commendable in warre as order bee it in marching or fighting. Xenephon saith that it is the goodliest and most profitable thing in men. Among the precepts of Vegetius this is singular, Vt omnes milites in acic vel in itinere incedendi ordinem seruent. v^g^t. C. ^. That all the soldiars should kepe order, either standing in Battell, or marching. beeing come to Basts, a village aboue
Neuf Chastell, they would haue seazed vpon the Castell of Famerku
which is shut vp betwixt the Mountaine and the Lake, whereof
the Duke had seazed the Day before; the Army hauing recouered
the top of the hill, they descouered that of the duke of Bourgoundy
standing in three great Bartaylons, and their ordinance before
them: The Swisses did not thinke to haue seene them so soone in
that order, and found that it was in good earnest, and that they must
of necessity ioyne.
Wherfore they caused their forward to march in the which were
the troupes of the Cantons of Bierne,Incounter of both armies at Granson. Schuitz and Biene, the Battle
followed afterwhere were the Banners and standards of the Cantons,
which are neuer displaied but vpon great occasions when
as the Common-weale is in danger.
They keepe them alwaies in the middest of the bodie of the
armie, as the most sacred and in violable peeces of the army;
they hold it infamous and vnfortunate to loose them. The
reproches which are at this day most sharpe and shamefull among
them, renew the memory of such losses.They reproch them of Zurich, who for that they had lost their enseigne a^ a Battell giuen at Vuinterberg, had sence added a band of purple, but the markes of this quality were blacke. And this hath beene giuen to Zurich by the Emperor Raoule of Ha^spourg, for an honor. Simlerus. A towne cannot giue
a greater testimony of want of vallor then to haue lost her enseigne,
as a soldiar cannot doe an Act more vnworthy of his profession then
to abandon his collours.The Romaine soldiar tooke an oth to follow his Generall in all places, not to attempt any thing against the people and not to abandon his Enseigne.
They had some few horse led by Erman of Eptingen. Those of
St^ausbourg beeing about one thousand and two hundred horse,
lost the opportunitie to be there, hauing charged their quarter the

day before for the discommoditie of forrages, not thinking that
the Duke of Bourgundy would appeare so soone. The footmen of
Basill were appointed for the reere-ward, least the enemie should
come and charge them behinde.
In the meane time the Duke moues,The Dukes Armie put into (...) Battels. he drawes his three Battailons
together, and causeth some lances to aduance to begin the
charge, they giue with great cryes (signes of courageCries in the beginning of a Battel were held by the Romans for a desire to fight and an abundance of courage. A Captaine in the second booke of Tit. Liu. speaks after this manner to his soldiors, Si iam satis animi est, decernique placet a gite dum, clamorem, quale^ in acie sublatu^^ estis, his tollite, Iudicem voluntatis, virtutisque vestrae. If you haue yet corage inough, and desire to be noted, goe on and raise vp such a cry, as you are accustomed to doe in Battell, which is a signe of your w^ls and vertues.) and fury
vpon the Suisses Battell, which withstood them valiantly. At the
same time the Suisses horsemen charged the Dukes armie in
flanke, and the footemen followed with such violence as the Bourgundians
were forced to retire; those that were in the last rankes
tooke this recoyling for a flight, and put themselues in disorder.
Those few horse which had done this effect,Victorie of the Suisses and recouerie of Granson. would haue pursued
them that fled, thinking that they might with reason doubt
of their courage against them that held good, if they shewed not
some proofes against them that ranne away.He that doth not charge th^ that wauer, wil be very staied against the^ that stand firme. One said vnto Agis, that hee should let his enemies passe. And how then shall we charge them that resist if we doe not fight with them that fly? Plut. But the Colonel
Eptingen stayed them, shewing them how dangerous it was, for
so small a number to follow so great and mighty an Armie,The Romane Army did commonly consist of 24000. men, and for the most of fifty thousand. With this number they did incounter the Gaules and Affricans. They made war with order and Art, and these with numbers and fury. which
was yet whole, and had endured no other harme, but what had
happened by their amazement; That they might rallie themselues
againe together, turne head, and take from them the aduantage
which they had, and that very easily, being farre from their foote,
who could not follow the chase.
The Duke had but too many men. Multitudes haue not alwaies
gotten the greatest victories. Pyrrhus demanded but fifteen thousand
men to assaile the world. There was a little Hill neere vnto
it, on the which the Duke gathered together what troupes he
could, and presented himselfe to fight, but the Suisses incouraged
and puft vp with the good fortune of this first incounter returned
furiously to the charge. The Dukes horsemen found their
owne weakenes against these great Battailons of Pikes; if they
had left their horses the charge had been greaterPhilip Viscomte D. of Milan being assailed by 1^000. S^^sses, sent the Earle of Carmagnoles with 6000 horse, and some few foot to ^^ght with them, he was repulst with losse, but finding the great aduantage of the Suisses armes against horsemen, he resol^ed to returne, and being neere ^e caused his men at Armes to light, who br^ke the Suisses, slue 15000, and the rest laying down their Armes yeelded* but the amazement
was such as the Dukes Armie resolued as soone to a Generall
abandon of Campe, baggage and Artillerie, as to fight.
The Suisses recouering Granson, they tooke them of their Nation
downe whom the Duke had caused to bee hanged, and in
their place hung vp as many Bourgundians with the same halters.
The spoile was aboue three millions in gold, moueables and iewels,
whereof the victors made so little esteeme, through the ignorance
of price of things, as they gaue gold for copper, and siluer for
tynne; They tare tents and pauillions of cloth of gold in peeces
to apparell their wiues and children. They liued yet in the commendable
ignorance of money which made Sparta for fine hundred
yeares the Queene of Greece.Soarta flourished by the lawes of Lycurgus, but when as vnder the raigne of Agis it began to know gold and siluer, and to loue and admire riches, then werethey violated and came to nothing. Plut. in the life of Li^urgus.

The Dukes great Diamond which was held a master peece of
the sun, was sold for a Florin to a Priest, who was so religious as he
sent it to the Magistrates of his Canton, who gaue him six shillings
starling. They say that this peece past through many hands for a
small price, at last it came vnto a Geneua Marchant remaining
at Lyon, who sold it for eleuen thousand Florins, and then Pope
Iulio the second had it for twenty thousand. They found also three
Rubies alike, which were called the three Brethren, with other
inestimable Iewels, which were little esteemed by the Suisses. Their
Generall made many Knights after this victorie, three of Zurick,
foure of Berne, two of Basill, and some of Strausbourg. Valour is
no lesse respected in Common-weales then in Monarchies, in the
first they loue valiant men, in the other they feare them, and although
that in the common-wealesThere proceed more excellent men (...) of Commonweales then out of Realms for that men gr^w excellent and make proofe of their vertue as they are imployed and rewarded by the Prince or commonweale, so as where there are many Principalities and diuers Est^tes so they also find greater ^obers of valiant men. Asia had sew for that it was all vnder the Empire of one alone. Affricke in like manner, Carthage hath raised many. Emrope hauing been diuided into many Empires, hath had more then all the rest, and the feare they haue had one of another hath made the profession of Armes to florish and that they which haue excelled haue been partakers of honors and publike recompences. they apprehend alwaies least
some one which excels the rest in merit, should attempt to exceed
them in authoritie: yet it is certaine that Europe for that it hath
had more common-weales then Affricke or Asia, beeing subiect
to the power of one alone, hath had more excellent Captaines
then those, and after that Rome had made but one state of all the
world, and that vertue had no other Theater but Rome the Estates
of Europe began to neglect the excellencie of Armes, vertue giuing
her fauours and recompences no where but at Rome.
This was a great Corosiue vnto him, to see himselfe vanquished
by them whom hee contemned and held vnworthy of his courage,
but much more to see that his reputation which hee had so highly
preserued was blemished for that it was well knowne that he had
come from Granson to Ioigne without any staye, and that it was a
dishonorable thing that footmen had caused such mighty troopes of
horse to flie fifteene leagues.Courage of the D. of Bourgondy after the Battell lost.
But he hath courage enough remaining not to faint vnder the rigour
of this misfortune. He doth not blame his own rashnes but the
blindnes of fortune, and the daily hazard of armes. He hath lost
nothing but what may be recouered for money, the losse concerned
himselfe alone and if it deserued greefe no heart should bee toucht
therewith but his. He thought that the greatnes of his houseIndiscretion doth ^alwaies take fortune to warrant her from reproch for her bad gouernment. Fortune alone is commended ir, all mens Actions soly esteemed and soly outraged, and soly blamed for bad euents. and
of his fortune stood yet firme as long as hee had an army on foot.
He coniured the chiefe noblemen which suffered in this losse to forget
it, and to change their greefe into wrath against enemies vnworthy
of such a booty, and to make them buy the little profit which they
had gotten at a deere rate.The words which proceede from the mouth of a Prince after any lo^se should bee generous. M. Crassus seeing that the Parthians carried the head of Pub: Crassus his sonne vppon a lance and that this sight did daunt the courage of his souldiers, he went through the band crying out the griefe of this losse doth concerne mee alone, but the greatnes of the Fortune and glory of Rome remaynes inuincible so long as you stand firme: Yet if you haue compassion on mee who haue seene mee loose so vertuous and so valiant a sonne, I beseech you to conuert it into wrath against your enemies, and make them bu^e the ioy which they haue receiued deerely.
Thus he resolued to haue his reuenge, but nothing troubled him
but the King. He feares that he will make his profit of this losse,

and that he will anoy him, wherefore he sends the Siegneur of Contay
vnto him,The Duke seeks for a continuance of the Truce with the King. to aduertise him of this accident, and the opinion hee
hath to repaire it to his aduantage beseeching him with words of humility,
befitting the condition of his affaires more then the greatnes
of his courage to entertaine the Truce, and to excuse him if he came
not to Auxerre as they had concluded together.
Although the Duke were in bad estate, yet the King considering
that he had lost nothing but his reputation, and that he had his estates
and forces entire, would not breake with him, but assured him all
that he desired for the Truce. He could not beleeue that this Prince
was ruined, so long as he had a sword remaining in his hand.The loss^ of reputation is great, i^ should neuer be hazarded, but it may be recouered if the estate remaine, it being lost they labour in vaine to returne againe; a vanqu^shed prince is m^s^rable that is expelled his estates. hee
knew that his subiects carried so great a^^ection and loialty that they
would not suffer him long in that necessity, that armes were changeable
and that all the nations in the world had many examples, and
France some, how that the vanquished had subdued the victors and
that a Prince is not ruined so long as hee hath a spirit, hope and a
sword remaining.As long as a Prince keepes himselfe vp how ruinous soeuer his affaires hee, wee must not ^ould him for lost. Masanissa beeing put to rout by Siphar, saued himselfe by swimming* hid himse^fe in a Caue being bruted that he was dead. He went to field beeing cured of a wound receiued, and recouered his Realme. Leonidas sonne to Syph^x expell^d him another time, hee fled with 70. horse and by Scipios meanes was restored.
The King informed himselfe particularly of this defeat, Contay told
him that there were but seauen men at armes slaine,Number of them that were slaine in the battell. but the losse of
the baggage was inestimable. The King being among his most confident
seruants made it appeare that nothing displeased him so much
as the little number. Hee commanded them to make Contay good
cheere, who made no shew to heare the people of Lions singing
through the streetes the shame and ruine of this battel, the courage
of the Suisses and the rashnes of the Bourgondians, for at that time
there was not a Battell but there was presently a Song made of
it.The custome is very antient to make hymms and Songs of Battells and victories. There are examples in Aristophanes and in Plutark in the life of Flaminius. Charle maigne caused a collection to be made of all the rimes of the like subiect.
This hard incounter bred a great alteration in mens mindes and
affections. Those which feared the courage and admired the prosperity
of this Prince, began presently to contemne him after the newes
of this rout. There was not any friend, no loue. Galeas Duke of Milan
renouncing the alliance the had made with him, besought the
King to renew those which he formerly had with France, and offers
him a hundred thousand Ducats. The King made this braue and proud
answer to his Ambassador. Tell your maister that I will none of his
money, and that once in a yeare I leuie three times more then hee, as for
peace and warre I will dispose as I please, but if he repent himselfe to
haue left my alliance to imbrace that of the Duke of Bourgondy, I am
content to returne as we was: vpon which wordes the Truces were published
againe.
This good newes augmented the content which the King tooke
at Lion, whether Rene Duke of Aniou came to see him. This good
Prince who had seene the death of his three sonnes,Rene Duke of Aniou comes to the King. and had but one
daughterRene Duke of Aniou had by Isabel daughter to Charles Duke of Lorayne three sonnes who died in the flower of their yeares. Iohn Duke of Calabria. Nicholas Duke of Bar. Lewis marquis of Pont, and yoland. put the Duke of Bourgondy in some hope that hee
would adopt him for his sonne: and transferre the rightes of
his house to the Crowne of Sicile, with the Earledome of Prouence

and this Prince had already sent Chasteau Guion into Piedmont with
20. thousand crownes to leuie soldiers and to passe them into Prouence,
to take possession thereof. The King being aduertised heereof
sent to Phillip Earle of Sauoy to seaze vppon Chasteau Guion
with his money and men. Hee had great difficulty to saue his
owne person but lost his money, adding this losse to others which
his maister had receiued.
The King intreated him to come to Lion, and not to deale with
the Duke of Bourgondy who sought to ruine him. The good old
man being discontented with the Duke of Lorraine, who had forced
him to giue his daughterAfter the death of Charls the first of that name* Duke of Lorraine, Rene Duke of Aniou pretended the Duchie, as husband to Isabell daughter to Charles. Hee lost a Battell against the Earl of Vaudemont, and was taken prisoner and forced to giue his Daughter Yoland to Ferry of Lorraine son to Anthony Earl of Vaudemont. Yoland of Aniou to Ferry his sonne,
resolued to this voyage.Complaint of the Du: of Aniou made by the Seneshall. Hee led with him Iohn Cosse Seneshall of
prouence, who with a freedome worthy of the age wherin he liued
and little knowne to them of his nation, (for he was a Sicilien) let
the King vnderstand that all whichRene of Sicile sold to Lewis of Chalon the homage and soueraigntie of the Principalitie of Oranges, his Son submitted it to the Parliament of Dauphine, and afterward K. Lewis restored it vnto him. Duke Rene had treated with
the Duke of Bourgondy touching Prouence and Sicily, and that which
he had dismembred to the benefit of the Prince of Orange, was only
to make his maiesty know the wrong which hee had done him in detaining
the Castles of Bar and Angers, and crossing him in all his
affaires, that this dispight had forced him to these resolutions, the
which notwithstanding he had no desire to effect if he might otherwise
haue reason from his maiesty.
The King taking the libertie of this Discourse in good part, as
free from flatterie, and seasoned with discretion,To fit a discourse to flattery for to please, is impudencie, but it is a great indiscretion to be to free and hardy, to auoid pleasing and flatterie. They must obserue a mean. Seemelinesse comes from mediocritie. (...) Plut. he found truth
in it which he could not gainesay, the which did binde him by all
courtesie and good vsage to deface the discontents which the good
old man his Vnckle King of Sicile had against him. The Chronicle
saith, that he made him great cheere at Lyon, he made him see the faire
of St Iohn, and the faire Dames of Lyon, but hee did well requite
this good cheere, for before hee parted hee contented the
King with such assurances as he desired to adde Prouence to the
Crowne.
The Duke of Bourgundy had besieged Morat,Morat besieged by the Duke of Bourgundy a small Towne
two leagues from Berne with an armie of fourescore thousand
men. The Suisses had twelue thousand Pikes, ten thousand Halbards,
and ten thousand shot. The Duke of Lorraine came also
with such troupes as the King had giuen him, and although the
number were not great, yet hee was commended by the Suisses.
They were weary saith Phil. de Com. in our Court of the D. of Lorraine. When a great man hath lost al his owne, most co^monly he tires them that support him. There might be in all some thirty two thousand foote, and
three or foure thousand horse.
The Duke of Bourgundy held it impossible for the Suisses or
the Duke of Lorraine to succour Morat,Battell of Morat won by the Suisses. and yet they did attempt
it and execute it very happily. As they approched the Duke saluted
them with his Canon which did play so furiously vppon their
troupes as presently there were many horses seene without riders.
The Suisses notwithstanding march on, for the way was
such as they must either aduance forward or retire back: they charged
the Dukes troupes, beat them back, and force many to seeke

their safeties in the Lake, into which they waded vp to the chins:
but they were noe more assured in the water then on the land, the
fury of the victorious souldiour slue them like Duckes. It was presently
made red with the bloud of this slaughter, many fled to the
next Forrest, and were slaine there. The Duke returned from Suisserland,
asHe that will see in what equipage Xerxes returned out of Greece, w^ether he had led a hu^dred thousand men, let him read the tenth Satire of Iuuenall.* Xerxes did out of Greece.

* Sed qualis redijt? nempe vna naue cruentis,
Fluctibus ac tarda per densa cadauera prora,
Has toties optata exigit gloria paenas.

The Suisses hauing continued three dayes vpon the place of Battell,
they dismist halfe their troupes, and with the rest recouered
the places which the Duke had taken, Petterlingen, Romon and Milden:
they enter at Losanna without resistance and find that all were
fled.Suisses enter the contrie of Vaux. They become masters of all the countrey of Vaux, and think
to doe as much vnto Sauoy, to make it knowne that they that would
not be their friends, were their enemies,Aristenus saith in the 9. Book of Titus Liu. speaking of the E^oliens. Romanos aut socios habere oportet, aut hostes, media via nulla est. The Romans must either haue fellowes and friends, or enemies there is no middle way. that there was no meane
betwixt both. The Lady Yoland, Mother and Gouernesse to the
Duke had broken the Treaties of Alliance, hauing fauoured the
Earle of Romonts quarrell against them, and giuen passage to the
Duke of Milans troupes, and to the Bourgonians to make warre in
Suisserland.Geneua compounds with the Suisses. The Towne of Geneua paying foure and twenty thousand
Florins was presented from the storme which their Bishop of
of the house of Sauoy had drawne vpon them.
The Duke retired into the Franch Contie,Affliction of the Du: after the Battell. opprest with so many
griefes and discontents as no man durst come neere him. If this
great Battell did not draw water from the ayre, as they say that after
great and bloudy Battels there shall fall great showers,After great Battels follow great showers, for that there is som God which doth wash and pu^ifie the earth polluted with humane bloud, or for that the dead bodies and the bloud which is spilt cast vp grosse vapors which thicken in the ayre. Plut. it did
from the eyes of many widdow women and Orphanes, for the
number of the dead was eighteene thousand of both sides: the
Historie of Germany speakes of two and twenty thousand.
The Duke vexed at this vnfortunate successe, the which hee
had attempted more to reuenge the iniuries of the house of Sauoy
then for his owne, and fearing least the Duchesse of Sauoy should
reconcile her selfe vnto the King her Brother,The Duchesse of Sauoy seazed on by the Bourgundians. and that the Sauoyards
should follow the fortune of the victory, he commanded Oliuer
of la March to seaze vpon the Duchesse and her two sonnes. He
stayed her neere vnto the ports of Geneua, set her on horsebacke
behinde him, and gaue order to them of his troupe to doe the like
vnto her two sonnes and two Daughters. The Duke of Sauoy was
saued and carried to Geneua. Oliuer de la March hee went on his
way all night, past the mountaine, came vnto a place called Myiou,
and from thence to S. Claud, and from thence to Rochfort,
and in the end to Rouure neere vnto Dijon. The King drew her from
thence by the Lord of Chaumont, and caused her come to Tours,
The Duchesse of Sauoy being prisoner at Rouure sent vnto the King to beseech him to set her at libertie. If she had not bin in these extremities, she would not haue done it, the hatred had been so great betwixt the King and her. whether he went after his departure from Lyon. Being arriued
there, he saluted her with these words. Madame of Bourgundy you

are very welcome. To whom she answered, that she was a good
French woman and ready to obay his commandements. He took
her at her word and this first answere was the best.The first answeres of women are commonly the best. It is that which Vlisses co^sidered in Homer pressing the soule of a woman to answere speedily. Their humors
and their passions were very contrarie to extract the essence of true
and perfect loue.She leaues the D. of Burgundies partie. Many things had past in their liues which had as
it were losened the Cyment of this brotherly affection. Philip de
Commines saith, that he conducted her to her chamber, and caused
her to be well intreated. True it is that he had (...) great desire to be rid
of her, and she as great to be farre from him.
The King would willingly that shee had married the Princes
her children to his humor, but she excused her selfe, and wrought
so as by his meanes and the mediation of the Duke of Lorraine
and the Arch-duke of Austria, she retired from the Suisses some of
those lands which they had seazed on, paying fifty thousand Florins
for the charges of warre, but it was not possible for the Earle
of Romont to recouer his. Eight daies after the King caused her to
be conducted into her Contrie with her children, but before they
parted one from an other, they would be assured of the promises of
loue which they had made, and not trusting to bare words they
added writings and others. They depriued themselues of that content
which their wils might haue receiued in producing freely the
effects of a reciprocall affection and confidence. But they had rather
be bound to religion then to Nature.
From this Flower-de-Luce are issued two Princes which haue
gouerned in Sauoy.A^e the 3. Duke of Sauoy husband to Yoland of France succeeded Lewis the second his father in the yeare 1468. Philip the seuenth D. married to Mary of Bourbon. Philibert the eight to Margaret of Austria* the ninth, Charles to Beatrix of Portugall: the tenth. Emanuel Philibert, to Margaret of Valo^s: the eleuenth Charles Emanuell to Catherine of Austria. She was mother to Philibert and to Charles,
Philibert raigned ten yeares vnder her charge, euery one desired to
haue this Prince in his power. King Lewis, as his Vnkle by the Mothers
side. Charles Duke of Bourgundy, as his kinsman and neighbour.
The Earles of Bresse, Romont and Geneua, his Vnkles by the
fathers side, who would exclude Galeas Duke of Milan, who had giuen
him his Daughter, tooke also the gouernment. He dyed and
left no^ children.
Charles his brother succeeded him and married Blanch of Montferrat:
of them was borne Charles the sixt, whose barren raigne
was but nine monethes shorter then his life. Hee liued six yeares
eleuen monthes. Philip Earle of Bresse, sonne to Lewis, and great
Grandfather to Charles Emanuel, who had been prisoner at Loches
succeeded him, a great Prince, as all they haue been whose fortunes
haue been tost and crost.They whom a variable and vnconsta^t fortune hath exercised and tryed gouerne the^selues better then others Tacitus speaks it of Caractatus. Que^ multa ambigua, multa prospeta ext^lerant, vt c^teros Britannorum Imperato respr^mineret. Whom many crosses and many good fortunes had raised vp, that he might exceed the rest of the Brittish commanders. After that Iustus Lipsius to confirme this truth hath spoken of Charles the fi^t, and Lewis the eleuenth: he addes Emanuel Philibert Duke of Sauoy, and concludes that the Greeke word, is true (...). I haue learned of them that haue hurt me, Miseria brudentiae bona mater. Misery i^ a good mother of wisedome.
At the Kings returne from Lyon,Alfonso K. of Portugal comes to demand succors in France. Alfonso King of Portugall
came to salute him, being at Tours, hee came vnto him as to his
last refuge, being no longer able to resist the power of King Ferdinand
and Isabelta. The cause of their contention is well worthy
the knowing, and to vnderstand it wee must remember that it was
formerly said that by the peace made betwixt Iohn King of Castille

and Iohn of Nauarre, Blanche the eldest Daughter of Nauarre was
married to Henry of Castille Prince of the Asturies, and that the
marriage was not consummated by reason of the disabilitie and
coldnes of the husband.Pope Eugenius the third, gaue a dispensation for the degree of proximitie that was betwixt the married couple, and the marriage was celebrated at Madrid in the yeare 1440.
The bashfulnes and modestie of this Princesse made her dissemble
her misfortune,Disabilitie of Henry K. of Castill^* whereof no man might inconsiderately grow
in doubt, for the Prince was of a manlike and braue aspect, but his
actions were faint and languishing. They were but fiue and twentie
yeares old when they were married. At one and thirty he succeeded
to his father, who died in the yeare 1454 of a quartaine
Ague, after that he had put Aluaro de LunaDom Aluato de Luna abusing the greatnes of his charge and the great loue the King bare him, was hated of the Princes and Noblemen of Castille, they forced the King to banish him six yeares from the Court. His faction won the Prince D. Henry, who armed against his father, and wroght so as he was restored to fauor, and made Master of the Order of S. Iames, but seeking to be reuenged of his enemies; and making many enterprises against them, Queene Isabel fauoring them, made the King resclue to put him in prison: and to haue him ex^cuted at Vaile dos^t. The King did forfeit al his goods, they did set a siluer Basin whereas his head was to receiu that which passers by would giue for his entertainment. A remarkable example of the inconstancy of Kings and fortunes fauours, Al sin (...) vita, a la tarde loa el dia. The life is commended by the end, and the day by the Euening. his Constable to death,
and had raigned nine and forty yeares and six monethes. Henry
succeeded him, and Alfonso his second sonne was great Master of
the Order of St. Iames, hee would willingly haue giuen him his
Crowne, for the griefe he had conceiued for Henries disobedience.
His Daughter Isabella was but three yeares old, to whom he gaue
the Towne of Cuellar, and a great summe of money for her mariage.
All things succeeded otherwise then he had proiected. The
eternall prouidence, which hath written in his tables of Diamond
the aduentures of things, which are, haue been and shall be, had
disposed after another manner.
But as the most constant patience is tired at length this Princesse,The Pope dissolues the mariage for sterilitie.
hauing for a long time endured her husbands disabilitie, began
to murmure, and he preuented her complaints, presenting a
request vnto the Pope to bee seperated from her, and shewed that
she was barren and could not be a mother, and that the affaires of
Castille required an heire. The Pope dissolued the first marriage
and suffered him to marry againe with Ione Infanta of Portugall,
Sister to King* Alfonso, and Daughter to King Edward, a Princesse
exceeding faire, who more desirous to bee a Queene then a wife,
consented to this marriage, notwithstanding that shee was fully
aduertised of the disabilitie of the husband which she tooke, who
although he were a great Prince could not haue found a woman,
where as euery one may haue for his money. But shee made it
knowne that a politick woman neuer dyes without an heyre.
On the other side the King held the blemish of disabilitie to be
so dishonourable, as to make the contrarie knowne* and to haue
children to succeed vnto his Crowne, he consented that Bernard de
la Cueua, one of his fauouritesSome write that D. Ioane consented therevnto by force, but when she had once made this leape, she had more need of a bridle then a spurre. A wonderfull incontinency and impudency. Being at it were confined to the Castell of Alacaes, vnder the custody of the Archbishop of Seuelle she had by D. Pedro the Archbishops Nephew two children, D. Ferdinand and D. Apostol. should lye with the Queene, who
presently conceiued with child, and to the end it should not bee
thought to be done by supposition, he would haue her deliuered
in the presence of Henry Earle of Alba de Lista, the Archbishop of
Toledo, and the Marquis of Vellena. It was a Daughter, which had
for her Godfather the Earle of Armagna^, who was at that time

Embassador in Castille to King Lewis the eleuenth.
Wisedome and discretion might haue made this deceit more
fortunate then it was,Henry the king of Castille degraded. for all Spaine made demonstration, of
incredible Ioy for the birth of this Daughter, but there was follie
and indiscretion of all sides. The King, who would confirme
this opinion that he was a gallant man, sought the loue of other
women, who soone discouered the deceit. The Queene made
shew to be iealous, entertained her loue securely with D. Bernard,
so as the great familiaritie he had with her made the world doubt
of her chastitie, and when as they saw that the King honored him
with the chiefe charges of the Realme, making him master of the
order of St Iames, and then Duke of Albuquergue, they did imagine
that he made him play his part in this Comedie, which ended
with cruel and tragicall effects, for the Great men of the realme made
a league to seaze vpon D. Alfonso and D. Isabella, brother and Sister,
to the end that this Bastard should not depriue them of their rights.
Alfonso being about twelue yeeres old was proclaimed K. of Castille
by them, and then did D. Henry shew the imbecillitie and weaknes of
his Nature, for whereas hee should haue opposed himselfe against
those mutinies, he suffred them to get such credit and authoritie, as
the Archbishop of Toledo, being sent for to come vnto him, to the
end hee might pacifie those troubles, he said vnto him that brought
him this charge. Tell your King that I am weary of him and his affaires,
and that he shall shortly see who is the true King of Castille.
The Grandos of the Realme assembled in a great plaine neere vnto
Auila to degrade the King from the royall dignity. That which
they could not doe vnto his person,Alfonso proclained K. of Castille. they did vnto his statueWhen as King Henry vnderstood of this degradation, which was in Iune 1^65. he said, I haue bred vp children and they haue contemned me. I came naked from my mothers wombe, and the earth at^ends me naked: No man can liue so poorely as hee is borne, and it God expels mee now for my fins he wil comfort and preserue mee afterwards, for his infinite power is that which kils and restores to life, which wou^ds and cures: that which giues Siegneuries and takes them away, which raiseth vp Kings, and puls them downe when he pleaseth. which
they presented vpon a scaffold: when as the Herad said that D. Henry
was degraded from the royall dignity, the Archbishop of Toledo
tooke the Crowne from his image, the Earle of Plaisance the sword,
and the Earle of Beneuent the Scepter, this done Diego Lopes cast
it out of the royall seat. Alfonsos standard was aduanced, and poore
Henry shouted at and contemned. They would end the quarrell
by a battell before Olivedo.The Battell of Oluiedo was in the yeare 1467. They doe not agree who had the victory. D. Alfonso was seen armed a^ all peeces incouraging his men. D. Henry appeared not in the fight, but entered triumphing towards night into Medina del Campo The two Armies fought by order,
one squadron against another. The Archbishop of Toledo led his
army hauing a white stole vpon his armes. The combat continewed
three houres, and ended with so great disorder of either side, as
both parties made bonfiers for the victory.
The Pope sent his LegatAnthony de Veneris Bishop of Lyon, the Popes Legate, being in Spain, co^manded them to lay downe Armes vpon paine of excommunication, the great men of Spaine opposed themselues and said that they appealed to a Councill. The Licentiat Iohn D. Alcacer and Doctor Alphonso of Madrigall were committed for this appeale. to pacefie these troubles, during the
which King D. Alfonso hauing raigned three yeares died of the
plague at Cardegnosa:Death of Alfonso King of Castille. The League would haue declared Isabella
heire of the Realme, the which she would not accept the King her
brother lyuing, wherevpon a peace was made, by which she was declared
Princesse of Castille the nineteenth of September, 1468. vpon
condition that she should not marry without the consent of the
King hir brother. They would haue married her to Alfonso of Portugall,

who was a widower, and D. Ioane to Iohn the eldest Sonne of
Portugall, vpon condition that if there came no children of the marriage
of the Pincesse Isabell,D. Isabella was sought for in marriage by the brother of King Lewis, and by the King of Englands brother. She made choise of D. Ferdinand Prince of Arragon. He came to see her vnknown, D. Guttiere of Cardona who co^ducted him shewed him her, saiing in Spanish, Esse es. It is he. To whome the Princesse answerered sodenly, and S. Shalbe thine armes, vpon this cause the family of this knight doth at this day carry an S in t^eir armes and deuice. those which issued from the marriage
of D. Ioane should succeed to the realme Castille. But D. Isabella
had other thoughts, she loued Ferdinand sonne to Iohn King of Navarre
and Arragon, whome shee caused to come to Vaillidolet in a
disguized habit and marryed him the eighteenth of October. 1469.Isabella of Castille marries Ferdinand of Arragon
King Henry was so incensed at this marriage, as hee declared his
Sister fallen from all the rights which shee might pretend to the
crowne of Castille, and caused Ioane his daughter to be proclaymed
his true heire, who was married to Charles Duke of Guienne, as hath
beene formerly said. This treaty of marriage was broken by the
death of the Dukd of Guienne. King Henry died also.The death of Henry the 4. King of Castille was in the yere 1474. the one and forty yeare of his age and the on and twenteth of his raign Hee was interred in the great Chappell of the Monastery of Guadalupe. He appointed 52. lampes of siluer to burne day and night vpon his tombe. And notwithstanding
that the Crowne were assured to Ferdinand and Isabel,
yet Ioane continued the title of Queene of Castille,Troupes sent out of France into Castille. and in this quality
she married with Alfonso King of Portugall, which was an occasion
of great warres. The French King being discontented with the
house of Arragon, and the warre of Pergignan, sent troupes to the
King of Portugal vnder the command of Aman of Albret.Ambassadors haue oste ingaged their Maisters in very ruin ous voiages. Philip de Co^mines who had treated with them of the K. of Portugall, saith that if they had beene well aduised, they would haue informed themselues better of matters here, before they had councelled their Maister to this voiage w^ich was very preiudiciall vnto him.
But the King of Portugal hauing lost his enterprises and his
Partisans, was forced to retyer himselfe into Portugall carring away
no other triumph of the warre of Castille, but the Princesse D. Ioane
his wife, whome notwithstanding hee would not mary before hee
were assured of the Realme of Castille, and therefore he went into
France to implore ayde from King Lewis, with whome he had treated
an alliance by his Ambassadors, who vnder the good chere which
was made them, and the good words which were giuen them during
the treaty, without any other intent, perswaded their Maister to come
into France, assuring him that he should doe more by his presence
for the succors which he demanded, then by the mediation of his servants,
and that there might bee a marriage made betwixt the Dauphin
and D. Ioane his Neece.
He landed at Marseille,Alfons^ K of Portugall comes to Tours. came to Lyons, and so went downe the
riuer of Loire to Tours, where he acquainted the King with the cause
of his voyage.Necessity ^orceth Princes euen to things vnworthy of their quality. They write that this Prince besought the King to succor him with such vehemency and humanity as hee fell on his knees at his heete. It had not beene secret though he had beene silent.
Kings come neuer to the gates of other Kings to offer or to giue, but
to demand and entreat. He carried a Lampe in his hand which descouered
his heart.The discommodities of great Princes cannot be hi^den. Ariston saith that pouerty is a lampe, which doth lighten and make all the miseries of the world be seene.
The Kings affaires would not suffer him to bee more liberall to
this Prince of good effects then of good words.Lewis refuseth him succors. If he had no other
consideratio^ but of the estate of Spaine, he had taken an other course,
but he had alwaies for a perpetual obiect the greatnesse of the house
of Bourgondy, whereof he durst nor iudge so long as the Duke was
armed, and therefore he had rather fayle his friends then himselfe.

To resolue of the succors which the King of Portugall required
of him, hee consulted rather with reason then affection,Resolutions taken by the Counsell of affection, are subiect to change those which are grounded vppo^ reason last perpetually. which
layed before him his great expences in Germany and Lorraine for
the entertainment of his armie, which he might not dismisse vnlesse
hee would runne the hazard of a surprize and scorne, not to haue
foreseene that which concerned himselfe.Wise men see all accidents in their thoughts they cannot bee surprized (...) word. I did not think it coms neuer out of their mouthes. Seneca cals it the word of ignorant men. Audimus aliqua^do voces imperitoru^ dice^tium^ Ne^ciebam hoc mihi restare sapiens scit sibi omnia restare quicquid fattum est dicit sciebam.
VVe sometimes heer the words of ignorant me^ saying, I did not know that this would haue happened A wise man knowes that all things may happen: Hee saith whatsoeuer is done I knew it.
The King of Portugall thinking that if he might soe reconcile
these two Princes affaires,The King of Portugal mediats a peace in vaine. as they might haue no subiect to doubt
one another, he should d^aw succors from them both, he vndertook
to goe into Lorraine to perswade the Duke to reconcile himselfe vnto
the King. His voyage was not long, for vppon the first propositions
he found that his enterprise was impossible, and so returned to
the King, who continuing the honors which he had done him at his
arriuall, intreated him to see Paris, and in the meane time procured
a dispensation for him from Pope Sixtus the fourthNotwithstanding that D. Ferdinand and D. Isabella of Castille made great oppositio^s at Rome against the marriage of King Alphonso of Portugall and D. Ioane his neece, his sisters daughter, yet the Pope granted a dispensation at King Lewis his instance. to marry
with D. Ioane his Neece.
The Chronicle and Martinienne, make a curious relation of his
entertainement, which was the 23. of Nouember 1476. The Lord
of Gaucour Gouernour of Paris,Reception of the King of Portugal into Paris. and Robert of Estouteuille Prouost
of Paris went to meet him on the way to Orleance towards the windmill.
The Chancellor of Oriole with the Presidents and Councellors
of Soueraigne Courts, and many Prelats went forth. The Magistrates
presented him a Canopy at Saint Iames gate. The Rector of
the Vniuersity, with the Doctor and Regents, receiued him at St. Stephens,
the Bishop and Clergy of Paris at our Ladies Church. The
short dayes and the long speeches added fire to the greatnes of
the ceremonyFire carried before the Prince was one of the ornaments of Maiestie, it was not in a Linke or Torch, but in a Lampe or Lanthorne. Prenuncius ante, Signa dedit cursor posita de more Lucerna. Corippus lib. 2. Herodian saith that Pertinax came vnto the Senate not suffring them to carrie fire or any other markes of the Empire before him. The President Bertier saith, that the same honor
was giuen to the Patriarks in the Greeke Church, and the ti^le of Balsamon. In Respons de Patriarch. Pr^uileg. They caused fifty torches to march before him to
conduct him to a Marchants house called Laurence Herbelot in the
street of Prouuelles.
The shewed him the singularities and beauties of Paris, hee saw
the Court of Parliament of peeres, the most sacred Senate of Europe,
where he did number as many Kings as Senators, Francis Hale
Archdeacon of Paris,A cause pleaded in Parliament by two (...) the Kings aduocate, and Peter of Brabant an
aduocate of the Court and Curate of S. Eustache pleaded a cause
the Chronicle saies, that it was a goodly thing to heare. Heere the
ignorance of those times moues me to pitty, few men were learned,
and few learned men taught in France. Italy had gathered vp some
wits of that great shipwrack of Greece, The tyrant of the East
would not allow of any exercise of learning.Greece hath giuen these goodly wits vnto Italy. Emanuel Chrisoloras an Athenian. George of Trebizo^de. Theodore de Gaza a Macedonian. Ier^nimo Spartiate, G^egory Typhernas, Iohn Argyropile of Constantinople, Lao^^^c Chalcondile Athenian. Marcus Musurus, of Candie, and Iohn Lascaris. For they make him
beleeue that learned men are soone possest with great and heigh resolutions,
against the seruitude which keepes them vnderBooks and Sciences teach men of iudgement more then any other thing to know themselues, and to feele the smart of seruitude and the losse of libertie. But this

light could not passe into France through squadrons of men of war,
and good books which are not preserued but in the Temple of peace,
lay yet in the dust of Cloysters, they were not made common to the
world, and they feared much that the masters in speaking well and
eloquently in a Chamber would not be so in doing well in field in
sight of the enemies,Cato perswaded the Senate to send away Carneades who was come to Rome on the behalfe of the Atheniens, for that his cloquence drew the youth of Rome to follow him, and disposed the rather to immitate to speake well the to doe well in war, and in the managing of affaires. Plut. that all eloquence was growne rusty in Barbarisme.
These great and goodly actions of those times, in the which they
must spread the maine failes of eloquence, were giuen to Doctors of
the Sorbone. They vndertooke to make Ouerture at the Estates, and
to iustifie or condemne Princes before the Kings Councell. See heer
a Curate of the greatest parish in Paris, who makes proofe of the
grace and greatnes of the French eloquence, in the first Parliament
of France before a strange King; the Ignorance of those times found
none more capable, he deserued to haue money giuen him to be silent,
rather then to speake.The ancient Orators got money both to speak and to be s^^et. One dema^ded of Demosthenes what he had gotten for speaking, and hee answered. I haue sold the silence of one day for fiue talents. Plut.
After that the King of Portugall had stayed somtime in Paris, they
put into his immagination (as iealousie doth easily possesse aflicted
mindes) that the King who had at the same time confirmed the ancient
alliancesThe All^ances betwixt France and Castille, were confirmed by the D^puties of both Kings betwixt Ba^onne. and Fontaraby. of France with Castile:Alphonso retires into Portugall. would cause him to be taken:
he thought to retire himselfe with an intent to shut himselfe into a
Monastery, or to make a voyage to Ierusalem, hoping for no succours
but from God, hauing in vaine attended them from men. The
King being loth to abandon him in this preplexity, caused certaine
ships to bee armed in Normandy to conduct him into Portugall,
where his sonne dispairing of his returne, had already taken the title
of King.
D. Beatrice widdow to D. Ferdinand of Portugall, Aunt to the
Q^eene of Castile,Accord betwixt the Kings of Castile and Portugall. vndertooke to reconcile them, intreating her
Neece to come to Alcantara to conferre together. Their Conference
did produce a peace for a hundred yearesIt was said by this accord that the peace should bee kept betwixt the Kings of ^astile and Por^ugal for a hu^dred years and one to come. to the content
of both Realmes, and to the glory of both Kings, who then carried
their armes and their designes to the conquest of new contries.
In the yeare 1475. the first voyage was made to Guinee by the marriners of Castile, after they had conquered the canaries in the yeare 1417. Of this enterprise Iohn of Batencourt a french was Generall and carried the title of King. Of that of Guinee Pedro de Colied s. By this peace it was said that the King of Portugall should not
marry D. Ioane; that shee should depart out of Portugall, or if shee
would remaine there, she should haue her choise, either to marry
with D. Iohn Prince of Castile, newly borne when he should come
to age or enter into a monastery.
This Princesse did rather choose a monastery then marriage, and
tooke vpon her the habit of Sta. Clara in the royall Monastery of Coimbra,
who for the greatnes of her courage and contempt of the
world, deserued of posterity the surname of excellent.
The flight of Granson, and the losse of Morat, two fatall accidents
to a spirit insupportable both in prosperity and aduersity,There are spirits like vnto sick bodyes which are distempered with heat and cold they cannot iud ure prosperity nor aduersity.
brought comfortles aflictions vnto the Duke,Afliction of the Duke of Bourgondy after the Battell of Morat. and made him continue
sixe weekes solitary at Riuiere, suffring his beard to grow carelesly

feeling his vnderstanding to grow weake, and his naturall heat
so cold, as they made him to drinke wine alone, in stead of Ptysan,
which before was his ordinary drinke. And to recouer his spirits and
to cheere his heart, they applyed therevnto diuers sorts of remedies;
and if by fits he came to his good sence, it was but to make him haue
a more liuely apprehension of his vnfortunate Estate.A great courage is very se^sible of pu^l^^e disgraces. Mahomet seeing himself^ forced to raise the siege from Belg^ade with losse and sh^me, called for poison to R^l himselfe. He neuer remembred this ahh^o^t but (...) his is head against the wall and ^are his mustastachos.
The solitarines which hee vsed to passe away his greefe, did but
augment it, and let him know that there is no worse estate then that
of a discontented mind in an vnsound body. Hee woould not endure
any one to talke vnto him, and was mad when they spake. If hee
would haue suffred himselfe to be seene it would haue giuen him
ease, and by the cheerfulnesse of his countenance his soldiers would
haue recouered their spirits which this accident had danted.Princes in the change of their fortunes ent^r into fury against them (...) at seek to ad^^se them. Perseus hauing been defeated by Paulus AEmilius, slue 2. of his greatest f^iendes, w^o s^ept foreward to tell him some truth. Euery thing dis^leaseth an aflicted mind. Great
sorrows must be euaporated, for the more they are restrained the
more they swell and grow more violent, but beeing past they must
shew a countenance free from all perplexity or basenes.He is contemned of his friends. Time did
but increase the wound in the Soule of this Prince, his friends and
allies contemned him. Gal^as Duke of Milan seeing that by this
losse all his Intelligences were crost in Italy, turned his back to him.
Frederie Prince of Tarentum, abused with a hope to marry his daughter,
allies himselfe to the house of France; whilst that this triumphant
Chariot went well, euery one would be on the top of it, but
now it is ouerthrowne they abandon it.Prosperity fi^ds many friends and kinsmen: misfortune and misery hath no^any,: (...) shi^ doth most commonly fellow f^rtune, who hath hauour and good successe at her sides.
The Duke of Lorraine seeking to make his profit of the Duke
of Bourgundies misfortune, recouers his places lost in Lorraine,
with the horsemen he had of France,Duke of Lorraine recouers his own Co^try and be^leegeth Nancy and some footemen from the
Suisses and the Townes of Germanie. He besieged Nancy, forced
the Lord of Bures of the house of Croy to yeeld, after that hee
had in vaine sollicited succors from his Master.R^ne Duk of Lorraine recouered many places which the Bourg^ndians held. E^pinal wou^d not yeeld without seeing him, for that they were made beleeue that he was dead. Nancy hauing indured ten weekes seege it yeelded the 7. of Nouember. 1476. The English
which were within it hauing lost Cohin their leader began to murmure
more at the length of the succors then the languishing of
the siege, for they had no other torment then the impatiencie of
that which they attended. They told de Bures that if hee did not
compound they would make their owne appointment. De Bures in
steed of opposing himselfe to so vniust and dishonourable a demand
yeelded vnto them. The Pilot beleeued the Galley slaues, and
the Phisition yeelded to the pleasure of his sicke patient.Pompey resolued to makewarre at the appetite of his soldiers, the which the Captaine of a sh^p should not doe, much lesse the Generall of an army, and against his owne mind, for he was wont to commend those Phisitions which did not please the disordred Appeti^e of their Patien^s. Plut. The
composition was made, and three daies after succors came.
The Duke of Bourgundy,Army of the Duke of Bourgon dies before Nancy. not to giue the Duke of Lorraine leisure
to fortifie Nancy, nor to furnish it with men and victuals,
blockt it in on euery side, hauing Pont a Mousson for his retreat.
This was not done with the aduice of his best Captaines,Not^ing doth more aduance the ruine of a Prince then not to beleeue Couns^ll, and to presume to know more then any. They hold him, saith Paulus AEmilius* that would manage all thinges after his owne braine for an arrog^nt rather then a wise man. Tit. Liu Lib. 44. who

held that seazing vpon the small places thereabouts, he should cut
off their victuals, and in the end famish them without troubling
his Armie, which had more need to refresh it selfe in garrison
then to Campe. But his Councels were disordred, and choller
and fury made his spirit runne headlong.Of an enterprise gouerned by choller and fury, there is no good issue to be expected. Furor iraque mentem precipita^t. Fury and choller make the mind run headlong. His will voide of all reason
and gouernment seemed to conspire against himselfe, the sooner
to aduance his misery.Phil de Co^. saith, that God propounds such resolutions to Princes, when it pleaseth him to change their fortunes. lib. 5. c. 5. Hee would giue no credit to Pope
Sixtus the fift, who sent the Cardinal of FriulyThe Cardinall of Friuli the Popes Legat being at Basill exhorted the Suisses to lay dow^e armes: But they said they could not doe it vntill the D. of Bourgundy were out of Lorraine, his Legat vnto him
to treat a Peace betwixt him and the Suisses.
In the heart of winter,Suisses send succors to the duke of Lorraine. and of a very rigorous sharp winter, he
camped before Nancy. The Duke of Lorraine was at Lucerne to
haue succors from the Suisses. They giue him eight thousand men,
which passe at Basil, crosse throgh Alsatia, and spoile the Iewes in the
townes of Ensicheim, Colmar and Schletstat, making no conscience
to take in grosse from the Iewes that which by their Vsuries they had
robbed by retaile from the Christians. All the Duke of Lorraines
forces being together, he made two troupes, the which were not
equall to the Duke of Bourgundies, being great in number, but very
weak and languishing for their precedent losses, and the discommoditie
of the season, which was wonderfull rigorous, and wherewith
notwithstanding both Dukes were pleased, as if they had bin
in the delights of their houses.D^licacy doth not become a Generall in his Armie. Tac represents Corbulo as a Generall of an armie should be in most discommodi us seasons. Ipse cultu leui capite intecto in agmine, in laboribus frequens adesse: Laudem strenuis, solatium conualidis, exemplum omnibus ostendere. He was accustomed to goe in a light weed, to be bareheaded among the rankes, and to be present at labors, to co^mend the strong, to comfort the sickly, and to be an example to all. Tac. lib. Ann. 17.
In the beginning of December the Duke of Lorraines Suisses
and Germans goe out of Bergarten and charge the Bourgundians
which were at S. Nicholas,Bourgundians charged and slaine. slue aboue a hundred and tooke many
horses. The brute of this charge comming to the Campe before
Nancy, awakes the Bourgundians, who presently beat to field to
succour their friends and recouer the bootie which the enemy had
taken at St Nicholas. At the same time the French and Lorraines,
who knew nothing of all this, enter the Bourgundians quarter of
an other side, where they slue many and set fire of it. Some thought
that if this had beene done by designe, and with intelligence,
Nancy had been deliuered.
Famine prest it extreamely, the inhabitants were forced to eat
Horses, Dogs, and Cats, their chiefe resistance was in the extreme
fury of despaire,The fury of necessitie makes strange resolutions, when as there is no other health but danger. which would haue made them goe forth like famished
Wolues out of a wood.
It was impossible to put in any victuals,Famine extreme in Nancy. but with the hazard of
many men. The approches were so kept as no pollicie, no stratagems,
which are commonly practised in such victuallings, could
succeed.In militarie factions, as the victualling of a place neere prest is one of the most difficult, so is it one of the most worthy. Policy can doe more then force. That of Landrecy in the yeare 1543. is one of the most memorable, by Francis the fift in view of the Emperor Charles the first ^e made shew to giue Battell, and the light horsemen being in skirmish be caused the victuals to enter, and then he retired. Rene resolued to put in certaine sackes of meale vnder the
conduct and hazard of a company of men at armes. They past not
all, many were taken and presented to the Duke, who commanded
they should be hanged by the rigour of the law of Armes, which

wils that euery man attempting to enter into a place to fortifie it
after that the Canon hath played shall be punished with death. Among
these there was a Gentleman of Prouence, caled Ciffron, Stuard
to the D. of Lorraine,Ciffron not heard meaning to discouer Campo^asses treason. who before his death said that he destred to discouera
matter which did import the safety of the dukes person. Campobasse
who knew him for that he had bin imployed in the practise of
his treason and intelligence with the Duke of Lorraine, makes the
Duke of Bourgundy beleeue that his desire to speak was but to desire
to liue and to winne so much time. This Duke too tractable in a matter
of such consequence, and which should not haue been neglected,
commands he should bee dispatcht. Ciffron said that it was not any
desire to prolong his life, but to free his Conscience, which made him
desire to be heard, they report this vnto the Duke, who sends back to
know what hee would say. This was to adde crueltie to death, to refuse
a little respight to a condemned man.To giue time to prepare ones selfe to die is an act of iustice and humanitie. The iudgements of Ne^o seemed the more cruel, for that he gaue not an hower to thinke of death.
Ciffron desired no delay for himselfe, for he was resolued to die,
but he required it to assure the Dukes life, to whom he sent word that
he could not trust that which lay hidden in his brest to any but himselfe.
Campobasse, who did wonderfully apprehend the last words of
C^ffron, Kept neere vnto the Duke, to the end hee might take from
him all meanes to discouer his Treason, wherefore comming out
of the Dukes chamber hee said that the Duke would not see Ciffron
and that he commanded them to dispatch him, so in strangling him
they smothered in his brest the aduice which might haue saued the
Dukes life. A miserable condition of them whose misfortune no man
beleeues vntill it be past.The Emperor Domitian said that the condition of Princes was miserable, for that hauing discouered conspiracies made against them, they are not credited vntill they be slaine. They alwaies say vnto them, it will be nothing, it can not be.
The blow, which Campobasse had receiued from the Duke of Bourgundy,
did continually blow in his heart the fire of reuenge, vvhich
lay hid, and to the end he should not loose the remembrance, he did
entertaine that by the ordinarie obiect of a deuice which was wittily
cruell.Campobasse leaues the Duke. It was of a Fig-tree vvhich by his owne force did riue the
Marble of an ancient Monument.Nicholas of Campobasse car^ied for his deuice the Fig-tree of Meala, Marmora Mealae findit caprificus. Mart. lib. 10. Not able any longer to couer
the fire of his reuenge, nor to hide his vnnaturall treason, and fearing
least the besieged, vvhom hee fortified with aduice and Councell,
should discouer him, he past to Re^es troupes, and did vveaken the
Dukes armie by some horsemen which followed him. That reason
which makes traitors odious, and treason acceptable, caused him
to be well entertained in Renes Court. Vice doth sooner finde a
vvife then vertue a husband. There is no such villany but it pleaseth
when it profits. Yet the Suisses and Germans which were in
the Duke of Lorraines Armie detested this treacherie,They that abandon their duties and l^yalties are neuer est^emed, Princes doe c^untenance and honor the^ for a time, but Noblemen that are about them (...) on them. protesting
that they would not fight with a Traitor. Rene sent him to Conde
vpon Mozelle, to keep the passage, and to make his profit of the
spoile of the Duke of Bourgundies men. They did counsell the
Duke to retire to Pontamousson to refresh his Armie,The D. of Bourgundy contemnes Councell. and not to
expose it in that weaknes to the hazard of a Battell, and to thinke
that the succors which Rene brought to the besieged, was not answerable
to the necessitie wherein they were. That his armie consisting

of forraine troupes, could not long endure the toyles of the
warre, nor the rigour of the winter, being certaine that the souldiour
which fights onely for pay growes discontent and disbands.
That which he receiues is lesse in his conceit then that which he suffers
and thinkes to merit.They that serue the^selues with strangers find an vndoubted inconu^nience. Thucidides saith, that most commonly they make w^r with bragging words and shews but when they are to fight, they retire. lib. 3.
He would not beleeue this Councell,Contempt an assured presage of his ruine. and resolued with a couragious
obstinacie to the worst, God had taken from him the tranquilitie
of the minde, and the fore-knowledge of his owne miseries.
Fortune, which ment to cast him downe headlong, blinded his
eyes that he could not see this Precipice.God will not onely depriue most men of a quiet se^led and happy life, free fro^ all troubles and care, but takes fro^ them most commonly the foreknowledge of calam^^es and afflictions which shall fall vppon them, and the meanes to preuent them, either for that he wil not haue his wil proue vaine and be diuerted, or to ex^mpt them from the care and vexation wherin they might be, a^tending the blowe, if they should foresee these ineuitable accide^ts. Nicetas Choniates. The wheele began to
turne, to stay it was difficult, and the fall was infallible. The descent
vnto ruine is easie, but the assent to good fortune is painefull. The
Duke of Lorraine diuided his armie into two great Battaillons, either
of seuen or eight thousand men, whereof the chiefe force
were Suisses, glorious and proud of two victories which they had
wonne at Granson and Morat. The Duke of Bourgundy had not
the third part of his troupes, and if he had made choise of the best
to fight, he should not haue found twelue hundred, yet he attends
the enemy resolutely being well intrencht, hauing before him a
Brooke betwixt two thick hedgerowes, neere vnto the Hospitall
of Magonne.
The Suisses vpon their first approch seaze vpon St Nicholas,Defeates and death of the Duke of Bourgundy.
and chase away the Bourgundians that were within it. The same
night the Duke of Bourgundy thought to surprise Nancy before
that the succors should arriue. The Duke of Lorraine was speedily
aduertised thereof: The Suisses let him vnderstand that the
season was so rigorous, and the cold so extreme, as if the troupes
did continue long without any imploiment they would ruine themselues
without profit.An armie in time surmounts all accidents. In like manner which in time ruine armies. Of this kind are hunger, cold, and other d^scommodities of the ayre. The next day which was twelfe day, they
aduanced towards Nancy, the Dukes chiefe strength was in his ordinance,
the which notwithstanding wrought no great effect. The
Duke being aduertised of the Suisses march, planted his Ordinance
against the high-waies comming to Nancy, thinking they
would come that way, but they tooke the left hand which was
a rough and troublesome way along the Riuer of Mozelle, passing
a little Brooke through the Y^e and Snow which then fell and ceased
as soone as the Battell began. They recouered a little hill,
by the which they might charge the Dukes Armie of both sides.
The Bourgundians discouering it, they raised a great cry to haue
the Artillerie charged: But it was too late. The Suisses hauing taken
breth, and made their prayers fell violently vpon the Duke of
Bourgundies footmen, and after some resistance woon their trenches,
make them recoile, and disorder them. The horsemen seeing
the footmen in route fled that way where as Campobasse stopt
their flight and their retreat. All the Bourgundians were at the
discretion of their enemies. The Duke being knowne by the traitor
Campobasses men was slaine with one blow of a Halbard, and two
thrusts of a Pike.When the D. of Bourgundies body was know^e, they found that hee had a blowe with a Halbard which did (...) his head from aboue the care vnto the teeth, one thrust with a Pike through hi^ ^high, and an another in his fundament.

After the Battell they were full of care what was become of him.
They sought him both among the liuing and the dead. There was
no difference, the bodies were all naked, the Lyon was stript by
some poore Grey-hound which durst not looke on him liuing.Cowardly dogges bite the skins of wilde beasts (...) they are in the house and (...) off their haire, but they dare not touch them whe^ they are in the ^ield. Plut.
They found him in a ditch, his face being plaistred ouer with mire
and bloud, the sharpnes of the winter hauing frozen all that they
could not know him. Nature hauing giuen him no greater share
of ground in this fall then to the meanest souldiour. The brute
was that he had escaped, and for sorrow of such a losse had attired
himselfe in a Pilgrims weed to wander throughout the world.There was seen in the town of Bruxelle in the Diocesse of Spire, a naked man couered only with a linnen cloth, who^ they held to be the Duke of Bourgundy.
Rene Duke of Lorraine sent to Metz to learne if he had not bin seen
passe, the Secretarie of the Towne hauing made inquirie, assured
him that he had not been seene.The Dukes body found by a Page.
Campobasse killing all them that fled, had reserued one of the
Dukes pages, who did serue to finde out his body,The Duke of Burgundies bodie was known by a Por^ugall Phisition, by the bas^ara of Bourgundy, by Oliuer of La March, and by the Gr^omes of his Chamber. the which he
knew by diuers markes, the wanting his teeth of the vpper Iawe
which he had lost in his youth with a fall, by the scarre of a wound
which he receiued in the throate at the Battell of Montlehery, by
the withering of the skin vpon his shoulder which a cole had made;
by a Fistula which hee had vnder his nauell, and by his nailes which
he ware longer then any one of his Court.
The Dukes Ensignes and coulours were presently carried to Rene,
who obseruing the Fuzils or Irons to strike fire which they carried
said.The Duke interred at Nancy. What a Pittie, when this Prince would warme himselfe, hee could
not make vse of these Fuzils to strike fire!The duke carrie (...) his coulours an iron to strike fire betwixt two trenchers of wood, meaning that it was in his power to make a great fire of warre when he pleased.
The bodie was drawne from among the dead and carried to
Nancy, where after they had washt it, and attired it in a poore weed
of linnen cloth, they layed it vpon a table, vnder a cloth of Estate
of black Veluet, the chamber being hanged with the same. The Duke
mourning in his outward habite for this death, and carrying ioy in
his heart for his victory, would needs see him, and was not so scrupulous
as Pompey, who turned away his eyes from the dead body of
Mithridates, King of Pontus, least he should prouoke the reuenging
wrath of the Gods against him.
At this sight the Duke was moued to pittie and sorrow, as compassion
is not lesse naturall in great courages, then crueltie euen against
the dead is proper to base and cowardly mindes.Great mindes are moued at the spectacle of the ruines of nature, and at the ^ragicall effects of fortune. Alexander felt his ^ies to swell with teares when he read these words in Persian vpon Cyrus tombe. I am Cyrus who conquered the Empire of the Persians, let no man enuy this little ground which couers my poore carkasse. Taking
him by one hand, he said, God receiue your soule, you haue caused vs
much trouble and sorrow. He caused him to be interred with all kindes
of Funerall Pompe, finding no expence so pleasing as that which is
made to interre an enemie.
It is strange to reade what is written and credited,K. Lewis aduertised of this death the next day. that the day
after the Battell, King Lewis being at Masse, the Archbishop of Vienna
said vnto him presenting him the Pixe. Reioyce Sr your enemy is
dead. The Posts which brought this newes so speedily might truely
be called windes, like vnto those of Elius Verus.The Emperor A^lius Verus gaue wings and the names of winds vnto his Posts calling one the North, another the great wind, an other the South, etc. And as the people

beleeue not that which they desire not, his subiects were long
doubtfull of the truth of his death. They said that the griefe of
this losse kept him hid, and that he had been seen in a Pilgrims weed.
It is troublesome to beleeue the death of Princes whom they loue,
who haue won their hearts by mildnes and affabilitie.
This Prince said, and his tombe speakes it yet, that he neuer had
any rest in his life. He would be the Eagle of Princes in designe and
execution, and as Eagles haue alwaies in their nests stones which
sound, hee had alwaies some designe in his head which disturbed his
rest. Hee that did inherit the matteresse whereon he slept, might
well keepe it to cause sleepe, seeing that a man so distempered did
sleepe little.
Wee must not suffer honor to grow old,Humor of the D. of Bourgundy nor to weare like a garment,
it must be renued by some goodly action. He sought by new
designes and new enterprises, to maintaine the brute of this reputation,
which he thought did passe away presently, if some other couragious
action did not renew it, and hee feared nothing more then
that his idlenes should giue the people occasion to demand what he
did. Meane men are not to giue an account of all their actions, but
will know what great men doe or doe not.A Prince should neuer giue the people occasion to inquire of his idlenes. Cato had reason to say, Non minus otii quam negotii clarorum virorum rationem extare oportere. The reason of famous mens Idlenes must be apparent, is wel as of their imployments. His great courage was
giuen him to afflict his bodie, and to torment his spirit. His force was
not equall to his Ambition, lesse pride or more power. His life was
too short to goe that great way. Hee would not haue been satisfied
with halfe Europe.Excesse the Dukes Ambition. All or nothing. Hee had more valour then
gouernment. Of this King and this D. might haue bin made the composition
of a great and absolute Prince;Who so could haue take^ some of the King our Masters conditions and some of his, might well haue made a perfect prince, for without doubt the King exceeded him much in iudgement, and the end did shew it by his workes. Phil. de Com. for the two essentiall parts
necessarie to make a great Captaine, Wisedome, and Valour, he had
but one, and would make himselfe to bee esteemed by actions
which were rather animated by courage, then guided by Counsell.
But he was laborious and diligent, two qualitiesHe is a good Captaine that is both wise and valiant. Hanniball was valiant, and Fabius wise. This man by his w^sdome vndermined the heat and courage of the other. Guiechiardin saith. That it is no lesse the dutie of a valiant Captaine to doe ^he workes of a wise man then of a couragious Paulus Aemilius did perswade Marcus Varro his Colleage to temper the hot fumes of his courage, by the coolenes of his vvisedome. requisite to
make a Captaine. He would be euery where, himselfe did view the
scituation of his Campe, with the aduantages and discommodities
about it, he obserued who went and came, who entred and who went
forth.Charles D. of Bourgundy vvas called by many the toiling, for that he vvould see all and doe all, toiling himselfe extraordinarily in all occasions. He was still walking among the souldiors, reprehending the
Captaines priuately, and the soldiors publikely, when he found them
to neglect their duties. The meanest fortune requires wisedome to
guide it, and the greater it is, the more it is enuironed with difficulties.
This Prince grew so insolent, and fell into so great a conceit of his own
valour, after his first deeds of Armes, that although his naturall inclinations
were not meerely warlike, yet hee tooke delight in no other
exercise then warre; with such great presumption, as he held no wisedome
comparable to his Councels, nor force equall to his valour, and
yet in that there vvas impatiencie and deceit, and in this rashnes and
violence. Presumption was so violent in his imagination, as he would
not haue giuen place to Hannibal nor to Scipio.Antigonus being demanded who vvas the best Captaine, he answered. Pyrrhus if ^e had liued a mans age. But among them that liued so, the first ranke was due to Haniball, the second to Scipio, and the third to Antigonus. He had made a temple

of his heart, which adored no other Deitie, then his Ambition.
After the Battell of Montlehery,The Duke grew presumptuous and insupportable. hee did nothing by Councell, all
after his owne head, and according to his own humor, being not able
to restraine the fiercenes of his pride, nor moderate the greatnes of
his designes,After that Paulus Emilius had vanquished Perseus, King of Macedonie, he spake these goodlie words. Let vs learne to humble our selues, and let vs restraine our fiercenes and pride. Vanity did so ouershadow the tree of his fortune, as it
made it die. His death vvas the ruine and desolation of the great body
of the house of Bourgundy, vvhich hath continued some 100. yeares
vnder foure Dukes in continuall felicitie and prosperitie. And so all ended,
yea the empire of Rome which co^manded al that was great, rich,
and powerfull vpon the habitable earth, is in the end fallen to peeces.The Empire of Rome in the time of the Emperor Adrian, had 200. thousand foote, and 4000. horse entertained daily, with 300. Elephants for war, and 2000. Chariots armed with 300. thousand Armours compleate: As for their sea forces, they had aboue 2000. gal^es, and 1200. gal^casses, and 800. vessels for pompe, siluered and gilt for ostentation only, and in ready mony aboue fifty millions of gould. Appian Alex. in his preface.
He had vertues worthy of a Prince, but Pride, presumption and
wilfulness blemished all the glory. Aboue all he was a great iusticer,
and they report an admirable example of his Iustice against a
Gouernour of a Towne in Zeland who was in a manner mad for
the loue of a Lady which was equally faire and wise,Example of the Dukes great iustice and who had
committed the gard of her beauty, to the loue of vertue. He attempted
against her honor, and this violent curiosity to be partaker of an
other mans pleasure,Plut. saith, that Adulterie is a curiosity of another mans pleasure. made him to sue vnto her and serue her. Seing
that hee could not winne her by praiers, seruices nor presents, hee
committed a notable villany, causing her husband to be imprisoned,
and faining that he was aduertised of some intelligence, which hee
practised with the enemy. Behold hee is in an estate where hee must
iustifie himselfe or die, for in such accusations there is no other way.
He that is accused of a crime must haue no other thought but to die, or to iustifie himselfe. It was the message which that couragious woman of Sparta sent vnto her Sonne, being told that he was accused of some crime. Either rid thy selfe of thy life, or of thine accusation. Plut. His wife cast her selfe at the Gouernors feet, whose intreaties shee
had so often scorned, suing for the innocent, and innocently pleading
plainly for the prisoners liberty. Why how now saith the Gouernor
do you make sute vnto him whose will you hold subiect to your laws?
restore me my selfe, and I will restore you your husband; he is my prisoner,
and I am thine, it is in your power to set vs both at liberty.
She saw her selfe reduced betwixt bashfulnesse and fear,A mind afflicted with fear and loue. blushing
first, and then palenesse painted vpon her face, did witnesse the one
and the other passion: for shame to loose her honour, by a crime
more odious in her Nation then in any other,When as Tacitus in his description of Germany speakes of their customes, hee saith. Paucissima in tam numerosa gente Adultera, quorum poena presens maritis permissa, accisis crinibus nudatam coram propinquos expellit domo maritus, ac per omnem vicum verbere agit. There are very few Adulteries in so populous a Nation, whose present punishment that is allowed the husband, her haire being cut of, he driues her naked out of the house before the neighbours, and beats her through the streets. and feare not to
recouer her husband. The Gouernour gaue her no time to bethinke
her selfe, for supposing that shee was in an Estate not to refuse
him any thing, he takes that by force which he could not haue
with her heart, and for that hee would haue no companion in this
tyranous possession,Cruelty base and villanous. to his loosenesse hee addes crueltie, which is
pleased with that company, and doth commonly lodge in base
mindes.Cruelty is an vlcer of the soule, proceeding from weakenesse and cowardise. Ammi. Marcel. lib. 27. He caused the Husbands head to bee cut off, the Wife
did summon him of his promise to set him at libertie, and he willed
her to go into the prison and take him: she goes thither with a hart
swelled with ioy for the deliuerie of her Husband, and with a great

desire to reuenge this iniurie, but she found him dead laid in a Coffin.
She cast her selfe vpon him, and with fearefull cries detested the
Gouernours inhumaine and cruell deceipt: which done, she goes
forth more furious then a Tyger,Iust. Lipsius who hath written ^hi, History saith, Retinere and placare conatur frustra; non tigris magis soeuiat (...) coepto; statim que Amicaru^ fidis aduocatis, rem denarrat, eius ordine^ and eulpam suam no^ culpam* ac consilium viamque vltioni exquirit: Censent omnes ad Principe^ eundu^: qui inter alias virtutes insignes, nisi superbia et peruicacia corripui^let, eximius Iustitiae cultor erat. He laboured in vaine to pacify her. No Tyger did rage more hauing lost her young, she presently called her ^riends, to whom she declared the matter, the maner, and her offence, yet no ^ffence: and required their aduice and a course to reuenge it. They all thought is fit to goe vnto the Prince, who among other noble vertues, if pride and frowardnesse had not corrupted him, was a great fauorer of Iustice. from whom they haue stolne
her yong ones, and reports to all her friends this cruell aduenture.
They aduised her to goe vnto the Duke, to whom shee fled and
cast her selfe at his feere, where with teares of reuenge and greefe,
she acquainted him with this iniurie, demaunding Iustice. The
Duke hearing of his barbarous accident, sends for the Gouernour,
who being confronted with this woman, feeles his face to blush for
shame, as much as hers was pale for greefe, who after hee had with
trembling denied a crime which had no other witnesse but his owne
conscience, and tried that villanies are more easily committed then
excused:It is a trouble to colour and disguise a villany. An ancient Lawyer being importuned by a Tyrant to excuse a parricide, which he had committed in killing his owne Brother, answered, That it was much more difficult to excuse an offence then to commit it. hee imbraced the Dukes knees, demaunded pardon of
him, and promised to marrie this woman, to repaire the wrong and
iniurie which he had done her. She craues reuenge for the death of
her Husband, and not the loue or alliance of him that had slaine
him. those that were present aduised her to accept of the offer, seeing
the mischeefe was done, and Iustice might well reuenge, but
not repaire the wrong. She being forced to fly to forgetfulnesse, the
Goddesse of the vnfortunate, resolued to giue her selfe vnto him,
who had depriued her both of honour and husband, and to binde
him vnto her for his life, which he could not saue but by her means.
The promises were written, concluded, and sworne, whereunto the
Duke added this Article, that the husband and dying first without Children,
all his goods should remaine to his Wife. This concluded;
their hearts did sacrifice to the concord of marriage, and they promised
to liue louingly together. It seemed there was nothing
else to be done, nor that so cleare a heauen as was that day, should
haue any lightning or thunder. The Duke turning towards the woman,
demaunded if she were content: I am my Lord answered she,
by your bountie and Iustice. I am not, replied the Duke, who wayed
how much the Commonweale was wronged in this crime: that a
Prince may well declare, but he cannot make an offender innocent:
that he is bound to do Iustice,A Prince doing Iustice equally, wins more glory then if he had giuen limits to the Sea, vanquished Monsters, ruined hell, and supported heauen. and to giue an accompt of innocent
blood, there being no triumph equall to that which a Prince raiseth
to his glorie in doing Iustice. He commanded the woman to retire,
and caused the Gouernor to be carried to prison, giuing charge that
he should loose his head in the same place wher he put the womans
husband to death,A woman depriued at one time of two husbands. and that he should bee also put into a Coffin.D. Ferdinand of Gonzaga, Lieutenant Generall to the Emperor Charles the 5. in Italy, made the like reparation to an Italian Lady. Hee caused his head to be cut off that had committed the rape, hauing first made him to marrie her, and to giue her all his goods.
Which done, he sent this woman to the prison, who being amazed
at this spectacle, and to see her selfe the widow of two husbands in so
short a time, was so violently opprest with greefe, as within a short
space she followed the way which these two men had made her.
But to end the life and discourse of Charles Duke of Bourgoundy,

he died at the age of three and fortie. He came into the world at
Dijon on Saint Martins Eue; in the yeare 1433. The verie daie that
he was christned he receiued the choller of the golden fleece, and
withall the name of Charles, which Charles Duke of Bourbon gaue
him, the title of Earle of Charolois, and Lord of Bethunes.
The house of Bethunes entred into that of Flanders, long before
the house of Flanders entred into that of Bourgundie. Baldwyn
Earle of Flanders, who purchased the Empire of Constantinople
by the force of his Armes, and the happie assistance of Anthonie
and Coesne of Bethunes, had two Daughters. Ione married first
to Ferdinand Prince of Portugall, and afterwards to Thomas Prince
of Sauoie, and dyed without Children. Margaret her Sister, married
William of Dampierre, and had three Sonnes and one Daughter;
Guy, William, Iohn and Marie. Guy married the Daughter of Fegard
of Bethune, Robert of Bethune succeeded him, to Robert Lewis
of Neuers, to Lewis of Neuers Lewis of Malain, Father to Margaret
his only Daughter, who was married to Phillip Duke of Bourgondy,
great Grand-father to Charles. This house of Bethunes hath
like vnto othersThe house of Bethunes hath brought forth many, great Captaines vnder this name of Robert. Robert who defeated Manfroy in Sicily, and marryed the Daughter of Charls of Aniou: Robert who beseeged and forced Roche vandais. Looke in the Duke of Sullys Panegyre. felt the iniuries of Time and Fortune. Of Time
which changeth and rechangeth all things, which maketh the grasse
to grow vpon the tops of Towers, and giues bounds to Empires
and Monarchies. Of Fortune, which makes of houses and men
as an Auditor doth of Counters, and a Melter of Medalles; the
first doth value them as he pleaseth, and the last doth cast the same
Image in Leade and Gold. It hath remained in a manner ouerthrowne,
vnder the ruines of this house of Bourgondie, there remained
nothing but the remembrance of her greatnesse, and a
mournefull conference of that which she was, with that which she
had beene, but Vertue would neuer suffer Fortune to deface out of
the courage of her descendants the magnanimity which was hereditarie
vnto them. Valour and magnanimity were as naturall marks
in their hearts,Many at their birthes haue carryed marks of their extraction; the Childre^ of Seleucus caried an Anchor vpon their thigh, they of Pithon of N^sibe had vpon their bodies the impression of an Axe, and the childre^ of Semes founder of Thebes had a Lance. as the Anchor, the Axe, and the Lance, to the
Children of Seleucus, of Pithon, and of Semes; But as that riuer which
hauing runne farre vnder ground, riseth vp more proudly and violentlie,
so this house continues about a hundred yeares vnknowne,
and farre from fauours and great dignities, it shall be like vnto an
example of vertue without fortune, of fidelity without credit, of
merit without recompence: it shall not bee but to appeare more
glorious, more powerfull, and more happy then euer.
At the same time Galeas Duke of Milan was murthered,Death of Galeas duke of Milan. his in-iustice
and crueltie had made him odious and insupportable. He caused
a Priest to be buried quicke with a dead mans bodie, the which
he would not interre without money. An extreame cruelty, and an
extreame auarice. Nothing did so much hasten his ruine, as a disgrace
which he had done vnto his Schoole-maister, hauing caused
him to haue as many blowes with a stirrop leather giuen him in his
own presence, as he had receiued stripes with a rod from him being
his Scholler.Princes doe willingly remember the seuerity which hath beene vsed towardes them in their In^ancies. Nero put Seneca to death. Arsenius fled into the desart, for that Arcadius his Disciple had resolued to kil him. To reuenge this affront, hee disposed there of his
Disciples whom he knew to haue beene wronged in their honours

by Galeas to kill him:Cruelties and whoredomes of the Duke of Milan. the one had beene depriued of his benifice;
the other two saw their Sisters dishonoured, by the voluptuousnes
of this Prince.Galeas Duke of Milan defloured the Sister of Charls Viscount, master of his ward robe, and then gaue her to one of his Mignons to abuse. Paul. Iou. The conspiracie being resolued, and they furnished
with courage and armes for the execution, they go to him being
at the doore of St. Stephens Church in Milan, approching neere
him,He is slaine at the Church doore. and making shew to salute him, Iohn Andrew Lampognano strook
him in the windpipe,They write that Lampognano to accustome and incourage himselfe to this execution, did euery day stabbe the Dukes picture with a dagger, and after his cruell meditations executed his desseigne. Ierosme Olgiato in the throat and stomacke,
and Charles Viscount wounded him in the belly. It was impossible to
escape, presently the Dukes Seruants seazed of them. The first being
content to die, seeing that Galeas was dead, cried out as they
cut him in peeces. After this manner I desire to die. Ierosme was taken
aliue, and being condemned to be fleied and quartered vpon a
scaffold aliue, he saied (making no other repentance for this crime)
that of so cruell a death, the reputation would be perpetuall.Ierosme Olgiati beeing strecht out vpon the scaffold to be quartered said. Mors acerba, fama perpetua, stabit vetus memoria facti. Burt. Lib. 5. Hist. Florent. A bitter death, but a perpetual fame, the memory of the fact shall remaine old.
The King was not so much greeued for the death of Galeas, as he
had beene for that of Francis Sforce,Lewis xi. a friend to Francis Sforce. the best of his good friendes,
fro^ whom he receiued 500. men at armes, and 3000. foot, led by Galeas
against the league of the Commonweale, and to whom he was
resolued to retire, if he might not haue entred into Paris.
When as the King saw himselfe freed of one enemy,Lewis sends an Ambassador into Scotland. he studied
what he should do to be reuenged of another, and remembring that
K. Edward had past the seas for the D. of Bourgundies passions, hee
desired to cry quittance with him, and therfore he sent Robert of Ireland
a Scottishman, and a Sorbonist, with two French Gentlemen,
to perswade Iames 3. King of Scotland, to make warre against England,
but the Estate of Scotland was so full of bad humours, as they
could not stir this bodie without danger of an incurable disease.Whilist that a body is found, it feeles not the putrified and corrupted humors which are disperced into diuers mebe^s, but as soone as one part is grieued, all gather together and run thither. It is euen so of states whilst they are in peace, but vpon the first trouble, any thing that is wicked, seditious and rebellious discouers it selfe..
The King was but seauen yeares old when he succeded to his Father,Contentio^ in Scotland for the Regency.
and the diuision was great to know who should haue the Regencie
and Gouernment of the Realme. Some were for Queene
Marie his Mother; Others were for Iames Kenneth, and George Douglas
Earle of Anguse. The Queene caused her selfe to be declared
that which she would be, and they that were for her saied; that if they
regarded Proximitie, there was not any neerer vnto the Sonne then
the mother: If they did consider the good of the childe, not any
one could haue more care then she: If they could not contend with
her in the degree of Proximitie, it were indiscretion to call her affection
and fidelitie in doubt, hauing therein nature for her Caution.
If they respect the common good, the condition of her birth
was considerable, for that being a stranger, no way possest with loue
nor passion, they should not finde that she would support the one
to the preiudice of the other, as they might doe which had Alliances,
Kinsmen, and Intelligences within the Realme, who carried
their dessignes beyond the Kinges life, and might builde vpon his
toombe: As for her, the death of her Son could bring her no other
fruits but a perpetuall sorrow, and therefore she was bound to desire
his health and preseruation.
Kenneth seeing this,Scottishme^ hate the commaund of women. stirs vp the people to apprehend the iniurie
which was done vnto the Lawes of a Realme, which had alwaies detested

the rule of Women, as contrary to that of nature,Gynecoratis or the gouernment of women is directly against the laws of nature, which hath giuen vnto men se^ce, wisedom, arms, and commaundment, and hath taken it from wome^: and the law of God hath wisely decreed, that the woman should bee subiect vnto the man, not onely in the gouernment of realms and Empires, but also in euery mans priuate family. Bodin. Lib. 6 cap. 5. and
which had seen the raigne of an hundred Kings, and not any one of
their Daughters that succeeded. Shall wee not finde saied hee,
among so many thousands of men, one man that is capaple to commaund
men? must a Nation which hath no other experience but
armes, beforced to subiect their swords to the lawes of a distaffe,
and suffer themselues to be gouerned at the discretion of a woman,
and of a strange woman?The first woman which opened the waie for the rule of women in Scotland was Mary Stuard: and Mary the Daughter of Henry the 8. in England. To pacifie this discord, they resolued
to leaue all matters as they were for a moneth, during the which,
the passions of both parties were but the more enflamed. Many
within the Realme, desired rather to obey the Queene then any other
that should be of an equall condition, or superior vnto them.
But as in such occasions a man of credit and authority workes
wonders, drawing the hearts and opinions of men as he pleaseth.
Iames Kenneth Archbishop of St. Andrew, giuing the Parlament to
vnderstand,Cato desirous to let the Romans vnderstand, that the commandeme^t of women was shameful, spake these wordes vnto them. All men co^mand women, wee co^mand men, and women command vs. Plut. that to giue the authority to the Queene, was to contradict the auncient Lawes of the Realme, to expose Scotland to
dangers, and Scottishmen to the scorn of a shamefull gouernment;
and who should iustifie the reproach which might be made vnto
them to commaund men, and to be commaunded by women.
That Scotland neuer knew what the gouernment of women was,
they found no names in their language to expresse it, they had neuer
seene woman preside in their Councels nor Parliaments, nor to
dispose of Iustice nor of the Treasure, and that which other Nations
call Queene, Scotland cals the Kings Wife.The history of Scotla^d reports the wordes of Iames Kenneth: Mairoes nostri adeo erant a cura publica muliaeribus mandanda alieni, vt si omnia reru^ vocabula excutias, ne mul^ebus quidem imperii nomen opud eas inuenias. Quorsum enim e^rei nomen imposuissent, cuius ipsi nullum, penitus vsum habuissent, nec imposterum vilum fore sperabant? Quas enim Reginas alii suo quisque sermone, nos Regum vxores appellamus. Our Elders were so farre from giuing the gouernment of publike affaires to women, as if you will examine all words, there is not any one to be found with them of a womans gouernment: why should they giue that a name whereof they had no vse, neither did they hope there should be. Those whom other Nations in their language tearme Queenes, we call Kings wiues. That for these
reasons he could not councell the Estate of the Realme, to preferre
the gouernment of a woman before that of a man, not to the
Queene to attempt it, beseeching her to thinke, that they which
councelled her did it more for their owne fortunes, then for her
honour. That although her vertues were not vnknown to Scotland,
and that they must hope well of the vigour of her spirits, and the
greatnesse of her courage, yet they had but two many examples of
the ruines which verie sufficient women had brought to States,
when as striuing to excell their sexe; they would exceed the bounds
ordained by nature.Zenobia Pal^^yren^ hauing vanquished the Parthians, and valiantly defended the Romaine Empire, in the end she saw her selfe vanquished and a prisoner. In a moment she lost the realme which her husband had inlarged and inricht. This seemes to shew, that the enterprises of women beyond their reach are alwaies dangerous. His aduice was, that they should chuse one,
or more, capable to gouerne the Realme, vntill the King had force
of minde and body to discharge them.
This opinion was followed by the greatest part, and they that
would willinglie haue crost it,Councell appointed for the Regency of Scotland. seeing themselues ouerswaied by the
multitude, consented. But to the end, one faction should haue no
aduantage ouer the other, they tooke two of either, giuing them
power to keepe the Prince, and to gouerne the Realme. They left

vnto the Queene the care to bring vp his two Brethren, Alexander
Duke of Albany, and Iohn Earle of Marre, and his two Sisters: but
she died the yeare following. The affaires being thus setled in Scotland,
the King of England made a truce with the Scottish men for
fifteene yeares.
About the sixt yeare of his raigne,Robert Bothwell fauoured by the King. Robert Bothwell a bold spirit,
being desirous to haue a share in the affaires, found meanes to approach
neere vnto this young Prince, and told him, that hee had
beene long enough vnder the gouernment of these old men, that it
was time to make himselfe knowne, and what God had ordained
him to be. Perswasions to raigne and commaund are alwaies sweet,
especiallie to Princes, who thinke they cannot begin their raignes
too soone, nor end the^ too late. Vpon this discourse, the King suffered
himselfe to be led to Edingbrough, to begin his raigne. The
Regents of the Realme were incensed at this presumption, and make
Bothwells processe. But the King declaring that hee had done nothing
but for his seruice, and by his commaundement, makes him
Lieutenant Generall of the Realme, and a Companion both in his
authoritie and affaires.Tiberius called Seianus Socium laborum, a Companion of his labou^s, he caused his statue to be honored in Pallaces and Theaters. Tacit. lib. 4. He commits vnto his charge his owne
person, his Brethren and Sisters, his Forts and Townes, vntill hee
should come to the age of one and twenty yeares, he bindes all the
Noblemen that were about him, to acknowledge him in this qualitie,
and he giues his eldest Sister in marriage to Thomas Bothwell the
sonne of Robert.The points reserued to Soueraigne Maiesty should neuer be imparted to any Subiect, no not by Commission, least they open a way to the Subiect to enter into the Princes place.
That which the King thought to do to assure this breeding greatnesse
was that which ouerthrew it,Nobility of Scotland conspire against Bothwell. for the Nobles of the Realme
did so enuy it, and did pretend so many dangers in this great Communication
of the Royall Authoritie to a priuate person, as they
coniured the ruine of this house. The King had demaunded Margaret,
the King of Denmarkes Daughter in marriage: whereunto
they did the more willinglie accord, for that by the treatie the controuersie
was ended betwixt those two Crownes, for the Ilands of
Orcades. The question was to send one to conduct the Queene:
This charge was giuen to Thomas Bothwell by the aduice of his enemies,
to the end that this absence might coole the great heare of
the Kings loue (as commonly Princes affections fauour that onelie
which they see) and weaken his faction, giuing more courage to
his enemies to make their party against him. They that had neuer
spoken word during his great prosperitie, cry now against those
Horseleeches of State, against those Rauens and Harpies.For a time they suffer and dissemble the publike iniuries and oppressions of priuate men, but when as any one begins to cry, all pursue them. All
the complaints which had beene made against the Father for the
bad gouernment of affaires, were reuiued with such vehemencie, as
the King saw himselfe in a manner forced to heare them, and to
prouide for it. A Parlament being called at Edinbourg, they make
a great instance vnto him; he cannot bandie himselfe against such
wholesome resolutions, and they let him vnderstand, that the force
of his Estate consists in the Accord of his Will with those of his
Senate.A Prince cannot sh^w to much fauour, loue and protection to the generall Councell of his Estate, from whence goe all the resolutions, for the good of the Co^mon-weale. Otho speaking of the Senate of Rome, said vnto his Armie. Quid vos pulcherima^ hanc vrbem, domibus, tectis, and congestu lapidum stare creditis? Muta ista et inanima intercidere and reparari promiscue possu^t, aeternitas rerum, and par gentium, and mea cum vestra salus, in columitate Senatus firmatur. What doe you thinke that this goodly Citty consists in houses, buildings, and heapes of st^nes these dumb and sencelesse things may fall and bee repaired againe, the eternitie of things, the peace of Nations, and my health with yours is setled by the safety of the Senate. Robert Bothwell is sent for to appeare in person, and to

giue an account of his actions.Bothwell co^demned by the Parliament. His flight into England did conuict
him. His Sonne being ficke, and not able to flie away was staied
a prisoner, and condemned to loose his head in the Spring following:
Thomas Bothwel being come to Edingbourg with the Queen,
much amazed after so many dangers which hee had runne for his
seruice, to see his house thus ruined, and vpon the aduice which
his Wife gaue him, of the small hope there was to returne into fauour,
he returned into Denmarke, past into Germanie, and so into
France, to intreat K. Lewis the eleuenth, to make his peace with the
K. of Scotland, but whe^ he saw that the king would not do any thing,
he retired to the Duke of Bourgondie, and did him great seruices.
But he did not long enioy the peace and quietnesse which hee
thought to finde there, for the King of Scotland, who desired to see
this house vtterly ruined, commaunded his Sister to leaue her Husband.
An extreme hatred from an extreme loue which forceth the K. of Scotland to breake a bond which could not be dissolued but by death. An example that t^er is nothing assured in the great fauour of Princes, and an instruction to ground our felicitie vpon our selues and not vpon an other. Man begins to be subiect vnto Fortune when he settles his felicity without himselfe. She was fullie resolued to runne her Husbands fortune,
but hee himselfe intreated her to goe vnto the King her Brother,
thinking that he could not haue more fauour, nor better sollicit an
end of his exile then by her. As soone as euer she came to Court,
the King married her to another, and makes her to send for her children
which were in Flanders: Thomas Bothwell died for greefe at
Antwerp, and the Duke of Bourgoundie, his heire, made him a
rich tombe, not so much for any care of his memorie, as to erect
vnto Fortune the trophee which she had gotten by the ruine of a
house,The house of the Bothwels was as soon ouer throwne as raised. The History of Scotland saith. Ita Bodiorum quae tum erat in Scotia florentissima familia intra paucos annos and creu^t and corruit, magno posteris documento quam sint lubricae Regum adolescentium Amicitia. So the familie of the Bothwels which then did florish much in Scotla^d within few yeares did both rise and fall; a great instruction to posteritie how slipperie the loue of yong Kings is. against the which it seemed she had no power.
The King in the meane time who had been bred vp in great libertie,King of Scotlands good inclination corrupted.
suffred himselfe to goe whether his humors led him, and puts his
Estate into such confusion, as there was nothing in a manner firme
nor well setled. The Truce with England was expired, and it was feared
they should fall to war, for that the same time the English had taken
and spoiled a great ship of Scotland, but K. Edward, who after that he
had ended his busines with Fra^ce, had no care but to take his plesure,
made no difficulty to restore that which had been taken, to the end
the Truce might be co^tinued, and the mariage of one of his daughters
treated with the Kings eldest son, the better to Cyment this accord.
The King of Scotland sent two Embassadors to the Duke of Bourgundy
to haue iustice of some complaints, made by the Marchants
which did traffick vpon his coast. Being arriued in Flanders, there
came a Phisition called Andrew to visit them. Hee was a great Sorcerer,
and one of those who to steale diuination, thinke to imitate Diuinitie,Andrew a Scottish Phisition a great Sorcerer.
and to abuse the world with illusions, wherewith their Demons
abuse them.The diuels inspire illusions into Sorcerers minds, to the end they should not see that which is, and see that which is not. Quicquid miraculi ludunt per Dae mones faciunt. What miracle soeuer they play, they doe it by their Diuels. Min. Felix. They are Apes of Diuinitie theeues of Diuination. Emulantur Diuinitatem, dum furantur Diuinationem. They imitate Diuinitie, whilest steale Diuination. Tert. Apolo. c. 22. He met them with amazement, for he told them
that they needed not to make su^h hast, for that within two daies they
should haue newes of the Duke which vvould make them to change
their resolution. The two daies vvere not expired before the newes
of the Dukes death vvas brought to Gand.

An accident which ouerthrew their embassage, and sent them
home into Scotland, where they did not forget to tell the King (as
Courtiers doe willingly discourse of that vnto their Master which
pleaseth him) that Andrew a Phisition had foretold them of the duke
of Bourgundies death.King of Scotland giuen to Sorcerie. Curiositie and idlenes had already framed
this Princes spirit to receiue these vanities for infallible sciences,
beleeuing that he could not be a King if hee were not a Magician.
Apuleius saith that to be a King in Persia hee must be a Magi^ian. Vili inter Persas concessum est Magum esse, hand magis qnam regnate. The brauery of the Court was all in these Impostures, if there were
any spirit corrupted with these errors, he was presently led into the
Kings Cabinet, whose spirit was like an infected Lyuer which draws
out of a great glasse of water a drop of wine to corrupt it more,
When a spirit begins to be depraued it seekes the ill although it be shut vp and enuironed with good, and conuerts the good into bad nourishment. some of his learned women had foretold him that the Lyon shold
be smothered by the yong Lyons. To haue more knowledge of this
prediction, he sent for this Phisition, he gaue him Benefices and great
entertainments to make him stay in Scotland, and consulting with
him as the Oracle of his fortune, hee had this answere from him.
That the dangers which threatned his life should come from the conspiracie
of his owne.
These words made so strange a Metamorphosis in this Prince: as
being gentle, milde and courteous, he became inaccessible, iealous
and distrustfull.Crueltie giues vnto a Prince the ^itles of Cyclops, Busyris, Phalaris, and others, wherewith Maximin was defamed for his cruelty, and to make it a Maxime, Nisi crudelitate Imperium no^ retineri. An Empire is not held without crueltie. Iul. Cap He thought that crueltie would purchase feare,
and feare would assure him, and disappoint the designes which
should be made against him. Hee held his neerest kinsmen for enemies,
and the greatest of the Realme to be traitors. Hee made new
creatures and gaue himselfe to be gouerned by base men, who managed
the state at their pleasures, and neuer did well but when as
they thought to doe ill.
The Nobilitie of the Realme beeing offended at this bad gouerment,The Noblemen conspire. and to see that the King was a slaue to men, who could not remember
their fathers condition without blushing, and who held
him coopt vp like a sauage beast that he might not grow tame, they
resolued to free him: but to preuent it, these petty tyrants of the
Kings will seaze vpon his Brethren,Iohn Earle of Marre the Kings brother was slaine in prison, he was accused to haue sought to bewitch the king, they caused twelue Sorcerers to be burnt they make the yonger dye by
bleeding, the other was put in prison, but the escaped and got into
France,Parricides and cruelties. with his wife, Daughter to the Earle of Bullen, being forced
to make that his contrie where he found his fortune, thinking to see
the same sunne euery where which he saw in Scotland. He besought
K. Lewis the eleuenth to assist him with sufficient forces to make war
in Scotland.Euery soile is the Countrie of a great courage. Quo modo lucem noctem que omnibus hominibus, ita omnes terras fortibus viris natura aperuit. As nature hath opened the day and night for all men, so hath she al contries for men of courage. Tac. lib. 4. The bad vsage he had receiued fro^ his brother caried
him to these motions to ouerthrow all that hee could not remoue.
The K. thought it not fit to ground a war against his allies vpon an
other mans passions: so as the Duke of Albany seeing that he could
not obtain that he expected fro^ the king, he past ouer into England,
and perswaded K. Edward to make war against the K. of Scotland.It is alwaies dangerous to make warre vpon the Councels of men that are banished from their countries, and reduced to those extremities to ruine it for reuenge. Passion doth easily transport them, they promise that which they cannot hold, and their wils are subiect to change.
The Noblemen of the Realme apprehending this storme assembled
together by night in a Church, where they resolued to cast all

that into the Sea which was the cause of this tempest, and which
made the King to play at tenis with his subiects heads,Nothing is of so little respect to a cruell Prince as the bloud of his subiects. Stratocles seeing them buy the heads and n^ckes of beasts for his supper said it was that wherwith they that gouerned the commonweale played at tosse-ball. Plut. in Demet. being necessary
to rid himselfe of domesticke enemies before he did incounter
strangers. The King who had spies in all places was aduertised of
this assembly, and sent Cocheran one of his fauorites to discouer it,
he was met by Archembald Douglas Earle of Anguse,Conspiracie of the Nobilitie executed. who took him
by the neck and made him fast with the same chaine of gold which
he himselfe ware, and then he gaue him in gard to certaine soldiors
vntill it was day, at the breake of which hee was carried vnto a
gibbet, lamenting his hard fortune, which had raised him vp to ruine
him. Some cried out to haue him dispacht, others were moued
to pittie.In these changes of fortune some sing, others we^p w^^n Radamystus caused* Mithridates to bee taken and vnchained, the people remembering the rigour of his co^mandemen^s added blows to his misfortune: others lam^nted the change of his fortune. Vulgus duto Imperio habitum probra ac verbera intentabat. Et erant contra qui tantu^ fortunae commutationem miseretentur The common people. required his hard command with reproches and blows. And there were others which
Pittied the change of his fortune. Tac. lib. 4. To be wise we must fly the conuersation of fooles. Magna pars sanitatis est hortatores Insaniae reliquisse. Sen. Epist. 94. It is a great part of health to haue left the perswades to madnes. All reioiced to see the Court purged from this contagious
plague. He goes directly to the Kings Chamber, and seazeth
vpon all these Empericks of state, vnder whose gouernment impietie
had so raigned, and iniustice been in such credit in Scotland, and
causeth them all to be hanged.
The King of England made his profit of these broiles,King of England sends an armie into Scotland. for hauing
sent Richard Duke of Glocester his brother into Scotland with a
mighty Armie, he forced the King to restore him Barwick, which
the Scottishmen had kept one and twenty yeares, by meanes wherof
a Peace was treated and sworne.
The Nobilitie of Scotland thought that the King would grow
wise, hauing no more these instruments of folly about him, z but
hee made them to change their opinions, for hauing setled his affaires
abroad, he began to call them to an account at home, and to
be reuenged of them which had prescribed him a law. This caused
anew reuolt, to pacifie the which the King fled to the Pope, who
sent a Legate, to draw the Rebels to their duties, and hee intreated
the King of France and England by his Embassadors, to assist him to
quench a mischiefe, the contagion whereof might creep in among
their subiects. Not holding himselfe safe in Edinbourg, hee
would haue retired to Sterling, but the Gouernour would not giue
him entry. He was then forced to keep the field hauing no retreat;
his enemies incounter him, and he accepts the Battel which they presented,King of Scotland ^^airne.
and fought valiantly, but finding his horse wounded, he retires
vnto a Mill, whether hee was pursued, and slaine, in the yeare
1488. the 31. of his age, and the eight and twentith of his raigne.
FINIS.



THE CONTENTS OF
of the eighth BOOKE.

1 THe King is aduised to make his profit of the diuisions of Italy, but he will not
heare of it.
2 Troubles at Florence, and conspiracies against the house of Medicis.
3 The Pope excommunicates the Florentines, and for their sakes the Venetians, arming
the King of Naples against them.
4 The King declares himselfe for the Florentines, and forbids to send money to
Rome. The Venetians ioine in league with the Florentines.
5 He sends his Embassadors to Rome, and is arbitrator of the controuersie: Ouerture
for a Peace: The lets of the Venetians side.
6 The Popes complaint against them.
7 Intelligences of the Duke of Brittany discouered, and Letters surprized by the
King.
8 Punishment of Peter Landais.
9 Townes of the Riuer of Somme recouered by the King.
10 Negotiation of Oliuer le Dain at Gand. Taking of the Towne of Tournay.
11 Princesse of Bourgundy sends Embassadors vnto the King to haue his Peace and
protection.
12 The King wins the Embassadors. Restoring of the Townes of Hesdin, Therouenne
and Monstreuil. Siege of Bullen, two and twenty Deputies of Arras hanged.
13 Arras yeelds vpon a composition, which is not obserued.
14 The Gantois rise against their Princesse, and will haue part in the gouernment
of affaires. Their Embassadors, sent vnto the King, bring back a letter which
the Princesse had written, contrarie to their Embassage.
15 The Princesse Chancellor, and the Lord of Himbercourt Gouernor of Liege, put
to death.
16 Ingratitude and impietie of Adolpe of Gueldres against his father.
17 The King entertaines friendship with the King of England, and keepes him from
inclining to the Princesse of Bourgundy.
18 Marriage of Maximilian Archduke of Austria, with the Princesse of Bourgundy.
19 The Kings armie in the Franch Countie.
20 The fi^st alliance of France with the Suisses.
21 Estate of the affaires of Castille vnder the new raigne of Ferdinand and Isabella.
22 Death of Iohn the second King of Nauarre and Arragon.
23 Peace and alliances renued with the Spaniards.
24 Blanch Countesse of Foix Queene of Nauarre, the mother of many children.
25 Battell of Guinegast.
26 Siege of Rhodes by Mahomet the second, and the valiant resistance of the great
Master.




@THE HISTORIE
Of LEWIS the eleuenth.
THE EIGHTH BOOKE.
TWO great occasions presented themselues
vnto the King to augment his
Empire,1477. after the death of the Duke of
Bourgondy. In the first, it seemed that
Italy was not diuided, but to vnite it againe
vnder the gouernment of one alone;
and that not any one but the
French King, might vndertake it, or
hope for it.
They councelled him to make his
profit of these diuisions,K. Lewis councel'd to make his profite of the diuision of Italy. and to renue the right which the Crowne
of France had to the Realme of Naples; since Charles, Earle of Aniou
Pope Vrban the third, called Charles of Aniou against Ma^froy, and promised him the Inuestiture of both Siciles. Charles came to Rome in the yeare 1264. in May, and receiued it fro^ Clement 4. and from the same hand the Crown at S. Iohn de Latran. the 28. of Iune. and Prouence, brother to the great King, who renowned by the power
of Armes, and much more by the holinesse of his life, deserued
to be declared a Saint.
Robert of Saint Seuerin came vnto the King,Robert of S. Seuerin came to the King, to make him resolue to come into Italy. Paulus Aemilius saith, that the King answered him, that he had learned fro^ his Predecessors, that the Fre^ch could neuer keepe any thing in Italy. and made him diuers
ouertures to moue him thereunto* but he, who was a Prince
which made more account of the essence then of the appearance
of things, would not hearken to it. The Geneuois intreated him to
take them vnder his command, hauing liued happily vnder King
Charles the 7. He was contented that Iohn Galeas, Duke of Millan,
Iohn Galeas Duke of Millan did homage for his mother, for the Dutchy of Genoa to the Lord of Argenton, returning from his Embassage to Florence in the yeare 1476. should do him homage; and whe^ they said, that they gaue themselues
vnto him, he gaue them vnto the Diuell, refusing a command
so ill grounded, as vpon the quicke-sand of the will of a multitude.
He was also resolued not to meddle with the affaires of Italy,
hauing learned from his fore-fathers, that to send Armies beyond
the Alpes, was nothing but to purchase repentance with much
charge, and great difficulties.The Geneuois haue often sought a Maister. Guichardin saith, that desiring with great instance to giue themselues to Lewis the eleuenth, he did not accept the donation, and had often refused, Dimescolarsi in Italia come cosa piena dispese and difficulta and all vltimo perniciosa al regno di Francia, to meddle with the affaires of of Italy, as a thing full of charge and difficulties, and in the end dangerous for the realme of France. Guic. l. 1.
He sent the Signior of Argenton to Florence,Troubles at Flore^ce. being full of troubles

for a conspiracy made against the house of Medicis: Laurence
de Medicis liued in that Common-weale as a Cittizen, and commanded
as a Prince: for alwaies in states which depend of the authority
of many heads, there are some which excell the rest.In popular Estates there hath alwayes beene some priuate man more eminent then the rest. Pericles at Athens, Epaminondas and Pelopidas at Thebes. His
Grand-father the great Cosmo,Cosmo de Medicis surnamed the Great. had laid the foundation of a great
authority, which did threaten the Common-weale with a new
forme of gouernement vnder the power of one alone: He was in
such reputation, through fauour of his wisedome, as he began to
terrifie the liberty of the Citty; and as Machiuel saith, the other
Citizens held it dangerous to offend him, and most dangerous
to suffer him. The contrary faction attempted to stoppe the
growing of this designe, the which they thought they could
not effect, but in killing Laurence and Iulian de Medicis brethren,
who were not odious vnto great men, but for that they had too
great credite, and their vertue too much reputation and applause.In a free Cittye the great vertue and reputation of one alone is alwaies suspected. Cato said against Scipio, that a Citty could not termed free, in the which the Magistrate did respect and feare a priuate man.
Heauen, which reserues vnto it selfe the disposition of States,
and which aduanceth or staies the Destinies as it pleaseth, had
resolued to raise the house of Medicis by the same meanes that
their enemies sought to ruine it.Conspiracies do many times succeed happily for them against whom they are made. Brutus in his History of Florence, the 6. Booke, saith: Consilia quae a coniuratis ad Medicum potentiam euertendam inita fuerant, ad eoru^ principatum stabiliendum mirifice contulerunt. The councels which the Co^spirators had taken to ouerthrow the house of Medicis, did wonderfully serue to settle their power and authority. It was already growne to that
splendor, and raised so high, as the fight of the vulgar sort was dulled,
and could not discerne it. The Lords which carried this
Name, being hardy and couragious, knew their owne merit, and
knowing themselues capable to reigne worthily, past all difficulties
to reigne assuredly.
The Conspiracie was executed vpon Iulian being at Masse in
Saint Reparees Church, but Laurence saued himselfe in the Vestry.
The Conspirators were hanged at the Palace-windowes,
and the Conspiracie held so execrable throughout all the world,
as MahometAll Princes are interessed in the punishment of traytors; When as Mahomet vnderstood that one of the Conspirators was in Constantinople, he caused him to be apprehended, and sent bound to Florence. would not suffer one of the Conspirators to liue safely
in Constantinople.Pope excommunicates the Florentines. The Archbishop of Pisa was among them
that were hanged: Nicholas, Cardinall of Saint Georges was put
in prison: Pope Sixtus the fourth was offended, and fauoured all
those that had beene dealers in this Conspiracie; he did excommunicate
the Florentines,Army against the Florentines. and caused Ferdinand of Arragon, King
of Naples to Arme against them: the Duke of Vrbin was Generall
of the Popes Army, and of the King of Naples, and with
him the Kings two sonnes, they did ouer-runne the Territories of
Florence, yet they spared that which did belong to Laurence de
Medicis, to bring him into suspition, and to make the people beleeue
that he had intelligence with them.So Hanibal spoiling and burning the houses which were about Rome, forbad the Souldiers to touch any thing that did being to Fabius Maximus.
This Common-weale was in deadly conuulsions of her liberty,Changes of gouernment at Florence.
scarce knowing what should become of her: Her Physitions
had rather see her rot with languishing, then to cure her, or

bury her.P^susanlas said, that he was a good Phisition which did not suffer the sicke to languish nor rot but did bury the^ speedily. Plut. She had passed through all the formes of gouernements
which the lawes haue established ouer people. From Oligarthia
she fell to an Aristocratia, and then the people banded against
the Nobility, and were reduced to those tearmes as they intreated
the Pope to giue them a Prince. This was Charles of AniouThe Citty of Florence was made desolate by the cruell factions of the people, which made the bloud to flowe in, the streets, and put all into combution. The Lucquois came and parted them, and it was resolued, they should take a maister from the Pope, so as he were royally descended. This was Charles of Aniou, brother, to the King S. Lewis. brother
to the King S. Lewis going to Naples.
He had scarce let them know what difference there is betwixt
the iust command of a Monarchy, and popular confusions, but they
that were bred vp, not to endure a maister, bring the popular estate
againe into credit;Duke of Athens died at the battell of Poitiers. then they returne to a Soueraignty, and submit
themselues to the Duke of Athens, against whom they made their
conspiracies, and forced him to leaue them:It is hard for a multitude to continue long in one forme of gouerment, especially when it is a stirring, actiue, and subtill Nation. These changes haue bin noted in the Athenians, Samians, Megarians, Syracusans, Florentines and Genouoys. The Athenians cha^ged 6 times in lesse then a hundred yeares. The petty Cantons of the Suiffes haue maintain'd the^selues in their first popular estate. then they returned
to their first confusions, they change and rechange their policy and
gouernement, thinking that they had got much by the change,
when they had new Officers, and that they which gouerned had
new names, the peoples vnderstanding beeing dulled with a
desire of Innouation: so as we finde, that in lesse then a hundred
yeares,Florence in an 100. yeares changed estate seuen times. they haue changed their estate seuen times, euery man seeking
to haue his share in the affaires, and thinking himselfe more
capable then his neighbour.
That wherin they were now, was to be held most lamentable, and
would haue beene more, if the King had not shewed his affection
for their defence. He sent them not any force against their enemies,King Lewis declares himselfe for the Florentines.
but he made an Edict, forbidding his subiects to send any
money to the Court of Rome, either by billes of exchange, or otherwise,
to obtaine prouisions of benifices, to the end that France
should not furnish the Pope with money to ruine his friends.
In the Edict which the King made to forbid them to send money
to Rome, bearing date the 16. of August, 1478. after a great and
patheticall complaint of the enterprises, and practises against Florence
made by Count Ieronimo, whom he calles an Vpstart, a man
almost vnknowne, of base and meane condition, we reade these
words: We did hope that our holy Father, like a good Father and Pastor
of Christian people, would haue imployed himselfe for a peace, and not
haue shewed himselfe partiall of either side; and hoping that for our
sake, who haue alwayes carried a great reuerence and deuotion vnto the
holy Apostolike Sea, hee would do some thing, we haue let him vnderstand
of the ancient friendship, league and alliance which we haue with
the Sgniory and Commonalty of Florence;Oath of the Gouernment of Flore^ceThe Flore^tins haue beene alwaies Allyes and Confederate to the Crowne of France, they holding that their Citty being ruined by Totila, King of the Gothes, was built againe by Charlemaigne, and cherished by the succeeding kings, whose party they haue alwaies followed, and declared themselues Guelphes for their sakes. Moreouer the King was bound to fauour this house of Medicis, which hath beene alwayes affected to his seruice; and be reme^bred the great Cosmo had exhorted his Citizens not to break with France, to fauour the designes of the Pope, of the King of Naples, nor the Duke of Millan. And in consideration of these great proofes of affection and good wil, he had suffered Peter his son, in the yeare 1465. to carry three Floures de Luce in his Scutchion. which hath beene alwayes
so well affected to vs, to the King and house of France, as they haue held
them for their singular Protectors; and in signe thereof, whensoeuer
they renew the Gouernours of their Signory, they sware to be true and
loyall to the house of France, and to defend their honour, and to entertaine
themselues in their friendship, good will, and seruice.

But notwithstanding all these aboue-named things, and without respect
of the present necessity of Christian people, our sacred holy Father,
hath shewed himselfe partiall in this matter, against the said Signiory,
and Common-wealth of Florence, and in like manner against the Duke
and Signory of Venice; wherefore they cannot by any better meanes, fortefie
the Turke and Infidels against Christians, then to molest and oppresse
them, that maintaine the Warre against the Turke: which things
are so strange to thinke of, as the Vniuersall Church, and euery vertuous
and Catholicke Prince should be grieued at it. And moreouer, wee
haue beene aduertised, that our said holy Father hath said; that in this
warre against the Florentines, Venetians, and others of their part, hee
would employ his Person, Goods, and all that he could furnish. The
which is a very strange thing, that the goods and reuenewes of the
Church, which are appointed for the seruice of God, defence of the Catholicke
Faith, and for the sustenance of the poore, should be imployed in
such warres, and for such Factions against Christians, and to mainetaine
such conspiracies to vsurpe the Signiories of Italy, and such murthers
and execrable crimes. In like manner it is very strange that
they suffer the indue exactions which are made at Rome, by expectatiue
Buls and other meanes, and by the Vacants which they leuy, contrary to
the holy Cannons and Decrets of the Church, made, and constituted, by
the holy Fathers, and against the determination of the Vniuersall
Church, and of holy councels, to employ the mony which hath beene so
gotten, to any Earledomes and Signories, to giue them vnto men of base
condition, and to aduance them, without precedent merite, or without
any aide or succour which they haue giuen vnto the Church. Among
all the Kings and Realmes of Christendome, we, our sacred Realme of
France, and Countrey of Dauphine, and generally all our Subiects, haue a
very great interest and losse, by the great abundance of money which is
drawne and paid by a great excessiue taxe, contrary to the said holy Decrees,
and the liberties of the French Church.
The Venetians made a league with the Florentines:League betwixt the Venetians and Florentines. The Pope
excommunicates them, being no lesse offended at this League,
then at the troubles which happened in Florence: The Duke of
Milan entred also into their League. The warre was managed with
that spleene wherewith their spirits were then transported. The
Venetians contemne these flashes of lightening, and are amazed
that Rome when it was Pagan had forbidden their Priest to looke
vpon dead men,The Priestes at Rome diuerted their ^eyes from all funerall sights, when as Tiberius made his sonnes funerall Oration, there was (said Seneca) a vaile betwixt him and the body: Quod Pontificis oculos a funere arecret: That it might keepe the high Priests eies fro^ that mournfull sight. Sen. in Cons. ad Mart. and being Christian, that he suffers men to kill
one another: That Pallas Priests durst not cursse Alcibiades,Pallas Priests at Athens would not cursse Alcibiades, although the people commanded it, for I haue (answered shee) the office of a Priest to pray for men, and not to cursse them. and
that the Pope being head of the Church, should cursse a whole
Common-wealth.
Italy became the force and store-house of the warres of Christendome,
there being no hope to quench the fire which his wilfulnesse
had kindled, but by the bloud of the vanquished.5 Lewis intreats the Pope for the peace of Italy: The King
knowing that the common enemy should reape all the profite of
this warre, sent his Embassadours to the Pope, to beseech him
not to show himselfe implacable to these two Christian Common-wealths.

The Pope receiued them with much contentment, as the
Angels and Messengers of peace: They came to Rome in February,
All this d^scourse is drawne out of the Oration which is in the Acts of the Vatican of Sixtus the 4. the which is cloqu^et and iudicious for that time, and for the estate of the businesse, it begins after this manner. Proximo Februario venientes ad nos dilectos filios Oratores Christianissimi Franceorum regis, pro nostra in eum principem solita charitate laeti suscepimus. Auxit laetitiam missionis tam longinquae causa. Ad pace^ enim in Italia procuranda diceba^tur venire. Our deere sonnes, the Embassadours of the most Christian French King, co^ming vnto vs, we receiued the^ ioyfully, for our wonted charity vnto but Prince. The cause of this long Embassage did encrease the ioy, they were said to come to procure a peace in Italy. and had audience as soone as they demanded it: They let the
Pope vnderstand that the Kings affection to the holy Sea, and his
zeale and piety to the seruice of the Church, had bound him to
seeke the meanes to quench this great diuision, and to vnite the
childrens will vnto the fathers, for that he was well aduertised that
Christendome should haue need to ioyne all her forces to resist the
Turke, who had a desire that yeare to inuade Christendome, and
it may be would begin with Italy, and therefore the League did
promise to giue care vnto a Pacification,Offer made by the King for the League. to the end they might
contribute their forces and meanes for the common defence of
Christendome.
The PopeEgimus pro meritis gratias, and pium magni regis desideriumlaudibus quibus potuimus extulimus. No^ vinci nons tanti boni affectu monstrauimus. Wee gaue them than thankes for their well deserning, we did co^mend as much as wee could, the godly desire of that great King: And, we did shew that we could not be vanquished in affection to so great a good. did thanke the Kings Embassadours with great affection,
he did much commend that commendable desire in Lewis,
whom he termed the Great King: (he that saith Great, saith enough,
it was the glorious Title of the Kings of the East,For the title of Kings, that of Great is excellent, and common to the kings of Persia, (...). and which
comprehends all other greatnesse) and desired that when there
should be any occasion presented, to seeke and aduance the good
of Christendome, his affection should neuer giue place to any
other, and that he had made it well knowne all the time of his
Popedome, by so many Legations which he had sent into all places,The Pope desires Peace.
to maintaine the Publique Peace, and make warre to cease,
and by that meanes supply the necessities, and serue for the defence
of the Faith: That neuer BishopThe History of Affricke saith, that the Bishop of Nola, after that he had sold all his goods to redeeme Christian slaues, he sold himselfe vnto the Vandales for his brethren. sold himselfe more willingly for
his brethren, then he would do, for so many poore Christians,
which do groane vnder the yoake of Infidels.
The Kings Embassadours; as Arbitrators and Iudges of the
Controuersie,Embassadours of France make an ouerture for a Peace. propounded some Articles to end it, and among
others: That there should be a suspension of Armes and Censures;
That the Cardinall of S. George should be set at liberty; That they
should ordaine certaine Suffrages and Prayers, for them that had
beene slaine in the Tumult of Florence; That the Florentines, and
Laurence de Medicis should humble themselues vnto the Pope, as
they offered to do, for the reuerence of the Apostolicke Sea; And
that all together should demand absolution, after the forme ordained
by the Church: That they should giue caution and assurance,
for their obedience and fidelity, and to maintaine the Liberties of
the Church: That all the forces of either side should be vnited together,
and paied for two or three yeares, to make warre against the
Turke.
The Pope hauing imparted the Articles and Instructions of the
French Embassadours to the Colledge of Cardinals:Articles of peace imparted to the Consistory. Euery man
commended the Kings Integrity, Religion, and Wisedome, but
they found them not full enough in matters which concerned the

Holy Sea,Non multos post dies jide^ oratores sicut internos atque aduersantes nobis mediatores accessera^t, ita media quedam ad conueniendum scripta dederunt integritatem, religionem, and sapientia^ deuoti regis monstra^tia Iudicio tamen nostro and venerabilium fratru^ nostrorum ad honore^ sedis, quem imprimis seruatum voleba^t satis non plena. After some few daies, as there came aduerse mediators vnto vs, so they propounded certaine meanes for an accord, shewing the integrity, Religion, and wisedome of the Great King, yet in our iudgeme^t, and of our reuerent brethren, they were not ample enough for the honour of the Sea, which they would haue chiefly kept. which the Pope did chiefly regard, and yet they were
allowed, vpon hope that they would produce a Peace, and an vnion
of Christian Forces, against the enemy of the Church; and also
for that the King pretended to make the Venetians and Florentines
consent to any thing that should be thought reasonable for
satisfaction of the holy Sea.
Vpon this assurance,The Pope receiues the Embassadours of Venice and Florence. the Embassadours of Venice and Florence
were welcome; for the Pope did beleeue that they came to performe
all that which the King had promised on their behalfe:
without this beliefe he had not receiued them, for the Church
dores are alwaies shut against them that are Excommunicate,
They that bee exco^municated are not heard, but to demand pardon and absolution. Pope Nicholas in the ninth Epistle to Lewis and Charles Kings of France, saith vnto them: That hee could not heare King Lothaire in his reasons, for that hee had beene disobedient to his commandements: Quod si contra propositum nostrum forte presumpserit venire Roman minime cum qua cupit honestate vel hic suscipitur, vel hinc profecto regreditur: That if hee shall presumne to come to Rome contrary to our purpose, he shall neither bee receiued with the honesty that hee desires, neither shall he depart. when as they present themselues to contradict his iudgements,
and to excuse their faults: But as they were about this Treaty, the
Pope supposing there would be no other difficulty, but for the Ceremonies
and Circumstances of the Reparation, which was due
for the offence done vnto the holy Sea; a Post comes vnto the Venetians,
bringing them newes of an accord which they had made
with Mahomet, by the which they did giue vnto him, Scudry, Tenare,
the Promontory of Lyconia, with the Iland of Lemnos, and
they did promise to pay him yearely eight thousand Crownes for
the liberty of the Traffique. This Peace brought ioy vnto the Venetians,
but it did terrefie all the Princes of Italy: For this Tyrant
was so neere, as he saw them from the Port which he had newly
gottenMahomet did besiege Scudry, the fifth of Iune, with foure score and fiue thousand men, the siege continued nine monthes.
The Pope was wonderfully discontented, seeing that the foundations
of the Peace of Christendome were ouerthrowne, and
that the King was disauowed by them, in whose name he had made
such instance for a League against the Turke,Indoluimus pro fidei causa vehementius, and quia potissimum conficiendae pacis fundamentum submoneri ex hoc videbamus, nec minus ipsius Regis Christianissimi gratia, in cuius dedecus maximopere redundat quo dum se huius pacis ad Ligae requisitionem autorem profitetur ab ijs tamen pro quibus orati, tam iniuriose contra fidei caussam affectus fuerit. Wee were much grieued for the Faiths cause, and for that he did see the foundations of making of a Peace shaken, and no lesse for the most Christian kings sake, to whose dishonour it doth much redound, who whilst be doth professe himselfe author of the Peace, at the instance of the League, yet he is iniuriously delt withall, by them for whom he had entreated. yet he did acquaint
the Venice Embassadours with the Articles; and they demanded
respite to answere, and to haue aduice from their Superiours. This
answere was attended two and twenty daies:Venetians demand suspension of Armes and Censures. The Pope thinking
that the longer they were to consult, the more iust and reasonable
the resolution would be.Fatemur errorem (dilecti filij) dies tam multos, ad saniora consilia pertinere credidimus, quanto inter eos consulebant diutius tanto and iustius and reuerentius ad salutem animarum vtilius responsuros putauimus. Deere sonnes wee confesse our errour, that there were so many daies of respite giuen, wee did thinke they had bene employed in sounder counsels, the longer they did consult among themselues, the more iust and reuerent we thought their answere would haue bene, and more for their soules health. But for their answere, they demanded
before all things, a Suspension of Armes and Censures, adding
great co^plaints, the which Sixtus maintained to be contrary to the

truth, intreating them to resolue within eight daies.
The Pope reports all this vnto the Consistory, and they finde it
hard to suspend the Excommunication,Vnpleasing to the Co^sistory.Dura res videbaturminusque aestimationi Apostolicae dignitatis conueniens, ad corum condemnatorumque nutum, nulla^ poenitentiae significatione^ edentium irrogatas poenas suspendi, diesque tantum octo, ad eam suspensionem edici. Peruersa and co^fusa iustitiae norma haud dubie apparebat ex reo iudicem, and ex iudice reu^ constitui. Porro aute^ cum Censurae ipsae nostrae ludibtio habitae esset, magistratumque imperio interdictum nullibi obseruatu^, omnibus in locis, omnia profanata, ridiculum iudicabatur, id suspendi quod seruatum non esset, id concecedi quod sibi peccatores ante sumpsissent. Et enim si censuras timeba^t, quaerebatur cur eas spreuissent, si non timebant, expediens non videbatur rem iudicio peccatorum non necessariam vel concedi, vel peti. before that they which
were excommunicated had made any satisfaction to the Church,
nor made demonstration of repentance: It was held a distastefull
thing that the Accused should prescribe a Law vnto his Iudge,
that the Iudge should do the duty of the Accused, and the Accused
performe the office of the Iudge: It was a ridiculous thing to
demand suspension of that which had not beene obserued, and that
they should grant that which they had already taken of their owne
authorities, and they said; if they feare Censures, why do they contemne
them? if they feare them not, why desire they to haue
things granted, which in their iudgement, they hold not necessary?
Moreouer they considered,Suspensio^ of Armes not alwaies necessary to make a peace. that it was not alwaies expedient to
haue a cessation of Armes to make a Peace: That many Treaties
had beene made, both within and without Italy, in the heate of
Armes; That in this suspension there might not onely be losse but
also danger, for that the course of the correction being broken,
mens minds grew incorrigible and more obstinate: And yet the Embassadours
of France did shew, that priuate considerations could
not haue such great effect as the generall for the common good of
Christendome; That the peace which the Venetians had made
was no let, but the other Soueraigne powers of Italy might
ioyne together to resist the Turke, euery one binding himselfe to
entertaine a certaine number of Souldiers, for so long time as
should be thought fit.
Vpon this consideration,Censures suspended and a Truce made. the Censures and Armes are suspended,
In ijs disceptandis augustijs publica charitas priuatum nostrorum periculum vicit, and defiderio intenti ad ea quae Gallici Oratores finem procurandae pacis, and oratione sua and mandatis and medijs regio nomine ediderunt, de iure nostro decessimus, acquiescendumque putauimus. In disscussing of those doubts, the publicke charity preuailed ouer our priuate interest, and inclining with a desire to that which the French Embassadours had deliuered in the Kings name, and by his mediation and commandement, for the procuring of a a peace, we haue relinquished our owne right, and thought good to surcease. The Embassadours of Venice and Florence fall to an examination
of the Articles: They finde not any pleasing vnto them,
they make new demands, and wil haue all restored which had ben taken
during the war, they passe ouer the Popes interests and respects
highly, and say plainely that the affaires are changed, being no
more in the estate they were in before they had made a peace with
the Turke, the which they declared they would maintain constantly
and fully:Conditio^s of Peace refused. As for demanding absolution, after the forme of the
Church, there was no such meaning.Pia insuper sanctaque impie and nefandissime occisorum Christianorum Domini suffragia, and Cardinalis legati detensione^ ambagibus quibusdam praetereunt. Qui vero monumentu^ declinandum existiment, si nostram eam infamiam putant aequo animo per Deum superflui officij curam deponant: Nam conscientia pluris est nobis quam omniu^ sermo and benefactis, quorum testis est Deus, maloru^ calumnias veras nobis laudes adscribimus. Discrimen iniustae criminationis malumus subire, quam tot defunctorum animas refrigerio iusto carere: Qui si ad seipsos eam infamiam referunt imieque factoru^ delere de ciuita^e memoria^ cupiunt: sunt haud dubie in seipsos and mortuos duri. Ad iterandam enim contritionem, proximisque praebendum exemplum, subleu andumque imprimis extinctorum animas stare ante oculos peccatum volunt: durae nimirum recusationis suae culpa haec est, non misericordis postulati nostri. They thinke it would be no

honour for them to entertaine an odious remembrance of things
past, causing Anniuersaries to be said for the soules of the dead, and
to giue new assurance of their affection toward the Church, there
was no mention.
When as the Pope saw this,Popes co^plaint against the League. he assembled the Consistory, with
the EmbassadorsVertimur ad vos Itali, and Co^federati Oratores, quoru^ causa haec agimus: lamentamur primo (...) Deo, and fratribus nostris, ceterisque Legatis in hoc loco presentibus, vocem patris, and plena salutis co^silia ad hunc diem, non audita esse. Clementia nostra vest^os Principes, pie non vsos plus apud eos armorum and belli fiduciam, quam Matris vestrae Apostolici Sedis charitate^, obseruantiam valuisse. Angimur quoque tam longinquam missionem amicissi Regis, curamque eius and vigilias pro viribus susceptas, sanctumque pro fide propositu^, successum per vos non habuisse. of the Emperour Frederick, of Lewis the French
King, of Edward King of England, of Ferdinand King of Arragon,
of Maximilian Arch-Duke of Austria, and of the Confederates:
He complained of the contempt of his authority, and told
the Embassadors of the league, that he lamented the obstinacy of
their Princes, who would not hearken to the voyce, and wholesome
counsell of their father, whose bounty they did abuse, and had more
confidence in their owne Armes, then affection to the Church
their mother: That he was exceeding sorry that the Kings Embassage,
and the good Offices which he had done to the holy Sea,
should remaine without effect, that for his part, his conscience
should neuer accuse him to haue contemned any thing for the
good of the Church, that his armes were alwayes open to receiue
them that would repent. And for that the Embassadors of Venice,
Florence, and Millan, demanded leaue to depart, he declared that
they were free, that he would not force the necessity of their returne;
but if they would stay, they might with all safety, that it
might be, time and their presence, might make those things easie,
which seemed difficult;Intellige^ces of the Duke of Brittaine discouered. and that sometimes Treaties were broken
off to be vnited againe more firmely.
But it is more time to repasse the mountaines, and see how the
King makes his profite of these last accidents. Estates are like vnto
ships, all things are not so well, but there is still some disorder: It
seemed that the Duke of Bourgundies death had brought France
to that estate, as she could not desire any thing else to make her
felicity perfect; But there is yet another Duke which hinders this
perfection: It is he of Brittany, who since the Treaty made at
Victoire neere vnto Senlis, hath not discontinued his practises in
England, forgetting that the English had alwayes reserued this
Prouince for the exercise of their Armes, when they should be
weary of peace;Edward the third, King of England, would not haue the Duke of Brittaine comprehe^ded in the Treaty of Bretigny, to the end he might haue meanes to vent in this prouince the boiling humours of his Realme, and haue where to discharge himselfe of his Souldiers. and that they haue taken delight to see him in
bad tearmes with the King. The Duke was more earnest and carefull
hereof, when he saw that he had lost the Duke of Bourgundy,
assuring himselfe that the King would fall vpon him, and that it
would be verified of him what the Fable sayes of the Larke in the
Hawkes tallants:The weake receiues from one that is more strong, what Law he pleaseth. The Larke (saith Hesiodus) demanded of the Spar-hawke, why he offered him violence. Miserable (answered the Spar-hawke) why dost thou complaine, a stronger hath thee in his power? Wherefore he sent often to visit the King, to
entertain him in a good opinion of his pains, and the fidelity of his
promises, and yet he continued his practises with the King of England.
The secret of this practise depended of Peter Landays,Disposition of Peter Landais Superintendant

of the Dukes affaires and Treasure, an able and sufficient
man to manage such Monopolies: He had Flattery for great men,
arrogancy and brauery for Inferiors, and he was difficult and seuere
to them that were his equals:These three qualities attributed to Landays, haue been giuen to Cutius R^fus, a man whom Tiberius, to ^^de the b^s^nesse of his extraction, said to be borne of himselfe. Curtius Rufus videtur mihi ex se n^tus Curtius Ru^us seemes to me to be borne of himselfe. Tacitus addes that hee was, Adu^rsus superiores tristi adulati ne, arro^a^^s minoribus, inter pares difficilis. To his superiours a sowre flatterer, arrogant to his inferiors, and difficult to his equals. Tacit. Animal. Lib. 11. He imployed and called Maurice
Bromell, who carried and recarried the Packets. The King, who
had spies euery where, discouers the messenger, and wins Bromell,
who by meanes of a Norman that could counterfeit the King of
Englands hand, the Duke of Brittaines, and their Secretaries, sent
the originall letters vnto the King, and carried the counterfeit Copies
into England.
The Duke of Brittaine, who thought he had no other witnesse in
this action, then the Sunne, and that the king could haue no knowledge
therof,In Actions which we think to keepe most secret, there is alwaies one witnesse irreproueable, our owne Conscience. sent his seruants often vnto him, to assure him, that
he was wholly at his deuotion, and would not depend of any but of
him. When as the King had meanes to verifie the contrary by the
proofes which the Norman put into his hand, hee caused Chauuin,
Chancellour of Brittanie to bee stayed, with all them that
did assist him in his Embassage, to the number of sixe or seuen
of the Dukes Councell, and committed them to close Prison
for ten or twelue dayes, the reason whereof they did not vnderstand.When as an inferior Prince deales not plainly and sincerely, with one that is mighty, he must not thinke it strange, if hee makes knowne the knowledge he hath of his subtilties, euen vpon them that know not any thing: and who, by the Law of Nations, should not be drawne in question. For this reason Lewis the eleuenth commits to prison Chauvin the Chancellour, the Seneshall of Vennes, and sixe of the Duke of Brittanies Councellers.
Chauvin seeking to iustifie his Maisters Actions, and imputing
this imprisonment to the power which some standerous suggestion
had ouer the King, they did shewe him all the Letters which
did witnesse the strict intelligence which was betwixt the King of
England, and the Duke of Brittaine. Your Maister (said the King)
is much too blame, who assuring me of his affection, shewes the contrary
in seeking the ancient enemies of this Crowne. I haue told him
often,Letters of the Duke of Brittany shewed to his Chancellor. that so long as he should hold the English for his friends, hee
must needes bee an enemy to France; and to the end hee shall not
excuse himselfe, nor contradict this truth, behold two and twenty
Letters vpon this subiect. Chauvin viewes them, and considers
of them: All his Rethoricke is not able to excuse the Duke,
he had rather calme the Kings iust choler by confessing and yeelding,
then to incense him more by contradicting.
The Duke of Brittanny seeing, that by the treachery of his
Seruants, his faith could not bee vntainted with the King, hee
sent for Peter Landays,Peter Landays suspected of treason. who alone had the charge of this Negotiation;
Being much confounded, he had no other answere, but
a protestation of his Innocency, submitting himselfe to the rigors
of Iustice, if hee were found tainted with any such disloyalty:
then remembring that hee had not employed any therein,
but Maurice Bromell, who had carried the Letters, and the
answeres, hee caused him to bee apprehended. This miserable
wretch confest all; and vpon his confession, he was put into a

Sacke, and cast into the Riuer, to the end the King should discouer
no more.
Peter Landays was vpon the declining of the precipice of his
life, and of this great fauour which hee had with the Duke of
Brittaine, if Bromel had not beene found; but hee was not contented
to haue escaped this danger,Hatred of Landays against the Chancellor Chauvin. his diuellish malice engaged
the Chancellour Chauvin, whose Iustice and Integrity hee
could not endure, being mad to see him so honest a man.An honest man is a great torment to malitious and wicked mindes: for although they blame and flye Vertue, yet they consider the glory and light, and that whatsoeuer is goodly in the world, as tributary to it. All the gold that is aboue, or vnder the earth, is not comparable to Vertue. Plat. and Plut. The
meanest Vertue may procure Greatnesse that is vitious to enuy.
Hee thought that the Wheele of his Fortune could not well be
staied; but being obserued by so quicke and piercing an eye, to
discouer and censure that which hee did, and that which hee did
not. But hee had more paine to accuse him, then to slander him.
Chauvins actions were like vnto well polished Tables, the flyes of
detraction could not sticke vpon them, they rest vpon rough and
vneuen places.
Hee makes the Duke beleeue, that without Chauvin the King
had neuer discouered the Negotiation of England, that hee had
Intelligence with him, depended of his Commandements, and
was his Pentioner. The Duke was so hooded by Landays, as he did
not see but by his eyes, giues eare to this slander, chargeth the Innocency
of this good seruant,Death of the Chancellor in prison in great pouerty. puts him in prison, and makes
him dye there with griefe, languishing, and hunger.Chauvin, Chaunceller of Brittaine, after two yeares and a halfe imprisonment, dyed of languishing and want in prison: foure poore Beggars carried him to be buried in the Franciscans Church at Vennes. He was so
old, as he could not liue many yeares, but his memory shall liue
euer, as a memorable example of the iniuries which Fortune hath
done to Vertue.
Soone after Landays appeared vpon the Theater of Gods Iustice,
to make knowne the shame which attended him at the last step of
his greatnesse. The Duke could not preuent it, but he must iustly
feele the same fortune which he had caused Chauvin to run:Landays processe made. for he
was taken prisoner euen in the Dukes Chamber, his processe was
made, and hee did insolently and arrogantly confesse all the excesse
of his life, vpon assurance which the Duke had giuen him to
saue him, and to draw him out of the Hang-mans hands. In the
end, for his Concussions, Violences, Thefts, Outrages, and other
Crimes,And hanged at Nantes the 19. of Iuly. 1485. he was condemned to be hanged, and the Iudgement executed
before the Duke had any aduertisement; the Castle gates
were guarded vntill the execution was done, to the end, that not any
one should enter.It was thought fit that the Earle of Co^minges should go and entertaine the Duke, during the execution; when as the Duke sawe him, he demanded in what estate Landays processe was: he answered, That the Iudges wold come and speake with him. They shall do well, said the Duke, for whatsoeuer he hath committed, I pardon him, and will that hee shall not dye. When as hee vnderstood of the execution, hee said, that his ereherous Gossip, the Earle of Comminges had deceiued him. He was therewith so troubled in minde, as few men saw him. This Landays came of base parentage: hee
was the Dukes Taylors Boy, he had charge of his Ward-robe, and
by little and little grew to haue the absolute command of the afffaires
of Brittaine. When as men of base condition are aduanced
to great places, they forget themselues, they abuse their fauour,
and respect not their fortune with that humility and moderation
which they ought.

Brittaine had no need to haue so great a King for enemy,Misery of the Duke of BrittainThe Duke of Brittaine sh^^s the pittifull estate of his imprisonment in a Sentence giuen against the Earle of Ponthieur, in these wordes, The Windowes of our Chamber were shut close and wee made a little hole with a Pinne, through the cloth that was waxt, by which hole we did looke into the Castleyard. Hee saith also, that Margaret of Clisson, Mother to the Earle of Ponthieure, came and scoft at him, vsing these words Deposuit potentes de sede. He hath put the Mighty from their seate. Hist. of Brit. Lib. 11. it
had felt the ruines and desolations which the Iustice of God brings
vpon Principalities for the sinnes of the Princes and People. The
diuision betwixt the Houses of Montfort and Blois, had brought it
to the last extremity, and it had seene an Act of wonderfull presumption
of a vassaile against his Lord; Duke Iohn hauing beene
prisoner to Oliuer of Blois, with such vnworthy vsage, as hee was
in a manner depriued of the aire, which all the powers of the world
cannot take from Man, there beeing nothing but death that can
depriue him of breath.
This poore Prince had no Aire at all, but was in darkenesse,
When as God, (saith Epictetes) takes from thee necessary things, as food, raiment, and thy sences, he sounds a retreat, hee opens the doore, and commands thee to come. and in a little Chamber, where hee could not see, (but by
a hoale made with a Pinne) the Sunne; for the which many
haue beleeued they were in the world:Anaxagoras said, that hee was in the world to admire the Sunne A more tedious kinde
of life then death it selfe, and hee that is reduced vnto it, hath a
strong resolution if he doth not murmure that God suffers him to
liue so long. One of the wise Stoickes thought that hee gaue
man leaue to depart this life, when as he gaue him no meanes to
liue.
But let vs returne vnto the King:Townes vpon the riuer of Somme recouered by the king. Before the newes of Duke
Charles his death was assured, hee brake the Truce which should
haue continued seuen yeares longer, and seized vpon Abbeuille,
Dourlans, Monstreuil, Montdidier, Peronne, Han, Bohain, Saint
Quintin, and the Townes vpon the Riuer of Somme, which by the
death of Charles, the last Male of the House of Bourgondy, returned
vnto the King.
Hee wisht hee might haue done as much to all the Low Countreyes,
and by some iuster meanes, then by Armes, in marrying his
sonne to the heire of Bourgondy.Lewis desires to marry his sonne to the heire of Brittain But beside the great inequality
of their ages, hee had promised him to the Princesse of England,
and he desired to giue him the heire of Brittaine, for she was more
sutable to his sonnes age; and this Princesse was a Rampart against
the fury of the English, who being seconded by the Dukes of Brittaine,
haue entred that way, and come into the heart of the
Realme.
He perswaded himselfe to preuaile by other meanes: he had good
seruants at Gand, who had made shew that this kinde of gouernement
was against their mindes; and that they affected new Maisters.
The day after that the Ganto is receiued newes of the Dukes death, they put to death 25 men of their Lawe. The pretex was, for that they had executed a man before they were confirmed in their charge. He thought that in taking some of the chiefe Townes of the
Countrey, the rest in this confusion of Councels, and weakenesse
of forces, would yeeld of themselues; and as if there had beene no
other difficulty, he disposed already of places and gouernments of
Prouinces.
His humor was to imploy meane men in great affaires, and to
handle great works with small engines. He sent Robinet of Odenfort
to S. Omer, and Oliuer le Dain, his Barber, to Gand, who was of such
power and authority, euen with the King, as the French going out
of the Realme, they demaunded of them in mockery, among

other newes of Court,Presumption of Oliuer le Daine. if Lewis were in good tearmes with Oliuer.
Stra^gers mock at princes which depend vpon (...) companions, and giue themseles, as it were, in a prey to their conduct. This man, for that hee was borne in a village neere vnto
Gand, was so presumptuous, as hee thought he could make this
Towne subiect to the Kings will, and tooke this charge vpon him
to goe thither, vnder colour to carry some message to the Princesse,
who had called an Assembly of the Estates at Gand,Estates in the Law Countries held at Gand. The Oath of fidelity was renued to the Princesse: for it had in already taken by Guy of Ro^^fort, Lord of Pluva^t, her Chamberlain, and by Guy Perrot, her Secretary of state. and vnder
hand practised men to what he had intended: he stiled himselfe
Earle of Melun. This purple-hue did nothing at all beautifie the
Ape, but made him more ridiculous to them that knew the basenesse
of his breeding.Basenesse of birth is a reproach which is giuen to them that gloriously forget the^selues. Iphicrates, Tully and Marius endured it.
Yet the King perswaded himselfe that hee would doe wonders
in this Citty, telling the chiefe Noble-men of his Court,
that they whom he had sent to Gand, and Saint Omer, were able
to get the keyes of the Towne, and to draw in his Troopes. He
made account of the one, as Augustus did of Mecenas,Augustus Caesar loued 2. men aboue all others, Agr^ppa for his patience, and Mecenas for his secresie, and discretion. Being in Councell with them after the war of Actium, how hee should gouerne himselfe, Agrippa aduised him to liue a priuate life: but Mecenas wisht him to think of a monarchy. Dion Plut. and Suet. and of the
other, as Agrippa.
Oliuer hauing demanded audience of the Princesse,Affront done to Oliuer at his audience with the Princesse. and refusing
to speake vnto her, but in priuate, hee caused himselfe to
bee scorned; and this disgrace concerned him that had sent him,
who had not considered, that such Commissions did properly belong
to men of birth, or of great merit; and that it seemes they
contemne the Prince to whom they send Embassadours of base
condition.They that carry the Title of Embassadours, should be men of credit and reputation. Caesar said, that the Suisses sent Embassadors vnto him, the chiefe wherof was Deuico, he who in the Cassian warre had bin their Generall.
The Gantois hauing discouered,Negotiation of Oliuer le Dain at Gand, and taking of Tournay. that hee had some secret
practises in their Towne, hee was in danger to haue beene cast into
the Riuer; whereupon hee retired to Tournay, and practised
thirty or forty men, by whose meanes hee brought in Mony with
his Company, which hee had at Saint Quintin, and seized of the
Towne, sending seuen or eight of the Gouernors to Paris.
The Princesse Councell seeing that her subiects fidelity was
shaken, and the Townes of Picardy deliuered vnto the King, that
she had to deale with a Cyrus,Embassage sent from the Princesse of Bourgundy to the King. and that she was no TomyrisCyrus hauing attempted against the Massagets, a people of Scythia, Tomyris their Queene being Imperious, high minded and proud, sent him the choice, either to go and assaile her in her owne countrey, where she would attend him, or that he would stay in his owne, and she would go vnto him. to say
vnto him, If thou comest not, I will goe: that euery one followed the
strangers fortune, they sent a great Embassage vnto the king,
consisting of many Noble-men, and of all the orders of the Countrey;
among which were William Hugonet her Chancellor, and the
Lord of Himbercourt, the dukes chiefe seruants, they found the king
at Peronne, where he had made his entry, and present the Princesses
letters vnto him, who besought him to protect her, rather then
oppresse her, as hauing the honour to come out of the House of
France, and rather consider the pittifull estate of her present Condition and Sexe, the which besides was subiect to the Councels
and Authority of passionate Men, then the respects of his owne
priuate Interest: That all subiects of Hatred and Offence
should bee buried in the Tombe of Duke Charles her Father:

When (...) the Supreame Authority lights vpon a woman, she must of necessity bee supported with great and eminet vertues, with a generous courage, and a wise conduct to gouern her selfe: vpon the first refusall disconte^tments grow, and then factions. Simon Rosgon Bishop of Agria, demanded of Q. Elizabeth, daughter to Sygismond, and wise to Albert King of Hungary, the Arch-bishoprick of Strigonia, to whom shee answered: Whilst I raigne you shall not haue it; and he replied; as long as I liue you shal not raign, and they both kept their words. That it was piety, for a great Prince, her Kinsman and Soueraigne,
to defend her in her Countries and Estates, whereunto she
succeeded according to the Lawes and Ordinances of Kings his
Predecessors, and in the end that she was resolued to referre her
affaires, to the good gouernment of foure persons, of the Dowager
her Mother, Sister to King Edward of England, of Rauasteen
brother to the Duke of Cleues, her neere kinsman, of Hugonet
her Chancellour, and of the Lord of Himbercourt.
The King gaue them good words,The King winnes the Princesses Embassadors. and hauing entertained euery
Deputy a part, following the first precept, not to force all at
once, but to pull of the horses taile haire by haire:To shew that perseuerance and co^tinuance doth by little and little preuaile ouer all things: Sertorious caused two horses to be brought, the one leane, feeble, and old, the other fat and strong; behind the leaner he set a strong and mighty man, and behind the other a slender weake one: a signe being giuen the strong man tooke the leane horse by the taile and sought with all his force to pull it of, but he laboured and sweate in vaine: The weake man who was behind the great horse began to pull it haire by haire, and soone stript it without any paine. Plu. Hee drew the
cheife of them to be at his deuotion, vpon the assurance of the marrying
of his sonne with their Mistresse: Hugonet hauing all his
lands in Picardy towards Amiens, and Himbercourt in Bourgundy,
giue themselues vnto him, and for the first proofe of their
affection, they dispose Phillip of Creuecoeur Lord of Cordes to
open the gates of Arras vnto him, holding him freed from his
oath to the Princesse: They thought that if this marriage tooke
effect, there were nothing to be diuided betwixt the house of
France and Bourgundy.
Vpon the same opinion,Townes yeelded to the King. Hedin, Therouenne, and Monstreuill
yeeld:That which the Ancients called Gessoriacum, is at this day named by the French Bologne, by the English Bollen, and by the Flemings Beunen: Beatus Rhenatus saith, that he had seene an old Inscription, where were these words: Gessoriacum, quod nune Bononia. Bulloine did not beleeue so lightly, it endured a Battry;
the King entred, and finding this Towne fit for the fortification of
the frontiers (as it hath bene alwaies famous on either side the
Sea) he compounded with Bertrand de la Tour, who was Lord in
propriety, and as the new Lord, he did homage without Girdle or
Spurres, bare-head, and on his knees, to the Virgin Mary, offering
as a right and duty vnto her image, a Hart of Massiue Gold,
weighing two thousand Crownes,Boloigne vnder the Virgine Maries homage. vpon condition that from
thence-forth, he and his successors Kings, should hold the Earledome
of Bulloine of the Virgine, should do her homage, and at
euery change of a Vassall, should pay a Hart of pure Gold of that
weight.
Thus the Princesse of Flanders,Arras besieged. saw herselfe forced to quite
that, which she could not keepe;It is better to quite that which we cannot keepe, then to loose it in keeping it. Phillip of Macedon did willlingly abandon many places vnto the Romanes, and a great continent of his Country which he saw he could not defend, rather then to be seene to haue lost it vnwillingly: So after the Battell of Cannes, the Romanes refused to succour many of their Allies, desiring rather to loose them, then to be blamed for that they were not able to defend them. T. Liu. Dec. 4. yet the King held nothing of
Arras but the Citty, which de Cordes had deliuered vnto him, and
wherein he remained Gouernour. The Lord of Lude defeated
the Horsemen which they of Doway had sent, and in this Encounter
Vergy was taken, and remained a whole yeare prisoner in
chaines, for that he would not be sworne vnto the King, protesting
obstinately that he could not cease to be seruant to the house of

Bourgundy, nor begin to affect that of France:It is dishonorable rashly to fall from the duty which we owe vnto the Prince, L. Maenius an Officer to Augustus, being carried prisoner to M. Anthony, he dema^ded of him, What wilt thou shall bee done with thee: that they strangle mee, answered Maeniu^, forneither for grace, nor punishme^t, will I euer cease to be Caesars souldiour, neither will I beginne to be yours. They of the
Towne seeing themselues prest demanded a Pasport of the Bastard
of Bourbon, Admirall of France, for two or three and twenty
Deputies vnder colour of going to Bollen to treat with the King.
They go forth with this pasport, but being followed and surprised
vpon the way to Flanders, they were led to Hedin, and by a
sentence giuen by the Prouost condemned to loose their heads: the
King arriuing vpon the execution staid it: Princes alwaies cause
punishments to cease when they are in presence: They told him
that among them that were executed, there was a Parisian called
Oudard of Bussy, to whom he had giuen the office of a Maister of
Accompts in the chamber at Arras: Hee caused his head to bee set
vpon a stake in the Market-place, wearing a scarlet hood, furred
with Meneuer.Arras yeelded by composition. A breach being made, an assault valiantly giuen, and
basely defended, Arras yeelded by composition, the victory was
but of bare wals, for their hearts remained firme to the house of
Bourgundy:There were a good number of Cittizens found in Arras, who suffred the^selues rather to be hanged, then they would say, God saue the King. The king also thinking it impossible to make this people
obedient, and to imprint the Flower de luce in their hearts, caused
most of the Inhabitants to depart,To people a Towne with ancient subiects, and to expell the naturall Inhabitants, is a means to assure it, but very inhumane: It was a pittifull spectacle to see poore men lade^ with their infants vpon their shoulders, passe out of the Coast Townes where they were borne, by the commadement of Phillip king of Macedo, and to go into Emathia, quitting their houses and inheritances to the Thracians. Tit. Liu. lib. 10. Decad. 4. and planted naturall Frenchmen,
commanding the Town should be Francis-towne, and that with
her first name, she should loose the ancient hatred she bare vnto
France. This people had no sooner yeelded, but they made it known
how much they were grieued to see themselues reduced vnder the
command of a new Maister, for the King hauing sent the Cardinall
of Bourbon, the Chancellor of Oriole, Des Cordes Gouernor of the
Towne, and Guyot Pot Bayliffe of Vermandois, to receiue the oath of
fidelity; they saw themselues assayled, in the Monastery of S. Vast,
where they dined, with a furious mutiny of the people, crying kill,
kill, The kings seruants were onely made afraid, but these mad-men
repented it, for many of them were stript and slaine, and the City fined
at three-score thousand Crownes.
The Princesse remained at Gand,Gantois ready to reuolt against their Princesse. with much trouble to keepe the
Gantois in obedience: She knew well their sedition, but she dissembled
the nu^ber of the seditious;It is not good to hold all them to be wicked, in open shew, which are so in effect: In old time they did not thinke it necessary to marke all their slaues, to the end they should not know their owne strength: In seeking out all the seditious, they know one another, and learne how many they are. seeming to make account of their
fidelities whose reuolt and treachery she held to be certaine: They
would haue againe the priuileges, which her father and grand-father
had taken from them, they vndertake the conduct, and absolute direction
of affaires, not being able to endure them, who for their
wisedome and experience had deserued the first places in the Princesse
Councell, and she had not any person capable to make head against
this Mutiny, the which doth neuer fortefie it self, but through
the weakenesse and cowardise of them that may suppresse it.A people which is fearefull, is alwaies humble and tractable: when as Mutines see the powerfull sword of Iustice before their eyes, they distrust one another: Being all together they are Lyons, and diuided Goats.
They made an Assembly in forme of Estates, and resolued that
from thence-forth she should be gouerned by the aduice of the Estates,
who should send vnto the King, to acquaint him with this

resolution, and to beseech him to allow thereof, and in this consideration
to cease all Acts of Hostility against her Countries: These
Embassadours come vnto the King, thinking to bring him a subiect
of great content: assuring him that their Princesse desired nothing
but the honour of his friend-ship and protection; being resolued
not to do any thing but by the aduice of the three Estates of
her Countries. The King, who knew well the humour of the Gantois,
the confusion of this Princesses affaires, and had a desire to
make his profite in this trouble,Embassadours contradicted and confou^ded.In many things, but especially in this, Lewis did imitate the most politick of Romane Emperours, who held it for one of the best maximes of State, to haue peace at home, and war far off. Princes which haue followed this course, haue atained to a perfect prosperity of their affaires, others haue gone astray. said vnto them: My Maisters, I
know not what to thinke of the cause that drawes you hether, knowing
wel, that it is not conformable to that which you say vnto me, and that your
mistresse will not aduow that she hath giuen you charge to tell me, that
that she would be gouerned by the aduice of the Estates of the Country,
for she hath giuen me to vnderstand the contrary: And as these men
protested of the truth of their instructions, and seemed resolute,
the King heares them coldly, and showes them a letter written by the
Princesse, and brought by Hugonet her Chancellor, and Himbercourt.
At the sight of this letter,The King deliuers the Princesses letters to the Embassadours. which made mention that the Princesse
was resolued to referre her affaires to the discretion of foure persons,
and not of the Estates, they end their Embassage, and attend no
other answere, being satisfied to see themselues deceiued, and the
King suffers them to go ful of choller and reuenge. They present the^selues
vnto the Princesse, to giue an account of their Embassage,
complaining, bitterly and indiscreetly, that she had made them
to carry a message vnto the king, contrary to that which she had resolued;
that she had reserued truth in the heart, and put falshood in
their mouths to ruin them: When as the Princesse sought to iustefie
the truth of her intentions,When as the Deputies of Ga^d presented themselues vnto the Princesse Councell, saying; That the King had let them see the contrary of their Embassage, the Princesse sought to maintain that she had done nothing contrary to their instructio^s, Then (said Philip de Comines) the Pentioner of Gand, drew out of his bosom the said letter, before al the world, and gaue it her. He shewed that he was a bad man and of smal respect, to do that affront to a yong Gentlewoma^, to who^ so villanous a scorne should not bee done: for if shee had committed any error, she shold not haue been reprehended publikely: It is not to bee demanded, if she were ashamed, for she had told euery one the contrary: Phil de Com. assuring them, that what she gaue
them by instruction, was what she thought; they present vnto her
the letter which the King had giuen them: She held this for a great
affront, and contempt, and the bloud which appeared in her face,
discouered the trouble of her mind: The Gantois hauing no means
to discharge their choller vpon her, vpon her mother in Law, nor
vpon Rauesteen; they vomite it out vpon Hugonet, and Imbercourt, the
chiefe of the Princesses Councell. They were instantly ceased on,
imprisoned, and accused to haue caused the Citty of Arras to bee
yeelded,Oliuer of la March saith, that the Chancellour Hugonet, confest that he had concealed the Duke of Bourgundies letters, written at Nancy, the which did much import the safety of his person and Army. and to haue taken mony of a priuate man of Gand, to
giue him a fauourable end of his suite, and to haue infringed the
priuiledges of Gand,Hogonet and Imbercourt conde^ned to die. the which may not be changed nor broken
without paine of death: Vpon these accusations, or rather slanders,
the Maior and Alderme^ of Gand, condemn the^ to loose their heads.
In 6 daies their processe was made, the number of their freinds, nor
the appearance of their innocency, which in those extremities is the
last refuge, could not saue them.Innocency is the last refuge of the miserable, and helps him much, that hath nothing else remaining: It hath sometimes set the condemned in the Iudges place: Neri, sonne to Vgucione of Fagiuola, Lord of Luga, condemned Castrucio to death, and the people freed him going to execution, and set him in Neris place. Three houres after the sentence
was pronounced they were executed, without any respect to the
appeale which they had made to the Court Parliament at Paris,
(...)

Brother in law,The Pope and Emperor offended at this impiety. at whose instance, the Pope, and the Emperour
Fredericke, send vnto Adolph to set the Country at liberty, and to
yeeld obedience to his father; and vpon the contempt of this commandement
they write vnto the Duke of Bourgundy, not to suffer
this impiety any longer.
The Duke was then about Dourlans, he commanded Adolph
to come, and to bring his father: Adolph durst not displease so
mighty a Neighbour: The Duke heares them in their complaints,
and confronts them together; The sonne accuseth the father of villanous
and wicked actions,Duke of Bourgundy Iudge of the quarrell. whereof he presently purgeth himselfe,
and by the testimony of Noblemen that were there present; at this
confrontation the sons slander was discouered and detested, then
the father, transported with extreme griefe presented the single co^bat
vnto his son. The Duke would not allow it, for the vncertaine
euent could not be (where soeuer the victory fell) without a certain
crime: Hauing conferred of this businesse with his Councell, hee
ordained that the father should retaine the title of Duke with the
Towne of Graue, and 3000. Crownes for his entertainment, and the
son should haue all the rest. Notwithstanding that this iudgement
was so fauourable for the sonne, as all men thought that the Iudge
was more affected to him then to the father;Adolph had maried Catherine of Bourbon, daughter to Iohn Duke of Bourbon, and Anne of Bourgundy, sister to Phillip: The Sigr. of Argenton saith, that the Duke fauored Adolph in respect of this marriage. yet this vnnaturall
sonne, straying from all obedience and duty,Decius was commended for that hee refused the Empire, saying; that being Emperour, hee should forget to be a sonne. Imperet pater meus, meum imperium sit parere humiliter imperanti: Let my father rule, my Empire shall be, humbly to obay him that rules: Val. Max. lib. 4. would not be satisfied,
saying; That his father had raigned long enough, and that he should
content himselfe with the pension of 3000. Crownes, and that he should
neuer set his foote in the Countrey of Guelders: To be short, that hee
had rather cast his father into a Well, and himselfe headlong after him,
then consent to the conditions of this sentence.It is an impious thing, saith Plato, for any one to force his father, and his Country, he saith more-ouer that the child should haue a care not to offend him, for there is not any praier which the Gods heare sooner, then that which the fathers make against their children.
The Duke being prest to go vnto his Army before Amiens,
leaues them in this dispute, and would not alter his iudgement.
The sonne fearing that his obstinacy might bring him to the place
where he had put his father, and knowing that few men affected
him, stale away in a disguised French habite, and tooke the way to
Graue:Adolph steales away and is taken prisoner. But passing the Riuer at Namur, with one man in his company,
he was knowne by a Priest, and staied by others, and conducted
to the Duke of Bourgundy, who sent him prisoner to Villeuor,
and afterwards to Courtray, where he remained miserable,
and no man pittied him in his misery,It is a cruelty and inhumanity to pitty a parricide: The punishment which he endures, how great soeuer, doth not giue so much amazement, as the crime causeth horror and execration. vntill that the Gantois set
him at liberty, to be their Generall in the warre of Tournay. The
father dying had giuen the Dutchy of Guelders to the Duke of
Bourgundy.
The warre being vndertaken, by them of Gand against Tournay,
and the Mutiny growing insolently violent against the Dutchesse
of Bourgundy, they had need of a Head, for without it their
hands were not much to be feared:He is set at liberty by the Gantols. They cast their eyes vpon
Adolph, draw him out of prison, and like mad-men (as they are)

thinke that this cruell wretch, who could not loue his father, will
haue a care of their affaires.What piety can bee expected of him that hath beene impious, and inhuman to his owne father? Qui fallere audebit Parentes qualis erit in ceteris? He that dares deceiue his Parents, what will hee bee to other men? Casiod. They giue him absolute command,
being resolued to aduance him higher then his Predecessours, and
to make him husband to the Dutchesse. People in such distractions
haue played madder prankes, and made more indiscreete
elections.
He lead them to Tournay, where hauing burnt the Suburbs, he
was slaine: His death was not more honourable vnto him then
his life. The Princesse was not sorry for this action; For if hee
had returned tryumphing from this exploite, the Gantois had forced
her to mary him; and rather then to haue had a husband of their
choice, she would haue taken one by chance, as the heire of Bohemia
had done,Primislaus a Labo^er becomes King of Bohemia. who marryed Primislaus, and drew him from labour,
to the honour of her Marriage, and Crowne*Lybussa daughter to Gracus second King of Bohemia, declared in an Assembly of the Estates, held in an open field, that shee would take him for husband, before whom a horse shold stay, which she should let go, without guide or force: He stayed before Primislaus, who was tilling his Land. They tooke him, and led him to the Princesse, who made him her husband, and gaue him to the people for their King: His wodden shoes were long kept in the Cathedrall Church of Prage, and shewed to the Kings of Bohemia, to make them remember their beginning.
The Princesse of Bourgundies affaires impaired. Many Physitions
vndid the Patient. The King had a mighty Army, which
kept all the Low Countries in awe, in his absence it was commanded
by the Bastard of Bourbon Admirall of France: There was
nothing attempted by the enemy, but was defeated. In many exploits
of warre, which were made vpon this Frontier, I finde that
Guerin le Groin Baliffe of Saint Peter le Moustier, and Robinet of
Quesnoy, Either of them Captaine of a hundred Lances, tooke
a great Conuoy of Money, which came to Doway, and with a
small Troupe defeated a great number of Horse, which did
gard it.
If the King of England had declared himselfe for the Princesse
of Bourgundy, there had beene a great alteration, and she had
lesse apprehended the power and hatred of the French King, who
had wisely preuented it:Lewis entertaines friendship with the English. He knowing that King Edward loued
his ease, and that he would not shew himselfe too passionate in his
Neighbours quarrels, caused his Embassadours to obserue
him, and entertained him often with Visits, and Presents,To send wise and polliticke Embassadours to Princes who^ they feare, vpon diuers pretexes, is the true meanes to preuent their designes. but especially
with the hope of a Marriage betwixt his sonne, and his
daughter; Whom in England they called the Dauphine: He caused
the fifty thousand Crownes, due by the Treaty of Piquigny,
to be paied at the day in the Citty of London, which the English
called the Tribute of France: He gaue great Pensions to the Chancellor,
Chamberlaine, Admirall, and Maister of the Horse in England;
This made some to speake, and others to hold their peace
touching the affaires of France:To cast Gold into a Princes Councell, is a great charme for greedy minds: Gold is a medecine which at one instant workes two contrary effects: To speake, and to be silent. There neuer came any Embassadours
but commended his bounty at their returne, and held themselues,
in a manner, bound to fauour his intentions: by which
proceedings, hee held himselfe, in a manner, assured on that
side.
This made the Princesse of Burgundy resolue to marry, and to follow

the counsell of the Lady of Haluin,Princesse of Bourgundy wil haue a ma^ to her husband. her first Lady of Honour,
which was to take a man, and not a child, for she was capable to
beare them:There was a great disparitie of age betwixt the Dauphin, and thus Princesse, who was mother of three children, before the Prince was a eleuen yeares old. Shee refused the king of Englands brother: It was
thought that if they had propounded, the Earle of Angolesme, father
to King Francis the 1. she would haue hearkened vnto it,The Annales of Aquitane speake thus vpon this occasion: King Lewis wanted indgment in this action, for if he had not, hee wold haue married her to Charles Duke ef Angol^sme, father to King Francis that now is. her
affections inclining to haue a Prince of France, although she
were much discontented, for that the King had beene the
cause of the death of her two good seruants, Hugonet and Imbercourt.
The Emperour Frederick sent his Embassadours vnto her, to put
her in minde of the letter which she had written, by the commandement
of Duke Charles her father, carrying a promise of marriage
to the Arch-duke Maxamilian his son. The Duke of Cleues,
who had another designe, instructed her to referre her selfe to her
Councell,In a Councell held vpon the reception of the Embassadours, the Duke of Cleues said, that after they had deliuered their message, the Princesse of Burgundy should say vnto them, that they were very welcome, and that shee would referre it to her Councell, and no more. Phil. de Com. and not to say any thing to the Embassadours: but at
the sight of this Letter, and a Diamond which did accompany it,
she declared that she had written the Letter, and giuen the Diamond,Princesse of Bourgundy marries Maxmilian.
by her fathers commandement. The marriage was treated,
and Maximilian came into Flanders to consomate it, and before
the yeare was expired, Philip father to Charles the 5. was the first
fruits of this marriage, Maximilian was then but twenty yeares old,
When as Maximilian came into Flanders, he was but twenty yeares old: Hee was borne in the yeare 1458. Elenor daughter to Edward king of Portugal was his mother. and desiring to shew that the loue of the Princesse of Burgundy was
not blind, in choosing him among so many Corriuals, he sought to
recouer that which she had lost.
The King sent Craon into Bourgundy,Kings Army in the French County.Peter or George of Tremouile, Lord of Craon, Liuetenant of the Kings Army in Bourgundy. who hauing a power,
and being assisted, by Iohn of Chalons Prince of Orange, reduced
the Towne of Dijon vnder the Kings obedience: The Prince of
Orange seeing himselfe deluded by him, and that he did not deliuer
vp the places vnto him, which he had taken, according to the
Kings commandement, grew discontented, reuolted, and recouered
in a manner all that Craon had wonne in the County, and then
cast himselfe into Gy.
From thence Craon besieged Dole,Dole besieged. contemning them that were
within it, as men whom he held to be without courage or defence.
This contempt, accompanied with carelessenesse, made him to
loose his honour, the Kings fauour, and the Towne which he
might haue taken; for the besieged made a sally in a night that was
windy, darke, and rainy, with such aduantage, as they surprized him,
and forced him to ritire, with the losse of some of his Ordinance,
and of three thousand men.The fault of a Generall of an Army is sufficiently punished by the losse of his honour, and his Princes loue and fauour. The Romanes had no punishment for such errours, to the end their Commanders should not haue their minds troubled with the dangers, and ordinary Inconueniences in such charges, and with the examples of such, whose faults had bene punished with death: For it is impossible to resolue iudiciously betwixt feare and suspition.
Charles of Amboise, Lord of Chaumont, was substituted in his
place, who aduised the King to renew his aliance with the Suisses,
and thereby to weaken the house of Bourgondy. The perswasion

of this counsell was not difficult: the King thought nothing more
fit for the safety of his estate, then to make his enemies weake of
Intelligence and Friends: He sent some to practise this league, and
pursued it with great vehemency. He had receiued so great content
in the ruine of the most obstinate of his enemies, as after the
Battels of Granson and Morat, hee did nothing but speake of the
Suisses valor,Lewis the ^1 greatly adua^ced the reputation of the Suisses. After victories which they had wonne against Charles, Duke of Bourgondy, he caused them to bee much esteemed. Hee sent Embassadours with rich presents: hee gaue them after the battell of Granson, vntill his death, aboue a million of Florins of the Rhin. and esteeme their Friendship. He put them in greater
reputation then euer they had beene, although they had much
honoured the establishment of their liberty with a triumph of nine
or ten Battels; and that we may say of them, as Titus Liuius did of
the Romans,Nulla vnquam Respublica nec maior nec sanctior, nec bonis exemplis ditior fuit, nec in quam tam serae auaritia luxuriaque immigrauerint, nec vbi tantus, ac tamdiu paupertati ac parfimoniae honos fuerit. There was neuer Commonweale greater, nor more holy, nor richer in good examples, nor into which auarice and luxury crept later, nor whereas pouerty and parsimony were so long honoured. That neuer Common-weale was better maintained
in her ancient discipline; nor wheras Auarice had lesse credit, and
Simplicity more honour, then in that of the Suisses.
For these reasons the king made a defensiue leaue with them,Alliance of France with the Suisses. and
by the Treaty, gaue himselfe the Name of the first Ally of their
Common-weale, and tearmed himselfe their Bourgesse.The Duke of Sauoy said, that the Title of the first Ally of the Suisses, belonged to him before all others. They
promised to furnish him with eight thousand men at all times for
foure German Florins and a halfe of monthly pay.2000 pou^d sterling. Moreouer, he
gaue them a pension of twenty thousand Franckes, to be distributed
among them.
By the meanes of this Alliance, his forces increased greatly in
Bourgondy, Dole was taken by assault, spoiled, ruined, and made
miserable. But this pillage did impouerish the King, beeing certaine,
that what is taken from Townes vanquished, is lost for the
Victor.Craesus, King of Lydia, seeing Cyrus Souldiers running vp and downe the Towne of Sardes, he demanded whither they did run. They go to the spoyle of the Towne answered Cyrus. They take nothing from me (replied Craesus) all they carry away is thine, and not mine. Aussonne held out but fiue dayes; Besancon, an Imperiall Towne, continued in her liberties, and was not forced to
more duety then shee had beene accustomed to yeeld vnto the
Earles of Bourgondy. Verdun would not yeeld but by force, and
suffered for her wilfulnesse. Beaune auoyded it, submitting herselfe
to a fine of forty thousand Crownes.
The King labouring to ruine the house of Bourgondy,Estate of the affairs of Castille
apprehended the rising of that of Castille, seeing that by the marriage
of Ferdinand and Isabel, the Realmes of Castille and Arragon,
which had beene diuided 405 yeares, were vnited.Castille and Arragon in the beginning were but Earldomes, they were made Realmes after the death of D. Sancho, the great king of Nauarre, who was the last Earle of Arragon and Castille. He would
haue beene nothing sorry, if the contention which was betwixt
them, who should haue the gouernment of Castille, had continued
longer. Queene Isabel said, that as daughter to King Iohn of Castille,
shee was sole heire of the Realme, and that her marriage
should not depriue her of her quality. King Ferdinand obiected,
that he was sonne to Iohn the second, King of Nauarre and Arragon,
descended in the direct line from Iohn the first, King of Castille;
and that it was not fit a woman should carry the Scepter of
so great a Realme.Lipsius speaking of this Prince and Princesse giues this censure, Maritus caetera vir egregius restrictor aut timidior erat retinere sua melior quam augere. Haec dilatabat. The husband a worthy man, a holder fast, or more fearefull: hee was better to hold his owne, then to augment it. She enlarged it. It was concluded by the aduise of the Grands,

that all Letters and Expeditions should bee made in the name of
both, and vnder the Seale of both Realmes, of Castille and Arragon,
and the money coined with the Armes quartered.
This iudgment (wherwith Ferdinand was not well pleased) was
grounded vpon the great and eminent vertue of Isabel,Vertues of Isabel of Castille. another
Zenobia of Spaine; and who did neuer breath any thing, but what
was great and generous: A great Iusticer, if euer any were, and inexorable
to rebellions,The Citty of Se^ile being reuolted, through the factions betwixt the house: of Gusman and Ponti, the queen Isabella went thither, and forst them all to their duties: she caused all that were in the Castle to bee hanged, hauing refused her the entry. she made the Court of Spaine a true Academy
of honour and vertue, out of which came Gonsalue the great
Captaine: her counsels were followed as Oracles, and often times
her husband and the Grands of the realme, hauing found that no
great matter was effected, if it were not approued by her aduice, neuer
disputed against that which she had resolued.
It is she that began and ended the war of Portugall, expelled the
Moores out of Grenado, added the realme of Nauarre to that of
Castill, and gaue meanes to Christopher ColumbusIn the yeare 1492. the third of August, the Queene D. Isabella sent Christopher Colu^bus from Palos de Moguet in Andalusia to discouer the westerne Indies: hauing sailed 2. moneths and 8. dayes, hee first landed in the Iland of Guanahamo, betwixt Florida and Cuba. to discouer new
countries: they also commend her for her great and constant piety,
and for her admirable sobriety, hauing neuer drunk wine: she loued
learned men, and tooke delight in the knowledge of the Latine
tongue: she was full of courage and resolution in aduersity; for being
vpon the treaty of her daughters marriage with Emanuel, King of
Portugall, newes being brought her of the death of her only sonne,
The Prince D Iohn of Castille, being married to Margaret of Austria, died at Salama^ca. The History of Spaine saith, that the King D. Ferdinand to acquaint his wife D. Isabella, with this death, caused a brute to be raised that hee was dead, and then presently shewed himselfe vnto her, so one sudden consolation betwixt two great afflictions, did moderate both the one and the other. she did not cease to proceed, suppressing her griefe vntill that Emanuel
was aduertised therof by others. She was very constant in al
distemperatures and dolours of the body, for she was deliuered of
her children without any groane or cry.In partus acutissimis doloribus and gemitum and vocem supprimebat, rem incredibilem, nisi a fidissimis matronis quae a cubiculi cura erant: id certo se cognouisse Marinaeus Siculus adfirmaret. In the bitterest pangs of childbearing, she did neither groane nor cry, an incredible thing, if Marinaeus the Sicilian did not affirm that he had receiued it from the faithfullest, matrons of her chamber.
King Lewis beeing very iealous of the county of Rousillon,Death of D. Iohn, King of Nauarre.
which was a thorne in the foot of Castille, held the kings in iealousie
and expences, and desired to haue the realme of Nauarre continue
in the possession of the successors of King Iohn, who died in the
end of the yeare 1479.D. Iohn, king of Arragon died at Barcelona, being 81 yeares old, hauing raigned in Nauarre 53. yeares, and 4. moneths: and 21 yeares six moneths in Arragon. He was buried in the Monastery of Poblete. He was a great Prince, and like vnto others,
had past the pikes of fortune. It hath beene said before, that his son
Charles, and after his death his subiects of Barcelona, and after all
that the king of Castille, and then the kings of France made warre
against him: he saw his realme in horrible combustions by the factions
of Beaumont and Grandmont, which he had seene spring vp, and
neglected to quench them in their breeding. About the end of his
dayes, when as he had more need of a Tombe then a wife; and that
the law PapiaAugustus in his latter dayes caused the Senate to make the Law Papia, it had many heads, and amongst others, a man of 60 yeares old, and a woman of 50, might not mary. This word Buckle was vsed by Seneca; and after him, by Lactantius. Quid ergo est quare apud Poetas salacissimus Iupiter desierit liberos tollere* sexagenarius factus est and illi ^ex papia fibulam imposuit? had buckled him vp, being aboue fourescore years
old, he fell in loue with a yong maid, named Francina Rosa, which
was no helpe for him to recouer his sight, which extreme age (for
the interest of so long an abode in the world) had taken from him.

The yeare before his death, he went to see his son D. Ferdinand at
Victoria, to conferre with him vpon the affaires of the realme,
which he should leaue vnto him: In this incounter the father had
not any with him, but ancient men, aboue threescore years old, and
the sonne was attended on by the flower of all the Nobility of Castille.
It was noted that the father in all things gaue place to the
king, D. Ferdinand his son, as the head of the house of Castille, from
whence he was desended.Alphonso the fifth King of Arragon, brother to Iohn the second, king of Nauarre would haue his Embassadors giue place to them of Henry the fourth, K. of Castill^, in signing the Articles of a Treatie made at Naples. The dispute of this precedence had bin
begun in the Councell of Constance, and decided in that of Basil, in
fauour of Castille; Alphonso, the fift king of Arragon, would not
yeeld it to his father Iohn the second King of Castille.It is a difficult thing sometimes for the prerogatiue of nature to giue place to that of fortune, and dignity; witnesse the Senator of Venice, who would not giue place to his sonne, although he were Duke, who to binde his Father, did alwayes carry a great Crucifix, to the which the father said hee did his duty. The law of
Maiesty was of more force then that of respect and naturall obedience,
wherof the son, how great soeuer, many not dispence himself
towards his father. The Crowne of Castille had alwaies pretended
that Arragon depended of it in soueraignty; and that if it were free,
it was by grace. The King D. Iohn the second, at his returne from
this voyage, dyed at Barcelona.
It was by his aduice that a peace was at that time treated,Peace and Alliances renewed with Spain of betwixt
king Lewis the eleuenth, and the kings of Castille, to confirme
the ancient Alliances that were betwixt the two Crownes.
Philip de Comines saith, that the Alliances of France and Castille, are betwixt King and King, Realme and Realme, Man and Man of their subiects. The Embassadors of France were the Lord of Lescut, and the Bishop
of Lombais, Abbot of S. Denis: they of Castille were Iohn de
Gamboa, Gouernour of Fontarabie, and Iohn de Medina, one of the
kings Councell. This peace being concluded, the Embassadors of
Castille came into France, they were receiued at Paris with great
honour, on Saturday, the third of Iuly, 1479. they did the like to
the Embassadors of France, who went to Guadalupa, whereas D.
Ferdinand, and D. Isabella were busied in punishing the disobedience
of the Marques of Villena, who had hindered D. George Manriquez
from chastizing them of Cinchilla, who had reuolted.At that time when as the Court was at Guadalupa, the Marques of Vill^na, head of the faction, being incensed that his enemies had caused six of his Souldiers to be hanged, wold do the like to as many of theirs, being his prisoners: the chance fell vpon a Souldier of Villeneufue of Laxara, neere to Allarcon, in whose place the yonger brother presented himselfe, and intreated that hee might dye for him, for that his brother had wife and children, who was set at liberty, and his offer accepted. Hist. of Spa. Lib. 22.
The Articles are sworne by the king; and moreouer it was agreed,
that the Towne of Parpignan should be put into the possession of
the Cardinall of Spaine, and that the two kings should name an Arbitrator,
to decide within fiue yeares what K. Lewis did pretend to
be due vnto him. After the death of D. Iohn the 2d, king of Nauarre
and Arragon D. Ferdinand succeeded in his fathers Estate of Arragon
and Sicile, and D. Leonora to the Mothers, as daughter to
Blanche, Queene of Nauarre; but this succession which shee
would haue aduanced, contrary to the Lawes of Nature and
Humanity, beeing blamed by the Histories of Spaine to haue
caused her elder Sister to be poysoned,D. Blanch being put away by D. Henry the vnable, was carried as it were a prisoner to Lescut in Bearne, by Gaston Earle of Foix her Brother-in-law, to the end she should not marry againe. The Spaniards write that her sister Elenor caused her to bee poysoned. did not passe the fifteenth
day after her Coronation.
Shee had by Gaston, Earle of Foix, many worthy Children,

Gaston,Blanche, Countesse of Foix, mother of many children. Earle of Foix; Iohn, Vicount of Narbona; Peter, Cardinall
of Foix; Iames, who serued King Lewis the twelfth in the
warres of Lombardy, and fiue daughters;Out of this house of Foix, were issued four Queenes, cousin germans, at one time: Catherin Q. of Nauarre, German, Q. of Castille, and Arragon; Anne Queene of France, and Dutchesse of Brittaine, Anne Queene of Bohemia and Hungary. Mary, wife to William,
Marquis of Montferrat, Ioane married to the Earle of Armagnac,
Margaret to Francis Duke of Brittanie, Catherine to the Earle of
Candal^, and Elenor promised to the Duke of Medina Celi.
The peace of Castille did not hinder the warre which the King
had against Maximilian of Austria;1479. who to diuert the Kings forces,
and frustrate his designes, besieged Therouenne:Maximilian camped before Therouenne with 20000. Flemings, some Troopes of Germans, and 300. English. It was re^ieued by de Cordes with 8000. Franke Archers, and eleuen hundred men at Armes. the Lord
of Cordes came to succour it: Maximilian went to meet him, and
both Armies encountred at Guinegaste. TheThe Gaules Horsemen were alwaies estemed and feared. Plutarch, Polibius and Appian co^mend the^. Caesar saith, that in the war of Affricke, 30 horsemen Gaules, put to rout 2000. horsemen Numidians. Caualarie of France
shewing their ancient valour,Battell of Guinegaste. brake that of Maximilian, and chased
them as farre as Aire, which made their Foot-men to wauer:
yet they were staied by the constancy and good order of the Captaines
which did fight on foot. Maximilian put himselfe among
the foot-men: the Earle of Rhomont, and Engelbert Earle of
Nassau, behaued themselues so valiantly that day, as they carried
away the honour, and Maximilian had the field and profite. The
French being Victors, busied themselues at the spoyle,Greedinesse of spoyle hath many times made them loose the victory who had it most assured. They that escaped fro^ this battell, and were at that of Nouora, committed not this error in pursuing the victory, as to fall to
spoyle: they were heard to cry out in the sield; Companions, remember Guinegaste. and lost
the victory which they had certaine.
When newes was brought vnto Lewis, hee would not beleeue
that the losse was such as they said. If it be true said he, that the victory
be lost for me, fare-well all my Conquests. This losse made
a Truce, and the Truce a peace, Christendome had great need to
vnite her forces against Mahomet, who besieged Rhodes. The King
obtained a Iubile from Pope Sixtus, and caused it to be published
throughout his Realme to gather mens Almes and Deuotion for
the reliefe and defence of that mighty Bulwarke of Christendome.
But the History doth not say that he gaue any thing of his owne to
the Relligion, as King Charles the seuenth had done, to prepare
himselfe against the Agression of so mighty and fearefull an enemy,
who vnder a vaine and deceitfull proposition of peace,Nothing doth so much fauour the designes of warre, as an opinion of peace: Mahomet caused his sonne Zizimi to make some ouerture of a truce vnto Demetrio Sofrano, Embassador of the Order, and vnder his negotiation he prepared for the warre. laboured
to discharge vpon them all the furies of warre.
But it was vaine against Rhodes,Siege of Rhodes by Mahomet valiantly defended. by the valour and vigilancy of
the great Maister of Aubusson, who vpon the first aduice that was
giuen him of Mahomets designe, prouided carefully for the defence
and safety of the Towne, hee caused some Churches to bee
beaten downe, which might haue annoyed them, if the enemy
should get them; but hee would not attempt this demolition tumultuously,
nor of his absolute authority, but would first haue the
Priests, Monkes, and all others that were interessed. These men, by
the permission of the Metropolitan of the Grecians, and of the
ArchbishopThere is alwaies a great correspondency betwixt the Order of the Church, the inferiors ordaine nothing without the aduice of their superiors. The Synode of Laodicea forbad the Bishops (diuided among the Villages of the Prouince) to doe any thing without the Bishop which was in the Towne. Colossensis, or of Rhodes (for there is a great Relation

of authority and obedience, of power and respect among
them) consented. In all his designes hee euer respected the Kings
aduice and counsell, and informed him of all that past; yea, of the
fortifications which he made in the Island, and of the ouertures of
an accord which Mahomet made to deceiue him; beseeching him,
that the French Commanders and Knights, which were within his
Realme, should not loose so goodly an ocasion to serue Christendome.
The siege of Rhodes began after that of Scutari,At the siege of S^utari, the Assailants shot so many Arrowes into the Towne, as the besieged, for a long time after the siege, burnt no other wood but Arrowes: Mahomet was forced to raise the siege. The Venetians, Lords of Scutari, left it him to haue a peace. in the end of
May, 1480.1480. After that Mahomet had knowne,Tribute refused to Mahomet. that it was impossible
for him to haue that tribute from the Rhodians which he demanded,
in regard whereof he would suffer them to liue in peace;
the Army camped on Saint Stephens Mountaine, and vpon little
Hilles thereabouts, it consisted of an hundred thousand men, and
a great quantity of Artillery: A great troope of horse and foote
came furiously from the Mountaine, to discouer the Towne of
Rhodes; the which were twice beaten and repulst. Their Batteries
being planted, the Canon played against S. Nicholas Tower:
The great Maister was informed of euery thing in the Turkes Army
by a Germaine Inginer, who cast himselfe into the Towne,
and left the Infidels, making shew that the onely zeale of religion
had moued him; hee related the whole estate of the Campe, and
discouered that which they could not learne, but by him. But his
zeale was meere treachery and treason;Treason of a German Inginer. for the which he was soone
after hanged, by the commandement of the great Maister, who
feared Traitors more then Enemies.At the siege of Towns, the practises within are no lesse to bee feared, then the attempts without. Scipio Affricanus said, that he was not so carefull to defend himselfe from the enemy, as from traitors.
He refresht the Garrison in S. Nicholas Tower, and placed of the
most valiant Knights, and best Souldiers to guard it; he viewes the
ruines which the battery had made, and causeth them to be repaired
speedily. The Turkes assaile it with an incredible fury; but they
were so receiued,Assault giuen by the Turkes. as in lesse then an houre they lost 700 Souldiers,
besides them that were wounded; and they that retired suddenly
to their Gallies, were drowned. The great Maister went triumphing
to Rhodes, to giue God thankes for this victory.
The Turkes, to weaken the forces of the besieged, and to vanquish
them the more easily being diuided, batter the Towne in
many placesThe Artillery battering the walles of Rhodes caused the Iland tremble; and it was heard plainly at the Iland of Castle Rosso, towards the East, an incredible way off. with peeces, and Engines of warre of an vnknowne
greatnesse. There was neuer Fort more furiously battered, neither
was there euer Campe more annoyed by the battery of the besieged.
The assailants made some shot, whose noyse was like vnto
Thunder, and their ruines like that of Thunder-bolts. The Rhodians
had a Canon which they called the Tribute, which carried
away great heapes of the enemies. The Scorpions, Rammes,
Slings, and Crosse-bowes of the old warres, which carried and
forced Mil-stones, and Rockes, with such great violence, and so
farre off, wrought not such terrible effects. The Turkes shot out
of Engines, the stones whereof ruined houses where they fell. And
after this maner Philip Augustus, and Richard, King of England, had

in former times ruined Ptolemaid: There was danger to remaine
within, and danger to come out of the houses.Pau^us Aemilius saith, that at the siege of Ptolemaid, Saxorum ictu quae Tollenonibus mittebantur tecta domorum superne perfringebantur. The toppes of hous^s were broken downe with the stones they cast out of engines.
The great Maister, whose prudence was without feare, and valour
without rashnesse, would not neglect it: he was as couetous
of his peoples bloud, as he was prodigall of his owne; he could
not see them die miserably, but provided a good remedy,To feare to loose his men, and to spare their liues, is the duty of one that commands. Fortes paratissimi effundere sanguinem suum, alienum videre non possunt. Valiant men are ready to powre forth their own bloud, but they cannot see anothers. Sen. commanding
the Women, Children, and vnable persons, to leaue the
houses, causing them to be lodged in a void place, betwixt the houses
and the Towne-wall, vnder Tents, supported with great peeces
of timber. The stones they shot out of their Bombards alwayes
past ouer them: for the Turkes shot onely at the houses, and at the
places most frequented; and if any stone fell there, it found resistance,
and did no harme. At night the people retired into Churches,
that were vaulted.
He commanded publicke prayers to be made, euery man casting
his eyes to heauen, hauing no other hope of helpe: it was impossible
to defend the wall, and therefore hee made intrenchments,
where the Women laboured with a wonderfull affection; they
would haue giuen their haireWomen haue often giuen their haire to make Instruments for the warre, or strings for bows, the examples are reported by Vegetius, lib. 4. The Senate of Rome in remembrance thereof, did dedicate a Temple vnto them, called Venus without haire. In honorem Matronarum Templum Veneri caluae senatus, dicauit I^l. cap. to haue made ropes against the
Turkes, more willingly then euer the Dames of Rome, Aquilea, or
Bizantium did to make bow-strings against their enemies. When
as the Bashaw saw, that the sole presence of the great Maister was
the chiefe force and defence of Rhodes,The Bashaw seeks to poyson the great Maister. he set two men to poyson
him: the first being surprized, and trembling at the first demaund
they made him, entring into Rhodes, discouered the second.
Saint Nicholas Tower did so command the Port, as the enemy
thinking that all the defence of Rhodes depended theron, gaue an
assault by night, when as they thought that the besieged, tired with
the continuall toyles of the day, had neglected the defence, they
made their troopes to land secretly, and marched directly to the
Mole, (it is the Port whereas sometimes the Colosse, one of the
wonders of the world stoodThe Colosse of the Sunne at Rhodes, was 70 cubits high of brasse set vpon the port, all ships past betwixt the legges: It was ouerthrowne by an Earth-quake, and laie long vpon the shore: Mabia, a Captaine of the Sarazens, hauing defeated Constant, the son of Constantine, and nephew to Heraclius, in a battell at sea, seized vpon Rhodes, and sold the mettall of this Colosse to a Iew, who laded 900. horse, and sent it to Alexandria, in the yeare 614. that is to say, 1460 yeares after that Charles the Indian, an excellent Grauer, had made it.) but found them that attended them,
who repulst them in such sort, as they lost a great number of their
companions.
The Bashaw by these first attempts, did iudge of the Issue of the
siege, thinking that he did beate in vaine against this rocke, and
that he might win the great Maister by some other meanes; he demaunded
to speake with him vpon the ditches banke, where hee
told him, that hee wondered at his presumption and rashnesse, in
seeking to resist so mighty a Prince, and obstinately to refuse him
tribute,It is a troublesome and importune demand, to require a tribute of free-men; yea it is insupportable to them that are born to seruitude. The King of Castille demanded from Muly Alboacen, King of Granado, the Tribute and Arrerages, to whom the Embassadors answered, that the Kings of Granado, tributaries to them of Castille, were dead, and therefore their bond was voyd; and that in Granado they carried no more gold nor siluer, but heads of Lances, Arrowes, and such like Armes, to turne them against their enemies, and to free themselues from seruitude and charge. seeing that he could not receiue more honor, then to be

Tributary to a Prince, to whom the greatest of Asia, Affricke, and
Europe paid tribute.
Although the great Maister did not thinke it fit to spend time
in words, and answeres, for that in such occasions, a Generall
should not haue his hands on his tongue, but his tongue in his
hands, yet would he not suffer the Bashaw to returne without an
answere, as without any profite of his discourse; and therefore he
said vnto him: Know that thou hast not to doe with base and effeminate
Asians,Generous answer of the great Maister. but with Christian Knights, who are ready to burie themselues
in the ruines of this Towne, rather then once thinke of yeelding.
The walles of Rhodes had in few dayes endured 3500 Cannon
shot, the Towers, the Bastions, with the goodliest buildings,
were beaten downe and ruined: there was a breach on all parts,
but in the knights hearts, who were resolued to loose themselues,
rather then to leaue it.Constancy and courage is neuer beter tryed, then in Townes besieged, whereof there haue been admirable examples seene. Some more through obstinacy then reason, haue first slaine their wiues and children, and then killed one another, to win the honour to be constant. The Bashaw, the more to incourage the
Souldiers to an assault, gaue them the spoile of the towne, and caused
it to bee proclaimed by Trumpet, declaring that nothing
should bee saued, but the Infants to bee conducted to the great
Turkes Serrail, that all the rest should bee put to the Sword, hauing
caused 8000 stakes to be made, to impale them that should be
taken aliue.
All things beeing ready, forty thousand Turkes came vnto the
assault towards the Iewes wall, and the quarter of Ierusalem, with
such fury, as if their Prophet had beene behinde them, like vnto
the Egyptian Gods:King Amasis making warre against the Arabians, caused the statues of the Aegyptians gods, whi^h they did worship to bee carried after them; to the end they might goe more cheerefully to dangers, remembring that they had behinde the^ their Gods for spectators; and that they were bound to saue them, and not to leaue them in their enemies power. Polioenus, lib. 7. The attempt was so great, as the Christistians
could not hinder them from planting of their ladders, the
wall was wonne, and their Ensignes set vp in signe of victory; but
they continued not long: the great Maister, and Anthony of Aubusson,
Vicount of Montelier his brother, came to succour them:
they finde many Turkes within the Towne,Scalodoe repulst. whom they cut in peeces,
repulst the rest, and follow them euen to the Bashawes Pauillion,
where they take the Turkes standard Royall, and carry it to
Rhodes.
They say, that in this assault, the Turkes sawThis vision is related at large by I. Bosio, in the first part of his History, accordingly as it is set downe in the Text, the which to auoyd repetition, I omit. in the aire vpon
the walles,Vision miraculous. a shining Crosse of gold, a virgin attired in white, with
a Target on her Arme, and a Launce in her hand, and a man muffled
with a Camels skinne, followed with a great troope of armed
men, all glittering, which seemed to come to succour the towne:
that the assailants were so amazed and terrified with this vision,
as they that were neerest vnto the walles, durst not goe on, and
they that were farre off, fled. This miracle hath beene mentioned
by all the Historians that haue written of this siege: and William
Coarsin, Vice-Chancellor of the Order, speakes amply in his Commentaries.

The Bashaw mad at their great constancy and resolution,Retreat of the Turks retired,
and caused his Artillery to be carefully drawne away, whereof a Generall
should haue an especiall care; for the losse is dishonorable:
He caused it to be imbarked, with his hurt men. The rage which he
could not poure forth vpon the Inhabitants of Rhodes, shewed it
selfe round about the Towne, leauing no tree vn-cut, Vine vn-puld
vp, nor house vn-burnt. The Bashaw going out of the Port, discouered
two great ships, which Ferdinand, K. of Naples sent to their
succour: he held it an affront if hee should suffer them to passe
without fighting. But in despight of him, and 20. Gallies which assailed
these two ships, they entred the Port after three houres fight.
Thus Rhodes, the cleere SunFor that there is no day, how clo^d^ soeuer, but the Sunne is seene at Rhodes: the a^cients said it was consecrated to the Sun. It lyes in the Carpatia^sea, in the (...) of I^cia, separated from the coast, by an Arme of the sea, which they call, the (...) of Rhodes, 20 miles broad: It is lo^g and (...) about 120 miles compasse. Towardes the North lyes ^^eya, Ae^^pt to the south, (...) to the Ea^t, and Candy to the west. of the sea, so famous in the Histories
of Antiquity, was preserued for the Christians. All the Citty in
signe of ioy, made bon-fires, shot off Ordinance, and rung their bels.
The Trumpets, Hautboyes, and drums were vpon the walles, vpon
the newes which the great Maister receiued from Pope Sixtus the
fourth, of a mighty Army which came to his succour. The Bashaw
desirous to know the cause of this ioy, sent certaine Grecians to demand
it of the Centinels, who told them, it was for that the Christian
Army was neere; which being reported vnto him, hee commanded
to weigh anchor, and to set saile, the 18 of August, hauing
continued at this siege 89 dayes, and lost the best part of his Army.
This valiant resistance, for the preseruation of the Island of Rhodes,
did purchase much glory to Christendome, and bound Christians
to praise the God of Victories, to make him fauourable when hee
should be calledXenophon exhort^ men to honour t^e Gods in prosperity, to the end they ma^ be ^auou^able v^to them in aduersity. in the like necessity, for that the defence of towns
and the defeat of Armies come only from him. The Crosse triumphed
ouer the Cressants. Mahomet, after this affront, did but languish,
hauing propounded, for a reuenge, to make a great enterprise
vpon Italy, to make Rome another Constantinople, a Serrail
of the Vatican, and a Mosquee of Latran. Vpon the apprehensions
of such ruines and desolation, Sixtus the fourth was ready to abandon
Rome, and go into France. Italy being too weake to resist so
mighty an enemy, who hauing made himselfe Maister of 12 realms
in the lesser Asia, of the Archipelagus, of Albania, and of Sclauo^ia,
of all the Empire of Co^stantinople, and of Trebizond, threatned
to enter into Europe by Apulia, and Calabria,M^homet the 2d. made warre three yeares in Apulia, and Calabria, hee tooke the Townes o^ Ydrunte, Tatum, and Leuce, by force. where he had caused
wonderfull desolations, and spoiled Italy of the flower of her
horse-men; and it may be, he should not haue found Princes which
would haue sent backe his Embassadors so couragiously, nor contemned
his threats, as Mathias Coruinus, K. of Hnngary, and Poland
did: for when this Barbarian had sent to him, to haue him yeeld
him his realme of Polonia, he made this braue and hardie answere
to his Embassadors;This generous answer made by Mathias Coruinus, is related by Ioachin Cu^eus, in the Annals of Silesi^, Mahomet did euer after fe^re him. Go and tell your maister, that he reignes in Greece
by my meanes, and that he shall remaine there no longer then I please.
The end of the eighth Booke.



THE CONTENTS OF
the Ninth Booke.

1 MAXIMILIAM makes no good vse of his aduantage, after the
battell of Guinegaste.
2 Attempt against the Kings Person, miraculously preuented.
3 The like enterprise discouered and punished.
4 Taking and recouering of Beaune and Verdun.
5 Sigismond Arch-duke of Austria, giues his Estates to the Arch-duke
Maximilian his Nephew.
6 Lewis of Bourbon Bishop of Liege slaine by William de la
March.
7 A new discipline for Souldiours made.
8 Goodly obser^uations of the aduantages which Foot-men haue ouer
Horse.
9 Death of Mahomet the second, Emperour of the Turkes, an
abridgement of the chiefe actions of his life, and his cruelties.
10 The Kings designe vpon Lorraine: Estate of that House from Duke
Iohn to Yoland of Aniou, wife to Ferry Earle of Vaudemont.
11 Variable successe of the huse of Aniou in the Realme of Naples,
from Lewis the second, sonne to King Iohn, to Rene Duke of
Aniou.
12 Death of Rene Duke Aniou, his death and exercises, he instituted
the Order of the Croissant.
13 Charles Earle of Mayne and Prouence, giues the County of Prouence
vnto the King.
14 The King seazeth vpon the Dutchy of Barre.
15 Rene, Duke of Lorraine Generall of the Venetians Army.
16 Warre of Ferara against the Venetians: The Pope, and the King of
Naples, deale in it. The Venetians are excommunicated.
17 Peace treated against the Popes liking, magnanimity of his
courage.
18 Necessity of the Church to hold a Councell.
19 Hardy enterprise of a Prelate against the Pope.




@THE HISTORIE
Of LEWIS the eleuenth.
THE NINTH BOOKE.
WHAT auayleth it for Stagges to haue
goodly and strong heads, if they haue
not courage to vse them?Maximilia^ makes no great vse of his aduantage at Guinegaste. The Arch-duke
Maximilian had more subiect to
repent himselfe, then to reioyce for
the successe of Guinegate, for that he
did not make vse of his aduantage: If
he had presented himselfe before Therouenne
or Arras, hee had found
amazement for resistance. But hee
durst not attempt it,Phillip de Co^min^s saith, that after the battell of Guingaste, if Maximilian had beene counselled to returne before Therouenne, hee had not ^ound any creature within it, nor yet in Arras. So as the battell which should haue purchased
him glory among the Flemmings,Hee lost more then he got. made him contemptible,
for they knew well, that the place of battell was not left him, but
to present vnto him the inequallity of the losse, hauing lost a greater
number of men then the King, who was still Maister of Artois,
without the which, the Earles of Flanders are but petty Princes.
Those Estates are vnhappy which are forced to seeke strange
Maisters, they are like vnto counterfeite legges and armes, set on
to naturall bodies: It fareth not much better with Princes
which are alwaies hated, who being not loued cannot bee well
obeyed.It is a glorious Title for a Prince, when hee can say, that hee is well beloued of his subiects. It cannot be purchased but by royall vertues, which are more to be esteemed then Kingdomes. I^ regnare depende spesso della fortuna, ma il Re che si proponga per vnico fine la salute and la felicita de populi suoi depende solamente da se medesimo and della propriavirtu. To raigne, depends often vpon fortune; but that King which propounds vnto himselfe for his onely end, the health and felicity of his people, depends ^oly of himselfe and his owne vertue. Guic. lib. 1.
Maximilian had not beene bred vp in affaires,His age without experience. his youth could
not be ripe before his time: The Emperour Fredericke his father,
one of the most couetous Princes in the world, had neither giuen
him men, nor mony, sufficient to performe those wonders which
were expected from him, before they saw him: In a word, hee had
not done sacrifice to reputation,By the first iudgements which are made of a new Prince, his reputation is weake or strong, and therefore the wise aduise. Instandum famae nam prout prima cedunt censentur vniuersa. We must stand vpon fame, for as the first succeed, all the rest are censured. entring into the Country.

Moreouer as men are more grieued for the fayling of things promised,
then for those which are but in expectation; they saw the
Emperour Fredericke did not care to assist him, nor to releeue
him with forces equall to the subiect which did presse him; For he
had written vnto the chiefe Townes, that as soone as he had
setled the affaires of the Empire, he would follow his sonne: and
yet he left him in a confusion of miseries,By the Emperor Fredericks letters written to the Towne of Dole, bearing date the 12. of February, 1477. wee see that hee promised to follow him presently. Nos vero co^positis paulisper negotijs nostris eundem fillium nostru^ ducem Maximilianum illico subsequemur, and ad vos in propria persona accedere volumus parati and inclinati vt ad omnem gratiam and fauorem quos vos intuitu dictorum ducis Maximiliani, and contoralis Ducissae Mariae impartiri possumus. Ann. of Bourg. hauing not where with
at all to defray the charges of his owne house, so as the Princesse
was forced to sell and pawne part of her reueneues.
So the battell of Guinegaste was not followed by any other
losse. Onely the Prince of Orange would make vse of it, hauing
found, that what he had designed against the Kings person
brought him nothing but shame and repentance. Reuenge inuents
villanous practises to please it selfe: Being offended with the King
for that he had not giuen him so great authority as he thought he
had deserued, he was not content to haue left his seruice to follow
the Arch-duke, and to haue caused the Townes of Bourgundy to
reuolt,Attempt against the Kings person discouered. but he attempted against his life, thinking that to free himselfe
from feare hee should vtterly ruine himselfe,To attempt against an enemies life is a testimony of feare and cowardise, vpon an apprehension that hee will bee reuenged: It is a counsell of safety, not of courage. Monsr.
d'Espilly the Kings Atturny Generall in the Parliament of
Dauphine (who is one of those that in merite and sufficiency finde
more men to imitate him then to go before him) sent mee an extract
out of the Register of the Chamber of Accompts of
Dauphine which related a strange example thereof, and serues as
in a cleere Lanthorne, that the eternall Prouidence hath neuer
failed in the preseruation of this Monarchy, diuerting those
stormes which hell had raised to ouerthrow it. And behold the
History.
Iohn Renond,Iohn Renond a Lionois. Borne at Saint Chaumond in Lionois, and making
profession of a Mercer, and an Apothecary,By the Processe verball, it is said, that this Renond was married, at Clermont, that hee had two brethen at Lion, one Beneficed in the great Church, and Peter Renond a Hosier, Tenant to Maister Michael Lambert. in the Towne of
Clermont in Auuergne, vndertooke to go to Florence to see one
called Francisquin, whom he had sometimes serued, and who was
a seruant in the house of Medicis, carrying him a horse of some
twenty Crownes price, being in hope that he would do him some
good, for men of that sort, giue not, but to receiue. He beganne
his iourney before Easter, past the holy weeke at Lyon, and past
the Monday after towards Mantua, where he was incountred by
fiue men who led him to Saint Claude, to the Signeor of Erbens,
who committed him to prison,Prisoner to the Prince of Orange. for that he said hee was a
French-man, and sent him to the Prince of Orange, who was then
at Arbois.
The Prince of Orange informed himselfe curiously of all that
he knew, and finding by his discourse, that a desire to draw
some-thing from the Maister which hee had serued at Florence
had made him vndertake so great a voiage, that necessity made him

capable of any thing, and that it made him of a sicke mans humour,
to whom a smal matter fitly administred giues ease:Benefits which preuent the demands of them that haue need, and whom necessity doth p^esse, worke great effects, and are like vnto those easy remedies which being fitly giuen, doe much case the Patient: In aegris oportunitas cibi salu^aris est, and aqua tempestiue data remedij locum obtinet. In sicke persons, the opportunity of meat^s healthfull, and water fitly giuen is in stead of a remedy. Sen. he began
to cast forth some words of the tediousnesse and difficulty of the
way, assuring him of greater good with lesse paine; he demanded
of him if he would not be as well pleased to haue it done him
there, as to seeke it so farre off.Hee offers to do any thing. Renond answered that he was well
content, and that he was ready to serue him against all men, yea
were it to go against the King: The Prince of Orange replyed:
Thou sayst well, thou art the man I seeke for, commanding they
should make him good cheere; and after that time they suffered
him to go vp and downe the Towne where he listed, yet they caused
a Legeois to accompany him, least he should escape. The
Bastard of Orange did sound him, to see if he continued in this
humor, and if he did embrace it willingly, or with griefe,We must not hope for any good successe of that which is done vnwillingly. Per multum interest vt^u^ spon^e nostra quid faciamusan inu^ti. There is a great difference whether we doe any thing willingly or by constraint. Arist. and assuring
him that if he did persist, he should find a happy fortune: that if
he would sweare to serue the Arch-duke of Austria faithfully, the
Prince of Orange had power to do him good, and his authority
was such, that if he gaue him halfe the Country,He is ingaged with the hope of great rewards. the donation
should not be reuoked. These words wrought the effect, which
may be expected from a soule of that disposition, and in such
affliction as to recouer his liberty, he would haue promised any
thing.
The Prince of Orange, thinking that there was not any else to
do but to bind him, causeth him to come into his chamber, in the
presence of the Bastard of Orange, to sweare vpon-the Masse-booke,
and the Figure of the Crucifixe,He swears to do what hee would haue him. to do all that he should
command him, and adding this clause vnto his Oath,An oath should haue three (...), Truth, Iudgement, and Iustice, if it wants any one, it is execration: we must alwaies forbeare to sweare to deceiue him that trusts vnto the oth that is made vnto him. In dolo iutat qui aliter facturus est quam promittit, cu^ periurium fit' nequi (...) decipere credentem. He sweares deceitfully that doth otherwise then he promiseth, being periury, wickedly to deceiue him that beleeueth. August. 21. q, 2. Can. in dolo. that if hee
did it not, he renounced God, his Christianisme and Baptisme.
Renond sware, and spake those words freely, and takes a chamber
in Hell (those were his words) if he fayled to effect that which
should be commanded him; but his heart did not consent to this
Oath, desiring rather to deceiue his heart, then to betray his
Maister.
They left him yet three daies, to see if hee did persist in this resolution,
and to obserue if there were any coldnesse in his words,
or amazement in his Countenance, for that words the most certaine
in shew are changed by the inconstancy of will, the Nature
of man being such, as it oftentimes taketh away Will from all his
intentions,There is nothing constant in humane resolutions, man (...) subiect to reiect that suddenly which he hath promised and sworne. Quia non ex* toto vult, non ex toto imperat. For he that doth not wholly will, doth not wholly command. and in these dangerous bargaines, we must not buy
men by the sound, as they do vessels of Tinne, the eye must
iudge both of the inward and outward man.
The Prince of Orange gaue him a horse, and carryed him to
Bleterans, where he caused him to come into his Chamber, and
comma^ded the Bastard of Orange to bring him fiue boxes of

Leade,They shew him fiue boxes of poison. presenting which vnto Renond, he coniured him by the
oath which he had taken, to vse them as he should direct him: He
let him see that those Boxes were full of diuers Liquors, and that
euery one was of a different colour; then he said vnto him. Thou
knowest that when the King hath heard Masse, or done his deuotions,
hee is accustomed to kisse the ground, and, many times, the corners of
the Altars.Reuenge is blind, it respects neither the holinesse of places, nor the reuerence of things. Princes should learne 'by this example, that death watcheth them, and may surprise them euery where* Thou shalt finde meanes to powre these Liquors at the
corners where he shall kneele, and shalt rub the corners of the Altar:
and to the end, the colour may answere the Ornaments that are vpon it,
and that the diuersity make them not obserue the spots, thou shalt take
greene liquour for greene Ornaments, blacke for blacke, white, for
white, and in like manner, red and blew for the like colours: The
white may be laid vpon the ground, or vpon any gray colour. They are
of this Composition, that as soone as they are powred forth, there will
nothing appeare, and no man can perceiue it, but beware thou dost not
touch it with thy hand.
This defence not to touch them, made Renond demand after
what manner he might lay them on the Ornaments of the Altar,
and not rub them with his finger. The Prince said vnto him:
Thou shalt take a waxe candle, and fret the end of it, then faigning to
make thy Offring, thou shalt according vnto custome, kisse the corners
of the Altar, and then thou shalt touch them with the end of thy Waxe
Candle, rubbing the place, where thou shalt thinke the King will kisse
the Altar.
Renond who did abhorre all this in his soule,He promiseth to do it. made shew by his
words that nothing seemed more iust, nor more easy to be done.
The Prince of Orange did long to haue him gone, and it seemed
to him, that his Reuenge, although shee were drawne by Cruelty,
Boldnesse, Impatiency, and Impudency, as by foure Tigers,
The Chariot of Reuenge hath foure wheeles, Cruelty, Impatiency, Boldnesse, and Impudency. Valde enim velox currus iste ad effundendum sanguinem, qui nec innocentia sistitur, nec patientiaretardatur, nec timore frenatur, nec pudore inhibetur. The Chariot to shed bloud is very swift, it is neither stayed by Innocency, restrained by Patience, Feare doth not brible it, nor shame hold it backe. went not swift enough, saying alwaies, that seeing the King
would not haue him for his seruant, he would neuer hold him for
his Maister. Renond promised to do all this, and made no difficulty
but how he might get out of the Country and not be stayed, for
that as soone as he should enter into the Realme, he was in safety,
and feared not any thing.
The Prince of Orange gaue him mony, and caused him to bee
conducted out of the Franch-County: He gaue him a Pasport to
passe vnto Bresse, and promised him two hundred Crownes: But,
for that Renond said, the recompence was not equall to the seruice
he vndertooke, he sware by the Prayer Booke, which he held in his
hand, that if he did that which he commanded him, hee would
giue him an Office, which had two hundred and forty pound yearly
fee: That if he dyed, he would cause to be giuen to his wife and
children, thirty pound Sterling of yearely rent, and a house, in the
Towne of Salins, for their retreat: and in a word, that they would
do him more good then they had promised him.
There remayned no more to do, but to make the Kings Epitaph,
but as they were vpon this discourse, the Signior of Erbeins arriues,

who brake them off, and the Prince caused Renond to retire,
who went downe into a chamber, whereas the tonnell of the chimney
did answere to that of the Prince, by the which he might easily
vnderstand what they said: After that Erbeins had discoursed with
the Prince of the affaires of warre, and that Dijon, Chalons, and
Beaune were ready to yeeld vnto the Arch-duke:The Townes of Dijon, Beaune, and Verdun reuolted against the King. The Lord of Chaumont, who was Gouernour, recouered them. Phil. de Com. saith that it was for want of iudgement in the enemy, and th^t God giues wisedome and g^uernment to that part which hee will support. He heard the
Prince say vnto him: You haue brought vs a man which is very fit for
vs, for the boxes which you know: Whereupon Erbeins said vnto
the Prince, you haue done ill to discouer this businesse, to one that
is a French-man. If you (said he) haue promised to make him a Knight,
the King will make him an Earle: He hath Knighted a Scullion, and giuen
him great meanes,Danger wherin Renond was. for that he discouered the like enterprise:
And what remedy then (said the Prince.) You must cast him into the Riuer
(answered Erbeins) to the end he discouer not any thing: That were
ill done (said the Bastard of Orange) seeing that he was taken in
Sauoy, in the habite of a Marchant, and not of a Souldier; that he
was a poore man, who had neuer spoken vnto Souldiour but with
his hat in his hand.
This first instrument being made vnprofitable, the Prince did not
for all that desist from his bad intent, his reuenge was so enflamed
with rage and despite against the King, who had contemned him as
a person that could neither do him good nor harme.The King, saith Phil. de Com. did not thinke that the Prince of Orange had had courage, or meanes, to rebell the Country of Bourgundy, as he did a great part of it. The Prince
demanded whom they should then employ for the Boxes: I will
answered Erbeins, giue you one of my seruants called Catherin, a
very faithfull man, who can both go and speake, and knowes many
in Court, and hath ben the Winter past at Arras, Paris, and at Tours.
They sent for this Catherin, who promised to do any thing they
would. Then the Prince of Orange commanded the Bastard of Orange
to carry Renond to Salins, and to haue a care least he escaped.
You shall do well (said Catherin) for if he go into France, I will not go,
for that he will discouer all (...) designes, and knowing me he will accuse
me: He had reason to think thereon, for if he had beene discouered,
they would not haue giuen him any time to repent.There are crimes, whose example is so necessary, as they that are apprehended must bee presently dispatched. In other excessesit is good that repentance go before the punishment, and a good Prince: Non poena semper, sed saepius poenitentia contentus esse debet: Not alwaies with punishment, but oftentimes must be content with repentance: Tacit in vit. Agtic. The Bastard
of Orange said, that he would put such irons on his feete that hee
should not be well able to flye: The next day, Renond was led to Salins,
and lodged in a base chamber at Chastelbellin, where hee had
fetters put on him, waighing aboue an hundred weight.
The Bastard of Orange went to BeauneThe Processe verball shows that the Country made great ioy for the reduction of Beaune, (...) these words. And in making the said feasts and dancings, he heard them that were in the chamber, vnder the Towre where this deponent was, cry out with a loud voyce, Long liue Burgundy and of the rest one: Thus they cryed three or foure times, and so did the rest that were in Castelbellin. to reduce it to the
Arch-dukes obedience,Renond a prisonerin Irons, put to ransom. which done he returned to Chastelbellin,
and told Renond that he was his prisoner taken in the warres, and
that he must put himselfe to ransome, Renond could do no other
thing but weepe, saying, that the Prince of Orange had promised
him otherwise. The Bastard of Orange told him, that it was no
place for teares, and that water was deere, that he should resolue
either of a ransome, or to be cast downe head-long from the top of

the rocke; Seing no remedy, he promised to pay two hundred
Crownes by Midsommer day, and if he did not acquit himselfe
within the time he should pay the double.
Hee found himselfe in this perplexity the first day of May,
which was the feast of Saint Iames, and Saint Phillip, he made his
Vow vnto our Lady of Puy in Velay, and to Saint Iames in Galicia,
promising to go thither to pay his Vowes, if he escaped out of
that prison, and not to see wife nor children vntill he reuealed the
Prince of Oranges practise vnto the King. His prayer being ended,
God (who hath alwaies had a particular care of the King and
Realme of France) gaue him meanes to breake his Irons,Renond deliuered miraculously and to
get out of prison, to aduertise the King of these matters, so much
importing the safety of his person, and of his estate:The Processe Verball saith; that after that Renond had made his Vow, his Ironsopened, and hee found meanes to escape* by two lances which he had tyed one vnto another; and by cords which hee found there* The feare
hee had to bee followed made him to take the way to Lausanne,
from whence he went with all speed to Bourges, where
hearing of the Lord of Bouchages being, and that he was one of
the Kings principall Seruants, hee addrest himselfe vnto him, to
tell him all that he had learned of the Prince of Orange. The
Lord of Bouchages sent for Raoul Pichon, Councellour to the
King, to heare this Declaration, and caused a verball Processe to
be made, the which was inrold in the chamber of Accompts of
Dauphine, bearing date the eight and twentieth of May, one
thousand foure hundred seuenty and eight, Signed Imbert of Baterne,
R. Pichon.
From this Discourse wee see another spring. The Signior of
Erbeins,The like attempt discouered and punished. to let the Prince of Orange vnderstand, that hee had inconsiderately
made choise of a French-man, to be the bearer of
his boxes, and the executioner of his designes; for that, beside the
bonds of God, and nature, which bound him to his Prince; and
not to hold any thing which hee should promise against him:
Vniust promises must not bee kept, it is iustice to flye from the^; and iniustice to obserue them* If they were extorted by force they bind not, for his will that promised was not free. The estate wherein hee was, when hee promised, dispensed him
of his promise: he said vnto him, that if Renond did it for the hope
of recompence, hee should haue more from the King,
then from any other, and that hee had made a Scullion of his
Kitchin, or one that did make sauce, a Knight, for that hee
had reuealed the like enterprise. The Chronicle maketh no mention
of this kind of recompence: but it reports the seruice,
which a Sauce-maker, called Colynet, did vnto the King.
Princes haue Instruments for the good and euill which they do,
they finde men for all affaires, whose spirits are apt to vndertake
any thing, and to dispatch the^ of me^ by waies vnknown to generous
minds, and vnworthy of Princes.To practise against the life of an enemy by any other meanes the^ by Armes, is vnworthy of a Prince: Adgandestre Prince of the Chattes promised the Senate to put Arminius to death if they would send him poison, the Senate answered: Non fraude neque occultis, sed palam and armatum populum Romanum hostes suos vlcisci, qua gloria aequabat se Tiberius priscis imperatoribus, qui venenum in Pyrrhum regem vetuerant, prodiderantque That the Romanes were not reuenged of their enemies by fraude and secret practises, but by Armes, in which glory Tiberius was equall to the ancient Emperours, who did forbid poyson to be giuen to King Pyrrhus, and did bewray it. The Duke of Bourgundy had
some, who practised a Marchant called Ithier, to haue the king poisoned
vpon promise of 50000. Crownes, to distribute among the^

that should execute this damnable designe, but they found that
the gate, by the which they would haue it passe was shut, and had
neuer beene opened to any such thoughts, whereas they found nothing
but misery, for we may say, to the glory of fidelity, that such
detestable conspiracies did neuer enter into the Kitchin.
Ithier corrupted one called Hardy, and he dealt with a maker of
Sauce in the Kings Kitchin, to whom he promised twenty thousand
Crownes. This Sauce-maker resolued suddenly to cry quittance
with this wretch, that came to tempt him, preferring the duty of
his fidelity before all other considerations of profite, making
shew to hearken to this bargaine, he told him, that he could not do
any thing without Colinet, who was also an Officer, and that it was
necessary to put the poyson into his hands: Hardy deliuered it vnto
them and instructed them how to vse it.The King aduertised of this poisoning. They presently aduertised
the King, who caused this poisoner to be apprehended and examined
in his presence, to know the motiues and the effects of his
designe; He confest the whole matter: The King went from Amboise
(where he was at that time) to go to Paris, and caused Hardy
to be conducted by Iohn Blosset, Captaine of an hundred Archers
of the Dauphins Gard, who carried him in chaines in a little Cart,
to deliuer him to the Prouost of Marchants of Paris, to do iustice
of him: The came and receiued him in the Suburbes, and caused
him to sit in a chaire, made fast in the Cart, to the end the people
of Paris might see him, not so much to the shame of this miserable
wretch, as to the confusion of the Duke of Bourgundy,
for that it was publiquely spoken, that he had commanded this
foule attempt.
They made his Processe,Hardy co^demned to be quartered.Execution of Iohn Hardy, on Thursday the 30 of March 1474. The Chronicle saith, that his head which had beene set vp at the Greeue, was presently stollen away. and he was condemned to be quartered,
his foure quarters to be carried to foure frontier Townes,
with an Inscription, containing the cause of his punishment, his
houses to be razed, and the place where he was borne to be ruined
and neuer more to be built.
A holy, and iust iudgement: If the places for that they haue
beene innocently guilty of any heynous villany, haue beene termed
wicked; they that haue subborned and suffered these Murtherers,
and poisoners, of Kings, should be held most cursed and execrable.The place whereas Iulia caused her Carroch to passe vpon the body of Seruius Tullius her father, slaine by Tarquine. The gate by the which the 300. Fabians went forth to battell where they died. The place of Battell whereas Claudius father to Drusus was sicke. The place where the V^stales were interred aliue: were termed Execrable.
The feare of the like punishment did not diuert an Englishman,
called Iohn Bon from the like thoughts, who vndertooke to
poison the Dauphine.Iohn Bon an Englishman conde^ne^. He was condemned to loose his head, by a
sentence giuen by the Prouost of Paris. Being at the place of excution,
he desired to haue his wife and children recommended vnto
the King: The Kings pleasure was, that the losse of his life
should be moderated with the losse of his eyes: He accepted of
this commutation of punishment, which did not bind him, but
to go accompanied,There is not any affliction but doth still finde some thing to comfort it. Asclepiades being growne blind, said that blindnes brought him this content to go alwaies acco^panied, causing (...) fe to bee guided by a yong boy. and kept him from a passage where man
finds no Companion, and is without hope euer to returne. My
opinion is, that the King did it in remembrance of some seruices,

which this miserable man had done him in the discouery of
some of the Earle of Armagnackes practises, as hath beene formerly
said.
God dispersed these wicked practises which the Prince of Orange
had against the Kings life,Taking and recouery of Beaune and Verdun but his designes vpon the Townes
of Bourgondy succeeded: Hee made Beaune reuolt; and as wee
haue said, the bastard of his house entred into it. Verdun did also
declare it selfe against the King: the Townes of Mons-aujon, Chastillon
vpon Seine, Semur, and Bar vpon Seine, followed this
rout. Chaumont, Liuetenant generall of the Countrey, recouered
them as speedily as they had beene taken,Rebels punished. and caused them to
be seuerely punished which had beene chiefe actors in this reuolt.
The punishment of a rebellion should be^ done speedily and sharply, as Q. Fuluius did vpon the Capuans, of whom he put 80 to death without acquainting his Colleague therewith, or expecting any commandement fro^ the Senate. Ita ad Capuam res compositae co^silio ab moni parte laudabili seuere and celeriter in maxime noxios animaduersum. Thus at Capua matters being settled by a commendable resolution, the chiefe offenders were speedily and seuerely punished Tit. Liu. lib. 16. Their enemies wanted iudgement, and Phil. de Commines referres
that to the difference of men, which should be imputed to the secret
iudgements of the eternall Prouidence, for the fauour or disgrace
of Princes and states. The Memorials of the Franch-county,
written by Golu, accuse the couetousnesse of the Emperour Fredericke,
and the weaknesse of his Garrisons that were in Bourgondy.
Giury compounded for Beaune at forty thousand Crownes. The
Bailiffe of Auxois yeelded Semur. William of Vaudre was taken
prisoner at Seurre, and Simon of Quingey, and Cottebrune at
Verdun.
The Prince of Oranges attempts (who was retired to Basill)
had not lasted so long in that prouince,Sigismond Archduke of Austria inconsta^t, giues his estates to his Nephew. if the Arch-duke Sigismond
had not beene an Actor, and quit the Kings Alliance. He was
suddenly incensed, and as soone pacified.Lightnesse, Cho^er, and Facility do not wel become a prince: either he is feared more then hee ought, or esteemed lesse the^ be desires. Such was Vitellius, Quem subitis offensis, aut in tempestiuis blanditii^ mutabilem contemnebant, (...) as inconstart, they did contemne and feare, for his sudden choler and vnseasonable flattery. These humors doe neuer
incounter in a Prince; but they make him co^temptible, or fearfull:
He suffered himselfe to be gouerned by his seruants, who abused
him as well in making him feare, as in putting him in hope. By
the counsell of some, he had followed the King against the Duke
of Bourgondy* by aduice of others, and in the worst estate, hee
leaues the King for his Nephew the Arch-duke Maximilian, and
sends German Troopes into Bourgondy, vnder the command of
Simon of Quingey, dispossesseth himselfe of all his estates, and reserues
onely a pension.Sigis^^nd, Archduke of Austria having no children by his first nor second marriage, gaue his goods to the Archduke maximilian his Nephew. Phi. de Commin (...) saith, that he suffered himselfe to be gouerned by his seruants, and there was neuer any great Iudgement nor honour in him.
What was lost in the battell of Guinegaste, was recompenced
with the winning of the Towne of Aire,Lewis of Bourbon, Bishop of Liege, slaine. and the troubles which
happened at Liege Lewis of Bourbon, Bishop of Liege, brother
to Iohn and Peter of Bourbon, was growne old in the hatred which
the Liegeo is bare him the which tooke deepe roote in their memories,
when as they remembred, that to reuenge his priuate iniuries,
the Duke of Bourgondy had reduced them to that misery
and desolation which they yet felt.
William de la Marche, called the Boare of Ardenne, who had

beene bred vp by the hand of this Prince, and who was a pentioner
to the house of Bourgondy, vndertooke to kill him, and to
make his sonne Bishop.
To execute this designe, hee gathered together a Troope of
the most desperate wretches that were in Paris, (a Forrest at that
time where such sauadge beasts did lurke,)(...) with the honor of their villanies, and the feare of Iustice. Therascally mullitude in Townes are alwayes dissolute, and they principally, quibus ob egestaten^ and flagitia, maxima peccandi necessitas, who for then pouerty or vil^anies, are forced to sinne. he gaue them red
Cassockes; and for a Badge, a Boares head vpon the sleeue, with
whom he went into the Country of Liege. Hee acquainted some
of Liege with his Conspiracie,Treason of the Liegeois. who promised to serue him. They
presently tooke an Alarme to see these Boares in their Vines;
they let the Bishop vnderstand, that he must not suffer them there,
and that if he would go forth to chase them away, euery man would
follow him.
This good prelate, whose courage could not deferre such an
occasion to another season, and did thinke that Palmes were not
planted for cowards, resolued as sudenly as he was intreated, to go
out against these theeues.
Beeing ready to charge, the Liegeois abandoned him, so as
hee was compassed in by these Boares, and barbarously slaine
by their Leader, who caused him to bee stripped starke naked,
and to bee carried to the place before the Cathedrall Church.
Soone after Maximilian caused the head of la March to bee cut
off.
Although the King held a Peace difficult betwixt Prouinces
so neere, so interressed, and so accustomed to picke quarrels, as
it is a hard matter for two Neighbours,Lewis seeketh a peace of Maximlia^. which haue many desputes,
to bee long at peace;Neighbour Estates haue alwayes some disputes: The Romans and Carthaginians, continued fiue hundred yeares in peace; but when they began to extend their frontiers, and to draw neere one vnto another, suspition. iealousie, and enuy of eithers greatnes thrust them into warre. yet the losse of the battle at Guinegaste,
made him resolue to seeke it. A resolution which could
not growe, but from great wisedome and policie, hauing duely
considered, that it was necessary, honourable, and profitable for
him so to doe.
A Prince that is already well stricken in Age, who sees great
discontentments amongst great men, and heares great complaints
amongst the meaner, and hath his Children very young,
should no more thinke of Warre, if he could not draw vnto him
the aduantage which he desired; and considering that the Footemen
had all the honour of the battle, hee made the body of an
Army of ten thousand Foot, two thousand Pioners, six thousand
Suisses, and a thousand fiue hundred horse to imploy vpon all occasions.
This establishment must bee reckoned among the examples of
his good Gouernement, or rather among the Instruments which
hee could handle to reigne powerfully. If hee had made this Order
sooner,New discipline for Souldiers. or if King Charles the eighth, and Lewis the twelfsth had
continued it, France had not felt those wants and weakenesse
which haue beene a let that her designes haue not beene equall to
her courage.
Estates depend not so much vpon a good forme of Gouernement,

Estates may wel be gouerned either by one alone, or by fewe heads, or by many, but their strength or weaknes depends vpon priuat order; and especially of Martiall discipline, whose effect is so great, as it preserues euen Tyrants in the estate which they hold, wherof the house of the Ottomans is a president. as of Force: Military Discipline is the foundation of an
Estate. The groundes of Warlike Discipline are Foote-men;
and all Foote-men which are not drawne from the Princes owne
Estates, cause more discommodity then profite. Rome which in
her greatnesse (that is to say,Dangerous to imploy forraine souldiers from Numa to the Emperour Augustus)
Footmen haue giuen vnto the Romans the Empire of^ all the world. Fro^ Numa to Augustus, they had but one yeare a suspension of Armes, and haue alwayes carried the warre into the Enemies countrey, how farre off soeuer. had fought fiue hundred and fifty Battels, and had wonne
foure hundred thirty seuen with her owne Troopes, held that footmen
were the sinewes of her forces, and hath not found a more
certaine cause of her ruine, then to haue mingled strangers in
their legions.
Strangers draw away the chiefe treasure of the realme, their affection
and fidelity is not so naturall, as they care more then the
subiects to preserue the estate: They dis-band for want of pay, and
sometimes they bandy against them of the Countrey with more
fury then against their enemies: they will prescribe a law when
they are ready to decide a good action; and like vnto Rauens, rather
follow the prey, then accompany the Wolues which pursue
and take it.The Fable saith, that the Rauens hauing accompanied the Wolues at the pursute of some beast to deuoure it, would haue their share whe^ it was taken, saying, that they had assisted the^, and alwaies follow'd them: you were not for vs (answered the Wolues) it was the prey that drew you thither, and if it had succeeded ill, and that we had beene taken, you wold not haue spared our owne flesh. Experience teacheth many examples to confirme this
Maxime. Those estates which haue no other suport but by forraine
forces, suffer great discommodities in time of peace, and recei^e
small profit and succours in time of warre: they are alwaies declining
to their ruine, the which is not deferred, but by the slacknesse
of the occasion, or the small courage of the assailant.
Men of warre are not ordained but to preserue or conquer,Obseruations of the adua^tages of Foot-men ouer horsmen. to defend
or take townes, and to decide by a battell the rights and differences
of Princes and Estates. In all these occasions foot-men are
more proper then horse-men. A towne which is kept by hors-men,
receiueth such discommodity for provision, as oftentime it is more
prest by necessity within, then by the enemies without: and alwaies
horse do more trouble aPhilip. father to Alexander, seeking to campe in a place of aduantage for the souldiers, but vnfit for the horse, cryed out, that it was a great pitty of our life, which must be subiect to the commodity of horse. Generall to feed, then to discipline his
souldiers. At assaults of places hors-men are of small seruice, if they
leaue not their horse, and serue on foot. At battels, foot-men which
haue meanes to entrench and couer themselues, and haue good
store of pikes, are alwaies more then equall to horsemen. It is true
that the Cauallary hath great aduantages, for a horse-man hath better
legges then his owne, hee chargeth more furiously, and hath
more force, heat and breath then a foot-man. Foot-men are leuied
more speedily, are led and lodged with more facility, are paid and
entertained more commodiously, fight more safely and couragiously,
and rally themselues againe moreWe are not now in the time of the old warres, when as Gentlemen onely gaue themselues to the exercise of Armes. At this day euery man hath liberty to seeke it without the Realme, and many are growne Souldiers, and neuer went out of their Village easily: For the facility of
the leuy, it is so great in France, since that the ciuill warres haue armed
the people, as there is not any parish where you find not Souldiers
which haue carried Armes, and others which are resolued to
run that fortune.

The Prouinces are so peopled,France cannot be disarmed of footmen. as if the King should loose as many
battels as the mightiest conquerer could giue him, yet could he
not disarme him of Foot-men. Adde hereunto, that horse fit for
the warre, are alwayes deere, and rare, and that we euer finde more
men then horses.The Romans, to repulse the Gaules, who had seized vpon some Townes of Lombardy, made a description of their forces, and of the number of men fit for the warre: they found six hundred thousand foot, and threescore thousand horse.
Touching the pay, we know that the difference is great betwixt
the pay of a man at Armes, and that of a foot-man; and that it is
easier to raise a thousand foot, then a hundred horse. For the facility
of lodging, foot-men couer and entrench themselues in field,
and fortifie themselues within a Towne: if they be lodged in a village,
they lye close to defend themselues, and not scattering like vnto
horse-men. For the aduantage of fight, it is true that horse-men
haue sooner done;l but also wee haue seene battels lost by the disorder
and violence of the horse, who can hardly keepe their ranks,
nor recouer them beeing lost; and oftentimes they fall vpon the
foot, and breake them with more disorder then the Elephants of
the Antients,One of the greatest forces of the Armies of the East, consisted of Elepha^ts: They must of necessity (saith M. de Montagne) giue great credite to their beasts and to their discourse, abandoning vnto them the head of the Battle: wher^s the least stay they could make for the greatnesse and heauinesse of their bodies, and the least amazeme^t that had made the^ turne head vpon their owne men, was sufficient to ouerthrow all. to whose discretion they did commit the head of
the Army. A Foote-man fights more surely, and more resolutely
then a horse-man. In what perplexity doth a valiant man fight vpa
faint-hearted Iade? and what is a Coward, or a mad-man vpon a
couragious horse? How many haue we seene carried away by their
horses, into dangers not foreseene, who can no more stay them in
the flight, then in the heat of their fight?They that speake of warre with knowledge and experience, hold, that commonly when as the Cauallary aduanceth to giue the first charge, it is the cause of the losse of the victory, returning often vpon their foot, and striking a great amazement into them, for that hauing conceiued a great opinion, and assured themselues often to winne the Battell, they finde themselues suddenly deceiued; and therefore the Rout of the Cauallary is alwayes full of amazement.
For the commodity of the leading, bee it to march, lodge, or
fight, the foot-men passe in all places, whereas the Cauallary
comes often into such difficult passages, as the men at Armes
should rather desire flying, then ordinary horses. Speaking hereof
with a braue French knight, very well knowne in these last warres,
and who hath yet command amongst the Kings men at Armes, he
said vnto me, That the discommodity of forrage had beene so great, as
the horsemen were sometimes fifteene, or twenty leagues from the campe
to supply their wants: That some went to warre with fiue or sixe Horse,
who fought but vpon one, and yet the people were forced to feed these vnprofitable
beasts, with their keepers: That ten horse-men had more Carts
then a company on foote. And if his aduice might purchase credite, they
should therein imitate the Spaniards, who giue honors, recompences, and
markes of vertue to the foote, and the contrary to horse-men.It is more honourable in Spaine to bee among the foot companies then among the Horse. The contrary is obserued at Rome. Valerius the Consull said vnto his Troope: Agite Iuvenes prestate virtute peditem, vt honore and ordini prestatis. Goe to yong men, excell the foot-men in vertue, as you do in honor and order. Liv.
The Horse-men were the losse of the battell at Courtray, and the
footmen defeated the Earle of Flanders before Gand. The horsemen
seeking to haue all the honour of the battell at Poitiers, came
to charge before that the foot companies had meanes to ioyne,
this was the cause that the English, whose force consisted wholly

in Foote, wonne the Battell. At the Battell of Guinegaste, the
Arch-duke Maximilians Horse-men abandoned the Foote, who
stood firme, and kept the place of Battell. Wee haue formerly
seene, that the men at Armes at the Battell of Mont-lehery, who
seemed as if they would haue supported heauen with their Lances,
fell vpon their owne Archers, and trode them vnder their feete,
doing them more harme then their enemies.
It is true, that whatsoeuer was fortunate and glorious in this
Encounter, came from the Arrierban, or Gentlemen of Horsebacke
of Dauphine, who made the Fore-ward vnder the commaund
of the Baron of Sausonnage, who was slaine there: for
of foure hundred Gentlemen which dyed in this Battell, there
were foure and fifty of Dauphine. Before the troubles, their names
and Armes were to bee seene in a Chappell in the Conuent of Iacobins
at Grenoble. Yet for all this discourse we may not banish
horse-men out of Armies; if RomeTo them that say, the Romans made their Conquest by Footemen, wee may answere, that in like manner, the Parthians encreased their Empire by horsmen: And that M. Antony hauing vanquished them in eighteene battels, found his victories vnprofitable, by reason of the inequality of Hors-men. Plut. could haue equal'd them of
France in Courage and Resolution, shee had sooner carried the
proud Title of Queene and Mistresse of Nations. But shee was forced
to make a vertue of necessity: for meaning in the beginning
to haue all the people fit to serue in Warre, and all hauing not
meanes to bee Horse-men, her chiefe force was setled in Footemen.
RomulusRomulus made but three Centries for hu^dreds of Horse-men. Tullus Hostilius added ten troopes, either of two and thirty Horse. Tarquinius ordained, that the number should be of three hundred: Seruius disposed the people into fiue bands, which made 93 Centuries, whereof 18 were for horse-men. hauing diuided the people into thirty Tribes,
made but three hundred horsemen. And to proue this pouerty, we
finde that when as Lucius Tarquinius, of a Patrician race was made
Constable by Lucius Quintius Cincinatus, he had alwaies fought
on foot, for that hee had no meanes to mount himselfe on Horsebacke.
Horse-men are very necessary in diuers occasions,Necessity of Horse-men. which cannot
be otherwise performed: If it be needfull to make a long iourney,
to surprise the Enemy, seize vpon, approch, cut off, or hold
passages, recouer the Cannon, inuest Townes, keepe the Enemy
in Alarme, to command the fieild, to make a spoile, to cut off victuals
from the besieged: all this Horse-men doe, and more readily,
and more effectually then Foot-men. Often-times they haue
recouered that which the Foot haue lost; they alone haue saued
the Estate:Sext. Tempa^^^us seeing the Volsques come to the charge against him, spake these words: Nisi haec armata cohors sistat impetum hostium actum est d^ Imperio. If this armed troope did not ^^ay the Enemies fury, the Emperour were vndone. and wee know well, that the Parthians haue done as
great Exploits with their Horse, as the Romans with their Foote;
but it is certaine, that the men at Armes haue alwayes beene
beaten when as they encountred Foote-men, and therefore wee
often see, that the Roman Horsemen left their Horses to fight
and defeate Foot-men, and tooke them againe to pursue them
when they were in flight.Titus Largius at the Lake of Regilla, and the Consull Valerius fighting against the Sabins, caused their Horse-men to light: And when as Largius had defeated the Latins, hee caused them to mount againe to pursue them. Equitibus admoti equi, vt prosequi hostem possunt. The like hath beene obserued in the
English and Bourgondian Armies.

But to returne to the Campe which wee haue left; It was not sufficient
to haue made this Leuy of Men of Warre, to keepe the
Field, and to serue vpon any occasion, if they had not added two
necessary things to make it profitable, Entertainment and Safety:
for if it had alwayes laine open to the iniuries of the Aire, and
the enterprises of the first Assailant; or if it had beene forced to
dis-band, to seeke for Victuals, it had beene like vnto the Pyramides
of Egypt, of great shew and ostentation, and of no profite.
The King prouided for the first, imposing a Taxe vpon his Subiects,
which Philip de Commines calleth Excessiue and Cruell,The entertainment of the souldiers of the campe, cost the king a hundred and fifty thousand pound sterling yearly. necessity
iustifieth all kindes of impositions: for all that is necessary
to the State, is Iustice; and all that is profitable, is necessary.
Necessity goeth beyond the Law;Necessity teacheth Princes to command the lawes, and dispenseth them from obseruing the Lawes, it doth excuse that which they doe, Necessitas, magnum humanae imbecillitatis patrocinium, omnem legem frangit. Necessity a great support of humane weaknes, breaks all lawes. Sen. and when the Prince is prest,
hee doth more consider that which hee doth, then that which hee
should doe: his Iustice goes of another traine, then that of Princes;
and those things which seeme to be against the lawes, are not
done, but to make the lawes liue and continue.
Wherefore,Armies are not to bee entertained without tribute. who-so will draw seruice from any thing, must make
it last: for that which is not for euer, cannot alwayes profite, and
hee that will haue it last, must make the meanes whch entertaines
it lasting:The Tributes by the which the meanes to make warre, are maintained, may not bee touched. Augustus ordained a perpetuall and certaine reuenue for the entertainement of Souldiers, out of the twentieth penny of Legacies and Successions. After his death, the Senate intreated Tiberius to extinguish it. Dion saith that hee would not doe it, and Tacitus giues this reason. Quod militare aerarium eo subsidio niteretur, that the treasure of the warre did (...) consist of that aid. The quyet of Provinces cannot be without Armes,
and Armies; Armes are not to bee found, nor Armies entertained
without Money; and the Money which is to bee imployed
in publique necessities, is not drawne, but from priuate commodities.
The Senate would haue Tiberius suppresse the twentieth
penny imposed (by Augustus) vpon Legacies, and Successions:
But this wise Prince would not yeeld vnto it, for
that it was onely affected for the entertainement of his Souldiers.
For the second, hee caused a great company of Tents, and
Pauillions to bee made, to lodge his Souldiers dry, and Carts
to close them in, and intrench them. All this would haue beene
found weake against a mighty Enemy, and against a mighty
attempt,Lewis the eleuenth, strong in Artillery. if hee had not placed Artillery. I do not hold it a small
matter the commendation which Philip de Commines giues him
to haue been alwayes well furnished of Ordinance in his Armies,
and better then euer King of France: for the great designes of
Princes are not executed by handie stroakes. His Chronicle
saith, that about the end of the yeare 1478. Hee caused twelue
great Bombardes to bee made, with a great number of Iron bullets
in the Forges of Creil, and many of stone, in the quarries of
Peronne.

Since that men grew so ingenious not to imitate Nature;(...). as
Xeuxis in his Vine, Appelles in his Venus, Memnon in his Statue,
Miron in his Cow, Architas in his Doue, Sapor in his Heauen
of Glasse, Mont-royall in the Eagle of Wood, and in his Flie of
Iron, Albert the great in his brazen head, but to offend and destroy:Art^llery inuented.
that Mens wits haue giuen wings and fire to Iron, to hasten
death more speedily; that a German MonkeThe inuention of Gun-powder and Ordinance was found out by Bartholmew le Noi^, a German Monk. The yeare is diuersly reported: some date it 1330. others 1334, and others 1380. went downe
into Hell, to finde fire there for the ruine of Man, as Prometheus
had mounted vp vnto Heauen to fetch that there, wherewith hee
thought to giue them life; and that Europe hath knowne that
which was not in vse,Nothing strong without Cannons. but to vnknowne Nations.The Portugals found Peeces of ordinance in the realme of Pegu, which the Chinois had broght thither 2500. yeares before: and the Chinois attribute this invention to an euill spirit, who taught it to their first King, called Vitey, to defend himselfe against the Tartars, aboue a thousand yeares before the birth of Christ. Artillery hath
beene a marke of the power and greatnesse of Estates, which cannot
bee held strong, nor assured, if they be vnfurnished, seeing that
nothing can be gotten, nor preserued without it.
Artillery shewes those Forts to bee weake, which the Ancients
held impregnable; there is not any but feares this thunder: and if
they ouer-throw the Attemps, and consume the meanes and patience
of the assailant,Formes of war changed. it is onely by the Cannon: It workes such
terrible effects, and so farre from the vse of the Engines in old
time, as it hath changedArtillery is the cause that warre is at this day more iuditiously managed then in former times, when as quarrels were ended by battels. Euery man seeketh to win time, and to force his enemy to necessity. They trust nothing to fortune, that may be committed to wisedome: they gouerne their designes with longer time, and more safety. all the old formes of Sieges and Battels.
Gun-powder and wilde-fire are multiplied in so many sorts,
and are growne to such perfection, as the warre which in former
times was made onely with Iron, is now done with Artillery and
Powder.
They cause the Cannon to martch in the head of the Army,All yeeldeth vnto the Cannon.
and that holdeth the ranke of Elephants:Elephants haue beene employed in the head of Armies. Siquidem Tirio seruire sedebam An^ ibali: When I did sit to serue Anniball of Tire. and Chariots armed
with Sythes, which did cut in sunder all they incounter. They giue
them the honour to begin those great battels, whereupon depend
the healthes of Estates; they open passages, and make new: all that
come by one way, scatter themselues into a dozen, because they
would not encounter them: nothing preserueth it selfe, but to
receiue death, or fight. They are absolute Iudges of the doubs of
victorie; and if a battalion of foote presents it selfe so strong, so
well armed with Pikes, and so couered with Muskets, as they mock
at all the attempts of a victorious Prince, and merite that glorious
name of an Armed wall,Dion calles the fourth Legion, (...). See what hath beene spoken thereon in the first Booke. they must at the sight of the Cannon
yeeld their Armes, or suffer the paine of their rashnesse, and
see themselues sooner ouerthrowne, then Grasse or Corne is
mowne downe and reaped.The terrible effects of Artillery is wittily represented by the Signior of Bartas in his Poeme of the Law.Euen as when many Cannons shot at once,Affront an Army; th' earth with thunder grones:Here flyes a broken arme, and breakes another,There stands th' one halfe of a halu'd body; th' otherFalles downe a furlong thence: here flies a shield,And deepe-wide windowes make they in the field.

It is Ordinance then, which maketh a Prince equall to thundering
Iupiter, who maketh the Rockes to leape, and ouerthrowes
the Gyants vnder the mountaines which they had raised against
him: The Brazen-mouthes which vomit forth Iron, winged with
fire, shew the greatnesse, and augment the reputation of them that
make them speake. All the Trumpets of their glory sound not so
loud, and are not heard so farre as these Flutes. They be the most
certaine Titles of the right of Armes, and are not subiect to contradiction;
so the charge is Royall, and there is not any Prince,
how great and powerfull soeuer, but in processe of time will finde
it insupportable. They write, that King Henry the second, in his
voyage to Germany, neuer made Cannon-shot, but cost him three
hundred Crownes.Blaise of Vigenere ^ saith, That in the voiage of K. Henry, in the yeare 1552. at Danwilliers, and Iuoy, places of small importance, which notwithstanding endured thousands of Cannon-shot, there was not any one shot but cost the King, (accounting all the equipage and furniture belonging to the Artillery) two or three hundred Crownes; so as a dozen of those balles came to a thousand six hu^dred crowns.
All the Instruments and Engines of Warre, knowne vnto the
Antiens, haue beene contemned to bring Artillery in vse, which
hath all the effects and force of Bowes, Arrowes, Rammes,
Slings, Crosse-bowes, Scorpions, and those terrible Engines
which did raise vp men into the Aire, carried away whole Gallies,
heaped vp and carried with great violence, Rockes, Millstones,
and Men,The Cross-bow was an Engine which carried farre off, and with great violence. Somtimes they did put in men aliue, or dead. Pelagius, a young man of Spaine, seeing himselfe forced to yeeld to the infamous and execrable lust of Almansor, strooke him on the face, wherewith being incensed, he caused him to be cast by one of his Slings, beyond the Riuer of Betis, or Guadalquibir, in the yeare 895. Iussit ^um funda machinali trans Betim mitti scopulosis rupibus illidendum. whom they made to leap beyond the Walles,
the Riuers, and the Mountaines of those places which they would
make subiect to ruine.
But as Inventions are not perfect in the beginning, the first Peeces
of Ordinance were all of Iron,Inuentio^s at the first rude and imperfect. with bandes and hoopes of the
same, so heauy and ill made, so difficult to gouerne, so ill mounted,
and of so bad a bore, as they had more shew then execution, and
did onely serue to amaze them that would bee amazed with the
noyse.All Mechanicke Inuentions are rude and grosse in their Infancy, as appeares in Artillery and Printing. The Batteries of those times were ridiculous, they did onely serue for an vnprofitable expence of powder. They shot^ a farre off, and at randon, and fiue or six vollies in a whole day. The Chronicle reports an example which shewes the little
industry and addresse that was euen in the Maisters of this Art: for
all the Officers of the Ordinance being gathered together on Munday
before Twelfth day,Bombard made at Tours. in the yeare 1448. in the field before
Saint Anthonies Bastille, to try a great Bombard which the King
had caused to bee made at Tours; At the first shot it carried an
Iron Bullet of fiue hundred pounds weight vnto the Gibbet at
Pont Charenton: They thought it was not well boared, and therefore
they would haue it cleansed and charged againe. The Caster
playing the Gunner, scoured it so carelesly, as hee left fire in
it, so as hauing charged it anew, and put in his Bullet; the Bombard
hauing no fire set to the touch-hole, discharged of it selfe,
blowing vp the Caster ino the Aire into many peeces, which
slew (neere and farre off) two and twenty men, and burnt and maimed
many others.The Chronicle addes, that the peeces of the Casters body were gathered together, and buried in the Church of S. Merry, and that they cried in the streets; Pray vnto God for I. Maugue, caster of the Bombard, who is newly dead between heauen and earth, in the seruice of the king our Lord.

Our age more industrious,Ordinance of Brasse. and subtile, hauing caused
Brasen Ordinance to bee cast, that is to say, a mixture of Tinne
and Copper, softer and more flexible then Iron: Artilery beganne
to be good in the warres of the Emperour Charles the fift, and of
Francis the first, and better vnder the raigne of Henry the second:
King Henry the fourth hath brought it to perfection. France could
not carry the title of Inuincible, before her Arsenals were filled
with that, whose want maketh the mightiest Empires weake:
Shee may now bragge to haue the keyes of all the forts of Europe,
and that there is not any one, but will stoope and humble it
selfe at the sight of this Thunderbolt, when as at the first word of
Iupiter, it shall be cast forth by the Eagle which carieth it, and which
onely demands where is it?
If Christian Princes would haue vented out in any other place
then in Europe,Death of Mahomet 2. that warlike heate, which turmoyled them to their
owne ruines, God had giuen them a goodly occasion to employ,
both the Camping Troupes of Lewis the 11., and all the forces of
other Christian Princes, to the ouerthrowing of that of the Turks,
which was wonderfully shaken by the death of MahometMahomet the second, Emperour of the Turkes, dyed the the 3d. of May, 1481. in the 52. yeare of his age.: Hee
dyed at that time in Nicomedia: Pope Sixtus was so glad, as he appointed
three festiuall daies,Sixtus the 4. reioyceth at the death of Mahomet. in Rome, to thanke God for that the
Church was deliuered from such a scourge: dying hee cursed
Rhodes thrice: he was a wiser and more polliticke Prince then
any of the house of the Ottomans, as he who in all his conquests added
pollicy to force. Hee was thicke, synowy, and strong of
body, he had an Aquiline nose, and so crooked, as the end hung
ouer his lip: Being yong, he beganne to take delight in the actes
of Alexander the Great, promising himselfe to surpasse or equall
him.Mahomet propounded no other patterne vnto himselfe then that of Alexander, not to imitate him in his vertues, but in his ambition. The first day he sate in the Throne of AmurathAmurath dyed before the Castle of Croy, in the yeare 1450. his father
(who raigned 32. yeares,Mahomet surnames himselfe the Great. a Prince much beloued of his owne, and
iust vnto his enemies) he would be surnamed the Great.
In shew he held Mahomets Religion, but hauing beene bred vp
as a Christian by his Mother, who was daughter to Lazarus
Prince of Seruia, and instructed by her in the Prayers, and Confession
of the Christian Faith, when he came to the Empire he found himselfe
in so great a doubt and distraction what he should beleeue, as he
resolued not to beleeue any thing, caring no more for the Gospell,
then for the Alcoran, making a scoffe at Mahomet, whom he termed
to be a Slaue and a Thiefe, holding his Prophecies for Fables, and his
Lawes for Impostures. The father dying had recommended vnto
him his yong sonne Turcin, being but eighteene Monthes old, and
he had promised not to make him feele the rigor of the house of the
Ottomans: But as he had no faith towards God, so he kept none with
men,Wee must not expect any obseruation of faith, from a Prince that hath no Religion. he forgat this promise, for death had no sooner closed vp
his fathers eyes, but he drew this poore Infant out of the Nurses
armes, to beate out his braines against the wall, saying; that hee
would not haue his father interred alone. Moses, one of his chiefe
seruants, entreated him not to defile his hands in his owne bloud.

This reason did not moue him, but onely to change the executioner,
for he commanded him to kill him. Moses caused water to bee
brought, and powred such aboundance into the mouth of this infant,
as he did both smother him and drowne him. The mother
seeing this Inhumanity, fild the house with fearefull cryes, and
made terrible imprecations against Mahomet, who to comfort her
said; That she sought in vaine to reuiue her sonne with teares, that she
should conforme her selfe vnto the Law,This custeme is inhumane and vnnaturall. But we must not expect iust Lawes in a (...) it is better to murther some few, then to expose a million to death by the warre which should gr^w in the house of the Ottomans, if the great Senior should suffer the Princes of his bloud to liue: But where is the Law of the God which they adore that approues a Parricide? It is a tyrannous custome, but yet ancient. The s^ccessors of Alexander, saith Plutarch, did commonly kill the mothers, wiues, and children, with their brethren, it was an ordinary custome. which would not that a Prince
comming to the Empire should suffer his brethren to liue, for that there
could be but one Head in the Empire, nor but one Sunne in Heauen: but if
shee desired any other thing, whatsoeuer it were, she should be sure to obtaine
it. This woman changing her griefe into reuenge, demanded
the heart of Moses;Reuenge of a woman. Mahomet instantly commanded that he should
be bound hand and foote, and with the same knife which she thrust
into his body, she opened his side, pulled out his heart, cast it to
the dogs, and was therewith pacified.The Author of the History of Scandeberge, relating this History in the 7th. book, addes these words: A profitable instruction, for those corrupted spi^its, which prostitute their consciences to the furious passions of great men.
Amurath had another sonne of sixe months old, called Calepin,
and foreseeing it would be impossible he should escape death, if he
were knowne for his son,Treachery of Haly Bassa. he recommended him to Haly Bassa intreating
him to saue him. This Treacherous wretch to purchase the
fauour of the new Prince, discouered this innocent creature vnto
him. Calepin was veiwed and knowne by thirty Matrons, and presently
strangled. Haly Bassa, did not liue long in the impunity of
this treachery, for after the taking of Constantinople, Mahomet
caused him to be strangled, accusing him of Infidelity, and of Intelligence
with the Christians, and that he had diuerted his father
Amurath from the siege of that Citty. Hee carried his designes
higher then his Predecessours, he breathed nothing but the Monarchy
of the whole world, and the desire of glory made him to
loue those which keepe the glory of Princes from decay, and to
fauour men of knowledgeMahomet much delighted in Histories and Historiographers fauoring Iohn Maria of Vicenza, for that hee wrote the Persia^ warres against Vssan Cassan, in the Turkish and Italian tongues. against the intention of his Lawgiuer,
who the better to keepe vnder the minds of men, and to
make them subiect to the yoke of seruitude, did forbid them the
knowledge of learning: Hee caused to be written in the Arabian
tongue, the liues of great Captaines, and especially that of Alexander,
whom he tooke for his Paterne; but he had not his generosity
in battels, nor his moderation in victories: He vsed it more
cruelly,Cruelties of Mahomet at the taking of Constantinople, and other places. when as at the taking of Constantinople, hee caused the
head of the Emperour Constantine to be carried in mockery
through out his whole Army, and troupes of men to be slaine like
sheepe. The most apparant which were retired into Saint Sophias
TempleThe Temple of S. Sophia, which had beene built by the Emperour Iustinian, was spoyled of the treasure, and pretious relickes, which Constantine the Emperour had preserued so deerely: It was made a Brothel-house, and a Stable for horses. being brought before him as he was at meate, he gaue
himselfe that cruell content, to see their heads flye off vnder the
hang-mans sword. When as he tooke Trebizond he gaue his word
to the Emperour Dauid Comnene, and to his two sons, he led them

in triumph to Constantinople, with the chiefe Noblemen, their
wiues and children, but this was but to adde vnto the infamy of
their death the quality of their misery, and to make the spectacle
more solemne, causing them to be publiquely executed. At the
taking of Chalcide,Mahomet besieged Chalcide in Negrepont, in th^ yeare 1470. Hee tooke it in 30. daies and lost 40000. men. it was a capitall crime to pardon any man
being aboue twenty yeares old: He caused some Noblemen
of Albania to bee fleed by peece-meale, and caused this barbarous
inhumanity to continue fifteene daies, to the end hee
might haue time to taste the sweetnesse which he tooke in this
cruelty.
He besieged the Castle of Iaisse in Bossina, the King yeelded
by composition, that he should carry away all that was within it,
but there was no faith kept with him, for he caused him to be bound
vnto a Tree, and to be shot to death, reproaching his auarice vnto
him, that he had rather saue himselfe with his Treasure, then with
his Honour.There is nothing more shamefull and disho^ourable to a Prince, then to yeeld without defence, or danger. They that bend without blowes are more worthy of blame and reproach, then they that do their endeauours to resist couragiously, Thucidides in his admonitio^ to the Athenians.
He had emploied Mahomet Bassa in his greatest affaires, and loued
him as one that had bene bred vp with him from his youth.
This miserable man had beene a Christian, and in his greatest honours
did still sigh for Christian liberty; for the greatest haue no
other title but of slaue to the great Signior, and although hee
were aduanced aboue the highest in the State, yet his nature being
proud and ambitious, he held himselfe vnder all, so long as hee
should be a slaue, and that he should see one or two aboue him.
An ambitious spirit cannot endure any thing higher then it selfe. Marcus Crassus is the picture of men of this humour. This foolish ambition had so blinded him as he could not bee satisfied to precede so many millions of men, but he held himselfe in a maner, the last of all, and that all things failed him for that they esteemed him onely inferiour to two. Plut. in the life of Marcus Crassus. Trusting therefore in his Maisters loue and fauour, he made him
a sumptuous feast, and at the end thereof offered him fifty thousand
Crownes, beseeching him to declare him free, and take from
him that odious name of slaue, leauing him that of most faithfull,
and most obliged seruant.Pride troden vnder foote. Mahomet was so incensed at this demand, as hauing instantly commanded this Bassa to couch with
his belly against the ground, hee set his foote diuers times vpon
his necke, vntill that this miserable wretch began to cry: I thanke you
my Lord, I thanke you, it is too great a happinesse for me to liue vnder
your feete. To liue after this, was to declare himselfe vnworthy to
haue receiued life,Generosity of a yong boy of Sparta. and to haue lesse courage then that Boy
of Sparta,A yong boy of Sparta being forced to serue, said he would not do it. He spake the word and performed it, for when as they commanded him to bring a Chamberpot he ran his head against the walles: whereupon Seneca saith. Tam prope libertas est, seruit aliquis? Doth any man serue, when as liberty is so neere? who seeing himselfe forced vnto a seruice which
his condition should not refuse, cryed out ^ I will not
serue: and in speaking this, hee ranne his head against the
Wall.
The siege of Belgrade was the Theater of his power, and
misery, for he neuer made greater attempt, nor had a mightier
Army. Hee had caused his Cannon to bee carried in peeces
by his Souldiours, and when hee was in Mysia hee made diuers
Peeces to bee cast of an vnmeasurable greatnesse, for hee tooke
delight in those fearefull Engines, hauing at the Siege

of Constantinople imployed a Bombard, to moue the which, he
vsed the force of two thousand men, and of seuenty yoke of oxen.
Hitherto fortune had euer smiled on him, now she makes him to
receiue so sencible an affront, as he is forced to hold them happy,
which had bene alwaies miserable, for being ignorant of the estate
of prosperity, they did with more patience endure their misfortunes:
Aduersity is insupportable to the which haue alwaies tasted of prosperity: Denis of Corinth, held them happy which from (...) i^fancy had be^ vnfortunate. L^^io^es relinquet quos nu^quam fortuna respexit quam quos deseruit: Sen. Fortune (...) the more (...) whom she hath neuer fiuored, then w^o^ she hath forsaken. He was shot with an arrow at this siege, by reason whereof
he was carried secretly to Varna, to the end it should not daunt the
courage of the Turkes, and fortefie the Christians: Being drest, he
demanded what they did in the Campe:Losse at the siege of Belgrade. to whom it was answered:
That all was in disorder, the Bassa of Asia slaine, the chiefe Captaines
put to rout, forty thousand men dead vpon the field, the Ordinance lost,
and that they lost time to thinke to take the Towne, which the onely presence
of Iohn Coruin made impregnable. These words put Mahomet
into such a rage, and rage into such despaire, as cursing both
heauen and earth,Mahomet seekes to poison himselfe. and blaspheming God, he called for poyson to
kill himselfe, which being refused him, he set fire of his Campe,
and retired.
As the vnfortunate euent of the Seige of Belgrade, made him
to desire death, so that of Rhodes, and an extreme sorrow to see
himselfe vanquished,Mahomet dyes for griefe. hauing done nothing but vanquish, made
him to dye:Mahomet co^tinued sixe and forty daies before Belgrade, the siege bganne the 13. of Iune, and was raysed the sixt of August. 1456. Dispairing then to subdue the Rhodians, and hauing
continued all his fury and violence of warre, against that strong
rampart of Christendome, foure score daies, he retired to Damiet
in Nicomedia,It is hard for a Prince to bee vanquished, hauing alwaies bin victor. Boleslas the third, King of Polonia, hauing won 47. battles, and being forced at last against the Russians to flye, dyed for griefe: Cr^m. lib. 6. where he was surprised with so violent a Cholick,
as he died. Phil. de Comines saith: That euery yeare in the beginning
of Summer, one of his legs did swell as big as his body, and did fall
againe after some time, yet no man could giue a reason of this griefe:
He imputes it to his Gourmandize, and to the punishment of
God. It may be it was that legge into the which Bladius, brother to
the Prince of Valachia, stabd his knife, to saue his honour from
that Goat, who would haue forced him to the infamous and vnnaturall
lust of a barren Venus:Amurath his father would haue done the like to twelue yong Gentlemen of Polonia, who^ he reserued for that abhomination, they resolued to kill him, but being d^scouered, they slew one another to auoid a more miserable life, or a more ignominious and cruell punishment. His cruelties and inhumanities made
some Souldiours of his Gard resolue to kill him in his bed:Excesse of Mahomet. The
Conspiracy being discouered by a Christian, he caused the Conspirators
to be strangled; and from that time he suffered not any
one aboue twelue yeares old, to enter into his chamber. For these
reasons Mahomet is the second of those great Princes, whom Phil.
de Commines preferres before all others, to haue raigned at one
time: King Lewis the eleuenth, is the first, and Mathias Huniades
the third.
The King did not extend his thoughts so farre,Designes of the King vpon Lorraine and Prouence. for seeing himselfe
approach neere vnto the West of his daies, he carried them
not into the East; His thoughts were conuerted vpon his neerest
neighbours, as vpon Loraine and Prouence, he held the Councels
to plant the bounds of his Empire vnworthy the courage of
a great Prince: He would haue France like vnto a great Tree,
which with the spredding of his branches, and shadow, hindreth

the growth of all that is about it.Augustus was authour of this Counsell to Tibe^^us, Coerce^di intra terminos impe^ij. To ^^straine the Empire within certaine bounds: A hard lesson for a Prince that hath courage: Vna and ea vetus causa bellandi est profunda cupido Impe^ij and diuitia^um. A great desire of Empire and riches hath beene the old and onely cause of war. Sal. The Estates of Nauarre,
Flanders, Brittaine and Prouence, were not more in the
power of their Princes then in his, and trembled vnder his authority,
as the Pigion, or Partrige do vnder the flight of the Hauke:
The designes which hee had vpon Lorraine and Prouence,
were executed in adding wisedome to occasion, and force to
reason.
To vnderstand this proceeding we must know that Iohn Duke of
Lorraine,Estate of Loraine. did first marry Sophia, daughter to Eberhard Earle of
Wirtemberg, and had two sonnes, Charles and Fredericke:
The children of Charles Duke of Lorraine were, Ralph, Lewis, Charles, Robert, Frederick Ma^y, married to Enguerand, Earle of Coucy, Margaret to the Earle of Baden, and Isabell to Rene of Aniou. Charles succeeding him in the Dutchy of Lorraine, married
Margaret daughter to Robert of Bauaria Count Pallatine, by
whom he had many children which dyed before him, leauing no
heire but Isabell. Fredericke Earle of Guise, married Margaret,
daughter to Henry Earle of Vaudemont, and had Anthony Earle
of Vaudemont. Charles married his daughter Isabel to Rene Duke
of Aniou, Calabria, and Bar, Earle of Prouence, King of Sicily,
Naples, and Ierusalem: Of their marriage came Iohn, Lewis,
Rene, Charles, Elizabeth, Margaret, Yoland, and Anne: After the
death of Duke Charles, Rene would haue entred the Dutchy, as his
wiues Inheritance: Anthony Earle of Vaudemont opposed himselfe
by this reason, that the Males exclude the Females.At the Councell of Constance Anthony Earle of Vaudemont demanded of the Emperor Sigismond, the inuestiture of the Dutchy of Lorraine against Rene of Aniou, for that it was a see of the Empire, wherof women were not capable. The
controuersy was first ended by Armes, Rene lost the battell of
Blanuille and was taken prisoner by Anthony Earle of Vaudemont,
who gaue him to Phillip Duke of Bourgundy, for that hee
had succoured him; afterwards by the marriage of Yoland daughter
to Rene and Isabel, with Ferry sonne to Anthony of Vaudemont,
the Dutchy of Lorraine remained in effect to Rene the Husband
of Isabell,Rene of Aniou D. of Lorraine. and in hope to Ferry husband to Yoland. Iohn succeeded
in the Dutchy of Lorraine; Hee had married MaryIohn and Mary had foure children, Isabel who was married to Iames King of Scotland Rene, Iohn, and Nicholas. daughter
to Charles Duke of Bourgundy, who dyed in her deliuery of
Nicholas, Marques of Pont, her third sonne, who succeeded in
the Dutchy of Lorraine, after the death of his father and brethren:
Hee left the affection which his Predecessours had borne
to France, and fell to the Duke of Bourgundies party, vpon
hope that he would giue him his daughter in Marriage. Death
surprised him in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred seuenty three
in the thoughts of his Marriage, and to renew a second enterprise
vpon the Towne of Mets,Nicholas Duke of Lorraine would haue seized vpon Mets by this Strat^geme. Hee caused certaine pipes to bee put into Wagons, as if they had beene full of wine, wherein there were armed, Souldiers. They entred, but seeking to seaze vpon the gate, the Portcullis was let downe, and they all taken and slaine in the Towne which they would haue surprized. the first hauing beene vnlucky and vnfortunate.
Thus there remained not any Male of the Branch of the
Dukes of Lorraine, there was not any but that of the yonger
brethren of Vaudemont and Guise.Branch of Vaudemont. The Law preserued the
right of the succession for the daughters of Rene Duke of Aniou,
and of Isabel of Lorraine: Margaret Queene of England being a

prisoner pretended not any thing: Yoland widdow to Ferry Earle of
Vaudemont succeeded: Shee was mother to many children, and
the right of Priority gaue the title of Lorraine to Rene, but Yoland
reserued the authority and command vnto her selfe, the which
held ten yeares.
Rene assured himselfe to be Earle of Prouence, as he was Duke
of Lorraine, that his Grandfather, by his mother side, disposing
of his estate would remember him; but the King had perswaded
him to make Charles of Maine, his Nephew, his Heire,Rene Duke of Aniou King of Sicile and Earle of Prouence, made his Will at Marsellis the 22. of Iuly. 1474. as hee
did in all his Estates, except in the Dutchy of Bar, the which hee
gaue to Rene, Duke of Lorraine, with the lands of Lambesque and
Orgon. Hee gaue to Iohn his base sonne, the Townes of S. Reny,
S. Canat, and the Marquesat of Pont. They would both haue had
Prouence, but the good old man, to let them know that neither
of them should haue it, being one day at Table, hee cast a
shoulder of mutton to two Spannels which fought for it, and at
the same instant hee let slippe a great Dogge, which scattered
them and tooke it away. It shall bee euen so, said Rene, of your
affaires, you contend for that, which one that is more mighty shall
carry away. This Embleme, is yet to bee seene imbost and
ingrauen on a cha^re, in his Oratory in Saint Sauiours Church
at Aix.
This Discourse, grounded vpon the very Originals, do contradict
the opinion of them that haue written,Rene did not giue Prouence to the King.An errour of some Writers which haue beleeued that which the chronicle hath spoken of this donation, making expresse mention that Rene being at Lyon, concluded with the King that after his death, the County of Prouence should returne directly vnto the King, and bee vnited vnto the Crown. that Rene gaue the
Earledome of Prouence to Lewis the eleuenth: That the losse of
the battell at Gransson, hauing altered the minds of many Princes
towards the Duke of Bourgundy, King Rene changed that
which hee had done to institute him his Heire, and that being
come to Lyon, he flatly renounced his friendship, and did consent
that Prouence should bee vnited to the Crowne, vpon condition
that the King should set at liberty his daughter, being Widdow
to Henry the sixth, King of England, and prisoner to Edward,
and that for her ransome hee should pay fifty thousand
Crownes, that in regard of this summe shee should renounce the
pretensions which she might haue vnto Prouence: That to content
those which the children of his daughter Yoland, Dutchesse
of Lorraine might also haue, hee left them the Lands of
Lambesque and Orgon. That to make the King know that the
declaration of his Will, came from his heart, with an extraordinary
content hee wrot this Donation in letters of Gold,
with his owne hand, and did enrich it with exceeding faire Lymning
Wee must obserue that among the titles which Rene tooke in Testament, hee addes that of Earle of Prouence, Barcelona Forcalqueci, and P^dmont..
The Testament of this Prince speakes not any one word of
King Lewis, neither is it found that he made any other, notwithstanding
that hee came vnto him the yeare following being at
Lyon. Hee named for Executors of his Will: Queene Ioane of
Lauall his wife,Executors of Renes Testame^t. Charles Earle of Mayne his first and cheifest Heire,
Rene Duke of Lorraine his second Heire; William of Harcourt,

Earle of Tancaruille, Gui of Laual Knight, Signior of Loue, and
Seneschall of Anjou, Iohn of Vignolle, Deane of Angers, and
President of the Assises and Accounts of Anjou, Iohn Pinot Doctor
of Diuinty, his Confessor; Peter Le Roy, called Bemanon, Vice-Chancellour
of Angiers; Iohn Buell, Doctor of the Lawes, and
Maister of the Accounts:Beside the contentment which the obseruation of these names may giue vnto those families which haue any interest therein, it serues to the curiosity of diuers qualities vnited in the same persons, the which at this time seeme incompatible. Hee would also that if hee dyed in Prouence,
the Archbishop of Aix, and the great Seneschall of
Prouence, should bee among the Executors of this Testament.
The King being aduertised that Rene Duke of Lorraine
made practises in Prouence, and fearing that by his meanes
King Rene should change his mind, commanded that they
should seaze on him,Kings haue long hands, and many s^ares to entrap their enemies: It is hard to auoid all their ambushes. and laid so many ambushes for him as it had
beene impossible for him to escape, if hee had not speedily recouered
Marsellis, where hee imbarkt; Hee remained three
monthes at Sea, past into Sicile, came to Venice, and crossing
through the Grisons Country, hee arriued in Lorraine,
neuer complaining of the dangers which had runne, nor the
time which hee had lost to make hast and flye from an incensed
Prince, whose clemency is nothing but a wearied seuerity and
rigour.
Rene had that misfortune which is insupportable to great
courages,(...). to suruiue the greatnesse of his house: Hee saw the
Crownes, which had honoured the heads of Kings his Predecessours
broken.Battell of Rocgueseiche. Lewis Duke of Anjou his Grand-father, second
sonne to King Iohn, had gotten the second Title of
Right vnto the Crowne of Naples, but his bad Gouernement,
after the battell which hee had wonne against Ladislas,
in the yeare one thousand three hundred foure score and three,
At the battell of Rocqueseich, the troupes ^f Ladislas were defeated by them of Lewis, but the victory was not pursued, whe^ as Ladislas spake of this encounter he said, that the first day after the battell, his enemies had beene Maisters both of his person and the whole Realme, if they done their endeuours to vanquish, the second day they might haue beene Lords of the Realme and not of his person, if they had followed the victory: but the third day, they could neither haue had his person nor the Realme. whereof hee had reaped not the profite which hee should haue
done, forced him to quitte Italy, where hee had entred
with an Army of fifty thousand men, and to retire into France,
grieuing very much at the vnfortunate, and ill successe of his enterprises.
His sonne Lewis the third, Duke of Aniou, was also declared
King of Naples by the Pope, and instituted Heire by
Iohn the second, who had succeeded Ladislas her brother. This
Princesse, so famous in the history for her vnchastnesse, was first
married to the duke of Guelders, and afterwards to Iames of
Bourbon Earle of March, whom she expelled both from her
bed and Realme, and this poore Prince made choice of the
Conuent of Franciscane Friers,Ioane Queene of Naples died at Cossence. at Besancon for his last retreat,
where hee caused him selfe to bee carried vpon a Siue, in
despight of the greatnesse and vanities of the world. Shee dyed
at Cossence without Issue, in the yeare one thousand foure hundred

thirty and foure, and remaining sole of the house of Duras,
shee left her heire by Testament Rene Duke of Bar, brother to
Lewis.
Alphonso King of Arragon who had beene adopted by Ioane,
and afterwards dishinherited by her,Alphonso of Arragon adopted sonne to Ioane of Naples. besieged Gaetta: Rene beeing
freed from prison,Rene after the Battell of Bl^niuille in the yeare 1431. against the Earle of Vaudemont, and the Marshal of Bourgundy, was de^^yned prisoner. whereas the Duke of Bourgundy
had held him, armed to go to Naples, whither hee had
sent Isabell and his children: Hee was receiued at Naples like a
victorious Prince. The Pope sent him the Inuestiture of the
Realme, vpon condition that hee should pay him a Tribute.
This was an occasion of great and extraordinary ioy at
Naples, being followed with so great honours, as there was reason
to hold them for signes of the peoples inconstancy.The peoples great ioy, and the honours which t^ey doe vnto their new Princes, are a^vaies followed with some act of their inconstancy. Thus excesse of honor is a bad signe of their loue. (...). Plut. in Demet. Hee
went through the Streetes on Horse-backe in a Royall Habite, a
Crowne vpon his head, and a Scepter in his hand, he made seuen
and twenty Knights, choosing them from among the chiefest, and
most valiant, of the Noblemen, and of his most faithfull serseruants.
Hee raigned foure yeares with some happinesse;Seige of Naples. but hee had
Alphonso of Arragon alwaies opposite vnto him, who besieged
Naples with foure thousand horse, and a great number of foote.
He entred by an old Conduite of water, which a Mason had discouerd
vnto him, being the same by the which Bellisarius that
great Captaine had entred it nine hundred and fifty yeares
before, and had expelled the Gothes. This Citty in one night became
wholly of the Arragon faction. Rene left it, and returned
into France with much griefe for his losse, but with more resolution
to liue in peace, detesting warre and ambition which entertained
it.
Alphonso dyed,Ferdinando base sonne to Alphonso. being much troubled in minde to haue broke his
word with Lewis of Aniou.Alphonso had promised by expresse capitulations, not to trouble Lewis his cozen, in the Realme of Naples: But a Crowne is too sweete a morsell not to breake with a friend, and to seeme too full of conscience: Hee perswaded Queene Ioane to adopt him, and shee for assurance of this Adoption, deliuered into his hands the two Castles of Naples. Ferdinando his sonne was crowned
by Pope Pius the second. Iohn Duke of Calabria sonne to Rene,
sought to recouer the Realme which his father had lost. The Geneuo^s
did furnish him with three Shippes of burthen and tenne
Gallies, and lent him three score thousand Crownes: He went out
of the Port of Marsellis with twelue Gallies, and a promise from
King Charles the seuenth of greater succour at neede. With this
Fleete hee arriued at Gaette, for the greatest of the Realme came
posting to kisse his hand,Battell of Sarmy, wonne by Iohn Duke of Calabria. and to declare themselues for him. Hee
wonne the Battell of Sarmy and Saint Fabian, and was wonderfully
well serued by Count Iames Picenin, so named for his small
stature, who in a little body had an inuincible courage, and the
forces of a Giant,Wee must not so much regard the great^esse and stature of the body, as the force and vigor of the minde: Homer saith that Tideus, father to Dyomedes, was little, but warlike and valiant. He was Generall of his Army, and held for
one the of most valiant Captaines of his time.

The power of the Arragonois had beene quite ruined, if the(...) the secod decleres himself for Ferdinand, King of Naples, and gaue him the Crowne vpon condition that he should restore vnto the Church the lands of Ben^vent and Te^acina, held by A^phonso of Arragon his father. At the councell which hee called at Mantoua in the yeare 1459. hee exhorted Christian Princes to succour Ferdinand against Iohn, Duke of Calabria. Pope
(who fearing least the prosperity of the French affaires would preiudice
the liberty of Italy) had not made a league with the other
Princes, to succour the Arragonois, beeing besieged in Barry, a
Towne ill fortified, and worse furnished against the necessities of a
Siege. But all their league had preuailed little, if it had not beene
fortified by Scanderbeg, that other Mars of Albania, whom Ferdinand
called to his succours, and whom Pope Pius the 2d coniured
to assist him: Hee came, in regard of the strict amity hee had had
with Alphonso, and was exhorted to this voyage by Paul Ange,
Archbishop of Duras. Scanderbeg ioyned at Duras with twelue Italian
Gallies; and from thence came to Ragusa,Ragusa in old time was called Epidaurum vpo^ the Adriaticke sea. It hath a Castle, which in those times was held impregnable, the gouernment is Aristocraticall. attending his
Troopes, and preparing victuals to send into Apulia.
Hee forced Iohn,Battell of Vrsare wonne by Scanderbeg Duke of Calabria, to raise the siege of Barry,
and wonne the battell of Vrsare. The Duke escaped the danger by
the switnesse of his horse; he recouered Troy, where he was receiued,
and drawne ouer the wall with a cord: from thence he caused
himselfe to bee conducted to Genoua, where hee found a Gally,
which carried him into France, despairing euer to doe any more
good at Naples, nor in Sicile; from whence he carried nothing but
the bare name of Duke of Calabria. He was followed by some Captaines,
who (for that they had run the same fortune) durst not remaine
vnder the command of the Arragonois;Count Picenin hauing escaped this danger, remained for a time hidden in Italy, Francis Sforce Duke of Millan, hauing drawne him vnto him by a false promise to make him his sonne in law, deliuered him to K. Ferdinand, who put him to death so as Rene grewe
old in the complaints of this vsurpation, fauoured by the Popes:
All his hopes were dead for the recouery of his fore-fathers Inheritance;
The inuestiture of the Realme of Naples, hauing beene once granted by the Popes to the house of Aniou, could not bee giuen away against their liking to that of Arragon. We heare often in their pleadings, Id quod nostrum est sin^ causa nostra a nobis aufe^ri non potest. and to fill vp the measure of his sorrow, hee saw the first
Branch of this Powerfull and Royall house of Aniou wither in his
sonne and grand-childe.
Rene surviuing, his sonne and grand-childe dyed in the yeare
1480. A Prince who had great and eminent qualities, worthy of a
better fortune: hee was a great Iusticer, and an enemy to long dispatches.
He said sometimes, when as they presented him any thing
to signe, being a hunting, or at the warre, that the Pen was a kinde
of Armes, which a Prince should vse at all seasons.K. Rene, although he were in Armes, did not forbeare to doe iustice to them that demanded it, saying, That the pen of Princes should neuer be idle, that long expeditions made them to loose the loue of their subiects. They write that he drank not any wine, and when as the Noble-men of Naples dema^ded the reason, he answered, that it had made Tit. Liuius to ly, who had said, that the good wines caused the French to passe the Alpes.
The reigne of so good a Prince was much lamented: for he intreated
his subiects like a Pastor and Father.Commendation of Rene of Aniou. They say, that when as
his Treasurers brought vnto him the Royall taxe, which was sixteene
Florins for euery fire; wherof Prouence might haue about
three thousand fiue hundred, hee enformed himselfe of the aboundance,
or barenesse of the season; and when as they told him, that
aThe Northeast wind. Mestrall winde had reigned long, he remitted the moity, and
sometimes the whole taxe. Hee contented himselfe with his reuenues,
and did not charge his people with new tributes. HeeMichael de Montagne in the 2d booke of his Essaies C. 17. of presumption, saith, that being at Bar-le-Duc, he saw presented vnto K. Francis the 2d. a portrait, which Rene, K. of Sicile had made of himselfe. spent

his time in painting, the which were so excellent, as they are yet to
be seene in the Citty of Aix: he was drawing of a partridge when
as they brought him newes of the losse of the Realme of Naples,
yet he would not draw his hand from the worke, such pleasure hee
tooke therein.
He liued long. A President of Prouence making an Oration before
King Charles the ninth, in the yeare 1573. said, that hee had
beene seene by some that were then liuing. Hee instituted an
Order, which hee called of the Cressant. The Knights carried a
Cressant, or halfe Moone vpon their right arme, with this Motto,
l'Os en Croissant; encouraging them thereby to seeke and desire
the encrease of their valour and reputation. Hee dyed at
Aix, his wife caused his body to bee transported into France, and
by a witty pollicie deceiued the Prouencals, who would haue
had it. His death made no other change in Prouencae, but of the
person:Charles, Nephew to Rene, succeeds him. Charles his Nephew, sonne to the Earle of Mayne,
was acknowledged Earle of Prouence: but his time was very
short: for hee dyed before he could finish the second yeare of his
reigne.
Some few dayes before his death, on the tenth of December,
1481. he made the King his heire, and after his decease, Charles his
sonne, and the other Kings his Successors,The institution of the heire is set down in th^se tearmes in his Testament, Et quia haeredis institutio est caput and fundament^^ cuiuslibet testamenti dictus Serenissim^s Domi^u^ noster rex in omnibus^ regn^s commitatibus Vicecomitatibus, etc. fecit, instituit and ordinauit, ac ore suo proprio nominauit sibi haeredem suu^ vniuersalem and insolidu^ Christianissimum excellentissimum principem ac dominum Ludouicum Dei gratia Francorum Regem, eiusdem consobrinum and Dominum chariffimum atque reuerendissimum and post eius obitum illustrissimun and clarissimum D. Delphinum etc. beseeching him with
all his heart, to suffer his subiects of Prouence to enioy the graces,
liberties and priuiledges which they held of King Rene,Prouence giuen to K. Lewis. recommending
vnto him his Cousen Francis, Lord of Luxembourg, to keepe
him in his Court, and to maintaine him in the lands of Martigues,
which he gaue him, he did not recommend him vnto any one
of his seruants in particular, but one Archer of his guard, called
the great Pickard.
There was little difference betwixt his Testament and his death,K. Lewis takes possession of Prouence.
and lesse betwixt his death, and the taking of possession: for on
the nineteenth of the same moneth of December, one thousand
foure hundred eighty one, the King sent a Commission to Palamedes
Forbin, a Knight, Lord of Sollier, Chamberlaine to the Earle
of Prouence, to take possession, and to command in the Countrey
in quality Lieuetenant generall, with absolute power to dispose
of Offices, to place and displace Officers, to remit and abolish
crimes, yea high Treason, to confirme or reuoke ancient
Priuiledges, and to grant new, to assemble the Estates, to impose
Tributes, and to leuy Souldiers for to force obedience:This commission was dated at Thouars, the 29. of December, 1481. in the presence of the Earle of Mar^e, Marshall of of France, and of Estellan, Bailiffe of Rouen.
The quality of this Commission, was a great Testimony of the
seruice which he had done the King, hauing solely disposed his
Maister to make this goodly present vnto France. But as all changes
cause amazement, there was some trouble to execute this
Donation, some holding the party of Lorraine, and others of
France.
Rene,Rene, duke of Lorraine discontented Duke of Lorraine, finding his friends feeble, and his power
weake against the King, was not willing to grow obstinate in

Prouence:Hee that encounters one that is more mighty, doth but vndoe himselfe. More mighty is to be vnderstood in dominions, subiects, force and treasure. A wise Italian saith to this purpurpose: Si tu truoui vna machina cresciuta per la felicita and disciplina d'ottocento anni, discostati da essa, che e cosa impossibile, quando pur ella cadesse, che tu non rouini sotto.
If thou findest a worke grown by the felicity and d^scipline of 800 yeares, auoyd it, being impossible if it falles, but thou shalt bee ruined vnder it. He passed the Alpes with an hundred men at Armes,
and a regiment of a thousand foote. The King sent a garrison of
Scottish men vnto Bar, vnder the command of the Lord of Aubigny,
hee caused the Walles to bee repaired, and the Armes of
France to be set vpon the gate, such as are yet to be seene.
Hee remained in Italy till after the Kings death, which day hee
held to be the rising of his hopes, the which were onely supported
by the assurance which the Duke of BourbonThis hope was not vaine: for in the first yeare of the reigne of K. Charles, he was restored to the Dutchy of Bar, and had a company of an hundred Lances giuen him. gaue him, that this
rigorous season would be followed with a greater calme.Warre against Ferrara. The Venetians
entreated him to accept the charge of Generall of their
land Army against the Duke of Ferrara. It was a warre which
shaking the peace of Italy, brought the peace of Christendome
into question, and gaue a great aduantage vnto the Turke,
who beheld these Tragicall furies neere at hand. And this was the
cocasion.
After the death of Borsio of Este, Hercules of Este his brother
would succeed in the principality: Lionel of Este, their brother, had
left Nicholas his sonne, who had the same pretension. Italy was in
a maner diuided, the one for the Vncle, the other for the Nephew.
The Venetians did succour Hercules so powerfully, and so fitly, as the
Scepter of his fathers remained to him. He married Elenor, daughter
to Ferdinand of Arragon, and being fortified with this new alliance,
he suffered the heate of friendship, which his fathers entertained
with the Venetians, to grow cold; as commonly Princes
doe not long follow their predecessors steppes, and if they commend
their Orders, yet they subiect not themselues vnto them.Borsio had very carefully entertained friendship with the Signiory of Venice. When there fell out any controuersie betwixt them for their limites, or that their Officers did attempt vpon one anothers Iurisdiction. Borsio came to Venice with a small troope, like a priuate person, to giue reasons vnto the the Senate.
He restored the Salt-pits of Commachio, contrary to the ancient
Conuentions: hee tooke from the Venetian Merchants the exemptions
and freedomes of Imposts which they had enioyed:
he caused a Fort to be built neere vnto Cap d' Argent, to bound his
Estates, and dissembled the wrong which the Magistrate of Venice,
residing in his Citty by accord had receiued, hauing suffered him
to be excommunicated by the Archbishop of Ferrara.
The Venetians,The venetians proclaim war against the Duke of Ferrara, although tired with warre by reason of the great
ruines which they had receiued by the Ottomans, yet they declared
it against Hercules of Este, they grounded it vpon the necessity of
their defence, which iustifieth all kindes of proceedings, and makes
all that to be found good, that is profitable. All times are in season.
When there is question of a defence, there is no regard to be had to Iustice or Religion. A certaine and ineuitable danger iustifies Armies. The Romans held some dayes vnfortunate for enterprises, but when as necessity forced them, they feared not any thing. Dies certos and euitabiles obseruabant cum inferenda in hostes arma non propulsanda forent. They did obserue certaine auoidable dayes when to assaile an enemy, but not to repell him. They raise two Armies, one by land, and another by sea, the one
to run along the Costs of Apulia and Calabria, and to hinder the
succours of Ferdinand, the other to remaine in the riuer of Pau.
The Pope was in the beginning for them, and hindered Alphonso
of Naples from passing with foure thousand men to succour his
brother-in-law.

The Senate sent Robert of Arimini to succour the Pope,Pope Sixtus ioynes with the Ve^etians who
wonne a battell against Alphonso of Arragon; but this victory cost
him his life, which he ended soone after.They write, that in one day died two of the greatest Captaines of Italy. ^redericke of Vrbin at Ferrara, and Robert of Ar^minial Ro^e. Pope Six^us caused th^se words to bee set ^pon (...), veni, vidi, vici, and pontifici retuli, (...) secundis rebus invidet. I came, I saw, and ouercame, and told the Pope, that death enuies prosperity.
Ferrara was besieged, and so prest with the valour and good
fortune of the Assailants, as it could no longer hold out. The Pope
(who had incited the Venetians to this warre) exhorted them to
peace;He declares him selfe against them. and seeing that they would not harken vnto it, declared
himself for the Ferrarois: he drew the spiritual sword against them,
and strook them, interdicting their Common weale. Baptista Zeno, and
Iohn Michele, 2 Venetian Cardinals, did coragiously resist this resolution;
yet the Pope notwithstanding their contradiction, proceeded
on: It is true, that as in the heate of Armes, they doe not alwayes
thinke of religion, his censures were contemned by the Venetia^s,
who did not respect them as good physicke, but as an
Emperikes plaister, the which Popes were wont to vse for all kinds
of sores. They found it strange, that hee would force them vnto a
peace, the which notwithstanding had not beene obserued when
they were busied in warre against the Turke. The Princes of Italy
made a league against them, and an Assembly of the Confederats,
which was held at Cassal-maior, in the territory of Cremona: Fredericke
Gonzague, Prince of Mantua, was chosen Generall of
the Army, the honour of the enterprise, and of the chiefe authority
being reserued to the Arragonois: There was not any Prince,
Citty, nor Common-weale in Italy, except Genoua, but was engaged
in this enterprise, to ruine the greatnesse of Venice.The greatnesse of Venice was then suspected to all the Potentates of Italy, and if it had beene augmented with the estate of Ferrara, the way had beene open to greater designes. Rene
of Lorraine (whom the death and ruine of Charles of Bourgondy
had aduanced to the reputation of one of the greatest
Captaines of this age) serued most gloriously in this Expedition.
Both parties were soone weary of this warre: they spake of treating
of a peace at Cesara, but this Proposition tooke no effect. It
was continued at Tourbolles betwixt Robert Sanseuerin, and Lewis
Sforce,Peace co^cluded. who finished it, and it was concluded, That the Venetians
should returne into all the places which they had lost, during this warre
in Lombardie, and should retire all the garrisons which they had on either
side of the riuer of Pau: They should ruine all the Forts which
they had made on the bankes thereof, and should restore to Hercules of
Este all that they had taken from him, except the P^llesin of Rouig^, which
they should retaine vnto themselues, and should enioy the same rights, both
old and new, which they were went to haue in Ferrara, and there abouts.
Such was the end of the sociall warre, which cost the Venetians in
lesse then 2 yeares, three millions, and 600000 duckets. This peace
was receiued with much content after these turbulent and ruinous
seasons. They made bon-fires and combates with great pompe at
Venice.When ^s Guichardi^ speakes of this peace, he saith, that it was honourable for the Common-weale of Venic^, and shamefull for all the rest of Italy, the which with a generall applause, and at such time as it did flourish in riches, armes, and force, had ^anded to ruine the Venetians; but God would not that the effects of his s^uerity and mercy, of his wrath and peace, Fussero in potesta d'^n huomo ambiciosissimo and superbissimo sotto posto al vino and a molte altre in honeste volunta che la ^ssercitasse ad arbi^ ^o delle sue cupidita, non secondo la consideratione della iustitia o del bono publico ^ella Christianita, should be in the power of an ambitious and proud man, subiect to wine, and many other d^sh^nest lusts, and should vse it after his owne will and not according to iustice, and the good of Christendome.

Pope Sixtus hearing of this Accord,Griefe of P. Sixtus for the Peace. died for griefe: He had incensed
all the Potentates of Italy at the Assembly of Cremona, against
the Venetians: his courage and resolution went beyond all the designes,
threats, and attempts of his Enemies: And when as to terrifie
him, they declared, that they would cause him to bee cited to
appeare before a Councell, hee made it knowne, that hee endured
these threats,Resolution of Pope Sixtus. as the Physitian doth the iniuries of a madde man,
answering;Sixtus inge^ti animo summaque constantia respondisse fertur. Se concilium quidem libenter admissurum vbi spera^^^ se omnium horum Principum criminibus par^factis res plurimas Ecclesia ablatas ab ijs repetiturum. Vnde qui illum metu expugnare sperabant ab eodem preterriti alia perfugia quaesiere. That he would alwaies take the holding of a Councell for a
great happinesse, when as there should be hope, by the discouery of their
wickednesse, to force them to yeeld vnto the Church the goods which
they had taken from it. Platina addes, that this answere was a proofe
of the vigor of this Popes spirit, and of the greatnesse of his courage,
which amazed them that thought to amaze him.
The Church notwithstanding had great need of this Phlebotomy,
or letting bloud, as the most wholesome remedy for the disorders
which time doth breed in the most holy and best ordered
things.Lewis 11. neglects the calling of a councell. It hath serued happily in the first yeares of her birth, vnder
the conduct and direction of the Apostles,In the Apostles time, and in the first Infancy of the Church, when as allwa^s pure, according to her institution, there were 4 Councels, or Apostolicall Assemblies. The first the 34th yeare after the comming of our Sauiour, whereas Matthias was named to the Apostleship, and the Assembly might be of 120 faithfull. The second in the same yeare for the election of Deacons, of which number St. Stephen was. The 3d in the 48th yeare, according to Onuphrius, and 51th according to Baronius, for circumcision, and the heresie of Cerinthus. The 4th for the the tolleration of circumcision for a time, that they might bury the Synagogue with honor in the 58th yeare. Of these foure Councels the Acts of the Apostles speakes. cap. 1. 15. and 21. and hath beene euer
since vsed. The King was not very carefull to procure this remedy;
being incensed for that which Pope Sixtus had done against the
Florentines, he forbad the transport of gold and siluer to Rome,
and commanded the Bishops and Prelates of his realme, to assemble
at Orleans, whither he sent the Earle of Beaujeu to preside. But
he shewed not the like zeale and courage which his father had
done in the Assembly of the French Church at Bourges. Where
there is question of Gods seruice, they must proceed after another
maner, then when it concernes but the Interest of men. Publicke
buildings must be made after another manner, and of another matter
then priuate. Moses sustained the peoples cause before God with
teares, he defended that of God against the people with Armes.
The King came to Orleans to passe to Clery, remaining there but
halfe a day to breake off the Assembly; hee was satisfied to haue
drawne from the Pope that which he desired in fauour of the Florenti^es,
and promised to continue it at Lyons.
This did but make the sights of good men more vehement, who
burne with the zeale of Gods house,Estate of the Church lamentable. and who saw that the wound
was ^neurable, and that the canker had seized vpon the vitall parts,
that the Church was at peace with Heretickes and Infidels, and in
perpetuall trouble with her owne Children. I haue nourished (said
she by the report of S. Bernard) Children, I haue exalted them, and
they haue contemned me.Vox plangentis in tempore isto. Filios enutriui and exaltaui, ipsi autem spreuerunt me, spreuerunt and maculauerunt me a turpi vita, a turpi quaestu, a turpi commercio: a negotio denique perambulante tenebris. They haue dishonoured me by the filthinesse
of their liues, and the foulnesse of their commerse, and by workes which
are done in darknesse.

The Chronicle of Basill reports a strange History of the passion,
(or rather furie) wherewith a Iacobin Frier was transported, whom
it names Andrew, Archbishop of Krane, a man of learning and
courage; who thrust on by presumption,Presumption carries mens minds out of the common way, it followes vnknowen courses, and embraceth nouelties. A spirit presuming little of it selfe, remaines in the bou^ds of innocency and simplicity. (a vice diuerting mens
mindes from their duties,Andrew, Archbishop of Krane, preacheth against the Pope. to wander out of the common way) past
the mountaines, came to Basill, and preached in the Cathedrall
Church against Rome, as against a new Babylon, coniuring the
Emperour, and K. Lewis the eleuenth, to procure the Assembly of a
Councell against her scandals. Pope Sixtus the fourth was no sooner
aduertised hereof, but he commanded the Magistrate of Basill
to deliuer him into the hands of his Iustice. The Senate answered,
that they had already giuen aduertisement thereof to the Emperour
Fredericke, and attended his pleasure; beseeching the Popes
Nuntio to haue patience, and to assure himselfe that there should
not be any thing done in preiudice of the holy Sea.
The Archbishop on the 13 of Iuly, the same yeare 1482. caused
a declaration to be published; by the which, lamenting the ruines
of the Church, he coniured and entreated all Ministers and Pastors
to succour it;xcomE nicated by the Pope. and by vertue of the Decree of Constance, to assemble
at BasillThe Councell of Constance in the 39 Session decreed that euery ten yeares they should assemble a general Councell. to aduise of the remedies: and for that the Pope had declared
him excommunicate, he appealed against his sentence; and
hauing no better reason to obiect against this excommunication,
then the want of power, he maintained that Sixtus the fourth had
not entred into S. Peters Chaire by the doore, but like a thiefe; that
he made trafficke of holy things, and that he tooke delight, not to
feed, but to fley Christs Flocke.
The Princes and Common-weales of Italy were not in good
termes with him, all threatned him with a Councell: And although
that Pius the second, his Predecessor,Pope Pius the second did excommunicate those that did appeale from the Pope to a Counceil. Iulio the 2d renued the same excommunicatio^. Silvest. verbo excommunicat. T. Num. 39. had called such forme of
proceeding against the Pope, Execrable; yet it seemed they could
finde no better meanes to restraine the excesse: Euery man cryed
after the reformation of abuses; but that which might be commendable
in publicke complaints, did not iustifie the boldnesse of a
priuate man, who presumed to censure the Pope: and the number of
fooles doth not excuse the folly.A common errour giuest some excuse, but the number of them that faile, makes not the fault lesse. It is alwaies ill done to play the foole with them that are not wise. Sixtus declared him an Heretick,
and a troubler of the Churches quiet, from whose body he was cut,
like a rotten member, vnworthy to exercise the ministery, to hold
any dignity, or to be partaker of the holy Sacraments, condemning
him to remaine prisoner in a Monastery, with bread and water, vntill
he had made full expiation of his crimes. In like manner, the
Emperour found the proceeding of this Bishop very bold, and gaue
him to vnderstand, that seeing he was but a priuate person, he desired
to know by what authority he pretended to call a Councell. He
answered, That the publike necessity of the Church approued his zeale,
and coniured the Emperour to maintaine it, after the example of the Emperour SigismondThe Emperor Sigismond laboured Christian-like to smother the new opion of the Hussites of Bohemia, he procured the conuocation of the Councell of Costance, and was there in person. and his predecessors, who had not spared any thing
for her quiet and peace, and to root out abuses: wherfore he besought him
not to shew himselfe difficult to grant out Patents and necessary pasports

for the convocation of a Councell: otherwise hee should answere before
God for the ill which his negligence would make incurable.
The 4th day of December Peter of Kettenheim, Pryor of Velpach;
the Pryor of Erford, and the Pryor of Mortau; present themselues
anew vnto the Senate of Basill, and declared that they had charge
to proceed against them by all the rigors of the Churches iustice, if
if they did not deliuer this reuolted person into their hands, to be
exemplarily punished. He was honoured by some, like a St. Paul,
that great Citizen of heauen, the pillar of Churches, an earthly Angell,
and a heauenly Man: he was contemned of others as a seditious
man, an Abironite, and a Rebell. Some thought it hard, that,
because he had said (not secretly, like vnto spies, and slaunderers,
but publickly, and in the Cathedrall Church of such a Towne) that
fire was at the doore, that the mine was ready to play, to ouerthrow
the whole building, and that Sathan had planted his ladders
whilst that the Centinels slept, they wold entreat a Bishop so rigorously;
and that, howsoeuer, they should consider the thing that was
good and wholesome,They say, wee must consider the Councell apart, and him that giues it apart. The Ephores caused the aduice which had been giuen by a bad man, to bee pronounced by one which was good In his quae a malis bene fiunt, hic tenendus est modus, vt appareat authorem displicuisse non factum. Plin. Paneg. Traiani. and not the person that might be passionate.
They also remembred, that many great personages about that time
had said,Words of Gerson. that in these disorders they might follow extraordinary
motio^s, either of powerful authority, or of charitable admonition.In the time of K. Charles the seuenth, euery man spake of reformation. Gerson presumed to say, that the pursuite might bee made, Per quos cunque fideles praesertim maiores authoritatiua potestate, siue charitatiua admonitione. Gers. in Propos. vtil. ad extirp. schis.
Others said, that the desire was good, but being guided by pride and
presumption, it made him odious that propounded it, that hee
which was sttooken with death, for that of his owne motion he had
put forth his hand vnto the arke, fearing lest it should fall, did serue
as a terrible example, shewing how dangerous it is to deale vnreuerently
in holy things.
The Senate answered,Basill excommunicated by the Pope. that they could not satisfie the Popes desire,
before they vnderstood the Emperous pleasure. Vpon this answere
the Towne was interdicted. The Emperour sent a Franciscan
Frier to Basill, who had audience in a great assembly, where
there assisted the Embassadours of the Princes of the league of Italy,
In this assembly assisted Iosias of Seligni, Bishop of Syon and Grenoble, Anthony of la Roche, Pryor of Mortau, Claude of Tholsugeo^, and William of Rochefort. where hee deliuered his charge, and spake of this Archbishop,
as of a Goliath, who had raised himself against the Lords host.
Hee said also, that being at Rome for the affaires of the Archduke
Maximilian, when as the Pope had beene aduertised of these troubles
and motions for the calling of a Councel, the Pope had commanded
him to go to the Archduke Sigismond, and then vnto the
Emperour, to know of them whether they did approue and fauour
this revolt:Pope co^plaines of the towne of Basill. and in like manner, to complaine that the Towne
of Basill, which had beene alwayes very obedient to the Holy
Sea, had suffered it selfe to bee carryed away very inconsiderately
with such Impostures and Impressions:The desires, and the effects of Desires which tend to reunite the members of one Family vnder one head, are iust and commendable, and God doth assist them. There is none but Sathan which hath fauoured and aduanced schisme and diuision. We are all of one stuffe, we make but one part of the garment, we haue need but of one seame Sarrura tantum opus est. But it is not fit to heare all them that speake. That the

Emperour hauing found, that whatsoeuer he did for the calling of
a Councell, proceeded from extreame hatred; and that his reason
was wholy conuerted into passion against the Pope, and impudent
arrogancy, presuming in the quality of a priuate person, to attempt
the reformation of the Church, and to call a Councell, the
which belonged onely to the Pope. The Emperours intent was,
It was not for that the Emperour did not earnest^y desire the ho^ding of a Councell, hauing written to king Charles (...) 7th to come or send to Mentz, to the end they might remedy the necessities of the Church in the yeare 1423. but hee did not allow of this particular Instance. that they should seize vpon the person of this Archbishop, and
that they should put him into safe keeping, and in such a place,
whereas he might be represented vnto the Pope.
At the same instant he produced the Emperours letters patents,The Emrour commands the Archbishop to be app^ehended.
by the which, commandement was giuen to all Prouinces, Potentates,
Townes, and Commonalties to apprehend this Archbishop.
Then directing his speech vnto him, he exhorted him to acknowledge
his error, and to humble himselfe to the holy Sea, that hee
might recouer the Popes fauour, who seeing his repentance, might
haue pitty on him, offring to that end all the good offices that hee
could desire from him.
The Archbishop answered in this sort: I haue neuer failed in obeence
and respect to the Emperour,The Archbishop resisteth in his proposition. and nothing hath moued me to speak against
the Pope, but the zeale of Gods honor. I can make a distinction betwixt
the person and the dignity; the Chaire, and him that sits in it. I
haue, with much griefe, seene the scandals and abhominations which abound
in Rome; and that the Pope is more pleased to flee^e, then feed the
sheepe, whom Iesus Christ with the price of his bloud, hath drawn out of
the Wolues throat.A Pastor should feede Christs Flocke, but, Illud quod hic dicitur pasce, alij mutant in tonde, quia multum stude^t circa subditos exactionem temporalium exercere, and de pastu non cu^a^t. That which is here said feed, some doe vnsitly change to fleece, for that they study to exact the temporalities from their subiects, and care not for feeding, Chrysost. I haue thought that there was no meanes to remedy
it, but by the holding of a generall Councell; and seeing that contrary to
the intention of the Decree of the Councell of Constance, they had let
passe aboue thirty yeares without holding of a Councell; and that the Decrees
of that of Basil were not obserued, nor executed, hauing often conferred
with the Cardinals at Rome, and found that the mischiefe was
neglected, I addrest my selfe to the Senate of Basill, as the most conuenient
place to make my good intentions knowne: and if I haue therein erred, I
submit my self to the iudgment of the Emperour, the French King and the
Councel, and take the Vniuersity of Paris for my aduocate, protesting that
I had neuer any intent to offend the Pope, neither can be called a Slanderer,
hauing truth for a warrant of that which I speake; beseeching that I
may haue three daies respite giuen me to answer more pertinenly to that
which is obiected against me.
Hereunto the Frier replyed, that if there were any disorder in the
Church, there were doctors to teach and correct, whose doctrine they shold
rather follow, then their maners and actions,The doctrine may be good, and the life bad: If the Pastor liues wel, it is his profit; if hee teach well, it is thine, take that which is th^e and meddle not with another mans. A bad and barren ground, may beare gold. and that it did not belong
to him to vndertake the correction.
And for that in this Discourse hee shewed his wilfulnesse, hee did
summon the Senate of Basill to forbeare to protect him, and to
apprehend him prisoner. The Nuncios and Commissioners, deputed
by the Pope, made the like instance, saying; that they
could not refuse him vnto the Pope, who was his lawfull
Iudge.

The Senate of Basil referred the dicition of this businesse to
the next Councell. The Popes Nuncio and other Deputies were
there, and the Arch-bishop appeared, where the contention was
long, and vrged with great vehemency and affection, of either
part,In the Assembly of the Senate of Basile, on Saturday, the 21 of December 1483. the Archbishop of Krane was arested prisoner, when as they consulted whether they should do it. The Embassadours of the Princes of Italy which were in
league against the Pope, would willingly haue had a Councell to
humble the great heart of Sixtus,Dispute of authority of the Pope and Councell. saying; that they should hold
themselues to the Councell of Constance, which had plainely decreed
that the Pope should obey the Councell, had prescribed
him the time for the calling of a Councell, and had bound him
not to dispossesse Angelo Corrario, who had carried the name of
Gregory the twelfth, from the dignity of Cardinall or Legat: That
the same doctrine of the Councell of Constance had beene followed
and practised in that of Basile:The Councell of Constance in the fourth Sessio^ made a Decree, declaring that it represented the Vniuersall Church, and had power immediately from God, the which euery man was bound to obey, yea the Pope himselfe. that if they tooke away that
constancy which was necessary for the obseruation of their decrees,
they thrust the Church into distemperatures and languishings,
like vnto those bodies which haue their sinewes strained, and
their members and bones displaced.
The Popes Ministers said, on the other side, that the Church was
a perfect Monarchy; that she had not her beginning from Dauid,
Alexander, Augustus, nor Fredericke, neither did she acknowledge
any other establishment: that the Church did not depend of any
other Iudge but of God; That euen the Councell assembled at
Sinuesse^ would not forcibly condemne that poore Idolatrous
Pope, who since was held for a great Saint. and who by a
wonderfull weaknesse, and base feare of death, had obeyed the
impiety of Dioclesia^, and sacrificed to his Gods, for prostrating
himselfe vpon the ground, confessing his fault, one of the Fathers
of the CouncellIn this History of Marcelline wee finde often that the Bishops said: Iudica causam tuamnostro iudicio non condemnaberis: and that after his confession one of them sayes: Iuste ore suo condemnatus est and ore suo Anathema suscepit Maranatha, Quoniam ore suo condemnarus est, nemo enim vnquam iudicauit Pontificem, nec prae^ul Sacerdotem suum, quoniam prima sedes non iudicabitur a quoquam. tooke the word, saying* he had iustly condemned
himselfe by his owne mouth, hee hath submitted himselfe to
excommunication. Neuer any one did iudge the Pope, for the
first Seate is not to be iudged by any; That the Councell of Constance
binding Popes to the execution of his decrees, had respect
onely to Anti-popes, and not to them whose election was holy
and lawfull: When as some said that the first Seate was not to bee
iudged by any one, the others replyed, that it was vnderstood of
priuate Assemblies, and not of a generall Assembly of the whole
Church.
The day was spent in these long Disputes, and night approaching,
Cinthius of Vrsin, Commander of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem,
entred the Senate, layd hold vpon the Arch-bishop and led him
away prisoner to the Tower of Spalen. The Senate was much
offended, and commanded the Popes Nuntio to depart the
Towne, seeing that his charge was ended. He retired himselfe, and
caused new Declarations and Excommunications against them
of Basill to bee published at Rahnfield, Constant, and other
places, forbidding all sortes of persons to conuerse with
them:

The prisoner in the meane time languishing in expectation of
what should become of him, tooke the shortest course for his liberty,
and iudging that if he liued in paine, his basenesse was the
cause of it, and that death might giue him a free passage, he changed
his patience into dispaire: so as on the Thursday after Saint
Martins day, in yeare one thousand foure hundred foure score and
foure, hee was found strangled with the cord of his bed: This
execrable kind of death was kept secret vntill that they vnderstood
the Popes minde; after which the executioner of Iustice entred
into the prison, put the body into a pipe, and cast it into the
Riuer of Rhine.To kill himselfe hath beene held an act of courage^: Plato forbids it in his Lawes: The Thebians detested it, and the Athenians did cut off his hand, that had slaine himselfe, and did cast it on the common dunghill. The Popes Deputies returned to Basill,
and the Excommunication hauing beene obserued three daies,
was taken away, and the Towne deliuered from the Popes
censures.
Yet for all this they did not cease to wish that the Pope would
earnestly embrace the reformation of the disorders of the Church.
Desires of this kind are iust, but wee may not presse them with
heate of passion and indiscretion of zeale.
An example shewing that it is not reasonable, in such sufferings
and perplexities of the Church, that the pride of any priuate person
should presume to reforme it: Wee must leaue those
thoughts to Princes and Magistrates. The simple multitude
must attend with patience at the foote of the
Mountaine, vntil that Moses descend to let them vnderstand
the will of God: The Ship wherein
that holy Family is included, which hath
neither sight nor day, but towards
heauen, shall in the end appeare
most glorious ouer the
waues of the deluge, and
shall come vnto the
Mountaine of a
happy tranquillity.
(*)
(@)
The end of the ninth Booke.



THE CONTENTS OF
the tenth Booke.

1 VVEakning and alteration of the Kings health in the beginning
of the yeare 1480.
2 An Apoplexy seazeth on him: His actions to maintaine his authority,
and to keepe himselfe from contempt.
3 Liberty of Cardinall Balue, and his pollicy to obtaine it.
4 Generosity of the Cardinall of Estouteville to maintaine his dignity,
and that of the Clergy: His death.
5 Oppressions of the people.
6 Desire of the King to reforme Iustice, and tedious Sutes.
7 Relapse of his sickenesse at Tours, he goes to Saint Claude, in his
returne passeth by Salins, and there setteth a Parliament for
the Franche County.
8 Death of Mary, Dutchesse of Bourgundy wife to Maximilian the
Emperour.
9 Admonition made by the King to the Dauphin at Amboise.
10 Estate of the Low Countries at the discretion of the Gantoies.
11 Treatie of peace, and marriage, betwixt the Dauphin and Margaret
Princesse of Austria.
12 Death of the King of England, and troubles for his succession.
13 Earle of Richmond, prisoner to the Duke of Brittaine, comes to the
Crowne of England by the Kings assistance.
14 Death of Francis Phoebus King of Nauarre; suite for the succession.
15 Death of Alphonso King of Portugall.
16 Lewis fals into new apprehensions of death, and shuts himselfe into
his Pallace at Plessis.
17 Zizimi son to Mahomet, reuolts against Bajazeth, flyes to Rhodes,
and is conducted into France.
18 Commendation of Mathias Coruinus King of Hungary.
19 Impairing of the Kings health.
20 Hee sends for Francis Paulo a Calabrois: strange distemperatures
of his sickenesse.
21 His aistrust of Iohn Duke of Bourbon.
22 Publication of the peace betwixt the King and Maximilian of
Austria, Marriage of Charles the Dauphin, with the Princesse
Margaret: Magnificence at their entrance into Paris.
23 The third and last relapse of the Kings Infirmity: his last actions:
His perfect sence euen vnto the last gaspe: His death.




@THE HISTORY
Of LEWIS the eleuenth.
THE TENTH BOOKE.
IN the beginning of the yeare 1480.1480.
Lewis beganne to dye, and to feare
death, the which comes neuer so fitly,
but it brings with it terrour and amazement.Life must bee considered by the end: If it bee good and glorious all the rest is proportionable. Quomodo fabula, sic and vita, non quandiu, sed quam bene acta sit, refert. Nil ad rem pertinet, quo lo^o desinas, quocunque voles, desine tantum bonam clausulam imponas. Life is like vnto a fable: It imports not how long, but how well it be acted: It skils not where thou leauest, leaue where thou wilt, so thy conclusion be good. Sen. His forces grew weake, but his
courage was fortefied and strong, vpon
an apprehensio^ which he had that they
would make designes vpon his graue,
and that they would not stay vntill hee
came to the end of his Carriere. Hee
desired to end it with the Authority, Maiesty, and Reputation that
he had begonne, and would not that they should know him dying,
nor that they should hold him mortall: Hee workes so, as in
the West of his life, the shadow of his reputation and respect is
as great as at the Noone-day of his raigne: Yet he finds that his
iudgement hath not the force and vigour which it formerly had;
that the remainder of his life is become sower,Age is alwaies accompanied. that age comes
not alone,When as wine and life grow low, they become sowre. Antiphanes. hauing brought him diuers discommodities, an incorrigible
melancholy, agitations of the minde, a slow Feuer, and
the paines of the Emerauds: He hath more prouision then he hath
way to go, he gathers and laies vp when hee should abandon and
let go.Age becomes couetous when it hath not any need of goods, it feares the earth should faile it: One demanded of Symonides why he was so sparing in the extremity of his age; for that said he: I had rather leaue my goods after my death to my enemies, then in my life time to haue neede of my friends. His designes are great and spacious, and his desires grow
yong, hee cannot free himselfe from new hopes, his soule is as it
were hung betwixt the feare of death and the hope of life, his vnderstanding
is a Milstone which the continuall course of affaires
doth turne day and night: And although his life passeth away
in languishing and griefe; yet had he rather endure the paine, then
not to be, desiring rather to be freed from it, then from life, the
which how painefull soeuer it be, hath some houre of ease:There i^ no life so languishing and full of paine, but it is supported by some hope freed from the feares of death: When a^ Antisthenes the Philosopher was in extreame paine, hee cryed out, Who shall deliuer me fro^ these miseries? Diogenes presenting a knife vnto him said; This, if thou wilt, and that soone. I do not say of my life (replyed the Philosopher,) but of my paine. For if

paines be violent they are short, and if they be short, they giue
no leasure to complaine: Going to heare Masse at a little Parish
neere to the Forges of Saint Chinon,The King suddenly and dangerously sicke. hee found himselfe very ill,
and fell into a great weakenesse, and faintings, loosing his
speech and all knowledge. Hee was speedily succoured by the
Signior of Bouchages, who was his Phisition, and afterwards
Arch-bishop of Vienna, hauing taken a glister he recouered
his spirits, went to horse, returned to the Forges and there
dyned.
But hee had so great a difficulty in his speech, as hee could not
be vnderstood but by signes. Phillip de Commines, who serued him
as Grome of his Chamber in this sickenesse, was also his Truchman
He vnderstood little of what was said vnto him, but he felt no paine: Hee made mee a signe to lye in his chamber, he did not pronounce many words; I did serue him fifteene daies at his meate and about his person, as Groome of his Chamber; the which I held for a great honour, and was well respected. Phil. de Com. when as he confest himselfe to the Officiall of Tours: And
for that being surprised with this sickenesse they carried him from
the Table vnto the fire,An Apoplexy vnperfect, and would not suffer him to come neere
vnto the windowes; hee remembred all this, and being come vnto
himselfe, he demanded who they were that had staid him by
force, and kept him from taking of the aire, being named vnto
him, he chased them away and would no more see them, for hee
did neuer like that King Charles his father should be forced to
eate, for that the Subiect should not in any thing force his
Prince.Wee doe not willingly see the^ that haue beene the secret witnesses of our faults, or imperfections. The Ape beholding it selfe and seeing his foulenesse, his wrinkles and deformed shape, breaks the glasse.
He thought that as soone as a Prince suffered himselfe to bee
gouerned by his seruants, he was, as it were, in tutelage and seruitude,Lewis maintaines his authority to the last gaspe.
and he would not that this great authority, the which he had
so absolutely maintained all his life, should bee in any thing
restrained, so as immagination being weakned and troubled by
age; Melancholy and distrust could not endure that he should bee
contradicted or disswaded from any thing, hauing these words
often in his mouth: Do you thinke that I know not what I do? Nothing
did so much afflict him,He feares contempt the forerunner of sedition. as the feare that his infirmity
should be knowne:There is nothing that a Prince, which beginnes to grow old should so much preuent, as to make it knowne that hee grows heauy, and that the vigour of his spirits is weakened: For ambition of rule is so itching a thing, as euery man will giue order to these defects. For hee thought that as soone as his weakenesse
and infirmity should be discouered they would hold him as
dead, and vnprofitable to the world, that he should be contemned
of his Subiects, who would passe sudenly from contempt to sedition.
Hee feared that in the end they would make him beleeue that
his sences were distracted, and that they would controule him
in the expedition of affaires: wherefore, as soone as he felt his
faintings past, and that his spirits beganne to returne, hee would
dye in action and standing:Vespasian being tormented with a bloudyflixe, whereof he dyed, did not forbeare to rise and stirre, his Physitions told him that it did encrease his griefe, perswading him to lye quiet, but he answered them; The Emperour must dye standing. he caused all the dispatches, made
by his Secretaries,Hee cals for dispatches and expeditions. to be brought vnto him, seeming to vnderstand
more then he had vigor, or light of vnderstanding: Hee
made shew to reade the letters, and although he sometimes turned
them vpside downe, and had little knowledge, yet no man
durst aduise him.

The misfortune of this accident was happy for Cardina^l
Balue,Cardinall Balue was imprisoned in August, in the yeare 1469.Cardinall Balue set at liberty. whom hee remembred among the scruples of his consciences:
Hee had taken as much pleasure to ruine him, as he had
receiued content to raise and aduance him: He was first imprisoned
at Montbasson, hee did confiscate his goods, and gaue his
moueables to the Commissioners which made his Processe:
His plate was sold, and the money deliuered to the Treasurer of
the warres, Tanneguy of Chastell, Gouernour of Rousillon had
his Tapestry-hangings: Peter of Orioles, Generall of the Finances
his Library, the Lord of Crussoll a peece of Tapestry of twenty
elles, with the ground of Gold, certaine skinnes of Sables, and
a peece of skarlet of Florence: If wee should onely consider the
malice of this mans nature, who was a deceiuer, treacherous, and
ambitious, and so knowne by the Italians, amongst whom hee
had liued, and there dyed,Ierome Garimbert^speakes of this Cardinall after this manner: Egli fu di natione Francesce da Verdune pouero, pl^beio, triste, cupido sempre di nouae rapacitae and ribald^rie. Hee was a Frenchman borne, of Verdune, a poore Plebeian, wicked, and alwaies couetous of gaine and filthinesse. the cause of his imprisonment cannot
be but iust; His spirit which had lodged him there twelue
yeare, for that hee had employed all his pollicies and inuentions
to nourish ciuill discord, and which like vnto the serpent drew in
the whole body where he might passe the head, furnisht him with
a notable stratageme to set him at liberty.
He pist and dranke his Vrine so secretly as they thought this
retention would kill him.His pollicy to get out of prison. The King caused him to bee visited, his
Physitions told him that his life was desperate, whereupon the
King (who was weakned with his infirmity) entred into some
scruple, that hee had done wrongfully to haue kept a Cardinall
twelue whole yeares in a Cage of Iron, that the Church
was scandalized, and his liberty wronged. The Cardinall of
Saint Peter ad vincula (who afterwards was called Iulio the second,
and was come into France to mediate a peace) tooke the
King in this good thought,The question is great vpon the exemption of Church-men out of the power of Princes: Some hold it is ordained by the Law of God, and others by grace and concession. made him to apprehend the offence
of the Church, in the long captiuity of such a Minister, and
entreated for his liberty, the which was presently granted: Balue
went to Rome, and was all the remainder of his life an enemy to
France, and for this cause was much fauoured by Ferdinand King
of Naples: he dyed Bishop of Preneste, and was interred at Saint
Praxede.
This Prelate had all his life time warlike thoughts and
inclinations, and a chollericke and stirring spirit: The Cronicle
saith that in the warre of the Common-weale, hee went day and
night on horse-backe to visite the Guards: Hee got a Commission
from the King to go and muster the Souldiers at Paris. The
Earle of Dammartin seeing the confusion and disorder which
this Prelates ambition caused in publicke charges, besought the
King to suffer him to go and hold a chapter in the Cathedrall
Church at Eureux.
If contrary aspects and shadowes raise and grace things opposite:Generosity of Cardinall Estouteuille.
the great and excellent vertues of William of Estouteuille
Cardinall of Rouan, will shew themselues heere gloriously:

Hee was the ornament of the Cardinals of his age, and neither
feare of danger nor apprehension of ill didTo do good where there is no danger is a vulgar thing, but to do good where there is perill is the proper office of a good man: to do euill is too easy and too base. hinder him from
doing good. Rome cast her eyes vpon him, as Athens did
sometimes on Aristides; He was wonderfull iealous of the dignity
of his Robe, and considering that the world was but a
Theater, on the which euery man was bound to play the part,
which his vertue, or fortune, had giuen him, hee would alwaies
performe his with constancy and honour: King Charles
the seuenth, commanded him to go to Rome, with the Embassadours
which hee sent to Pope Calixtus the third, to yeeld
him obedience, but hee excused himselfe, not for feare to expose
his sufficiency,Ignorance and weaknesse feare any encounter, for that they thinke being co^pared one with another, their imperfections will presently appeare. to the encounter of a greater, but not to
offend the honour of his Cardinals place, which did not
allow him to accept of any Legation, but from the Popes
authority.
With the same courage that he maintained the honour of his
Hat, hee defended that of the Church, and of France.
The Barrisell, or Prouost of Rome finding a man in committing
a flagrant delict or heynous crime, and hauing no hangman
to execute him, presently forced a poore Priest, whom hee
found begging in the streete, to doe this office: Hee laboured
in vaine to tell him that he was a Priest, and a Frenchman,
and that he had neuer done an act vnworthy the one or the
other:Cruelty of the Prouost of Rome. The Prouost, who had abandoned the Helme of reason to
the storme of choller,A iudgement transported with choller, is like vnto a Shippe without Pilate and without helme, or a lodging, out of the which the maister is expelled by the fire and smoake which is in it: The end of all that is done in choller is the beginning of rerepentance. the which had fild his spirit with fumes,
felt himselfe so transported with passion to punish the crime, as
hee would not hearken vnto the innocent, but threatned to
make him play the part of the offendor, if he would not do that
of the Hang-man.
The feare of death, which had forced greater men to doe
worse, made him resolue to this infamous excution, after
which he retired himselfe, holding downe his head for shame,
into the house of Cardinall Estouteville, where hee complained
of this wrong, and demanded iustice. The Cardinall
considering that by the iniury of this poore man, the dignity of
the Church, and the honour of the Nation was interressed, sent
for the Prouost, and hauing let him know his fault, commanded
his Muletier to hang him at the barre in his Hall, with one of his
Mules halters: At the sight of this Prouost, hanging at the window,
the Popes Officers made great complaints, and the
Cardinall Estouteuille was ready to retire into France, but
Pope Nicholas being aduertised thereof blamed the cruelty
and iniustice of the said Prouost, who had so affected the
punishment of another,It is the ordinary course of iniustice to plunge it selfe into the mischiefe wherhinto she would draw others: Dat poenas dum exigit: They bee ruines which breake vpon that whereon they fall. as hee had not considered into what
danger hee engaged himselfe: Hee commended the Cardinals

iustice, and entreated him not to leaue Rome.
He remained 28. yeares there, and dyed the same yeare when
as King Lewis the eleuenth left this life: Hee was made Chamberlaine
to Sixtus the fourth, Bishop of Ostia, and Deane of the
Colledge: Hee caused Saint Augustines Church to be built, and
did much inrich that of Saint Mary the Great: The Chanons of
this Church, and the Monkes of the other, did not yeeld that respect
vnto his memory which they ought: For being ready to interre
him they fell to quarrell for his Roabes, with so great a disorder,
as the rings were taken from his fingers, and hee
had like to haue beene stript naked by the indiscretion of those
whom he had cloathed.
This first sickenesse of the Kings continued some 15. daies,
During this sickenesse all ^ffaires were dispatcht by the Bishop of Alby, by his brother the gouernour ^f Bourgundy, by the Marshall of G^e, and the Lord of Lude, who were lodged in two little chambers vnder his. at the end whereof he went to see the Campe of his new disciplined
souldiers, which hee had erected, and caused them to bee
put in battell, in a Valley neere to Pontdelarche in Normandy,
hauing caused a great number of Tents and Pauillions to be made
to lodge them in field, and Carts to enclose them and to
serue as a Trench: For the entertainement whereof hee must
make new leuies for money, and excessiue taxes, for it did amount
yearely to a hundred and fifty thousand pounds Sterling: They
that were about him when this sickenesse tooke him,Oppressio^ of the people. considering
how much the people were opprest, and thinking that hee would
neuer recouer it, made diuers decrees for the suppression of this
Taxe.
Many thought that this sickenesse had toucht his heart, and
made him more sencible of the miseries and calamities of his
subiects, for the remonstrances so often made vpon this subiect
had not preuailed any thing, and they expected no ease but what
should come from his owne motion:Hee had much opprest his people (saith Phil. de Comines) and more then euer any King did, Authority and perswasions could not moue him to ease them; It must come fro^ himselfe, as the^ he would haue done, if God had preserued him from sicknesse, and therefore it is good to doe well whilst we haue leasure, and that God giues health and vnderstanding to men. He propounded to reforme
all the disorders of his Realme: If hee might not haue the honour
to haue reigned well, he desires to make his reigne better
at his death then in his life, thinking nothing makes a Prince to
be more lamented, then when he dies in some great action for the
good of his Realme.
He meant to begin this Reformation by Iustice,The Kings desire to reforme Iustice. and Phillip de
Commines saith, that he loued not the Court of Parliament of
Paris, for that he disliked many things: He had so much contemned
to giue great Offices to the recommendation of merite and
sufficiency, and therein to consider the honour and condition of
persons as ignorance had the reputation which did to belong
knowledge, and they might say that France was betrayed by Asses,
as Troy had bene by a horse,That age was in the thicke darkenesse of ignorance, the which doth weaken all resolutions of wel-doing. Diogenes said that Troy had beene betrayed by horses, and the common-weale of Athens was lost by Asses. petty-fogging did triumph in the
Pallace, and did plunge them that came for iustice into gulfes of
confusion: It became insupportable by long and tedious delayes,
and therefore he vndertooke to cut off the proceedings of
the instructions of suites, and those long formalities which
made iustice like vnto a Vine, which, not being cut, brings forth

much wood, and little fruit. Lawes are made for publike infirmities,
and yet when there were most lawes, the Common-weale was
most corrupted, and weakest.To shorten tedious sutes, and to cut off that which is vnprofitable, and superflous in laws, hath beene the enterprises of great Princes, of Theodosius, Iustinian, Ch^rlemaigne and Frederick, Emperours.
But such good thoughts came to late: they say that the Moule
opens her eyes when shee is ready to dye. The functions of his
soule were languishing and deiected. It was no more that great
Spirit, which gaue life and motion to all the spirits of his Realme,
that first mouer which made all the spheares of Christendome to
work; and who, remaining in his Cabinet,Wisedome workes great effects without mouing from one place* Edward of England seeing that Charles the fift did so much annoy him, and y^t neuer went out of one place, said I neuer knew king that did Arme lesse: He doth crosse me m^re with his letters, then euer his Father and Grand-father did with their great forces and Armies. kept all his neighbours
in awe. The remainder of his life was at the discretion of all kindes
of languishings. This cold Melancholy could finde no heate, it
was chill in the hottest dayes of the yeare,His waywardnesse and melancholy. and did plunge him into
a perpetuall waywardnesse, insupportable to his followers, and
much more vnto himselfe. Melancholly and sicknesse drew him by
one and the same way vnto death. They sought all meanes to
cheere him, and caused Musitians to play before him, they brought
many sheepheards of the Countrey of Poictou, to sing, to make
him merry, and to keepe him from slumber, which drew him to a
perpetuall sleepe. But as the flame is smothered by smoke, so this
great desire of life, and this base feare of death blemisht the beauty
of the goodliest actions of his age.We must drink this cup ioyfully when God presents it. He that hath a firme hope of enternall life, should not feare a temporall death. This careful desire of life retaines nothing of the generosity of the minde. Maroboduus non excessit Italia per duodeviginti annos consenuitque multum imminuta claritate ob nimiam viuendi cupidinem. Maroboduus went not out of Italy for the space of two and twenty yeares, and hee grew old, hauing much blemished his glorry, by his too great desire to liue. Tacit. Annal. lib. 2.
A yeare after hee fell into a relapse of his sicknesse at Tours,
where as he was taken with a more violent convulsion then at the
first,Relapse of the Kings sicknesse at Tours. so as he was held for dead, and remained some two houres laid
vpon a mattresse. The Signior of Bouchage, and Philip de Commines
made a vow for him to S. Claude, and he writes, that presently
after he recouers his speech. A change which the minde of man
should consider as all other meruailes of the hand of God, by the
humility of his zeale, and not by the subtilty of his iudgement.The reason of that which is done miraculously depends onely of his power that hath done it. S. Gregory saith that miracles, debent considerari per studium and non discuti per intellectum.
He went to Argenton to change the aire, and remained there a
moneth very sicke; then hee returned to Tours, and from thence
past to S. Claude to performe his vow, where hee left an euerlasting
memory of his piety and deuotion.The Chronicle saith, that in this voyage, for the safety of his person, he led eight hundred Launces, and sixe thousand foott.
At his returne hee past by Salins,A Parliament erected at Salins. where hee erected the Parliament
of Bourgondy, which the ruines and extreame fury of the
warre had chased from Dole. He made ordonances for the gouernment
of Iustice, the which are yet obserued in the Franch-County.
Being at Beaujeu in Beaujolois, he was aduertised of the death
of Mary, Dutches of Bourgondy, who had fallen from her horse
going a hunting, and had left two children, Margaret and Philip,
for the which hee was not sorry, foreseeing that this death would
breed some alteration in Maximilians affaires: for the Gantois

could not suffer the command of Maximilian, nor Maximilian endure
the humors of the Gantois.When as Manlius was chosen Consull, he said vnto the people, Seeke another to whom you may giue this honour: for I cannot indure your maners, nor you my commaundements. Liv.
At this returne from this voyage he would see his sonne the
Dauphin in the Castle of Ambois,The King go^s to see his sonne at Ambois where he had remained since his
birth, and had not seene him, neither did he suffer him to be seene
by all sorts of men: for remembring, that at the same age the great
men of the Realme had seized on him, against his father Charles the
seuenth, he feared the like attempt.Clau^ Seissel saith, That the King would not haue his sonne seene by the Nobility, and men of Estate, so as many doubted whether hee were liuing or dead. And I thinke it is one of the reasons which made him write, that Charles the 8. was supposed.
One of the greatest griefes and discontents which he might haue
at the end of his life, was the apprehension of blame which
France would giue him, to haue neglected the breeding and Instruction
of this Prince, and to haue so late sought to repaire those
defects: he would that the admonitions which he gaue him in the
presence of his most confident seruants, should bee published in
forme of an Edict, and enrolled in soueraigne Courts, to the end
his subiects might know, that if his sonnes reigne were not answerable
to his hopes, the cause should not be imputed to his fathers
Instructions.
Lewis,Admonition made by the king to the Dauphin. by the grace of God, King of France, Dauphin of Viennois,
Earle of Valentinois, and Dioys, to all those to whom these Presents
shall come greeting, Wee let you vnderstand, that considering the beginning
of all things, and the end thereof, euen of humane Nature,
whose dayes are short: And that God our Creator hath giuen vs
such great graces, as it hath pleased him to make vs the head Gouernour
and Prince of the Noblest Region and Nation vpon Earth, which
is the Realme of FRANCE; whereof many Princes and Kings our
Predecessors, haue beene so Great, Vertuous and Valiant, as they haue
purchased the name of The Most Christian King,The Kings of France cary the Title of Most Christian since Clovis. Charles the Bald is called Most Christian in his Coronation. Pope Innocent, and Honorius the 3d. in their Bulles to King Philip Augustus, and to Lewis the eighth, called them, Most Christian. The Apostolike Legate, and three Bishops named in their Letters, write that the Realme of France is Most Christian. Du. Tillet. as well for reducing
many great Countries, and diuers Nations, inhabited by infidels,
to the good Catholicke Faith, rooting Heresies and Vices out of our
said Realme, and maintaining the Holy Apostolicke sea, and the holy
Church of GOD in their Rights, Liberties and Freedomes, as for
doing many other goodly deedes worthy of eternall memory, so as
some are held for Saints, liuing in the glorious company of GOD in
his Paradise, which our Realme, and other our Countreyes and Signiories,
we haue (thankes bee to GOD) so well entertained, defended,
and gouerned, as wee haue augmented and enlarged it of all sides, by
our great care and diligence, and by the aid also of our good, faithfull,
and Loyall Officers, Seruants and Subiects, notwithstanding that soone
after our comming to the Crowne, the Princes and Noble-men of our
Bloud and Linage, and other great Noble-menThe Princes and Noble-men of the League, were Charles of France, the Kings Brother, Iohn of Anjou, Duke of Lorraine and Calabria; Iohn, Duke of Alencon; Charles of Bourgondy, Earle of Charolois; Iohn, Duke of Bourbon; Francis, Duke of Brittanie; Iames of Armaignac, Earle of Marche, and of Castres, Duke of Nemours; Iohn, Earle of Armaignac his vncle; Iohn, Earle of Dunois, and of Longueville, Bastard of Orleans; Lewis of Luxembourg, Earle of S. Pol. Charles, Lord of Albert, father to great Alain, and Anthony of Chabannes, Earle of Dammartin. of our said Realme, or

the greatest part of them, had conspired, plotted, and attempted against
vs, and the Common-weale of our said Realme, many great practises,
treasons and conspiracies, so as by meanes thereof, there hath followed
so great warres and diuisions, as it hath caused a wonderfull effusion
of humane bloud, ruine of Countries, and the desolation of multitudes of
people, the which hath continued since our said comming, vnto this present
day, and is not yet fully quenched, but may, after the end of our dayes,
reviue, and continue long, if some good order and course be not taken.
Wherefore, hauing regard hereunto, and to the age wherein wee are,
and to the certaine infirmity wherein wee are fallen, for the which
wee haue beene in great deuotion to visite the glorious body of Saint
Claude; so as with the helpe of our Creator, wee are much amended,
and haue recouered health. Wee therefore resolued, concluded and determined,
after the returne of our said voyage, to see our most deere
and well-beloued sonne Charles, Dauphin of Vienna, and to instruct
him in many notable thingsHappy are those Princes which learn the formes of Gouerning well, by the examples and instructions of their fathers. Leon receiued them from the Emperour Basillius, and Philip Augustus from Saint Lewis. For if the highest knowledge of a Prince bee to know his Estate, the knowledge cannot bee more faithfull, nor certaine, then from those* which haue the experience. The Booke of the Emperor Constantine Porphyrogenete, for the Instruction of his sonne associated to the Empire (the which is now remaining in the Kings Library) is onely vpon this subiect; and as Monsteur Casaubon, who hath it in keeping, writes in an eloquent Epistle vpon Polybius: Sciebat vetus regnandi Princeps ad negotia gerenda in quibus Repub. salus continetur illud adprime defiderari vtingenia hominum probe nota sint quibus cum agitur siue illi sint subditi; siue amici, siue socij, siue hostes. The Prince who was old in Gouernement, knewe well, that in matters which concerned the safety of the Common-weale, it was chiefly to bee desired, that the Dispositions of men, with whom they are to deale, bee well knowne, bee they Subiects, Friends, Allies, or Enemies. for the direction of his life in good manners,
gouernement, entertainement and conduct of the Crowne of
France, if it please God hee come vnto it after vs. For the accomplishing
whereof, after our returne from our said voyage, into our Towne
of Ambois, wee went into the Castle of the said place, where our said
sonne the Dauphin was, whom we haue alwayes caused to bee kept, and
bred vp there; where, in the presence of a certaine number of Nobleblemen,
and Ladies of our Bloud and Linage, and other great Personages,
men of our Councell, Captaines and Officers, both to vs, and
said sonne, wee haue called our said sonne before vs, and haue caused
those words and Remonstrances which followed to be deliuered vnto
him.
First, after a recitall made by vs of the aforesaid things, or of the
greatest part of them to our said sonne, wee haue let him vnderstand,
how much wee desire, that after vs he might (with the aid of God) come
vnto the Cromne of France, his true Inheritance; and that he might so
gouerne and maintaine it, as it might bee to his honour and praise, and
to the profite and vtility of the Subiects of his Realme, Dauphine and
other Countries and Signiories, and of the Common-weale.This Instruction regards onely the setling of the Princes affaires, and doth not extend vnto the duties of Conscience, nor to those vertues which edifie Kings, Piety and Iustice. But to what end so many Instructions? To make a Princes conduct happy, wee must wipe these wordes out of his minde, If it please, it is lawfull: If it may bee, it shall bee. A good Prince should not will any thing, but what hee ought. Caesar^ cum omnia licent, propter hoc minus licet: vt foelicitatis est posse quantum velis, sic magnitudinis velle quantum possis; vel potius quantum debeas. For that all things are lawfull to Caesar, therefore they are the lesse lawfull: As it is a happinesse to doe what thou wilt, so it is a greatnesse not to will any thing but what thou mayest, or rather what thou oughtest. Plin. Paneg. Traja.
Item, That if it pleased God to work his will on vs, and that our son
should come vnto the Crowne of France, wee haue commanded and enioyned

him, as a father may doe his sonne, that he shall gouerne himselfe
and the said Realme, Dauphine, and Countries, by the Councell and aduice
of our kinsmen, Lords of our Bloud and Linage, and other Noblemen,
Barons, Knights, Captaines and wise men of our Councell; and especially
of those whom he shall know and finde to haue beene good and
faithfull to the deceased, our most honored Lord and Father (whom God
absolue) to vs, and to the Crowne of France, that haue been vnto vs good
and loyall Officers, Seruants and Subiects.Bod^n writes in the fourth booke of his Common-weale, Chap. 4. that K. Lewis the (...) made another Edict, declaring all offices perpetuall, if resignation, death, or Fortune, did not cause some change, and hee ordained, that a Destitution by forfeite should not take place, if the forfeiture were not adiudged.
Item, Wee haue also expressely commanded and enioyned him, that
when it shall please God he come vnto the said Crowne of France, that
he shall maintaine all the Noble-men of our Bloud and Linage, and all
other Noble-men, Barons, Gouernours, Knights, Esquires, Captaines and
Commanders at warre, in their Offices and charges, and all other, hauing
the command of men, and guard of Townes, places, and Forts, and
all other Officers, either of Iustice, or other, of what condition soeuer,
not changing or disappointing any of them, vnlesse they bee duely found
faulty and disloyall,An Officer which feares to be disappointed, holds all his actions pure, and keepes himselfe from failing: Yet a Prince should neuer displace without cause, and one of the greatest commendations which they giue to king Robert, is, that he neuer disapp^^^ed any Officer if he had not offended. and that there may be a due declaration made by Iustice,
as is requisite in that case.
Item, Vnto the end our sonne may, and will, consider of, entertaine
and accomplish our said Ordinance, Iniunction and commandement, wee
haue laid before him the great miseries, inconueniences, and ir-repairable
losses which befell vs soone after our comming vnto the Crowne, for
that we had not maintained them in their estates, charges, and Offices,King Lewis the eleuenth coming to the Crowne, did suddenly disappoint all his fathers ancient seruants, who handled him in such sort, as he was ready (as hee confest after-ward) to quit his Crowne and his estate.
the which hath continued long, to the great oppression and ruine of many
of our Countries and Subiects, and doth yet continue, although that (God
be thanked) we haue not lost any thing of the Crowne, but haue augmented
it with great Lands and possessions; hoping shortly, with the pleasure
and good will of our Creator, to settle peace and tranquility: And
that if our said sonne should doe the like, and should not continue the said
Noble-men and Officers, the like, or worse, might happen vnto him; and
that as hee loues the good honour and increase of himselfe, the said
Realme, and others our Countries and Signiories hee should haue
a speciall care not to doe any thing to the Contrary, for what cause soeuer.
Which Remonstrances made by vs to our sonne, the Dauphin, for the
good of the Crowne of France, and to the end the said Ordonances, Commandements
and Iniunctions made vnto him, should take effect, and bee
in perpetuall memory, wee haue demanded of our said sonne,A marke of great mildnesse in a seuere Prince, and of great bounty in a difficult Father, hee doth not vse his authority ouer his sonne for so iust a command. Hee first sounds his will, then hee suffers him to consult with his obedience, the bond whereof is sealed with the Seale of Nature, the which hath not giuen to men any Commission to command others, and to make them subiect, except the Father, whom Procles calleth, The Image of the Soueraigne GOD. what hee
thought, and whether he were content, willing, and resolued to entertaine
the same things, and other deliuered by vs, and especially touching
the said Charges and Offices. Whereunto he hath humbly made answere,
and said, That he would willingly obey, acomplish, and performe with all

his power, the Commandements, Instructions, Ordonances and Iniunctions
which we gaue him, for the which he did most humbly thanke
vs.
Moreouer, wee commanded him to retire himselfe with some of his
Officers which were there present, and conferre with him vpon those
matters which hee had propounded vnto him, and resolue whether hee
would entertaine all that wee had enioyned him: The which hee hath
done, and then he spake these, or such like words vnto vs: Sir, with the
helpe of God, and when it shall bee his pleasure that these things
happen, I will obey your commandement and pleasure, and will
performe and accomplish all that you haue enioyned me. Wherevpon
we said vnto him, That seeing he would doe it for the loue of vs,
he should hold vp his hand, and promise so to do and hold: The which he
hath done.
Item, After many other things declared by vs, concerning the same
matter, and also of many Noble-men our aduersaries within our realme,
A Prince cannot leaue a more profitable and fruitful precept vnto his sonne, then to make him knowe the friends of his Estate, to cherish them; and the enemies to beware of them: the one and the other are known by the effects; but men regard but the face, and God seeth the heart. who haue alwayes beene contrary to vs, and our said Crowne, from
whom part of the miseries and inconueniences aboue mentioned, haue
sprung, to the end he might haue a watchfull eye ouer them, we haue recommended
vnto him some of our good and loyall Seruants and Officers
which were there present, and some absent, letting him vnderstand
how well and faithfully they had serued vs, as well against our enemies,
and about our person, as also in many and diuers sorts. Of which things,
and of euery their circumstances and dependances, we haue ordained and
commanded our louing and faithfull Notary and Secretary, Mr. Peter
Parrent, to make all Letters, Provisions, Patents and declaratory clauses
of our said will and commandement, that shall bee needfull; as well during
our said Reigne, as that of our Sonne; and in the beginning of his
said Reigne, by manner of confirmation to the said Officers, and confirming
the^ in their said Charges and Offices, and we haue so co^manded and
enioyned our said sonne, to cause it to be done by the said Parrent, as our
Secretary and his. Wee also command by these Presents, our louing and
faithfull Councellours of our Courts of ParliamentPresently after the death of Lewis, the Parliament of Paris decreed, that the Officers should continue in their charges, as they had done before, attending the answere of the new King, the which shewes, that charges are suspended, vntil that his pleasure hee knowne, according to an ancient Decree made in October, 1382. of the said Realme
and Dauphine, Exchequer of Normandy, Maisters of our Accounts, Generals
and Councellors of our Treasurie, of Iustice, and of our Aids, Maisters
of requests of our houshold, Prou^st of Paris, and all Bailiffes, Seneshals,
Provosts, and other our Iustices and officers, or their Lieuetenants,
and euery of them to whom it shall belong, which are at this present, or
shall be hereafter, in our time, or our sonnes, that they obserue, entertaine
and accomplish, and cause to be obserued, entertained and accomplished,
from point to point inviolably our present Ordonances and Declarations,
and all and euery thing contained in these Presents, with their circumstances
and dependances, not doing, or suffering any thing to bee done to
the contrary, either now or hereafter vpon any cause or occasion what soeuer,
forcing all them that shall oppose themselues to the contrary, by the
taking away of their letters granted to the contrary, (...) thereof,
seizure and detention of their goods in our hands, imprisonment of their
persons, euen as is accustomed to be done for our own affaires, notwithstanding

any opposition, appeale, or complaint, or any Ordonance made, or to
be made by Vs or our said sonne, restraint, or commandement, defences
or letters to the contrary, for the which wee will not haue the contents,
effect and execution of these presents in any sort deferred, stayed, or hindered.
And for that many men haue need of these Presents in diuers places,
We will that full credit shall be giuen vnto the Copy therof, made vnder
the seale Royall, or signed by the said Parrent, or any other of our Notaries,
or ordinary Secretaries, as to this present Originall. In witnesse
whereof we haue caused our Seale to be set to these Presents. Giuen at our
Castle of Ambois the 22 of September, in the yeare of grace 1482. and of
our reigne 22. By the King, my Lord the Dauphin, the Earle of Beaujeu,
the Earle of Marle, Marshall of France, the Archbishop of Narbona, the
Signiors of Bouchage, Percigny, Plessis of Solhes, Iohn Doyac, Gouernor
of Auuergne, Oliuer Guerin, Steward of his houshold, and many others
being present.Miscounting in the History. Signed Parrent.
The date of this Edict discouers the mis-counting of Philip de
Commines,Philip de Comines was sent into Sauoy, to set at liberty the Signior of Illins a Dauphinois, whom the King had giuen for Gouernour to Duke Philebert his Nephew. When as the Earle of Bresse sawe the Kings Armie at Maston, hee did what they desired. who saith, that in the yeare 1483. the King would see
the Dauphin his sonne, whom he had not seene in many yeares before,
and that soone after he had spoken vnto him, he fell into the
extremity of his sicknesse, whereof he died: for this Remonstrance
was made in the Castle of Ambois, in September 1482. and the
King died not before August the yeare following. But to resolue
the doubt of times, it may be that the King some few dayes before
his death, had a will to see the Dauphin, when as they conducted
him to Paris, to make his entry, and to celebrate his marriage, and
that Philip de Commines not beeing at Ambois when this first Remonstrance
was made, beeing stayed in Dauphin or Sauoy, whether
the King had sent him with Troopes, against the Earle of
Bresse, hee had no knowledge thereof, and therefore hath written,
That the King had not seene the Dauphin in many yeares before.
If a History bee the Image of Truth,A History is the proofe of time, the light of truth, the life of memory, the mystery of life, and the Trumpet of Antiquity. It is the Image of truth, and as the image is perfect, that doth rightly represent the Originall, so a History should represent all things in their simple truth. and if Truth can haue
but one vniuersall face in all things, how can it accord the
Chronicle with this Edict? It writes, that the King going to
Saint Claude, and before his departure out of Tourraine, sawe
the Dauphin at Ambois, and gaue him his blessing: That
in the moneth of October, the same yeare, beeing fallen into
a Relapse of his sickenesse, hee caused himselfe to bee carried
to Ambois to exhort him to that which hee should doe, which
makes mee to wonder, if in matters that bee secrete and important,
Writers doe not alwayes giue full, perpetuall, and
immutable Assurances, seeing that in these they dispense so
freely with the Certainety.
The Instructions which the King gaue vnto the Dauphin, were
found Good and Holy, but they could yeeld no good fruits,
but with a peace. All the rest without it had beene of small vse,
there being nothing whereof a Father, who leaues a yong heire,

should bee more carefull, then to leaue him his inheritance quiet
and assured.
Being therefore resolued to giue a peace to France, who attended
it as a gift from heauen,There can bee nothing giuen more pleasing, no^ more healthfull to the people, then a peace, Vt circumspiciamus omnia quae populo grata ^^nt, atque iocunda, nihil tam populare quam pacem, quam concordiam, qua^ otium reperimus. Let vs looke vnto all things that are pleasing and acceptable vnto the people, wee shall not find any thing more popular then peace, concord, and ease. Cicer^ pro Le Agr. he thought to giue his sonne a wife,
but not the Princesse of England, who was promised him by the
Treaty of Piquigny.
After the death of the Dutchesse of Bourgondy, the Gantois
had seized vpon Prince Philip,Estate of the Lowcountries at the discretion of the Gantois. and the Princesse Margaret
her Children, telling the Arch-duke Maximilian, that the
Guard and Tutele belonged vnto them. The King, who desired
to haue the Princesse Margaret married vnto the Dauphin,
and knewe well, that by the Gantois meanes, the Propositions
of the Treaty would bee to his aduantage, commaunded Des
Cordes to make some Ouerture thereof, with two or three petty
Companions of the Towne of Gand, who had purchased
some credite in the Seditions and Mutinies of the people. These
Men sitting their duety to the time and fortune,A proposition of a peace and marriage. transported
with priuate passion (a deadly poysonAll passion and priuate affection is a poyson in the conduct and managing of affaires. Peffimum veri affectus and Iuditij venenum sua euique vtilitas. Euery mans private interest is a deadly poyson to true iudgement. Tacit. in Affaires of importance)
and distasted with the soft and effeminate commande of
Maximilian, consent speedily to the Propositions of Des Cordes,
and promise to make them succeed to the Kings good liking.
There was little paine in the effecting of this businesse: for the
Gantois, to preuent all difficulties which the Father might propound
in the marriage of his Daughter told him plainely, that
they would haue no more warres with France. They insulted ouer
him, doing and vndoing many thing contrary to his Intentions.
On the other side, Pope Sixtus, both by the reason of
his Office,P. Sixtus mediates a peace. as a common Father, and by the Law of Religion,
which doth nothing more Christian,There is nothing more proper for a Christian, then to make peace. (...) BASIL. then to make
peace, solicited the King and the Archduke thereunto, to
ioyne their forces against the common enemy of Christendome,
and had sent the Cardinall of Saint Peter ad Vincula to exhort
them.
The Deputies of either side met at Arras:A Treatie of peace and marriage. they layd open
all the Pretences of the Crowne of France to the House of
Bourgondy. The Kings intention was, that the Riuers should
returne vnto the Sea, from whence they came; and his reason was
grounded vpon the Law of the Realme, which giues no part of
Reuenues of the Crowne in propriety to the Females; and portions
giuen to the Princes of France, passe not to their daughters,
when as they leaue no sonnes.In old time the Infants of the House of France had their Portions in Soueraignty. This was abbrogated in the third race, and so ordered, as the yonger sonnes could not pretend any thing to the Succession of the King their Father, but a prouision for their entertainement, the which, (hauing no Heires Males) returned to the Crowne. Heereupon there was a Sentence giuen to the benefite of King PHILIP the third for the Earledome of Poitiers, and Lands of Auuergne against CHARLES the first, King of Sicile, brother to Saint LEVVIS, in the Parliament of Tousaints, 1283.

Finally, vpon that Maxime, That the reuenues of the Crowne are Inalienable,
and not subiect to prescription: For men cannot prescribe any
thing against God, nor priuate men against the Estate. To apply
the square vnto the stone, and the Hypothesis vnto the Thesis,
the Kings Deputies did shew that the Dutchy of Bourgondy, the
Franch-County, with the Earledomes of Flanders, Artois, and
Henaut, were peeces of the Crowne. If their discourse was not in
these tearmes, it was so in substance.
The beginnings of the diminution of Flanders, as they of all the
great Empires of the world, haue beene weake, vncertaine, and
fabulous.Estates, as all other things in the world, haue three times, the beginning, the decrease, and the declining. The Countrey was peopled by a Colony of Saxons,
whom Charlemaigne brought thither, gouerned vnder the authority
of the Crowne of France, by their Lords Forresters.The Gouernors and Guardi^ns of Flanders (saith Mr. du (...)) before Baldwin, surnamed Iron-Arme, were Officers mutable at the will of the Kings of Fra^ce, although that some sonnes haue succeeded in their fathers Offices, for that that they were heires of their vertues, and were called Forresters, not that their charge was onely vpon the land, being fall of Forrest for coles, but the guard of the sea was also commutted to them. The Estate
began by Baldwin, suruamed Iron-arme, and continued in his
posterity; but as it ended by Maud, daughter to Baldwin the fifth,
Flanders past vnder the commands of the Dukes of Normandy,
then of Thierry, Earle of Alsatia, who married Sibilla, daughter to
Foulques of Anjou, King of Ierusalem, and had but one daughter,
who was heire to the Earledome of Flanders, and married to
Baldwin the fourth of that name, Earle of Henaut; of this marriage
came Baldwin, Earle of Flanders, the eighth of that name, who was
Emperour of Constantinople, who died at Andrinopile, who left
but two daughters; Ioane, who died without children, and Margaret,
Countesse of Flanders,Margaret, Countesse of Flanders, who raigned thirty yeares, had two husbands, the first was Bourcher, an Englishman, by who she had one sonne, which dyed yong: and William of Dampierre, second sonne to Archambauld, Lord of Bourbon, Father to Guy, Earle of Flanders, Father to Robert of Bethunes. who married William of Bourbon,Guy, Earle of Fla^ders
sonne to Archamb^uld, Lord of Bourboun: He was father to three
sonnes; William, who died without children; Guy Earle of Flanders,
and Iohn, Lord of Dampierre.
Guy, Earle of Flanders, married Maud, daughter and heire to
Robert (others named him Fegard) of Bethunes,Robert of Bethunes. by whom hee had
fiue sonnes, and three daughters: Robert of Bethunes his sonne,
who hath deserued the surname of Great, as well for the greatnesse
of his vertue as his fortune, succeeded him.
Charles of Anjou, King of Sicile, brother to Saint Lewis, gaue
meanes to acknowledge his valour more gloriously, hauing set
two Crownes vpon his head, by the Victory of the battell of
Benevent,Battle of Benevent, the 10 of February, 1565. where as Manfroy, bastard to Conrade, whom he had poysoned, was slaine. whereas the Parricide Manfroy ended his tyranny, honour
and life. Hee had enioyed them longer, and more happily, if
hee had followed the councell of this Prince,Robert of Bethunes, Earle of Flanders, did not allow of the death of Conradyne: The History, which detests it, reserues him this honour: Vtrique nou^ ac regio nomine indigno crudelitatis in or be Christiano exemple fecuri vitam eripit frustra Flandriae Comite monente, generosum victorem decere moderationem, and clementiam. Sed vicit vox cruenta vita Conradini, mors Caroli; mors Conradini, vita Caroli. Hee tooke away both their I was by an example of cruelty, which was new in the Christian world, and vnworthy the name of a King, the Earle of Flanders ^^lling him in vaine, that moderation and clemency did become a generous victor; but that cruell voyce preua^^d: The life of Conradine is the death of Charles, and the death of Conradine is the life of Charles. who found the
death of Conradine and Frederick of Austria, Prisoners taken in the
warre, barbarous and inhumane.

Of this Marriage Charles was borne who dyed yong,Charles of Bethunes son to Robert Earle of Bethunes dyed at a eleuen yeares of age. They write that he brought from his mothers wombe the figure of a Crosse betwixt his shoulders. and Lewis
who was father to Lewis the second,Lewis the second of Bethunes. Earle of Flandes* Hee married
Margaret of France, daughter to Phillip the Long, who treating
of the conditions of this Marriage would that Robert of
Bethunes his Grand-father, should declare the children that were
to be borne of this marriage, Earles of Flanders* This Lewis of
Bethunes, surnamed of Cresse, for that he dyed at the battell of
Cresse,Lewis the third of Bethunes. left one some called also Lewis, and surnamed of Mallaine:
These so diuers names haue but one Spring* Mallaine is
Bethunes, and Bethunes is Flanders: The greatest Families of Europe
haue forgotten their first names to continue them of their
portions and successions: So we see Bourbon for France, Austria
for Habspourg, and in this Genealogy of the Earles of Flanders,
Dampierre for Bourbon, Bethunes for Flanders, and without
any other distance, but from father to sonne, Neuers and Mallaine
for B^thunes.
Lewis of Bethunes, or of Mallaine, married Margaret daughter
to the Duke of Brabant, and had his onely daughter Margaret,
who was first married to Phillip Duke of Bourgundy, and afterwards
to Phillip the Hardy, sonne to King Iohn. From this truth
we must conclude, that the Crowne of France, had the right of
homage, and of Soueraignety ouer the Earledome of Flanders,
before this marriage. The like is said of the Townes of Lisle,
Douay, Orchies, and Bethunes.
Consequently, Artois cannot bee separated from France, no
more then the Earledome of France from whence it is come,County of Artois. for
the parties follow the nature of their whole. King Lewis the ninth,
performing the will of Lewis the eighth, his father, gaue it for a
portion to his brother Robert, vpon condition that he should not
transferre it to the daughters which should be borne of his marriage
with Maude daughter to the Duke of Brabant: For these reasons,
the treaty of Arras betwixt King Charles the seuenth, and
Phillip the second Duke of Bourgundy, did expressely reserue the
Fealty, Homage, and Soueraignty, of those lands which did hold
of the Crowne.King Lewis the eighth, disposed after this manner of the Country of Artois, Volumus and ordonamus quod filliusnoster secund^^ natu habeat totamterram Attrebatensemin feudis and domanijs and totam aliam terram quam ex parte matris nostrae Elizabeth, possidemus saluo dotalitio matris suae. Quod si idem qui Attrebatensium tenebit sine haeredem decedat volumus quod terra tota Attrebatensis and alia terra quam tenet ad filium nostrum Regni nostri successorem and liberos integre redeat.
The Franch-County hath made a part of the ^state vnder
Cloues,The Franch-county. and Clo^ilde. The Dutchy of Bourgundy hath alwaies beene
one of the goodliest Flowers. Henry the first, King of France,
gaue it to Robert of France his brother for his portion; His posterity
hath held it vnto Phillip the sonne of E^des. Phillip the fourth,
married Ioane, the eldest daughter of King Phillip the Long:Phillip the Long had foure daughters by the Lady Ioane of Bourgundy; Ioane married to the Duke of Bourgundy, Margaret married to Lewis of Crecy, Isable married to Guy Dauphine of Viennois, who was slaine with an arrow before the Castle of Lapierre, and Blanch a Nunne, in the Monastery of Louchan, neere Paris. By
this alliance, the two Bourgundies were vnited, and of this marriage
came Phillip Prince of Bourgundy, who was married to Ioane

daughter to Robert Earle of Bolleigne, who died at the battell of
Crecy, Phillip his sonne, surnamed de Roue: succeeded in the Dutchy
of Bourgundy after his Grand-fathers death, in the yeare, one
thousand three hundred fifty and foure; Hee was married yong to
Margaret of Flanders, the onely daughter to Lewis the third,
Earle of Flanders, and dyed at the age of twenty foure yeares, in
in the yeare, one thousand foure hundred three score and two: By
his death the Dutchy of Bourgundy came vnto the Crowne, by
the right of returne, and by proximity of bloud, King Iohn being
found neerest to the succession. This proximity is easie to verefie,
being certaine that Robert, Duke of Bourgundy had foure sons, and
two daughters, by Agnes of France, daughter to King Saint Lewis,
Hugh, or Hughues, Eudes, Lewis, Robert, Ioane, and Margaret; Hughues
was Duke and dyed without children; Eudes succeded him, Ioane
was married to Phillip of Vallois, father to King Iohn, who onely
remained of the discendants of Robert:Phillip the Hardy, Duke of Bourgundy. He caused it to bee vnited
and incorporated to the Crowne, and gaue it to Phillip the Hardy,
his sonne, by reason of his seruice and recommendation.In the inuestiture which beares date the 6. of September, 1363. wee reade these words. Ad memoriam reducentes grata and laude digna seruitia, quae charissimus Phillippus filius noster quarto genitus, qui sponte expositus mortis periculo nobiscu^ ^mperterritus and impauidus stent in acie prope Fictauos vulneratus captus, and detentus in hostium potestate: ibi and post liberationem nostram h^cten^s exhibuit ind^fessevero amore filiali ductus ex quibus suam merito cupientes honorare personam, perpetuoque praemio fulcire, sibi paterno correspondentes ^more spem and fiduciam gerentes in domino, quod ipsius crescente prouidentia dicti nostri subditi Ducatus eiusdem, a suis oppressionibus releuabuntur.
The Deputies of Flanders were well instructed what they
should answere, and if they had not beene a deniall had serued for
a sufficient reason, for in disputes of consequence, to consent were
base, and to deny wisedome. They said, that reasons drawne from
Lawes, and Customes obserued, did not proue that successions,
Fees, and the place of Peeres, were incompatible with the quality
of women: Iudith daughter to Charles the Bald, brought vnto her
successors Earles of Flanders, the Low Cou^tries, with their largest
limites:The ancient bounds of the County of Flanders, were betwixt the Ocean Sea, and the Riuers of Escault and Somme. The same Prouinces haue beene gouerned in diuers seasons
by women, Margaret of Alsas, Ioane of Constantinople, and
Margaret of Mallaine.
The place of Peeres of France hath beene held by wo^men.
In France, women are capable to hold the places of Peeres, and to giue their opinion in the iudgement of Peeres. Maude Countesse of Artois did assist at the Processe of Robert Earle of Flanders, in the yeare 1315. And in this quality, the Dutchesse of Orliance, and the Countesse of Artois, were adiourned to iudge the Processe of Iohn Monfort Duke of Brittany. The examples are in Normandy, Guienne, Tholousa, and Brittaine.
Raou^ married the daughter of Lewis King of France, who
had Normandy for her Dowry: Eli^or, daughter to William Earle
of Guienne had that goodly Prouince in marriage: Alphonso brother
to King S. Lewis, was Earle of Tholousa by his wife: Maude of
Artois,Maude of Artois, caused Robert, Grand-child to Robert the second Earle of Flanders, to be excluded from the succession by two decrees, the one made, by Phillip the Faire, at Asmeres, the 9 of October 1309. and the other by Phillip the Long, 1318. by the iudgement of Phillip the Faire, succeeded in the
County of Artois, by this onely reason that the daughters were capable
of this succession, and that representation had no place in the
direct line.
To all this the Deputies of France answered suddenly;Answeres to the obiections. That
Prouinces once vnited to the Crowne can bee no more dismembred:

That great Empires should endure great changes and alterations,
if the Females were made equall to the Males in the right of succession,
for their Crownes should not be dismembred into many
peeces, for that we finde in Common-weales in generall, and in
Families in perticular, more daughters then sonnes; That if examples
had more force then reason, and that they must decide the
controuersy by the number, they might not contradict the authority
of King Phillip the Faire, who would that the County of
Poictou, which hee had giuen to Phillip his sonne, should returne
vnto the Crowne for want of Heires Male, by reason whereof,
when as Eudes the fourth, Duke of Bourgundy, and Ioane of France
his wife, daughter to Phillip the Long, had pretended the succession
of the County of Poictou, against King Charles the Faire,
Phillip the Faire, would that the County of Poictou which he gaue to Phillip his son, who was afterwards King of France, Surnamed the Long, should returne to the Crown for want of Heires Male, vpon condition that the King should be bound to marry the Daughters. they were reiected by a Decree of Parliament giuen the 22. of
February: The same hath beene obserued in other Portions of the
Princes of France, for the Prouinces of Berry, Orleans, Anjou,
Maine, the Countie of Clermont, Artois, Alanccon, Perche, and
Eureux.
The Deputies did not agree vpon these points, and the proofes
could not be so cleere, but there would be still found some exception
or diuersity: Moreouer, they treated for two Princes, who
stood not vpon words but held all things doubtfull, wherefore
they thought it fit for the good of a peace to giue more power to
trust then to iealousy,In Treaties it is neccessary to vse all the cautions which wisedome and foresight can inuent, but in the end wee must trust them with who^ wee treate, else it is impossible to resolue any thing. which is a shelfe, against which affaires
suffer ship-wracke: They did winke at many things, and did turne
from that which the necessity of affaires did forbid them to encounter:
For in Treaties of this sort, Hee that can giue, must
giue, and hee that cannot, must seeme liber all of that which hee can
neither sell nor keepe; He that will haue all, looseth all. Matters past
as they desired, not by the rigor of restitution, but in fauour of the
marriage of the Dauphin Charles, with Margaret Princesse of
Flanders;Margaret of Austria was married to the Dauphin, but shee was not his wife, for in the yeare, one thousand foure hundred foure score and twelue, He sent her backe, and married the Dutchesse of Brittany: Shee was married to the Prince of Castile, who dyed in the first yeare of his marriage. For the Arch-duke and the Estates representing Prince
Phillip as Heires to the Princesse Mary, appointed for her Dowry,
and promised, the Counties of Artois, Bourgundy, Mafconois,
Auxerrois, Salins, Bar-sur-seine, and Noyers for her, and
her Heires, Males and Females: For want whereof all the
afore-named land should returne to Prince Phillip, and to his
Heires.Phillip the first, was married to D. Ioane of Castile, and had many children, Charles the fift, Emperour: Ferdinand King of the Romanes, then Emperour, and King of Hungary. D. Elenor Queene of Portugall and France, D. Maria wife to Lewis king of Hungary. D. Isabella Queene of Denmarke, D. Katherine, wife to D. Iohn King of Portugall.
That if the lands returned to any other but Prince Phillip and his
Heires, then the King might retaine them vntill the controuersy
were decided, for the Townes of Lisle, Douay and Orchies,
the which should be done within three yeares after the case should

happen: The said Signiory should be gouerned vnder the Dauphin,
who should make satisfaction for the mony borrowed in the
Counties of Artois and Bourgundy, and suffer that the pensions
granted by former Princes should take effect.
And if the marriage were not consummated, all those places
should returne to Prince Phillip, reseruing onely a Dowry of fifty
thousand Florins by the yeare, assigned vpon Bois de Vincennes,
Montargis, Crecy, and other places of Champagne, Bry, and
Touraine: That during the minority of Prince Phillip, and before
his marriage, the King, nor Dauphin, should not demand
the gouernement of his Low Countries: There was a generall
pardon granted to all banished men of either side, and euery
man should re-enter into his possessions, without restitution of
fruits:It was also agr^ed that be Prince of Orange, the Earle of Ioigny, Leonard of Chalousi^u^, Maister William of Baume, Signior of Ilain, and Claud of Theolongeon, Signior of Bastie, comprehended in the peace, should returne into the possession of their lands, in Bourgundy, Dauphine and the Realme. The King also promised to fauour the Signior of Romont
for the recouery of his lands.
All priuileges giuen by the Princes should remaine to them
that had obtained them. The houses of Flanders at Paris, and
Conflant, should be restored to Prince Phillip, and that of Artois
to the Lady Margaret.
This marriage was the gate by the which many Families of the
Franch-County, past into France: The Signiors of the house of
Chalon, Iohn Dandelot Maister of the Kings horse, and Balife of
Amont, Iames of Colligny father to Gaspard of Colligny, High
Admirall of France, Guy of Rochefort Signior of Pluuant,
Chancellour of France, Iohn of Ache, Signior of Verreu, Captaine
of Dijon, Balife of Auxois and Chamberlaine to King
Lewis, Iames of Vaudre, and some others of the house of Mouy,
and of Saint Fall. These Conditions of such aduantage were
yeelded vnto without any difficulty, for the King had wonne them
of Gand, who had the children in theirIf they of Gand could haue giuen vnto the King the Counties of Namur and Henalt, with all the subiects of that house which speake French, they would willingly haue done it, saith Phillip de Commines, to weaken Maximilian. possession, and whose
onely care was to weaken Maximilian, and to take from him all
meanes to arme against them; not considering that flying one
mischiefe they did runne into another, giuing the King meanes to
haue them at his discretion, and that they were like vnto the horse,
which suffred it selfe to be bitted and backt by man, to encounter
the Stagge.
During this Treaty, the King was growne so^leane, pale, and
disfigured, as a man could hardly know him, and in an other Religion
they would haue commended him more to haue encountred
death then to attend it. Hee was nothing but a shadow and a
voyce, in the hottest daies of Summer his body was content with
his owne coldnesse, without seeking any other refreshing. Hee
made difficulty to signe any Articles, not for that he did not allow
of them, but to hide the deformity of his griefe,When as age, or sickenes, causeth any deformityin a Prince, he should suffer himselfe to bee seldome seene: Tiberius did therefore liue out of Rome: Facies parum decora aetas grauior, valetudo imbecillis saepe risui and fastidio sunt: A deformed face, old age, and (...) are often subiect to be laught at, and loathed. L. Lips. ex Tacito. and there
was not any one that durst speake vnto him, nor demand any
thing of him.

When as the King of England receiued aduertisement of the
resolution of this marriage,Death of the King of England. he was so much grieued as hee dyed:
he saw his hopes frustrate in France, and his actions contemned in
^ngland, repenting that hee had not giuen credite to his
Councell, who thought it necessary to breake betimes with the
King, and not to suffer him to fortefie himselfe with the ruines of the
house of Bourgundy, seazing vpon the Townes so neere vnto
England; for the taking of Bollegne did threaten him with the
losse of Callice and Guines. Towards the end of his daies, he
recompensed the toiles of his life, and plunged himselfe in delights,
taking care how to make himselfe fat: That which was superfluous
became necessary to him:The increase of a Neighbours power, holds a Prince in perplexity, and sometimes in sachirresolution, as not daring to make warre, he^ doth things preiudiciall to peace. Phillip de Commines saith,His Exercises and pleasures. that
hee had no thought but of Ladies (and more then was fit) of Hunting,
and to entreate his owne person well: When hee went a Hunting, hee
caused many Pauillions to be carried for Ladies, and in this sort made
great feasts, for hee had a body as fit for it, as any that euer
I saw, being yong, and as beautifull as any man that liued in his
time.Edward was held in his youth to excell all the Princes of his age, in beauty and stature, but when as hee came into France, in the yeare, one thousand foure hundred three score and fifteene, He was growne grosse. F^w men become so but by their owne meanes.
Entring into the Realme hee saw himselfe surprized with a
storme, and expelled by him who had assisted him to conquer it;
Hee retired into Holland with two Hulkes, a little Ship, and many
men, without mony, seeing himselfe to giue a gowne furred with
^ables to satisfie the Marriner who had transported him: At the
end of sixe monthes he re-entred into London, when as his enemies
had held him to be lost. In eleuen daies the Earle of Warwicke
had wonne the whole Realme for Henry the sixth, Edward
recouers it in twenty daies, with the hazard of two great battles.
The strongest carried it,They are sometimes bound to fortune, and sometimes to pollicy, for the happy euents of great enterprises, but most co^monly the stronger is the Maister. (...). Occurrat forti qui mage fortis erat. and remained peaceable King, yet
with some remorse to haue beene bound for the quiet possession
of his Realme, to the cruelties, and inhumanities, which he committed
against his owne bloud: For he put to death King Henry the
sixth, and Edward Prince of Wales his sonne, with the Duke of
Clarence his brother.
The cause of this brothers death is not very certaine: The most
common opinion is, that hee would haue armed to succour
the Princesse of Bourgundy, contrary to his brothers liking.
Polydore Virgil saith, that enforming himselfe, he learned of them
that liued in those times, that King Edward being aduertised by a
Coniurer,All the answeres of Sorcerers are doubtfull, and deceiue them that trust in them: They spake truely, meaning the Duke of Glocester, and the King deceiued himselfe vnderstanding it of his brother of Clarence. that his name that should succeed him beganne with
a G. had a conceit that George, Duke of Clarence, his brother,
should take the Crowne from his children,Death of the Duke of Clarence the Kings brother. and vpon this apprehension
hee put him to death in a But of Malmesey. Others haue
written, that hee sought the Alliance of the Princesse of Bourgundy,
and that the Dutchesse Margaret, sister to Edward,
fauoured his Designes, which the King (not wishing so great a

fortune to his brother) hindred. That at the same time one of
the Dukes seruants, hauing beene condemned to dye for poyson,
the Duke of Clarence was offended, and spake in such sort as the
King, taking his words for threates of some great trouble,
caused him to die in pryson.George Duke of Clarence, brother to the King of England, made choice to dye in a But of Malme^cy, to die with some content, which an (...) disolution of the soule is wont to cause, as Seneca saith: or to make himselfe drunke, and to free himselfe from the horrour end feeling of death: Drusus meaning to dye of hunger would not cate any thing in nine daies but the flockes of his bed. Tacit. l. 6. Annal. An act notwithstanding which did
afflict him with such griefe and repentance, as remembring the
great precipitation of his iudgement, procured by his brothers
enemies, when as any came to sue for a pardon, for any one that
was condemned to dye,Repentance doth, vndoubtedly, follow cruell and rash actions: Caracalla hauing put his brother Get^ to death, hee did neuer thinke of him, or looke vpon his stature but hee wept. Hee caused Loetus who had perswaded him to this paracide, to be imprisoned, and did all kindes of honour vnto his Funerall. Funus Gerae accuratius fuisse dicitur, quam eius qui a fratre videretur occisus. Getas Funerall was performed with more then his that seemed to bee murthered by his brother. AELIVS SPARTIANVS. he alwaies said: My poore brother had not
any to sue for him, He left two children, Margaret who was married
to Richard Poole, and Edward whom the King made Earle of
Warwicke.
All the crosses which Edward had suffred did not so much
afflict him, as he receiued contentment at his returne from the
warres of France, for the peace which he had brought backe, and
the Treatie of marriage which he had made of his daughter with
the Dauphin of France, and the pension of fifty thousand
Crownes: So when he saw the Dauphin married vnto the Lady
Margaret of Austria, he was so grieued as hee resolued to returne
into France to reuenge this iniury: Choller and griefe were so
violent in his soule, as he dyed, the tenth of Aprill, at Westminster,
whereas the Parliament was assembled to resolue vpon the
warre of France. His body was carried to the Castle of Windsor,
and interred in S. Georges Chappell: He had tenne children by Elizabeth
his wife, and left Edward Prince of Wales, and Richard
Duke of Yorke liuing.
All his life hee had beene liberall, and dyed coue^ous: Hee recommended
his wife,His brother murthers his children. children, and Realme to Richard Duke of
Glocester, who to haue the Crowne, put Edward, who had raigned
but two monthes, and Richard, his Nephewes, to death.Edward had a base sonne called Arthur, his daughters were married to diuers Princes, Brigit the last was a religious woman. The
daughters were declared Bastards, by the Parliament, for that a
Bishop affirmed that hee had married Edward vnto a Lady of
England before that hee was married to the Lady Elizabeth
Riuers: Hee caused himselfe to bee Crowned King in Iuly following.
The parricide of his two Nephewes, caused so great scandall
and horrour in all the orders of the Realme, and the
mother, who had fledde into the Sanctuary at Westminster,This trust, and recommendation of such precious Iewels, bound the Duke of Glocester to haue a care of them. IS DIGERDES King of Persia, seeing that ARCADIVS the Emperour his enemy, had recommended his some THEODOSIVS vnto him, found himselfe bound to preserue his Estates, and laying aside all passions of precedent hatred, hee proclaimed warre against any one that should molest his pupill. hauing
fore-seene the rage of this Tiger, filled the Citty of

London with very pittifull and strange complaints, as euery
man found this greedy and vnsatiate desire to raigne, inhumane
and tyrannous, hauing forced him brutishly to teare in peecees
the Lawes of Nature, and to pollute his hands with his owne
bloud.Churches are Sanctuaries, but they giue no safety but to Innocents, and to them that are wrongfully (...). The Temples of the Ancient were a Sanctuary to three sorts of men, to Offendours, to Slaues, and to Debtors.
God did raise vp the Earle of Richmond,Earle of Richmond prisoner to the Duke of Brittany. who was prisoner
to the Duke of Brittaine, all good men desired it, to reuenge
the innocent bloud, and this Tyrant, fore-seeing that there
was nothing to bee feared but from that part, sent Thomas
Hutton to the Duke of Brittany to deale with him that hee
might not bee set at liberty,Ambition of raigne is not restrained neither by the respect of piety, nor the motions of Nature. Cupido regni fratre and fillia potior. The desire of raigne is deerer then brother or daughter. Tacit. Annal. lib. 12. seeking the friendship of King
Lewis, who would not make any answeres vnto his Letters,
nor heare his Embassadours, calling him most inhumane, cruell,
and wicked, for the most horrible and execrable murther of
his Nephewes.
The King assisted the Earle of Richmond, who being set at
liberty by the Duke of Brittany, past into England with three
thousand Normanes, the scumme (as Phillip de Commines saith)
of the whole Prouince, and was presently fortified, by all them
that were offended for the death of their lawfull Prince,Earle of Richmond King of England. giuing
him battell within few daies after his arriuall, in the which this
Tyrant was slaine, and the Earle of Richmond acknowledged
for King.
In all these great reuolutions wee must confesse a Diuine
Iustice, which doth earely or late reuenge iniquities, pursuing
them euen in the generations of children, who are punished
for their fore-fathers offences: Henry the fourth, caused Richard
the second to dye in prison, Henry the sixth, his Grand-child, dyed
a prisoner to King Edward the fourth, Richard Duke of Glocester
murthers Edwards children, and Richard is slaine by Henry
Earle of Richmond the seuenth of that name. Who can deny*
but there is an Eternall Iustice in all this,When (...) ^ wicked man commits any villany, hee is presently a prisoner to GODS Iustice, and like a fish hee is taken with the baite of pleasure and delight which hee hath taken in doing it. which doth punish the
wicked by themselues, and makes vse of them to scourge others,
and it deferres publicke punishment for a time, the secret doth
neuer abandon the crime, and is a perpetuall thorne in the offenders
soule.
Francis Phoebus, sonne to Gaston Earle of Foix, dyed also, hauing
succeeded to Elenor of Arragon his grand-mother,Death of Francis Phoebus King of Nauarre. hee
being but twelue yeares old, and raigned vnder the gouernement
of his mother.The Ladie Magdaline of France during her sonnes minority carried this Title: Magdaline, Daughter and Sister to the Kings of France, Princesse of Viana, Gouernesse to our most deere, and wel-beloued sonne, Francis Phoebus, by the Grac^ of GOD King of Nauarre. The Realme of Nauarre was so diuided,
as it had neede of a Prince of more greate respect
and farre better experience, and yet for that hee was neere allied
to the Kings of France and Castile, the most factious were quiet,

and tooke the oath of Alleageance, when as hee entred with incredible
applause into the Towne of Pampelone, the tenth of
December, in the yeare, one thousand foure hundred foure score
and two.
Presently after his Coronation, Ferdinand King of Castile
offered him Ioane his second daughter in marriage: The Queene
his mother did still protest that her will did wholly depend vpon
King Lewis the eleuenth her brother: The History of Spaine
saith that he had a desire to marry her to D. Ioane, a Nun at Coimbra,
to the end hee might renue the pretensions which shee
had to the Realme of Castile, as daughter to Henry the fourth;
and by this meanes, hee did alwaies assure himselfe of the
County of Rousillon. But when as his mother had brought
him backe into Bearne, hee was poisoned at Pau, playing on a
Flute. Hee dyed with this griefe that his life nor death did not
profite any man,As no man should desire to liue to himselfe alone, so that death is honourable which is imployed for the publicke: Turpe est sibi soli vivere and mori. Plut. there being nothing that doth more trouble a
great spirit then when he liues and dyes not for himselfe. Dying
hee spake these holy words, which the mouth of the Sonne of
God pronounced a little before his death: My Kingdome is not of
this world: If hee had liued, he was borne to be a great Prince, but
the world (to speake truely) is so small a matter, as the Phylosopher
had reason to mocke at Alexander, who had carried the Title of
Great.Alexander would be instructed in Geometry, to learne the greatnesse of the earth, Hee found that the Title of Great, which he carried, was false, co^sidering: Qua^ pusilla terra esset, ex qua minimum occupauerat: Quis enim esse magnus in pusillo potest* How little the earth was wherof hee held the least part, who can be great in a small thing. Sen.
The Lady Catherine his sister succeded him,Katherine of Foix, Queene of Nauarre. and was married
to Iohn of Albret; Iohn of Foix, Vicount of Narbona her Vncle,
did quarrell with her for the Earledomes of Foix and Bearn, saying
that these lands, lying within the Realme of France, whereas
women did not succeede, Queene Katherine could not pretend
any thing, and did by force seaze vpon Maseres and Monthaut,
and besieged Pamiers, but could not take it. Queene Katherine
aduertised King Lewis the eleuenth with this inuasion,
France doth furnish many examples against the Vicount of Foix, to shew that the daughters, being neerest of bloud, did exclude the Males that were farther off. who sent Commissioners into the Country to forbid the Vicount
of Narbona to proceed by way of fact, vpon paine of loosing his
right.
This controuersy was of such importance as he himselfe would
be iudge thereof,Controuersy for the lands of Foix, Bern, and Bigorre. and after him Charles the eighth was Arbitrator:
In the end they must passe by the censure of the Court Parliament
of Paris: Iohn of Foix Vicount of Narbona, and after his decease,
the Kings Atturney Generall, as Tutor and Gardien to Gaston of
Foix his sonne, said against Katherine of Foix, that daughters being
vncapable of dignites, by reason of their sexe, might not succeed
in the Realme,King Charles the eighth, sought to make an agreement betwixt the parties, and therefore committed it to the Cardinall of Foix, and Monsieur D'Alby, but seeing they could not agree, hee sent them to the Court Parliament, All which proceedings in writing were imparted vnto me by Maister Galland, one of the most famous Aduocates of the Parliament. Dutchies, or Counties, but onely the Males,

and that they might not dispose thereof by Testament.When as they say that women are incapable of dignities, it is to be vnderstood of charges, which consist in Functions and Offices. A Woman cannot be a Consull, a President, or a Chancellour; but when the dignity is patrimoniall, and annexed to the Fee, such a dignity may belong vnto a woman, as wel as the iurisdiction.
The King caused a Consultation to be made of all the learned
Lawyers of his Realme, to know what his Neeces right was. They
found that it depended vpon this Maxime; That the Nephew, or
Grand-childe represents his Father and Grand-father in the right of
Primogeniture, or first borne. That this right is transferred to the
children of the elder, although hee die before the Father, and holds the
place of lawfull heire.
They did also consider the custome, and common obseruation
of this Realme, where the eldest sonne dying, and leauing a sonne,
hee succeedes the Grand-father, as his Father should haue
done: The Grand-fathers second-sonne being excluded from
all pretention: for the Nephew excludes the Vncle, and representation
hath place in this Realme, in Fees which are not diuisible.
In the time of King Charles the fifth, his Maiesty sitting with
the Peeres of France in his Court of Parliament, Ioane of Brittany,
married to Charles of Blois,Charles of Blois, and the Lady Ioane of Brittaine his wife, did enioy this Dutchy fiue and twenty years, or thereabouts, vntil that Iohn of Montford being succoured by the Forces of England, slewe Charles of Blois in battle, and expelled his wife out of the Dutchy. was declared heire to the Dutchy
of Brittany, as representing her Father, against Iohn, Earle of
Montfort, her Vncle. She was daughter to the Duke of Brittanies
second brother, and the Earle of Montfort was the third brother.
Allain, Lord of Albret, as sonne vnto the eldest, Vicount of Tartas,
who was deceased, succeeded his Grand-father in the Landes of
Albret, and excluded from the succession the Lord of Sancte Bazille
his vncle, and the Lord of Oruall, his Grand-fathers yonger
brother.In the house of Albret there are many Earledomes: The Earledome of Gaure, the Earledome of Dreux, the Earldome of Peyragore, and many Vicounties and Baronies. They held that house in the time of King Lewis the eleuenth, to haue sixe thousand pound sterling of yearely rent.
King Philip, in the yeare 1314. did iudge the suite betwixt
Maud, daughter to the Earle of Artois, and Robert of Artois her
Vncle; and by his iudgement it was decreed, that the daughter
should succeed, as the neerest vnto her father. Lewis, Earle of Flanders,
had but one daughter, the richest heire of Chrstendome, the
which succeded her father in the Earledome of Flanders, excluding
the Duke of Brabant her Vncle, and was married to Philip of
France, sonne to King Iohn, and first Duke of Bourgondy,The Treaty of Marriage betwixt the Duke of Bourgondy, and Margaret, Princesse of Flanders, was made the twelfth of Aprill, one thousand three hundred sixtie nine. the
Dutchy of Guienne, which comprehends all Gasconie, as well that
which is of the iurisdiction of Tolouse, as of Bourdeaux, and more,
was carried to the Crowne of England, by the marriage of the
daughter of William Duke of Guienne, with Henry King of England.Elenor, the onely daughter to William, Duke of Guienne, and Earle of Poitiers, was married to Lewis, King of France; and beeing put away by him, shee married againe to HENRY, sonne to the King of England, and Duke of Normandy.
Henry, King of Nauare, and Earle of Champagne, left one daughter,
who was married to K. Philip the Faire, and succeded her Father
in the Earledome of Champagne. The last Earle of PoictouThe County of Poictou, and the Towne of Poitiers were vnited to the Crowne by King Charles the seuenth, in the yeare 1436.

had one daughter named Margaret, who was married to the eldest
sonne of France, and succeeded her Father, notwithstanding
that the Earle of Saint Valier, her Vncle, was then liuing.
Raymond, the fifteenth and last Earle of Tolousa, dying without
Issue Male, Ioane his onely daughter succeeded him, and was married
to Alphonso of France, brother to the King Saint Lewis.The marriage of Alphonso of France, and Ioane, Coumtesse of To^ouse, was treated in the yeare 1228.
Matthew, Earle of Foix, dying without children in the yeare 1398.
his sister, surnamed Isabel, succeeded him, and was married to Archambaut
of Grailly. Lewis of Luxemburge, Earle of St. Paul, had
many children, but his eldest sonnes daughter, who was married to
to the Earle of Vandosme, was sole heire of all his lands, as representing
her Father, who was the eldest.They hold that the Countesse of Vendosme did not succeede in the Earledome of Saint Paul by right of succession, but by a Treaty of peace, and that her Vncles were all incapable of this sucession, for that the Landes of Lewis of Luxemburg her father, had been confiscate.
The Earle of Lauragais left but one daughter, who succeeded
in the Earledome, whereof she made donation to the French
King.
The Earle of Castres had one daughter, who was married to a
yonger sonne of the house of Bourbon, Earle of Marche, who after
her fathers decease, succeeded in the Earledomes of Castres,
and Vandosme, and excluded them of Montfort, who were her
Vncles, from the succession. Of this marriage were borne two
sonnes, Iames of Bourbon the elder, who was Earle of Marche,
and of Castres: and the yonger who was Earle of Vandosme.
Iames of Bourbon married Beatrix of Nauarre:Iames of Bourbon, Earle of Marche, married with Beatrix, daughter to Charles the second, King of N^uarre, the fifteenth of August, one thousand foure hundred and fiue. Elenor their onely
daughter, was married to Bernard, Earle of Armaignac and
Perdiac, who after her fathers death succeeded as well in the
Earledome of Marche, as of Castres, and excluded the Earle of
Vandosme from the succession. True it is, that these Earledomes
haue remained in the house of Bourbon by transaction.The King made Donation of the Earledome of March, to Monsieur de Bourbon, and his wife: The Duke of Nemours children beeing restored to their Landes, there was a sute to ouerthrow this Donation, and then an Accord was made, by the which the Earledome of Marche remained to the house of Vendosme and Bourbon, the Duke of Nemours children being otherwise recompensed.
William, Vicount and Lord of Mountpellier, although hee
had many kinsmen of his name, had no other heire but his daughter
Mary, wife to Peter, King of Arragon. Peronelle,Du Tillet saith, that this Peronella of Bigorre, had fiue husbands: 1. Gaston of Bearne. 2. Ninion Sance, Earle of Sardaine. 3. Guy of Montford. 4. Rao^l Tescu. 5. Boson of Mathas. daughter
to the Earle of Bigorre, succeeded her father in the Earledome
of Bigorre, in the yeare, one thousand two hundred sixty foure,
and was married to Boson of Mathas, Vicount of Marsan and
Gabardan. Of this marriage issued D. Mathea, married to Gaston,
Prince of Bearne, who succeeding her father and mother,
brought vnto the principality of Bearne, those goodly peeces of
Bigorre, Marsan, and Gabardan.
In like manner by the daughter of Gaston, Prince of Bearne,
named Margaret, married to Roger Bernard, Earle of Foix, all
that is come vnto the house of Foix. Examples which serue to
confirme this generall custome obserued within the Realme:
That in all Dutchies, Counties, Vicounties, Baronies, Lands and

Signiories, the daughters being neerest in degree haue succeded,
and beene preferred before the Males. So as if King Lewis the eleuenth
had liued, he would haue decided this controuersie, in giuing
sentence for the Neece against the Vncle: His iudgement
had beene grounded, first vpon the right of the first borne, and representation:
secondly, vpon the conuentions of marriage betwixt
Gaston of Foix, and the Lady Magdalen of France, making expresse
mention, that the children which should bee borne, should succeed
in all the lands of Foix and Bigorre, then held by Gaston of
Foix, her father. Thirdly, vpon the ancient customes and obseruances
of the Realme. Fourthly, vpon the testament and last will of
the Earle of Foix.
Alphonso of Portugall died also at the same time:Death of Alphonso, K. of Portugall. hee had his
share in the miseries of Kings, hee entred a childe into the
Realme,Such as God giues the prince, such must the people receiue him; but the wisest of all Kings saith, Vnhappy is that Realme which is commaunded by a child. Metius Falconius Nicomachus approuing the Election which the Senate had made of Tacitus, being old and broken, vsed these wordes: Dij auertant principes pueros and pattes patriae dici impuberes and quibus ad subscribendum magistri literatij manus teneant quos ad Consulatus dandos dulcia and circuli and quaecunque puerilis voluptas invitet. Quae malum ratio est habere Imperatorem qui samam curare non nouerit, qui quid sit Respub. nesciat, nutritorem time at, respiciat ad nutricem manum, magistralium ictibus, terrorique subiaceat, faciat eos Consules, Duces, Iudices, quorum vitas, merita, aetates, familias et gesta non nouerit. God forbid the Princes and Fathers of the Countrey should be tearmed children* whose hands their maisters must hold when they subscribe, and who are drawne to giue Offices with childish delights: What a misery is it to haue an Emperour which knowes not how to maintaine his fame* nor what a Common-weale is, who feares his Tutor and is subiect to stripes and terror, and shall make them Consuls, Dukes, and Iudges, whose liues, merites, ages, families and actions hee doth not know. which was ill for himselfe, and worse for his subiects.
His mother Elenor, sister to Iohn the second, King of Arragon, was
depriued by the Estates, of the Regency which her Father had left
her: Peter, Duke of Coimbra, caused her to bee poysoned. Alphonso
tooke Armes to reuenge his mothers death: Peter was slaine
before Lisbone with a poysoned Arrow. They would haue married
Alphonso to Ioane, the supposed daughter of Henry the fourth,
King of Castille: this Tragedy hath beene formerly plaid. He died
at Sinta, being nine and forty yeares old, in the yeare one thousand
foure hundred, eighty two, and the three and fortith of his reigne,
and was interred in the Royall Monastery of the Battell of the order
of preaching Friers.
After the warres betwixt him and the King of Castille, and the
vnfortunate voyage which he made into France, hee did nothing
but languish. He saw himself forst to passe into France for succors.
Fortune could not set him in a more wretched estate for there is
nothing so miserable, as to see a Prince expeld his Countrey, and
begging. Pitty is presently changed into contempt, and the consideration
of that which is honest, doth not ouer-sway that which is
profitable. They may well say, that kings are brethren, that one royall
bloud cals another, that their interrests are common, that Rome
is his mother, the Senators his fathers, their children his brethren;
yet if the aid which he demands, doth not benefit him that giues it,
he shall returne more discontented then he came.In great deliberations, profite goes before honesty. Demetrius, sonne to Seleucus, hauing beene giuen in hostage, and bred vp from his infancy at Rome, intreated the Romans to restore him to his Realme, which was held by the children of Antiochus; and to moue them thereunto, hee called Rome his Countrey and Nurse, the Senators his fathers, and their children his brethren. But for all this the Senate inclined to that which was most safe and profitable, they assisted the children of Antiochus, being weake and yong, suspecting much the great courage of Demetrius, who was in the flower of his age. Polib.

Thus behold three Kings imbarked almost at one instant in the
shippe of Death,Death of the Dutchesse of Bourbon. onely God knowes the port whereunto they
are arriued: hee did call at the same time, the Lady Iane of France,
Dutchesse of Bourbon, to the end that Lewis should not be grieued
to leaue the world. The Chronicle calles this Princesse, Most noble,
Powerfull, Holy, and the example of good liuers. She died in the Castle
of Moulins, in May, 1482.
She had laboured all her life to entertaine loue and friendship
betwixt the King her brother, and the Duke of Bourbon her Husband,
knowing that the concord of France, and the greatnesse of
her houshold, depended thereon, and we may ascribe vnto her, the
glory of the peace which was made at Ryon, by the which the
principall fire-brands of the great fire of the league, were quenched;
Whereupon all they that loued quyet, cast their eyes
vpon those of this Princesse, and held them the Pleiades of
France, whose sweete Influences made the Oliue-tree of peace to
flourish.Princesses, by whose meanes peace doth flourish, are the Pleiades of Estates, wherein they are allied. Pliny saith, that the Oliue-tree springs vnder the Influence of the Pleiades. Con^ipiunt oleae virgiliaru^ exortu haec sydus illaru^ est. Polybius saith, that among the Grecians the Caduce, and among the Barbarians the Oliue is a signe of peace and friendship.
At the same time dyed Iohn of Bourbon, the second of that
name, Earle of Vendosme. Here amazement stayes me suddenly,
why in all the History of King Lewis the eleuenth, Philip de Commines
hath neuer made any mention of that Nursery of Caesars and of
Alexanders, and of that Royall branch which hath brought forth
the greatest King that euer ware Crowne or Scepter. He speakes
of foure sonnes of Iohn the second, Duke of Bourbon, of Charles
Cardinall of Bourbon, of Peter, Lord of Beaujeu, of the Bishop of
Liege, and makes no mention of Iohn the second, Earle of Vandosme,
who liued vnder the reigne of Charles 7, and continued vnto
the end of Lewis 11. wee must not wonder if the Chronicle hath
forgotten it, it doth often follow toyes, and leaues most famous actions.
As there are iniuries which are repaired by the quality only
of them that doe them,The basenesse of him that doth a wrong, defaceth the fearing of the iniurie. Crates hauing receiued a blow on the face by Nicodromus, a Man of base condition, was contented for revenge to set these words vpon his wound: Nicodromus faciebat. so we see writings of so poore a fashion, as
it is indiffrent whether they be inserted or not.
But how comes it to passe that so diligent, so exact, and so iuditious
a Writer had neuer cast his eyes vpon this house, which had
held all them of France in admiration, and had not spoken of the
actions of Iohn the second, Earle of Vendosme, which were no
workes of ambition, but of vertue, and had not glory for their
simple obiect, but the contentment of his owne conscience, desiring
rather they should be grauen in the memory of good men,
then vpon the front of publicke workes.
An Historian that doth surpasse honour, wrongs the publicke,
and as a sacriledge doth rauish the recompence of vertue,The sweetest fruit of a great and heroicke action, is to haue done it: they are deceiued which thinke to giue any other glory vnto vertue, then it selfe. She cannot finde out of her selfe any recompence worthy of her selfe. and
doth enuy the fruit that may grow thereby. For although that men
may be borne generous, and full of heate for the loue of vertue,
yet it is needfull that the precepts and Images be often represented

vnto them, and that the statues which (...) set vp in the Temple of
memory, grauen with the sciffers of eternity, should bee shewed
them; yet it is not sufficient to shew them adorned with the Palmes
and Crownes of their Triumphes; they would haue them represented
in such sort as they may seeme to breath, speake, and say
vnto them:Mens mindes are excited to the loue of vertue, by the examples of glory and honor, which adornes the memory of men whom she hath made famous: werefore Polybius saith, that they did represent to the youth of Rome, their Images, as liuing and breathing, to encourage them to that desire of honour which doth accompany good men. Poly. lib. 6. You shall be as we are, if you will liue as we did.
This labour may haue great defects: they are found in the most
perfect,A History should be free from loue or hatred. but they shall rather seeme to come from want of Iudgement,
then of will, the which I finde free, in this kinde of writing,
from hatred and loue, furious passions which disguise both truth
and false-hood. They shall rather reproch me with ignorance, then
with lying, and my writings shall alwayes haue more salt then
spleene; with what face shall they appeare in this age, so much
bound vnto the Kings glorious actions, if they were dishonored
as the rest, with so iniurious a forgetfulnesse of his Predecessors.
Iohn, Earle of Vendosme, great great Grand-father to Henry the
fourth, King of France and Nauarre, was sonne to Lewis, Lord
Steward of France, and Gouernour of Picardy, sonne to Lewis,
Earle of vendosme, sonne to Iohn, Earle of Marche, sonne to Iames,
Constable of France, the yonger sonne of Lewis of Clermont,
Duke of Bourbon, eldest sonne to Robert of France, second sonne
to S. Lewis. His Grand-mother was Katherine, heire to the house
of Vendosme, his mother Ioane of Lauall, daughter to Guy of Lavall,
surnamed de Gaure.The Signiory of Laual was erected to an Earldome by K. Charles the seuenth; at the instance of Lewis of Burbon, Earle of Vandosme, and was the first act of Soueraignety which he did after his Coronation.
His father dyed in the yeare of our Lord 1447. and this death
happened in a time so full of troubles, as hee was forced to gird
his sword vnto him, more for the necessity of common defence,
then by reason of his quality, or for seemelinesse. Hee past his first
Apprentiship in Armes, vnder the braue Achilles of France, Iohn
of Orleans, Earle of Dunois, and was at the siege of Rouen, Bourdeaux
and Fronsac with Iohn, Earle of Clermont, sonne of Charles
Duke of Bourbon, and Carles of Bourgondy, Duke of Neuers. He
serued King Charles the seuenth in all occasions that were offered
to restore France; and to free it from the oppressions of her enemies,
and did merit the Title of Most faithfull seruant of his Kings
will, and an inuincible companion of his dangers.
These two qualities which should haue purchased him loue
with his successor,Loialty of the Earle of Vandosme. were the cause of his disgrace, wherein hee did
comfort himselfe by the knowledge he had of this Princes humor,
who did not loue any of his bloud, nor them whom his Father had
loued. This was not able to withdraw him from his duty: for hee
still preserued the reputation of the ancient fidelity of them of his
house vnto the Crowne.This branch of Vandosme hath that of glorious, that it hath neuer left their kings, in a maner all the Princes of France were of the league of the Common-weale; yet Iohn, Earle of Vandosme, would not hearken to it. When as the Duke of Orleans tooke Armes against the Lady Anne of France, he drew vnto his party Charles, Earle of Angoulesme, the chiefe Noblemen of France; onely the house of Vendosme remained with the Kings Gouernesse.

And although that Iohn the second Duke of Bourbon had declared
himselfe of the league of the Common-weale, for that the King
had dispossest him of the gouernment of Guienne, from whence
he had expelled the English, and had reduced it vnder the obedience
of the Crowne, yet would he not imbark himselfe in the same
ship; and for that he would not looke vpon this storme from a safe
shore, he was present at the battell at Montlehery, with Francis and
Lewis his children; one of which was prisoner to the Earle of
Charolois. As the example of the head of his house did not make
him reuolt, so the feeling of his owne interest did not make him
discontented. His father had carried the Staffe of Lord Steward,
and his great grand-father the sword of Constable of France. King
Lewis the eleuenth disposed of the one and the other in fauour of
men, as farre inferiour in comparison of his merites, as in qualities
of his birth; yet he did not murmure, nor seeme disco^tented, considering
that it is no more lawful for the greatest Prince of the bloud,
then for the least Officer of the Crowne to prescribe a law to the
Soueraignes will, to make it yeeld vnto his passions; and that the elections
of Kings, in the distributions of honors, are not subiect to
the rules of distributiue Iustice, which obserues a proportion betwixt
recompence and merit.The King of France holding his Crowne of God only, and the ancient Law of the Realme, distributes honors as he pleaseth. It is a great violence to force a a minde full of courage, to hate that which hee loues, and to ruine that which he hath raised. In the end this charge of Lord Steward
is returned into the house from whence it went: It did honor
others, Charles of Bourbon, Earle of Soissons doth honor it at this
day by the great and goodly qualities which heauen addes to the
greatnesse of his birth: he restored order in the kings house, and reuiued the glory of his Maiesties seruice.
With the same courage that Iohn the second followed the King
against his rebellious subiects, he serued him against forraigne enemies,
He was present at the great Assembly at Ambois, with all the Princes of the bloud, and the chiefe Officers of the Crowne, to resolue a warre against the house of York in England, and against the duke of Brittanie, where there was a league made for the defence of the house of La^caster, and Edward, sonne to King Henry the sixth, was married to the Earle of Warwicks daughter. and was imployed with the Duke of Bourbon to disperse
the storme wherewith King Edward the fourth threatned France,
being come thither not so much to fight as to receiue the triumph
which the vanity of his ambition promised him.
The proofes of his seruice are not verified by those of recompence;
and wee may say, that this Prince, beeing not present
at the distributions of the great honours of the Realme, had no
great share in the Kings fauours and bounty: Wee see him hold
his ranke at the Coronation, and in the Assembly of the Estates,
but being none of those that were honoured with the first
colours of the Order of Saint Michael, hee hath remained in
the ranke of those great Spirits, whose contentment dependes
onely of themselues. All the Princes of the bloud cannot haue
all the honours of the Realme. All Planets make not a shadow:
the refusall of a dignity augments the glory of him that hath well
deserued it, and the concession doth not make him famous that is
vnworthy.They ordained statues for them that had made war in Affricke against Tacfarinates, though they did not va^quish him. Dolabella went thither, defeated him, and slue him; he demanded the same honours which had been giuen to others, which Tiberius refused, and Taci^us thereupon said, Sed neque; Blesus illustrior and huic negatus honor gloria^ intendis.
He had sixe daughters, Ioane of Bourbon, married to Iohn the second,
Duke of Bourbon: Catherine, married to Gilbert of Chabannes:
Ioane, wife to Lewis of Ioyeuse: Charlotte, married to Engelbert

of Cleues; Earle of Neuers: Rene, Abbesse of Paintes, and then
of Fonteuerard, and Isabell, Abbesse of Caen, and two sonnes, Lewis Earle of Vendosme,Lewis of Burbon ha^ 2 sons, Iohn Earle of Vendosme, and Lewis of Rochesur you head of the house of Montpensier. who married Mary of Luxemburg, and
Charles his eldest sonne, the first Duke of Vendosme, married Frances
of Alencon, and had by her seuen sonnes, and six daughters: the
second of his sonnes was Anthony, who married Ioane of Albret,
Queene of Nauarre, and heire of the house of Foix, Albret, Bearn,
and Armagnac. Of their marriage was borne Henry the fourth, king
of France and Nauarre: their third sonne was Lewis of Bourbon,
Prince of Conde, father to Henry, Prince of Conde,
to Henry
Prince of Conty, to the Cardinall of Vendosme, and to Charles,
Earle of Soissons, and Grand-fahter to Henry, Prince of Conde,
first Prince of the bloud. The yonger sonne of Iohn the 2d Earle of
Vendosme, was Lewis, head of the branch of Montpensier, and of
Roche-sur-yon, whom death hath cut off from this great tree. There
remains one daughter, promised to the Duke of Orleans, the Kings
second sonne.
Death freed the Earle of Vendosme from the cares which a longer
life had augmented by the iealousies and distrusts which the King
conceiued of all the Princes of his bloud, and which kept him continually
in the diuers agitations of hatred and feare. It is impossible
but that he who by his extreame rigors and seuerities hath offended
many, should feare alwayes: hee cannot trust his subiects as his
Children, seeing he hath not entreated them as a Father,Loue is a strong guard of a Princes person. Agesilaus said, that he wold liue safe without gardes, if he co^manded his Subiects as a good father doth his children. He must be beloued of his subiects, and feared of strangers. Amorem apud populares, me^^ apud hostes quaerat. Tacit. he hath
his share of the feare which hee hath made common. Wheresoeuer
hee casteth his eyes, he seeth markes of his seuerity; so hee
findeth not any one but puts him in feare: hee hath feare of his
Children, feare before him, and feare behind: and as in his life hee
had alwayes desired more to be feared then loued, so in the end he
found himselfe composed of the same humor, fearing more then
he loued.
Hitherto it seemeth he did not trust any man but Peter of Bourbon,
Lord of Beaujeu, his son-in-law, in whom he had so great a
confidence, as he referred vnto him all the care of his affaires, when
as the pleasure of hunting entertained him in the Forrests, not for
some few dayes, but whole moneths. The Author of the Annals of
the house of Bourbon, who hath seene the originals of many great
treaties, speakes after this maner: This Peter of Bourbon, Lord of Beaujeu
was in such fauour with the king, as his Maiesty desiring to retire
himselfe from affaires, kept commonly at Chamois and places thereabout,
a Countrey, at that time, full of wood, and wilde beasts, causing the said
Lord Peter of Bourbon, his son-in-law, to remaine at Montereau-faut-yonne,
to bee chiefe of the Councell, to whom all men repaired for their
dispatches which had any businesse in Court.A Prince must be feared and loued, but for that it is difficult to haue these two things concurre together, it were better and more safe to be feared, for that Princes which haue grounded themselues vpon the loue of the people, haue found, that there is nothing more inconstant, and men do sooner offend him that makes himselfe to be loued, then hee that is feared, yet must they not in seeking to bee feared, make themselues odious. The King loued the woods
and hunting to free himselfe from cares, reposing all vpon the said
Lord of Beaujeu. His Maiestie also said, That hee did hate deadly
them of Bourgondy, Aniou, Alencon, and the Dukes of Brittanie
for their pride.
And contrariwise, that hee loued Charles of Artois, Earle of Eu,
for that hee retained nothing of the arrogancy of his predecessours, and
them of Bourbon more for their mildnesse and humility.It is not the first testimony which the kings of France haue giuen of the mildnesse, wisedome and moderation of the Princes of the house of Bourbon. When as King Charles the ^s^h, passed from Au^gaon, (where hee had seene Pope Clement the sixth) i^to La^gueclock to settle an order for the coplaints of the Countrey against the oppressions which they had suffered vnder the gouernment of the Duke of Berrie his vncle hee commanded the Dukes of Berrie and Burgondy to retire, and would not haue any other prince ne^re vnto his presence, but Lewis, duke of Bourbon, his vncle by the mothers side, and Iohn of Burbon Earle of March and of V endosme whom hee loued infinit^y, giuing a reason hereof openly, That he loued those Princes, for that they had neuer serued any other maister, and had neuer had any ambition nor design against the state, neither had they euer giuen him any occasion to complaine of them. This vertue
was neuer found in a great spirit, but it did purchase power and affection
with others. Pride is barren, humility fructifieth: a vine
spreading vpon the earth beares excellent fruit, the high and
straightest Cypres-trees are vnfruitfull.
Hee was not so bountifull of his fauours to the Lord of Beaujeu,
but hee was as sparing to the Duke of Bourbon his brother:
he had an implacable hatred against Iohn, Duke of Bourbon, sonne
to Charles, the Achilles of France. This hatred was nourished with
a fresh apprehension, for that this Prince lamenting the disorders
of the State, the miseries and oppressions of the people, and the
bad vsage which Charles, Duke of Berrie suffered, had laid the first
foundations of the league, had left it by the Treaty of Ryon, and
re-entred againe into it vpon despight, for that during this Treaty,
the Duke of Millan, by the Kings commandement, had ouer-run
and ruined his Countrey of Beaujolois and Forrest.
But for that hee was a Prince of great power, great courage, and
great credit in the heart of all France: hee would not euaporate
this fire of reuenge and indignation which hee had against them,
and considered rather what he might doe, then what he should do.
And the Duke, who was acquainted with the disposition of this
King, knewe well, that all Princes write offences done them in
brasse, and the seruice which they receiue, vpon sand; wherefore he
remained long in his Dutchy of Bourbonois, and would not come
to Court.
The King, whose chiefe care was to weaken his enemies, and
to diuide them, gaue him the gouernement of Languedoc, dissembling
the remembrance of things past. Vpon this assurance
the Duke of Bourbon shewed that hee did not breathe any thing,
but the Kings seruice; neither had he any greater content, then to
yeeld him proofes equall to his affection: and therefore hee followed
him to Peronne, and we must beleeue that without him
in this voyage hee had giuen his Enemies more courage to
execute those dangerous councels, hauing resolued to stay him:
For besides the respectes of Alliance, the Duke of Bourgondy,
respected this Prince, who had the two principall
partes necessary in great Captaines, Valour and good Fortune.The two qualities necessary in the Generall of an Army are, Valour and good fortune. Duo sunt quae Claros Duces faciunt, summa virtus, summa foelicitas. Lat. Pac. Paneg.
Wee haue formerly seene, that the Constable of Saint
Pol did what hee could to drawe him to the Duke of Bourgondies
partie,Fidelity of the Duke of Burbon and to make him ioyne with the King of Englands forces;
and that this braue Prince made it knowne, that nothing was able
to shake his loialty, no not if he should be reduced to the misery

of Iob,An extreme oppression is no lawfull cause to arme against the Prince, rebels seeke pretexes and coulors to shadow their discontents, but good subiects suffer with patience. although that the sincery of his actions could neuer
wipe away the blemish which distrust had put in this Princes eyes,
yet would he not trouble the content which hee had receiued by
the testimony which his conscience gaue to fidelity and vertue.
The King also fore-seeing that if his enemies were fortefied, with
his fauour and forces, hee should be much troubled, hee coniured
him to come vnto him. The Duke excused himselfe vpon a
resolution which hee had taken to liue quietly in his house, the
which no man could enuy him, hauing purchased it with incomparable
toyles and crosses. Hee besought the King to suffer
him to rest in the port of this tranquility after so many stormes, and
to content himselfe with the seruice which the other Princes of his
house, and his Bastard the Admirall did him.
The King entreated and coniured him to come, and to reape
the same fruits in Picardy which he had sometimes receiued in
Guienne,The honour of the glorious victory of Fromigny is giuen to Iohn the second Duke of Bourbon, who then tooke the title of Earle of Clermont, for hee charged the English with such fury, as with the losse of tenne men onely, hee defeated fiue thousand English, and tooke 1400. prisoners. to the shame and confusion of the English, sending
the Bishop of Mande vnto him to deliuer his requests, and recommendations
more confidently, and to assure him that the occasion
was not lesse glorious then at Fromigny.
The Duke being loath to faile France in so great an occasion,
and remembring that his predecessours had not desired a more
glorious graue then to die vpon a field of battell couered with
the bloud of their enemies,The Princes of the house of Bourbon who haue dyed for the seruice of the Crowne, are Peter of Bourbon, slaine the 19. of September 1356. at the battell of Poicters, Iames and Peter his sonne at the Battell of Brignay neere vnto Lyon: Lewis at the Battell of Agincourt 1415. Francis at the battell of Saint Bridget on holy Crosse day in September 1525. Iohn at the battell of Saint Laurence, 1557. and Anthony at the siege of Roan, 1562. and to free the King from all conceite,
that he had a will to giue eare vnto the Constable, who did
solicite him with all vehemency, he deliuered the Constables letters
into the Bishops hands, protesting that hee would neuer carry
Armes against the Kings seruice. The effects did not differ from
his words; for seeing the Duke of Bourgundies troupes approach
to enter the Country, he went to horse and put them to rout: The
Earle of Conches was slaine there, the Earle of Rousillon Marshall
of Bourgundy was taken prisoner there, with the Earle of
Dammartins sonne, and the Signiors of Longy de Lisle, Digoin,
Ruygny, Chaligny, and the two sonnes of the Signior of Viteaux,
one of which was Earle of Ioygny: Being then assured of the
discent of the English, and that they had passed the Sea, he came
vnto the King with sixe hundred horse, and commanded part of
his Army which was neere vnto Beauuais. Matters being reduced
to those tearmes that the King desired, and the King of England
hauing repassed the Sea, he retired himselfe to Moulins to performe
the last duties to his mother,The Lady Agnes of Bourgundy dyed in December 1476. Shee was wife to Charles Duke of Bourbon, and mother to Iohn the second of that name, Duke of Bourbon, to Charles, Cardinall and Arch-bishop of Lyon, Peter Lord of Beaujeu, Lewis Bishop of Liege, and Iames who dyed at Bruges, and to the Lady Ioane of Bourbon, married to the Lord of Arlay, Prince of Orange, and Margaret of Bourbon, wife to Phillip Earle of Bresse. and from that time resigned
his aboade at Court vnto his brethren.
After the Duke of Bourgundies death, hee would not bee an
actor in the warre which the King beganne against his daughter,

and with a discourse free from all flattery, a vice vnworthy of a
great courage)A great courage speakes fr^ely, but without btterner or slander: Fattery is the marke of seruitude; and slaunder deth falsely vs^rpe that of liberty. Adulationi^oedum crimen seruitutis, malignitati falsa specie^ libertatis in est. Tacit. Hist. Lib. 1. hee did not dissemble his opinion, saying; that the
King should haue giuen it a better and a more reasonable Title,
then a simple desire to ioyne the Low Countries to his Crowne,
this so free and true a iudgement did much offend the King, who
from that time resolued to let the Duke of Bourbon know that
this last offence had renewed the feeling of the first: He caused secret
informations to be made against him, yet doubting his courage
and reputation, he would not haue the rigor of his iustice aime
directly at him; Hee beganne with his Officers, and gaue commission
to Iohn Auin, Councellour in the Court of Parliament,
and to Iohn Doyac, to enforme against him, thinking that to free
themselues from trouble they should bee forced to engage their
Lord,Claude of Seyssiell saith, that King Lewis the eleuenth sent vnto ^he Duke of Bourbon some of his ministers, men of base condition, to doe him some intollerable wrongs, vnder colour of Iustice, thinking for the great spirit which hee knew to be in him, to prouoke him to offer some violence, or to make resistance, but the Duke knowing to what end all was done, endured it with patience, and escaped by sufferance and dissembling. they decreed a personall adiournement against his Chancellour,
his Atturny, the Captaine of his Guard and many others,
who appeared with more confidence to defend themselues, then
slander had assurance to accuse them; vpon their answere the
Commissioners knew not what to say, and the Court of Parliamen,
which knew well that it was a practise to trouble the Duke of
Bourbon, whose probity and integrity (two rare qualities in that
age) had purchased him the surname of Good, and the affections of
all the people, enlarged them: The Chronicle saith, that this proceeding
was against God and Reason.
It was a very sencible griefe vnto him to see his loyalty called in
question, and his seruices contemned. But hee considered all
these occurrents with an open eye, and a resolute brow, with the
a ^uantages which a good conscience gaue him, and did iudge
thereof with a setled spirit, lamenting the bad counsell which entertained
the King in his great rigours in an age which was not fit
for it.Seuertty is not good in a Prince whose age is declining, It is needefull to purchase loue, Galba knew it well. Some other would not haue forborne teares for so peircing
a griefe, he would haue lost his sleepe, and his body should
haue found no other rest but that which disquietnesse brings by the
agition of the mind; but afflictions which assaile good men do
them no other harme but burne the bonds which hinder them to
lift their hands, with their hearts, vp to heauen. They blesse the
name of God in the midst of flames, Imprisonment doth not depriue
him, which suffreth for iustice, of the sweetnesse of a profound
sleepe: His rest is so sound as the Angell of the Lord which
comes to deliuer him, must awake him.
It is now time that Lewis go the way which these great Kings
haue traced vnto him. There wants nothing but this peece to the
triumphant Charriot of death, and hee could not desire better
company then of these three Kings his neere kinsmen, who were
there already,Hauing passed through all the charges of life, we must not refuse that of death: Seneca said to him that was loath to leaue the charges and offices wich he had exercised in his life time. Quid tu nescis v^um esse ex vitae officijs and mori? Dost thou not know that to die is also one of the duties of life. Sen. Epist. 77. he had passed by all the offices of life, there remained
nothing but the last: but it is the most difficult, and would bee
lesse if he had thought on it in time; if going by the way of life, he

had thought of the lodging of death, those feares which hold him
in worse estate then death it selfe, should be dispersed. Accidents
foreseene a farre off, considered without amazement, and attended
with resolution, do not trouble the minde like vnto those which
surprise it: His thoughts were ingaged in so many mortall and perishable
things, as he had small care of Immortall, and yet these
went before him and attended on him, and the others followed
after him and abandoned him: He hath busyed himselfe to gather
vp Attlantas Apples, and hath so much the more hindred the fruite
and prise of his course; In the way of health he that staies, retires;
and hee that retires looseth himselfe and goes astray. There are
three sorts of men whom God loues not, they that stay, they that
turne backe, and they that wander: Wee must giue courage to the
first, call on the second, and direct the others.
Lewis found himselfe to be in so difficult a passage as he had need
to be encouraged,Lewis fals into new apprehensions of death. supported and directed,It is a sweete consolation to a Princes minde among the trances and feares which are found in the passage of life and death, when hee hath not to doe with any but himselfe, that all his enterprises are ended, and that he may say, I die content. hee could not but
murmurre against the Law of Nature which did not suffer him to
glut himselfe with the pleasures of life: But to haue content of the
rest at the point of death, hee must make prouision thereof
throughout the whole course of his life: That word, I dye content,
is not alwaies found in the mouth, nor proceeds not from the heart
of Princes, who haue had so much paine to content the^selues, and in
whose liues, as in those of other men, we finde, Vanity, weakenesse,
inconstancy, and misery: The great oppositions which Lewis makes
against the decree of death, shew that he is not yet content with
the fruits of life: He complaines that he hath discouered the Port,
and desires to thrust himselfe againe into the violent waues of the
world; He thought that a little more life would haue made him
reape the fruites of so many designes which hee had sowne in diuers
places, and did grieue that death would not suffer him to see
that ended which he had begunne.
Yet it is a very remarkeable thing that before his death he saw all
things new or renued in all other Kingdomes of Europe, as if the
eternall prouidence of God, had not left him in the world, but to
consider these great changes which did amaze England, Arragon,
Nauarre and Scotland. And although they were things farre from
his sight, yet could he not but be passionate, and informe himselfe
as interressed in all things: His curiosity notwithstanding was staid
by the respects of his Religion,Offers of Bajazeth to the King. in contemning the offers of
friendship which Bajazeth made vnto him, who sent him a list of
all the Reliques which his father had found at the taking of Constantinople,
and of the Holy Land, promising to deliuer them vnto
him; so as hee would assure him of Zizimi his brother, who
had yeelded himselfe to the Knights of Rhodes. This peece is
worthy to bee related:Zizimi reuolts against Bajazeth. Mahomet left two sonnes, BajazethBajazeth was the elder, and Zizimi the yonger, who said that he was the Emperours son, for that hee was borne during the raigne of Mahomet, and Bajazeth before. the
elder, surnamed by the Turkes Ildrimy, that is to say, Lightning,
he co^manded in Paphlagonia towards the black or Euxin Sea, Iohn
called Zizimi, that is to say, Loue, was at Conio a city in Licaonia,

the Ianisaries were diuided which of the two should succeed, the
first was held effeminate and dissolute, the other led a more manlike
and martiall life: The controuersy was followed by a great
sedition, and the great Turkes Treasury was spoiled; many desiring
that the Scepter should bee giuen to him that had the best
sword.The Law of Nations hath alwaies preferred the ^lder b^fore the yonger, what aduantage of force or vallour soeuer he hath, and ^lthough that Pirrhus had ordained that which of his children had the sharpest sword should succeede him. Yet notwithstanding the eldest was lesse valiant and carried it. The faction of Bajazeth, by the wisedome of Acmet
Basha, remained victorious, and Zizimi was forced to retire himselfe
into Asia the lesse, from whence he passed to Ierusalem and
then to the great Caire, towards the Souldan of Egypt.
The great Caraman hearing of the diuision which was betwixt
these two brethren, held it a fit occasion to be embraced, to recouer
the Realme of Cilicia which Mahomet had taken from him,
whereupon he inuites and solicites Zizimi by letters and Embassadours
to ioine with him. They make an Army, and present themselues
neere vnto Mount Taurus to giue Battell vnto Bajazeth:
Zizimi considering the inequality of their forces (for the Army
of Bajazeth consisted of two hundred thousand men) and that if
hee fell into his brothers hands, he would put him cruelly to death,
he thought there was no other retreate for him but to the Christians.
In any sencible griefe, or when any execrable thing was spoken, the Iewes and Mahometans, rent ther garments. Among the acts of choller and fury of Maximin, obserued by Capitolinus are these: Incurrere in parietes, vestem cindere gladium arripere quasi omnes posset occidere. To runne against the wals, to cut his garments, and to draw his sword as if hee would kill all men. This was not without doing great violence to his conscience,
breaking his habits in signe of breach of his heart, in such
resolution, for he was a great obseruer of his religion, and so iealous,
as hee fell into fury when hee saw a Turke drunke:
Hee dranke water with sugar, and sometimes wine, so as it were
mingled with spices and other liquors, saying, that this mixture
did alter it, in such sort, as it was no more wine. There is not
any Law whereas humane pollicy doth not finde some exceptions.
By the aduice therefore of Caraman, hee left his wife and children
with the Soldan of Egypt, and resolued to seeke his fortune
and succours among the Christians, and to retire himselfe to
Rhodes, hauing written this letter to Bajazeth.

Zizimi King, to Bajazeth his most cruell brother.
DEmanding of thee that which was iust and honest,Bajazeth receiuing this letter and hauing read it, remained two daies retyred, and would not bee seene, shewing a wonderfull griefe, that his brother had retired to the Christians, especially to the Knights of Rhodes, the greatest enemies hee had in Christendome. thou a breaker
of all Diuine,Letter of Zizimi to Bajazeth. and Humane Lawes, and a contemner of Mahomet,
doth force thy brother to flye vnto the Christian name, and to them in
particular, which weare a Crosse, for the great hatred they beare vnto
our powerfull House: I am forced to retire my selfe vnto them to saue
my life, and thou art the onely cause of this mischiefe: If thou hadst
granted me that which I desire so iustly I had remained peaceably vpon
the frontier, and thy brother, a Mahometane as thou art, and of the
same bloud, should not be forced to ioyne with Christians, with whom
it would be impossible for him to serue God according to the ceremony

of our Law,Zizimi was alwaies sad and melancholicke, being depriued of the exercise of his Religion* At the first feast which the great Maister made him, there was Musicke of all sorts of Instruments; yet hee was nothing the merrier. They brought before him a scullion of the Kitchin, a Turk who was a slaue, who sung, or howled out a song after the Turkish manner whereat he took a wonderfull delight. I attend from God the reuenge of so great a wickednesse,
and do pray vnto our great Prophet to giue thee a punishment equall
vnto thy crime: If our father had fore-seene thy impiety, I assure my
selfe that with his owne sword, or by poyson, he would haue taken away
thy life. Hee hath exalted the house of the Ottomans, and it seemeth,
thou takest delight to ruine it: But it is impossble that an Empire which
thou hast vsurped with so great tyranny and cruellty, should continue
long, the building cannot be firme vpon so bad a foundation. The day
will come, when to reuenge thine impiety, some one will do the like to
thee and thy children, that thou attemptest against me and mine. Adue
and looke to the ruine which threatneth thee.

Zizimi was well receiued at Rhodes the 24. of Iuly 1482. the
great Maister sent Aluaro of Estuniga Prior of Castile with the
Gallies of the Order to conduct him,Zizimi comes to Rhodes. he went himselfe to meete
him with all his Knights: Zizimi was amazed to see himselfe receiued
with so great honors in a Towne which his father would haue
ruined. Hee made it presently knowne that hee had a desire to go
into France, and to cast himselfe into the Kings Armes, although
he were inuited by many other Princes to come vnto them.He is conducted into France. The
great Maister hauing thereupon receiued commandement conducted
him thither.
They tooke Saye before him,The Say which is taken to Princes is ancient, Xenophon in the first of his Cyropadia shews how the Persians did vse it. Tacitus speaks of Halotus, who carued the meate, and tooke Say to Claudius: inferre epulas and explorare gustu solitus. Athaneus saith, that the Romans called him that had this charge, (...),. and the Grecia^s (...) as they vse to other Princes (an
ancient custome and knowne to the Romanes who had it from the
Persians) whereat being amazed, and desiring to let them know that
he was not come thether to distrust, he did eate of euery dish that
was set before him, before any Say were taken: Noble and generous
minds (said Zizimi) are not distrustfull, I feare not to be poysoned among
such braue and noble Knights, and if I had feared it I would not haue
trusted my safety in their hands, I wil liue among them as a priuate man,
and not as a Prince: Bajazeth was so fearefull least he should be set at
liberty, and trouble his Estates, as he payed yearely 45000 Ducats
to the Treasury of the Religion, 35000. for the entertainement
of Zizimi, and 10000. to repaire the spoiles which Mahomet
his father had done them at the siege of Rhodes,There was an accord made betwixt the great Maister and Bajazeth, the 8. of December 1482. the which is worthy of memory; for that it may be said that the great Turke to liue in peace, and fearing that Zizimi should returne into Turkey, was forced to yeeld himselfe tributary to the Knights of Rhodes. and would that
the Embassadours which carried the first payment should passe into
Auuergne to see in what estate he was.
The great Maister wrote to all the Princes of Christendome,
that if they did not contemne this goodly occasion to diuide the
Empire of the Ottomans, by the meanes of Zizimi, they might spoile
him of all the Estates he had taken from the Christians, and by so
pretious a Gage, bridle all his designes, in such sort, as Christendome
might remaine long in peace and tranquility, for hee should
not dare to attempt any thing, whilst his brother were in the Christians
power.Bajazeth feared both at home and abroad, Zizimi had friends, he put all them to death whom he suspected to fauour, and among others Acmath Basha, who had taken Otranto, Isaac Basha was dismist from his Offices. But at this season Italy was full of diuisions. The
Pope, Venetians, and Siennois, were in league against Ferdinand
King of Naples, the Florentines, and the Duke of Milan: The Emperour

made an excuse that hee could not intend it. Christendome
did not reape the profite it might haue done, and neglected
this occasion, as the precedent offered by one of the sonnes of
Amurath, who had made himselfe a Christian, and maintained that
Mahomet was vnlawfull, and supposed.(...) Mahomet the son of Amurath, and gaue him to Pope Nicholas the 5. who caused h^m to be instructed in the Christian Religion and in good learning: after his death he retired himselfe to the Emperour, and then vnto Mathias Coruinus King of Hungary, and knowing the controu^^^y that was betwixt Bejazeth and Zzimi, hee let the great Maister of Rhodes vnderstand that both their pretensions were vaine.
Mathias Coruinus King of Hungary sent his Embassadours to
the Pope to entreate him to be a meanes to deliuer Zizimi vnto
him, promising by this meanes that Christendome should be reuenged
for the dishonour and losse that it had receiued at the cruel
and bloudy battell of Varna: Let vs stay our eyes vpon the excellent
vertues of this braue Prince, which is the third of the
three greatest Princes, which Phillip de Commines saith, had raigned
at one time (a season which did produce but meane things) and
let vs turne them a little away from the first, who is now dying, and
is no more but a sad and lamentable image of the ruines of life.
Mathias Huniades or Coruin, was second sonne to Iohn Huniades,
a great Noble-man of Valachia,Commendation of Mathias Corui^us King of Hungary. who after the death of Vladislas
King of Poland and Hungary, slaine at the battle of Varna, was
chosen at the age of twenty yeares, by the common consent of the
Hungarians to be Lieutenant generall of the Realme.Of all the battels betwixt the Christians and Turkes, that of Varna was the most memorable in loss^: It continued three daies and three nights, the victory which seemed to fauor the Christians in the beginning, t^rned from then, and Ladislaus King of Hungary was slaine there, tbe 20. of Neue^ber. 1444.
He had forces in field, courage and opportunity to climbe higher
and to make himselfe King, but he would keepe himselfe in this
estate and preserue the Crowne for Ladislaus sonne to Albert of
Austria, and to Elizabeth daughter to Sigismond King of Hungary.
The Emperour Fredericke drew him vnto him, after the death
of his father, to bring him vp. The Hungarians demanded him, and
vpon the Emperours refusall to deliuer him, Coruin did ouer-runne
the Country of Austria, Stiria, and Carinthia, filled them with fire
and bloud, expelled the Bohemians out of the Townes which they
held in Hungary, and restored Ladislaus in his capitall Citty to his
fathers Throne, at the age of 12. yeares. This great seruice deserued
an equall guerdon, but as suspitions, iealousies, and slanders, are
plants which grow of themselues in the Courts of Princes: Huniades
made trial how hard it is for great vertues to be free from them,
and to be long happy by the onely conduct of wisedome.Suspitions and de^ractions in the Courts of Princes not onely hurt the against whom they are made, but them that inuent the^ an^ that giue care vnto them. A Prince should giue no (...) eare vnto them, especially when it concernes those whom he may not punish, but he must forget the great seruices which he hath (...).
Vertue was in this braue courage, as the Iuy which ruines the
wall that holds it vp: Glory which is the fruite of vertue made the
Tree to wither, and this reputation, grounded vpon his merites,
stirred vp enuy against him, and enuy framed slander, a monster of
hell,Slander worse then hell. more curell then hell it selfe, which torments onely the wicked,
but she doth cruelly afflict Innocents: There was nothing in
him that could offend it but the greatnesse of his merits, and seruices,
which made him to be esteemed theThe History giues this commendation to Iohn Coruin. Huius and felicitas tyrannorum impetus repressi^, velut obiecta moles, exundans flumen. Nec quisquam regum, aut ducu^ res maiores and Europae vtili^res aduersus Tu^ca^ gessit. This mans felicity did suppresse the fury of Tyrants, like a banke cast vp against an ouer-flowing Riuer: Neither hath any King or Captain done greater matters, nor more profitable for Europe, against the Turke. Hercules of Hungary, and
the rampire of Europe, for he alone had presented his head, like a
strong rampire, against those furious torrents Amurath and Mahomet,

Vlric Earle of Cilia being incensed for that hee had broken
the designes of his ambition in Dalmatia, suggested matter against
him to Ladislaus a yong Prince, who beleeued easily that such a
courage would not conteine it selfe like to his other subiects, and
that an authority which is excessiue is not safe: Death freed him
from this slander, but the Calumniator continued it against his
children,The continuance of a great power which is aboue his condition that holds it, is not sure. Nunquam satis fida potentia vbi nimia. That power is neuer safe that is ouer-great. Tacit. Ladislaus and Mathias who smarted for it; The first not
able to endure the insolency and pride of the Earle of Cilia, fell to
strange termes with him, and from words to the sword, and slew
him. The King was much amazed at so hardy an act against the
chiefe of his seruants, and from that time he resolued to be reuenged,
but hatching his reuenge vnder a faigned forgetfulnesse, hee
sware to Temisvuar vpon the Sacrament neuer to remember it, and
for a greater proofe of his loue he presented him with a robe of
Scarlet embroidered with Gold: hee caused Ladislaus and Mathias
to come to Buda, vnder colour to giue vnto Ladislaus a charge for
the execution of a great designe, and the conduct of a mighty Army
against the Turke, and to Mathias the place of Liuetenant
generall of the Realme. They went rashly, not considering how
their father had sometimes aduised them not to trust an incensed
Prince.Two brethren which thinke they haue offended a Prince, should not suffer themselues to be taken together. The King not thinking himselfe bound to hold his word
vnto a subiect who had so much offended him,When the Prince holdeth his word with them that haue offended him, he addeth much glory to his reputation. caused Ladislaus
head to be cut off.Cruelty of Ladislaus King of Hungary.
God did shew vpon the point of this cruell execution the innocency
of him that was executed, and that as this Prince had confounded
his accusers outwardly, so he had liued in such sort as hee
felt no accusation in his soule.To present ones selfe to death without amazement, is the triumph of his innocency, who feelleth no accusation within him, and is not confounded with that which is done outwardly: Sic vixi vt accusatorem exterius non timeam vtina^ sic vixissem vt intra me ipsam accusatorem conscientiam non haberem. I haue liued so as I feare no outward accuser, I would I had liued so as I had not my conscie^ce within me to accuse mee. Greg. They bring him to the place of execution
with his hands bound, and attired in that robe which the
King had giuen him: he kneeles downe, recommends his soule to
God, and stretcheth forth his necke to receiue death: The hang-man
gaue him three blows and made him to fall flat to the ground,
yet he rose againe although he were bound, and with all the force
of his voyce and soule,Death of Ladislous Coruin. called vpon God, the witnesse of his innocency:
at the fourth and fift blow the Executioner made an end
of him: Ladislaus seeing that this death had wounded the hearts of
the greatest of his Realme, and that he was not safe amongst them,
retired into Bohemia, and led Mathias with him.
The friends of Count Vlric seeing him conducted to prison
mocked at him,Mathias Coruin a Prisoner at Prague. saying; That it was not the way to make himselfe to be
crowned King, as he had proiected. The fire of this great courage
A generous and couragious spirit cannot endure an offence or wrong, for any accident that doth oppresse him. which burnt incessantly (though couered vnder the ashes of this
misfortune) answered; That if he were a King, he would cause their
wickednesse to be punished after another manner. These two brethren
did serue for an example to reason, which assures how dangerous a
thing it is to trust a Prince that is yong, powerfull, offended, and ill
aduised. He did not long enioy this reuenge, for soone after being
at Prague he was poisoned by a Lady, incensed for that he had left
her to marry Magdaline daughter to King Charles the seuenth.

As soone as Michaell Zilasius brother to Mathias mother, was aduertised
of this change, and that George Poguebrac entreated Mathias
courteously, he assembled all his friends, and came to the Estates
held at Pesta, accompanied with 20000. men where he demanded
audience: He represented the great seruices of Count Iohn Huniades,Propositions at the Estates of Hungary.
who by his valour and courage had purchased the name of the
Lightning and Thunder of the Turkes,Iohn Huniades defended Hungary against Amurath and Mahomet: Hee repulsed Mahomet from the siege of Belgrade: The History saith that he was called Fulmineus terrur Turcorum: The lightning terrour of the Turkes. he complaines of the ingratitude
wherwith he had bene rewarded, and the vnworthy vsage
of his children; forcing some to pitty, and others to acknowledge
those great merits: whe^ as he saw their minds wauering, he thought
it not fit to do things by halues; The people must be taken at their
word, and opinions are like vnto peeces of coine, which although
they be scarce currant, yet are accounted so if they haue course. Resolutions
which are taken in such assemblies are not alwaies grounded
vpon the knowledge of that which is, but of that which is maintained
to be: He caused them which had the authority, to say that
Hungary could not be without a King, and that they could not chuse
a better then Mathias: That if the Election might not be done willingly,
he was there to haue him crowned by force, and saying those
words he drew out his Cimeterre, which he sware not to sheath
againe vntill a resolution were taken conformable to his.Mathias Coruinus chosen King of Hungary. The Estates
of Hungary said, that they should not loose any time to seek
another Prince,It is easy for the sonne to mount to honors when as he finds that his father hath prepared the way. and that they would not desire one better known,
more generous, nor of a better Race: Finally, they declared him
King of Hungary.
The aduice of this Election was carried speedily to George Poguebrac,
King of Bohemia, who was at supper, Mathias sitting at the
lower end of the table, hauig read the letter, he caused him to come
and sit aboue him;To go from a prison to a royalty, from great misery to a supreme honour, are the effects of GODS Prouidence and bounty, who rayseth the humble and throwes downe the proud. Mathias was much amazed, his condition made
him to dobut that which he vnderstood not, and his thoughts were
obscured with the variety of false immaginations. After supper Poeguebrac
told him what had hapened, saluteth him and embraceth him
as king of Hungary, and entreateth him to loue him as his brother;
Mathias promiseth it, and their promises were confirmed by his
marriage with Katherine, daughter to Poguebrac, with whom hee
caused him to be conducted into Hungary.
He beganne to triumph as soone as to raigne, for to fight and vanquish
was all one vnto him. At one time being followed by his
owne forces, which were greater in courage and discipline then in
number,These three qualities were eminent in Iohn Huniades, Valiant, Wise, and Generous, Ducum omnium (saith the History) qui cum Turcis arma contulerunt illotempore cla^issimus, solers* ac sagax in prospiciendis, patiens in expectandis, acer in persequendis rerum occasionibus, atque in ipsis rebus vrgendis pertinax, in conficiendis felix, ac fortunatus. Of all Commanders which had made warre against the Turke, hee was at that time the most famous; watchfull to fore-see, patient in expecting, swift in embracing, resolute in pursuing all occasions, and happy in effecting them. He did gloriously end three great enterprises, the one
against the Emperour Fredericke, whom he forced to yeeld him that
which he held of the Crowne of Hungary; the second against the
Bohemians, whose factions and conspiracies he ouerthrew, and the
third against Mahomet the 2. to whom he gaue many occasions to
think that the valour, conduct, and generosity of Iohn Huniades his
father were reuiued in him.

He recouered Iaisse,Exploits of Mathias Coruin^s. and seuen and twenty Castles thereabouts,
he past the riuer of Saue, entred into the higher Misia, and in two
assaults seized vpon Zerbenic, where are those goodly Mines of
siluer: he expelled Suela, that famous thiefe out of Bohemia, pacified
the seditions of Transiluania, punished them that were the
Authors,Punishment which is applied fitly, and seuerely done vpon the head of a conspiracy, offends few, and spares many. who had made Iohn, Earle of S. Georges, King; and besieged,
burnt, and ruined Romansarre. The flames of the fire of his
Iustice, did amaze all Moldauia: all the furies came out of Hell to
follow his Armie, and to reuenge the iniuries of Christendome
vpon those Infidell Prouinces. A warre which was all cruelty, and
a cruelty which was all iustice; victory which is alwayes insolent,
and especially in ciuill warres,Pitty nor Mederation doe not alwayes purchase fauour in a Conquerours heart, they are forced somtimes to giue place vnto liberty, and therefore Tully saith, that victoria ciuilib* bellis se^per est insolens, Victory is alwayes insolent in ciuill warres. had no pitty, but of those which
had no more need: he had rather ruine Towns to saue soules, then
to saue Townes, and ruine soules: he left in all places, such markes
of the furies and terrors of the warre, that euen at this day the
Countrey laments the effects, and numbers the examples. That
which the sword did spare, was consumed by fire and famine.
And therfore the name of Mathias was at that time a terror to the
Women and Children of Hungary,His valour and conduct who in all occasions performing
the duty of a Generall, and yet somtimes running the hazard
of a Souldier, as if his body had bin borrowed; he was wounded
in the thigh with an arrow. He did so diminish the number of
his enemies, as the prouince was assured, and his Armie rich with
spoyles.Mathias is taxed with ingratitude, for that hee had made warre aagainst George King of Bohemia, who had giuen him liberty, and his daughter in marriage. This warre was vnfortunate to either, and preiudiciall to Christendome.
Being returned to Agria, he came to Buda, where he receiued
letters of intreaty from Pope Pius the second, and from the Emperour
Fredericke to make warre against the Hussits, the which he vndertooke.He makes warre against the Hussites.
It was not his only obedience to the head of the Church
which drew him to this warre, nor any desire to triumph ouer the
truth, ambition had a great share in it, the desire of a newe
Crowne made him forget the good vsage which he had receiued
in his imprisonment from Poguebrac, and dispensed him of those
bonds which cannot bee dissolued by death, nor discharged but
by life. Great enterprises are not scrupulous, and if the lawes of
piety are to be violated, it is to content those of ambition. They
write that these two Kings made warre ten yeares,MATHIAS King of Hungary, and GEORGE, King of Bohemia, made warre tenne yeares for Religion; And in tbe end they agreed, that his Religion should be the better, whose Foole did vanquish the other at fist. and that the
combat of their Iesters, fighting at fists, reconciled them. In the
end Mathias dispossessed George Poguebrac of the prouinces of Morauia,
Silesia, and Lusatia, and death of his Crowne.
Mathias caused himselfe to be proclaimed and crowned King of
Bohemia,Mathias crowned King of Bohemia. and Marques of Morauia. Some Bohemians refused to
obey him, and framed a faction vnder the name of Ladislaus, son
to Casimir, King of Polonia, whom they did acknowledge for
their King. Mathias came thither, and prest them so eagerly, and
intreated them with such rigor and seuerity, as all the Townes

submitted themselues to his will, to haue his peace and pardon:
These long and and troublesome warres had so wasted his treasure,
as hee was forced to make vse of the Clergy goods. The Prelates
of Hungary opposed themselues, and the chiefe Noble-men
of the Realme ioyned with them,This conspiracy was so stro^g and violent, that of 75 Tribes of the realme, there were but 9 that co^tinued in their first obedience. conspiring together to expell
him the Realme.Nobility of Hungary discontented. Hitherto hee had made knowne what loue and
force might doe; now hee shewes himselfe so wife and temperate,
as returning into the way of the duety of a good Prince, he doth
easily reduce his people to that of good subiects:That Prince is wise which doth not disdaine to giue some satisfaction to his subiects whom he hath offended, especially when he feares a greater mischiefe. And by this
meanes many who had cast themselues into his enemies Armie,
returned vnto him. Ladislaus beeing coopt vp in Nitria, was
forced to make an Accord with Mathias, and to returne into
Poland.
Casimir his father apprehending this shamfull retreat, and taking
his part of the Affront, reserued the whole reuenge to himselfe;
hee leuied an Armie of threescore thousand fighting men, Polonians,
Bohemians, Russians and Tartarians, and entred into Morauia
and Silesia, to recouer that which Poguebrac had lost. The
first beginnings were so fauourable, as not regarding the inconstancy
of fortune, he suffered his thoughts to wander in the common
error of Princes, who neglect the storme, during the calme of
their affaires.In great designes Princes thinke on^y what they should doe when they haue executed them, and cast not their eyes vpon that which may hinder the execution, and which as Polybius saith, hath neede of great prouidence Polyb. lib. 11.
Mathias held it not fit for his reputation nor courage to attend
them, hee goes to meete them with eight thousand horse, and hauing
furnished the Towne of Vratislauia with victuals and munition,
he lodged himselfe in the sub-vrbs, and there attendeth them
with a resolution not to hazard any thing.A Prince shold not stay vntil his enemy come vnto him, and force him to feed him at his charge. Euery day they made
Sallies and Skirmishes to the Polonians losse, who neuer returned
but with griefe for some prisoners taken, but many more
slaine. And to shew that hee did little esteeme their Attempts,
and that hee could loose little, and get much, he caused scaffolds
of Wood to bee built vpon the Walles for the chiefe Ladies
and Gentlewomen of the Towne,It is a great aduantage for a Generall of an Army, when hee is assured that victory brings him great profit and great effects, and that the losse cannot equal the gaine. and for those chiefly who were
not made but to bee beloued. They beheld the Knights who
made Sallies vpon their Enemies, and cast themselues couragiously
into dangers for their sakes. At their returne they commended
their valours, and encouraged them to continue. If they
were hurt, they were the first that drest them, if they returnd victors,
they presented them the prisoners Armes and colours which they
had taken.
The Princes of Germany desiring to diuert this storme, and fearing
that this fire, kindled vpon the Frontier, would flye further, laboured
to quench it: Ernestus, Duke and Elector of Saxony, and
Iohn, Marques of Brandebourg,The courages of these 3 Princes were vanquished by the eloquence of the Marques of Bra^deburg, who in the Assembly of three Kings, of Casimir, King of Polonia; Ladislaus, King of Bohemia, and Mathias King of Hungry, discoursed with such grauity and vehemency, vt prae admiratione adstantes obstupuerint. Ita tune, virtute Ernesti Saxonis and eloquenti^ Ioannis Marchionis haec or a Germaniae magno discrimine liberata, redijt ad tranquilitatem, That the assistants were amazed with admiration. So then by the vertue of Ernest of Saxony, and the eloquence of the Marques Iohn, that coast of Germany was freed from great danger, and recouered peace* made an Army of six thousand

horse, and presented themselues before Vratislauia, protesting
that they came thither to no other end, but to set vpon him that
would not liue in peace. So by their meanes a peace was concluded
the 12. of February, in the yeare 1475. and Silesia was diuided
betwixt Ladislaus and Mathias.Mathias makes war against the Emperour
This war being ended, he began an other against the Emperour,
he besieged Bohemia, and forst the Emperour to demand a peace.
Pope Sixtus, and the Senate of Venice (for that they would not incense
the Emperour) tooke from him the pensions which they had
giuen him, to the end that the Emperour should not think that they
fauoured his designes;Death of Mathias Huniades. yet for all this Mathias did not forbeare to
presse the Emperour to effect that which he had promised him; and
seeing that hee thought to entertaine him with the vanity of his
words, hee began the warre againe, and besieged and tooke Hambourg
vpon the confines of Austria and Hungary.
Mahomet thinking to make his profit of this diuision, ouer-ran the
Countries of Dalmatia, Carinthia and Friuly, and carried away a
great number of slaues; but they were set at liberty, and they that
led them cut in peeces, being incountred by Mathias Captaines.The portrait of of (...) Prince makes him of a higher sature then the ordinary of men, open and quicke eyes, his eye-browes eleuated, a bigge head, a faire face, and of a good complexion a large forehead and flaxen haire.
The Emperour Fredericke sought a peace of him; the which taking
no effect, there was a truce concluded. Soone after MathiasHee that hath written the History of the kings of Hungary, ends the discourse of Mathias life in these tearmes: In somma non si puo diro altro di vantagio: se non ch'e vanita il persuadersi, che altre personnagio si trouasse alhora in tutte lc parti pareggiante l'inuitto and glorioso Matthia Coruino: se l'ambitione d'vna principessa Aragonesse non lo hauesse tyrannegiato. To conclude, there can bee no more said, but that it is a vanity to think that there can bee any one sound comparable to the inuincible and glorious Mathias Coruinus: if the ambition of a Princesse of Arragon had not tyrannized ouer him. died
at Vienna in Austria of an Apoplexie, in the yeare 1490. being 47.
yeares old. He had taken to his second wife, Beatrix daughter to
Ferdinand, King of Naples, by whom he had not any children, suffering
himselfe to be transported with her ambitious humors, enemies
to all rest.
The commendation which is giuen him of a great Prince, and a
great Captaine, doth not blemish that to haue made the Sciences
and learning to flourish againe, and to haue fauoured them that
made profession thereof, and among others, Iohn of Monroyall,
the Ornament of the Mathematickes: He replenished his library
with the rarest bookes hee could finde, out of the which are come
some fragments of Polybius, and Diodorus Siculus.A Prince which affects glory, esteemes them that are the Trumpets. The most valiant haue done things worthy to be written, and haue written things worthy to be read, Corn. Sulla, Caesar, Augustus, Claudius, Traian. Adrian. If after the death
of Mahomet they had put Zizimi into his hands, as he desired and
besought the Pope, he had ouer-throwne the tyranny of the Ottomans:
for Bajazeth vpon these apprehensions, sought to be at peace
with him; but the Pope would haue him make warre against the
Hussites of Bohemia.
Let vs returne and see what Lewis doth in his sad and melancholike
thoughts of that day which must bee the Iudge of all the rest: he
hath giuen an end to all his designes, and the law of Nature will
haue him end: he^ doth not liue but by intreaty, and the dayes
which remaine serue onely but to the end he should husband them
that they might profite those which hee hath past and lost. His
Seruants comfort him, and his Physitians haue no meanes

to cure him: they entertaine him with vaine hopes, and diuert his
thoughts from any thing that might augment his waywardnesse:
And for that they told him, that a Northerly winde, which did
then reigne, made mens bodies sickly, and did hurt the fruits, he
commanded the Parisians to goe in Procession to S. Denis, to cause
it to cease.The Chronicle saithn, that to appea this, Northerly winde, all the Estates of Paris went diuers dayes in procession to S. Denis in the moneth of February, and that the same prayers were made in May following for the kings health.
But he was more troubled with distrust:Distrust of Lewis 11. It is a torment vnto him,
in comparison whereof all his other afflictions seeme light: Hee
feares his sonne should deale with him, as he had done with Charles
the seuenth his father, and that he would bee the head of a faction.
When as Peter, Duke of Bourbon his son-in-law, entred into his
chamber, he would see if they of his traine were not armed. Hee
liued in as great feare amongst his owne followers, as a passenger
can doe in a thicke Forrest which is haunted with Theeues and
Murderers.The Prince is happy which distrusteth not his subiects, but can sleep safely with them, yea among the woods, as Eberhard, Duke of Wittemberg said.
Hee feareth lest they should aduance his dayes, that the old factions
would reuiue: In former times hee dissembled all, now hee
distrusts all; he doth not remember what was past, but to be reuenged
of offences: he doubts his son-in-law, distrusts his daughter,
and feares his sonne. And to the end the weakenesse of his minde
should not bee iudged by the indisposition of his body; and to
make it knowne that they be not the legges,Authority and Seuerity should support the contempt of olde age: the Empeperour Seuerus being full of the gout, the great men of his Count contemned him, and gaue the Title of Emperour vnto his sonne: Seuerus caused himselfe to bee carried vnto the Pallace, and commanded those proo^d heades which contemned him, to bee cut off, who being prostrate at his feete to demaund pardon, hee said vnto them, Learne that it is the head, which commausndes, and not the legges. but the minde which
commaundes and reignes, hee makes diuers Ordonances, which
make the people thinke that they cannot come but from a sound
iudgement, and a firme and vigorous disposition: for although
that these desires seemed to haue ridiculous causes, yet they proceede
from a great and constant resolution to end his life in
action.
But he was no more but a walking Anatomy, and euery man
wondred how hee could liue* Philip de Commines saith, that in the
voyages which hee made to diuers places after his first sickenesse
at the Forges of Chinon, His great Heart carried him. Now hee
hath not any about him but two or three men of base condition,
and bad fame, who after his death were presently chased from
Court: hee did often change the Groome of his Chamber, and
all other sorts of seruants; and to excuse this change, hee said, that
it was one of the pleasures of nature. Hee did not suffer them to
speake vnto him of any Affaires, but such as could not bee
dispatched but by his Commaundement. A Prince in his perfect
health should not bee troubled nor importuned with euery
thing.Whilest that a Prince busieth his head about matters of small consequence, the most important passe away and are forgotten. It is not fit to trouble a prince with all sorts of Affaires, nor to binde him to play the part of a Chauncellor or President. Maius aliquid and excellentius a principe postulatur, Some greater matter, and more excellent is expected from a Prince. Tacit.
Humane remedies failing to cure him, they had recourse to
extraordinary, and did things which the originall calleth strange.
Philip de Commines saith, That Pope Sixtus the fourth being informed,
that through deuotion he desired to haue the Corporall whereon S. Peter
sang Masse, he sent it presently vnto him, with many other Reliques,
the which were returned backe againe.Of this, and for that the Turke s^^t to offer him the Rediques which were ^ound at Constantinople, Phil de Commines concluddes, that this Prince was estemed and honoured throughout the world.
It seemeth that Philip de Commines doth great wrong vnto the
memory and courage of such a Prince, when hee saith, that neuer
man feared death so much, or did so many things to thinke to auoid
it; and who in the apprehensions he had that they would aduance
it, he neither trusted sonne, daughter, nor son-in-law: what
a madnesse, to offend Nature to auoid that which shee hath ordained?
What a blindnesse, to thinke to resist time, which carrieth away
all? Turne thy head of all sides, thou shalt see the ruines
of Townes, and why not of Men? Behold Megara before thee,
Aegina at thy backe, Pyrea on the right hand, and Corinth on
thy left. What is all this but ruine, contempt, solitarinesse and
horror?Sulpitius comforts Tully by the ruines of these foure Townes which were sometimes most flourishing, saying, Hemnos honumculi indignamur si quis nostrum interijt cum vni loco tot appidorum cadauera proiecta sint. Are wee poore men angry if any of vs dye, when a^ the carkasses of so many Townes are cast into one place?
They told him, that in Calabria there liued one called Francis
of Paulo, an Hermite of an admirable holinesse and austerity of
life; who did great miracles: he neuer ceased vntill he had obtained
leaue from the Pope to draw him into France, thinking that
by his presence and prayers he might prolong Life, and recoile
Death. This holy man had not purchased the reputation of sanctity
by false Titles: he had made profession from his InfancieFrancis of Paulo borne of meane parentage, profest himselfe an Hermite from his youth. Hee went out of his Hermitage to build a little Church neere vnto Paulo, where hee layd the first foundations of his Order vpon humility, calling them Minimes that shold make profession, and vpon austerity, binding them by a fourth vow to a ^perpetuall lent. He died at Tours being 93 yeares old. by an
incredible humility and austerity of life. God had giuen him the
gift of Prophesie, and had vsed his hands to make his power
knowne. He had past the straight of Sicile vpon his Cloke spred
vpon the Waues, the Maister of the Barke refusing to receiue
him, and reiecting him as an vnprofitable burthen. The King sent
men expresly to Naples to haue him come: hee past by Rome,
where he was honoured of all men for the holinesse of his life. Entring
into the Kings Chamber, hee cast himselfe at his feet, intreating
him to prolong his dayes: he would willingly haue had the
Sunne descend ten degrees, and the shadowes of his Diall to haue
gone backe* Philip de Commines doth not report the Answere of
this Hermite, and hath depriued vs of so iust a curiosity, hee
saith onely, That hee answered as a wise Man should doe. Hee went
not with that ostentation which we finde in them that are learned:
for hee was such a one as Saint Francis desired his Religious men,
should bee more skilfull to pray then to reade,Francis of Assise said, that hee had rather haue his religious men skilfull in praying then in reading. hee had a
sweete, pleasing, and easie speech, and his language was Italian,
not common, or much knowne vnto the French, which made him
to bee admired. Wee must beleeue, that this light of the Spirit
of God, shining clearely in a minde purged from worldly affaires,
As the sonne is seene more plainly in a cleerre water then in mire, so the diuine light shines more in spirits that are cleansed from worldly affaires then in those that are alwayes troubled with the cares thereof. made him speake words, if not altogether Diuine, yet at

the least,Flatterers pleasing to Princes. free from pleasing and flattery, which in these extremities,
doe alwayes abuse Princes; making them beleeue that they
are farre from death, although it hang vpon their lippes. There
are many which assure them that they should hope for more
good then they euer had; but there are fewe which let them
know, that they should feare greater torments then they haue
euer endured. It is lawfull for the Physitian of the body toPlato in the third Book^ of his Common-weale, giues physitians leaue to lye, and to promise health vnto the sicke, even in their extre^^t, to (...) the comfort. lye
vnto his Patient, but he that hath the cure of Soules, neither may
nor ought.
God did much fauour this Prince, to send him a man of this
condition to helpe him to dye; who among many great qualities,
necessary to this Office, euen towards such a King, might
speake freely vnto him, without dissembling, or flattery: For
Princes in these extreamities haue need of men which should
not bee like vnto the sonnes of Zebedee, who spake of Scepters
and Honours, when as Christ discoursed of the Crosse: They
must let them know, that the world, and all that is great and admirable
in the world, is vnworthy of the soule, which is not
made for the world, but the world is made for it.The health of the body depends of the soule. The soule (saith Chrysostome) was not made for the body, but the body for the soule, who so neglects the first, and is too carefull of the second, looseth both. That beeing
of a substance exempt from corruption, and by consequence,
from death, cannot haue an obiect disproportionable to her power,
nor can delight in mortall and corruptible things; and being
the ImageAs a Tryangle is not fill^a with a Tryangle, s nothing is able to fill the heart but God. Caeteris omnibus occupart potest, repl^ti autem non potest, capacem enim Dei, quicquid Deo minus est non implebit. It may well be busied with other things, but it cannot (...) filled: whatsoeuer is capable of God, nothing can fill it that is (...) then God. of God, there is not any thing hath reference to her eternall
essence, but her Immortality. God had no beginning, and
it hath hath no ending: God is for euer, and man desires nothing
more then to continue his being. The forme of his vnderstanding
is Truth, and there is no other Truth, but God. The great
world hath but one sunne, the lesser but one soule, and both haue
but one God.
This good man vndertooke to make this Prince capable of
two things, the hearing whereof is difficult to men, and Kings are
very hardly taught: to loue God, and to contemne the world. The
world entertaines their minde with so many things which men
think worthy of loue, as they cannot lodge any other affection in
their hearts, and do not thinke of the loue wherewith the Angels
liue and burne, being the fire of the Intellectuall world, as the Sun
is of the coelestiall, and the Elementary of ours. Princes in stead of
louing God, loue themselues, they finde that all is made for them,
they dispose so absolutely of all the beauties and pleasures of the
world, as they desire no other: they haue vnder their powers so
many great and goodly spirits, as they haue no will to change their
abode, to see them of the other world;One demaunded of Cercidas the Megapolitaine if hee dyed willingly. Why not, said hee* For after my death I shall see those great men, Pythagoras among the Phylosophers, Hecateus among the Historians, Homer among the Poets, and Olympus among the Musitians. Ael. lib. 13. de Var. Hist. all is made for them, nothing
is spoken against them: for them the fish cut the waues, the
birds beate the aire, beasts march vpon the earth, and men runne,

toyle, sweat and kill themselues; wherefore when in the end conscience
commands them to raise their thoughts towards the place
whither their face is turned, to mount towards their beginning, to
breathe nothing but eternity, to contemne the fumes of the world,
and to admire the light of Heauen, they haue their heads so heauy,
and their eyes so dazled, as they cannot vnderstand, that Hee
that loueth the world, the loue of God is not in him. They eye cannot, at
one instant, bohold both heauen and earth.
The exhortations of Francis de Paulo did cast some seeds of the
loue of God into this Princes heart; but the cares of the world
were the birds which carried it away, and did smother it in the
thornes of affaires. The fruits of a slow piety, which doth flourish
but in the Winter of mans life, doe neuer ripe well. It must bee
manured in due time:That piety comes late when it hath not recourse to God, but at need. Byon had vanquished Athens, and had poysoned many spirits with the impiety of Theodorus, his maister being reduced in the end to languish of a great infirmity, hee began to acknowledge, that there were Gods, but it was to cure him. A mad man (said be that writ his life) not to beleeue that there were Gods, but whe^ he had need of their helpe. Diog. Laert. lib. 4. the same God which would haue fire
burning alwayes vpon his Altar, will that fire burne continually
in a Princes Heart. It was sometime kindled well in that
of Lewis, but the first winde of worldly affaires blew it away.
His heart had good inclinations when as necessity and afflictions
prest it; but hee suffered them to wither at the first
Sunne-shine of prosperity. A mischiefe which is naturall to the
fragilitie of men, who doe no good, but for the feare of euill,
and make themselues voluntary slaues to things whereunto they
should command, and which are made for them* There is not
any man but would blush at the reproach which his owne conscience
may giue him, that if hee had giuen him the tenth part of
the time which he hath imployed for his flesh, it should bee much
better.This reproch is like vnto that of Marcus Varro, in his Satyrs. Si quantum operae sumpsisti vt tuus pistor bonum faceret panem, eius duodecimam Philosophiae dedisse tempore bonus iampridem esses factus. If thou hadst spent but the twelfth part of that time in philosophy which thou didst to haue thy Baker make good bread thou hadst in time been made a good man.
Lewis then following the first traine of his life, seemed to haue
more Deuotion then Conscience, more trembling with superstition
then constant in Piety,Alexander was strooke with this infirmity, who hauing liued impiously, dyed superstitiously. A. his death there was none seene about him but Diuines and South-sayers, who made prodigies of the lightest things. more desirous of the health of
his body, then of his soule: for hauing made a prayer vnto Saint
Eutropeus to recommende vnto him the one and the other,
Claudius of Seissell said, that hee caused the word Soule to bee
put out, saying; That it was sufficient if the Saint made him to
haue corporall health without importuning him with so many
things.
Hee was growne so confident that his holy man would
cure him, as hee still sent to Plessis to tell him, that it consisted
onely in him to prolong his life: The more hee trusted this
good man, the more he distrusted all his seruants.Such extraordinary guards and distrusts were not without cause: for as Phil. de Commines saith, some had an intent to enter into Plessis, and to dispatch matters as they thought good, for that there was nothing dispatched; but they durst not attempt it, wherein they did wisely, for there was good order taken. The Castle was
well guarded, the Walles were fortified with great barres of Iron.
The guard stood Centinell in the Ditches, hauing command to
shoot at any one that should aproch before the gates were opened

Hee would willingly haue drawne the ladder after him going to
bed: hee daily changed his seruants, and depended vpon the
austere humors of Iohn Cottiere his Physitian, to whom hee gaue
monethly ten thousand Crownes, not daring to refuse him any
thing, and promising whatsoeuer hee desired, so as hee would
chase away that fearfull apparitionAlexander Tyrant of Pher^a liued in such distrust, as the Chamber wherin he was accumtowed to lye, was kept by two terrible dogges, hauing a ^^dder to ascend vnto it. of Death, at the name whereof
hee shrunke downe betwixt the sheetes. This Physitian did
sometimes braue him, saying; I know well, that one of these mornings
you will chase me away as you haue done others; but I sweare by God, you
shall not liue eight dayes after. This poore Prince in stead of vsing
him as Maximin did his,Maximin the Emperour commanded his physitions to be slain for that they could not cure his wounds. gaue him whatsoeuer he would, Bishopprickes,
Benefices, and Offices. The holy man of Calabria on the
other side watcht, fasted, and prayed continually for the King, neither
was it euer possible to diuert him from the thoughts of his pouerty.
The King could not giue enough to the one, and could not
force the other to receiue any thing.Antipather King of Macedon said, that be had two friends at Athens, Phocian and Demades, The one hee could neuer content with giuing, and the other he could neuer moue to receiue any thing that bee offered him. Plut.
He sometimes attired himselfe richly,Curiosity of Lewis the 11th. contrary to his custome,
but it was in a Gallery like to a flash of lightening, and as one
would say, I am yet here; or by his rarenesse to procure admiration
to Maiesty and Grauity, like to to the Kings of Egipt;The ancient Kings of Aegipt shewed themselues seldome vnto the people, and alwayes after some new^ manner, carrying sometimes fi^e vpon their heads, and sometimes a bird, or a branch, to moue admiration. hee
had not any in his Court, but his Physitian and maister Oliuer.
Euery man began to bee weary of this solitarinesse. The French
desire to see, and to presse neere their King: They doe not
Court it in vaine, and doe not serue an inuisible maister: Hee
ordained diuers businesses, both within and without the Realme,
sending to fetch diuers things out of farre Countreyes for ostentation
and rarenesse;The more rare and vnknowne things that Princes haue, the more apparant is their greatnesse, and therefore they cause many beasts to bee kept for shew, as Tygres, Lyons, and Ounces. as little Lyons in Affricke, Rayne-Deere
and Buffes in Sweathland and Denmarke, Allans in Spaine,
Mules from Sicile, and little Grey-houndes out of Brittanie:
Hee changed his Officers, cashiered his Captaines, tooke away
their pensions, and all to bee spoken of, fearing they should hold
him to be dead, although it bee very hard to conceale the death
of a great King.There is nothing can bee lesse concealed then the death of a prince. They might say of his designes, as Stratonicus
did of the Rhodians buildings: That he vndertooke things
as if hee had beene Immortall: for hee feared, that in doing
nothing, the people would bee curious to know what hee did,
not apprehending so much the hatred of his subiects as their contempt.Stratonicus said, that the Rhodians did ^ate as if they should dye soone, and did build as if they had beene immortall. Plut.
In these last and extreame languishings hee caused the peace to
be proclaimed at Paris,Publication of the peace. as the Archduke had done at Brussels: for
it had bin said, that it should be published in the Courts of Parliament
of France, and in the chiefe Townes vnder the Archdukes obedience,
and sworne by the Abbots, Prelats and Noblemen of the
countries of Artois and Burgondy, to the end it might be known that it

was not onely made with the Princes to continue during their
liues, but with the Princes and people. The Princesse Margaret
This marriage was so displeasing vnto the Arch-duke, as Phillip de Co^mines saith, he would willingly haue taken her f^om them if he could, before she went out of the Country, but they of Gand had giuen her a good Guard. was brought to Hedin by the Lady of Rauestien, base daughter
to Duke Phillip. The Earle of Beaujeu, and the Lady Anne of
France his wife receiued her, and conducted her to Amboise
whereas as the Dauphin was: Shee made her entry into Paris in
the beginning of Iune, and was married in Iuly.
The Chronicle reports the pompe of this entry in these termes.
On Monday the second of Iune,Entry of the Lady Dauphin into Paris. about fine of the clocke in the euening,
the Lady Dauphin made her entry into Paris, being accompanied by the
Lady of Beaujeu and the Admirals wife, with other Ladies and Gentlewomen,
and they entred by Saint Dennis gate, whereas were prepared
for her comming three goodly Scaffolds; in the one, and the highest, was
a personage representing the King, as Soueraigne; On the second were
two goodly children, a sonne and a daughter, attired in white Dammaske,
representing the said Dauphin, and the Lady of Flanders; and
in the other vnderneath, were the personages of the Lord of Beaujeu,
and of the Lady his wife; and of either side of the said Personages
were the Armes of the said Lords and Ladies: There were also
foure personages, one of the Husbandmen, another of the Clergy, the
third of Marchandize, and the last of the Nobility, euery of which
made a short speech at her entry.
The marriage being celebrated at Paris, whereunto all the
chiefe Townes of the Realme were inuited, The King would
haue his sonne returne to Amboise, not holding if fit that this new
Sonne should rise before the West of his life. This great reioycing
of all France did but augment his heauinesse, to see himselfe
forced to quit the place vnto his sonne: All the helpes which the
Art of man could inuent were imployed: He caused the holy Oile
to be brought,This Vyall of holy Oile was seene by Philip de Commines vpon the Cupbord in the Kings Chamber, at Plessis, at the houre of his death. Others baue written that the gaue vp the Ghost as it arriued. the Clergy of Paris, the Court of Parliament,
the Vniuersity, and other Companies, went in Procession, the last
day of Iuly 1483. to meete it at Saint Anthonies in the field, it was
lodged that night in the holy Chappell, and the next day passed
on, and was followed with the same company vnto our Lady in
the fields. Phillip de Commines saith, that he had an intent to take
the like vnction that he did at his Coronation: Others haue written
that it was to know the declining of his life, for when the King
is dead, it is empty, and filleth againe miraculously for the Coronation
of a new.
On Monday, the 25. of August, he fell into that extremity of
sickenesse which ended his daies,Last actions of Lewis the eleuenth. and forced him to acknowledge
himselfe, not onely mortall and dying, but as death: At that time
he sent vnto his sonne, all such as came to see him, saying vnto
them: Go vnto my sonne, your King, serue him well: giuing to euery
one some charge to deliuer vnto him, but most confidently to
Stephen de Vers, Baliffe of Meaux, who had bene his Gouernour:
He sent vnto him also his chiefe Officers, the Chancellour with
his Seales, and all his traine, the Captaines and Archers of his

Guard, his Hunts-men and Faulkeners. But his intent was not to
suffer them long there, if hee recouered his health as assuredly as
he felt his courage firme, and his iudgement strong, the braine
not being troubled with the maligne fumes of his infirmity, for he
had a continuall loosenesse: So wee see that the soule in this seperation
of the lodging wherein it hath beene shut, and whereof
it hath great cause to complaine,(...) of the (...) some guest, and the soule complain^s of the body, (...) of a troublesome lodging* Vt qui in alieno habitant multis aguntur in commodis, semperque de aliqua domicilij parte queruntur: Ita animus nunc de capite, nunc de pedibus, nunc de stomacho, nonc aliud de alioqueritur significans se esse non in suo domic^o, sed vnde breui sit emigrandum: As they that dwell in another mans house haue many discommodities and doe still complaine of some part of it: So the soule doth complaine sometimes of the head, of the legs, of the stomacke and other parts, shewing that she is not in her own mansioan, but fro^ whence she must soone depart. Se^. recouereth new strength, by the
ioy which it conceiues to re-enter into this spheare of her rest. She
disposeth (saith a great man of this age) more wisely, and more holily
of all things, fore-seeth more certainely that which is to come,
fore-telleth it and doth prophecy, for that shee beginnes to approach
to her first beginning, to be ioyned againe to that immortall
being, and to participate with the life eternall.
Soone after hee fell into great faintings, which made him to
loose his speech, but he recouered it, to will the Duke of Bourbon
to go vnto the King his sonne, and that hee should haue a care of
him,Commandements extraordinary of the King. charging him with many extraordinarie things, the which
had caused terrible accidents if they had encountred a froward and
difficult spirit: Philip de Commines in this place speakes what hee
thinkes good, and confirmeth his opinion by the euents, Hee gaue
him all the charge and gouernement of the King, and commanded him
that some men should not come neere him, telling him many good and
not able causes, and if the Lord of Beaujeu had obserued his commandements
in euery point (or at least in part, for there were some extraordinary
co^mandements which were not to be kept) and that in the generality be
had obserued the^ better, I think it had been profitable both for the Realme
and himselfe, considering those things which haue since happened.Phi. de Com. doth not^ heere the diu^sio^which was betwixt the Lady Anne of France, and the D. of Orleance, whereof he hath not written any thing in the c^urse of the history: A diuision which caused the Assembly of the Estates at Tours, and then of a league, whose first attempts appeared before Orleance, the second ended in Brittany, by the battell of Saint Aubin the 28. of Iuly 1488. and by the taking of the Duke of Orleans.
This commandement of the King incountering a spirit, which
was milde, tractable, and temperate, had not the effects it should
haue had. Bounty, and mildenesse are sometimes negligent in
matters which require heate, and quickenesse. This Prince was one
of the best of his age, being nothing but mildenesse and courtesie.
The more rare these qualities are in Princes,Humility and courtesie are goodly qualities in great men: Humanitas tam clara in imperatore quam rara est. Nam quum indiscreta felicium predissequa sit superbia, vix cuiquam contingit and abundare fortuna and indigere arrogantia. Cuius quidem ita maiores nostros semper praetesum est, vt grauiorem semper putaue^nt s^ruitutae contemptum. Humanity is as glorious as rare in an Emperour: For as arrogancy is an indiscreeet (...) to fortune, it seldome happens that any one abounds with good fortune and wants arrogancy: The which was alwaies so hatefull to our fore-fathers, as they held contempt more grieuous then seruitude. Lat. Pac. Pan. the more excellent
they are: arrogancy neuer faileth in them who haue no wants,
and pride doth alwaies follow felicity: It is a miracle to see a
great Prince, courteous, milde, and affable. Rome found not
any Surname more odious, for the last of her Kings, then that of
Proud, and comprehended in that word all the vices, for the which
she changed the forme of her gouernment, and supprest the Royalty
in despite of the King; Yet the mildenesse and facillity of this
Prince gaue a great foundation to the troubles which happened for
the Regency of the Realme.

The King had often said in his life time,Lewis the 11. would not haue the^ speake of death vnto him. that in what extremity
soeuer they saw him they should neuer pronounce that word of
death vnto him,These feares which happen at the diss^lution of such sweete company as the body and the soule, cometh not through faihtnes of heart, or want of courage; this word Death; hath drawne words of griefe from the soule of the Son of God, it hath made the heart of the most constant to tre^ble, and the Stoickes haue painted palenes and blushing on the foreheads of many great and valiant Captaines: The greatest courage of the world, wold not willingly go to danger, if he were assured to dye there. finding it too distasting for a Kings eare: Yet
must he be content that she present her selfe, and that she take his
Crowne from his head, as she hath done the Armes, Club, Scepter,
and Sword out of the hands of Achilles, Hercules, Alexander,
and Caesar: They that had charge of his conscience, expected
when he himselfe finding his strength to faile would acknowledge
it. The resolution to signifie this iudgement vnto him, was taken
betwixt a Diuine, his Physition, and Maister Oliuer: They went
roughly unto him, and with small respect, like vnto men which
had added impudencie to the basenesse of their condition, there
speech was after this manner:Indiscretion of the^ that speaks to Lewis the 11. of death. Sir, wee must discharge our consciences,
hope no more in this holy man nor in any other thing, for vndoubtedly
you are a dead man, thinke of your conscience, for there is
no remedy: Euery man spake something briefly, to let him know
that they were all of one accord concerning his death: He answered,
I hope that God will helpe mee; and the flesh desiring to deceiue
the Spirit by a vaine confidence of her forces, and to declare
herselfe openly against the constancy and resolution, which this
last point of life required of him, to make them iudge of his courage,
she made him say, I am not, it may be, so sicke as you thinke: Being
halfe dead he counterfeits himselfe whole; The spirit, body, and
forces faile him, onely dissembling holdeth good: Hee desired rather
to weare in languishing, then couragiously to breake in sunder
the chaine which (although he were a great Prince) held him in
the seruitude of life.Lewis hath had great resemblances in his raigne, and in his life, to the ^umour of Tiberius, his end did also sauour of his. Tiberium iam corpus iam vires nondum dissimulatio deserebat, ide^ animi vigor sermone ac vultu intentus quae-sitae interdum comitate qua^uis manifesta defectione tegebat. Force and strength fayled Tiberius, but not dissembling, the same vigor of the minde with a setled speech and countenance, and a counterfeit courtesie did couer it, although he decayed visibly. Tacit. lib. 6. Annal.
Hee was enuironed with Reliques, and made Barricades of
them, thinking that death should not dare to passe ouer them, and
lay hold of him, he was so often dead, as fiue daies before his
deathTiberius did all he could to conceale his death, it being bruited abroad Caligula thought to enter into the Empire, but behold the dead man demanded meate, and his successour began to quake for feare: Macro who had beene one of his fauourits, seeing him to continue too long, caused him to be smothered with couerings. Macro intrepidus opprimi senem iniectu maltae vestis iubet discedique ab limine. Macro being without feare, commanded that the old man should be smotherd with couerings, and that they should presently go from the dore. newes came to Paris before the accident, by reason of a
fainting: They that were about him held him for dead, and euery
man thought of his owne priuate affaires: But behold sodainely
the dead man called for meate, they saw him reuiue in an instant
hauing a plaine speech, a firme vnderstanding, and a iudgement
such as in the vigour of his age, disposing of many things
for the good of his Estate, as if this fainting of his bodily force
had beene nothing but to suffer his spirit to meditate: saying;
Tell Des Cordes that hee giue ouer the enterprise which wee haue
vpon Callice, least hee incense the English, that hee remaine sixe
monthes with the King my sonne, and that they thinke no more to
make warre against the Duke of Brittany, nor any neighbours to this

Realme for fiue yeares at the least. Hee would haue peace beginne
his new raigne, to the end the Kingmight grow in age, and France
in wealth: I will be interred, said he, at our Lady of Clery, and accompanied
at my funerall by such and such. They told him that the
Kings of France were interred at Saint Dennis,Saint Dennis (...) is the Sep^lch^e of the kings of France Dagobert was the first s^under, and there was interred: The kings predecess^u^s had there Se^ul^^res in d^uers places, Clouis is interred at Sa^nt (...), Childeber^, Chilperi^, and C^o^a^e at S. (...) main d^spres, Clouis or Lewis, at Ch^l^es, Pe^in at Saint Denis, Chorlemanse, at Air La^^ apelle, and their successours haue their Tombes in diuers places, but the greatest number is at Saint Dennis. and that his father
and Grand-fathers were there, It is all one, said he, I will lye
there: Hee had so great a deuotion to the Virgin Mary, had
made so many vowes vnto her, and had receiued such visible effects
of her intercession, as he would haue her Temple the depositary of
his bones.
He fell extremely sicke on Monday, and although that no man
thought that he should haue continued vntill the next day, yet hee
said, That the good Lady would make him liue vntill Saturdy: It was
true, his prayer returned into his owne bosome; he ended the
weeke,Death of Lewis the eleuenth. the last day of his life was on Saturday, the thirtieth of August,
at eight of the clocke at night, hauing liued three score and
three yeares, and raigned three and twenty: Hee continued in the
world longer then any Prince of his race, that is to say of the third
branch of the Kings of France, but he liued little,I thinke, saith Phillip de Commines, that from his infancy, he neuer had but troubles and afflictions vntill his death, and if all the good daies which hee had in his life, wherein he had more ioy and pleasure, then trouble and care, were well numbred, I beleeue there would bee few sound, and that for one of pleasure and ease, their would bee twenty of paine and affliction. hee that hath
beene long at Sea in stormes and tempests, and hath neuer arriued
at a safe Port, cannot say that he hath sayled much, but that he hath
bene long tossed with a tempest: In like manner hee that hath liued
long in the crosses of this life, cannot say that his life hath
beene long, but that hee hath continued long in the waues of
this world.
Hee dyed not with this griefe, not to haue done any thing in the
world, he that in dying carryeth no other marke of his being, but
old age, departeth shamefully out of this life: Lewis the 11. left it
not with that remorse to haue beene idle, and to haue let the torrent
of age slip away, without retaining some-thingOf running water there is nothing kept but what is drawne forth to vse; In like manner of the course of life, there remaineth nothing but what vertue reserueth for glory to haue liued: Tantum habes a currente flumine quant^m hauris ita ex a^nis semper euntibus nihil accipis nisi quod in res duraturas collocaris. Thou hast so much of a running streame as thou drawest forth, so of yeares which still slide away, thou retainest nothing but
what thou dost employ in durable things. for his successors,
giue him the honour to haue freed them from subiection, and
France is bound vnto him to haue beautefied it with the Crownes
of Dukes and Earles. The death of Charles the last, Duke of Bourgundy,
restored vnto him the Dutchy, and County of Bourgundy,
but his good title must be so assisted by force, as his Prouinces
were rather conquered then restored.
He vnited also vnto the Crowne, the Dutchies of Anjou and
Mayne, which had beene separated for the portion of Charles the
first King of Sicile,The returnes of the Counties of Anjou and Maine, which had beene very remote from the Crowne, was drawne (...) ^arriage of Charles of Valois, who married the daughter of Charles the second, King of Sicile, vpon cond^tion that he should renounce the rights and hopes of the Crowne of Valencia and Arragon. and giuen for a Dowry to the Lady Margaret
of Sicile, who married with Charles of France Earle of Vallois.
This marriage restored that hope vnto France, which she had in a

manner lost to revnite those Prouinces, for that contrary to the
Law of the Realme, they had beene giuen in marriage to a
daughter.
France is also bound vnto him for the acquisition of the County
of Prouence, by the meanes which haue beene formerly mentioned:
The peece was not entire, for the Principallity of Orange
was seperated, yet in the yeare one thousand foure hundred three
score and fifteene, he had purchased the homage and iurisdiction
of William of Chalon Prince of Orange, and made it subiect to
that of Dauphine.Lewis of Chalon Prince of Orange, bought of Rene King of Sicile, the ^omage and Soneraignty of the Principall^ty of Orange, which was held of the County of Prouence, and William of Chalo^ sold it to King Lewis the 11.
Hee past the three score and third yeare of his age, the which
he had alwaies apprehended for that the Kings of this branch had
neuer attained vnto it:Age of Lewis the eleuenth. And as it is the nature of man to desire to
liue, and to repent to haue liued, when he had attained vnto it, he
would willingly haue kept backe that tearme, in the which nature
by the great infirmities wherewith hee was brought low, chased
him out of this life, not as from a Ship-wracke, but as out of
an Inne where hee had made good cheere.Themistius compares the death of old me^, to the going out of an Inne, and that of yong men to a Shipwracke. In like manner Princes,
and they that haue liued in pleasure, feare not death for want
of courage, as many thinke, but for the long continuance of their
delights and contents. Hee arriued not at this port without
stormes and great perils, in the which hee was preserued by the
same hand which had diuerted many damnable attempts against
his person. The most doubtfull of these accidents was at Peronne,
the greatest at the battle of Montlehery, the most vnexpected
vnder the port of the Castle of Alencon,Dangers which hee did escapeThis accident happened on Sunday the 8th. of August 1473. Edward the 2. King of England, playing at Chesse, ended his game so fitly, as a great stone f^ll vpon the place as soone as he was vp, and had slaine him if hee had stayed. Thomas Walsingham. when as a great
stone falling from the Vault did but touch his sleeue: An accident
which shewes, that no man knowes where death shall surprise
him, and that a wise man should alwaies attend it resolutely in all
places.
This Raigne was rough, difficult, and tossed with strange reuolutions.
Such as liued in those times said that the world had neuer
beene more wicked. Opinion, which like vnto Orpheus Harpe,
doth alwaies moue the lesser and weaker spirits, hath made
this beleefe common among them, that the world doth daily impaire,
that the Golden Age is changed into Siluer, then into
Copper, and in the end into Iron and Brasse: That our
It is true that the older the world growes, the more remote it shall bee from the innocency, and simplicity of the first Age.Aetas parentum peior auis tulit.Nos nequiores mox daturos* Prolem vitiosiorem.But in all ages men haue beene corrupted and disordered: Seneca saith, that his co^plained, and that such as should come after would make the like complaint. Grand-fathers times were better then that of our fathers, that
ours hath increased in wickednesse, and that they which shall succeed
shall be more wicked.Paradox that the world growth not worse. But I find in this Princes time as famous
villanies as haue bene since: His Chronicle doth produce
many, besides those great distractions which the History
hath obserued in publicke actions, as rebellions, Infidelities,

Attempts, Treasons and Conspiracies, not discouering many
other excesses which haue remained smothered in the consciences
of two or three. I haue collected the examples which it setteth
downe, as a lumpe of many poysons to make a Treacle
against vice. The first in shewing a great liberty discouereth a great
bounty.
The yeare that the King made his entry into Paris, a yong
woman left her husband to follow her owne disordered lusts, and
after her husband beeing well aduised (these are his very words)
tooke her againe. Wise men hold the sower and sweete of marriage
secret: That age as well as those which haue gone before,
and haue followed after, doth furnish examples of men, who in
fauour of MecanasGalba hauing in^^ted Mec^^nas to supper, seeing his wife and him to court is by lookes and signes, hee (...) downe vpon his C^sh^^a f^yning to be v^^y sleepy, to giue way vnto their leues: The which hee maintained with a good grace, for his man being ready to take away the dishes which stood vpon his Table, hee cryed out vnto him, how now Knaue? dost thou not see that I sleepe not but for Mecaenas. haue shut their eies whilst they courted their
wiues.
In the warre of the Common-weale,Examples of diuers disorders. there were seene passe
through Paris two hundred Archers on horse-backe, after them
eight Strumpets, with a blacke Monke their Confessor: In the
yeare one thousand foure hundred three score and fiue, the sixt of
Iune, a Capper in Saint Dennis Streete, strangled his wife in
his owne house, and a Labouring man of Clignancourt cut his
Throate. Another Gentle-woman of Paris was accused of
Adultery, and poysoning, by her owne husband. A father had
long abused his owne daughter, and had many children by her,
and as the wicked are neuer content with one wickednesse, hee
fell from Incest to Parricide,When as the minde of man hath once subiected it selfe to the tyrany of vice, hee is not wicked with one kind of crime onely. Quisnam hominum est quem tu co^tentum videris vno Flagitio. What is hee among men, whom thou shalt s^e content with en^ villany. Iuv^n. killing his children so soone as they
were borne: Hee was hanged at Paris, and his daughter was burned
at Magny neere vnto Pontoise. Three Serieants, forced
a Priests chamber in Paris and did beate him outragiously, they
were condemned to bee whipt through the Streetes of Paris.
A Religious man of the Temple had his Throate cut by one
of his brethren, The great Prior of France being assisted by
the Commanders and Knights, condemned him to bee kept
prisoner in a Dungeon, and there to be fed with the bread of sorrow
and water of heauinesse. A faire Burgesse of Paris, who
was much esteemed among the women of best fame, gaue
eare to the Earle of Foix, who attempted against her honour,
suffered her selfe to be wonne, and left father, mother, husband
and children, to follow him. A Hosier being accused
of many Thefts cut out his owne tongue, for that hee
would not confesse any thing. There were many scandalous
Libels cast abroad in Paris, against the Kings chiefe Officers,
namely against the Constable of Saint Paul. An Archer was
condemned to be hanged at Paris, for^he Schoole o^ Physitions at Pa^^s, dere an. (...) to be cut, that they might see how the stone is framed, and how it lyeth in mans body, for that there were many troubled therewith in those daies, he was cured and his life saued. sacriledge, hauing robbed
the Church of Meudon. A Franciscan Frier Preaching indiscretly,
was banished the Realme, in the yeare one thousand foure

hundred three score and eighteene, in the month of October, a
Monke Hermaphrodite vsing both Sexes became great with
childe.
Behold how that in those times, as well as in ours, excesse and
disorders were common. The world is nothing but a sincke of
all filthinesse. O what a vile and abiect thing (said an Ancient) is
man, if hee doe not raise himselfe aboue man! Wee see few become
good men for the onely respect of integrity and honesty: If
they enter into the Temple of Vertue, it is alwaies by some false
dore.
Lewis the eleuenth had three sonnes and three daughters: Ioachim
died yong,Children of Lewis the 11. and this death drew, with sorrow, from the
fathers heart a Vow neuer to know any other woman but the
Queene. Francis Duke of Berry died in the yeare one thousand
foure hundred three score and foureteene: This losse caused him
to shut himselfe vp for some few daies, in the Castle of Amboise,
refusing to see or to bee seene of any, not considering that
Kings children were men borne in the cries and groanes of their
mothers, and bewayling their owne miseries like to other men.
Stratonicus an Artificer of Athens, hearing that the mother of Timotheus cryed out at her deliuery, said; How wold she haue cryed, if she had made an Artificer? Hee mocked at that common slattery, which spake of Kings children, as of the children of the Gods. Atheneus. This griefe was humane, and should haue beene lamented humanely,
and comforted by this reason: That the thing which
is restored to him to whom it belongeth cannot be said to bee lost: But
it is hard to see a goodly flower die at the breake of day: A vaine
reason, he that maketh it to grow, may gather it when, and how he
pleaseth.
Louyse his eldest daughter dyed also in her Infancy* Anne
was betrothed to Nicholas Marquesse of Pont, Grand-childe
to Rene Duke of Anjou, but hee did not marry her, for the
Duke of Bourgundy being iealous of this Alliance propounded
vnto him the marriage of Mary, his onely daughter, to
draw him by this vaine hope, from the seruice of this Crowne:
Shee was married to Peter of Bourbon, Ioane his third
to daughter was married to Lewis the twelfth, and put away in
the first yeare of his raigne: So as finding her selfe hatefull
vnto her husband, and vnpleasing to many, shee left the world:
Being vnmarried she wedded herselfe to solitarinesse, the which shee had desired all her life: In her Infancy, the King demanded of her of what Order shee would haue her Confessour, and shee made choice of the Gardien of the Franciscan Fryers at Amboise. Her father loued her not, for that Nature had giuen him cause to
complaine of her deformity, hauing not ingrauen any makes of
her fauours, neither vpon her face nor on her person, for she was
blacke, little, and crooked:Beauty, is a peece of so great recommendation, as they that are not fauored there-with, are lesse pleasing eue^ to them that by Nature should loue them. The Signior of Lesguiere her
Gouernour did hide her often vnder his Gowne, when as the
King met her, to the end hee should not bee troubled with
the sight of her. The hatred of King Lewis the eleuenth, her father,
the death of Charles the eighth, her brother, and the diuorce
of King Lewis the twelfth, her husband, changed all the sweetenesse
of her life into the bitternesse of the Crosse, and imbarkt
her as in a tempestuous Sea, whereas shee found no other
Port but that of death. The children of great men to become
the children of God, are bound to drinke of the cuppe

of afflictionHappy are those paines and afflictions which are to amend and saue, not to ruine and destroy the afflicted: The Crosse is the marke of the Cittizens of heauen, they whom the hand of God disdlaines to strike, are such as he disdaines to amend. as well as the meanest. The way to heauen is full
of Thornes: The flaming sword appeared at the entring of
Paradice: The Land promised to the faithfull aboundeth with
plenty of Milke and Honny: Milke is first bloud before Milke;
Honny is drawne from bitter flowers, Roses grow among
Thornes.
Her husband loued her not,Cause of the dissolution of the marriage of Lewis the twelfth. and yet during the time of his
imprisonment in the great tower of Bourges, he receiued no other
succour, nor assistance but from this Princesse. The cause of
their Diuorce was Sterrility, and want of consent in marriage.
CLAVDIVS of Seyssell saith that hee gaue her vnto him, to
the end that sterrility, and barrenesse, might depriue him of
all meanes to haue children, so much he hated and abhorred the
Bloud Royall.The cause of this diuorce was fterility, and want of consent in marriage: Lewis declaring that King Lewis the 11. had forced him to marry her.
Her consolation was in this solitarinesse, for that shee recouered
the liberty which shee had long desired: The King gaue
her the Dutchy of Berry for her portion, the Towne of Bourges
was her retreate, with a yeerely pension of one thousand two hundred
pounds Sterling. Shee made the Order of the Religious of
the Annunciado, otherwise called the Order of the Virgin Mary,
the which was allowed and confirmed by Pope Alexander the
sixth, in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred and one, and shee
caused the Monastery of Saint Laurence of Bourges to be built:
The habite of her Religious women is a blew, or skie couloured
Gowne, a white Kercher, and a red Scapulaire, with a Cord of
tenne Knots, signifying the ten Vertues, or Consolations, which
the Virgin Mary had in her lifeThe ten Knots of this Cord had relation first to the purenesse: secondly, to the wisedom; thirdly, to the humility; fourthly, to the faith; fiftly, to the vertue, sixthly, to the praise; seuenthly, to the obedience; eighthly, to the pouerty; ninthly, to the patience; and tenthly, to the pitty of the Virgine Mary.: She dyed at Bourges, the fourth
of February, one thousand foure hundred and foure: Her body
was burnt, and the ashes cast into the wind in the first
troubles, when as the Earle of Montgomery tooke the Towne of
Bourges.
Charles his sonne succeeded him at the age of thirteene yeares:
The Histories of those times, speake much of the greatnesse of
his courage, and the weakenesse of his braine: They all agree that
hee neither had any great vnderstanding, nor much wit: Two
great defects in two little words, the which are much dilated in
the actions of his life, whereas wee see that hee attempts lightly,
and giues eare to many things which are alwaies preiudiciall to
them that hearken to themA Prince should stop his eares to reports, and should flye them: Clandestinas existimationes nullisque magis quam audientibus insidiantes susurros. Melius omnibus quam singulis creditur. Singuli enim decipere and decepi possunt, nemo omnes neminem omnes fefellerunt. Secret suggestions and whisperings which circumuent none more then them that giue eare vnto them. It is more safe to trust all in generall then any one in particular: A man in particular may deceiue, and bee deceiued, no man hath deceiued all men, neither haue all men deceiued any one man. C. PLIN. PAHEG.: If the felicity of an estate dependeth
of obedience, if to obey well depends of commanding well, if to
command well depends of a Princes wisedome, what good co^mandement
can be expected from a Prince, who neither hath a sound

iudgment, nor hath gotten any thing to make it better? What hope
is there that hee shall euer be able to command others and himselfe
well?
After that Philip de Commines hath shewed that hee was touched
with the like feuer of the braine to Charles the seuenth his
Grand-father, and to Lewis the eleuenth his Father, who both
feared their Children; and that for this cause hee soone past ouer
his griefe for the death of the Dauphin his sonne: He addes,
that this Prince was alwaye little,Dispositio^ of Charles the eighth both of body and vnderstanding;
but hee was so good, as there was neuer a better creature seene. Claudius
of Seissill saith, That hee was a good Prince, Noble, and of
a greater courage then of body, couetous of honour and glory,
desiring all good and honest things as much as his age
could beare, and that hee failed in the flower of his youth, when
as hee began to vnderstand his owne affaires. Peter Desrey a
Champenois, who hath written his Chronicle, saith; That hauing
past the weaknesse of his first Age, youth gaue great hopes
of more force and vigor of his Spirit, and that hee did exercise
himselfe in the knowledge of many things, which make Princes
learned in the difficult knowledge of all.The knowledge how to reigne and commaund, is the highest and most difficult of all others. Bookes may helpe much, for that they furnish examples whereof the shortnesse of life cannot see the hopes. But a good vnderstanding doth all. The knowledge which comes fro^ books, may serue for an orname^t, but not for a foundation. The Phylosophy of Princes is constancy, faith and sincerity, other scyences are but as Paintings, as Plato saith. After the death
of his father (saith this Chronicler) and that hee had taken vpon
him the Royall dignity, he began very willingly to reade bookes written
in the French tongue, and had a desire to vnderstand the Latine;
and to do like a good Prince, hee imployed his youth willingly to serue
God deuoutly, and to heare the councell of wise men, desiring to learne
how to gouerne well.
Notwithstanding that the carelesnesse of Lewis the eleuenth
to haue him Royally instructed, and bred vp, hath ministred occasion
to the most famous Historian of those times, and which
hath beene since, to write that which cannot bee spoken but of
a Prince, ill bred, and worse brought vp: yet let it not displease
him: for this Charles, whom hee giues vs for an Ignorant Man,
is the same whom hee compares vnto Iulius Caesar, for that his
comming and his victory in Italy was but one thing.Carlo condotto ad allogiare al Castel Capoano gia habitatione antica de re Francesi hauendo con marauiglioso corso d'inaudita felicita sopra l'essempio di Iulio Caesare prima vinto ^he veduto and con tanta facilita che non fusse necessaria in questa espeditione ne spregare maivn padiglione ne rompere mai pur vna lancia. Charles being conducted to lodge in the Castle of Capua, an ancient habitation of the Kings of France, hauing with an admirable course of vnheard of felicity, beyond the example of Iulius Caesar vanquished before hee had seene, and that with so great facility; as in the expedition he had no need either to pitch a Tent, or to breake a Launce. For it
is true, that hee strooke more amazement into Italy at the brute
of his comming, then the Gaules had done by their descent in
former times.
Hee put all the Potentates in alarme, Pisa at liberty, Florence
in feare, and Sienna in iealousie; and hauing the effects
of his desire greater then those of his hopes; hee entred armed
into Rome, with his Launce vpon his Thigh, hee planted his
Cannon on the Market-place, and made himselfe to bee acknowledged and admired of all men for the Deputy of the liuing
God, for the reformation of the disorders of Italy: and
without striking stroake, or pitching any Tent, hee entred a

Conquerour into Naples; and in his returne, hee marched (as it
were) vpon the belly of Italy, being all banded against him, to hinder
his retreate. And although that France hath not reaped the
glory and fruit which shee promised vnto her selfe by this voyage,
it sufficeth that the cause was iust and glorious: for wee must
iudge of things not by the euents and executions, but by the causes
and motions of their wils that haue done them.He that considereth of things by the euents, doth iudge of the whole Image by the heele. In all occasions we must settle our iudgements not vpon the issue and execution but vpon the causes and intentions of them which doe them, and the differences of things. Polyb. lib. 2.
This course might haue carried me vnawares to vnfold the
whole part of the Table. Behold (by the grace of God) wee are
come to the banke; It is sufficient to haue written the Fathers
History, leauing the Sonnes to some other. But before wee
end, wee must repasse vnto the Iudgements of the actions
of this Prince. That done, wee will enter into the
great Carriere of the toyles and glory, the Combates
and victories, the Vertue and Fortune
of the greatest Prince that euer
was before or after Lewis
the 11th.
The end of the tenth Booke.



THE CONTENTS OF
the eleuenth Booke.

1 LIberty of Iudgements vpon the life of Lewis the eleuenth.
2 A particular examination of his actions, his piety, his deuotions, and
pilgrimages, his good deeds to Churches, his behauiour toward the Pope.
3 What he was towards King Charles the seuenth his father, towards
his sonne, his wife, and the Princes of his bloud.
4 Maiesty: The care hee had to preserue the respect: hee did not affect
pompe: who were the chiefe officers of his Crowne: hee is very wary to
confer titles of honor and dignity, he contemnes the mark of maiesty.
5. Magnificence: The order and expences of his house: he receiues the
Embassadors of forraigne Princes with great state. His buldings.
6 Clemency: He leaues no offence vnpunished: his Prisons and Cages of
Iron, a rigorous vsage of the Dukes of Alencon and Nemours: Hee
reuengeth old offences which he had receiued before he was King, and
forgets not them of the league: Seuerity in the end makes him fearefull
and distrustfull.
7 Iustice: He institutes the Parliaments of Bourdeaux and Dijon: hee
loues not the Parliament of Paris: a free and couragious admonition
made by the President La Vacquerie: how chiefe Ministers should
carry themselues to Princes: Of the Kings Audiences.
8 Wisedome: He was alwayes accompanied with feare, he let slip the occasion
to do his businesse in England and Flanders, he can choose men
and draw forraigne Princes to his deuotion, as the Archduke of Austria,
Cosmo di Medicis, and others; he drew vnto his seruice the
Lord of Lescun, and Creuecoeur, and Philip de Commines. His
tongue offends his wisedome.
9 Liberality: He is neither couetous nor liberall: he hath formes to giue
which bind much: hee entertaines many Pentioners: his liberality
passeth to excesse, empties his Coffers, driues him to necessity, and to
lay rigorous Impositions vpon the people.
10 Valour: Proofe of the greatnesse of his courage in diuers encounters,
what care he had of warre. His policie and military discipline.
11 Knowledge: He had more knowledge of learning and the s^yences, then
other kings his predecessors. The pittifull estate of the profession of
learning vnder his reigne, his Apothegmes and Answeres.
12 Temperance: Hee had two base daughters: his priuate kind of life:
his domesticke pleasures: his exercises and his confident seruants. Diuers
other obseruations vpon his life and Historie.




THE HISTORY
Of LEWIS the eleuenth.
THE ELEVENTH BOOKE.
MEN iudge freely of the liues of Princes
after their deaths:Iudgme^ts are free after death. the glistering of
their Purple-Robes doth no more dazle
their eyes,Themist^us (...) that the court of the Emperour Iovinian was full of flatterers, said, that then adored the p^rple more then the person, and that the Court was an Euripus whose waues did f^ow and e^be in an insta^t. Nicep. Cal. l. 10. c. 42. and the Iudgements
which are made, are purged from flattery,
which doth alwayes augment the
good, and diminish the ill which they
do. That King doth greatly binde him
which speakes of his life, when he giues
him no occasion to lye in commending
him: For Princes are neuer so perfect, but Truth may finde
great exceptions in the goodliest qualities of their praises; and before
that the Statue be made perfect, there must much Marble bee
taken away, and the forme exactly sought in the substance. Philip
de Commines saying that hee had seene the greatest Princes of his
time, and in them all there was both good and euill, for that they
were men; he addes for truth, freed from all flattery, That God had
created Lewis the eleuenth more wise, more liberall, and more vertuous
then all they, and that in him there were more things belonging to the
office of a King and Prince, then in any of the other. I haue in a manner
(saith he) seene them all, and knowne what they could doe; wherefore
I deuine not.
This great authority which hee preserued vnto the last gaspe,Liberty of iudgment vpon the life of Lewis 11.
and carried into death, was supported by three mighty pillars,
which his owne wisedome had raised, Seuerity, Constancy, and
Reputation.Maiesty is the inuincible f^^t of a Prince, it is better preserued by s^uerity, then by too great (...).
But for that these good soules are like vnto the Mill-dew of the
starres, which looseth much of her purenesse passing by the Regions
of the aire; and by the entrailes of Bees which forme it; and
that the gold of Princes vertues cannot bee drawne absolutely
pure from their liues, being alwayes mixt with diuers strange matters,
we must consider if the piety which was in him, hath retained

nothing of superstition or hypocrisie, his elemency of feare, Iustice
of cruelty, wisedome of subtilty, liberality of prodigality, and
his other goodly qualities of Art and dissimulation. Euery man
may now speake his opinion without feare of displeasing, or
blame of flattery:Praises which are not necessary are best: Neminem magis laudare Imperato^em decet, quam que^ minus necesse est. praise may passe on freely, and boldly, without
any other necessity or bond, then the respect which euery man
should haue to preserue the memory of Princes, against the outrages
of slander.
Posterity, which vnderstands not things, but by the voice of such
whom benefites or offences haue bound to remember them, doth
alwayes receiue flatteries and lies for truth.Flattery or hatred do most co^monly turne an History out of the right way of truth, and therefore Tacitus protests, that they of whom he speakes, are not known vnto him neither by offences done, nor by benefits receiued Mihi Galba, Otho, Vitellius, nec beneficio, nec iniuria cogniti. It is fitting in painting
to represent Hanniball and Antigonus halfe-faced, to hide the
eye which they wanted; but a History must shew the whole face, to
the end that Princes may find their owne vices in the portrait of others.
This hath noted them, to shew that there is nothing perfect
in this world; and if the Tapestry of this Princes life bee faire and
pleasing, viewing it on the right side, you shall finde the backe very
much disfigured with knots and seames.
We must not seeke his Elogies in the Histories of strangers,Buchanan saith, that Lewis 11. Tyrannidem exercebat, practised tyranny; and that there was nothing more common, Quam ex vsu and suis co^modis sine discrimine ^idem fall re quibuscunque sed precipue agnatis Principibus, then of custome, and for his owne profit, to deceiue any without distinction, especially the Princes of the bloud.
who speake as if God had suffred him to liue for the miserie of the
Common-weale, and the ruine and desolation of the people, whose
fatnesse and good estate he held dangerous for the health of the
whole body; holding for a Maxime, that they should not do ill vnto
the people, nor attend any good of them.
In the end the Chronicle speakes after this manner: This King in
his life time, by reason of some men that were about his person, as Oliuer
the Diuell, called Dain his Barber, Iohn Doyac, and many others,
to whom hee gaue more credit then to any men of his Realme, did during
his Reigne, many Iniustices, wrongs and violences, and had brought
his people so low, as at the time of his death they were almost in despaire.
All this is nothing but a rough draught of his humours:Plety and Religion of Lewis the 11th. To
view the whole Table wee must consider what his Religion and
Piety was towardes God, and his obedience towardes the Pope:
then wee will passe to his affection toward his Wife, his Sonne,
Father, and his neerest Kinsmen the Princes of his Bloud, and his
Seruants. Of all these things the Iudgement shall bee reserued
to truth and discretion, which will haue the memory of Princes
to be alwayes reuerenced; and that they speake of their defects,
not as of vices, but as of imperfect vertues.The vertues of Princes shold be spoken without flattery, and their vices by discretion, they must not set downe their defectes plainly, but passe them ouer as vertues which are not perfect. It is the aduice which Plutarke giue, writing the life of Simon. For the first, the
good is alwayes good, and the euill is alwayes euill; Opinion
cannot change the essence of things, they are very hardy which
will haue actions to bee other then they appeare: Slander hauing
no strong sight to behold the brightnesse of vertue, vseth
false spectacles, and calleth that Feare which is Wisedome, Hypocrisie
that which is Deuotion,^arde iudgment of Claudius Seissel. and Inhumanity that which is Iustice.
I finde that Claudius Seissell hath iudged very boldly of the
Deuotion and Piety of this Prince, thinking that he hath pierced

into the very inward parts, by the obseruation which he hath made
of the outward man. He hath represented him very melancholicke
and superstitious, alwayes trembling and terrified with the horrour
of eternall paine. His deuotionTrue p^ety supports it selfe, she will haue the soule cheerefull and obedient, and that a good man bee so, although that nothing should bee euer knowne. (said he) seemed to bee more
Superstitions then Religious: For to what Image, or Church of GOD,
and Saints, and namely of our Lady, that he vnderstood the people had any
deuotion, or where there were any miracles done, he went thither to
make his Offering, or sent some expresly thither. Hee had moreouer his
Hat full of Images, the most part of Lead and Tinne, the which whensoeuer
any good or bad newes came vnto him, or that the humour
tooke him, hee kist, falling sometimes suddenly downe vpon his knees,
in what place soeuer hee were; so as hee seemed rather a man distracted
then wise.
Such censures belong to him who doth keepe and iudge the
hearts of Kings;God the Iudge of Hearts. but it is true, this Princes Religion was wholy
outward, retaining nothing in his heart. It was popular and ceremonious,
as if he had had for the obiect of his worship a visible
dignity, and that it were sufficient to appeare holy, and not to
bee so.Religion will haue an exterior and publicke exercise with her Ceremonies. The Prince is bound vnto it, and it is Impiety for any other to contradict it, and to trouble the order, But the seruice which is done by the Spirit, is answerable to the essence of God, who is all Spirit, and that which is done outwardly, is more for vs them for him.
His Chronicle saith, that on a Sunday, the eighth of September,
going from the Tournelles to our Ladies Church, hee past by the
Church of Mary Magdalen, to subscribe himselfe a brother and companion
of the great brotherhood of the Bourgeses of Paris. The God of
the people is the God of Kings, but the exterior seruice of Religion
allowes many things to the simplicity of the people, which are
not fitting for the maiesty of Kings.
If wee shall iudge of causes by the euents, wee may say, that
the Pilgrimages on Foote and Horse-backe,Pilgrimages of Lewis 11 and the most zealous
deuotions of this Prince, haue often couered designes which
were repugnant to Piety and Iustice: Hee did therein alwayes
circumvent some one, and vpon this opinion, that the shew of religion
workes wonders in the beleefe of men,The people opinion of their Princes holinesse workes great effects. Sertorius with his Hinde had gra^en such a superstition in his Souldiers mindes, as they did not thinke that they were gouerned by a man who had more iudgement the^ they, but they did firmly beleeue that it was some God which guided them. keeping them from
iudging rashly of his life and actions, whom they saw so familiar
with God. They say, that he did fit his religion to his designes, and
not his designes to his religion. They did not in those times speake
of that most impious Maxime;Maxim of Machiuel. That it is sufficient for a Prince to
seeme outwardly religious and deuout, although he be not so. A Maxime
of Atheisme, which mockes at God, to deceiue men: at God, who
in the end confounds hypocrites, and wil be serued with an vnfaigned
heart, whereof hee sees and sounds the deepest bottome.They make Machiuel Author of this Maxime, that a new Princce cannot obserue all things for the which men are esteemed good; being often constrained for the maintaining of his estate, to doe things contrary to faith and religion, to leaue the good when he may, and to do the euill when he is forced. We
may well say, that the world lookes but to the exterior, and that
which is in shew. It is not possible in matters of religion, whose
actions must be so often reiterated, that hypocrisie should still
ioyne them so well together, but some one will dis-band and discouer
the deceite. The Signior of Haillan, Historiographer of

France, who hath promised to publish the whole History of
this King, and hath giuen vs an abridgement in his booke, which
is excellent and iuditious touching the affaires of France, speakes
of his Religion after this manner: Neuer Man was more superstitious
then hee, hee did things which were good in shew, but
to a bad intent, thinking by his superstition to deceiue both GOD
and the world. The superstitious feare not to doe euill for the opinion
they haue to obtaine absolution by the acts of their superstition.Hipocrisie cannot continue long, lying cannot deceiued long. The night lasts not, but whe^ the Sun is far from the Horizon. Iudgements are setled vpon that which they see, wherefore Machiuel saith, It concernes euery man to see, and few to feele, but in the end the maske falles. Hee
tooke from the poore to giue vnto Churches, and did more oppresse
his people with Tributes and Taxes, then any other King of his Predecessors,
and therefore hee made his subiects to bee ill affected vnto
him.
Hee confest himselfe often, for that once a weeke hee touched
them that were troubled with the Kings euill.Curing of the Kings euill. It is the onely miracle
which hath remained perpetuall in the Christians religion, and
in the house of France. That this griefe, whose beginning is an incorrigible
ill digestion, a hidious vlcer to looke on, dangerous to
touch, and for the most part incurable, should bee healed by these
words: The King toucheth thee, and God cures thee, is a wonder beyond
the reach of discourse and iudgement.That Clouis did first cure the Kings Euill, is drawne out of the Epistle of Hormisda a Pope. S. Lewis addes to the Ceremony of touching, the signe of the Crosse. His arme is at Poblette, whither they that are sick of that discase* go in pilgrimage to be cured. I say aperpetuall
miracle:The Kings of England haue the same vertue. for since Clouis the first Christian King, it hath continued
to them which succeeded to his Religion and Crowne. Other
Realmes haue had the like graces giuen them, but they haue
not continued: The Kings of England cured the falling sickenesse,
they of Hungary the Iaundise, and they of Castille those that
were possest.
I could not finde what men he imployed for the seruice of God,
and the conduct of his conscience.Wee finde that he, who was the head and directer of Gods seruice in the Kings house, was cald Apocris^ire vnder the first race, Arch-chaplain in the seco^d, and great Chaplain, or great Almoner vnder the third. I reade, that besides the great
Chaplin, or Arch-chaplin, hee had two Chaplins and one Clarke
of the Chappell; and that a Franciscan Fryer called Iohn Vouste,
did for a long time exercise one of these charges.
The Chronicle saith, that a little before his death hee made a
Doctor of Tours, called Maister Martin Magistri, his Councellour
and Almoner, who dyed at Clerry after the voyage of
Saint Claude. In the accounts and expences of his House, wee
finde, that hee bound the Citty of Tours to giue euery day in
the Weeke (Friday and Saturday excepted) a peece of Royall
Beefe a foote square to the Lepers and Hospitall of Tours; and
for the performance thereof gaue a hundred pounds sterling to
bee imployed in the purchase of lands for the foundation of this
peece. Leprosie, which growes from an Adust and Melancholy
bloud, demands meates that are lesse earthly;The aire, water and nourishme^t may not only alter the temperature of bodies, but also of the minde. Sunt qui non corpora tantu^ verum etiam animos valea^t mutare liquores. being certaine,
that nourishment ingenders diseases, and being ingendred, entertaines
them.
Hee granted vnto the holy Chappell at the Palace of Paris,
the moities of the Regalities to bee imployed in the entertainment
of the Church and Ornaments. Hee founded the Religious
Nuns of the Aue Marie, which was the ancient Conuent of the

Beguines, a kinde of Religion, which was (as it were) Neuter, betwixt
the Maries, and other religious Women: his picture, and
that of Queene Charlotte is to bee seene in the quire in glasse.
He did enrich the Church of our Lady of Clery, and of Victory,
with great reuenues. Being at Lyon in the yeare 1476. he gaue vnto
the Chapter of the Church of Foruiere,This Church is on^^ of the most remarkable Antiquities of the C^tty of Lyons. The word of ^ oruiere comes from Forum veneris or Forum vetus. It is much bo^nd to the memory of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury. the rents and guards
of S. Simphorien le Chastel, and the Farme of the Chastelenie of Charlien,
to binde them to say certaine Masses daily in a Chappell called,
Our Lady of good Councell. The letters of dispatch shewe the
great deuotion of this Prince to the seruice of the virgin Mary, and
begin in these tearmes: Hauing had consideration of the great and singular
graces which God our Creator hath heretofore done vs, at the Intercession
of his blessed Mother, the glorious virgin Mary; in whom, after
God her sonne, we haue alwayes had our chiefe refuge and hope: and
who, in the conduct of our greatest affaires, hath alwayes imparted vnto
vs her grace and Intercession to God her sonne; so as by her meanes, and
aid, our Realmes and Signiories are, by the grace of God, preserued, entertained,
and remaine in peace, vnder vs and our true obedience, notwithstanding
any enterprises, practises and conspiracies which haue
beene made since our comming to the Crowne, against vs and our said
Realme, Signiory and Subiects, as well by our enemies and aduersaries, as
other our rebels and disobedient subiects, their adherents and complices.
He did institute many godly things, the obseruation whereof hath
continued vnto our times:The institution of the prayer which is made at noone by the sound of a bed, was the first day of May, 1472. his deuotion to the virgin Mary made
him ordaine, that at noon-day euery man should pray at the sound
of a bell, and say the salutation of the Angell for the peace of the
Realme.
The Emperour Charlemaine had great and eminent vertues:The commendatio^ of Charlemaigne. hee
declared himselfe enemy to Didier, King of the Lombardes, who
had reuolted against the Pope: he pacified Italy, subdued the Saxons,
and expelled the Sarazens out of Spaine. But this enterprise
was greater and more hardy then profitable and needfull: for Gannes,
otherwise called Gannelon betrayed him, and was the cause of
that memorable defeat of Roncivaux,In the valley of Ronceuaux dyed these valiant Captaines, Rowland, Reynold of Montauban, and Ogier the Dane* Charlemaigne made these foure verses vpon the death of Rowland his sisters sonnes
Tu patriam repetis tristi, nos orbe relinquis,Te tenet aula nitens, nos lachrymosa dies,Sed qui lustra geris octo and binos super annos,Ereptus terris, iustus ad astra redis. where those braue and generous
knights were lost, whose incredible valour is no more beleeued,
then the truth of the Romance. He ioyned the Roman Empire
to the Monarchy of France. But the Emperiall Diadem did not
cure the great afflictions of the minde which he had all the time of
his Empire, by the reuolt of the Sarazens in Spaine, the Sclauonians,
or Danes, and the Normans. Three yeares before his death, at
the age of 68 yeares, he gaue himselfe to holy contemplation, and
to the care of Religion, and the Church;Founder of the Vniuersity of Paris. he erected the Vniuersity
of Paris, by the aduice of Alcuin his Schoole-maister, and did people
it with the most learned men of his time.

Hee had soure wiues and many Concubines, the greatnesse of
his vertue, and the wonders of his reputation, made him to be
adored of his subiects, and redoubted of strangers: The Sophie
of Persia, and Prester Iohn of Ethiopia sought for his alliance:
He built two goodly houses,His Buildings. the one at Iughelheim the place
of his birth, the other at Nieumegue; hee built the Bridge at
Mentz, a worke of tenne yeares, the which, the yeare before his
death was ruined by a suddaine fire, in lesse then two howres: He
built the Church of Aix la Chapelle where he is interred: During
his life he caused sixe Councels to be called, at Mentz, at Rheims,
at Tours, at Chalons, at Arles, and at Francfort, and made Orders
for the Reformation of the Church:Charlemain made a booke for the reformation of the Church, which carries this title, Capitula Carol^ Magni, and containes Proofes of his great piety* When he went to Collegiall, Churches, or Monasteries, hee did sing with the Priests, and say the lessons of the morning, and caused the^ to be said by his children and other Princes of his Court. He died the eighteenth of
Ianuary, and in the eighth day of his sickenesse, in the yeare eight
hundred and foureteene,His Death the three score and eleuenth yeare of his
age, and the seuen and fortieth of his raigne, including fifteene
yeares of his Empire.
For his great and heroicke vertues, which serue as an example,
and patterne to Princes, and for his great bounty to Churches,
for the which Phillip de Commines saith, that a Chartreux Monke
called Iohn Galleas,His Can^nization. Duke of Milan Saint:Phillip de Commines visiting the Church of Pauia, and beholding the statue of Iohn Galeas Duke of Milan on horseback to be higher then the Altar, whom a Chartrous Monke, borne at Bourges, called Saint; he demanded of him why he called him Saint, seeing the Towns which were painted about him were so many markes of his tiranny, hee answered softly, in this Country we cal all the^ Saints that do vs good, hee built this Monastery. King Lewis the 11.
would that the day of his death should be solemnized like Sonday.
The Church doth not solemnize the birth of Saints, it makes
the day of their death a Feast, which is another kind of birth then
the first, there being no more proportion betwixt the world out
of which they go, and heauen whereinto they enter, then there
is betwixt the wombe out of which they go, and the world whereinto
they enter. He caused his Statue to be taken out of the ranke
of the Kings, to make an image vpon the Altar of the Chappell at
the Pallace with that of Saint Lewis; he would also haue his owne
in his ranke, after another fashion, kneeling before the Image of
our Lady.
But how great soeuer his zeale was vnto the Church, yet would
he haue the Popes know, wherein, and wherefore, they were bound
vnto the Crowne of France: The Kings of France haue deserued,
the glorious Surname of Eldest sonne of the Church,Popes bound to the Crown of France. hauing
defended it from great enemies, and freed it from terrible persecutions.
It is also found that at the last wherewith she is threatned
she shall haue no other deliuerer but a King of France;This opinion is grounded vpon a Treatise of Antichrist, which some attribute to Saint Augustine, others to other ancient fathers, and many to Rabanus: Reade vpon this subiect the eighth Discourse of Doctor Suares, a Portugois, vpon the Apocalipse. the
which hath made many to say, and write, that the Maiesty of the
Church shall neuer bee ouerthrowne so long as the Crowne of
France shall endure.
The deuotion of Lewis did not make him incensible of the
wrongs which the Temporall power might receiue from the Spirituall.
Pope Pius the second, Paul the second, and Sixtus the fourth,
knew well that this spirit could not submit himselfe in all things
without knowing the reason: He did not dissemble the wrong

which Sixtus the fourth,Pope Sixtus beeing ^ff^rded at the violence done to Cardinal Riario his Nephew, and to the Arch-bishop of Pisa, did excommunicate the Florentines, declaring that ^ee would employ against them and the Venetians his person, goods, and whatsoeuer else he could: The KIng vpon this aduertisement thought it not reasonable that the goods appointed for the seruice of God, should be employed in war, making a defence to to carry mony to Rome. did vnto the dignity of his father, and
common pastor of Christian people, banding himselfe against
the Common-weales of Florence and Venice, and suppoting the
vndue exactions which were made in the Chancery of Rome:
He forbad all men to send any mony thither to haue prouision of
Benefices, by Buls and expectatiue graces, vpon paine of confiscation
of body and goods, giuing the moueables, iewels, and horses
of all the offendours to them that should discouer them. Hee
appointed Commissioners in the chiefe Townes of the Realme, to
see and peruse the Buls and prouisions which should be brought
from Rome, that he might know whether they were contrary to the
priuileges and liberties of the French Church;The Signior of Gaucourt^ Chamberlaine to the King was appointed in the Towne of Amiens, the commission is reported by Du. Tillet. He commanded
the Bishops and Prelates which remained in the Court of Rome, to
watch ouer their Troupes, and to be resident in their Bishoprickes,
vpon paine of priuation of the Temporall of their Reuenewes, and
to prepare themselues for the holding of a Councell at Lyon when
it should be called, vpon the instance which he would make vnto
the Pope: He was aduertised that Religious Friers going to generall
Chapters of their Orders out of the Realme, were imployed to
carry packets,Religious men imploied in messages. and intelligences, he made a defence for the going
to any Chapters which should be held in forraine Prouinces;The defences by this Edict giuen at Selongnes the third of September 1476. were generall against the Religious of the Order of Cisteaux, of the Charthusians of Clugny, and the fowre begging Friers; But the Chartusians are not subiect to the punishment, by the same Edict it is spoken of the Friers Minors of the three Orders. the
punishment was diuers: He appointed banishment for them of Cisteaux
and of Clugny, and declared them incapable to hold any
Benefices in France, and in regard of the Begging Friers, besides
banishment, he said that he would root out, and expell the Realme
all them of that Order which should infringe his Edict.
Howsoeuer he did reuerence Church-men, yet would hee not
haue them stray from publicke instructions,Sermons of seditio^. to censure affaires of
Estate; for such kinds of discourses do more trouble the minds of
men then comfort them: They be but cloudes which breake forth
into brutes of sedition, incense Princes,Discourses of affaires of State in a troublesome and difficult time enter into seditious Spirits, as burning nailes do into greene wood. They be Conduit Pipes, saith the President Du Vair, by the which dest^ll the affections wherewith the people are seasoned, and afterwards thrust on to good or bad actions. and are like vnto the arrowes
of Thrace which were shot against heauen to appease it: He
was aduertised that Frier Anthony Fradin, a Franciscan born at Ville-Franche
in Beaujollois, spake too boldly of the bad gouernment of
affaires: He sent Oliuer le'Dain to Paris in the beginning of the
yeare 1479. to forbid him to Preach. The multitude (which runnes
as it is led) mutined against this pursuite, and followed this Preacher
in troupes to defend him,The people go like troupes and consider not; Quo eundum, sed quo itur: Whether they must go, but whether they go. yea the women carryed stones and
kniues, to vse against such as should come to offend him.
From one liberty they saw diuers spring, as faults follow one
another, and this sedition was ready to cause great tumult:Light faults should be repaired by pardon, and great by seuerity; and a Prince, as Iulius Agricola saith, must not alwaies bee pacified with the punishment, he must rest oftentimes contented with the repentance of such as haue ^rred. Nec poena semper, saepius poenitentia contentus esse debet, Tac. The
Court of Parliament preuented it in such sort, as they gaue the
King subiect rather to content himselfe with the repentance then
the punishment of this silly multitude. They commanded the Frier

to go out of Paris, and not to Preach seditiously in any other Prouince;
They did consider that France had seene and suffered terrible
agitations by the violence of these spirits, and that England had
beene violently afflicted vnder the raigne of King Richard, by the
seditious Sermons of one onely man, who seeking to confound all
Orders by a pernicious equality, Preaching alwaies in his Sermons
that when as Adam did eate the Apple there were no Gentlemen,
that Nature, the Minister of God, had created all men of the same
forme, and had cast them in the same mould, as brethren and companions
lodged on the same earth,The Bishops of England hauing forbidden the Pulpit to Iohn Ball an English Priest, he went to Preach seditiously in the fields, causing himselfe to be followed by the people, where in the hearing of 200000. he began with these tearmes. and if God would haue made
this distinction amongst men, he would haue ordained this difference
from the beginning.
A great man of that time spake these words vpon that subiect,
which are so worthy and true,Discourse is a powerfull charme. as the History shall not stray to step
a little out of the High-way to consider them. In truth (saith he)
the force of speech is a powerfull thing, especially hauing life giuen it
by passion; for you would say that it doth, in a manner, mould and fashion
mens soules, and that it is a fire kindled, which incountring another
body inflames and sets it on fire,When Adam delu'd, and Eue span: Who was then the Gentleman? how farre off soeuer it bee, like
vnto Naphte, which kindles at the very sight of the fire.What cannot Eloquence do in the mouth of an honest man and of credit, seing that comming from a seditious spirit, it workes such great effects. One word of a man of credite, saith Polibius, may diuert men from bad enterprises, and draw them to good: The eloquence of a wicked man is like poyson in a cup of Gold. I haue often
obserued when, not with any eloquent discourse, but with words which
were scarce intellegible, and without any discourse of reason, they haue
put the people that heard them into choler, for that they were so: so easily
do passions co^municate by words, and passe from him that speaks, to him
that heares. The same iealousy which a husband hath for the honour
of his wife, the feeling which the son hath for the loue of his
father, the same motions which a faithfull Minister hath for the
loue of his Prince, a Preacher should haue for the Glory of God,
he should dry away for the zeale of his house, and for the increase
of his seruice; any other passion that transports him is but fury.
Next to the seruice of God, piety respects the obedience and
honour which we owe vnto our parents.How Lewis was towards his father. It is true that Lewis offended
against this Law, not onely in his first age (whose weaknesse and
facillity to the impressions of other men might excuse his errour)
but in his full vitility, which made him inexcusable, when as hee
could not be ignorant that his duty towards his father was so naturall,
so religious, and so strictly commanded, by Diuine and Humane
Lawes, as all other duties yeeld vnto it.All the offices of Piety yeeld to that of the child to the father, the sonne which sees his father and his sonne in danger of their liues, if he cannot rel^^ue both, he must abandon his sonne to saue his father, for the dutie which hee owes him is more ancient then the love which he heare^ vnto his children: Cymon being vnable for his pouerty to bury his father, before he had paid his debt, sold his owne liberty. The ioy which King
Charles the 7. had of his birth did not continue so long as the sorrow
he had for his disobedience; when he was borne he had cryed
Noe like others, and this word which in the beginning did signifie
rest and consolatio^, was a presage of the crosses and toiles which he endured.
It is true that this sowre seuerity wherwith he controuled his
actions, was cause of his disorders and excesse;The rough, seuere, and imperious proceeding of fathers towards their children makes them to grow insolent and disordered. It is a Diuine counsell which Saint Paul giues vnto fathers: Parentes he prou^cetis ad iracundiam filios ne despondeant anim^m: Parents prouoke not your sonnes to anger, least they turne away their minds. For being vnwilling

to dis-ioyne the authority of a father from that of King, he chose
rather to keepe him in feare and obedience by the seuerity of the
one then by the mildenesse of the other: He thought that he had
no better meanes to enioy this spirit then by keeping him short,
and restraining the violent motions of his courage, and that being
in necessity he should be alwaies in obedience.
He was eighteene yeares old before he had any portion allowed
him, no not that which did belong vnto him from the day of his
birth; for the father considered that if at the age of twelue or thirteene
yeares, when as he had no part in the Estate, he should haue
beene had of some great faction, the increase of meanes and
yeares would haue drawne him to great enterprises. The first example
of his disobedience was the trouble of the Praguery, which
hath bene formerly related, when as he suffred himselfe to be surprized
and stole away from the Earle of March, his Gouernour,
whom Chroniclers haue called a Prince of the Bloud, and erroniously
haue taken the husband for the wife. For it is true, that
Iames of Bourbon,The Lady Elenor of Bourbon daughter to Ieames of Bourbon Earle of March, was married to the Earle of Perdriac, sonne to the Earle of Armagnac. Earle of March, King of Naples, and sonne
to Iohn of Bourbon first Earle of Vendosme, hauing but one
daughter of his first marriage, gaue her to Bernard of Armagnac
Earle of Perdriac, who by this marriage carried the name of Earle
of March, and Gouernour to Lewis the 11.They write that Lewis chased away the Earle of March, for that hee had aduertised King Charles that the Duke of Alencon was come to Ni^rt to subborne him.
For this reason it was late before he gaue him the gouernment
of the Country of Dauphine, neither would hee that the displacing
of Officers should depend vpon his capricious humours,
this wise father hauing found that his actions were so wandring,
inconstant, and contrary to themselues, as it was a difficult thing
sometimes to beleeue that they proceeded from one spirit, for
there is nothing equallMens mindes change not according to the motions of reason but according to occasions: Nemo non quotidie consilium mutat: There is not any man but changeth his minde daily. if it comes not from the same resolution,
wherefore in the Letters Pattents, which were granted at Charleiu
the 28. of Iuly, 1440. the King reserued not any other thing, but
that he should not displace those Officers which were setled in
their charges, and that the Chancellour of France should keep the
seale of Dauphine.
For the taking of possession of this Prouince, he sent Iohn Signior
of Gamaches, a Knight, and Gabriel of Bernet Signior of
Targey, a Squite, Steward of the Kings house to Grenoble,
whom he termed his Embassadours; they presented the Kings letters,
and the Dauphins, to the Councell of Dauphine, in the presence
of Iuuenal of Vrsins a Knight, Lord of Treynell, Leiutenant
of that Prouince, in the absence of the Lord of Gaucourt,
who was Gouernour, and of the chiefe Noblemen of the Prouince.
Stephen Guillon President in that Councell made an Oration
vpon this subiect, but after such manner, as it discouered the rudenesse
and simplicity of the matter, for who so should discourse
now after that manner, they would wonder why the feete should
do the eares so much wrong as to suffer attention.A Babler demanding of Aristotle if his discourse were not strange; no, answered he, but yet a man hauing feet should not giue himselfe so long patience to beare thee. They found

men in those times who knew how to speake, but few were able
to discourse eloquently, It is easy to iudge of the beauty of the
building by the frontespice: Behold the first periode of this Oration,
Seeing it is the pleasure of my Lords the Embassadours to our
most redoubted Lord and Prince my Lord the Dauphin Lewis, that I
should say some-thing vnto you concerning the matter of their Embassage,
to obey them as I ought, I will speake it as well as I can, with
the help of our Lord and of his Mother, and also with the good supportation
and correction of them and you my Masters, and the better to relate it I
take for my Theame: Fillius ditus est nobis dominator Dominus and in
manu eius potestas and Imperium: I say the third and the ninth chapter:
In those times publicke actions were performed like Sermons, and alwaies they tooke some passage of Scripture for the ground of their discourse. The whole Discourse is of the like straine, and extends it selfe
vpon the Dauphins praises, being drowned, as it were, in the allegations
of diuers passages of Diuinity and Law.
I thinke in those daies they had more regard to deeds then
words,Simplicity of the eloquence in the old time. and that they had more care to do then to speake, that their
discourses were without pompe or vanity, and did not fauour of
that bold babling which will make men beleeue, that he which is
beaten should make reparation, and that the vanquished is victor.
Thucydides and Pericles, had charge of the gouernment of the Common-weale of Athens, yet could neuer agree, Archidamus King of Lacedemonia, termed their contention a wrastling, and asking Thucydides who was the stronger, he answered: When I haue throwne Pericles downe be makes them that see it beleeue that he is not vanquished, but that hee stands still. But in this action there is neither choice of termes, nor choice
of reason; and for that he would not haue it wholy without inuention,
he stands vpon the letters of Lewis his name, and saith that
that in this word Ludouicus there are nine letters, the first represents
the Liberallity of this Prince, the second that he was Vertable,
the third that he should Domineere, and be feared; the fourth
that he was Orthodoxall, the fift Vigilant, the sixt a Iusti^er, the
seuenth Charitable, the eight Vertuous, and the ninth that he was
filled with Wisedome: Hauing ended the Dauphins Panegericke,
he fell vpon that of ^his Embassadours, and said that the Signior of
Gamasche, who was called Iohn, was a fore-runner to IESVS
CHRIST, and the other the Angell which did fore-tell his
Incarnation to the Virgin MARY, for that his name was GABRIEL.
Such kind of writings are like vnto Medals, which men
esteeme more for their stamps, and for the testimony they giue
of the doubts of Antiquitie, then for their proper beauty: neither
doe wee see any but giue some light in the obscurest difficulties,
and serue in the managing of great affaires. We see in
the beginning of his discourse,The Dauphin is not acknowledged Prince of Dauphine vntill the King hath giuen him the power. how this President labours to
satisfie them who held, that Dauphine should acknowledge
the Dauphin from the day of his birth: for he maintained, That
the eldest sonne of France, could not bee acknowledged for Prince, and
Lord of Dauphine, vntill it should please the King to giue him the prouisions
and command.
The History sets downe how he retired into Dauphine, and
from thence into Flanders: A wonderfull hearts griefe vnto the
King,Griefe of K. Charles the 7. which did accompany him vnto his graue; In either of his
vioages, he was alwaies accompanied by necessity: His seruants

purses being emptied in the voiage of Dauphine, they borrowed
a hundred Crownes of them of Romans. The Bill which
hee made is carefully kept among the publicke writings of that
Towne. It is true, that Lewis the eleuenth, was such towards
Charles the seuenth his father, as hee desired not that Charles
the eighth his sonne, should be like vnto him, and doubting that
the disposition of his nature might be helpt by his nourishment,
hee did not care to breed him vp in those vertues which are
worthy of a Prince. These defects proceeded not so much
from the fathers fault as from the time,In th^se daies they held that learning did wrong to courage, and the most val^ant of those times were very grosse and ign^rant: They say also that Italy being giuen more to learning then Armes, had giuen a great aduantage to them that had conquered it. where the old errour was
sworne by the greatest Families, that the study of learning
did daunt their courages: Hee would not haue him learne any
more Lattine then these few words: Qui nescit dissmulare nescit
regnare:King Lewis the 11. would not haue his sonne learne any other Art, but how to dissemble, in the which he had pasi Maister; he also said that in reading bookes he should find so many accidents and perils, as he would becomelesse couragious. A Prince leaues his sonne learned enough, when he hath
made him capable to force obedience: Obedience is the Science
of Princes.There is not any Science necessary for a Prince but to command well, and to bee well obeyed.
Of his two daughters hee loued none but her whom hee
gaue to the Duke of Bourbon, the eldest was a sadde encounter
to his eyes. Hee fayled also in the affection which hee
ought vnto the mother, for hee gaue her not so good a
share of his heart as shee ought to haue had. CLAVDIVS of
Seyssell saith: That whilst hee was in the vigour of his age, hee
was not loyall of his person, Hee alwaies kept her meanely attended,
in some Castell for the most part, whether hee went some times
to see her,Lewis the 11. a bad Husband. more for a desire to haue Issue, then for any delight
hee tooke in her; and for the feare shee had of him, and his
sowre vsage of her, it is credible, that shee had no great delight
nor pleasure in his company: But that which is worse, towards
the end of his daies hee sent her into Dauphine, and did expressely
command that shee should not bee neere his sonne when hee should
bee King. Of all the contentments of life that of marriage is
most to bee desired: It is a roughs passage, the waies are flanked
with Bushes and Thomes, it is impossible to go vnto the end
of it, but some Brier or Bramble will catch hold of you:
Marriage is good of it selfe, but it is subiect to bad accidents: To explaine this truth, Gregory brings a comparison of a way which is cleane and straight, and yet hath on either side brambles which may catch hold: In via quidem munda non offendimur, sed a latere nascitur quo pungamur. We are not hurt in a cleane way, but it growes from the sides wherewith we are prickt. Greg. 12. Moral. And the great Prince, which did draw all sorts of Sciences
aboundantly out of the Treasures of the Eternall Wisedome,
doth number the concord of Marriage among his chiefest
felicities, holding him happy that hath a wise wife, and aduowing
that there is not any thing more pleasing vnto God then
Nuptiall Concord.
That of brethren is no lesse pleasing vnto him,Lewis bad to his brother. there was not
any betwixt the King, and the Duke of Guienne his brother, and
wee cannot say that of them which is written of the two Twinnes,
Two brethren were held Twinnes, for that being toucht with the same Infirmity, the beginning, progresse, and declining was equall in either of them. August. lib: 5. de Ciuit. that the one had a feeling of anothers infirmity: There was no

resemblance of Complexions and Will betwixt them. The
Duke of Guienne hauing seene that his presumptions in the
League of the Common-weale, and those of the Dukes of Brittany,
Bourgundy, Bourbon had beene recompensed, and to
draw fauours from the King, it was good to make himselfe to
bee feared, hee still continued his practises with them that
might terrifie him, and held his spirit in the apprehensions of
warre.
This great rigour, which the King vsed towards him, might
well bee excused and maintained with this great reason, not
to make the Princes of the bloud great in a time of trouble
and liberty. If his brother had had a greater share in the
State, and if his portion had lyen neerer to his enemies,
the League of the Common-weale had continued longer. In
the beginning hee thought to content him, in giuing the
Dutchy of BerryThe Dutchy of Berry was giuen him for his portion in Nouember 1461. and in the yeare, 1465. he entred into the Dutchy of Normandy, and the Lands which the Duke of Orleance held there, as the Counties of Mortaigne and Longueuille. to him, and to his Heires Male, then the
Dutchy of Normandy, with power to impose all sorts of Subsidies:
But hee did all this onely for the necessity of his affaires,
and to dispierce, and cut assunder the storme of the League:
Soone after, hee draue him out of Normandy, and compelled
him to retire, and with-draw, himselfe into Brittany, as poore
as euer.
This seuere course was approued and allowed by the three
Estates, who held it not fit, nor conuenient, to pull so goodly a
Flower from the Crowne, saying; that hee should rest himselfe
contented and satisfied with the offer which the King made him
of twelue hundred pounds Sterling yearely rent, with the Title
of a Dutchy, and foure thousand eight hundred pounds
Pension:This offer was made, according to the Ordonance of King Charles the fift, in October 1374. by the which he would that Lewis of France his second son should haue twelue hundred pound sterling yearely rent, for his portion, and 4000. pounds giuen him to furnish him. In the end, hee gaue him the gouernement of Guienne,
but hee commanded Iohn of Popincourt, President of
the Accounts at Paris, not to inuest him with his Letters,
before hee had deliuered, and resigned vp the others, and made
his renounciation: This was but a scantling of the whole peece,
for of this great, spacious, and goodly Prouince of Guienne,
hee had nothing but the Country of Bourdelois, Bazadois, and
Landesse: Hee neither enioyed it long, nor yet possessed it
quietly; for being there, hee presently found great troubles
for the limites, and bounds, which the Kings Officers stroue and
contended for, and for the which the Duke of Bourgundy
would haue taken Armes, but it was compounded and verefied by
the Court of Parliament two yeares after. Death gaue him
a more contented, quiet, and certaine Portion in the other
world.
If death had not done the like grace to the Duke of Orleance,
and drawne him out of the cares and afflictions of this
life, hee had declared the cause of the same resolution
the which hee made knowne to King CHARLES the seuenth:
The violent death of LEVVIS Duke of Orleance his

father, hauing inuited the English to mount vpon the Stage,
and there to act the part of Kings of France for many yeares,
made him to take Armes, and to ioyne the reuenge of this
death to the defence of the Crowne: Hee was taken prisoner at
the battell of Agincourt, and carried into England, where hee remained
fiue and twenty yeares. His liberty and rest came from
thence, from whence proceeded the causes of the miseries of
his house, and of his captiuity. Phillip Duke of Bourgundy,
paied two hundred thousand Crownes for his ransome, married
him to Mary of Cleues his Neece, and gaue him the Order
of the Golden Fleece,The Duke of Orleance receiued the Order of the Duke of Bourgundy, after his returne out of Engla^d, in the yeare 1440. Hee was not receiued by King
Charles the seuenth, according to his hopes and the greatnesse of
his quality.Assembly at Neuers in the yeare 1442. This discontent made him to ioyne with the intentions
of the Dukes of Bourgundy, Brittany, Alencon, and other
Noble men, who assembled at Neuers, to make King Charles the 7.
regard them better then he did, and to reforme the disorders of the
Realme.The discontented Princes assembled at Neuers, in the yeare 1442. The Archbishop of Rheims Chancellour of France, was sent to moderate their choller, and to assure them of all they desired.
This was presently repaired, for the English made their profite,
and the Duke of Orleance recouered the ranke, and authority
which the dignity of his birth gaue him neere the
King: Who employed him in the conference which was made
at Tours, for a Truce betwixt France and England, vnder the fauour
whereof hee vndertooke the conquest of Milan, after the
death of PHILLIP MARIA. The successe of this enterprise
did shew that hee had beleeued them too lightly who had
represented it so easy; as the first day hee should arme, Lombardy
would giue him the Castle of Milan. Hee past into Italy to
take possession of the Dutchy,It is a great errour in a Prince to beleeue that lightly which is represented vnto him of the facillity of a great designe, notwithstanding that the most temperate are subiect to suffer themselues to bee carried away with these goodly perswasions. Credulitas error magisest quam culpa and quidem in optimis cuiusque mentem facillime irripit. Credulity is an errour rather then a fault, and it doth easily creepe into the best mens minds. Cicero. But as it hath beene alwaies
reproached vnto the French, neuer to thinke of their returne
when they passe the Mountaines, being there hee was presently
vnfurnished of all necessary meanes to worke any great effect,
and was forced to end his enterprises as soone as they beganne. The
conquest of the County of Ast was the fruite of his voiage, the
rest remained to FRANCIS SFORCE. This County of Ast
serued him for a retreate for some time after, the greatnesse
of his courage not suffering him to remaine neere the King,Cause of the Duke of Orleans death. for
the small esteeme he made of him. A contempt which did wound
his heart with so sencible a griefe, as CLAVDIVS of Seyssell
finds no other cause of his death.
Lewis Duke of Orleance was successour to this bad vsage, and
to the end that this contempt might bee a counterpoise to the
greatnesse of his courage, hee would haue his breeding lesse exquisite
then his generous disposition could beare, and forced him to
marry his daughter, who was weake and crooked,The Author of the remembrances of the Royall House of Bourbon saith, that Lewis the eleuenth, caused Lewis Duke of Orleance to bee bred vp as grossely as he could, to abate that generous heart of the house of Orleance, Claudius of Seyssell saith, that he vsed him very roughly, and sought to kill him. giuing him a

boane of griefe and repentance to gnawe for aboue twenty
yeares.
According to the Maxime, to humble the Princes of his bloud,
hee intreated the Earle of Angoulesme no better, and would not
suffer him to thinke of marrying the Princesse of Bourgondy, desiring
rather that that great and mighty Estate should be in the power
of a forraigne Prince. Hee doubted the courage of them that
were neerest allied vnto him, and held them (as it were) ouerwhelmed
vnder the rocke of contempt and necessity, and kept them
from great charges. The springs of his bounty were drawne dry
for them, for he vsed France like vnto an Orchard, where as they
cut, pull vp, and transplant trees at their pleasure.
That great and wonderfull house of Bourbon, which alone can
reckon as many triumphes as France hath had enemies, and which
before all others carried a Ducal Crowne, auoided these stormes.
This royall family of Bourbon hath bin so much esteemed by our ancie^t Monarks as it was the first among the Princes of bloud that was honoured with the Title of a Duke: for although the Dutchy of Bourgondy were long before the erection of the Dutchy of Bourbon, yet it was neuer comprehe^ded in the house of France, but since Charl^s the fift and the Dutchie of Bourbon was erected by Philip of Valois, Grand-father to Charles the 5. He would haue vsed it with the like rigor, but hee found it more
firme,Greatnes of the house of Bourbon. forcing him to conuert his spleene and hatred into other effects
of loue and affection. For he he gaue the first Coller of the
Order to Iohn Duke of Bourbon, his brother, who had married
the Lady Ioane of France, daughter to Charles the seuenth, and the
Lady Agnes his daughter, to Peter of Bourbon, to whom he committed
all his important affaires; hee gaue him the inheritance of
the Earle of Armagnac, yet he would not haue him carry the Title
of Earle.
Maiesty. Next to the duties which binde a Prince to serue God,
and to loue his Allies, there is not any thing which should keepe
his spirit more in action then the care of Maiesty: for it is so delicate
a spring, as if it slip or breake, the whole frame of authority
is in disorder, and he becomes a king of a Tragedie. When I speak
of Maiesty, I meane not that, to maintaine that a Prince should
liue like vnto the Kings of Persia, in a Castle with three Ditches,Ridiculous grauitie of Princes.
and as many Walles,The Kings of Persia were rather worshipped then reuerenced by their subiects. They remained in a Castle with three Ditches and three walles, speaking to few, and yet had news daily from all parts of their Empire, from the straight of Hellespont to the East Indies, by Centinels which were set vpon the mountaines. that they should not speake vnto him, but
through a trauers, like vnto the Kings of Borney: that hee should
not see his subiects, but bare-headed, and couered with ashes; or
that hee should not shew himselfe but once a yeare, like to the first
Kings of France: But my meaning is to speake of that inuiolable
and glorious respect which bindes a Prince not to say, do, or yeeld
to any thing contrary to the dignity of his Crowne, which cannot
endure to be forced, and doth neuer shew himselfe in publicke actions,
but with what is fit and necessary for his greatnesse and power.
The words and actions of Princes are so considered, and the people iudge of them as they vnderstand them; and therefore should alwayes appeare Maiesticall, and (if it may bee) Diuine. And ancient Grecian said, That a Prince should not speake before the people, but as if hee were vpon a stage in a Tragedy. This Maiesty is like vnto Moses Rod,Maiesty compared to Moses rod. the which being held in
the hand, was the Instrument of admirable things; but creeping
on the earth, there was nothing but horror and contempt.
Lewis the eleuenth was alwayes very carefull to maintaine this
Maiesty, being wonderfull desirous of reuerence, respect, and reputation,
and yet his priuate and familiar actions were very
contrary. This care was the last garment he put off; hee shewed
it vpon the tigpe of his lippes when as hee thrust forth the last
words of his life. He gaue it two supporters, Feare and Admiratition,
(...) that gre^ God, who the Prince doth represent. It is the support and protec^sion of an estae and conf^^^ bee contemned, nor wronged, but the whole body will be distempered. maiestas Imperij solutis tutela. Maiestly is the guardian of the Empires health. another would haue maintained it with Loue and Authority;
but hee mist this first way at his comming to the Crowne, and
could neuer after recouer it: hee found such sauadge humors, and
so accustomed to liberty, that as the intemperance of the Patient
iustifies the seuerity of the Physitian, he was forced to vse fury to
make mad men wise.
Thus his Maiesty was feared of the greatest Princes of Europe,
it was not contemned of any man without punishment,
and it was reuerenced of all his subiects. This Maiesty was like
vnto those Pictures which seemed fairest farre off. It was admired
in forraine Prouinces, but it was something blemished by
his carelesnesse and facility, wherewith he did often wrong his
greatest actions.
The Castillians at the voyage of Bayone, scoffed at him, to
see him with so little pompe and maiesty.Custome of Lewis 11 at ceremonies. Vpon dayes of great
shew hee caused some one to bee attired like himselfe.At the enterview of King Lewis the eleuenth, and Edward the fourth at Piquigny, Philip de Comines was att^^ed like the King. And
yet a Prince should neuer doe any thing that should cause him
to bee sought for among his subiects and seruants; the brightnesse
of his Maiesty must shine like vnto a Planet ouer the lesser
starres.
Great men which inuiron a Prince, giue a lustre to the greatnesse
of Maiesty.Offices of the crown The Offices of the Crowne are ordained to
that end, and the great dignities which France doth impart to
great merites, addes reuerence, and doth incite their mindes to
merit them.
It is like vnto the Garden of Phaeaces, which abounds with all
sorts of fruites. It is not vnfitting to set downe heere who tasted of
them during this Reigne.When as king Lewis the eleuenth came vnto the Crowne, there was no Constable: Arthur, Duke of Brittanie, Earle of Richmond, was vnder the Reigne of Charles the seuenth. Constable. Lewis of Luxembourg,
Earle of Saint Paul, no other carried the Sword during this
Reigne. Chancellour, Peter of Moruilliers, Iuvenall of Vrsins, Lord
of Treynell, and Peter of Oriole.
Lord Steward. The Lord of Nantoillet, IOHN of Croi,
CHARLES of Melun, ANTHONY of Croi, sonne to IOHN of
Croi, and ANTHONY of Chabannes, Earle of Damartin. Chiefe
Chamberer. IOHN the second Duke of Bourbon.The Office of chefe Chamberer, or Gentleman of the Chamber, continued long in the house of Bourbon. The King Saint Lewis gaue it to Robert of France his sonne, Lewis the first, Duke of Bourbon, Charles the first, Iohn the second, Peter the second, Dukes of Bourbon. Lord Chamberlaine.
IOHN of Orleans, Earle of Dunois, ANTHONY of Chasteauneuf,
Lord of Lau. Marshals of France, ANDREVV of Lauall,
Lord of Loheac, IOHN Bastard of Armagnac, Earle of Comminges,
Ioachim Rouant Lord of Gamasche, of Boismenard, and

Peter of Rohan, Lord of Gye. There were but two vntill King
Francis the first. Admirall, Iohn Lord of Montauban, Lewis Bastard
of Bourbon, Earle of Rousillon; Lewis, Lord of Grauille.
Maister of the Crosse-bowes,The maister of the Ordinance of France, or the Co^oncll of the Infantery, haue succeeded in this charge. Iohn of Estouteuille, Lord of Torcy.
Great Butler, the Lord of Lau.
Wee finde not that hee had any Maister of his Horse, or
Maister of the Pantry. Ioachim of Rouant was Maister of the
Horse at his Coronation. Yuon of Fau his chiefe Hunts-man,
Lewis of Lauall, Lord of Chastillon, was maister of the Waters
and Forrests.
The ancient order of France was, that Knights Banneret, the
Maister of the Pantrie, the chiefe Caruer, and the chiefe Cuppebearer
should serue the King at the foure Annall Feastes, and
to either of them was giuen foure poundes sterling: but when
as Lewis the eleuenth neglected this Gratuity, they forgot the
Dutie.
It is one of the precepts of Maiesty, that the markes of Soueraignty
bee not imparted to any,A prince shold not be more sparing of any thing then of honours which depend of his maiesty. yet hee suffered the Prince of
Orange to stile himselfe Prince by the grace of God,Here P. Mathew is deceiued. and to Rene
King of Sicile, to seale in yellow Waxe in the yeare one thousand
foure hundred sixty nine, the which doth onely belong to
the Kings of France, other Princes of Christendome seale in waxe
of diuers colours; and to Charles Earle of Angoulesme to release
prisoners, when hee made his first entry into any Towne where
he commanded.In this priuiledge, but for once to Charles Earle of Angoules me, prisoners for high Treason were excepted. It was granted in the yeare 1477.
Hee was very staied in giuing Titles of Honour and Dignity
to great Families: a Prince cannot bee too warie therein: for it
falles out often, that the considerations which fauour the priuate
merite of any one, end with him when hee dies; but when
the dignitie is tyed vnto the person, as the feodall titles of Dukes,
Marquises, Earles and Barons bee, the Family for the which the
gratification was made, is dispossest thereof, when as the Landes
goe away.Many disallowed that the feodall Titles of Dukes, Marquises, etc. should bee giuen in France to the Land, and not vnto the Bloud, for it happens that some one loosing the land, doth also loose the meanes to maintaine the Title which remaines. Hence it comes that in England such dignities are
not annexed to the Landes and Fees,Policy in England for the titles of Houses. but to the Bloud, and the
Descendants of the Familie. The German doth not impart it to the
whole posterity, but onely to them which descend from the
Males.
There are two houses which bee so great and famous of themselues,
as they honour the titles which are giuen them. King Charles
the seuenth his Father, hauing made the Earledome of Foix a
Pairie for Gaston of Foix, hee confirmed this erection; but hee
made not any new. This house of Foix was in those times one of
the most famous in Christendome, and compare with Soueraigne
PrincesWe find that in great ceremonies the Earles of Foix are named before the Princes, and had precedence of the Earles of Vendosme. There is no other reason but that the eldest of Princes houses precede the yonger of other houses, and therfore at the Estates held at Tours, the Earles of Neuers, Eu and Foix, had precedence of the Earle of Vendosme.
Gaston of Foix, who liued in the time of King Charles the fifth, went
equall with Kings: when as King Charles the sixth was at Tholousa,
he sent the Earle of Sancerre Marshall of France; and the Signior
of Riuiere, one of the chiefe of his Councell to the Earle of
Foix, who was then at Mazere, to intreate him to come vnto him,
or else he would goe to see him. He did not excuse himselfe vpon
the Indispositions of his great Age, and being sorry that hee had
not preuented this summons, he parted from Mazere with six hundred
horse, and came to the King to Tholousa.Traine of the Earle of Foix. The History saith,
that presenting himselfe vnto the king, hee was followed by two
hundred Gentlemen, all cloathed in silkes; among them there
was noted the Vicount of Bruniquet and his brethren, Roger of
Spaine, Lord of Montespan, issued from the bloud of Arragon,
and head of the house of Montespan,Espagno let of Spaine, sonne to Roger of Spaine, sonne to Leon of Spaine. and the Lord of Corras,
who first raised the honour of the Earles of Caramain, a great
and rich family,Beginning of the houses of Mo^tespan and Caramain allied to that of Foix, and who (seeing that Houses
and Families haue their periods like to all other worldly things)
could not desire a more glorious fall, then into the house of Monluc,
where it begins to reuiue. King Charles the sixth requited this
visite at New-yeares tide in the yeare 1390.At this voyage the Earle did institute King Charles the sixth his heire, the which hee would not accept, for that he would not defraud the Vicount of Chastellan his lawfull Heire.
He fauoured the house of Lauall with the like declarations of
honour,House of Lauall. the which was long before held for one of the worthiest
of France, hauing neuer wanted children, nor the first dignities
and alliances of France, hauing for their stemme the House of
Montmorency,They drawe the beginning of the first house of Montmorency, to the time of Saint Denis, by whom the first that was conuerted among the French Knights, was a Lord of Montmorency, and therefore the ancient Deuice of this house is, God helpe the first Christians. the first Christian of France; and there is no difference
in their Armes, but fiue Cockle-shels Argent to the Crosse.
Wherefore he would that Francis of Lauall, Lord of Gaure, sonne
of a daughter of king Charles the seuenths sister, should go in rank
with the Earles of Vendosme, as well in Councell as in Parliament,
and in all other publike actions; and caused his letters to be
dispatcht at Mans the nine and twentith day of Nouember 1467.
to serue for a speciall and perpetuall priuiledge to his posteritie.
He had much contemned the glorious and honourable markes
of Maiesty.Princes had alwayes men appointed to serue in time of peace and warre for the ornament of their maiesty, and royall greatnesse. Heralds were instituted in France for that respect, in time of peace they carried mayles vpon their breasts, and in times of warre their Coat of Armes powdred with Flowers de Luce. I haue obserued in the Church and Cloister of Saint Catherine du Val of the Schollers, twenty of their Tombes which shew the forme of their Maces and Scutchions. Bodin writes, that hauing chased away almost all the
Gentlemen of his house, hee imployed his Taylor for a Herald at
Armes, and his Barber for an Embassador, and his Physitian for a
Chancellor, as an ancient king of Syria did Apolophanes his Physitian,
whom he made the president of his Councell. Philip de Commines
obserues it, when hee shewes how much hee was troubled
to furnish out a Herald which he sent to the King of England. Heralds
were necessary for the Maiesty of a Prince, in actions of war,
and in the most solemne dayes of peace.

They had diuers names, and diuers charges, and they either
carried the Titles of the Soueraignes, Prouinces, or of some other
famous occasion, as in France the Heralds are diuersly named,
and wee finde often in the History of France, these names
giuen to Heralds:Bosios error in the History of Malta. Monjoy e Saint Denis, Mont Saint Michel,This word of Monjoy Saint Denis was sometimes the warlicke cry of the French. They say it grew vpon that which Clouis said in the battell neere to Colleyn, when as fearing to loose it, hee promised to beleeue in Iesus Christ, worshipped by Clotilde his wife, and to hold him for his Ioue. Since that time they cryed in their battels, Monjoye Saint Denis, as if they would say, Christ whom Saint Denis hath preached in Gaule, is my Ioue, that is to say, my Iupiter. The word of Ioue beeing turned into that of Ioye. The Antiquities of Gaule wri^ten by the President Fauchet.
wherein a great man of Italy hath erred, and moues them that
obserue it, to laugh; for hauing found in our Histories that King
Lewis the eleuenth had sent two Heralds to Bajazeth to complaine
that hee had broken the peace with the Venetians: hee
sets downe their names after this manner: Monsieur Gaudio de
Saint Denis, Monsieur de Saint Michel, whereas hee should haue
saide, The Herald Monjoy Saint Denis, and Mont Saint Michel.
They were created at great and solemne Feasts, and when they
presented Wine vnto the Prince, hauing drunke, he gaue the cup
to him whom he made Herald, wherwith he should make his Scutchion.
Oliuer of la Marche saith, that Philip Duke of Bourgondy did
somtimes giue them the name of that Country whereas the Wine
which hee then dranke, did grow: which done, the other Heralds
gaue him the Coate of Armes, charged with the Princes
Armes.
There were more Ceremonies at the Creation of a King at
Armes: for his sufficiency was to bee testified by all the Kings at
Armes,Creation of Heralds and Heralds that might bee found, and they were distinguished
from others by a Crowne croslet, which they carried
on their heads. Their chiefe charge was to make a distinction
of the Armes of Families, to preserue the ancient, and preuent
the vsurpation of new. They might forbid them that were
no Gentlemen to carry Armes which were not fit for their profession,
or for Gentlemen to carry any other Crests then their
Fathers had done, or to open the Helmet, or to crowne them
without permission.
It was also their duty to keepe the Blason of Armes of Houses,
There were great considerations in the forme of Scutchions, and in the Crests of Armes. A Knights Scutchion might bee cut square, or voided at his pleasure, wherevnto a Crest was added, taken out of part of the Armes, and the Helmet shut, and stand^ng straight. A Squires Scutchion was round, like vnto a Rondache, and had had no Crest, but his Helmet onely shut, turned on the one side. to haue recourse vnto them vpon any dispute that might
growe vpon differences and conformities.Office of Heralds at Armes. They kept a Register
of the Deuices and Colours of Soueraigne Houses, as White
for France, Blacke for England, Red for Bourgondy, Blewe for
Savoy, Yellow for Lorraine, and Greene for Anjou. The King at
Armes in the house of Bourgondy had a care that such as were
made noble, should not carry a field gueles, for that it was the
colour reserued for the Prince.
This house did greatly obserue the Respects and Ceremonies
of a Soueraigne pompe.Magnificence of the house of Bourgondy. When the Duke did eate at any solemne
Feast, besides all the ordinary state of Kings, he had behinde
him the Kings at Armes, and Heralds with their Coates and

Crownes, and before him were set, at a low Table, two Vshers, and
two Sergeants with their Maces, who had alwayes their eyes vpon
his, to execute his commandements vpon the least signe he should
make; yea, to take the greatest prisoners which could not be taken
else-where.
These Charges haue beene contemned by the contempt of persons
which haue not desired them, but to couer the indignity of
their birth. In former times they were not held but by Gentlemen,
whose honour carried them vnto dangers with the same
courage that they which are lesse generous flye from them. They
had the guard of the Kings Chamber, and had that charge which
since the Archers of the Guard haue.The S^rgean^s at Armes, by day, carried a Mace before the King, and guarded his Chamber by night, and therfore du Tillet thinkes, that they held the place of the Archers of the guard. They shewed good
proofe of their valour at the battell of Bouuines, vnder Philip
Augustus, by reason whereof Saint Lewis did build the Church of
Saint Katherine du Val des Escoliers, and King Charles the fifth appointed
the brotherhood there, whereas at this day many Tombes
are to bee seene, which haue preserued the ancient forme of their
habit and Armes.
That which Philip de Commines obserues of a Gascon which
came into the place where as the King was at the stoole with
three or foure, confirmes this opinion of the small care hee had
of the formes befitting Maiesty; for although there were no Vshers
at the doores,Duty of Chamberlaines. yet this facility to enter euen into the Cabinet, was
dangerous. His Predecessors had prouided for it, and the Chamberlaines
were boundThe first care of the kings person belongs to the Lord Chamberlaine, he was bound to lye at the Kings feete, whe^ the Queen was not present, and so Peter, Lord Chamberlaine to the king S. Lewis, was buried at Saint Denis, at his maisters feet, as hee serued him liuing. And at this day in the Assembly of the Estates, and when as the King sits in Iustice, the Lord Chamberlaine sits at his feet. by the duty of this charge, not to suffer
it: but hee contemned it all the time of his reigne, vntill the end,
when hee was more carefull of it then was needfull, passing from
a great facility and confidence, to a rigorous seuerity and distrust
to keepe his gates shut: wee finde these words very remarkeable
in the Ordonance of King Philip the long: After the care of the
soule, they must not bee so negligent of the body, as through negligence,
or bad guard any perils arriue, especially when for one person many
troubles may happen. Wee therefore ordaine, and doe therewith especially
charge our Chamberlaine, that no vnknowne person nor boy of
poore estate enter into our Wardrope, nor lay their hand, nor bee
at our bed making, and that they suffer not any strange sheetes to bee
layd on. And wee command the Steward of our house, that our Pantrie
or Kitchin, and all other Offices of our house bee so well and carefully
kept, as no danger may arriue, and these things wee will
haue obserued in the houses of our Company, and of our Children.
The other precept of Maiesty,Great Offices shold not be hereditary. is not to continue great Offices
in one Family,The perpetuity of great charges is dangerous. They that haue commanded long, are loath to obey. Antiquitas voluit Prouinciarum dignitatem amica successione repara^i ne diutina potestate vnus insolesceret. Antiquity would that the Gouernments of Prouinces should be supplyed yearely, least that any one by a continuall command, should grow insolent. and to make them hereditary. The Order
and iustice of the state, will that a distribution be made of those

who by the quality of their birth, or the greatnesse of their merite,
are capable.
The perpetuall Dictatorship did ouerthrow the state of Rome,
the great authority giuen to the Mayors of the Palace, did ruine
the first Family of our Kings. To those that are ambitious of
the same Offices their Predecessors enioyed, wee should wish
the like moderation and integretie that Quintus Fabius Maximus
had, who hauing beene fiue times Consull, and vndergone
many great charges, intreated the Senate not to conferre that
Honour vnto his sonne; not that hee thought him vnworthie,
but that hee knewe well, that the Common-weale should receiue
preiudice by the perpetuity of great Offices in one Family.
In an other occasion Quintus Fabius Maximus did shewe, that in the election of great Charges there should be no respect had but of the publicke good, hee would not consent that T. Octacilius, who had married his wiues daughter, should bee Consull, for that hee held him not capable of that charge; nor of courage to make head against Hanniball. T. Liu. lib. 24. This was to loue the State more then himselfe. Lewis the eleuenth
tooke more delight then hee receiued content or profite
to change his Officers often. When as a place is executed
worthily and profitably by any one, his dismission is vniust, and
the Princes seruice is wronged:Offices are to bee maintained if they be good. for if the place bee not supplyed
by a man of the like experience and sufficiencie, the Common-weale
is damnified:As the ruine of Families comes commonly from new seruants, so the fall of Estates proceedes from new magistrates which enter into Offices without experience. those that are new come, beeing
greedy of gaine, preferre their owne priuate Interest before all
publicke consideration. The soundest Estates haue alwayes some
vlcers: to change the remedy, and to change the Physition is one
thing. Wounds haue no time to close vp, when they doe often
change plaisters.
Hee dismist the Duke of Bourbon from the gouernement
of Guienne,Changes in diuers Charges. and gaue it to the Bastard of Armagnac:IOHN of Andie, Lord of Lescun, bastard of Armagnac, Earle of Comminges, head of the house of Riberac. Hee
tooke from the Lord of Bueil the Office of Admirall of France,
and gaue it to the same Bastard, and afterwardes to the Bastard
of Bourbon his Sonne-in-lawe, who did him great seruices;
yet hauing no consideration thereof, hee tooke from him
the Gouernement of Picardie, to giue it to PHILIP of Creuecoeur,
Lord of Cordes. Hee would haue the Lieutenants in
the Gouernement of Bourgondy to hold their places as the
Wolfe by the eare: Hee tooke it from Des Cordes, and gaue it
to Chaumont, who died in the yeare, one thousand foure hundred
eighty one.King. Lewis the eleuenth being discontented that the Lord of Tremouille had not taken Dole, hee tooke from him the Gouernment, and gaue it to Charles of Ambois, who was gouernor of Champagne.
Hee tooke the Seales from PETER of Moruillier, and gaue
them to IUVENEL of Vrsins, from whom hee had taken them
when he came to the Crowne, them hee gaue them to Peter of Oriole:
Hee tooke the Office of Marshall of France from the Lord
of Loheac, and to restore it to him againe hee tooke it from the
Earle of Comminges, bastard of Armagnac. Charles of Melun was
his Lieutenant in the Citty of Paris, hee dispossest him of that
charge to giue it the Earle of Eu, and made him Lord Steward
of his house.
Entring into Paris hee made Iames of Villiers Lord of Lisle-Adam

Prouost of Paris. After the Warre of the Commonweale
hee dismist him from that Charge, and gaue it to ROBERT
of Estoteuille. His whole Chronicle is full of these changes
in all sorts of dignities and Offices.
Magnificence.Magnificence of Lewis 11. The Maiesty of a Prince is followed by his
Magnificence, which is one of the Flowers of his Crowne; It
is a Foile which giues lustre to this Dyamond,Iamblicus cals Magnificence, the crown of the Empire of princes, and saith, that it is chiefly admired among the principall actions of a Prince. it shewes it
selfe in many places, and vpon many occasions; but her Theter
is in his House, and at his Court, shee presides in his expences,
and appeares in the priuate Ornament of his person.
Lewis the eleuenth did respect it so little,Habit of Lewis 11. as to see his Apparrell
you would haue said, that he desired to liue poore, and to dye
rich. Hee attired himselfe plainly in course Cloath, and tooke
no delight to see sumptuous Apparrell. His Chronicle saith,
That hee ware Doublets of Fustian. Whether hee did it to
make his Fashion more popular; or (by his example) to cut off
vaine and vn-necessary expences, thinking that a King, who
should carry nothing that doth sauour of a Woman, is more adorned
by the Ornaments of the minde, then by those of the body.
A Princes habit should not be too stately, and ful of pompe. Romulus attiring himselfe in scarlet, or purple lost the loue of his people, nor lasciuicous and dissolute, like to Nero, Calligula, Commodus and Heliogabalus, nor of a strange fashion, for the which Hieron of Syracusa was odious vnto his subiects. It neuer represents him well apparrelled but once. This was
when to conclude the Treaty of Conflans, hee went to the Mercers
Grange with a small Traine, and little brute, Attired in a
long Roabe, loose, furred with Ermines, the which was much
more seemely then the other garments which hee was accustomed to
weare.
There is to bee seene at this day in the house of a Councellor
of State,Bed of Lewis 11. the bed wherein hee lay, the which wee cannot behold
without admiring the excesse of this Age, and the simplicitie of
that. It is of Yellow and Carnation Damaske, without any Lace,
and the Fringe without fashion. Bodin saith, That in scorne hee
ware a greasie Hat, and the coursest Cloath. In the Chamber
of Accounts there was an Article found of his Expences, making
mention of two shillings for a newe paire of Sleeues to an
old Doublet; and another Article of three halfe-pence for a Boxe
of grease for his Bootes,300000 L sterling. and yet hee raised yearely three millions
more then his predecessors had done, and did alienate a great part
of the Crowne lands.
The expence of his house was much lesse then that of many Noble
men of that time. All things were very exact there, frugality was recommended
in such sort, and superfluity so odious, as they needed
not to passe out of SclauoniaDissolution hath been great in priuate persons by the examples which Athens doth produce, and among others, of Aesope, a player of Tragedies, who being come into Sclauonia to eate Creuices, which were much esteemed in that Prouince, when as they told that those of Affricke were better, he sailed into Affricke. into Affrick to eate creuises. By the accounts
we find that they increased according to the years voyages
and affaires. It did not exceed three thousand six hundred pounds
starling vntil the yeare 1480, when it amounted to foure thousand,

three hundred threescore and one pounds, eight shillings Sterling:
In the yeare 1481. it came to sixe thousand sixe hundred
sixty and eight pounds Sterling:The expence of the Kings house for that which concerned the mouth onely, was in the yeare 1471. two thousand 800. and three pounds two shillings Sterling: In the yeare 1472: 2900. pounds: The yere 1473, 3280. pounds: In the yeare 1474. 2520. pounds Sterling. The yeare 1475. 3020. pounds. In the yeare 1476. 3040. pounds. in the yeare one thousand, 4. hundred seuenty and seuen, three thousand 600. and foure score pounds: In the yeare 1478. 3480. pounds, and in the yeare 1479, 3700. pounds sterling. And yet hee went not from
Plessis, from the eight of Nouember vntill the seuenth of September,
the yeare following, that he was carried to be buried
at our Lady of Clory.
The number of Seruants for the ordinary seruice of this expence
was not great, their wages small in comparison of these
times. They serued the whole yeare, and it beganne in October.
There are none but these set downe in the rowle of his voluntary
pensions. Two Chaplins, and to either of them twenty shillings
a month, and to a Clarke of the Chappell tenne shillings: A
Gro^me of the Kings Chamber nine pound a yeare; Fowre
Squires of the Kitchin to either twelue pounds a yeare: One
Hastler, one maker of Brothes, a Sauce-maker, a Head-cooke, a
Butler, and two Groomes of the Carriages, to either of them
twenty shillings a month: Two Vnder-Cookes of the Kitchin at
sixeteene shillings a month; a Porter, a Pastry man, a Baker, two
Carters, to either of them sixe pounds a yeare: To a Groome of
the Stable, and two to assist him, eight and forty shillings a
month: A Farrier twelue pounds: The Maister of the Chamber of
the Kings Treasor had sixe score pounds, and the Comptrouler
fifty:King Lewis the 11. gaue thirty pounds of increase to Martin Barthelot, Maister of the Chamber of his Treasure, but the chamber of Accompts would not allow of it without a speciall command, the which was dispatched at Paray le Moinat the sixt of Aprill 1481. They gaue but fiue shillings for the Groomes Liuery, and
foure and twenty shillings for Cloakes for the Clarkes, Notaries,
and Secretaries of the house and Crowne of France.
His expence was not all in one place, many did profite by it,
and did draw their commodities out of the liuely Springs of the
Princes Magnificence:Lewis remained little at Paris but most at Plessis. I haue obserued in the Accomps of the
Chamber of the Treasure,By the Accompts of the Kings house which were made monthly, we find that in twelue yeares they were made. but twice at Paris, the one in the Kings house, and the other in that of Maister Iohn of Popin court. that there past not any yeare but hee
made many voiages, and that Paris saw him but seldome: In the
meane time he kept not his Chamber to liue at his ease, neither did
hee imitate the first Kings, who did not shew themselues vnto their
subiects but like the Images of the Gods, which they drew once a
yeare out of their gilded boxes: He did visite his Prouinces, hee
spent not the twelue monthes in one sole lodging of the Zodiake:
Neither did hee send his affaires to the Maior of the Pallace.Clouis the 2. the 12. King of France beganne to giue to his successours, vntill Charlemaigne, the name of idle, They were seene but once a yeare.
Magnificence doth not alwaies consist in the priuate expences
of a Princes house,Magnificence how farre it extends. in numbers of Horses and Dogs, nor in the
shew of Lyons, Tygers, Leopards, or Elephants; it should appeare
in Receiuing, Lodging, Feasting, and defraying forraine
Princes and their Embassadours: This Prince in such occasions
made it knowne that Magnificence doth not dwell but in Kings
houses, and that Frances was the Theater: Hee receiued in this
manner the King of Portugall, the Queene of England, and the
Prince of Wales her sonne, Rene of Aniou King of Sicile, the

Duke of Sauoy, and the Princesses of Sauoy, Anne, Louyse, and
Mary.The expence of these three Princesses came to forty two pounds eleuen shillings and a peny, from the 28 of October to the 24 of Nouember.
By the same respects of Magnificence, which will that a Prince
labour to content the eyes, and minds of others, as himselfe,
A Prince doth many things wherewith hee might dispence if hee had none to content but his owne s^ lf: Magnum est personam in Repubtueri principis qui non animis solum, sed occulis ciuiu^ seruire debet. It is a great matter to maintaine the person of Prince in a state, who is not onely bound to serue the Cittizens minds but also their eyes. Cic. hee made many other expences, which were esteemed and commended
both by his Subiects and Strangers: He did often, and for
many daies, feast and defray the Embassadours of England, Hungary,
Arragon, and Naples. In the yeare 1477. in March, the king
of England sent the Lord Howard to visite him, being followed
by three score and tenne persons, whom he defrayed all the time
of his abode in France. The good cheere hee made vnto the
English at Amiens, after the Treaty of Pyquigny, and the twelue
pipes of wine, of the growth of Fay Monjan which hee caused to
be conueyed to Deipe to giue to Edward King of England, bound
the English to those cries of ioy which were heard in their Army,
and at their departure: A largesse for the Noble King of France.
But as there is one kind of Magnificence which is all in shew,
and doth purchase great applause among the people, so there is
another which is not so glorious and hath much fruite: It is that
which giues pensions to strangers, and doth bind them to serue
the Prince,He doth gratefie his memory in binding learned men vnto him who haue credit with posterity. Senec. which doth nourish, aduance, and recompence good
wits, entertaines excellent Artists, fauours good inuentions, and
all those that haue any credite with posterity.
There is also an other which is Religious,Religious Magnificence. and which hath not
beene knowne but by the most Christian Kings, who without
wronging the greatnesse of their Maiesty made their houses a refuge
for the miserable: Robert sonne to Hugh Capet had commonly
a thousand poore men in his traine, hee gaue them horses to follow
him, and to pray for him:Lewis the 9. was founder of 28. Colledges in France, who dying commanded his sonne to bee deuout to God, and charitable to the poore. Lewis the eleuenth had ordinarily
sixe score, and in Lent two hundred and forty, whom he fed with
meate from his Table.
And yet this is not the whole extent of Magnificence, it goes
farther, and will be seene in Plaies, Shewes, and Iousts, and in
things which are rare, and not common;In publicke calamities, the Greeks and the Romans did vow Hecatombs, they did sacrifice a hundred beastes vpon so many piles of wood: Si vero Imperatorum votum esset, centu^ Leones, centumque Aquilae vna mactabantur. If it were the Emperours vow then were there a hundred Lyons, and a hundred Eagles, slaine together. when as the people did
vow Hecatombes of hundred Oxen, and a hundred Sheepe,
the Emperours did offer a hundred Eagles, and a hundred Lions:
But the expence which is wholy employed for sight, entertaines
the people but till they thinke of the belly* A remembrance
which dispenceth with all other things, and hath no share in publicke
cares, but that which doth prouide meanes to content it,
The multitude cares not for the conduct and good successe of affaires, so they find corne at Market: Vulgo vna ex republica Annonae curae. The common people haue no care of the Common-weale, but for Corne. when it endures any want, all Sights, all Plaies, all Sports are tedious,
and makes them say that the Feast is made at their
charge.
The Princes Magnificence must therefore shew her effects in
things whereas the pleasure incounters with profite, and which
passe not with the contentment which the spirit takes in admiring

them, like vnto the daughter of Maruell which inamels her halfe
circle vnprofitably in the Aire. The Prince must not imitate the
pride of the Pharaohs of Egypt, who employed the sweate of their
Subiects, and the treasure of their Cofers in workes of Ostentation,
They say that the Piramides were vnprofitable workes, but the structure was profitable for the Prince, who by this meanes made his subiects to labor, whom idlenesse had corrupted and drawne to reuolt and sedition. and studied more for vanity then profite: Wherefore Princes
haue caused their Magnificence to be renowned in publicke works,Workes of vanity and ostentation.
and in the b^autifying of Townes, which seemed not to haue bene
ruined but to be re-edified more stately, and which haue purchased
the honour to haue left them to their Successours much fairer then
they had receiued them from their Predecessours.The Citty of Romewas bound to the Emperor Augustus for her decoration, and most glorious ornaments, therfore he said: Roman lateritiam accepi, marmorea^ relinquo: I receiued Rome built of Brick, I leaue it of Marble.
Wee do not see that he did any great workes in Buildings, for it
is a hard matter for a Prince to hold a Sword in one hand, and a
Trowell in another. Hee caused the Church of our Lady of Clery
to be built, and repaired that of Victory neere to Senlis, he did enrich
and beautify by his bounty the High Altar, with 16. Lampes
of Siluer: His Statue stands on the right hand, wee see it also on
the Portall with that of Queene Charlot, and their Armes round
about, with those of the Dauphin. Phillip Augustus had caused this
Church to be built in remembrance of the happy victory which he
had against the Flemmings:The battell of Bovines in Iuly, 1214. wonne by Phillip Augustus against Otho of Saxony, and Iohn King of England: Ferdinand Earle of Flanders was take^ prisoner there and carried to the uure, and the Earle of Salisbury an Englishman to Saint Quentin. There remaines nothing of the ancient
building but the Body and the Cloister, the Inclosure of the
Church, all the Quire and the Portall are new, and carry a remarkable
difference of the Architecture of these two raignes: The first
is plaine and low, the other is stately and more raysed then those
times did beare.
He hath not left in France any other marke of this publicke care,
and although that Phillip de Commines giues him the honour to
haue done more then his Predecessours, in the fortification of his
Realme, yet it was so little as neither the memory nor the fruite
hath remained to his successours.The Romane Emperours haue preserued their memory by the reparatio^ of publicke ruines. Augustus restored the Theater of P. Emilius: Tiberius that of Pompey: Caligula the walles of Syracusa Vespasian the Capitoll. Titus the Theaters: Antonyn that of Adrian, and Alexander Seuerus Traians Bridges. This glory which hath beautified
the Bayes of victorious Princes, and which hath giuen a
dumbe eloquence to Marbles to eternise their names, did belong
to Henry the fourth, the restorer of ruines, whereof France imputed
the cause as well to the liberty of the French, and carlessenes of
her Kings, as to the iniury of times and the designes of her enemies.
As wee may giue him the glory to haue restored life, order, and liberty
to France, so we may say that he hath giuen her a new face, new
force, and new beauty: The Fortresses of France, which did tremble
and humble themselues at the first approach of any enemy, are
become inexpugnable. The Kings houses which seemed desart, and
had felt, with the rest, the fury and liberty of troubles, do now cary
vpon their Frontespice, the glorious markes of the felicity of his
Raigne: Barren and inhabitable places are become fertile and frequented,
Townes are added to Townes, and Riuers ioyned vnto
Riuers for the facillity of the Commerce.
All Bridges, Ports, Passages and High-waies are honoured with
the eternall Monuments of this Princes care for the greatnesse of
his estate, and the necessities of his people, who besides his part

of these publicke workes, retires with one hand for the reward of
his toyles, that which he paies with the other for the tribute of his
duty; for the Treasury of France which hath a continuall ebbing
of that which it receiues, doth not resemble that of some Emperours,
which neuer restores any thing of that which it takes, and
therefore it hath beene compared to Charibdis,The treasure of a couetous Prince is compared by Latinus Pacatius, to the Gulph of Charybdus. Noster ille pirata quicquid vndecunque co^uenerat, id nobis sibique periturum in illa^ specus sui Caribdim congerebat. Boni nostra ad aerariun^, vna and perpetua via iba^t, nullas eorum reliquias, nulla fragmenta, vel sero victa fastidio, illa co^munis vorago reuomebat. That our Pirate whatsoeuer came from any place, that did hee thrust into his Carybdis to perish both for vs and himselfe: Our goods went one way continually to his treasure, and that common Gulphe: and being glutted did not vomite forth againe any relickes or fragments. but with this
difference that this Gulph casts to shore whatsoeuer it hath deuoured,
but nothing comes out of that bottomelesse pit. Thus
the profite made the toyle pleasing, and they which labour so profitably
complaine during the Solstice of Summer that the day
passeth away too fast: Thus the poore cannot excuse their misery
whilst they haue armes left them:A Prince should entertain publike workes least that idlenesse bred sedition, and that the poore may haue no excuse that they want meanes to get their liuings, for where there is idlenesse they alwaies find Mutines and Theeues. Thus idlenesse, the plague of
States, is banisht, and finds no retreat but among idle hands which
steales the fruits from them which labour.
The structure of these great and incomparable workes, whereas
we see the marueiles of the industry of Mirons, of Phidies, Appelles,
and Lysippus, and which are worthy to be accounted the
eighth wonder of the world (if it bee true that there were seuen)
could not be effected but by that great Augustus and most victorious
Prince, the best of the Kings of France and Nauarre:The most glorious Title of a Prince is that which the Senate ordained for Traiane. Nee videri potest optimis in sua cuiusque laude praestantior. Minus est enim Imperatorem and Caesarem and Augustum quam omnibus Imperatoribus, and Caesaribus and Augustis esse meliorem. Hee cannot seeme the best that doth not excel them all in their own vertues: It is lesse to be an Emperour, a Caesar, and an Augustus then to be better then all Emperours Caesars and Augustus: Plin. Panegeric. None
but the Duke of Suilly, great Surueiour of France, could execute
his Commandements with more order, courage, and care.
France is bound vnto him for her decoration, the enriching of her
Crowne, the restoring of her rights, and the recouery of her first
beauty and felicity. For her he hath first put in practise that great
Maxime of polliticke knowledge: To mainetaine fertile places by
commerce, and barren by handy Trades: This Eloge is not mine owne,
I receiued it from the Kings owne mouth.
Clemency:Clemency This goodly Pearle is not seene in his Crowne;
The vertue which rayseth Kings to heauen is Clemency:
Consulere patriae, p^rcere afflictis, fera,Caede abstinere, tempus arque ira, dareOrbi quietem, saeculo pacem suo,Haec summa virtus, petitur hac coelum via.Sen. in Octau. this great and royall vertue which pardons the afflicted, rayseth vp
them that are deiected,Lewis the 11. knew not how to pardon. and breakes the current of choller, was
vnknowne vnto him: Yet neuer Prince found more occasion to
winne himselfe honour, but that deceitfull Maxime, that a Princes
iustice may alwaies and in all cases dissemble,A Prince may mingle prudence with Iustice, he may bee a Doue and a Serpent, with these three conditions, that it be for the necessary, apparant, and important good of the State, that it be with measure and discretion, and that it be for an offence, and not to offend. and sow the Foxes
skinne vnto the Lyons, fil'd his raigne with tragicall examples of
seuerity, and gaue him in dying that contentment not to haue left
any offence vnpunished.

Phillip de Commines being to liue vnder the sonnes raigne,
hath not written all he knew, and could haue spoken, vpon the fathers,
and yet he saies but too much to shew his rigour. Hee was
(these are his words) suspitious, as all Princes bee which haue many
enemies, and which haue offended many, as he had done: Hee was not beloued
of great men, nor of many of the meaner sort, and had charged
his Subiects more then euer King had done.
If Commines would haue painted out a cruell Prince, hee
could not haue imployed other coulours then those wherewith
hee sets forth his rigorous prisons, his Cages of Iron, and his fetters:Cardinall Balue inuentor of these Cages of Iron, was lodged there with the first, and continued 14. yeares. Lacum fodit and aperuit eum and incidit in fouea^ quam fecit. He digged a pit and opened it, and fell into the Ditch whic^ hee had made.
Hee saith, That they were of wood couered with plates of Iron,
that he had caused Germanes to make most heauy and terrible fetters
for mens feete,Rigorous prisons of Lewis the eleuenth. and there was a ring to put vpon the legge, very hard
to open like vnto a choller, the chaine was great and waighty, with a
great bullet of Iron at the end, much more weighty then was fit, and they
were called the Kings Snares.
Although that punishments be the effects of Iustice, and very
necessary, for that hee hurts the good which pardons the wicked,
yet it caries some shew of cruelty, when as the Prince himselfe
seemes more carefull thereof then he ought, and that hee doth
employ them as well against innocents as those that are guilty:
The more rare executions bee, the more profitable is the example. Remedies which curemildly, are to be preferred before the^ which bur^ne and mutulate: To affect new punishment, and against accustomed manners of the Country are markes of cruelty. I haue seene (saith Phillip de Commines) good men prisoners with
fetters on their feete, who afterwards came forth with great honour,
and receiued great fauours from him, amongst others, a sonne to
the Lord of Gruture of Flanders, taken in battell, whom the King
married and made his Chamberlaine, and Seneschall of Anjou, and
gaue him a hundred Lances: Also the Lord of Pie^^es, a prisoner in
the warre, and the Lord of Vergy: For hee found in the end that vigour
doth but distract mens minds, the violent gust of the
Northen wind cannot make a passenger to abandon his Cloake,
whereas the Sunne casting his beames by little and little, doth
heate him in such sort as hee will bee ready to strip himselfe
into his shirit: Generous horses obey the shaddow of a small
Wand, whereas Asses tell their paces by the number of their
blowes.
The raigne of this Prince was wonderfull stormy, they could
not say of him as of Antonyn, that hee had shedde no bloud.
The raigne of the Emperour Antonyn was so good as Herodian called it (...). that is to say without bloud. Tristan his great Prouost, who for his barbarous and seuere
behauiour, did as iustly as Maximin deserue the name of
Sowre, was so ready in the execution of his rigorous commandements,
as hee hath sometimes caused the innocent to bee
ruined for the offendor: Hee alwaies disposed this Prince rather
to vse a sword to punish faults, then a Bridle to keepe them from
falling.
A more temperate Spirit would haue staid him, and Princes
in these stormes doe but what pleaseth them which guide
the effects of their Wils. A Prince is no lesse dishonoured by
the multitude of executions,A multitude of executions, saith Seneca, breeds as bad a reputation to the Prince, as a multitude of Burials to a Physitian, too great rigours makes the paines contemptible, augments the number of offendours, and makes them to become wicked through despight. then a Physitian receiues

blame by the death of his Patient: Claud of Seyssell could not
say any thing more bitter to the memory of this Prince then that
which hee writes: That there were seene about the places of his abode
many men hanged vpon Trees, and the prisons, and other houses neere,
full of prisoners, who were often heard day and night, crying out
for the torments which they endured, besides others which were cast into
the Riuer.
Many great Princes haue felt the seuerity of his humours: Iohn
Duke of Alencon had in the end as much cause to murmurre
against his iustice, as hee had to commend his Clemency in the
beginning of his Raigne. Hee had beene cond^mned to loose
his head vnder Charles the seuenth: The King restored him to his
liberty and honour, to make him some yeares after vndergoe
the like censure:The Duke of Alencon being prisoner in the Casile of Loches was led to Paris the sixt of Iune, 1473. by the Lord of Gaucort, and Chaletiere Steward of the Kings house, with 24. Gentlemen and 50. Archers. Hee caused him to bee apprehended
and carried to the Towre at the Louure; His Processe was made
in the yeare one thousand foure hundred three score and foureteene,
and a Sentence pronounc't the eightenth of Iuly in these
termes:Sentence against the Duke of Alencon. The Court hauing seene the Charges, Informations and
Confrontations of witnesses against Iohn of Alen^con, his voluntary
confessions, the Processe and other things which were to bee seene
touching the great and heynous crimes committed by him, by the
conspiracies, practises, and treaties which hee hath many and
sundry times had, and made, with the English, the ancient enemies
and aduersaries of this Realme, and other Rebels disobedient to the
King, and to the great preiudice of the King, and subuersion of the
publique good of the Realme, forgetting, through ingratitude, the
great grace that the King had done him,The King going into Touraine about the end of the first yeare of his raigne, found Iohn Duke of Alencon prisoner at Loches, and set him at liberty. infringing the conditions
for the which the King had pardoned him, and likewise the quality of
other crimes which hee had committed: Hauing also seene and considered
all that was to bee seene in this party, with mature deliberation,
It hath beene said that the Court declares the said Iohn
of Alencon guilty of High Treason,Crimes wherewith the Duke of Alenicon was accused. and Murther, and to haue
caused counterfeit Money to bee qu^ined with the Kings stampe and
Armes,Coyning of money is one of the rights of Soueraignety: It is treason to make any be it good or bad; Many Nobleme^ in France had the priuiledge to coine, but they were reuoked by an Edict made by King Francis the first. and as such a one, the said Court hath condemned him
to receiue death, and to bee executed by Iustice, and with all hath
declared all and euery his goods forfeited to the King, the execution
notwithstanding of the said Iohn of Alencon, reserued vnto
the Kings good pleasure. The King freed him from the paine, but
hee left him one more tedious then that of death, Ignominy and
Imprisonment.
Hee did not also suffer Rene King of Sicile his Vnkle by the
mothers side to liue in peace: Hee commanded his Court of
Parliament to make his Processe, But it made him answere that hee
could not bee iudged of Treason but in the Kings presence.
Bodin in the fourth booke of his Common-weale, the sixt Chapter, saith; that the Court of Parliament made this answere the twenty sixth of April one thousand foure hundred three score and fifteene: It had done the like in the Duke of Alencons Processe in the time of King Charles the seuenth, In the yeare 1458. Hee had the courage to withstand this brunt, and as wee haue

seene, attended vntill that time had cured the vlcer of the Kings
hatred against him.
The Duke of Nemours could not escape the seuerity of his Iustice,
the which hee had contemned by great relapses into the
same faults. If the Duke of Bourgundy had returned a Conquerour
from the Suisses and Lorraines, the King would haue beene
no lesse troubled to put him to death, then to set him at liberty:
Captiuity is a meanes to free the soule from the tyranny of the body: It is an act of cenerosity to contemne death more then to hate life. Fortium virorum est magis mortem contemnere quam odisse vitam. Q. Cur. lib. 5. The tediousnesse of his prison had disposed his soule to leaue
that of the body without griefe, to contemne death and to hate
life.
Princes finde the offences of them they haue bound vnto
them more sencible and lesse pardonable: The King had erected
the County of Nemours into a Dutchy,Relapses of the Duke of Nemours. he had pardoned him
his felony of the League of the Common-weale, and yet forgetting
the effects of such a bond, and his oath of fealty, presently
after the Duke of Guienne was retired into Brittany hee sent
a man vnto him, disguised like a Frier, to offer him both his body
and goods, protesting to serue (as hee did) against the King his
Soueraigne Lord. The Duke of Guiennes death forced the Duke
of Nemours to flye the second time to the Kings mercy, for a
second pardon, which the King granted him vpon an oath which
hee tooke neuer to conspire against his Prince:The extract of the Processe sent to the Prouines and Parliaments, shewes that this oath was taken in the presence of sixe Apostolike Notaries, and sixe Royall Notaries, and vpon the Crosse end Crowne of our Sauiour. soone after hee
assisted the Earle of Armagnac, and renewed the practises and
intelligences which he had with the Duke of Bourgundy: All
these inconstant actions weere degenerated into so many crimes,
which might not remaine vnpunished, and which did assure him
that death could not surprise him. His soule was bound to resolue
the same day that hee entred into resolutions, which could not be
otherwise expiated.
Innocency may bee surprized, crimes cannot, for the offence and the punishment are Twinnes: it is also a kinde of content to foresee which way wee must passe. Iulian dying did thanke the Gods for that they had not kild him by surprize. The King caused him to bee taken at Carlat, and sent him
prisoner to the Castle of Pierrescise, which was then without
the walles of Lyon. A while after hee caused him to bee conducted
to Paris, where his Processe was made by the Court of
Parliament.By an accord made betwixt King Lewis the eleuenth, and Iames of Armagnac Duke of Nemours, the 17. of Ianuary, in the yeare 1469. the said Duke did renounce his place of Peere, being content to be tryed as a priuate person, if hee did faile in his obedience to the said King, who did not shew that rigour, but did furnish his Court with Peeres for his iudgement, made at Noion the fourth of August 1477. Du Tiller. The Lord of Beaujeu Earle of Clermont was
President by the Kings Commission: Hee confest all that hath
beene formerly spoken, and moreouer that hee had had intelligence
with the Constable of Saint Paul to seaze vpon the
King and Dauphin:Confessions of the Duke of Nemours. That the Duke of Bourgundy had sent
him word if hee could take them hee should haue the Citty of
Paris and the Ile of France for his part: That the Dauphin should
be deliuered into the hands of Monsir de Bresse, and the King transported
out of the Realme of France:The Duke of Nemours confessed more that hee had consulted and giuen credit to a Frier a Doctor of Diuinity, whose bookes had beene burnt in the Bishops Hall at Paris. Vpon these occasions
he was condemned to loose his head at the Hales in Paris, the

fourth of August, one thousand foure hundred three score and
seuenteene: Hee was a Peere of France, but this quallity was
omitted in his Sentence, for that by an accord made the seuenteenth
of Ianuary, in the yeare one thousand foure hundred
three score and nine, hee had renounced his place of Peere,
and was content to bee tryed as a priuate-person, in case of relapse.
The sentence of death was pronounced vnto him by Peter of
Oriole Chancellour of France:A Prince shold alwaies keepe his word inuiolably, and hold faith the foundation of Iustice. It is a great glory for a Prince when his tongue and heart agrees. Mira est in principe nostrome^tis linguaeque concordia, no^ modo humilis and p^^ui animi sed seruile vitium scit esse mendacium: The vnion of mindle and tongue is admirable in our Prince: hee knowes that lying is not onely the signe of a base and abiect mind, but that it is a seruile vice. Hee had no refuge to his innocency,
for it appeared not, nor to the Kings Clemency, which
was tyred with releeuing him, hee appealed to Faith, which is the
first vertue of a Prince, saying: That hee had not yeelded but vpon
assurance of a pardon, which was promised him. The King protested
that he had not promised him any thing, and that he would rather
haue forced him in the Castle of Carlat, then receiue him to
saue his life, hauing so often deserued death. Hee therefore would
haue the chiefe points, whereof he was conuicted, drawne out
of his processe, and sent to other Parliaments throughout the
Prouinces, to the end they might know what had incensed the seuerity
of his Iustice.
Hee neuer pardoned any that had beene ingaged in the league
of the Common-wealth, nor those which had banded themselues
against him to follow his brothers dessignes. His hatred against
the Bishop of Paris appeared most after the death of this Prelate,
for being aduertised that hee was lamented by all the Orders
of Paris, hee commanded the Prouost and Aldermen of Paris to
make him an Epitaph, which shewed the bad seruices hee had
done his Maiesty, by his intelligences with the Princes of the
League. As they that were neerest vnto his bloud haue felt the
effects of his wrath, so they which thought themselues to be neerest
vnto his heart haue not beene freed,Princes fauors are not immortall. Fato potentiae (saith Tacitus speaking of Maecenas) raro sempiternae, an satias cupit, aut illos cum omnia tribuerunt, aut his cum ia^ nihil reliquum est quod cupiant. and haue not growne
old before they haue tryed the truth of this old Maxime:Fauours of Princes last not. That Princes
fauours soone grow old: For a Prince is weary of giuing; or hee
that is fauoured being full of fauours doth not care to husband
the continuance: They make mention of the feare hee put the
Lord of Lude, and the Earle of Sancerre in. Antony of Chasteauneuf
Lord of Lau, may well be produced for an example, both
of his fauours and of the miseries which doe accompany fauorites:
The Chronicle saith that hee was chiefe Butler of France,
Seneschall of Guienne, Lord Chamberlaine to the King, and
more beloued of him then euer any one had beene, hauing had in
lesse then fiue yeares, three or foure hundred thousand Crownes
in reward from the King: But we must attend the end, and not
iudge of the building before it bee finisht;Aluaro de Luna who^ Iohn King of Castile aduanced and loued aboue all men of his Realme, said to them that admired his fortune: Iudge not of the building before it be fun^sh^. He dyed by the hands of Iustice. behold the backeside
of the Medal. At his returne from the voyage of Peronne he
caused him to bee put in prison in the Castle of Suilly vpon Loire:
He commanded Tristan to draw him from thence and to leade him
to Vsson in Auuergne, but he escaped.

Many were punished for this euasion, Charles of Melun, a man at
Armes of the Admirals company, and Captaine of Vsson lost his
head at Loches, his wiues sonne called Remonet, and the Kings Atturney
at Vsson.
This Charles of Melun must not bee taken for Charles of Melun
who commanded in the Bastille, when as Paris was besieged by the
Army of the league, and who could not auoyd it, but his fidelitie
was otherwise censured by his King then it appeared in the proofes
of his seruice. He felt the stormes of fortune in the disgrace which
hee receiued when as the king tooke from him the Office of Lord
Steward of France, to giue it to the Lord of Craon.
The ordinary examples of new punishments for old faults made
repentance vaine: his searches being feared of Innocents, did forbid
them that were guilty to trust vnto the assurances of his clemency.
All were in feare, and stood vpon their guard, not so much
for him as against him. They knew well, that he had his eyes blindfold,
to strike of euery side, according to his choler, and the suddennesse
of Tristan,Seuerity of Tristan the Hermit. who had reduced the markes of Maiesty to the
Sword and Halter. If hee had sworne by as many Gods as the Aegyptians,
Assyrians, Persians and Grecians did worship,The Egiptians did worship as many Gods as the Earth brought them forth fruits, the Assyriars as many as they had Town: the Persians as many as they saw stars, or fires the Gretians as many as they had fountaines. no man
would haue trusted him; wherefore they that followed his brother
considering that hee knew not how to forget iniuries, and that hee
made a iest of that royall precept: A Prince that will sa^e much, must
pardon much, they went to serue them whom they held to bee least
reconcileable with him.
Claude de la Chastre, who had left him, vpon some discontentment,
to serue the Duke of Guienne, who honoured him with many
charges, and among others, with the guard of his person, had
retired himselfe vnto his house at Nancy after the death of this
Prince:If a Prince hath any subiect of choller, it should bee open, and soone gone, it is not generous to conuert it into hatred. and the King, who had both his choler sudden, and his
hatred long against offences of this kinde, and who neuer held the
smallest that were committed against him, to be light, sent to take
him prisoner by his Gossip Tristan, and held him about a moneth
in suspence what he should doe with him: for hee had committed
no fault, but in seruing the Duke of Guienne loyally, preseruing his
faith vnstained amidst great temptations, and seeing himselfe a
prisoner, hee did more glory to bee an Innocent in prison, then
guilty at liberty:Admirable is ^ at faith which amidst great accidents and vehement pursutes remains vntainted. hee caused him to come before him, and demanded
of him, if he had a will to serue him as faithfully as he had done
his brother. He answered, that he could neuer do so great seruice
vnto his Maiesty; but his affection would be greater; and that the
seruice which he had done vnto the Duke of Guienne, was a proofe
of the fidelity which he would alwayes shew to him that should be
his Maister. The King told him, that hee would vse his seruice, and
hauing an intent to make his guard, as well of his owne subiects, as
of strangers,The Infidelity of subiects forceth Princes to imploy strangers for their guards. Alex. Seuerus was the first which tooke souldiers of a rough aspect terrible and fearfull, and therefore Dyon saith that his entry into Rome was odious. The Emperours did ordinarily imploy Gaules, Italia^ Spaniards, Germans, or Macedonians. The Emperour of Constantinople was guarded by Englishmen, Tiberius by Germans, Nero had Hollanders, or Frisons, and Herod of Iudea Germans. hee sent him with a Commission to raise a Company
of an hundred Gentlemen for the guard of his person: then remembring
that his wife had beene much altered and distempered

with his imprisonment;Lewis fears the reue^ge of women. and that the weakest are strong enough to
doe mischiefe, hee said vnto him; Hearken Captaine Claude, women
are bad when they will do a mischiefe; behold a paire of perfumed gloues
which thou shalt carry to thy wife from me, with fiue hundred Crownes
which are in them: I know that she was much afraid when as my Gossip
Tristan went to take thee, bid her that shee should not wish mee ill,
and come againe to mee three Moneths hence with thy Companie.
I giue thee one of my best Mules to carry thee more easily.
This was the first French Company, there hauing beene none
before but that of Scottishmen,The first guard of the body was Scottishmen, and therefore the Captaine of the Scottish guard carries the Title of the first Captaine of the Guardes of the Kings person: he begins the yeare, and serues the first quarter. and it is called at this day, The ancient
French Guard. Claude of la Chastre, who was the first Captaine,
dyed at the age of 81 years, vnder the reigne of Lewis the twelfth.
After his death, fiue of his successors and heires of the same Armes
commanded successiuely in this charge. It is at this day commanded
by Monsieur de Pralins.
Offences grew not old in his memory, and the secret wounds
which his ConscienceA Conscience toucht with remorse for his cruelties and inhumanities, suffereth terrible torments without dying. Such was that of Herod, and of Catullus, who were terrified euery night with the fights of such as they had put to death, and had daily their complaints and sighes in their eares. gaue him in reproach of so many men
which had beene beaten and ruined by the lightning of his Iustice,Hee pursues old offences.
made him not more tractable to pardon. Hee did neuer forget the
displeasure which he receiued during the wrath and indignation of
King Charles his Father. Three great personages of the Parliament
of Grenoble; Iohn Bayle, the Kings Atturney, th^^ a Councellor,
and afterwards a President. Guy Pape, a Councellor in the same Parliament,
and held by the soueraigne Courts and Vniuersities of all
Europe, the Oracle of the Law, and Rene of Tomassin, a Councellor
also, felt in their Age, the rough blowes of this Princes remembrance.
They had all three declared themselues for the Father
against the sonne, and not willing, in this diuision, to wauer
betwixt Iustice and Discretion, resisted his designes, and diuerted
all those which strayed from their duety to follow this
Prince.
As soone as Lewis came to the Crowne, hee remembred all
this,A Prince which pardons offences, giues a great peace vnto his conscience. The Panegerick of Constantine hath this goodly passage: Sibi imputet quisquis vti noluit beneficio tuo, nec se dignum vita iudicauit quum per te liceret vt viueret: tu quod sufficit conscientiae tuae etiam non merentibus pepercis^i. Sed ignosce dicto non omnia potes, dij te vindicant and inuitant. Let him impute it to himselfe that would not make vse of thy bounty, neither did he thinke himselfe worthy of life, when he might haue liued by it: thou to satisfie thine owne conscience, hast spared euen them that deserued it not. But pardon me, thou canst not doe all, the Gods reuenge thee, and inuite thee. not to make vse of it to the glory of Clemency, and to the
content of a good Conscience, which takes delight to pardon euen
them which deserue it not, and remits the reuenge to God, but
to giue new punishments to old offences; and as his nature was
more prompt to reuenge an offence, then to reward a good seruice,
and more easie to hate then to loue,They are very naturall passions to be sensible of iniuries. It is a dulnesse and basenesse to haue no feeling of an iniury, and it is folly to hold that for an iniury which is not. Irasci in quibus non oporter, insipiens est: non irasci in quibus oporter, insipientis est. Arist. in 3. Eth. hee caused a Commission
to bee dispatched the two and twentieth day of Aprill, in the
yeare 1462. and sent it to the President of the Chamber of Accounts,
and to one of the Stewards of his house, to make the Processe
for these three good seruants to king Charles the seuenth.
The chiefe points of the Accusation were, That they had assisted
and seconded King Charles in the detention of Dauphine (for so
they spake) from the Dauphin Lewis, the true and onely Lord of
that Prouince: That they had crost the designes of their Soueraigne
Lord, and that the generall Estate of the Prouince, assembled at Grenoble,
did not grant him a summe of money to supply his wants when
as hee was in Flanders. That Bayle had imprisoned all his seruants
which came about his affaires, and depended wholly of king Charles;
from whom hee had obtained, for one of his sonnes, the Archbishoppricke
of Ambrun; and for another, the place of Atturney Generall.
The accused were heard, and the Innocency which they felt
in their Soules, did put such generous words into their mouthes,
as the Iudges hearing them, did not distinguish good men but
by the hatred of their Prince, and their hard Fortunes, holding
them more worthy of the Recompence of Prytaneus,The Iudges consulted after what manner they should put Socrates to death: Cicero saith, that vpon the diuersity of their opinions, hee spake after this manner: Ego ob ea quae feci dignu^ me censeo qui publicitus alar in Prytaneo. then
of the Seuerity of Areopage: Yet they were forced vpon these
Accusations, to pronounce a sentence the second of Iune following,
by the which they were declared, conuicted of Felonie,
Ingratitude and Treason committed against the Dauphin,A sentence very rigorous. depriued
of their Offices, Charges and Dignities, and condemned to restore
the Fees receiued by them since the Dauphins departure into Flanders,
their Fees, Landes, Signiories, Iurisdictions, and other goods
depending of the Dauphin confiscate, and themselues banished for euer
out of Dauphine, with defence neuer to returne againe vpon paine of
death.
They ended the remainder of their dayes vnder the rigour of
this Iudgment, and and left nothing to their Children, but the
hope of a milder Reigne, hauing not tasted any vnder this
Prince.Those which had beene Donotaries of these goods, would not leaue them, and opposed to the Letters of CHARLES the eighth, that of LEVVIS the eleuenth, by a Sentence solemnly giuen by the Commissioners in the presence of the Kings Lieutenant, dated the eight and twentith day of Iune, in the yeare 1484. It was said, Priorem sententiam minus debite fuisse latam nec talemeos pati debuisse, sed po^ius absoluendos. The first sentence was not duly had, neither should they haue suffered it, but were rather to bee absolued. M. de Franc, Treasurer of France at Grenoble instructed mee herewith. After his death, King Charles the eighth, by his letters
dated the three and twentieth day of March, in the yeare 1483.
restored them to their Honours, Fame and Reputation, and would
that all their goods should bee restored vnto them, notwithstanding
any opposition which was made by them that held
them as confiscate.
The examples of this seuerity shewes the reason of the feare
and distrust which troubled his minde, and kept him shut vp like
the vestall fire, and set Care and Silence in guard about him, being
reasonable that hee should feare those which hee had hurt:
for neither great nor small can loue them that haue wronged them.
Herewith accords that which Claudius of Seyssell hath written.The feare which growes from rigour and seuerity doth neuer purchase the peoples loue. Oderunt quem me*tuunt. And it is hard long to resist the publicke hatred. Plebi multae manus, principi vna ceruix. A multitude hath many hands, and a Prince but one necke.
He openly discouers the feare which he had of his subiects when as

hee heard say,Galeas D. of Millan brother in law to the King. that Duke Galeas Sforce had been slaine by certaine
Millanois in the Citty of Millan vpon a festiuall day, and in the
Church: for he augmented his guards about his person, and forbad
them to suffer any man to approach neere him; and if any one
did striue, hee commanded them to kill him. And moreouer hee
caused a page to carry a Pertuisan after him, to defend himselfe if any
should offer to outrage him; the which (beeing come into his
Chamber) was set at his beddes head: And truly it appeared plainly
at his death, whether he were beloued or hated: for then all sorts
of people reioyced, few were sorry for it; no not his very seruants,
and they to whom hee had done most good. But if nothing
but the dislike of the people had blemished the memory of this
great Prince, it had not beene lesse glorious; the Iudgements of
the multitude are Iudgements of folly, and the affections of the
people are alwayes indiscreet, they reiect that which is good, and
approue that which is bad; what they say is false, what they commend
is infamous, what they vndertake is fury, and they make
things greater then they are.They that haue wel known the people, haue compared their iudgements to a tempest. In Imperita multitudine est varietas and inconstantia and crebra tanquam procella, sic sententiarum commutatio. In the vnskilful multitude there is variety and inconstancy, and often like vnto a tempest, so often they change their mindes. Cic. pro domo sua.
His Iustice.Iustice. They cannot depriue him of the honour of the erection
of two parliaments, to doe iustice to them of Guienne, and
of Bourgondy. He instituted that of Bourdeaux in the beginning
of his Reigne, and that of Dijon presently after the death of
Charles the Terrible. We haue shewed before how much he was
grieued for that hee had not reformed many things that were deformed
vnder his reigne, and especially the administration of Iustice.
He had beene bred vp in an Age so full of liberty, that as he
had beene forced to see and suffer many iniustices,A Prince shold neuer dispence with the lawes of reason. Those words are flatteringly tyrannicall, Licet si libet, in summa fortuna id equius quod validius, nihil iniusta quod fructuo sunt; sanctiras, pietas, fides priuata hona sunt, qua iuvat Reges eant. That is lawfull that they list; in a great fortune that is iustest that is of most force, there is nothing vniust that brings profile; sanctity, Piety and Faith are priuate vertues: Kings may go which way they please. The Law is the Prince which wee must obey, the head which wee must follow, and the rule whervnto we must apply all our actions. Arist. 3. Polit. It is the inuention and the gift of the Gods. Demost. in Aristog. so hee did not
care but to doe iustice himselfe, according to the lawes of his will,
thinking that his duty was contained within the limits of his pleasure,
and reason within those of his will.
But admit his life were so pure and sincere,Hatred of Lewis 11. against the parliame^t. as the most seuere Cato
could finde no cause of reprehension, yet would it bee hard to
excuse that which Philip de Commines saith, That hee hated the Parliament
of Paris, and that hee had resolued to bridle it. This is
not like a little flye vpon the face of his reputation to beautifie it,
but a malitious vlcer to disfigure it. It is the duty of a good Prince
to giue authority to the administration of his soueraigne Iustice, to
maintaine those venerable heads which conceiue the Oracles, and
preserue the rules of state, who are alwaies laden with mortar to repaire
the ruines, and are the Ministers and Interpreters of the law,k
which is the rarest inuention, and the most excellent gift that Heauen
hath giuen to men.
The rootes of this hatred were very deepe, and the first effects
did appeare in the yeare 1442. when as K. Charles the 7. his father

left him at Paris, to command there in his absence. The Earle of
Maine sought to make vse of this occasion, and of his fauour to
haue certaine priuiledges verified. The Court of Parliament being
prest, and in a manner forst, put this clause in the verification; By
the expresse commandement, to shew that if their suffrages had been
free, it had not been done;We finde often in the Registers of Soueraigne Courts these words, De expresso mandato: and De expresissimo ma^dato, and sometimes, Multis vicibus reiterato. he sent for the Presidents of the Court,
and commanded them to put out that clause, else hee would leaue
all, and would not go out of Paris vntill it was done. The wisdome
of the Court contented him, the clause was put out of the Decree,
and retained vpon the Register.
The change which he made in the Parliament presently after his
Coronation, was a branch of this root;Iohn of la Vacquety was Recorder of the Town of Arr as, when as after the death of Duke Charles the King did send to summon it to yeeld. La Vacquerie said that it might not be, for it was of the ancient patrimony of the Earles of Flanders, and descended to the ^ daughters for want of heires male. and I thinke that it serues
for a reason, for that vpon the execution of the Treaty of Conflans,
the letters were directed to the Chancellour and Priuy-Councell
before the Parliament. It is also true, that hee would
often haue had the willes of the Court liable to his; and that hauing
threatned it vpon the refusall it made to verifie some Edicts
which it had found vniust,Whether a Magistrate bee allowed to quit his Office rather then to verifie an Edict, is a question treated by Bodin in the second booke and fourth chapter of his Common-weale, but very superfluous, for there is not any one but knowes therein what he should doe. the President la Vacquery (whom hee
had drawne from the seruice of the Princesse of Flanders) came
vnto him with a good number of other Presidents and Councellors
in their scarlet roabes. The King being amazed to see this
red procession, demanded wherefore they came. Sir, (answered la
Vacquerie) we come to resigne vp our places into your hands, and to endure
whatsoeuer it shall please you, rather then to wrong our consciences
in verifying the Edicts which you haue sent vs. Hee was very sensible
of these words of Conscience, and did not willingly like of any
thing that was spoken to charge it: he presently called them backe,
and promised neuer to doe any thing but what should bee iust
and reasonable: yet this course was not commended by them
who compare a Magistrate leauing his charge (for that he cannot
allow of the Princes will) to a Marriner which abandons the
Helme during a Tempest,A Magistrat^ should not quit his charge for any respect. or to a Physitian, who iudging the
Disease incurable, doth not vovchsafe to apply Remedies to
asswage the paine when as hee sees those that may cure it are in
vaine.
In these occasions the examples of good men, whom wee
must imitate, and the aduice of wise men whom wee must honour,
should carry a light before iudgement. Hee who first (in
France) had the keeping of the sacred Seales of two Crownes,
seeing himselfe sometimes forced to haue the constancy of his
duety striue with the absolute commandements of the King,
shewes how others, ouer whom the dignity of his Office, his vertues,
experience and merits giue preheminence, should compose
and gouerne their Actions.
When as the King, to free himselfe from the Importunity
of some Spirites which are hard to content, and who abusing
discretion in demanding, grow discontented when they vse liberty
in refusing, commandes him to passe the Seale for things which

exceede the ordinary formes of Iustice, and are both without
President and Reason.Example is a cleere light in doubtful things: for those which are not grounded vpon example, cannot bee maintained by reason. Quod exemplo fit, id etiam iure fieri putant. That which is done ly example, that they thinke lawfully done. Cic. ad Sulpitium. Hee hath beene heard to say, that hee
should hold himselfe inexcusable, vnworthy of his charge, and
to carry the Title, of the first Minister of the Kings Soueraigne
Iustice, if hee did represent vnto him the wrongs which
it receiued in commaunding him things forbidden by the lawes,
and which should bee odious to his owne iudgement, if importunity
had not rather wrested then obtained them from
his bounty;Iustice is the felicity of Empires. they haue seene how discreetly to his Admonitions
hee added most humble prayers not to wrong the most sacred
thing which the wisedome of God hath left to Princes for the
felicity of their estates.
And when these Admonitions haue not preuailed, that his
Maiestie hath had other motions, and that the effects which seemed
contrary to Iustice, haue made him see causes which
Time, the Men, and the Affaires haue made lawfull and necessary,
hee hath alwayes conuerted his Reason into Obedience,
contenting himselfe to haue shewed the integrity of his minde,
without opposition against the will of his Prince, which is aboue
the Lawes, and doth declare all that iust which doth accomodate
his Affaires: for there is no Lawe which commaundes a Magistrate
to ruine himselfe in maintaining Iustice against the power
of his Prince; and Wisedome, which carries a light before all other
vertues, will that a man faile in any thing rather then himselfe.Among the Precepts which Polybius sent to Demetrius, to draw him out of the danger into which youth and indiscretion had ingaged him, this is remarkable. Quit all rather then thy selfe.
When as the Princes will strayes from reason, it must bee
reclaimed mildly by discretion; wee must thinke that hee can doe
nothing without the aduice of his Parliaments:Kings haue alwayes had a Councell a part, to consult and resolue vpon the great affaires of their estate. The peeres of France did not enter into the Kings Councel, and their quality did not priuiledge them, if they did not please the King. It is also obserued in the Ordonances for the gouernment of the realme, and for the Regency in the absence and minority of Kings, they doe not in any sort speake of the Peeres of France. The King
should bee no King if there were (in his Realme) an Authority
aboue his. Great resolutions, which concerne the safety of the
State, are not treated of in great Assemblies, where as the secret,
which is as the soule, cannot bee long kept in, but doth euaporate.
Matters are neuer kept secret in great Assemblies: whatsoeuer was done in the Senat of Rome, was blowne abroad, the Senators Children told newes to their Mothers; and Titus Liuius wonders that the Embassadors of Greece and Asia had discouered nothing of the speech which King Eumenes had vsed in open Senat against King Perseus.
Monarkes haue alwayes had a Councell separated from the
Senate, which is otherwise busied enough with the flowing and
ebbing of Sutes, and they haue not onely reserued great affaires
to their Councell, but they would haue chosen persons confifidently
to impart vnto them their most important affaires. This
is not without President: for the greatest and most happy Founders
of the Roman Empire, had (besides the Senate) a Priuie
Councell of few persons.Iulius Caesar had for his priuy Councellors, Q. Paedius, and Corn. Balbus: Augustus had Maecenas and Agrippa, with whom hee treated his greatest, and most important Affaires.

The Parliaments haue the care of the execution of the Kings
Edicts, they publish them, and cause them to bee obserued:
they keepe the Registers, that at neede they may haue recourse
to them. It is true that Princes haue sometimes shewed themselues
so absolute in their willes, as the wise men of their Councell,
not beeing able to restraine or moderate them, haue often
allowed the oppositions which the Parliaments haue made to
their Edicts, and fauoured them for that they were conformable
to reason, and agreeing with the publicke good. For although
the Soueraigne bee aboue the Lawes, and that hee may derogate
from Right and Law, wherein Soueraignty doth properly
consist, yet it is necessary that the absolute power bee restrained
by the Ciuill, and that he consider, that in destroying the Law,
and offending Iustice, he is like vnto the Iuy, which puls downe the
wall that beares it vp.
I leaue it vnto the wise to consider, if they did well to put into
the mouth of King Charles the ninth,Words of K. Charles to the parliament. (the thirteenth yeare of
his Age, and the second of his Reigne) these wordes:These wordes are reported by Bodin in the 3d book of his Common weale, the first chapter, and hee addes, that the Parliament made other admonitions, for that there was a diuision vpon the publication of his Letters, which gaue occasion of the Decree of the Priuy Councell the 24 of September following, by the which the diuision was declared void, and the Parliament forbidden to put into deliberation the Ordonances proceeding from the King concerning affaires of State; the which was also done by letter patents in the yeare 1528. I will not
that you deale with any other thing but to doe good and speedy Iustice:
for the Kings my Predecessors haue not set you in the place where you
are, but to that effect, and not to make you my Tutors, nor protectors
of the Realme, nor preseruers of my Citty of Paris: And when I
shall commaund you any thing, if you finde any difficulty, I shall bee
content you acquaint me with it; which done, without any further reply
I will bee obeyed.
But when the State is gouerned by a wise Prince, whose reputation
is grounded vpon great and eminent vertues, they haue
no other part in the Estate,The Authority of the king is an Ocean. but the Honour and the Obedience.
The duety of a soueraine Magistrate is to obey the Prince, to bend vnder his obedience, to co^mand his subiects, to defend the warlicke, to resist the mighty, and to do Iustice to all. A Regall power is an Ocean, into the which all others,
like vnto Riuers, loose their name: They bee as Starres, which
borrow their light from the Sunne, and haue none in his presence.
It is sometimes necessary that they resist those commandements
which haue beene rather extorted by importunity, then obtained
by reason from the Princes motion; and the admonitions
which they make in such occasions, should bee alwayes considered.
But if the Prince haue other Reasons, and other respects,
and that his thoughts go not the common way, it is not for them
to shew themselues difficult, neither must they attend a third command;
and it were better to dissemble and support some things
extraordinary to the Princes will, then to incense him. It is well
knowne, that the obstinacy and resistance of PAPINIAN to
the will of CARACALLA, made him more cruell and violent.Caracalla hauing put his brother Geta to death, he commended Papinian to make his excuse vnto the Senat. Papinian answered suddenly, That he would not do it, and that it was not so easie to excuse, as to commit a particide. Caracalla incensed with this answere, put him to death, and continued his cruelties, which a more discreet proceeding had restrained. Spartiat.
Wise men thinke one thing, but they do not vtter it: They alwayes

wayes goe one way, but they goe not still the same pace. If a
storme hinders them from comming into the hauen, it is wisedome
to obey the Winde, and not to bandy against the Tempest.
The Office of a Wise man is comprehended by Cicero in these words: Vt in nauigando tempestati obsequi arti^ est, sic omnibus nobis in administranda Repub. proposit^m esse debet. Non idem semper dicere sed idem semper spectare. As in sailing it is Art to obey the Tempest, so should all wee doe in the gouernment of the Common-weale. Not alwayes to speake the same thing, but to look to the same end.
Lewis the eleuenth strained his absolute power vnto the
height: His Prouost went and tooke prisoners out of the Consergerie
of the Pallace, and caused them to bee drowned
right against the Mercers Grange. Towardes the end of his
dayes, hee found his Conscience much opprest with the contempt
of Iustice: hee would haue repaired it, but he was come to
the Sabaoth of the weeke, when it was no longer lawfull to labour.
In Aprill 1482. hee sent vnto the Court of Parliament an Act
of the Oath which hee tooke at his Coronation,The King in his Oath at his Coronation, doth promise to defend his subiects from all violence and wrong, and that in all iudgements hee will commaund equity and mercy, to the end that God, who is mercifull, may grant it to him and his subiects. to exhort
them to doe good Iustice, and to free him from that bond. It is
that wherein the condition of Princes is to bee lamented: They
are laden with the very weight of their Consciences, and with
the excesse which hath beene committed throught all the Orders
of the Realme, for that they haue neglected the remedies. What
peace can a soule haue which labours to fight against his owne
faults and other mens?It is a troublesome enterprise to correct his owne vices, and to striue against other mens. Neque enim multum prodest vitia sua projecisse si cum alienis rix ^ndum est. Neither hath hee profited much that hath cast away his owne faults, if hee must contend with other mens. SENEC.
Hee that shall consider how easily hee did communicate with
all sorts of persons, and how willingly hee did heare them, he
will thinke that if hee had not a care of Iustice in generall, hee
had done it to all men in particular: But hee erred as well in
this, as in any other thing. But it is equally bad to giue eare to
all the World, and not to any man, and hee made it knowne,
that in matters which are held perfect among men, there is alwayes
some thing to bee taken away, or added, and that is onely
perfect, where there is nothing wanting, nor any thing that exceeds
it.There is nothing perfect in the vertues of men: Nothing can come from man that is in euery degree perfect. Nunquam e mortali semine nascetur qui sit omnibus bonitatis numeris absolutus. Hee shall neuer bee borne of mortall seede that shall bee absolute in all goodnesse, DIONYS. HALIC. lib. 8.
PHILIP DE COMMINES hath obserued in two places of
his History, that his eare was open to euery man. In the first
hee saith; Neuer any man did lend so much eare to men, nor did
enquire of so many things as hee did, nor that desired to knowe
so many men. In the second: Hee medled with many meane things
of his Realme, which hee might well haue forborne, but his humour
was such, and so hee liued. And his memory was so great, as hee remembred
all things, and knew all the world, both in all Countries,
and about him.
It is the office of a King to heare the complaints of his subiects
with mildenesse and gentlenesse, which doth not blemish Maiesty.
God who hath constituted them Iudges ouer their Subiects, will

require reason of the Iustice which hath bene demanded and not
done,Kings should giue an account of the administration of Iustice ouer their people: Wisd. 6. Audite Reges terrae and intelligite, discite iudices finium terrae, praebete aures vos, qui continetis multitudines, and placetis vobis in turbis nationu^, quoniam data est a Domino potestas vobis and virtus ab Altissimo, qui interrogabit opera vestra, and cogitationes: quoniam cum effetis Ministri regni illius no^ recte iudicastis nec custodistis legem Iustitiae^, neque secum du^ voluntate^ Dei ambulastis: Heare ^ yee Iudges of the earth, vnderstand, etc. To demaund Iustice of a King is to do him a kind of homage
which doth not belong to any other, and to confesse that he
holds the ranke ouer men that God doth ouer Kings: But for that
they cannot participate with euery thing, see all, heare all, not bee
euery where,Princes relye vpo^ their Ministers. they relye vpon the dilligence and fidelity of their
seruants, whereof some assist them with their wits, counsell, and
tongues, and others with their hands, swords, and fortune. France
hath alwaies beene seconded by men of this quality, it brings
more forth daily, and is not weary of so many Childe-birthes.
Princes are like worke-men, their Officers are the Iustruments with
the which they may cut and fashion as they please: And although
all charges bee distinguished and haue their bounds, that the
Trowell may not do the office of the Hammer, yet they tend all
to one end, the seruice of the Prince, whereon depends the publick
safety, which is the perfection of the worke.
The Princes eare is like vnto the Temple of the Goddesse
Horta, which was alwaies open, but the prayers must be short and
guided by reuerence and humility, for Iupiter of Crete hath
eares at his feete: Those which are vniust, are dead towards the
King, and mortall towards God for him that makes them: Wee
must speake vnto the King as if God vnderstood it, and none must
speake vnto God as if we were vnderstood by men. There are
some which demand things of Kings which they would not giue
to them that aske them, and others that would blush if the prayers
which they make vnto God were knowne: Wherefore a Prince
sends such petitions to whom hee pleaseth to see if they bee iust
and ciuill; It were impossible for him to heare them and determine
them, without doing wrong to those affaires which require no
delay to resolue on. The greatnesse of his Maiesty is wronged
when as they make him discend into the care of base things.
It is importunity to a Prince to giue him an account of base things, When as Pliny wrote to Traian, De seruis damnatis quise Ministerijs publicis immiscuerunt. Of slaues condemned who had wrought in the publike workes: Hee addes this Preface to his Letter: Salua magnitudine tua, Domine, descendas oportet ad meas curas cum ius mihi dederis referendi ad te de quibus dubito. My Lord, sauing your Greatnesse, you must descend vnto my cares, hauing giuen me leaue to impart my doubts vnto you. Wisedome, which is the light of his actions, and the Serpent
which shadowes his fore-head,Bochoris King of Egipt being by nature rough, sowre, and violent, the Goddesse Isis sent him a Serpent, which wrething about his head did make a shadow, to the end his iudgement should bee seasoned with Prudence and Iustice. forbids them to trouble their
heads for all sorts of affaires, the which are often represented by
men, which neither see farre off nor much behind them, who confounds
their discourses in the beginning, and speaking without
reason would be heard with patience.
Wee must beautify this discourse with the same authority
which gaue lustre vnto the precedent. The discourses which are
held at the Table of the Chancellours of France are alwaies vpon
some goodly Subiect, pleasing to learne, and profitable and necessary
to vnderstand, and wee may say, that delicacy of wits
findes that there which excesse did furnish to the appetite of
(...)

men for foure monthes, to deliuer into his hands the foure chiefe
Townes of Brabant, Brussels, Antwerpe, Macklin, and Louan, and
to leaue him the Country of Flanders in Soueraignety without
homage if he could conquer it. These offers proceeding rather
from the necessity of affaires, then from the Kings intention, who
desired nothing but to aduance his affaires in Bourgundy and
Artois, and to diuide and weaken his enemies forces, were well
and wisely weyed by the King of England,The lesse which is profitable and certaine is to be preferred before the more which is vnprofitable and vncertaine. The King of England desires rather the Countries of Bullen in effect, then Brabant and Fla^ders in hope: neither could the English consent vnto a warre which did interrupt their Trafficke with the Low Countries. who answered that
if the King were so well minded to make him a sharer of his
conquest, he had rather haue some of those which were already
conquered in Picardy, and that in deliuering him Bulloine hee
would declare himselfe for him against the Princesse of Bourgundy.
The King then hauing contemned the way of mildenesse and
reason to follow that of force and fortune, neglected also the occasion
which this first amazement of the Princesse and her people
put into his hands, and leauing her the liberty to marry her selfe,
and to carry those goodly Prouinces to a strange house, all things
became impossible: Maximilian, hauing married the Princesse, raysed
with great solemnity the order of the Golden Fleece,Oliuer dela-March, reports the ceremony which was made at the raising of this Order, and saith that they wondered the King had not preuented the Arch-Duke. to shew
that he would also restore the affaires of that house.
Yet for all this they do not leaue to giue him the honour of the
wisest of his age:Partes of wisedome. He made his wisedome appeare in that he could
consult and deliberate well, he could iudge and resolue well, and
he could leade and execute wel; This wisedome was wholy his, and
depended not of the motion or discourse of any other: Wherefore
when as he demanded of Brezay, Seneschall of Normandy, the
reason why he said that his horse was great and strong, being but
little and of a weake stature: For that (answered Brezay) hee
carries you and all your Counsell. It is a very singular grace of heauen
when as the actions of Princes, vnfurnished of Councell, succeede
happily: For as a Prince hath need of a soule to liue by, so
is it necessary for him to haue counsell to raigne:Euery Prince hath two Councels, one interior and the other exterior: The interior is that which growes in his head from his owne knowledge and vnderstanding: The exterior is of those that assist him in the managing of affaires. It is weake
councell which consists onely of yong heads: Yong men may well
haue some good points, but they are like vnto those of the eares
of corne: The force of councell consists in wisedome which is
not gotten but by experience, and experience comes not but with
time: A man may be borne capable of wisedome, but onely time
makes the wise; Yong Vines carry Grapes aboundantly, but the
old make the good wine: In all that he vndertooke hee shewed the
force of his spirit; speaking of Armes hee seemed neuer to haue
done any other thing but fight with men and besiege places, and
discoursing of affaires of Estate he seemed to haue past his whole
life in Councell.Great Spirits are alwaies entire in any thing they deale in. When as Cato had Armes in hand bee seemed neuer to haue practised any other thing: When as hee spake of Sciences a man would haue said hee had neuer gone out of the Vniuersity.
Hee informed himselfe curiously and exactly of all things, and
of all persons whom he knew not to be capable to shew any arte
or disguising: A Prince addes much esteeme and respect vnto his
reputation when as he beleeues that he knowes all. Phillip de

Commines obserues an effect of his wisedome to sow discord and
diuision among those that would agree against his seruice: King
Lewis our Maister vnderstood that Art better; to diuide men, then
any other Prince that I euer knew; and hee spared neither his Siluer,
Goods, nor Paines, not onely towards the Maisters, but also to the seruants.The must heare all things to draw profi^e from them: Valetius Publicola is praysed by Plutarch for the liberty hee gaue euery man to enforme^ him of that which concerned him. And Isocrates doth therefore commend Euagoras King of Cypres: But there must bee great discretion in that which is spoken with and against priuate men.
Another act of his wisedome to haue kindled, and entertained
the fire which did consume the forces and burnt to ashes the ambition
of his enemie; In causing the instruments of the warre of Germany,
Swisserland, and Lorraine to moue, he remained at peace:
Hee had meanes to discharge his Realme of the vnprofitable burthen
of men which cannot liue but in trouble: As the flowing and
ebbing is necessary for the Sea, to discharge it of the great scumme
and filth which a calme gathers together, so a great Empire must
purge it selfe and cast forth the bad humours which a dead and idle
life drawes together.
Although his promptnesse in speaking hath oftentimes hurt
him,Silence a soule of great actions. yet would hee haue it knowne that his very Hat had no
part of his secrets. Silence is the Pole and Axletree of enterprises,
the which must not onely be in words, but also in gesture and countenance,
for the eyes and the face are the dumbe interpreters of
the mind:He that doth manage a great designe must know how to gouern his tongue, but much more his minde, for Polybius saith that many haue discouered by their faces the designes which they haue kept in their hearts. They cannot be executed but at certaine times, vpon
certaine places, with certaine men, and by certaine meanes; if the
one or the other be neglected or discouerd, all must go to smoake.
The concurrence of many things is necessary for the execution of
a designe, the failing of one is able to ruine it, but there is neuer
enough when they talke too much.
Wisedome hath also cause to complaine of his tongue: Hee
hath often paid for the liberty of his speech: But who can impose
silence to Princes? The liberty of Speech is a marke of their authority,
it is the point and seasoning of discourse, but the diuersity of
occasion makes it perilous: It sometimes offends the most mild and
patient spirits, and as euery wound hath his griefe, so there is not
any wound that seemes light to him that feeles it, and oftentimes
they fall into incurable vlcers:Nothing can happen more troublesome to free men then to bee debarred of the liberty of free speech. The liberty of free Discourse (saith Democrates) is a signe of courage and generosity. There are houres when wee may not
speake anything,A rule how to speake. others when we may speake some thing, but none when
wee may speake all.
Besides the exact intelligence of his affaires, he had a great
iudgement in the choice of men, and an admirable wisedome to
entertaine them and keepe them. He esteemed them, bound them
vnto him, and did not suffer them to languish in any discontent,
nor to attend the fruits of their seruice: He knew how to lay
the stone-worke, to enrich the Iewell, and to beautefie it with
Amaile, gold, and ornament: Hee not onely knew them of his
Realme that were most capable to be imployed in diuers functions
for his seruice, but also who were the most worthy Ministers with
Neighbour Princes: Hee knew in what heads did reside the
sufficiency of England, Spaine, and Portugall, and did not cease
(...)

This great and profitable skill to diuide their minds, that might
hurt him, did not onely stetch to the seruants and ministers of the
same Prince, but he knew how to diuide Princes of one bloud and
family. He did gouerne the affections of Sigismond at his pleasure,
The Archduke Sigismond of Austria was wonne by the King, whose party hee followed both against the Duke of Bourgondy, and the Archduke Maximilian. He reuoked the adoption which hee had made in his fauour, beleeuing them that sayd, that to shorten his hopes, hee would shorten his life. and turned him sometimes against the Archduke Maximilian,
his perswasion being of such force with this Prince, (who was
good and tractable) as he made him beleeue that Maximilian had
designes against his life, the sooner to get possession of his Estates,
which were assured him after his death. Sigismond in the end discouered
this fraud, and found that the ruine of the Archduke his Nephew,
toucht him so neere, as the Franch-County could not bee
lost, but the County of Feret would be also exposed to great danger,
and had great subiect to apprehend the increase of greatnesse
of so mighty a neighbour; and therefore hee yeelded to a leuie of
some troopes in his Estates of Elsasse and Ferret, which were imployed
to relieue and defend Dole, the chiefe Town of the Franch
County, which was besieged by the Lord of Chaumont, of Ambois.
The King found meanes in loosing Sigismond, to winne the
Captaines that led the Troopes, so as they suffered a great number
of Franke Archers of the Kings Campe to slippe into the
Towne with their Troopes, who seizing vpon the Gates, gaue
entry to the rest of the Armie. The Towne was exposed to sacke
and pillage,Sacke and desolation of Do^e. both of the enemies and of strangers, and fire made
an end to ruine that which the Souldiers could not spoyle or carry
away, neither was there any house exempt, but whereas the Generall
was lodged.A lamentable example of the misery of those Townes which are relieued by forraigne forces, whose fidelity being gotten and maintained by money, depends alwayes of him that offers most. From that time Dole was called the Dolorous.
By the same skill of winning men, and knowing how to vnknit
knots without cutting the Corde, hee had at his deuotion the most
confident Ministers of England. Philip de Commines saith, that he
was imployed to win the Lord Hastings, as the Duke of Bourgondy
had formerly done to haue him his friend at a thousand Crownes
pension. Hee was very difficult to resolue; but as Siluer is like
vnto Cephalus Arrow, which is neuer shot in vaine, that a long pursute
shakes the most constant resolutions, hee suffered himselfe to
be wonne for two thousand Crownes pension.
The King sent Peter Cleret, one of the Stewards of his House,
vnto him, to carry him this Money, and to bring backe a quittance
to bee put with the rest, and to iustifie hereafter, that not onely
Hastings Lord Chamberlaine, but also the Lord Howard high
Admirall, the Lord Chainey, Maister of the Horse, and Thomas of
Montgomery had beene Pensioners to the French King. This was
said to make a gaine in giuing, and to make a Trade of liberality.To hope for profite of that which is giuen, is to trafficke, and to put money to vsury, it is to thinke to ^old in letting goe, and to receiue in giuing.
Philip de Commines doth plainly set downe what past betwixt them.
Cleret demanded a quittance, and Hastings was not so ill aduised as
to giue him any: Cleret let him vnderstand that hee had to doe
with a Maister who was very distrustfull, and if he did not make
it appeare how he had deliuered this summe vnto him, he might

say he had stolne it; and therefore he desired onely a letter of three
lines vnto the King.
Hastings seeing that there was some colour in his reasons, but
much more in those which did not allow him to write, gaue him
to vnderstand,Wisedome of the Lord Hastings. that they should trust his Faith and Word,There is nothing that doth binde more then the assurance which wee take of the fidelity and conscience of any one. It is easier to breake ciuill bonds then them of honour. which
hee esteemed more then an hundred bondes in writing. Hee
therefore answered after this manner; Sir, that which you say is
reasonable, but this gift comes voluntarily from the King your Maister,
and not at my suite; if you will haue mee take it, you shall put it into my
sleeue, and you shall haue no other letter nor testimony: ^ will not that it
shall bee said by me, that the Chamberlaine of England hath beene a
Pensioner to the French King, nor that my quittances bee found in his
chamber of accounts.It is iniustice to cause benefit to be hurtfull and infamous to him that receiues it. The said Cleret rested satisfied, left him the money,
and came and made this report vnto the king, who was much offended
that he had not brought him a quittance; but he commended the said
Chamberlaine more then all the other seruants of the King of England,
and he was euer after paid without giuing quittance.
He was so great an Architect, as he imployed all sorts of spirits,
fortunes and conditions in the building of his designes. Hee did
not only seeke to haue at his deuotion the chiefe Ministers of kings,
but hee also drew them vnto him, that had credit and authority in
free Townes and Common-weales, therefore he loued great Cosmo
de Medicis, and was grieued for his death, which happened in the
first yeares of his reigne. The lawes of wisedome did binde him to
enter frendship with a house,Commendation of the house of Medicis. whose great felicity drew the greatest
of Europe to admiration. Vertue doth force euen Enuy it selfe to
suffer this Palme to grow, which sprung vp the higher, the more
they sought to depresse it,When as Enuy hath stormed and striuen against the growing glory of a house, in the end shee is forced to yeeld, her eyes can no more endure such a glistering light.Est aliquod meriti spatium quod nulla furentisInuidiae mensura capit.
Claud. in laud. Stiliconis. and made it knowne that it is no lesse indiscretion
to maligne the glory and prosperity of merit, as to bee
angry when the sun shines, which Iupiter commandes, and Apollo
pronounceth his Oracles. In those dayes to enuy the glory of the
greatnesse of the house of Medicis, was to depriue the Colossus of
vertue of his shadow, which is glory.
Lewis 11. had great reasons to esteeme him, knowing that great
Cosmo de Medicis had made Francis Sforce Duke of Millan, that the
wealth of his seruants had raised the hopes of many great Princes,Riches of the house of Medicis.
which were in a maner deiected,A seruant vnto Peter de Medicis lent vnto Edward the fourth, an hundreth and twenty thousand Crownes, and another 50000 to the Duke of Bourgondy at one time, and 80000. at another. that without him Edward 4. had
not returned into his Realme, and the Duke of Bourgondy had lost
his credit in Italy. In those times they did not speake but of the Piety
and Magnificence of great Cosmo de Medicis, who had opened
the barre to his posterity to attaine vnto the soueraigne command
of Tuscanie. Hee liued as a Cittizen, commanded as a Prince,
and his Countrey gaue him the Title of Father: His vertue was
a Rampart to good Men,A good man is a great Rampart to good man against a powerfull Citizen that persecutes them. Such was Nicias at Athens against the insolency and rashnesse of Cleon. Plut. in Nicias: his House a refuge to good Wittes
out-raged by F^^tune, and a Port to the Muses chased out of
Greece. His b^unty appeared in foure Millions of Gold,
(...)

The Kings of Perou haue their newes carried after this manner,
They haue, vpon the high wayes, posts, or Cabanes, appointed at
euery mile, the first Carrier cries vnto the second what is commanded
him, the second carries it vnto the third with the like speede,
and so vntill it comes vnto the place appointed.(...), as Suetonius reports, I^uenes P^^ro modicis inter^alles per militatis vias dehinc vehicula disposuit. He first set yong men by small distances vpon the high wayes, and then hee appointed Coches. Hee speakes also of Caesars diligence by Coches. Longissimas vias incredibili celeritate confecit, expeditus meritoria rheda, centena passuum millia in dies singulos. Hee went long iourneyes with incredible speed, a hundred miles euery day, being set in a hired Coch. The Emperour
Augustus ordained Coaches in certaine places, to conduct them
that carried his commandements through the Prouinces, or that
brought him any newes, before time they did hire them, and Caesar
did vse them when as he went in so short a time from Rome to the
bankes of Rosne.
Paris, the Rome of France, the miracle of the Citties of Europe,
whereof it should be the Dyamond if it were a Ring, owes vnto
this Prince the most fauourable concession and confirmation of the
priuiledge which it enioyeth, and wherewith Kings haue alwayes
gratified it, holding it reasonable that it should beare the markes of
their fauour;Priuiledges of the Parisians. and the profit which it feeles by the ordinary presence
of their Maiesties, he gaue leaue to euery Burgesse to take yearely a
certaine measure of salt for their prouision, paying the Marchants
right onely, and to be freed of the forraigne imposition, paying six
deniers vpon the Liuer in Paris, and twelue vpon the furthest parts
of the Realme, not being bound to giue caution for the sale of it:
That they should not bee forced by any harbinger to lodge the
kings Officers, nor any Souldiers, but at their owne pleasures.These priuiledges were ampl^fied and confirmed during the warre of the Common-weale, and for that the people did apprehend that they might bee reuoked when it did cease, the Chronicle saith, that he declared in a great Assembly, that hee desired rather to augment them, then to cut off any thing. Not
to be bound to plead any where but in Paris, for what cause soeuer.
To be freed from all duties and seruices for the fees they held, yet
vpon condition to haue sufficient and defencible Armes, according
to the value of their fees, for the guard and defence of the
Citty.
In like manner the Citty of Lyon (that mighty Bulwarke of the
State) is bound vnto him for the establishment of the Faires.
Commerce is a great meanes to drawe forraigne commodities into
a State, but it may cause a dangerous transport of gold and siluer,
if it bee not entertained by the exchange of Wares. And as it
should not bee lawfull to transport those that bee necessary, and
whereof the Subiects may haue need,One of the iustest, and most ancient meanes to augment a kings tributes, is vpon the entry, going forth, and passage of Merchandise. It is the forraigne Imposition, an ancient right to Soueraignes, and it is called, Portorium quod mercium quae importantur exportan^urve nomine penditur. neither those which are
vn-wrought, so the permission should be easie and free for those
which are needfull for strangers; that the subiects may thereby
gaine the profit of their hands. This Prince being giuen to vnderstand,
that the Faires at Geneua did draw a great quantitie of
Money out of France, he erected foure Faires at Lyon,The Estates of Tours after the death of King Lewis the eleuenth, required to haue these Faires ^ept but twice a yeare, at Easter, and at the Feast of All-Saints, and in some other Towne then Lyon, for that it was too (...) ^^^thest bounds of the Realme. and gaue
them his letters patents at Saint Michael vpon Loire, the 20th of
October 1462.
Trafficke cannot receiue a more sencible iniury then by the calling
downe, or raising of Money, which wrongs the Law of Nations.
If there bee any thing in an estate which should bee immutable,

it is the certainty of their valour. Wisedome is not commended
but for the constancy of that which she resolues:A Prince who is the warrant of publicke Iustice, and subiect to the law of Nations, should not suffer the course of Money to bee variable and vncertaine, to the preiudice of his subiects and strangers, which treat and traffick with them. Wherfore the Kings of Arragon comming to the Crowne, tooke an Oath, not to alter the Coines which were allowed. she learnes
fit accidents which are mutable and immutable to reason, which
is constant and one, and not reason to accidents. When as the
course of Money is disordered and vncertaine, all is in confusion.
Lewis the eleuenth changed the course of coins in the yeare 1473.
hee ordained that the great Blankes should goe currant for eleuen
Deniers Turnois, which before were worth but ten; he reduced another
coine called Targes,Orders for Coins. to eleuen Deniers, which past for
twelue. The Crowne at thirty Souls, three Deniers Turnois, and
after this proportion all other peeces. Then considering that one
of the causes of the weakning of Coines grew for that the Officers
tooke their Fees and entertainements from the rights of the
Mint, which should bee vnknowne in great Estates,The Ancients knew not what the right of Minting meant, and the Coines were not imparted for the fees of officers, which were taken fro^ other kindes of mony, to the end that the coyning of money should be free from all suspition of deceit, it was done in publicke places, as at Rome in Iuno's Temple; and Charlemain did forbid any to bee coined but in his Palace. and are
not seemely but in petty ones, where they draw profite from euery
thing, and augment their Reuenues by the coining of money.
In the yeare 1475. he displaced the Generals and Maisters of the
Mint, and set foure Commissioners in their places, Germaine de
Merle, Nicholas Potier, Denis the Britton, and Simon Ausorran, and
ordained that the Kings crownes of Gold which before had course
for foure and twenty Souls Parisis, and three Turnois, should goe
for fiue and thirty peeces of eleuen, being worth fiue and twenty
Souls, eight Deniers Parisis, and they should make other Crowns,
which should haue a Halfe-moone in stead of a Crowne, which
was on the rest, and should be worth thirty six peeces of eleuen of
the value of twenty six Souls, six Deniers, and new Dozains, at 12
Turnois a peece.
Liberality. Wee should lye in calling this Prince couetous, as
well as in saying he was liberall:Liberality he neuer knew what it was to spare,
no not in his age, when as couetousnesse doth most trouble the
mind when it hath least need of it.Couetousnesse, which comes in the end of mans life, is inexcusable. What auails it to prouide so many things for so smal a iourny? Auaritia senilis maxime est vituperanda. Potest enim quicqua^ esse absurdius, quam quo minus viae restat eo plus viatici quaerere? Couetousnesse in age is much to be blamed. Can there bee any thing more obsurd then when there is least way to go, to make most prouision? Cat. M^i. One thinking that there was nothing so honest, as to demand and receiue, demanded of King Archelaus, being at supper, a cup of gold, wherein he dranke. The King commanded his Page to go and giue it to Euripides, who was at the table, and turning towards him that had beg'd it, ^e said; As for thee, thou art worthy to demand, and to be refused, for that thou dost begge; but Euripides is worthy to be rewarded although he demands not. he knew not what it was to giue
with reason and discretion, to whom, how much, and when. Hee
gaue not with a refusing countenance, but cheerefully and freely.
No man holds himselfe bound for that which is giuen by importunity,
and which is rather wrested away then receiued. Slow graces
are as troublesome as the swift are sweete: Bounty should preuent
demands, sometimes hopes, and neuer merit. Shee doth not
consider who receiues, how farre the greatnesse of his courage and
fortune goes that giues, and doth fore-warne him, that there are
some that deserue to bee refused when they demand, and others
which demand not, deserue to haue giuen them.m
Hee gaue good Words, but his Promises were so sure, as
hee seemed to bee bound to the day hee promised. A Man might
hold that receiued which hee offered. There is nothing so great,
(...)

hast past, hath giuen thee nothing but increase, the conspiracies of the
greatest powers of Europe haue onely tried thy forces. Rich and goodly
France, whom the ingratitude of thine owne children could not shake: If
thou hast beene sometimes ignorant of thine owne power, thou canst not
(at this day) dissemble what the felicity of an Estate is which liues in assured
peace.
In former times there was nothing found in the Treasury but
debts. The difficulties which Kings haue had to decide
Controuersies with their owne Subiects, haue forced them to
sell their demaines, the chiefe part of the entertainment of their
Maiesty. The sinewes of this body were heretofore shrunke, their
functions were neither liuely nor free: now that this great Esculapius hath set together the members, and restored it to life, heate
and motion, France may say that shee was not happy vntill the
day that she was vanquished by his victorious Armes.Lat. Pac. making Rome to speake in the panegericke^ of Theodosius, saith thus: Quando me Nerua tranquillus, amor generis humani Titus, pietate memorabilis Antoninus teneret, quum moenibus Augustus ornaret, legibus Hadrianus imbueret, sinibus Trajanus augeret, parum mihi videbar beat^, quia non eram tua. When as milde Nerua, the loue of mankinde, religious Titus, and memorable Antonine enioyed me, when as Augustus did beautifie mee with walles, Adrian gaue mee Lawes, and Traian augmented my boundes, yet did I hold my selfe scarce happy, because I was not thine.
It is the Hercules which hath cut off these Hydras heades,
which hath deliuered France, tyed Want to mount Caucasus;
and who (after incredible toyles) hath dedicated Peace, that
white Hinde Menelea, which hath the Head and Feete of Gold.
The beames of this Glory reflect vpon so many great vnderstandings,
so many noble resolutions which haue followed
the Iustice of his Hopes, and the crosses of his Fortunes. A
good Prince hath an Interest in the Commendation of his
Seruants, hee hath a feeling of that which honours them, hee
is moued with that which wrongs them; and a good Seruant
cannot desire a more glorious acknowledgement of his seruices,
then in the heart and iudgement of his Maister.
Euery man knowes, and many vnderstand the esteeme which
the king made of the Duke of Suillyes seruices, which are such, that
as all the Nations of the Earth giue the palme of Valour to
this great King, in the restauration of this great Empire of
FRANCE, so they cannot deny him the glory of great Wisedome,
and cleere Iudgement, and Prouidence, in the election
which he hath made to commit vnto him the principall peeces of
his Estate.
The purest eloquence hath already shewed her riches vpon
this subiect by Discourses which cannot bee followed but by
the eyes of Admiration, and a desire to imitate them. A great,
rare, and happy Wit, Counceller to the King in his Councels,
and President in a Soueraigne Company, hath made the
Marbles to speake vpon this verity.
His Panegericke filling mens mindes with Admiration, and
their eyes with Wonder, hath made knowne that one line sufficeth
to iudge of the excellency of the Hand that drew it. I
haue taken this period as a glistering stone to beautifie this Discourse.Commendation of the Duke of Suilly.
This great HENRY hath lodged his Treasure in the Temple
of your Integrities, a Temple shut for the prophane, a Temple

whereas onely vertue findes a place to receiue the reward* of her
Trauels. You haue made all Europe knowe, that there is not any
place so fortified, either by Nature or Art, or by both together,
which can long holde out against the thundering Artillerie which
the IVPITER of France hath committed into your handes, as to his
faithfull Eagle, to carrie it wheresoeuer hee shall command.
It is now that our great King may sit in his Throne of Iustice,
and punish Rebelles according to their deserts: For although that
Mens offences bee without number, hee can cast forth as many thunderbolts
as they can commit faults. The glistering of so many perfections
and Armes wherewith your Stone-houses are filled, dazles the eyes
of Subiects, and people bordering vpon France; the one feare them,
the other are assured; but both the one and the other doe equally
admire so fearefull a Power in the King, and in you so great Industrie,
who knew how to prouide the meanes to make our peace so
firme, as wee can giue it, and take it from whom wee please, whereby
the Kings Maiesty is (at this day) the Arbitrator of Christendome.
Valour comes in order in the obseruation of the Vertues
and Vices of this Prince.Valour naturall to the Kings of France. It is superfluous curiosity to search
it among his Vertues: for although some men say, That Nature
makes few men valiant, and that valour comes from good
institution, yet it is true that the Kings of France are all borne
valiant.Valour doth constantly resist all the accidents which may shake the weaknesse of man. Timendorum contemptrix, quae terribilia and subiugare libertatem nostram nitentia despicit, prouocat, frangit. A contemner of fearfull things, those things which bee terrible, and seeke to subiugate our liberty, hee despiseth, prouokes, and breakes.
This vertue, which (through excellency) is simply called Vertue,
and which containeth many other vertues, all Heroicke
and Royall, Magnanimity, Wisedome, Assurance, Constancy, and
Perseuerance to vanquish, breake and endure all kindes of accidents
and difficulties, which returnes from Combats in the like
sort it goes, feares death no more in Armes then in his House,
and hath his seat in the Heart and Will.
This Prince had not learned the Art of Warre by discourse,
hee went to Horse at the age of foureteene yeares, and continued
vntill his Father had expelled the English out of his
Realme.Hee that is no Souldiar but by seeing battels painted, is like vnto him that vnderstands musicke, but can not sing. Hee made proofe of his Courage at the battell of
Montlehery, at the Alarme and Assault of Liege, and in the
Warre of Artois. His Wisedome corrected the heate of his
Valour: for that which was esteemed valour before hee was
King, would haue carried the name of Rashnesse after he came to
the Crowne.
PHILIP DE COMMINES saith, that (of his owne nature)
hee was somewhat fearefull, and would not hazard any thing.
But euery where, and in any great occasion hee giues him the
glory to haue carried his resolutions beyond all kindes of accidents
and dangers. Wee must iudge of Courage by all the dimensions,
and not onely by the height and greatnesse, but also by
the length and extention, not being sufficient to bee valiant, if it
continue not.

Aduersity is the Touch-stone of mens resolutions,Hee that hath neither enemy nor misfortune cannot make accou^t of the force of his courage. Mis^rum te esse iudico, qui nunquam tue^is miser, traxisti sine aduersario vita^. Nemo scit, quid potueris, neque tu quidem ipse. Opus est enim ad sui notitiam experimento. Quid quisque possit, non nisi tentando didicit. I hold thee miserable that wer^ neuer wretched, and hast drawn forth thy life without an enemy. No Man knowes what thou canst do, no nor thou thy selfe. It is needfull to haue experie^ce to know ones selfe. No man hath learned what he can do but by tryall. no man can
iudge of his good fortune, nor her forces, if hee hath not tryed
those of mis-fortune, and the vigor of his enemies: Shee is a learned
mistresse in all professions, and makes that ruines, ship-wracks
and routs produce the precepts which frame sufficiency, and assure
the iudgements of Architects, Pilots and Captaines.
Hee gaue Military charges to them that were capable to discharge
them, he loued men that were resolute to dangers, and did
them good. By the Capitulation of the Castle of Hedin, Flamen of
Launoy, who was gouernour, remained in the Kings seruice,There is no other thing to bee considered in the prouisio^ of great Offices which cannot bee executed but in presence and person, but experience and sufficiency. Tiberius regarded the quality of the birth, so as it were seconded by proofes of vertue. Mandabat honores, nobilitatem maiorum, claritudinem militiae, illustras domi artes spectando, vt satis constaret non alios potiores fuisse. He gaue honours, respecting the Nobility of the Ancestors, their valour in warre, and their good deserts at home, so as it might appeare there were not any more worthy. Tacit. all
his lands being then in the Conquerours power and dominions,
the King gaue a pension to Raoul of Launoy his sonne. After the
siege of Hedin, the King did batter Quesnoy le Comte, made a breach
and gaue an assault, Raoul of Launoy, to begin his seruice by some
notable proofe of his courage and valour, did clime vp the ruines
of the Wall, through the blowes, fire, and flame, so couragiously,
as the King seeing and admiring his courage, said aloud, Hee is too
furious, hee must be bound. The place being taken by assault, the king
sent for him, and said vnto him: Passion of God my friend, thou art but
too furious in a fight, we must binde you to moderate your heate: for I
will not loose you, desiring to make vse of your seruice more then once.
And in saying so, he put a Chaine about his necke of fiue hundred
Crownes, and gaue him a company of foot-men.The presents and rewards of Princes are Chaines and Manacles which bind and captiuate mens affections. Hee was
made Bailiffe of Amiens, and Lieutenant for the King at Genoa.
They of his house haue for a long time carried a Chaine about
the Scutchion of their Armes, in remembrance of this gratification.
Armes then were the delight of this Prince in his youth, wisedome
gaue him Maximes, contrary to those of his courage, when
hee was king, and yet in all places wither hee sent his Armies,
commanded by his Liutenants, and in those where hee was himselfe
vpon the Frontier of Flanders, hee alwayes made it knowne,
that his wisedome to resolue, and his presence to execute, made
the principall part of the happinesse of his affaires. He had all the
time of his reigne Armies on foote,Contempt of discipline in Souldiers. and they giue him the honour
to haue entertained greater and more mightie Armies then his
Predecessors,One demanded of Agesilaus what parts were requisite to make a great Captaine, hee answered, Courage against his enemies, and wisedome and iudgement to make vse of occasions. and to haue had more care of Men of Warre, Fortresses
and Artillery. All this is seene in the Precedent booke, speaking
of his new erection of Troopes to haue alwayes the body of
a great Armie ready to guard his Estate and person, and to suppresse
any sudden reuolt, holding it indiscretion to attend necessity
for the leuying of Souldiers. They of his time liued very licentiously.
The complaints that were made presently after his death,An Estate should haue ordinary and extraordinary forces: the ordinary is vnderstood of Companies which are entertained in Forts, and neere vnto the Prince: the extraordinary is in Armes which are leuied, entertained and imploied in occasions of warre. to

the Estates at Tours vpon this subiect, were vehement; and it
was particularly said, That the men at Armes, the Gentlemen of the
Ban, the Franke Archers, and the Suissers, had done infinite harme vnto
the people; that the Souldiers not contenting themselues with the
goods they found in the labourers houses, forced them with cudgels to
goe and fetch Wine, Fish, Spices, and other excessiue things from the
Towne.
King Lewis the eleuenth sought to remedy these disorders, and
to settle discipline, to make the Souldiers more modest and moderate,
Military discipline consists in three poynts, Continency, Modesty, and Abstinency. By the first they avoyd voluptuousnesse, which makes courage fainte. By the second they frame the^selues to valor, and it hath these three poynts: Velle, vereri, and obedire, to Will, to feare, and to obey. By the third they are content to doe that which is allowed. and to hold their hands free from all violence. But hee
did it not effectually: for his Edicts had neither constancy nor execution.Edict to reforme Souldiers.
The Chronicle saith, that in the yeare 1474. being at
Creil, hee made an Edict touching the Men at Armes of his
Realme, by the which hee declared, That a Launce should keepe but
sixe horses: that is to say, the Launce three horses for himselfe, his
Page and Cutler, and the two Archers two horses, and one horse for the
Groome, and that they should no more haue Paniers to carry their Armes;
and withal, they should not lodge aboue one day in a village. And moreouerit
was proclaimed, That no Merchant should sell vnto the said
Men at Armes, or lend any Silkes and Chamblets, vpon paine of loosing
the money which the said Souldiers might owe them by reason thereof:
and also that they should not sell vnto them any woolen-cloath of aboue
three shillings three pence an Ell.
The disorder of Silkes was as great in those times as it had been
little knowne in precedent Ages.PHILIP the faire made an Ordonance for the reformation of apparrel, according to the condition and difference of persons. There was no mention made of Silkes, for that the vse was not common, nor known in France. It allowes a Duke, Earle or Baron of sixe hundred pounds sterling a yeare rent, or more, to make foure suits of apparrell euery yeare, and no more, and as many for their wiues, and forbids Lawyers and Clarkes which are not in dignity, to make Gownes for their bodies of cloth of aboue sixteene Soulz the Ell of Paris. This dissolution was one of the
causes of the rarenesse of Gold and Siluer, which was no more to
bee found but in Chaines of gold, and in their purses who had had
meanes to transport it out of the Realme to haue Silkes. The Estates
of France complained at Tours, and it was said, That euery
man was clad in Veluet and Silkes, and that there was not a Fidler,
Groome of the Chamber, Barber nor Souldier but ware it, that they had
Collers, or Rings of Gold on their fingers, like the Princes, and that there
was not treason nor villany but they committed to continue this disordered
sumptuousnesse of apparrell.
Science.Science. If hee were learned by Art or by Practise, wee must
looke vnto the effects of his good Conduct, with the which (like
vnto Perseus with Mineruas Courtelax) he had cut off the head of
the Medusa of reuolts and sedition in his Realme. If it bee true,
that in his time simple honesty,Innocency doth commonly lodge with Ignorance and Simplicity. The troubles which haue molested the world, are not come from the simple. The learned, or they which presumed to know all things, haue framed them. Simplex illa and aperta virtus in obscuram and solertem scientiam versa est. That simple and open vertue is turned into obscure and cunning knowledge. and ignorant vertue were degenerated
into a Science, or knowledge of dissembling, or subtilty,
we must hold him for the most learned Prince that euer bare Scepter
in his hand, or Crowne vpon his head. Hee had (saith Philip
de Commines) his speech at commandement, and his wit perfectly

good, without the which bookes serue to small purpose. They
make men learned, but not wise; and the difference is great to
haue a full head, or a head well made, to bee sufficient or learned,
instructed in contemplation or in action.They teach men diuers Sciences for their vse, and to excell in them. Princes should learne, Regere Imperio populos, To gouerne the people. A Princes Science is to
know how to command. Philip de Commines saith, that hee was
learned enough.
The Author of the Annals of Aquitane writes, That hee had
gotten more knowledge, as well Legall as Historicall, then the Kings
of France were accustomed to haue. And although hee were not
of those times, when as they met with Emperours going to the
Schooles with Bookes vnder their Armes,Lucius met with M. Antony, who went to see Cyrus the Philosopher, son to one of Plutarkes sisters, this Prince said vnto him, That it was a goodly thing to learne, euen for a man that grew old. To whom Lucius all amazed, answered, O Iupiter Romanoru^ Imperator iam apetente senio gestans librum qui pueris mos est preceptore^ adit. O Iupiter the Roman Emperour growing old, goes vnto his maister, carying a book, as school-boyes vse to doe. nor was not of the
humour of that other Emperour, who forgat his Dinner to
heare Lessons,Charles 4. Emperour loued learning in such sort, as being in in the schooles at Pragne, some comming to put him in minde of dinner, hee said vnto them, that hee had dined, preferring^ the contentment of the mind before that of the body. Aen. Silv. yet that great leasure which hee had in Dauphine,
and afterwardes in Flanders, accompanied with a desire
to learne (which is the first steppe to mount vnto knowledge)
could not leaue him in the ignorance of things necessary to reigne
well. On a time he vsed his Latine to good purpose: Pope Sixtus
had sent Cardinall Bessarion,Cardinall Bessarion borne at Trebisond, and Monke of S. Basil was made Cardinall at the Councell of Florence by Eugenius the fourth, and sent Legat into Germany to reconcile the Emperour and the Archduke Sigismond brethren. a Grecian borne, to mediate a peace
betwixt him and the Duke of Bourgondy. Hee had beene imployed
in great Embassies in the time of Pope Eugenius, who
had made him Cardinall, and of Pius the second, the which hee
ended happily. This was the cause of his death: for hauing begun
with the Duke of Bourgondy, as holding him the most difficult
to draw to reason, the King tooke it ill, and imputing it to
contempt, or to some priuate passion, as hee presented himselfe
at his Audience, hee laid his hand vpon his great beard, and said
vnto him: Barbara Greca genus retinent quod habere solebant.The Grecians called all other nations barbarous. Plat. in Menoxeno. An
Arrow shotte not against Greece, which gaue the name of
Barbarous to all other Nations, but against the Birth and Inciuilite,
or Indiscretion of this Cardinall, whom hee left
there, and commanded to bee so speedily dispatched, as he knew
his stay there was no more pleasing vnto him, then his Indiscretion.
The feeling hereof did so afflict him, as soone after returning
to Rome, hee fell sicke at Thurin, died at Reuenna, and confirmed
that Truth, That Embassages ambitiously affected, doe neuer succeed
happily.A graue and true sentence spoken by Iohn Caruagial Cardinal of S. Agnolo, Nessuna legatione ambita puo hauer desiderato fine. No Embassage affected can haue a desired end. Ier. Garimbert.
Who so had the Apothegmes, the goodly speeches, and good
words of this Prince, should enrich this discourse with so many
pearles and pretious stones. There comes nothing from the mouth
of a great King, full of wisedome and experience, but should be as
curiously gathered vp as the crums which fall from the table of the
Gods.Damis did curiously collect the words of Appollonius. Some misliking that ^e busied himselfe with such trifles, said that he had done like vnto dogs, which gather vp all the crums and fragments which fall from their maisters tables. Damis answered, You say well, but this is a banquet of the Gods, and all that assist at it are Gods also, the Officers suffer nothing to be lost.
Philip de Commines hath obserued this: A King hath more force
and vertue in his Realme where he was annointed and crowned,
then he had without it.
To haue serued well, doth sometimes loose men, and great seruices
are recompenst with great ingratitude;Iudgment vpon the reco^pence of seruices but this may happen
as well through the errour of them that haue done the seruices,
who too arrogantly abuse their good fortune, as well to their Maisters,
as their Companions, as through the mistaking and forgetfulnesse
of the Prince.Princes seeing the merites and seruices to bee so great, as they cannot recompence them but by great aduancemets, they doe not willingly looke vpon them, who as often as they present themselues vnto their eyes, seeme to demand recompence. Beneficia eo vsque laeta sunt, dum videntur exolui posse. Vbi multum antevenere pro gratia odium redditur. Benefits are so long pleasing as they thinke they can bee payd; but when they haue exceeded, hatred is repayed for thankes. Tacitus, lib. 4.
To haue good in Court, it is greater happinesse for a Man
when as the Prince whom hee serues doth him a great fauour
for a small merite; wherefore he remaines bound vnto him which
should not bee if hee had done so great seruices as the Prince had
beene much bound vnto him. Wherfore hee doth by nature loue
them more that are bound vnto him, then those to whom hee is
beholding.
When as pride goes before, shame and confusion followes at
the heeles.Pride is alwayes followed by Ruine and Shame.
Dominare tumidus spiritus altos gere,Sequitur superbos vltor a tergo Deus.SEN.
When hee changed his seruants, he excused this change, saying;
That Nature was pleased with variety.
Hee said, That if hee had entred his Reigne otherwise then
with Feare and Seuerity, hee had serued for an example in the
last Chapter of BOCACE his Booke of vnfortunate Noblemen.
And considering that secresie was the soule and spirit of all
designes, he said sometimes, I would burne my Hat if it knew what
were in my head.Metellus said the like, that if hee knewe his shirt vnderstood his secerets, hee would burne it,
Hee remembred to haue heard King Charles his father say, that
Truth was sicke, and hee added, I beleeue that since shee is dead,
and hath not found any Confessor.
Mocking at one that had many bookes, and little learning, hee
said, that he was like vnto a crooke-backt man, who carries a great
bunch at his backe, and neuer sees it.
Seeing a Gentleman which carried a goodly Chaine of Gold,
hee said vnto him that did accompany him; You must not touch it,
for it is holy, shewing that it came from the spoyle of Churches.
It is long since that this sacrilegious liberty hath beene in custome,
and that Princes, that would please GOD and Men, haue
detested it; but custome to euill hath more power ouer the willes
of men to entertaine them in it, then it giues horror and shame to
flye from it.Caesar did bite Pompey to the quicke, for that hee had taken away the ornaments of Hercules Temple. Pecuniam omnem ex fano Herculis in opidum Gades intulit, and giuing himselfe the honour to haue caused it to bee restored, Referri in Templum iubet.
He took delight in quick answers, which were made without study:

for if there be premeditation they loose their grace. On a time seing
the Bishop of Chartres mounted on a Mule with a golden bridle,
hee said vnto him, that in times past Bishops were contented with
an Asse and a plaine Halter. The Bishop of Charters answered
him, That it was at such times when as Kings were Sheepheards,
and kept Sheepe. The Annals of Aquitane, which report this, adde
that that the King began to laugh: for hee loued a speech which
proceeded from a sudden wit.
Hee loued Astrologians, and this loue proceeded (as it were)
from a naturall and hereditary curiosity, hauing much troubled
the mindes of his fore-fathers. Charles the fifth was gouerned by
them,Credite of Astrologians. and gaue them meanes to teach Astrologie publickely
in the Vniuersity of Paris. Hee had for his Physition one called
Monsieur Garuis Cretin a great Astrologian.CHARLES th^ fifth caused many Bookes of Astrology to bee Translated into French, he built a Colledge for Astrologie and Physicke, and gaue them the Tithes of the Village of Caugie, and caused the foundation to bee confirmed by Pope VRBAN the fifth. He caused the Natiuity of King Charles the sixtth, to b^e cast by Monsieur Andrew of Suilly. The like curiosity
made Charles the 5th to loue and cherish familiarly Michael Tourne-Roue
a Carthusian, who was very skilfull in the practise of Elections:
Hee made that of the day when as the King went a hunting,
where as hee found the great Stagge which had a Coller
of Copper about the necke, wherein these words were written;
Hoc Caesar me donauit, Caesar gaue me this. The figure of it was set
vp in the palace of Paris.
Hee was also much bound to the aduice which Iames of Angiers
gaue him of the bad Intention which two Augustine Monks
had to open his skull, who were beheaded at Paris.In the booke of SIMON of Phares, which is in the Kings Library, wee reade this: IAMES of Angiers was in that time, who discouered the false intent which the two Augustines had, which did open King CHARLES his head, saying; They would cure him, beeing ignorant both in Physicke and Chyrurgery: They were suborned by PHILIP Duke of Bourgondy, (as was said) to worke this effect. The matter beeing discouered, the said Augustines were degraded, and lost their heads, as was reason. Hee also
made great account of Charles of Orgemont, who foretold him
that the Duke of Aniou his brother should bring nothing backe
from his voyage at Naples, but shame, want, and misery, the which
happened: for all the Knights which had followed him, returned
with white stickes in their hands,Vpon this Prediction SIMON of Phares speakes thus: The French were forced to flye, and the Duke of Millan forgetting his Faith and Oath, did kill them that were taken, and suffered the Dogges to eate them, and therefore let this be an aduertisment to the Kings of France, and to the French, neuer to trust in a Lombards tongue. or dyed in Hospitals. He was also
aduertised of the issue of the voyage which Boucicant made to
Genoa, and of the treason of the Marques of Montferrat, and of
Count Francisque.
CHARLES the seuenth had Astrologians all his life: Hee entertained
in his Court IOHN of Bregy, a Knight, who cast the
Natiuity of AME Duke of Sauoy, and of the Lady YOLAND
of France his wife; and Germaine of Tibonuille, who fore-told
the death of King Henry the fifth, and of Charles the sixth. He
receiued into Pension, and into his house IOHN of Buillion,
whom the English had kept prisoner at Chartres, for that hee
had fore-told that which hahpened vnto them at the siege of
Orleans.
Hee gaue entertainement also to SIMON of Phares, borne

borne at Orleance, whose booke of excellent Astrologians is to
be seene in the Kings Library:This Symon of Phareswrites of himselfe that hee did foretell, The great famine at Paris, and the great plague which followed vnder the raigne of Charles the ^. that the Lands were vntilled, and the woods, so ^full of wolues as they deuoured women and children, and that it was proclaimed that for euery Woolfe they could take they should haue two shillings, besides that which the Commons might giue. Maister Lewis of Langre a Spaniard,
a Physition and Astrologian at Lyon, told King Charles of
the victory he should get at Fromigny, in the yeare 1450. and of the
great plague which was at Lyon a yeare after, for the which hee
gaue him forty pounds a yeare, pension.
In all the chiefe actions of the life of Lewis the eleuenth, wee
finde that Iohn Merende of Bourg in Bresse, did cast his Natiuity,
and speaking of his Aduentures vnto the thirtieth yeare,Predictions vpon the life of Lewis the eleuenth. hee aduertised
King Charles the seuenth of his rebellion, and how his gouernment
would be wonderfull to men,This man was much esteemed by Duke Amedeus the Pope, hee foretold the Schisme of the Church, and the warre betwixt France and England. Manasses a lew of Valencia
continued these predictions vnto the battel of Montlehery:
Peter of Saint Valerien, a Chanon of Paris, and a great Astrologian,
was sent in the yeare 1435. into Scotland for the marriage
of the Lady Margaret; during his abode in Flanders, hee consulted
alwaies with Astrologians of future things, and these impostors,
more hurtfull to a Common-wealth then Players,Sights entertaine the people and breed them vp ^n idlenesse: And therefore Phillip Augugustus by an Edict banisht Plaiers out of France: Nihil tam moribus alienum quam in spectaculo desidere. Sen. whom
his predecessours had chased away, were alwaies in his eares. Hee
caused many iudgements to be made by Iohn Coleman his Astrologian,
who taught him to vnderstand the great Almanacke, and
vpon the great Coniunction of Saturne and Mars, which was the
eighth of Aprill, about ten of the clocke eighteene minutes, in
the yeare 1464: He spake plainely of the troubles of the League,
and so did in like manner Peter of Grauille, whom Lewis the 11.
caused to come out of Normandy: Conrade Hermgarter a Germaine
left the Duke of Bourgundies seruice for the Kings, who
gaue him great entertainements. But aboue all, hee made great
esteeme of Angelo Catho a Neapolitan, who came into France with
the Prince of Tarentum,Iohn Spirink did also foretel the Duke of Bourgundy that if he went against the Suisses it would succede ill, the Duke answered, that the fury of his Sword should vanquish the course of heauen. and had foretold the Duke of Bourgundy
and the Duke of Guelders their misfortunes. The King
gaue him the Arch-bishopricke of Vienna, wherein hee could not
reside for the great crosses he receiued from them of Dauphine,
but was forced to retire himselfe to Rome: His Chronicle doth
also speake of the death of Maister Arnold his Astrologian during
the plague, in the yeare 1466. the which hee had foreseene, and
which vnpeopled Paris of aboue 40000. persons.
France had other kinds of men which did better deserue the fauour
and bounty of the King then these Deuiners. God is offended
at the rashnesse of this science which vndertakes the knowledge
of future things, which is onely reserued to his eternall Prouidence,
and which in regard of man is all composed in with
clouds and impenetrable darkenesse.Vanity of Iudiciary Astrology. The curious are deceiued,
for they tell them things that are either true or false,Fauorinus with this Dilemma mockes at Iudiciary Astrology: Aut aduersa dicunt and prospera. Si dicunt prospera and fallunt, miser fies, frustra expectando. Si aduersa dicunt and mentiuntur, miser fies frustra timendo? Either they tell aduerse things or prosperous: If they fore-tell prosperous things and erre, thou art a wretch in vaine expectance? if they tell aduerse things and lye, thou wilt be a wretch in fearing without cause? They make

themselues miserable in the expectation of prosperity which neuer
happens: They are miserable also in the apprehension of aduersities
which they feare incessantly, and happen not but when they
least dreame of them, thinking they haue escaped them, and howsoeuer
lying deceiues hope and augments feare:Iudiciary Astrologyis forbidden by the reasons which Epiphanius produceth against the Manicheans, Bas^le in his Exameron: Chrisostome vpon Genesis* Hom. 5. Augustin. lib. 4. cap. 3. of (...), Cofession^, and by the Counciles of Tol^do. The Church
which hath the eternall truth for the verticall Starre of her establishment,
which doth alwaies looke vnto the Sunne of Iustice and
Constancie, not gouerning her selfe like vnto the Synagogue, by
the inconstancy of the Moone, hath religiously and iudiciously detested
the practice of Iudiciary Astrology, which filles the eares
with vanity and curiosity, and the conscience with amazement.
If the curiosity had had any reflexion to the aduancement and
beautifying of learning, Barbarisme had not tyranized so long
ouer so many good wits: Princes cannot adde goodlier Crownes
to the Palmes and Bayes of their vertues, then those which good
wits do dedicate vnto them as an acknowledgement of their fauours
to learning.The glory which a Prince doth get by Armes is great, That which comes from the fauour and protection of learning is immortal. Int^r omnia quae vertute principum ac felicitate recreantur, sint licet for tasse alia magnitudine atque vtilitate potiora, nihill est tame^ admirabilius haec libertate quam fouendis honorandisue literarum studijs i^partiu^t. Among all the things which are delighted with the vertue and felicity of Prinalthough it may be there are some to be preferred in greatnesse and profite, yet there is nothing more admirable then that liberality which is bestowed to nourish and honour the study of learning. Eumenes Rhoet^r in orat. pro instau. scho. King Charles the seuenth, father to Lewis, and
King Charles the eighth his sonne, had some care of the Vniuersity
of Paris: The first set downe an order for the decision of causes
referred to the Court of Parliament: The last declared what men
should enioy the priuiledges of the Vniuersitie, and how they
should be inrowled in the booke of Priuiledges: But wee do not
finde that Lewis hath done any thing either with it, or against it.
The President Thou, whose History Europe doth no lesse admire
for his eloquence and boldnesse, then Italy did Titus Liuius, and
Greece Thucidides, speakes of Iohannes Vulceus of Groningue,
and saith that he reformed the Vniuersity, during the raigne of this
King, and this reformation shewes that there was some disorder.
The negligence of men was not so much the cause as the violence
of times, full of troubles and confusion, which did not permit them
either to teach or to learne. These clouds of Ignorance were as
darke in other Nations:Barbarisme in in the time of Lewis. The misery of that age was so great as
who so should represent the potrraite of that Barbarisme, would
moue the minds of men both to pitty of so great ignorance, and to
feare that our negligence would bring vs soone into the like. The
sweetenesse of the Muses was but bitternesse, their flowers all withered,
and their light all confusion; the men of those times did
not onely contemne learning, but they did abhorre her beauty, and
said that it did not agree with the grauity and seuerity of other
Sciences.Barbarisme being banished the schooles whereas the taught good learning, it remained long among the Lawiers. King Francis the first hauing seene these words in a Decree, debotauit and debottat: commanded that al^ the Actes of iustice and contracts should be made in Lattine. For this cause the purity of the Lattine Tongue was
banished out of the Schooles, and they were filled with vnknowne
Sophistries, which were strange and barbarous: The Schooles were
no more the Fountaine of the Muses, but Moates full of Frogges,
There were good wits, as all ages doth produce, as all Seas may
breed Pearles: But as there is a necessity to howle with Wolues:

they were forced to fit themselues to the common vse, being impossible
to wipe away the contumely which was done to the reading
of good bookes: It was a good Verse if it fell not twice or
thrice vpon the Cadence of the same Sillable: All Lyricke Poets
medled with time, as carelesse of elegancy as of reason.
The Latine tongue was harboured in some Cloisters, and thence
the Prouerbe came, Not to speake Latine before Friers: as if they
should not handle any tooles before good worke-men, nor dance
before good dancers: But they that haue written of those times
shew that all the eloquence was nothing but a confused babling
which brought forth new words, as monsters bred of pride and ignorance:
So the greatest and most famous actions were all made vpon
the modell of Sermons, and they alwaies tooke some Text of
Scripture which they called the Theame of the Discourse:In those daie: they busied mens w^ts with vnprofitable and impertinent Etimologies: They said in Schooles that the Scipio's and the Censorins were names of dignity: That the Ethnickes came from Mou^t Ethna, and that the Law* Falcidia was so called a fal^e, for that like a Sithe it did cut off Legacies. They
did often adde ridiculous and foolish Etymologies, and their inuentions
were about Letters and Syllables. The proofe heereof
may grow of that which hath beene obserued in diuers places of
this History, as of the discourse which the first President of Grenoble
made to Lewis the 11. Of the pleading which was in the
Court of Parliament before the King of Portugall: Of the Oration
made at the opening of the Estates of Tours: That which
was made vnto the Millannois vnder the raigne of Lewis the 12.
is an other marke of this great simplicity:The Millannois for a rebellio^ made against King Lewis the 12. came in Procession to dema^d pardon of the Cardinal of Amboise, his Maiesties Lientenant, Mr. Michael Ris a Doctor of the Laws, Councellour in the great Councell and Parliament of Dijon, and in the Senate of Milan, made a great discourse vpon this occasion, the which he began in these termes. Misertus est Dominus super Niniuem ciuitate^ quod poenitentiam egit in cinere and cilicio. In like manner the Oration
made by the Rector of the Vniuersity of Paris, to Queene
Mary, second wife to Lewis the 12.
When they haue searcht into the causes of this great desolation,
they haue found that auarice hath contributed most; for when
as they found that great wealth was not gotten by the profession of
learning; that they which had consumed most in good bookes, had
wasted their estates vnprofitably, and contemned their fortunes:
that onely pleading got the graine and left but the straw for other
professions: Men studied no more to be learned but contented
themselues to be Doctors: The Law it selfe, which makes a great
part of polliticke knowledge, was, in a manner, abandoned, and
her excellencies dishonoured with an infinite number of ridiculous
glosses and vaine questions: Wherefore Pope Innocent the 3.
who laboured, more seriously then happely, to restore that Profession
to honour, did often complaine that auarice had made the
Liberall Sciences Mechanicke, and that many past impudently
from the first precepts of Grammer, to the study of the Lawes, not
staying neither at Phylosophy, nor any other good Art: Wherefore
throughout all the East good bookes were not knowne but to
some rare and eloquent spirit, and in the West the Latine tongue
was growne barbarous, the Syriac vnknowne, and the Greeke so
odious, as it was no ignorance in the most learned to skip a Greek
word and not to reade it.Ignorance is so shamelesse as shee glories of that shee vnderstands not. In those times when they met with a Greeke word, they were dispenced with, if they made no stay at it, and the Reader said: Graecum est non legitur.

The taking of Constantinople did wholly ruine learning in the
East, and was the cause to make it reuiue in the West, by the care
of Pope Nicholas the fifth, and of great Cosmo de Medicis, who gathered
together the sad Relickes of this Shipwracke: They caused
the good bookes of all the Greeke Authours to be sought out and
preserued, and did lodge and entertaine them that were capable to
make them speake Lattine. This misfortune made them to arriue
in Italy as into a Port of safety, against the tempest of Greece, or
rather as some precious moueable rescued out of a great fire, they
found a sweete retreate, and an honourable resting place in the
house of Medicis.
Some time before Emanuel Chrisolara had beene sent by Iohn Paleologue,
to demand succours of Christian Princes against Bajazeth
the first, who threatned Greece with the seruitude which it
hath endured vnder the Empire of his descendants: Hauing
done his charge he staid at Venice, then at Florence and at Rome,
he read some lessons at Padua, past into Germany, and dyed during
the Councell of Constance. George Trapezonde, by extraction
from Trapizonde, but borne in Candy, and Theodore Gaza of
Thessalonica continued these first beginnings. Cosmo de Medicis
made choice of Iohn Argyropile,Iohn Capnio was one of his A^ditours, the first time he entred, Argyropyle asked him of whence hee was and what he would; hee answered that hee was a Germain, and would remaine at Rome to learne something of him in the Greek to^gue, whereof hee had already some knowledge: Argyropile commanded him to reade and to interpret a passage of Thucidides, Capnio did it after so elegant a manner, and with so cleane a pronounciation, as Argy^opile sighing said, Graecia nostro exilio transuolauit Alpes. Greece by our exile hath flown ouer the Alpes. their companion to be schoolemaister
to Peter de Medicis his soone, then he went to Rome, where
he did publickely interpret the Greeke Histories, and did so inspire
the loue of learning into the hearts of good spirits, as the Cardinals
and Noblemen of Rome did not dsidaine to go and heare his
Lessons.
Out of the Schoole of Emanuel Chrisolara came Gregory Typhernas,
who came to Paris, and presenting himselfe to the Rector,
he said vnto him, That he was come to teach the Greeke, and demanded
to haue the recompence allowed by the Holy Decrees: The Rector was
somewhat amazed at the boldnesse of this stranger, and yet commended
his desire, and with the aduice of the Vniuersity staid him
and gaue him the entertainement he desired: Ierome of Sparta succeeded
him.
The Shipwracke of Greece brought many other great personages
to the roade of Italy, Demetrius Chalcondyle,Demetrius Chalcondyle an Anthenian, taught publickly at Florence after Argyropile: Hee went away through the practise and iealousy of Angelus Politianus, and retyred to Milan. Marcus Musurus
a Candiot, Iohn Lascaris of the Imperiall race, whom the Magnificent
Laurence de Medicis employed to get leaue from Bajazeth
to visite the Libraries of Greece, from whence are come many
good books, which where so many Lampes ^ dispierce the clouds
of Ignorance and Barbarisme.
The Vniuersity of Paris as fruitfull a mo^^er of good wits as a
carelesse Nurse to cherish them, is much fallen from her first glory:
Her Schooles, which were sometimes more famous then those of
Athens in Greece, are vnpeopled; the water of her Fountaines
which did water all the youth of Europe is troubled; there is no
Spring in the yeare for these goodly flowers, which are cherished
of some for the rarenesse, of others for the smell, and of all

for the assurance of fruites. The Northerne blasts of the last troubles,
haue (in a manner) withered them, and hardly will they recouer
their beauty, if the same Sunne which hath raised the Flower
de Luce doth not reuiue them. Hercules after so many glorious labours,
did not disdaine the name of Musagete:Fuluius caused a Temple to be built in Circo Flaminio at Rome to Hercules Musagete, that is to say the conductor of the Muses, and Eumonius the Rector giues this reason: Quia mut^is operibus and premijs iuuari orna^ique deberent, Musarum quies defensione Herculis, and virtus Herculis voc^ Musarum. For that they should be releeued and adorned by their mutuall workes and rewards: The quiet of the Muses by the defence of Hercules, and the vertue of Hercules by the voice of the Muses. France dare not
hope that any other will finish that which Henry the fourth shall
leaue vnperfect, he will not suffer that she which carries the glorious
name of his eldest daughter, and hath purchased it by her immortall
watches, and by the production of many great personages,
which haue worthily serued the Church and State, shall languish
any longer in hope to recouer her first dignity: There wants
nothing else for the tryumph of his glory,Iames Dauid Cardinall du Perron High Almoner of France. nothing but that can
make his Bayes immortall: The Muses haue neede of Hercules valour,
and the labours of Hercules haue need of the recommendation
of the Muses. The generous thoughts which our Augustus
hath of this restauration, are wonderfully reuiued by the liuely
and powerfull perswasions of the learned Cardinall, the miracle of
our daies: But where shall we finde so many B^deus, Turnebus, Cuias,
Murets, and Scales as is necessary to haue the effect answereable to
the designe and reputation.
Temperance:Temperance wherein it consists. If it were not taken but for the moderation which
seasons all things, that great temper which he had in prosperities,
and his constancy in aduersities, had purchased him the palme of
this vertue, but if they take it for the rule and restrainte of voluptuousnesse,
and of other motions of the minde, it is not so apparent
in his heart as in that of Alexanders, Cyrus, and Scipioes: The two
base daughters which he had shewes that he was not contented
with the lawfull intemperance of marriage:After the Battell of Montlehery the King gaue his base daug^ter to the Bastard of Bourbon, and the assura^ces were made in the Towne house of Paris. Hee married the first
to the Admirall of Bourbon, and the other to the Lord of Saint
Valier: The letters which were dispatcht for the declaration of her
Armes, would not be vnprofitable to insert in this place, and they
were in these termes.
Lewis, by the Grace of God, King of France, to all to whom these
present Letters shall come greeting: Hauing of late treated, and accorded,
the Marriage of our deere and louing Base daughter, Mary, with
our deere and faithfull Cozen, Aymard of Poicters, Lord of Saint Valier,
Wee haue thought it expedient to appoint the Armes which it shall
please vs our said daughter shall cary: Wee therefore giue to vnderstand
that, being assured that the said Mary is truely our base daughter, and
desiring to honour her and her posterity, that shee may enioy the honours,
dignities, and prerogatiues which belong to the Bastards of Princes, for
the great loue and affection which we beare her:Du Tillet saith that the Surname of France is allowed to the base daughters of Kings, if vpon the aduow there be no other Surname giuen the^, and the Armes of France with the difference of a Bende: Some haue beene aduowed by letters Pattents, and others by fact being nurst. Wee will, and ordaine,
by these presents, that the said Mary, our base daughter, carry the Armes
of France, and for a difference a Bend Or, beginning at the sinister
Canton, as base children haue accustomed to do, for the which wee haue
and do giue her power and faculty for euer: In witnesse whereof wee
haue caused our Seale to be set to these Presents. Giuen at Meslay, the
eleuenth of Iuly, 1467. and of our Raigne the sixt: By the King,

the Lord of Crussol. Peter Doriole and others being present. L. Toustain.
It were a great proofe of Inconstancy,Opinion that Charles the 8. was supposed. and prophane pollicy, if
that were true which many haue said, that King Charles the 8. was
not sonne to Queene Charlot, and that the King hauing him by a
Mistresse made this supposition: They that write things whereof
they cannot speake, which are not knowne to all men do often
erre, for that they trust to their owne conduct, and turne away
their eyes from that which might giue them light in the darkenesse
of such difficulties. It is the melancholy of men of this profession;
presumption and vanityVanity hath much power among learned men. Iustus Lipsius hath obserued it in his time. O litterae, litterae! quam semper a vobis aliqua vanitas, and quam illud verum, oportere omnibus corydalis crista^^inesse. makes them thinke that they see
cleere enough, and as the Citties of Greece ruined themselues
for that they would do their businesse a part,Errour of learned men not to communicate. they loose by this disvnion
that which they might preserue by conference. I haue alwaies
held it an honour to learne, and a happinesse to bee reprehended.
A man should hold himselfe more bound to bee
warned of a fault in his writings then of a blemish in his face:
Vpon this supposition I went to Monsieur du Haillan, for that in
the second booke of the estate of the affaires of France he reports
this opinion, and promiseth a more ample discourse in the History
of this King not yet printed:Many were of opinion that Charles the 8. was supposed, others held that hee was the Kings sonne but not by the Queene, and that the King to quench the troubles which had beene raysed by his brother, made this supposition, the which is more amply written in the History of the said King, and not yet printed. Bernard of Girard Signior of Haillan in his second booke of the estate of the affaires of France. He answered me that hee held it
from them who thought they knew it well, and that he hath written
many other things of like consequence vpon the beleefe of
Tradition.
Princes will haue their loues excused, for that loue doth not alter
the generosity of a great courage, Caesar did sacrifice his heart
to Armes and Ladies:Wee cannot find a more perfect patterne of Ambition and Loue then Caesar. As for Ambition, his life is full of it: For Loue, he had the Maidenhead of Cleopatra, he made loue to Eunoe Queene of Mauritania, to Posthumia wise to Seruius Sulpitius, to Lollia of Gabinius, to Tertulla of Crassus, to Mutia of Pompey, and to Seruilia, Sister to Cato, and mother to Marcus Brutus: He changed wiues foure times. But I finde this Prince sometime in delights
which were not ordinary, nor scarce knowne to the Kings
of France his Predecessours: His Chronicle speakes of Bathes
prepared for him, for the Queene and Ladies. I was of opinion
that he had brought that custome from Flanders: when Phillip de
Commines speakes of the excesse and dissolutions which peace had
brought into the Low Countries, hee makes mention of Bathes.
The great and superfluous expences (saith he) of men and women in
apparell. The greatest and most prodigall bankets that I haue knowne
in any place: The Bathes, and other feastings with women, great and
disordered, and with little modesty.
Delights and pleasures are not fashioned in an instantBesides the Bathes of Agripina, of Nero, of Vespasian, and of Titus, Rome hath beene beautefied with them of Domitius, of Alexander, of Gordian, of Seuerus, of Aurelian, and of Constans. Marcus Agrippa, to purchase the peoples fauour caused 170. Bathes to be built in Rome, to the end that euery Quarter should haue one, Antonin was the first that decreed they should pay nothing for Bathing, for before him they gaue the fourth part of an Assis. they
haue their beginning, increase, and continuance: That of Bathes
was the like. At Rome, in the beginning, they did wash nothing
but their Armes and legges, after labour and painefull toyle, for
that they would not haue their members vncleane, and their
pores stopt with sweate: They did wash the whole body at Faires,

and health was the end of Bathing, as a thing generally held holdsome,
since health is growne vnto voluptuousnesse, and they adde
vnto it vanity and needlesse pompe. The rarest Marbles of Affrick
and Alexandria were sought for, and the most industrious Caruers
and Architects were employed in these Bathes as for the building
of Temples.
If Temperance gaue no other content vnto a Prince but the quiet
enioying of health,Fruites of temperance. he should be wonderfull curious,Health is to be preferred before all things, as the richest pres^nt of nature. Pithago^as said that men should demand 3. things of God, Beauty, Riches, and a good constitution of minde and body. for there
is not any thing but we should do for that which is the best, and richest
present which Nature hath giuen, and without the which li^e
is but a languishing, and all other felicities troublesome, and importune;
men are miserable, in that they know not the price of
things but by the losse of them: They do not taste of rest but in labour,
nor of peace but after warre, nor health but in sickenesse;
When they are sicke they make vowes to health, when they are in
health they do what they can to be sicke. They sacrifice to health
and eate the meats of the sacrifice euen vntill they burst, so as drinking,
eating, sleeping, playing, watching, sicknesse itselfe, health,
and all the actions of mans life are so many steps to death:One demanded of Hypocrates a rule for his health, he answered him, Cibi, potus, somni, Venus, omnia^ oderata sint. Let thy meate, drinke, sleepe, and Venus sports bee moderate. And
although that delay of payment be no quittance, yet life is longer
or shorter according to the Order of these things.
Princes are not alwaies knowne in these eminent places, they
must be seene in actions which are not so glorious: Let vs look vpo^
Lewis the 11. in his priuate carriage and course of life: Great spirits
haue not their heads alwaies busied with great affaires, their
thoughts descend often to meane things and of small consequence:
Egypt worships her Gods cloathed in those formes which
are farthest from the Maiesty and greatnesse which she thinkes is in
them.Nicias going fro^ Councell shut himselfe vp, and caused Hieron his man to say that hee left his owne affaires to thinke of the publicke, yet in the meane time he informed himselfe by a Deuine of the issue of his affaires, and thought of his mines of Siluer which he caused to bee digged. Plut. in Nicias. Nicias makes men thinke that he extracts the quintessence
of his wit for the affaires of State, whilst that hee entertaines himselfe
with the hope and profite of his Mines: Traian did sometimes
spend whole nights in telling tales with his seruants.It is good a Prince should be sometime familiar with his seruants, but the more rare the better. Traian surprised them sometime at meate, he came to their houses without Gard, and spent whole nights there: Xiphilinus: But they do not all w that Titus went to the Bathes and washt himselfe openly with the people; Affability is a goodly thing so as it draw not neere to contempt. When
as Lewis the 11. was in his solitary aboade at Plessis, he tooke delight
to go into the Offices, and to talke with the first he met. One
day he went into the Kitchin whereas he found a yong Lad turning
of the spit, he demanded his name, of whence he was, and what he
did earne: This Turne-spit, who knew him not, told his name, that
of his father, of his Village; and although hee were in the Kings
seruice, yet he got as much as the King: For the King (said he) hath
but his life and so haue I, God feeds the King, and the King feeds mee.
A small matter rayseth the fortune of a man, and changeth his basensse into greatnesse, Mahomet Bachas who was Vizier to three Emper^urs, was beholding for all his greatnesse to a leap which he made when he was yong: Sultan Solymari being at a window which did looke into a Garden let fall a Letter, euery man ran downe the sl^ires to fetch it, but Mahomet who was a yong Lad leapt out at the window, and brought the letter vnto the Emperour. This ready answer pleased the King, who drew this Boy out of the
Kitchin to make him serue in his Chamber, and fro^thence raised him
to great wealth: Behold how fortune fauours euen the^ which haue

no knowledge of it, nor seeke it not. Hee added to the pleasures
of solitarinesse those of rusticke Husbandry. I haue seene by the
Accompts of the Chamber of the Treasure, that in the yeare one
thousand foure hundred three score and seuenteene, he caused a
woman of Bethune, with two more with her, to come to Plessis,
hauing two horses and foure Kine, to make Butter and Cheese for
his owne mouth, and that for the voiage, implements, and prouision
of this woman and her Family, he paid seuen pounds.
This popular facility did much auaile him to winne the hearts of
the Parisians,Popularity of Lewis the 11. whom the pretext of the Common-weale had
much shaken. The Signior of Haillan saith: That being come to
Pares hee went from street to streete, and from house to house, to dine
and sup with them, talking familiarly with euery one, to make himselfe
pleasing vnto the people, and to incense them against his enemies; That
the Parisians neuer held the better party, nor did any thing commendable,
but at this time, for they were for the King, and did support and releiue
him. His Chronicle obserues, for an example of his affection
to Paris, that he came in the yeare, one thousand foure hundred
three score and eleuen, with the Duke of Guienne his brother,
and there made great feasts, and kindled the Bonfire at the
Greue, on Saint Iohn Baptists Eue: His most confident seruants fate
commonly at his Table, and hee made them discourse of diuerse
subiects. He would not haue their hearts in the clouds whilst their
bodies were at the Table:(...) the minde (...) the necessary pleasures of the body, not that (...) wallow in them: He must s^bmit his violent occupations and (...) Lbhorious thoughts to the vse of the ordinary life, and if hee bee w^se l^t him vse moderation. Hee would be entertained in his eare by
them that came from other Prouinces to vnderstand all things, and
to draw out the Quintessence. Among the profites of Commerce
the knowledge they haue of that is done among strangers should
be esteemed one of the chiefe, for by the going and comming of
Marchants Princes are aduertised of many things, whereof they
should otherwise be ignorant, and they that report them do not
conceiue of them after the same manner as they do that receiue
them. Great Vnderstandings draw profite from euery thing, and
can iudge of the resemblances of things which do nothing resemable,
the which is one of the highest points of humane wisedome.
It is true that the wise obserue other discommodities which grow
by commerce, to alter and degenerate mensWhen as Caesar would giue a reason of the Belges vallour, he saith: Propterea quod a cultu and humanitate Prouinciae long issime absunt, minimeque ad eos mercatores saepe commeant, atque ea quae ad effemina^dos animos pertinent, important. Caes. l. 1. de Bell. Gall. For that the Prouinces are farre from ciuility and humanity neither do Marchants go often vnto the to carry those things that may make their minds eff^minat. manners and courages.
The King being very familiar with men of this sort, caused them
to eate at his Table to discourse more freely: The Kings good countenance,
added to the place, and good cheere, makes them speake
that are most staied: A Marchant seeing himselfe often in this honour,
disdained to see himselfe still called Sir Iohn, and besought
the King to make him an Esquire: The King gaue him letters
of gentry, after which the Marchant ware a Rapier and apparell
accordingly:Marchandise is incompatible with Nobility, not for that the one propounds honour onely, and the other profi^e, for both may bee vnited: But for that Gentry cannot be purchased but by birth, and the seruice of the sword, or by the d^gnity of Offices which make men Noble: wherefore the Emperour Maximilian answered a merchant who besought him to make him a Gentleman: I can make thee much richer then thou art, but it it is not in my power to make thee a Gentleman. He presented himselfe vnto the King, thinking
that by this new honour hee had beene raysed to the Epicycle
of Mars, and that hee should go equall with the chiefe Noble-men
in Court. The Asse is entertained with blowes when as

the Spaniell is cherished at the Table. But hee would not vouchsafe
to looke on him, and left him alwayes attending. The Merchants
would gladly haue left his letters to returne vnto his first
course; and not able to endure this change, hee complained vnto
the King, who said vnto him: When I made you sit at my table, I held
you as the first of your condition, and did no wrong vnto this Gentlemen to
honour you for such.The change of condition is not alwayes honorarable nor fortunate. It is better to be the head of a slye, then the tayle of a Lyon. Now that you would be a Gentleman, and that in
this quality you are preceded by many, who purchased it by the Swords of
their Ancestors, and by their owne merits, I should do them wrong in doing
you the like fauour. Go Mr Gentleman.
Of all exercises he was most earnest at hunting;Lewis 11. delighted in hunting. and indeed it is
the most royall and most necessary for a Prince, to inure him to
toyle,Hunting is the true exercise of Princes. The Roman Emperours beeing alwayes in warre, had no pleasures, and besides, they were forced to hunt very farre from Rome. The Kings of Macedonia, Persia and Parthia haue alwaies been great Hunters. to know the Countrey, and to entertaine, in time of peace,
a goodly table of warre; but he would not haue this exercise common,
although it doth rightly belong vnto the Nobility, when
they are dispenced withall from the seruice of the sword. Hee did
forbid hunting in the beginning of his reigne, and added to this
defence odious punishments. It was a hanging matter for a Gentleman
to flye idlenesse: they punished him as rigorously that had
slaine a wild beast, as a Man:To take the exercise of hunting from a Gentleman, is to declare him base. Besides it, he can not do any thing in time of peace, and to play the Gentleman for time that is not, is to do nothing. A Lacedemonian seing that the Ariopage had condemned an Athenian of Idlenesse, intreated his friendes that were about him, to shewe him the man that was condemned to liue a Gentleman. and thereof come so many tales of
the seuerity of this Prince, which haue dishonoured his life, and
which now beautifie this History as Toads, Serpents, and Monsters
are admired and pleasing vpon Marbles and Agathes.It was more pardonable, saith Claud Seyffel, to kill a man, then a Stagge, or a wilde Boare.
Princes haue alwayes made choyce of a great number of seruants,
in some they haue had more confidence and credit, they
haue done them greater fauours, and aduanced them more then
the rest. And although these elections bee not alwayes grounded
vpon merit, and that honours conferred vpon vnworthy men
are the lesse esteemed, yet it were to clippe the wings of the Kings
Authority to restraine him from this liberty. Hee made of men as
an Auditor doth of Counters, placing some for hundreds, others
for thousands, some for ten, and some for vnits. He allowed many
petty Companions in his Cabinet, who could not remember
the condition of their fore-fathers without blushing, or disavowing
them.Honor meeting with an vnworthy subiect, hath lesse luster and esteeme. When as the people of Athens saw that Yperbol^^ (...) decayed man, and who had nothing to loose) was intreatreated equally with good men, they dissolued the (...) an honorable punishment for those whose vertue was suspected. In like manner they tooke it ill at Roma when as Flauius being freed by Appius, was made Edilis Curulis. But for all that he did not leaue to haue about him, and
to imploy in great charges. Noble-men issued from houses which
were then illustrious, both by their owne vertues, and by those of
their fore-fathers. Of this number was Iohn of Daillon, Lord of
Lude,The Lord of Lude. and Imbert of Baterney, Lord of Bouchages. They came
in fauour with this Prince by diuers meanes, and maintained it in
like maner. The Lord of Lude had been bred vp with this Prince,
and the affection which begins so soone, doth not wither easily.
Philip de Commines addes this reason, that he knew well how to please
the King.

Fortune fauoured the merits of Imbert of Baterney.Imbert of Baterney. Lewis Dauphin
of France retiring himselfe into Dauphine, and going from
Moras to Romans, hee staied in a valley vnder the Castle of Baterney,
to take the coole aire, and demanding some refreshing in the
heate of the season, and the tediousnesse of the way, the Lord of
Baterney sent some things vnto him, and came himselfe to doe his
duty; hee brought with him Imbert of Baterney, being then but a
youg man, who carried a Hauke, with the which hee kild some Partridges.
The pleasure of hunting, which had beene the ra^ing of his fortune, was (in a manner) the cause of his ruine. Claude of Seyell saith, that going to (...) to see the Dauphin, and hauing had him to field to see his Haukes flye, the king was much inc^sed, thinking that he had a designe to make him see the wo^ld, and to know it. The Dauphin tooke pleasure in it, and commanded him
to come vnto him to Romans, for that hee had a desire to see that
Hauke flye againe. He went, and did so please this Prince, as he demanded
him of his father, and from that time he neuer abandoned
him vntill his death. He made him great in riches, and honor, as he
was in merit and vertue.
Charles of Artois,Charles of Artoix. Earle of Eu, hauing remained three and twenty
yeares prisoner in England, returned into France, and was much
beloued of king Lewis the eleuenth, for that he held nothing of the
sower and arrogant humors of his predecessors, and he continued in
the Kings seruice at such time as the Noble-men left him to follow
the Princes Armie. He reconciled the King, and the Duke of Brittanie,
and soone after died in Iuly, in the yeare 1471. without any
children: Iohn of Bourgondy, Earle of Neuers his Nephew, was his
heire.The accord betwixt the king and the Duke of Brittany was made at Saumur in the yeare 1469. and the difficulties were decided by the de^terity of the Earles of Eu and Dunois.
Iohn of Orleans,Bastard of Orleans. Earle of Longueville, base sonne to Lewis Duke
of Orleans, was the greatest and most fortunate Captaine of his
time: he alone of all the Noblemen of the league of the Common-weale,
pursued the fruits which France expected of such an enterprise.
He was chiefe and President of the Commissioners appointed
for the reformation of the disorders of the Realme, and died
before he could see the effects of that which hee had so earnestly
pursued in the yeare 1470.
Andrew of Laual,Andrew of Laual. Lord of Loheac. Lewis 11. tooke from him the
dignity of Marshall of France, wherewith Charles 7 had honoured
him, and rewarded his seruice. Hee restored it vnto him againe,
when as necessity made him know, that none was more capable
then he. For his sake he gaue vnto his brother the Lord of Chastillon,
the Office of great Maister of the Waters and Forrests.
Alaine of Albret purchased the surname of Great by the same
greatnesse of courage which gaue the sword of France to Charles of
Albret his grand-father.Alaine of Albret.Charles of Albret was not onely entreated, but in a manner forced by the King to receiue the sword of Costable. The king p^t it into his hand, the Dukes of Orleans, Burgondy, Berry, and Bourbo girt him with it, a little before hee had caried Charles the seuenth vnto the font. He left the league of the Common-weale
as soone as he was entred into it, and remained more constant in
the assurance of his word, then the Duke of Nemours: his great
corage found nothing impossible: He was often wont to say, that he
which had force in hand, needed no other thing. He married Francis
Vicountesse of Limoges, and was father to Iohn of Albret, King
of Nauarre.
Iohn of Bueil,Iohn of Bueil. Earle of Sancerre, presently after the coronation
of Lewis the eleuenth, was dismist from his Office of Admirally,The Earle of Sancerre was Admirall of France by the death of Pregent of Coitiuy, Son-in-Law to Giles of Raix, Marshall of France. for

no other reason, but for that he had serued Charles the seuenth. He
returned to Court and fauour, but yet he stood alwayes vpon his
guard against that Lyon which strooke with his paw when they
least thought of him.
Iohn of Andie,Iohn of Andie. Bastard of Armagnac, Lord of Lescun, and Earle of
Cominges, was Admiral of France after the dismission of the Earle
of Sancerre, and then Marshall of France, he chased the Brittains
from Baieux, and was Gouernour of Dauphine.
Ioachim of Rouvault,Ioachim of Rouvault.Hee had done great s^ruices vnder King Charles the seuenth, and had beene present at the battell of Fromigny, and at the siege of Bourdeaux. The King gaue him the place of Marshall of France: and Monstrelet saith, that Charles the seuenth made him constable of Bourdeaux, and that hee tooke his oath in the hands of the Chancellors of France. Lord of Gamasches serued him worthily
and couragiously in the warre of the Common-weale, and was the
cause of the preseruation of Paris. He alwayes coasted the Duke of
Bourgondy his Army to keepe it from scattering to the hurt of the
Kings subiects; and that it should not make profit by the surprise of
any places in passing. Then he cast himselfe into Paris* and by his
presence fortified the courages which an accident (rather feared
then foreseene) had much deiected. The King gaue him the
gouernment with a troope of two hundred maisters, and made him
Marshall of France.
Tanneguy of Chastel,Tanneguy of ChastelHe was one of the Commissioners whom the King appointed for the accusation and Imprisonment of the Cardinall of Balue. one of the Architects of the league, found
in the end, that there was no better lodging then at the kings armes.
His fortune was ruined in Brittany, and raised in France. Hee did
negotiate the enter-view of the King and Duke of Bourgondy at
Peronne, he was imployed in the Truce of nine yeares, 1475. and
was aduanced to the gouernment of Rousillon.
The Lord of Nantoillet had for a time the authority ouer all the Armies
of France,Lord of Nantoillet he wanted nothing but the name of Constable, for he
did exercise the Functions, the King hauing made him his Lieutenant
Generall throughout his whole Realme, and afterwards Lord
Steward of France. He was so fauoured, as the King gaue him often
the moity of his bed. This fauour lasted not long. The Chronicle
of the Kings library saith, That the King could not pardon any one of
whom he had suspition.Death of the Lord of Nantoillet. He caused his head to be cut off in the yeare
1468. and that the Hangman hauing cut off but a peece at the first
blow, hee lest him force and courage enough to stand vp, and to
protest before heauen and the people, that hee died an Innocent.
After that Philip de Commines had said, that he had serued the king
well in Paris in the warre of the Common-weale, he addes: In the
end he was ill rewarded, more by the pursuite of his enemies then by the
Kings fault, but neither the one nor the other can well excuse themselues.
Anthony of Chabannes,Anthony of Chabannes. Earle of Dammartin, brother to Iames of
Chabannes, Lord Steward of France, saw the ship of his fortune
cast vpon the shelfe in the beginning of this Princes Reigne. His
good fotune drew him out of the Bastille to go to the warre of the
Common-weale, in the end whereof hee was made Lord Steward
of France, hee had the chiefe charge of the Kings Army in Guyenne,
and was then much fauoured by this Prince, with whom hee
was so inward, as when hee meant to marry his second Daughter

to the Duke of Orleans, hee discouered his secret affections vnto
him by a letter which hee did write vnto him vpon that subiect,
wher of the Chronicle (in written hand of King Lewis the twelfth)
makes mention: hee sent him word, that whatsoeuer they said, hee
was resolued to giue his daughter to the yong Duke of Orleans,
but no man should bee troubled to nourish the Children that
should bee borne of that marriage.
Peter of Termouille,Peter of Tremouille. Lord of Croan, saw not his life to end with the
fauours and honors hee had had of this Prince. His Predecessors,
Guy of Tremouille and Iohn of Tremouille, Lord of Ionuelle, were
made great in following the Duke of Bourgondies party. The eldest
of this house married Ioane Countesse of Boulleyn and Comminges,
Widow to Iohn of France, Duke of Berry.K. Charles (...) yeare 1430. King Charles 7
supported George of Tremouille, Lord of Craon, in the quarrell
which he had with the Earle of Richmont for the Lands of Thouars
and Benon. Peter of Tremouille defeated the troopes of the
Prince of Orange before Gy in the Franch-County, but hauing
beene repulst from the siege of Dole, hee was disgraced by Lewis
the eleuenth, who loued the seruices better then the seruants. Hee
was (saith Philip de Commines) a very fat man, who being reasonably
well content and rich, retired himselfe to his house.
Charles of Ambois did long feele the disgrace of Peter of Chaumont
his father,Charles of Ambois. who retired himselfe in the begining of the reigne
of Lewis with the Duke of Berry.The House of (...) by the Kings Commandement in the (...) 1465. He was afterwards imployed in
great affaires, and continued vnto the end. His brother was Bishop
of Alby, and then Cardinall, and the greatest fauourite of Lewis
the twelfth, who called him Mr. George. Philip de Commines calleth
Charles of Ambois, a most Valiant, Wife, and Diligent Man.
Peter of Rohan,Peter of Rohan. Lord of Gy, did gouerne his fortune happily amidst
the waues and stormes of this Princes reigne, who made him
Marshall of France. He was one of the foure which vndertooke
the gouernment of affaires during the Kings infirmity, and disability.
(...) the Bishop of (...) the Lord of Ch^umont, the Marshall of Gye, and the Lord of Lude, gouerned the Estate for 10 or 12 dayes. Hee continued this great Authority vnder the reigne of
Charles the eighth: for the respect whereof, the Lady Anne of
France, Regent to the King, and Wife to Peter of Bourbon, offended
that the Duke of Orleans attempted vpon her Authority,
would haue taken him prisoner by the Marshall of Gye. The Duke
of Orleans retired himselfe, and hee that was chosen to stay him,
was the Instrument of his returne, and made his peace with the
Regent.
Iohn of Chalons Prince of Orange,Iohn of Chalons. left the Duke of Bourgondy
to serue Lewis the eleuenth: then hee left Lewis to serue Mary,
daugther to the Duke of Bourgondy. This first discontentment
against his first maister, grew, for that disputing the succession of
Iohn of Chalons, Prince of Orange his Grand-father,Iohn of Chalons, sonne to Lewis and Margaret of Vienne, was married to Mary of Baussac, heire of the principalitie of Orange, by whom hee had Lewis, surnamed the Good. Lewis first maried Ioane of Montbel^art, by whom hee had William: and then hee ma^^ied Elenor of Armagna^, by whom hee had Lewis and Hugh. Willia^ was married to Katherine of (...), of (...), Iohn of Chalons was borne, of whom wee now make mention. against
Lewis and Hughe his vncles, the Duke of Bourgondy being President
in his Councell when as the cause was pleaded, made a Decree
against him.

This despight drew him to the Kings seruice, who promised to restore
him to his lands, and to giue him the gouernment of Bourgondy;
but when as he saw that he had but the name, and that the
Lord of Tremouille had the command of all the forces, he returned
to the seruice of the Princesse of Bourgondy; and caused the whole
Countrey to reuolt from the King. He troubled him much, and let
him see, that a great Prince hath no small enemies; that a Hornet is
able to put a Bull into fury.
Iohn of Esteteuille,Iohn of E^^teuille. Lord of Torcy, gouerned his fortune amidst so
many rockes and shelues vnto a safe port. The King made him maister
of the Cross-bowes, and committed vnto him the guard of the
Cardinal of Balue in the Castell of Montbason. It was he that came
and aduertised the King of the danger in suffering such numbers of
English to enter into Amiens, during the Treaty of Piquigny.
Philip of Creuecoeur,Philip of Creuecoeur. Lord of Esquerdes, or Cordes, Marshall of
France. He had great honors, and deserued great aduancements
in the house of Bourgondy: he receiued the Coller of the golden
Fleece, when as D. Charles did first solemnize the order at Bruges
after his fathers death,Charles (...) should haue stood with these words, which are read in a Chronicle, M. S. of the Kings library: The Earle of Neuers being adiourned by the letters patents of the most high, and most excellent Prince, my redoubted Lord the Duke, sealed with the seale of his order of the Fleece, to appeare in person at this present Chapter, there to answere vpo^ his honor touching witchcraft and abusing the holy Sacraments of the Church, hath not appeared, but hath made default. And to auoid the sute and depriuation of the order to bee made against him, he hath sent back the Coller, and therefore hath been, and is declared out of the order, and not called in the offring. when as the Earle of Neuers was degraded
more vnworthily then the respect of his house made him to hope
from a Prince his neere kinsman. The Duke gaue him the gouernment
of the County of Boullein, and afterwards of Artois. He came
vnto the Kings seruice, and deliuered into his hands the Towne of
Arras after the Dukes death. It seemes that Philip de Comines would
not speake all he knew, nor call a Fig, a Fig. He knits it vp shortly in
these words: He could not mistake in submitting himselfe vnto the
Kings seruice, vnlesse he had taken a new oath to the yong Lady of Bourgondy,
and in yelding vp that vnto her which he held of hers. They haue
and will speake diuersly hereof, wherfore I referre my selfe to the truth.
Tristan the Hermit whom the rigor of this reigne hath made so
famous for the suddennesse of his executions, was high Prouost.Tristan the Hermit.
King Charles the 7th made him knight after the siege of FronsacAfter the siege of Fronsac there were made knights, Iohn of Bourbon, Earle of Vendos^ne, Iohn of ^ourbon his base brother, the Vicount of Turaine, the Lords of Rochefautaut, Commery, Rochechouart Grignaux, de Barres, Mommorin, Bordeilles, Fontenelles and Estauge. The
name of Tristan was giuen to Princes borne in some great affliction.
Iohn of France was surnamed Tristan, for that he was borne at
Damiete during the Imprisonment of S. Lewis his father. In like
manner, the sonne to the King of Sicile was called Tristan, for that
he was borne in Catelonia, when his father was a prisoner.
Philip de Commines Lords of Argenton.Philip de Commines. Some haue thought that
he freed the king from the danger of Peronne; and that it was the
cause of the great fauour which he had purchased with the king. I
haue wondred why the king did not adde the honour of the Order
of S. Michael, and how it was possible that it should faile a man who
wanted not any thing, and who was so much fauoured, and so familiar
with the king, as he did often lye in his Bed, eate at his Table, sit
at his Councell, and carried his most secret designes to Princes
(...)

treatedWee doe often finde the (...) of the secrets in Lawyers books. Procopius sayth, that the w^ters of (...) were called a Secretis. Honor qui tunc daba^ur egregijs, dum ad Imperiale Secretum tales constet eligi, in quibus reprehonsionis vitium nequeat inveni^i. An honour which was then giuen to worthy men, whilst such are chosen to the secrets of the Empire, in who^ no vice of reprehension can bee found. happily, but by them that know them by the beginning,Secretarie of state a necessary Office.
progresse, and effects, by whose eyes and hands they see them, and
then dispatch them. Sufficiency, Experience, and Fidelity, serue as
a lampe in obscurest deliberations, and giues them Ariad^es threed,
which keepes them from meeting the Minotaure of repentanceThe Venetians (whose state is Aristocraticall) change all their Officers yearely, and some euery two moneths; but the Duke, the (...) of St. Marke, the Chancellor, and the Secretaries of State, are for life: the which the Florentines ordained in their state wh^^ as Lewis the twelfth freed them from the tyranny of Count Valentine.
in the intricate Labyrinth of Enterprises. For this reason in
some well-gouerned Common-weales, where as Offices are annuall,
that of Secretary is perpetual; to the end that one alone may
be Register of that which is concluded by many, and an inviolable
Guardian of Secrecie; which is the soule of affaires, and returnes
neuer when it is once let slip.Secrecie is the soule of affaires, and as Valerius calles it, Optimum ac (...) agend^rum vinculum: The best and safest hand for the managing of Affaires.
France cannot passe without the Counsell and experience of
him: who for that hee hath serued foure Kings in that great and
painfull charge, is held by all Europe for the Oracle of all resolutions
and reuolutions. There is not any thing vnpenetrable to his
Iudgement: who entring into the most confused and obscure affaires,
doth presently draw light. But it is time to go to land. This
name so famous and renowned throughout all the world, is the
rocke of Adamant which drawes my ship. Hee is the Port of this
Nauigation which I finish: he shall be the North-starre of another
which I continue. The profit of them shall redound to all in generall;
the thankes vnto the King; and the glory vnto God.
The end of the History of Lewis the eleuenth.



MAXIMES, IVDGEMENTS,
AND POLITIKE
OBSERVATIONS
OF
PHILIP DE COMMINES
Lord of Argenton.
VPON
THE LIFE, REIGNE,
AND ACTIONS OF LEWIS
the eleuenth, and of diuers
other occurrents.




PLACES AND TITLES
of these Maximes.
Prouidence of God.
Princes.
Realme.
Salique Law.
Enter-view of Princes.
Gouernments.
Councels and Councellors.
Court of Parliament.
Embassadors.
Treasure of the Prince.
Assemblies and Treaties.
People and Subiects.
Townes and Nations.
House of Bourgondy.
Enemies.
Enterprises.
Battels.
Warre.
Souldiars.
Sieges.
Victories.
Changes.
Prosperity and Aduersity.
Diuision.
Tumults and Sedition.
Liberalitie.
Iustice and Iniustice.
Punishment.
Iniury and Offence.
Wisedome.
Secresie.
Experience.
Knowledge.
Historie.
Nourishment.
Nature.
Hope.
Age.
Fore-sight.
Carelesnesse and Vigilance.
Pride and Presumption.
Treacherie.
Dutie.
A good Man.




POLLITICKE
MAXIMES.

PROVIDENCE OF GOD.
ALL well considered our onely
hope should be in God,In the end of the first booke. for in
him consists all our assurance
and all goodnesse, which cannot
bee found in any other
thing in the world: But wee do,
euery man, acknowledge it too
late, and after that wee haue
neede: yet it is better late then
neuer.
Grace and good fortune
comes from God.Lib. 1. chap. 4.
In all enterprises wee must
haue God of our side.Lib. 2. chap. 1.
God hath alwaies loued the Realme of France.Lib. 4. chap. 1.
To see things which God hath done in our time,Lib. 4. chap. 13. and doth daily,
shewes that he will leaue nothing vnpunished; And we may see
plainely that these strange workes come from him, for they are supernaturall,
and his sodaine punishments, and especially against
them that vse violence and cruelty: Who, commonly, are no
meane men, but great Personages, either by their owne absolute
power, or by the Princes authority.
When God meanes to change the fortune of a Prince,Lib. 1. chap. 3. from
good to bad, or from prosperity to aduersity, he prepares him enemies
of no force, suffers his seruants to become treacherous, and
makes him distrustfull and iealous of them that are most faithfull.
Example of Charles Duke of Bourgundy.
God giues the Prince as he meanes to punish Subiects,Lib. 5. chap. 9. and to
Princes Subiects, and disposeth of their affections towards them
as he meanes to raise or ruine them.

God hath not created any thing in this world,Lib. 5. chap. 18. neither men nor
beasts, but he hath made him some thing opposite, to keepe him in
feare and humility.
God speakes no more to men, neither are there any more Prophets
which speake by his Mouth; For his Faith is ample and
plaine to all those that will heare and vnderstand it, and no man
shall be excused for Ignorance, at least they which haue had hope
and time to liue, and which haue had their naturall wits.
The misery of Princes is when as God is so offended as hee
will no longer endure them,Lib. 5. chap. 18. but will shew his force and his Diuine
Iustice, and then he doth first of all take away their iudgements,
which is a great wound for them it toucheth: He troubles
their house, and suffers them to fall into diuision and murmure.
The Prince fals into such indignation with God, as hee flies the
counsell and company of wise men, and doth aduance Vp-starts,
Indiscreete, Vnreasonable, Violent men, and Flatterers, who applaud
whatsoeuer he saith: If he must impose a peny, they say two:
If he threatens a man, they say he must be hanged; and in like manner
of all other things: And that aboue all things they cause themselues
to be feared; They carry themselues insolently and proudly,
hoping that they shall be respected and feared by this meanes, as if
Authority were their inheritance.


Princes.
THere is good and euill in Princes,In the Prologue. for they are men like vnto
vs, and to God onely belongs perfection.
When as the vertues and good conditions of a Prince are greater
then his vices,In the same. he deserues great praise; for that such personages are
more inclined to all voluntary things then other men, as well for
their breeding and little correction they haue had in their youth,
as for that comming to the age of man, most men seeke to please
them, and to applaude their humours.
No man should attribute any thing to himselfe,Lib. 1. chap. 4. especially a
great Prince, but should acknowledge that grace and good fortune
comes from God.
Great Princes are much more suspitious then other men,Lib. 1. chap. 5. for the
doubts and aduertisements which are giuen them, and oftentimes
through flattery without any necessity.
Princes and they which rule in great Estates should bee very
carefull not to suffer any faction to grow in their house, from
whence this fire flies throughout the whole Prouince: But this happens
not but by a Diuine instigation. For when as Princes or
Realmes, haue beene in great prosperity and wealth, and haue forgotten
from whence that Grace did come, God hath raysed them
enemies of whom no man doubted.
God doth a great fauour vnto a Prince when he makes him capable
to winne men,Lib. 1. chap. 9. and it is a signe that he is not infected with the

odious vice and sinne of pride, which doth purchase hatred with
all men.
Princes and great men that are proud and will not giue eare to
any,Lib. 1. chap. 10. are sooner deceiued then they that are affable and heare willingly.
God shewes a great grace vnto a Prince,Lib. 1. chap. 10. when he knowes good
and euill, especially when the good precedes.
Aduersity teacheth a Prince to be humble,Lib. 1. chap. 10. and to please them
that he hath need of. Example of Lewis the eleuenth, expelled from
his fathers Court in his youth.
A Prince which hath entred into league with others,Lib. 2. chap. 12. should
dissemble many things which may breed diuision betwixt them:
and as he is the stronger, so should hee bee more wise. It is the
counsell which the Lord of Contay gaue vnto the Earle of
Charolois, who was discontented; for that the Dukes of Berry and
Britany held councels in his chamber and presence, diuided from
him.
I neuer knew Prince that could discerne the difference of men,Lib. 2. chap. 12.
vntill he had beene in necessity and in action.
Princes haue sometimes need of them whom they haue contemned:
Example in King Lewis the 11. Edward the 4. and the Earle of
Charolois.
Princes impart their authority to them that are most pleasing
vnto them, both for the age which is most sortable vnto them, and
for that they are well conceipted of them: or sometimes they are
led by them who know and gouerne their delights. But they which
haue vnderstanding, returne soone when there is neede.
I haue seene Princes of two humours, some so subtile and suspitious,Lib. 1. chap. 16.
as no man knew how to liue with them, and they did still imagine
that they were deceiued: the others trusted enough in their
seruants: but they were so grosse and vnderstood their owne affaires
so ill, as they could not discerne who did them good or euill. And
these are presently changed from loue to hatred, and from hatred
to loue. And although that of both sorts there are few found
good, nor any great assurance in them: yet I had rather liue vnder
the wise then vnder fooles. For there is more meanes to purchase
their fauour: but with the ignorant there is no meanes to be found,
for that there is nothing done with them, but with their seruants
whom many change often. Yet euery man must serue and obey
them in the Countries where they are, for they are bound vnto it.
To pardon, to be bountifull, or to do any other grace, are things
belonging to the Office of Princes.
A Prince, or any other man, that was neuer deceiued, cannot be
but a beast, nor haue knowledge of good and euill, nor what difference
there is.
Men are not all of one complexion,Lib. 1. and therefore the Prince
for the lewdnesse of one or two, should not forbeare to doe pleasure
to many. For one alone, being the least of all those to whom

he hath done any good, may happily do such seruice as it shall recompence
all the villanies which the others haue committed. Example
in the Hostages of Leige, whom the Duke sent away free, contrary
to the opinion of the Lord of Contay, who concluded to put them to
death, some made the Liegeois grow obstinate in their reuolt, others
were the cause of their reduction, and the instruments of the wise negotiation
of the Lord of Imbercourt to draw in the Duke.
One of the greatest signes of Iudgement that a Prince can shew
is to draw vnto him vertuous and honest men: For he shall be held
in the opinion of the world to be of the disposition and humour of
such as are neerest about him.
God hath not ordained the Office of a King or Prince to be executed
by beasts; nor by them who through vaine glory say, I am
no Clarke, I refer all to my Councell, I trust in them, and so giuing
no other reason, go to their sports: If they had beene well bred in
their youth, they would haue other reasons, and bee desirous that
both their persons and vertues should be esteemed.
God cannot send a greater plague vnto a Country, then a
Prince of weake vnderstanding: for from thence proceed all other
miseries; First growes diuision and warre, for he alwaies puts his
authority into an other mans hand, the which hee should be more
carefull to keepe then any other thing, and from this diuision proceeds
famine and pestilence, and all other mischiefes which depend
of warre.
Princes hate them mortally that seeke to keepe them in
feare.
Wise Princes do alwaies in their Designes seeke some honest
and apparant coulour: Example in Lewis the eleuenth, who caused
the Estates to assemble at Tours, and there made his complaints
against the Duke of Bourgundy, to haue a Subiect to breake the peace.
Of those bad Princes, and others, hauing authority in this
world, which vse it cruelly and tyrannously, not any, or few, haue
remained vnpunished: but it is not alwaies at a prefixed day, nor at
such time as they that suffer desire it.
It is no blemish to Princes to be suspitious, and to haue an eye
ouer those that go and come: But it is a great shame to be deceiued,
and to loose by his owne errour; yet suspitions should haue a
meane; for to exceed is not good.
A weake and couetous Prince endureth any thing: Example in
the Emperour Fredericke, whom the Authour cals a man of a faint
courage, and who endured all for feare of spending.
There is no reason a Prince should thrust himselfe into danger
for a small matter,Lib. 1. chap. 1. if God hath not abandoned him: Example in the
Duke of Bourgundy, who vndertooke a war against the Suisses for a very
light occasion, and without hope of profite, considering the nature of the
people and country.
Princes giue not honours and riches at their pleasures that demand
them.In the (...)
Princes feare not to thrust a seruant into danger if neede require.Lib. 3.
The Duke of Bourgundy had commanded Phillip de Commines
to go to Calice, which he durst not do without some assurance: The
Duke commanded him to passe on, although he should be taken, promising
to redeeme him.
A Prince gouerned by other counsell then his owne doth in
the end returne to that which is most necessary for him:Lib. 3. chap. 10. Example
in the Duke of Brittany.
A Prince should alwaies feare to put any thing in hazard.Lib. 6. chap. 2.
There is not any man,Lib. 6. chap. 12. of what dignity soeuer, but doth suffer,
either in secret or in publicke, and especially they that cause others
to suffer.
The condition of two Princes, which haue beene enemies, is
therin miserable; that they cannot by any meanes assure themselues
one of an other. Example in Lewis the eleuenth, and Charles Duke
of Bourgundy: When they were together at Leige, there were not fifteene
daies past that they had made and sworne a Peace, and yet (saith the
Authour) there was no trust.
The old age of a Prince makes him patiently to endure many
things:Lib. 1. chap. 2. Example of the Duke of Bourgundy, who dissembled that
which the Earle of Charolois his sonne did against the house of Crouy.


Realmes.
GOD hath had,Lib. 4. chap. 7. and hath still the Realme of France in speciall
recommendation.
The diuisions of Realmes are made in heauen:Lib. 1. chap. 3. Example of the
houses of Lancaster and Yorke, and of the crownes of Castile and Portugall.Lib. 5. chap. 18.
God hath giuen to the Realme of France the English for Opposites,Lib. 3. chap. 18.
and to the English Scots, to Spaine Portugall, to Castile
Grenado, to the Princes of Italy the Common-weales, to the
house of Arragon the house of Anjou, to the Sforca's that of Orleans;
to that of Austria that of Bauaria and the Swisses, to that
of Cleues that of Guelders, to that of Guelders that of Iuliers:
The Princes and Townes of Germany are opposite one to another,
and it is necessary it should be so throughout the world.


Salique Law.
VVIth wise and great deliberation,Lib. 6. chap. 3. and the Assistance of
Gods Grace, that Law and Ordonance was made in
France, that the daughters should not inherite the said Realme,
least it should fall into the hands of a forraigne Prince, for hardly
should the French euer haue endured it, neither do other Nations:
And in the end there is no great command whereas the Country
doth not remaine to them which are of the Country; the which

you may see by France, whereas the English haue had a great
command within these forty yeares, and at this day they haue nothing
left but Callice, and two little Castles, which cost them
much to keepe: The rest they lost with much more ease then they
conquered it, and they lost more in one day then they got in a
yeare. The like wee may say by the Realme of Naples, the
Iland of Sicile, and other Prouinces, which the French haue enioyed
many yeares, and at this day there is no signe nor memory
of them, but by the Sepulchres of their Predecessours. And although
they should endure a Prince of a Forraine Nation, with a
small traine well ordered, and himselfe wise, yet shall they hardly
do it with a great number of men: For if he brings with him a great
Traine, or he sends for them vpon any occasion of warre, they fall
out with the Subiects, as well for the diuersity of their humours
and conditions, as for their violence, and for that they are not beloued
in the Countrey as they that are borne there, and especially
when they seeke Offices, Dignities, and the Managing of
great affaires in the Country. A Prince that will shew himselfe
wise, when he goes into a Forraine Country, must reconcile all his
Townes, and if he bee endowed with this vertue (which onely
comes from the grace of God) it is to be esteemed before any other
thing: And if hee liue the age of a man hee shall haue great troubles
and affaires, and all they that shall liue vnder him, especially
when hee shall come to age, and his men, and seruants, shall haue
no hope of amendement.


Enterueiw of Princes.
IT is almost impossible that two great Lords shall euer agree,Lib. 1. chap. 14. for
the reports and suspitions which they haue howerly, and two great
Princes which desire to loue should neuer see one another, but
send honest and wise men one vnto another, who should entertaine
their friendships, and reconcile their errours.
It is a great folly for two great Princes (which are in a manner
equall in power) to see one an other, vnlesse they were very yong,
at which time they haue no discourse but of pleasures: But when
as they beginne once to enuy one another, although there were no
danger for there persons (which is in a manner impossible) yet
there hatred and enuy encreaseth. Wherefore it were better they
should reconcile their quarrels by good and wise seruants.


Gouernements.
A Prince should haue a great care what Gouernours he sets in
a Country newly conquered, or ioyned to his State, to the
end the Subiects may be better intreated then they were before.

Example of Archam^and of Hagembach, who was the cause that the
Duke of Bourgundy lost the Country which he held by engagement from
the Arch-Duke Sigismond.


Councelles and Councellors.
A Wise man cannot be bought at too deare a rate.Lib. 2. Chap. 1. It is very necessary
for a Prince to haue many of his Councell, for the wisest
erre very often, eyther for that they are passionate in matters
whereof they speake, through loue or hatred, or for that they will
oppose one against another, and sometimes by the indisposition
of persons, for we must not hold that for Councell which is done
after dinner. Some may say, that men committing any of these errors,
should not be of a Princes Councell. To whom I must answer
that we are all men, and he that would finde out such as should alwaies
speake wisely, and should neuer be moued nor distempered,
must seeke them in Heauen, for they are not to bee found among
men: but to recompence it, there may bee some one in Councell
which shall speake very wisely, and much better then he hath beene
accustomed, and so one helpes another.
There are few things secret in this world,Lib. 2. Chap. 8. especiallie of those that
are spoken.
About great Personages there are alwaies some Clarkes or
Lawyers, as it is fit and reasonable when they are good, but verie
dangerous when they are bad, they haue still the Law in their
mouthes, or some Historie, and the best that can be found, may be
turned to a bad sense: but wise men that haue read will neuer be abused,
neither will any be so hardy as to tell them lyes.
It is a great treasor for a Prince to haue a wise man in his company,
and very safe to giue him credite, and that he may haue libertie
to speake the truth.


Court of Parliament.
IT is the custome of France to publish all Accords in the Court
of Parliament,Lib. 2. Cha. 14. else they should be of no force, yet the King may
alwaies doe much.


Ambassadours.
WHen as Ambassadours returne from Treaties and Negotiations,Lib. 1. Chap. 9.
they must be heard alone, or in little company, to the
end that if their discourse be to terrifie, they should giue such words
as they ought to them that are inquisitiue, for euery man desires to
heare newes of them that come from such Treaties, and many will
say: Such a one will not conceale any thing from me. But yet they will,
if they be as I say, and that they know they haue wise Maisters.
It is not verie safe to haue many goings and commings of Ambassadors:Lib. 3. Chap. 8.
for many times they treat of things that are preiudiciall,

yet it is necessary both to send and receiue it.
Ambassadours which come from true friends,Lib. 3. Chap. 8. and where there is
no cause of Ielousie, should be well entertained, and may see the
Prince often, according to the qualitie of the Princes person, for
if he be not wise nor honest, the lesse he is seene the better. If Ambassadors
come from Princes, which are not friends, they should be
receiued and intreated honourably, they must appoint trusty and
wise men to accompanie them, and dispatch them presently, for it
is a bad thing to keepe an enemy with him.
Although warre were begunne,Lib. 3. Chap. 8. yet should they not breake off any
Treaties or Ouertures that are made of Peace, (for they know
not when they shall haue neede of it) but intertaine them all, and
heare all Messengers, doing the said things, and keeping good gard,
what men should goe vnto them, and who should bee sent both by
day and night, but as secretly as might be. And for one message
or Ambassador which they should send me, I would send them two:
And although they were weary, saying, that I should not send any
more, yet would I send when as I should haue meanes and opportunitie.
For you cannot send a better Spy, which should haue so
good meanes to see and vnderstand. And if they be two or three,
it is impossible to keepe so good gard ouer them, but the one or the
other will haue some speech, or learne some thing from some of
them: I meane holding honest tearmes, as they doe to Ambassadors.
And it is likely that a wise Prince will alwaies endeuor to haue
some friends with his aduerse party, and preuent it as hee can: for
in such affaires they cannot doe as they would; Some will say that
your enemy will grow more proud. I respect it not; for I shall
know more of his newes, and in the end shall reape both the profit
and honour. And although that others may doe the like with me,
yet will I not forbeare to send: And to this end will heare all practises,
and not breake any, but still find new matter. Moreouer, some
are not alwaies so iudicious as others, nor haue so great experience
in these affaires, neither haue they so great need. And in this case
the wisest gaine alwaies.


Treasure of the Prince.
KIng Charles 7. did neuer raise aboue one hundred and fourscore
thousand pounds sterling a yeare.Lib. 5. Cha. 18. And King Lewis his Sonne
did raise at the houre of his death, foure hundred, threescore and
ten thousand pounds starling, besides Artillerie and such other like
things: and without doubt it was a great pitty to see the pouerty of
the people. But our good Maister had one good thing in him, that
is, he laid vp nothing in his Treasure. He took all, and spent all, and
made great buildings for the fortification and defence of the towns
and places of his Realme, more then any of the Kinges which had
beene before him.



Assemblies, Conferences, and Treaties.
THe Assemblies and Conferences which are made from party to
partie are very dangerous,Lib. 1. Chap. 9. especiallie for him that is in danger
to fal. Most men haue naturally a desire to raise or saue themselues,
the which drawes them easily to the stronger. Some are so good
and so constant, as they haue none of these respects, but there are
few of them. And this danger is cheefly, when as they haue a Prince
which seekes to winne new. Example of the conference which was
made at the Mercers grange, which was since called the Market, for that
both parties did debauch one anothers men.
Treaties of peace should be managed by the most faithfull Seruants
of Princes,Lib. 1, Chap. 9. and men of middle age, least their weaknesse cause
them to make some dishonest bargain, or to amaze their Maister at
their return more then is needfull; and they should be rather imployed
that haue receiued most fauours from him: But especially wise
men, for no man euer made his profit of a foole, and these treaties
should be rather handled a farre of then neere.
There was neuer so good a marriage but some dined ill.Lib. 1. Chap. 4. Example
in the Treatie of Conflans where as some did what they would, and others
got not any thing.
There are some good people which haue this glorie to think that
they will end matters whereas they vnderstand not any thing,Lib. 1. Chap. 16. for
sometimes their Maisters discouer not vnto them their most secret
intents. In the company of such, who, most commonly, goe but
for shew, and many times at their owne charge, there goes alwaies
some meane man which doth negotiate apart.
Princes should haue a wise care to whom they commit their affaires,Lib. 1. Chap. 16.
and so should they also haue that are imploied for them, and
deale in such businesse. He that could excuse himselfe and not meddle
(vnlesse he saw that they themselues vnderstood it well, and had
an affection vnto the matter) should be very wise.
It is an honor for a Prince to feare that which is to be feared, and
to foresee it.
A Prince if he hath age should be verie warie not to make this excuse,
I did not thinke such a thing would haue happened, for it is not allowable.
Princes feare not to thrust their Seruants into danger when they
haue neede.
In Treaties Princes must imploy men that are pleasing, and such
as will passe ouer all things, and all wordes, to attaine vnto the end
of their Maisters desseignes.


Allyances.
BEtwixt the Kinges of France and the Emperors, there are great
oathes and confederacies not to attempt one against another.
(...)

The first Suisses that were seene in this Realme,Lib. 1. Chap. 6. and who haue giuen
credit to them that haue come after them, were at the Siege of
Paris, in the war of the common-weale, whereas they behaued themselues
most valiantly, and in all other places where they were imploied.
The English are in a manner vnprofitable in the wars of France.
If the Duke of Bourgundy would haue made vse of them,Lib. 4. Chap. 5. it had bin
needfull that for a season hee should haue accompanied them, to
help, to direct and gouerne their Armie, according to the manner
of our warres. For there are none more ignorant nor more vntoward
when they first passe: But in a short space they become good
Souldiers, wise and valiant.
There is but one high Chamberlaine in England:Lib. 6. Chap. 2. and for that
there is but one, it is a great office.
The English are the best Archers in the world.Lib. 1. Chap. 3.
The English are suspicious.Lib. 6. Cha. 11.
The English haue a common saying,Lib. 3. Chap. 8. whereof they haue sometime
told me treating with them: That in battails which they haue
had with the French, they haue alwaies, or most commonly won:
But in all treaties with them they haue euer lost. And in my opinion
I haue knowne men in this Realme, as worthy to manage a great
Treatie, as any other in the World, and especially of the breeding
of our King.
The Florentines did euery three months change their Lords who
had al the gouernment of the Cittie.Lib. 6. Chap 5.
The English are not so subtile in Treaties and Accordes,Lib. 4. Chap. 9. as the
French: and whatsoeuer is saied they goe grossely to worke, but
they must haue patience and not debate matters cholerickly.
The Italians take not Townes besieged so speedily as the French.Lib. 6. Chap. 5.
They know not so well how to force places and to defend them:
but to hold the fielde, and to settle a good order for their victuals,
and all other thinges necessary to hold the field, they vnderstand it
better then we do.
I doe not thinke that I lie,Lib. ^. Chap. 2. to say that I beleeue, that since the first
battaile of Granson, vnto the death of the King our Maister, the
said Townes, and priuate men of the Suisses, haue gotten of our
King a Million of Florins of the Rhin, of the Townes I meane but
foure, Berne, Lucerne, Friburge, Zurich, and their Cantons, which
haue their Mountaines. Suisses is one, yet it is but a Village. I
haue seene one of this village, being an Ambassadour with others,
in a very meane habit, who notwithstanding gaue his aduice with
the rest. Soleuure and Ondreual are called the other Cantons.
The English,Lib. 6. Chap. 2. as well Nobility, Commons, as Clergie, are inclined
to warre against this Realme, as well vnder colour of their quarrels
which they pretend, as for the hope of gaine; for that God
hath suffered their Predecessours to win many great battels within
this Realme, and to haue a long possession, both in Normandy and
in Guyenne, which they had held three hundred and fiftie yeares,

when as King Charles the seuenth won it first, as I haue said elsewhere,
at what time they carried great spoiles and riches into England,
as well of Princes and Noblemen of France, which had been
their Prisoners, and in great numbers, as of Townes and places
which they had taken in the said Realme, and hope still to doe the
like. But hardly should such an aduenture haue happened in the
time of the King our Maister: for he would neuer haue hazarded his
Realme, by putting himselfe, and all his Nobilitie, on foot to fight
with them, as they did at Agincourt, but would haue proceeded
more wisely if it had come to that point.
The Earledome of Flanders is a smal matter,Lib. 6. Chap. 7. without the Country
of Artois; which lies betwixt France and them, and is as it were
a curbe vnto them.
Offices and Estates are more desired in Paris then in any other
place of the World,Lib. 1. Chap. 6. for they that haue them make of them what
they can, and not what they ought: There are Offices without fees,
which are sold for aboue eight hundred Crowns, and others which
haue very small entertainment, are sold for more then their wages
amount vnto in fifteene yeares. Wherefore seldome doe any disappoint
themselues. And the Court of Parliament maintaines
this Article. It is reason, for it concernes them all. Among Counsellors
there are also some good and worthy men, and in like manner
there are some ill conditioned: So is it in all Estates.


House of Bourgundie, her greatnesse and
fall.
AFter along felicitie and great riches,Lib. 2. Chap. 9. and three great Princes
good and wise going before this, who had continued sixescore
yeares or more, and liued well and vertuously; God gaue this duke
Charles, who contin^ally held his Subiects in great warres, toyle,
and expence, and in ^ manner in Winter as much as in Sommer,
so as many rich men were slain or ruined by imprisonment in these
warres. The greatlosses began before Nuz, and were continued
by three or foure batels, euen vnto his death, so as in this last battell
all the force of ^is Country was consumed, and his men either
slaine or taken pris^ners, who might and would ha^e defended the
State and honour if his house. And so (as I haue said) it seemes
that this losse hat^ beene equall to the time that they were in felicitie:
for (as I haue said to haue seene it great, rich and honoured) so
I may say to ha^ seene it all in his Subiects; for I thinke that I haue
seene and knowne the best part of Europe, yet haue I not knowne
any State or Country, so much for so much, nor of larger limits,
that did so much abound in riches, moueables, and buildings, nor
in prodigaliti, expence, feasting, and good cheare, as I haue seene
during the (...) I was there. And if it seeme to any one (who was
not there in ^ose times) that I speake too much, others that were
then prese^, will happily say that I speake but little.

It is God which made this great and sumptuous building to fall
suddenly; that powerfull house which hath fed and maintained so
many good men, and hath been so much honored both far off and
neere, by so many trophees and victories, as not any Neighbour in
those times hath receiued the like. And this felicity and grace of God
continued an hundred and twentie yeares, when as all their Neighbours
did suffer (as France, England and Spaine) and they haue all
come thither to require aide; as you haue seene by experience of
the King our Maister, who in his youth, and during the life of King
Charles the seuenth his Father, liued sixe yeares there, in the time of
the good Duke Philip, who receiued him louingly. From England
I haue seene King Edwards two Brethren there, the Duke of Clarence,
and the Duke of Glocester; who afterwards called himselfe
King Richard, and of King Henries partie (who was of the house of
Lancaster) I haue seene in a manner all that race there. I haue seen
this house honoured from all parts, and then suddenly fall, and to
be the most desolate and ruinous house both in Princes and Subiects
of all her Neighbours.


Enemies.
THere is not any thing which a Prince should not doe to send an
Enemie out of his Realme;Lib. 4. Chap. 8. but he must not yeelde to giue him
any land: by the example of king Lewis the eleuenth to haue Edward
the fourth repasse the Sea: who said that hee would hazard all, rather
then giue him any places.


Enterprises.
WE must be slow and fearefull in Enterprises,Lib. 2. Cha. 10. and pursue them
in such sort, as we may be sure to be the stronger. Such was
Lewis the eleuenth.
In all Enterprises we must relie cheefely vpon God.Lib. 2. Chap. 1.


Battailes.
THe cheefest things in battailes are Archers;Lib. 1. Chap. 3. (...) as there be thousands
(for beeing in a small number they are not of any force)
and that they be ill mounted, to the end that the bee not greeued
to loose their horses; or that they haue not any at (...). And it is better
for this kind of armes, in a day of battaile, to haue ^hose that neuer
saw any thing, then others that haue had much pra^ise. The English
hold this opinion, who are the flower of all the ^rchers of the
world.
Battailes are in the hand of God,Lib. 1. Chap. 3. who disposeth (...) victories at
his pleasure.
Matters succeed not in the field, as they are co^cluded in a
Chamber. Example of the battaile of Montlehery, wherea^he Earle of

Charolois did quite contrarie to that which had been resolued.
It is dangerous for any one to hazard his estate vpon a battell,Lib. 2. Chap. 2. if
he may auoide it. For although the number be small that he loose,
yet the hearts of his men are danted, and the change more then can
be imagined, as well in feare of their enemies, as in contempt of
of their Master and of their trustie seruants, and they fall into mutinies
and practises, demanding more boldly then they were wont,
and they grow angry if they be refused. One Crowne before would
haue satisfied them better then three wil now. And if he that hath lost
be wise, he will not at such a time hazard any thing with them that
haue fled: But onely stand vpon his gard, and seeke out something
easie to vanquish, whereas they may be Masters to put fresh courage
into them, and take away feare. Howsoeuer, a lost Battell hath
alwaies a great traine, and bad for the looser: True it is that Conquerors
should seeke it to shorten their worke, especially they
that haue good footmen, and better then their neighbours, as wee
may say at this day the English or Suisses. I speake not this to contemne
other Nations, but those haue had great victories, and
their men are not to hold the field long without imploiment, as
the French or Italians can doe, who are wiser, or more easie to
leade. Contrariwise he that gaines growes into greater reputation
and esteeme with his men then before. His obedience encreaseth among
his subiects. In this estimation they grant him whatsoeuer
he demands, and his men grow more couragious and hardie: Also
the said Princes do sometimes grow so glorious and proud, as they
miscarry afterwards, and hereof I speak vpon knowledge: But such
grace comes onely from God.
Euery one should be fearefull to hazard a battell that is not forced:Lib. 2. Chap. 4.
But if there be no remedie, before he come to it, he must cast
all the doubts that can be thought on. For commonly they that
doe things fearefully make prouision for all euents, and gaine
oftener then they that proceed with pride: yet when God will haue
a hand in it nothing can preuaile.
Euery man should doe what he may,Lib. 2 Chap. 3. and what he ought in a day
of Battell, and acknowledge that it is one of the accomplishments
of the worke of God, begun sometimes vpon small occasions, and
giuing victorie sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the other.
And this is so great a misterie, as Realmes and great Siegnories
are sometimes ruined, and others increase and begin to
raigne.


Warre.
IT is an easie matter to begin Warre betwixt two great Princes,
but hard to pacifie it, by reason of the accidents which happen:
For many exploits are done of either side to anoy his enemy, which
on the sudden cannot be recalled.

It is a great folly in a Prince to submit himselfe to the power of
an other, especially when they are in warre.
It is a great show of pride or folly for any one to hold himselfe
too strong,Lib. 2. Cha. 10 and yet Captaines doe it sometimes to be held valiant,
or for that they doe not well vnderstand the busines which they
haue in hand.
Among other things that are fit to make conquest, if there bee
not a great iudgement all the rest is of no force, and I thinke that it
must come from the grace of God.
He that hath the profit of the Warre hath the honor.
There must bee no hast nor precipitation when they vndertake,Lib. 5. Chap. 28
and begin a warre: And I tell you that Kings and Princes are
much the stronger when they vndertake it with the consents of
the subiects, and are more feared of their enemies. When it is a
defensiue warre this cloud is seene comming a farre off, especially
if it be from strangers, and therein good subiects should not complaine
nor refuse any thing, and the accident cannot be so sudden
but they may call some men, such as shall bee named. It is not
done without cause, and therein they vse no fixion, nor entertaine
a pettie warre at pleasure, and without cause, to haue occasion to
leuy money.
The greatest miseries come commonly from the stronger: For
the weaker seeke nothing but patience.


Souldiours.
I Hold that men at Armes entertained are well imployed vnder
the authoritie of a wise King or Prince,Lib. 3. Chap. 3. but when he is otherwise,
or that he leaues Infants, the vse, wherevnto their Gouernours imploy
them, is not alwaies profitable, neither for the King nor for his
subiects.
Men at Armes lie continually vpon the Country, without paying
any thing, committing infinite insolencies and excesse, as
all others know: For which they are not content with an ordinarie
life, and with that which they finde in a labourers house, from
whom they are payed: But contrariwise they beat the poore men
and force them to fetch bread, wine and victuals from abroad:
And if he hath a faire Wife or a Daughter, hee shall doe well to
keepe her safely. Yet seeing there is pay, it were easie to reforme
it, so as the men at Armes were payed euery two monethes at the
farthest, and so they should haue no excuse to commit those insolencies
which they doe, vnder coulour of want of pay: For the money
is leuied and comes at the end of the yeare. I speake this for our
Realme, which is more opprest in this case then any other that I
know, and no man can help it but a wise King. Other neighbour
countries haue other punishments.



Sieges.
ALthough that sometimes sallies bee very necessarie, yet are
they dangerous for them that are in a place, for the losse of
Ten men is greater to them then a hundred to the enemie without,
their numbers not being equal: neither can they recouer more
when they will, and they may loose a Commander or a Leader,
which oftentimes is the cause that the rest of the souldiors demand
nothing more then to abandon the place.
In sieges of places the losse of one man alone is the cause to preserue
his Master from a great inconuenience,Lib. 5. Chap. 3. although, he be not
of his house, nor of any great extraction, but onely hath iudgment
and vertue. Example in Cohin, an Englishman, who being slaine with
a Canon shot within Nancy, the Englishmen whom he commanded mutined
and caused the Towne to be yeelded.
After that a Prince hath laid siege against a place,Lib. 5. Chap. 6. and planted
his Artilerie, if any come to enter and to relieue it against him they
are worthy of death, by the law of Armes. Yet it is not practised in
our Warres, which are more cruell then the wars of Italy or Spaine,
whereas they vse this custome.
Despaire of succors make men besieged to put all things in hazard.
Example by the furious sallie of them of Liege who had like to
haue taken or slaine the King, or the Duke of Bourgundy.


Victorie.
THey doe alwaies augment the number of the vanquished.Lib. 2 Chap. 2. I
haue seene in many places whereas for one man they said they
had slaine a hundred, to please them, and with such lies they doe
sometimes abuse their masters.
Hee that gaines in warre growes in greater reputation with his
Souldiors then before.Lib. 2. Chap. 2. His obedience encreaseth. They grant
him what hee demands, and his men are more hardie and couragious.


Changes.
THe changes are great after the death of great and mighty
Princes,In the Prologue. where some loose, and others gaine.
Great changes proceed not from fortune,Lib. 1. Chap. 12. which is nothing but
a Poeticall fiction. The Author speakes this vppon the Constables
ruine, and concludes in these tearmes. He should be very
ignorant that should beleeue that fortune, or any such like
thing, should cause so wise a man to be hated of these two Princes

at one instant who in their liues did neuer agree in any thing but in
this, and most of all of the King of England who had married
his Neece, and did wonderfully loue all his wiues kindred, and
especially those of this house of St Pol. It is likely and very
certaine that hee was depriued of the grace of GOD to haue
made himselfe an enemie to these three Princes, and not to haue
any one friend that durst lodge him one night, and there was no
other fortune that had any hand in it but God, and so it hath happened
and will happen to many others, who after great and long
prosperities fall into great aduersities.
When as a great man hath lost all his owne, he soone wearies
them that support him. Example of Rene Duke of Lorraine, who
retired into France after the Duke of Bourgundie had taken his Country.
God giues extraordinarie willes vnto Princes when it pleaseth
him to change their fortunes.Lib. 5. Chap. 5. Example of Charles Duke of Bourgundie
who grew obstinate at the second siege of Nancy, against the aduice
of his Councell.


Prosperitie, Aduersitie.
A Misfortune neuer comes alone.Lib. 3. Chap. 5.
Prosperitie makes people proud.Lib. 4. Chap. 3. Example of them of
Arras.
Princes are proud and seeke not the true remedies in their misfortunes,Lib. 5. Chap. 5.
whereof the first is to returne vnto God, and to consider
if they haue offended him in any thing, and to humble themselues
before him, and acknowledge their errors: For it is he that
iudges of such suites whereas no error can bee propounded. After
this, it will doe him great good to conferre with some priuate
friend, and boldly to discouer his griefes vnto him, for it
doth ease and comfort the heart, and the spirits recouer their
vertue, conferring thus with some one in priuate; or else he must
seeke another remedy by exercise and labour, for of necessitie, seeing
we be men, such griefes must passe with great passion, either in
publike or in priuate.
In time of aduersitie euerie one murmures and contemnes
all the actions of the afflicted.Lib. 5. Chap 7. Example in the Duke of Bourgundy
after the losse of the battels of Granson and Morat.
Wee must hold for certaine that the great prosperities of
Princes,Lib. 5. Chap. 6. or their great aduersities, proceed from the Diuine
prouidence.
If men were alwaies wise,Lib. 1. Cha. 15. they should bee so temperate in
their speeches in time of prosperitie, as they should haue no
cause to change in time of aduersitie. The Flemings during the
life and prosperitie of their Duke, spake not to the King, nor of the

King with such reuerence as they haue done since.
Affliction troubles the minde and alters the complexion. This
was knowne in the Duke of Bourgundy after the Battell of Granson.
He was neuer so wise as he had been, his choller and naturall heat was
so great before as he dranke no wine, and after this they caused him to
drinke it pure.


Diuision.
ALl good things in this world are ouerthrowne by diuision,Lib. 2. Cha. 16. and
it is almost impossible that many great Noblemen of like estate
can long entertaine themselues together, if there bee not a
head aboue them, and if it were necessarie he should be wise and
well esteemed to draw obedience from them all.
A wise Prince hauing the command of ten thousand men,Lib. 1. Chap. 16. and
meanes to entertaine them, is more to bee feared then ten hauing
either of them six thousand, all allyed and confederate
together, for that they haue so many things to decide among
them, as halfe the time is spent before any thing can bee
conceiued.
The true signe of the ruine of a Countrey is when as they
that should hold together are deuided and abandon it.Lib. 2. Chap. 1. Example
in the Towne of Dinand, which left the alliance of them of
Liege.
Factions are much to be feared in a Realme when as they happen,Lib. 3. Chap. 7.
and cause great ruines. Example of the diuisions of England
betwixt the houses of Lancaster and Yorke.
When as a faction begins,Lib. 3, Chap. 8. although there be but two or three
Princes, or meaner men that deale in it, yet before the feast hath
continued two yeares all the neighbours are inuited.
There was neuer any faction begun in the countrie but the
end was preiudiciall and hard to be quencht.Lib. 4. Chap. 9.
Diuisions are the springs of Warre from whence grow mortalitie
and famine,Lib. 5. Cha. 18 and all these miseries proceed for want of
faith.
Wee must confesse (considering the wickednes of men, and
especially of great men who know not, neither doe beleeue that
there is a God) that it is necessarie that euery Nobleman and
Prince should haue his contrarie to keep him in feare and humilitie,
else no man should bee able to liue vnder them or neere
them.


Commotions and Seditions.
IN tumults and Seditions the most wicked are most bold and
hardie.In the Prologue.



Liberality.
RIches and Honors are not giuen at their pleasures that demand
them.In the Apology.
King Lewis the eleuenth gaue much to Churches.Lib. 5. Cha. 18. In some things
lesse had done better: ^or he tooke from the poore to giue to them
which had no neede. To conclude, there is no perfect measure in
this world.


Iustice and Iniustice.
THere are Princes which punish vnder a colour of Iustice, and
haue Instruments fit for their humours, who of a venialll sinne
make it mortall. If they haue no matter, they finde meanes to delay
the hearing of the parties and witnesses, to ruine them in expences,
expecting still if any one will complaine of him which is in durance,
and whom they hate. If this course will not serue to compasse
their intention, they haue others more suddaine; saying that
it were necessary to make him an example, making his case as they
thinke good.
To others that hold of them and are somewhat stronger,
they proceede by way of fact, and say: Thou disobaiest or doest
contrary to the homage which thou owest me, and so by force they
take from him that which he hath, if they can, (at the least they doe
their best) and make him to liue miserably. He that is but their
Neighbour (if he be strong and resolute) they suffer him not to liue:
but if he be weake, he knowes not what course to take. They will
say vnto him, he hath supported their enemies, or they will send
their men at Armes to liue in his Country, or will buy quar^els, or
finde occasions to ruine him, or will maintaine his Neighbour against
him, and will lend them men. Of their Subiects, they will
disgrace such as haue serued their Predecessors well, to raise new
men.


Punishment.
TO see the things which God hath done in the World,Lib. 4. Chap. 13. and doth
daily, it seemes that he will leaue nothing vnpunished, and we
may see plainly that these strange workes come from him: for they
are beyond the workes of nature, and his punishments are so suddaine,
especially against them that vse violence and cruelty; who
commonly are no meane persons, but great, either in Signeurie, or
the Princes Authority.



Iniuries, Offences, and Outrages.
PRinces and they that are in great Authority, should feare to doe
or speake outragiously, and haue a care to whom they speake
them: For the greater they are, the more sencible and distastfull
are the outrages they doe; for it seemes that outrages will bee mor^
noted for the greatnesse and authoritie of the person that commits
them, and if he be their Maister or Lord, they will dispaire euer to
receiue honour or fauour from him, and more men serue for the
hope of future good, then for that which they haue receiued. Example
of the lye which the Constable gaue to the Lord of Imbercourt at the
conference of Roy.


Prudence, Experience, and Occasion.
I Haue seene few men that could flye time,Lib. ^. Chap. 3* and auoyd their misfortunes,
neither heere, nor in any place else: For the one hath
no experience, hauing not seene their neighbour Countries, which
is a great error in all men of worth, for it giues a great iudgement
and resolution to haue seene thinges by experience. Others haue to
great a loue to their Goods, Wiues, and Children. And these
reasons haue beene the causes of the ruine of many good men.
Men which haue no experience,Lib. 1. Chap. 3. maintaine many ill grounded
arguments, and with sm^ll reason. Wherefore it is good to follow
the opinion of him which saith, That no man repents himselfe of speaking
little, but oftentimes for speaking to much.


Secrecy.
AS soone as Princes depart one from another,Lib. 11. Cha. 8. they secretly
whisper whatsoeuer hath beene obserued in them, and then
through indiscretion speake of it openly at dinner and supper, and
then it is reported of both sides, for few thinges are kept secret in
this world, especially of those which are spoken.


Knowledge.
A Prince,Lib. 5. Cha. 18. or man of any Estate whatsoeuer, if he haue force and
authoritie where he liues ouer others, if he bee learned and
hath seene or read, it will either amend him or impaire him: For
the bad impaire with much knowledge, and the good amend. Yet
it is credible, that knowledge doth rather amend him then impaire

him, were there nothing but the shame to know his owne euill, it
were sufficient to^keepe him from doing ill, at the least not to
wrong any man, whereof I haue seene many experiences among
great personages, whom knowledge hath drawne from many bad
desseignes, and also the feare of Gods punishment, whereof they
haue greater knowledge then ignorant men, who haue neither seen
nor read.


History.
IT is a great aduantage for Princes to haue read Histories in their
youth,Lib. 2. Chap. 6. where they may plainely read of such assemblies, and of the
great fraudes, deceipts and periuries, which some of the ancients
haue vsed one against another, hauing taken and slaine them that
haue relyed vpon such assurances. It is not said that all haue vsed it,
but the example of one is sufficient to make many wise, and to giue
them a will to stand vpon their gard: And in my opinion one of the
greatest means to make a man wise is to haue read ancient Histories
and to learne to gouerne himselfe wisely thereby, and by the example
of our predecessors. For our life is so short as it suffic^th not to
haue experience of so many thinges. Besides we are decayed in age
and the life of man is not so long as it was wont to be, nor their bodies
so strong,
All the Bookes that are written were to no vse, if it were not to
reduce things past to memory, where we see more in one booke in
three monthes, then twenty men liuing successiuely one after another,
can see by the eye or learne by experience. Although that enemies
nor Princes be not alwaies alike (notwithstanding that the subiect
be) yet is it good to be informed of thinges past.


Nourishment.
ALl men that haue beene great,Lib. 1. Chap. 9. and done great matters, haue begun
very yong. And it co^sists in the education, or coms from the
grace of God. This is spoken by the Author vppon the good education
of Lewis the eleuenth, without the which it had beene impossible for
him to haue surmounted those great difficulties which he had in the beginning
of his raigne, and to blame that of the noblemen of his time, who
were not bred vp but to shew their folly in their speach and apparrell.
They haue no knowledge of any learning, and there is not a wise
man among them. They haue Gouernors to whom they talk of their
affaires, and not to themselues, and they dispose thereof, and there
are such Lords which haue not sixescore and ten pounds starling
yearely rent which take a glory in saying, speake vnto my officers,
thinking by these wordes to seeme great men. In like manner I haue
often seen such seruants make their profit of their maisters, giuing

them to vnderstand that they were beasts. And if happily any one
returnes and desires to know his owne, it is so late as it serues him to
small purpose.
A Princes subiects haue cause to greeue, when they see his Children
ill bred vp, and in the hands of bad conditioned men.


Nature.
A Naturall wit, perfectly good excells al other sciences, that may
bee learned in the world. Example of Lewis the eleuenth who
without any knowledge of learning had the reputation and the effects of
the wisest Prince of his age.


Hope.
ALL well considered our only hope must be in God,In the end of the first Book. for in him
lies all our assurance and all bounty, which cannot be found in
any worldly thing, But euery man knowes it too late, and after that
he hath need, yet it is better late then neuer.


Age.
THe fathers old Age makes him to indure the Insolencies of his
sonne patiently.Lib. 1. Chap. 2. Example of Philip Duke of Bourgondy, who dissembled
the bad vsage of his sonne the Earle of Charolois to them of th^
house of Croy.


Foresight.
VVIsemen discerne so farre off as their life is not sufficient to
see halfe of those things which they haue foreseene.Lib. 3. Chap. ^.

Carelesnes and vigilancy.MAd and distracted Princes are not to bee blamed if they gouerne
their affairs ill:Lib. 6. Cha. 4. but they that haue their iudgments sound
and are well disposed of their persons, if they spend their whole time
in idlenes, and folly, they are not to be pittied if they fal into misfortunes:
But they which diuide their times according to their age,
somtimes seriously and in Councell, and somtimes in feasts and pleasure,
are much to be commended, and the subiects are happy to haue
such a maister.
(...)





An Alphabeticall Table of the principall matters
contained in the first seuen Bookes of
this History.

A
ACcord betwixt the King of
Castile and Portugal. fol. 220.
Affaires of a Prince are then effected
with most safety and
aduantage, when he hath won
that person, who is most in credit
and authority with the other,
with whom he Treates.
166.
Affection of Maisters to bad seruants
is the cause of much disorder.
14.
Alphonso King of Portugall,
comes to demand succours in
France. 215. But is refused by
the French King. 218.
Alphonso proclaimed King of
Castile. 217. His death. Ibid.
Amazment breeds strange effects.
80.
Ambition hath no other law, then
the fancy of the Ambitious. 77.
Amurath puts Scanderbegs brethren
to death, 120. and growes
fearefull of Scanderbegs valour.
Ibid.
Army of the Earle of Charolois.
79.
Articl^s of a peace betweene
France and England. 165.
Attempt against the Duke of
Bourgundies life, discouered by
the King. 206.


B
Balue the Cardinall, imprisoned
in a cage of his owne inuention.
132.
Basile besieged by Lewis the
Dauphin. 22.
Battell of Firmigny, 30. Battell
at Montlehery. 81. Battell at
Wakefield. 56. Battell of Varna.
121. Battell of Morat. 213.
Battell of Nancy. 224.
Beauuais besieged. 164.
Birth of Charles the eight. 146.
Boldnesse after danger past. 86.
Bothwell in great fauour with
the King of Scotland. 232.


C
Cadet rescueth the Earle of Charolois.
83.
Challenge sent to the Duke of
Bourgundy. 3
Charles the seuenth disinherited
by his father Charles the
sixt. 1. Hee armes against
his sonne Lewis the Dauphin.

12. He takes the Castle of
S. Maxiant. 13. His reprehension
of the Duke of Bourbon. 14.
His fragility. 26. His Death. 27
Charles Duke of Orleans led prisoner
into England. 3. He dieth
for sorrow. 69.
Charles of Nauarre poysoned by
his Mother in Law. 61.
Charles Duke of Berry retires into
Brittany. 70. His solicitatio^
of the Duke of Bourgundy to
assist him for reformation of
disorders in France. Ibid.
Campobasse his treason against
the Duke of Bourgundy. 223.
Charles, Earle of Charolois, afterwards
Duke of Bourgundy; his
negligence in trayning his Army.
82. Is in danger to be slaine
or taken. 83. His repast among
dead bodies. 84. Runs into vnseene
danger. 94. His Humour
and disposition. 105. Is constrained
to grant the Gantois their
demand. 107. Is forced to raise
the siege of Nuz, and comes to
Callice to the King of England.
180. His profite and blame by
the death of the Constable. 205.
His iourney against the Suisses.
207. etc. He looseth the battell,
but not his courage. 211. Hee
seizeth vpon the Dutchesse of
Sauoy and her children. 214.
His affliction after the Battell
of Morat. 220. His defeat and
death. 224. An example of his
Iustice* 227. 227.
Charles Prince of Nauarre makes
warre against his father. 151.
Chastity and Beauty are rare companions.
27.
Choler and Praecipitation are two
blind guides. 67.
Combustions in England. 53.
Complaints against Lewis the
Dauphin. 30. Complaints for the
Pragmaticall Sanction. 135.
Confidence is the true cyment of
friendship. 187.
Considerations of the King to haue
a peace. 179.
Conspiracy against King Henry
the sixt. 54.
Constantinople taken. 123.
Consultation taken to put the Hostages
of Leige to death. 108.
Contention in Scotland for the
Regency. 230.
Contentment of priuateme^ makes
them forget the publicke. 96.
Councell of Basile seekes an accord
with the Dauphin. 24.
Counsels in perplexity. 85. counsels
sauor of the passions of counsellours.
173. counsell contemned
drawes on destiny. 223.
Courage of the women at the siege
of Beauuais. 165.
Courtesy proffered but not meant.
189.
Crosse of S. Laud. 179.
Croysado published against the
Turke. 64.
Cruelties makes Princes odious.
125. cruelties committed at the
taking of Nesle. 163. cruelty
base and villanous. 227.


D
Death of Charles Duke of Orleance.
2. Death of the Signior
of Contay. 108.
Death is sweete, when it is the
end, and not the punishment, of
life. 204.
Declaration of the house of Bourgundy. 36.
Delight in publicke miseries for
profite sake. 24.
Desire of rule sets father and son
at variance. 60. Desire to haue
things as we wold, makes vs oftentimes
accept appearances for
the things themselues. 87.
Dignities change the Maximes

of conscience. 48.
Disability supplyed by Deputy.
216.
Disobedience rightly punished. 81
Displeasure of the Duke of Bourgundy
against his sonne. 34.
Disposition of the Earle of Charolois.
33.
Distraction of Charles the sixt. 1.
Dutchesse of Bourgundy drawsher
husband to the treaty of Arras. 8
Duke of Bourgundy flies into
Flanders. 2. and is slaine by Taneguy
Du Chastel. 4.


E
Earle of S. Paul is made constable
of France. 97. His naturall affection.
Ibid. His bad conduct.
98. His pollicy. 143. His dissimulation
to creepe againe into
the Kings fauour. 168. the
manner of his comming to the
King. 169. His double dealing
with the King of England. 181
Is abandoned of all his friends.
196. His grieuous perplexities.
198. Is deliuered prisoner to
the King. 200. His confessions,
Arraignement, sentence, and
execution. 201. 202. etc.
Ease found in conference of troubles
and afflictions. 27.
Education is as another nature. 16
Edward 4. proclaimed King of
England. 57. He declares himselfe
for the Bourgundian. 77.
Hee sends the Garter to the
Earle of Charolois. 88. Is defeated,
and taken prisoner. 141. His
passage into Fra^ce. 177. His repentance
for his passage. 182.
Eloque^ce, naturall in Lewis the
eleuenth. 133.
Embassage from the Fren^h King
to the Emperor Frederick. 176.
Enemies that are ambitious must
haue more work made the^ then
they can compasse. 173.
English, well entertained at Amiens.
187.
Enterveiw of the Kings of France
and Cistile. 62. Enterveiw of
the French King, and Earle of
Charolois. 93. Enter veiw of the
French King and King of England.
^89.
Estates assembled at Cl^rmont. 13
Exploits done by captain Salezard
at the siege of Beauuais. 165.


F
Faction of the Orleano^s, and
Bourgonians. 1.
Famine extreame in Nancy. 222.
Fatality of names. 6.
Feare, and the strange operation
thereof. 93.
Ferdinand King of Naples, seeks
the alliance of the Queene of
Cyprus. 127.
Fidelity and deuotion of the French
towards their Kings. 5.
France the Sanctuary of Popes. 47


G
Galeas Duke of Milan, his death,
229. His cruelties and whooredomes.
230.
Gantois profite by the Ligeois. 110
George Castriot circumcised, and
called Scanderbeg. 120. Hee
leaues the Turk, and ioynes with
Iohn Huniades. 121. Hee demands
succors of the Pope. 123
his death. 124. His force and
dexterity. Ibid.
Gyles of Brittany his Tragicall
end. 151.
Good of a peace, and necessity of affaires,
respect not formalities. 9.
Gouernement of Venice commended.
129,
Guienne giuen to the Kings brother.
135.


H
Heirs teares are soon dryed vp. 41
Henry the sixt, King of England,
is crowned King of France at

Paris. 4. Hee flies into Scotland.
57. Is imprisoned in the Tower
of London. 58. Is set at liberty
againe. 143.
Henry King of Castile degraded.
217.


I
Iames the first, King of Scotland,
murdered. 7.
Iests should end, when they begin
to moue laughter. 28.
Iewes probation^waters. 146.
Impatience of the Earle of Charolois.
67.
Importance of the Office of the
Constable of France. 205.
Indignities and insolences of people
reuolted. 103.
Inequality of recompence after the
battell of Montlehery. 84.
Inhumanity of the Duke of Bourgundy.
164.
Iniuries done to faith and reputation,
are not easily repaired,
nor recompenced. 100.
Insolence in victory punished. 23.
Institution of the order of Saint
Michael. 136.
Intelligences continued betwixt
Bourgundy and Bourbo^. 139. Intellige^ces
of the Constable with
the Duke of Bourgundy. 177.
Iohn Earle of Armagnac expelled
his Country. 154. accused by a
Welchman. 155. Desires a safe
conduct to iustifie himselfe. 156
Is reconciled to the King. 157.
And is afterwards slaine, vnder
the assurance of a Treaty.
158. His incest 159. His superstition,
in holding it a bad presage
to meete an Englishman
with a Red Crosse. 160.
Isabella of Cstaile marries Ferdinand
of Arragon. 218.


K
Katherine Cornari adopted by
the Venetians. 126.
King Lewis in danger to be taken
or slaine. 116. His letters to the
Lord of Lude. 152.
King and Queene of Cyprus driue^
out of their owne Realme. 126.
King of Scotland giuen to Sorcery.
234. and is slaine in fight by
his Nobility. 235.
Knights habite of the Order of St.
Michael, and the marke of the
Order. 137.
Knowledge better how to die then
to kill, is the best and onely part
of vallour. 17.


L
League of Armagnac. 2.
Learning is silent when warre
speakes. 26.
Letters from Amurath to Scanderbeg.
121. And the answer
ot it. 122. Letters of the Solda^
to the King of Cyprus. 125.
Letters of defiance from Edward
4. to the French King. 178
Lewis excited against his father
by bad counsell. 10. He soliciteth
the good Townes of France
to ioyne with him. 12. Is reconciled
to his father. 14. He desireth
rather to be held a bad son,
then a bad master. 15. He takes
Deipe. 20. Is too true in his
threats, and promises of reuenge.
29. auoyding one danger he fals
into another. 31. Is dispossest of
his reuenewes in Dauphine. 32
His wandring being in Hunting.
34. His coronation. 42. His
voyage into Brittany. 52. Is
made Arbitrator betweene the
Kings of Castile and Arragon.
62. Is receiued with great
pompe into Tournay. 64. His
message to the Duke of Britany.
65. Hee separates the heads of
the League. 107. Two errours
which he co^mitted in the assurance
of his person. 111. 112*

His politick dissimulation with
the Constable. 170. His iudgement
to distinguish spirits. 183
His message to the King of England.
Ibid. He discouers the Constables
double dealing to the
Bourgundian. 186. His iests vpon
the peace made with Edward
4th. and his feare to haue
them related againe. 191.
Learning disalowed by the Turke.
219.
Liberty, the ancient coulour for innouation.
80.
Lie, especially in a Gentleman how
to be punished. 169.
Leige reuolts against the Duke of
Bourgundy. 103. Is supported by
the French king. 107. Submits it
selfe, and demands pardon. 109
Hath her wals beaten downe.
110. Is againe besieged by the
Bourgundian. 114.
Loue, without regard of honour or
profite. 58. Loue continued towards
children for their fathers
sake. 76.


M
Marriage of Lewis the 11th. 6.
Misery of imprisonment, mittigated
by kind vsage. 177. miseries
of France for 70. yeares. 5.
Modesty of Blanch, daughter to
Iohn King of Nauarre. 6.
Mony leuied vnder the pretext of
warre, and ill employed. 46.
Multiplicity of Popes. 38.
Murder iustified by the Duke of
Bourgundy. 2.


N
Nauigation contemned by the
French. 180.
Neutrality in a subiect is meere
Treason. 98.
Normandy yeelded to the King. 99


O
Obedience in a Souldier is as much
commendable as courage. 177.
Obseruations of the Duke of Guiennes
life. 150.
Occasion which caused an ouerture
of peace betwixt the French and
English. 182.
Opinion causeth terrible motions
in the soule. 15.
Opportunity of fight neglected. 81
Ostentation of Maiesty not suteable
with misery. 6.


P
Paris reduced to the French Kings
obedience. 9. Famisheth the Army
which would haue famished
it. 91. Almost vnpeopled. 99.
Parpignan besieged, and wonne by
famine. 154.
Parts which frame a Prince. 16.
Peace of Bourges. 3.
Peter Hagembach his crimes, iniustice,
and death. 174.
Phillip Duke of Bourgundy wins
Dinan by force, and ruines it.
104. His death; and the greatnes
of his house. Ibid. His bounty,
courage, and moderation. 105.
Pius 2 presseth the abolition of the
Pragmaticall sanction. 44. His
affection to the house of Arrago^,
and his threat against France.
45. He disauowes his own writings.
48. His death, birth, fortune,
and dignities. 72.
Plurallity of chiefes is for the most
part ruinous and vnprofitable. 88
Pontoise taken by assault. 18.
Power which is not feared by stra^gers
is not well obeyed by Subiects.
32.
Pragmaticke Sanction abolished,
and dragged through the streets
of Rome. 51.
Praecipitation is a shelfe, couered
with the shipwrackes which she
hath caused in great occasions.
78.

Princes are especially to provide,
that great houses vnder their
gouernment, ally not themselues
against their liking. 19
Princes seeme very weake, or very
fearefull, which giue an Enemy-army
leasure to make a bridg. 89
Princes, in marrying, regard not
their pleasure, but the necessity
and profit of their affaires. 144.
They are no lesse bound by simple
words, then priuate persons are
by Oathes. 163


Q
Quality of Cardinals. 50


R
Reasons which perswaded the
English to peace. 184
Reformations of the disorders of
the Realme. 95
Reception of the King of Portugall
into Paris. 219
Representations ridiculous. 43
Reputation of a generous Father,
makes a valiant sonne lesse remarkeable.
20
Rigor of Lewis in the beginning
of his reigne. 53
Royalty endures no equall. 8
Rubempre staid at the Hage by
the Earle of Charalois. 66
Ruine and desolation of the Legeois.
118


S
Sedition ought to be smothered in
the beginning. 76
Sedition cloked by Religion. 106
Siege of Pontoise. 17
Siege of Saintron. 109
Siege of Nancy. 221
Seuerity of discipline is hardly obseruable
in ciuill warres. 80
Son-in-law against father-in-law
3
Succours of Men and Money sent
to the Earle of Charalois. 94
Suisses before Zurich, 21. defeated.
23. they send succours to
the Duke of Lorraine. 222
Summe of the Pragmaticke Sanction.
49


T
Talbot relieues Pontoise. 17
Temporising profitable. 149
Thornes and Roses of Marriage.
44
Trechery most damnable. 158
Treaty made without Liberty,
bindes not. 119
Treaty of peace between the Fre^ch
King and the Bourgondian. 192
Trifles want not their moment,
and serue many times to driue
weightier matters out of the
heads of the people. 132
Troubles in England. 140
Truce betweene France and England
prolonged. 24
Truth not to be found in an enemies
tongue. 25
Tumults in Cyprus. 127
Turkes make their profit of the diuision
of Christendome. 46


V
Valour and bounty of Lewis the
Dauphin. 9
Valour and fidelity of the Scottishmen.
117


W
Water not to bee digged for in a
neighbours house before we haue
sought for it in our owne. 148
Wisedome and temporising surmount
all difficulties.
Words of S. Bernard. 49
Words of the Duke of Bourgondy.
79
Words of K. Lewis at his departure
from the Duke of Bourgondy.
119
Words betwixt the King of England
and the Duke of Bourgondy.
187


Y
Youth and Inconstancy are Sisters
of one Mother. 78




A Table of the principall Matters contained
in the last foure Bookes.

ADmonition made by the king
to the Dauphin. 70
Age becomes couetous when it
hath not any need of goods. 64
Alponso King of Castille, his
death. 87
Anaxagoras his speech of the
Sunne. 11
Andrew, Archbishop of Krane,
preacheth against the Pope, 58.
and persisteth in his proposition.
60
Armies are not to bee entertained
without tribute. 42.
Arras yeelded to the French King
by composition 14
Artillery inuented. 43
Audiences of Henry the third at
his returne from Poland. 159
Authority of the King is an Ocean.
135


B
Balue the Cardinall his policy to
get out of prison. 66
Barbarisme in the time of Lewis
the eleuenth. 190
Basnesse aduanced, forgets it selfe
and the fauor which raised it. 10.
Basill excommunicated by the
Pope. 58
Beginnings of the diminution of
Flanders. 76.
Bishop of Liege trecherously slaine,
being abandoned of his owne
people. 37. and 38
Boloigne vnder the virgin Maries
homage. 13
Bosio's errour in the History of
Malta. 137


C
Changes of gouernment at Florence.
2
Charlemaine founder of the Vniversity
at Paris. 124
Chauvin Chancellor of Brittanie
his lamentable end. 10
Chronicles often follow toyes, and
leaue out most famous actions. 88
Claudius Seissel his hard iudgement.
121.
Comandements extraordinary of
the King. 110
Confession of the fault is the best
rethorick to appease iust choler. 9
Conspiracy against the life of the
French King miraculously discouered.
31. 32. etc.
Contempt is the fore-runer of sedition.
65
Contempt of discipline in Souldiers.
184
Controuersie for the Lands of
Berne, Foix, and Bigorre. 84
Cosmo de Medicis his great riches
and bounty. 167. his exile
and returne. 168
Credit of Astrologians. 188
Cruelties of Mahomet at the taking
of Constantinople. 46
Curing of the kings euill. 123


D
Danger in employing forraigne
Souldiers. 39
Death of the Lord of Nantoillet.
199
Desolation is the house of Bourgondy.
161
Discourse of a powerfull charme.
127
Discommodities of prouision for
Horse-men. 39
Disposition of Charles the 8th. 117
Dispute of the Authority of the
Pope and Councell. 61
Dissimulation of the Duke of Brittanie.
9



E
Edict to reforme Souldiers. 185
Edward the fourth his death. 81
Embassadours of France make Ouerture
for a peace. 5
Embassages ambitiously affected,
neuer succed happily. 185.
Error of learned men not to communicate.
194
Estate of Lorraine. 49
Estate of the Low-countries at the
discretion of the Gantois. 75
Estates that are popular, haue alwayes
some one priuat man more
eminent then all the rest. 2
Estates vnhappy which are forced
to seeke strange Maisters. 30
Example is a cleare light in doubtfull
things. 154
Examples of diuers disorders. 114
Excesse esteems nothing but what
is rare and chargeable. 158
Expences ruled by occasions. 176


F
Fauours of Princes last not. 148
Ferdinando, base son to Alphonso
of Arragon, crowned King of
Naples by Pope Pius the 2d. 52.
is ouerthrowne by Iohn Duke of
Calabria. Ibid. and restored by
Scanderbeg. 53
Flatterers pleasing to Princes. 106
Florence in one hundred yeares,
changed estate seuen times. 3
Formes of warre changed. 43
France cannot bee disarmed of
foot-men. 40. it sends Spaine to
the Indies. 177
Francisco de Paulo an Hermit
of admirable holinesse. 105


G
Garniers Oke. 178
Generosity of a yong Boy of Sparta.
47
God the Iudge of hearts. 122
Grauity ridiculous. 133
Griefe of Pope Sixtus for the
peace betweene the Venetians
and Ferrarois. 57


H
Henry the fourth, the last French
King, his worthy commendations.
143
Heralds creation. 137
History should be free from loue or
hatred. 89
Hugonet and Imbercourt condemned
to dye. 15


I
Iames of Luxemburg, his generous
answer to the King. 172
Ignorance and Weaknesse feare any
encounter. 67
Impiety ouertaken by Iustice. 10
Ingratitude and Impiety of Adolph
of Guelders. 16
Inhumanity of Mahomet. 45
Intelligences of the Duke of Brittanie
discouered. 8
Inuentions are not perfect in the
beginning. 44
Iudgement transported with choler
is like a shippe without a
Pilot. 67
Iudgements are free after death.
120
Iudgement vpon the recompence
of seruices. 187
Iustice is the felicity of Empires.
154


K
Katherine of Foix, Queene of
Nauarre. 84
Kings haue long hands, and many
snares to entrap their enemies. 51


L
Lewis counselled to make his profit
of the diuision in Italy. 1. He
declares himselfe for the Florentines.
3. Hee seeketh a peace of
Maximilian. 38. His designes
vpon Lorraine and Prouence. 48
Hetakes possession of Proue^ce. 54
He neglects the calling of a councell.
57. His waywardnesse and

melancholy. 69. his visitation of
his son at Ambois. 70. he fals into
new apprehe^sions of death 95.
his distrust. 104. his deuotion.
107. his curiosity. 108. his last
actions. 109. he could not indure
to heare of death. 111. his superstition.
Ibid. his death. 112. his
children 115. his pilgrimages.
122. the Latine which he would
haue his sonne to learne. 130. his
custome at Ceremonies. 134. his
contempt of the markes of Maiesty.
136. hee knew not how to
pardon. 144. his rigorus prisons
145. his feare of the reuenge of
women. 150. he was neither liberall
nor couetous. 171. his
meane borrowings. 175. his proper
Science. 185. his letters pattents
wherby he gaue Armes to
his base daughter 193. his great
popularity. 196. his delight in
hunting. 197. his fauorites and
Contemporaries. Ibid. etc.
Lightnesse, Choler and Facility do
not well become a Prince. 37
Loyalty of the Earle of Vandosme.
89
Loue of God, and contempt of the
world. 106


M
Magistrates should not quit their
charge for any respect. 153
Magnificence of the house of Burgondy.
137
Magnificence of Lewis 11th 140
Magnificence how far it extends.
141. Religious Magnificence. 142
Mahomet dies for griefe after
the losse at Belgrade. 48
Maiesty compared to Moses rod.
133
Mariages of France and Sauoy. 164
Mathias Coruinus his resolute
answere to the Turkes Embassadors.
28. his commendation. 98.
is chosen king of Hungary. 100.
his valor and conduct with other
worthy acts. 101. his war against
the Emperour 103. his death. Ib.
Maxime of Machiuel. 122
Miscounting in the History. 74
Misery of the Duke of Brittanie.
11


N
Necessity of Horse-men. 41
Neighbour-estates haue alwayes
some disputes. 38
New discipline for Souldiers. Ib.
Nobility of Hungary discontented.
102


O
Oath of the gouernment of Florence.
3. an Oath should haue
three conditions. Truth, Iudgement
and Iustice. 32
Obedience is the Science of Princes.
130
Obseruations of the aduantages of
foot-men ouer horse-men. 39
Offers of Bajazet to the King. 95
Office of Heralds at Armes. 137
Offices that are great should not
be hereditary. 138
Offices are to bee maintained if
they be good. 139
Oppression of the people. 68


P
Philip Earle of Bresse, his marriages
and children. 165
Policie to bring an enemy into
suspition of his owne people. 2
Policie in England for the Titles
of families. 135
Popes bound to the Crowne of
France. 125
Pouerty of France in the time of
King Iohn. 176
Practise against the life of an enemy,
by any other meanes
then by Armes, is vnworthy of
of a Prince. 35
Predictions vpon the Life of

Lewis the eleuenth. 189
Presumption of Oliuer le Daine.
12
Pride troden vnder foot. 47
Princes rely vpon their Ministers
157
Priuiledges of the Parisians. 170


R
Relapse of the Kings sicknesse at
Tours. 69
Rene of Anjou his commmendation.
53
Reputation grounded vpon great
and eminent vertues. 155
Reuenge taken by a woman. 46
Rhodes besieged by Mahomet. 25


S
Sacke and desolation of Dole. 166
Science of Treasure. 179
Sentence against the Duke of Alencon. 146
Sentence very rigorous. 150
Sermons of sedition. 126
Silence the soule of great actions.
163
Simplicity of the eloquence in old
time. 129
Sleping for a Benefice. 173
Stablishment of Posts. 169
Sterrility of Suisserland. 180
Suspension of Armes not alwayes
necessary to make a peace. 7


T
Temperance, wherein it consists,
193. the fruits thereof. 195
Treaty of peace and marriage between
France and Bourgondy. 75
Tributes, by which the meanes to
make war are maintained, may
not be touched. 42
Tristan his barbarous behauiour.
145


V
Valour is naturall to the French
Kings. 183
Vanity of iuditiary Astrology. 189
Venetians contempt of the Popes
fulminations. 4. their Accord
with the great Turke. 6. They
proclaime warre against the
Duke of Ferrara, and soone after
conclude a peace with him.
56
Vertue enuied for the lustre thereof.
10
Vision miraculous. 27


W
Wisedome of the Lord Hastings.
167
Witnesses of our faults and imperfections
wee seldome desire to
see. 65.
Workes of vanity and ostentation.


Z
Zizimi reuolts against Bajazet.
95. his letter to Bajazet. 96.
he repaireth to Rhodes, and is
conducted into France. 97

FINIS.

