



The Triumphs of Loue and Antiquity.
IF Forreine Nations haue beene struck with admiration at the Forme, State, and Splendour of some yearly Triumphs, wherein. Art hath bene but weakely imitated, and most beggerly worded: there is faire hope that things where Inuention flourishes, Cleare Art and her gracefull proprieties, should receiue fauour and encouragement from the content of the Spectator, which (next to the seruice of his Honour, and honourable Society) is the principall Reward it looks for; and not despairing of that common fauor (which is often cast vpon the vndeseruer, through the distresse and miserie of Iudgement) this takes delight to present it selfe.
And first to beginne early with the Loue of the Citie to his Lordship, let mee draw your attentions to his Honours entertainment vpon the water, where Expectation big with the Ioy of the Day, but beholding to free Loue for Language and expression, thus salutes the Great Maister of the Day and Triumph.

The Speech, to entertaine his Lordship vpon the Water.

HOnor and Ioy double their B(...),
I, the Dayes Loue, the Cities g^^^^er all Loue.
Salute thee in the Sweetnesse (...)
All* that behold me worthily, may se^*
How full mine eye stands of the Ioy (...)
The more, because I may with Confidence say,
Desert and Loue will be well matcht too day:
And herein the great'st pitty will appeare,
This match can lust no longer then a yeare.
T^^ let not that discourage thy good wayes,
Mens Loues will last to crowne thy end of dayes,
If those should fuile, which cannot easly dye,
Thy good workes wed thee to Aeternity.
Let not the shortnesse then of Time dismay
The largenesse of thy worth; gaine euery day,
So many yeares Thou gainst, that some haue lost;
For they that thinke their Care is at great cost
If they do any good, in Time so small,
They make their Yeare but a poore Day in all.
For as a Learned Man, will comprehend
In Compasse of his Howre, Doctrine so sound,
Which giue another a whole yeare to mend,
He shall not equall, vpon any ground:
So the Iudicious vvhen he comes to beare
This powerfull Office, strucke vvith Diuine feare,
Collects his spirits, redeemes his howres with care,
Thinkes of his Charge, and Oath, what Tyes they are,
And with a Vertuous Resolution then
Workes more good in one yeare, then some in Ten.
Nor is this spoken any to detract,
But all t'encourage to put Truth in Act.
Me thinkes I see Oppression hang the head,
Falshood and Iniury with their guilt strucke dead
At this Tryumphant Hovvre, Ill Causes hide
Their Leprous Faces, daring not t'abide
The Brightnesse of this day; and in mine eare
Me thinkes the Graces Siluer Chimes I heare.
Good vvishes are at vvorke novv in each hart,
Throughout this sphere of Brotherhood play their part,
Chiefly thy Noble owne Fraternity,
As neere in hart, as they're in place to thee.
The Ensignes of whose loue Bounty displayes,
Yet esteemes all their Cost short of thy praise:
There will appeare elected Sonnes of Warre,
Which this faire City boasts of for their Care,
Strength and experience, set in Truth of heart;
All great and glorious Maisters in that Art
Which giues to man his Dignity, Name and Seale,
Prepar'd to speake Loue in a Noble Peale.
Knowing two Tryumphs must on this day dwell,
For Magistrate, one, and one for Coronell,
Returne Lord Generall, that's the Name of State
The Souldier giues Thee; Peace, the Magistrate.
On then, Great Hope, here that good care begins,
Which now earths Loue and* Heauens hereafter wins.

At his Lordships returne from Westminster, those worthy Gentlemen, whose loues and works were prepared before in the conclusion of the former Speech by water, are now all ready to salute their Lord Generall with a Noble Valley, at his Lordships Landing: and in the best and most commendable Forme, answerable to the noblenesse of their free Loue and Seruice, take their march before his Lordship, who beeing so Honourably conducted, meetes the first Tryumph by land, waiting his Lordships most wished arriuall, in Paules Church yard, neere Paules Chaine,

which is a Wildernesse, most gracefully and artfully furnish't with diuerse kindes of Beasts bearing Furre, proper to the Fraternity, the Presenter, the Musical Orpheus, Great Maister, both in Poesy and Harmony, who by his excellent Musicke, drew after him wild Beasts, Woods and Mountaines; ouer his Head an Artificiall Cocke, often made to crow, and flutter with his wings. This Orpheus at the approch of his Lordship, giues life to these words.


The Speech deliuered by Orpheus.

GReat Lord, Example is the Crystall Glasse,
By which wise Magistracy sets his face,
Fits all his Actions to their comliest Dresse,
For there he s^^t honour and Seemelinesse;
Tis not like flauring glasses, those false Bookes
Made to set Age, back, in great Courliers Lookes;
Like Clocks on Reuelling nights, that nere goe right,
Because the sports may yeeld more full delight,
But when they breake off then they finde it Late,
The Time and Truth appeares, such is their State,
Whose death by flatteries is set back, awhile,
But meetes'em in the midst of then safe Smile.
Such horrors th^se forgetfull things ^^end,
That onely minde their ends, but not their End;
Leaue them to their false Trust; List Thou to me,
Thy power is great, so let thy vertues be,
Thy care, thy watchfulnesse, which are but things
Remembred to thy praise, from thence it springs,
And not from feare of any want in Thee,
For in this Truth I may be comely, free,
Neuer was man aduanc'd, yet waited on
With a more Noble Expectation;
That's a great Worke to perfect: and as Those
That haue in Art a Mastry, can oppose
All comers, and come off with Learned Fame,
Yet thinke not skorne still of a Schollers name
(A Title which they had in ignorant youth:)
So he that deales in such a weight of Truth
As th' execution of a Magistrates place,
Though neuer so exact informe and Grace,
Both from his owne Worth, and mans free Applause,
Yet may he cal'd a Labourer in the cause,
And be thought good to be so, in true care,
The Labour being so glorious, iust, and faire.
Behold then in a rough Example here
The Rude and thonny wayes thy care must cleare,
Such are the vices in a City sprung,
As are yon' Thickets that grow close and strong:
Such is oppression, Cosnage, Bribes, false Hires,
As are yon' catching and entangling Briers:
Such is Gout-Iustice, that's, Delay in Right,
Demurs in Suites, that are as cleare as Light.
Iust such a Wildernesse is a Common-wealth,
That is vndrest, vnpruin'd, wilde in her health;
And the rude multitude, the Beasts a'th wood,
That know no lawes, but onely Will and Blood:
And yet by faire Example, Musicall Grace,
Harmonious gouernment of the Man in place,
(Of faire Integrity, and wisedome framde)
They stand as mine doe, rauisht, charmde, and tamde.
Euery wise Magistrate that gouerns thus,
May well be cald a powerfull Orpheus.


Behold yon' Bird of state, the vigilant Cocke,
The Mornings Herald, and the Plow-mans Clocke,
At whose shrill Crow the very Lyon trembles,
The sturdiest Prey-taker that here assembles;
How fitly d'os it match your Name, and power
Fixt in that Name now by this glorious Houre,
At your iust Voyce to shak the bold'st offence
And sturdiest sinne, that ere had residence
Insecure man, Yet with an equall Eie,
Matching graue Iustice with faire Clemency;
It being the property Hee chiefly shower,
To giue Wing-warning, still before he Crowes,
To Crow before he strike, by his clapt Wing,
To stir himselfe vp first (which needfull thing
Is euery mans first duty) by his Crow
A gentle call, or warning, which should flow
From euery Magistrate, before he extend
The Stroake of Iustice, he should reprehend,
And trie the vertue of a powerfull word,
If that preuaile not, then the Spurre, the Sword.
See, herein honors to his Maiestie
Are not forgotten, when I turne, and see,
The seuer all Countries, in those faces, plaine,
Allowing Fealty to one Soueraigne,
The Noble English, the faire Thriuing Scot,
Plaine hearted Welch, the Frenchman bold and hot,
The ciuilly instructed Irish man,
And that kind Sauage, the Virginian;
All louingly assembled, ^^n by Fate;
This thy Daies Honour to congratulate.
On then; and as your seruice fills this place,
So through the Citie doe his Lorship Grace.

At which words, this part of Triumph moues onward and meetes the full Body of the Shew in the other Paules Church yard: then dispersing it selfe, according to the ordering of the Speechess following, one part which is the Sanctuary of Fame, plants it selfe neere the little Conduit in Cheape; another which bath the Title of the Parliament

of Honor, at S. Laurence Lane end, Vpon the Battlements of that beautious Sanctuary, adorned with six and twenty bright burning lamps, hauing Allusion to the six and twenty Aldermen, (they being for their Iustice, Gouernment and Example, the Lights of the Citty) a Graue Personage, crownd with the Title and Inscription of Example, breathes forth these sounds.


Example.

FRom that rough Wildernes, which did late present
The perplext State, and cares of Gouernment,
Which euery painfull Magistrate must meete;
Here the Reward stands for thee, a chiefe Seate
In Fames faire Sanctuary, where some of old
Crownde with their Troubles now, are here enrolde
In Memories sacred sweetnesse, to all ages;
And so much the Worlds Voyce of Thee presages.


And these that sit for many, with their graces
Fresh as the Buds of Roses, though they sleepe,
In thy Society had once high places,
Which in their good Workes they for euer keepe;
Life cald 'em in their Time, Honours faire Stars,
Large Benefactors, and sweet Gouernors.
If here were not sufficient Grace for Merit,
Next Obiect, I presume, will raise thy Spirit.

In this Maister-peice of Art, Fames Illustrious Sanctuary, the Memory of those Worthies shine gloriously, that haue beene both Lord Maiors of this Citie, and Noble Benefactors, and Brothers of this worthy Fraternity, to wit,

S. Henry Barton, S. William Gregory, S. Stephen Iennings, S. Thomas Mirfen, S. Andrew Iudd, S. Wolstone Dixe, S. Stephen Slanye, S. Richard Saltonstall: And now the Right Honourable Sir William Cockayn.

That Sir Henry Barton an Honour to Memory, was the first, that for the safety of Trauellers, and strangers by night through the Citie, caused lights to be hung out fro^ Alhollontid to Candlemas; therefore in this Sanctuary of Fame, where the beauty of good actions shine, he is most properly and worthily recorded. His Lordship by this time Gracefully conducted toward that Parliament of Honour, neere S. Laurence Lane end, Anti quity from its Eminence, thus gloriously salutes Him.


Antiquity in the Parliament of Honor.

GRaue Citie Gouernor! so much honour doe me,
Vouchsafe thy presence and thy patience to me,
And I'le Reward that Vertue with a Story,
That shall to thy Fraternity add Glory,
Then to thy Worth no meane part will arise,
That art ordaynde Chiefe for that glorious Prize.
Tis I, that keepe all the Records of Fame,
Mother of Truths, Antiquity, my Name;
No Yeare, Moneth, Day, or Houre, that brings in place
Good Workes and Noble, for the Cities Grace,
But I Record; that After Times may see
What Former, were, and how they ought to be,
Fruitfull, and Thankfull, in faire Actions flowing,
To meete Heauens blessings, to which much is owing;
For instance, Let all Gratefull Eyes be plac'st
Vpon this Mount of Royalty, by Kings, grac'st,
Queenes, Prince, Dukes, Nobles, more by numbring gain'd
Then can be in this narrow Sphere contain'd.
7. Kings, 5. Queenes, onely one Prince alone,
8. Dukes, 2. Earles, Plantagenets twenty one;
All these of this Fraternity made Free,
Brothers and Sisters of this Company;
And see with what propriety, the Fates
Haue to this Noble Brotherhood knit such States;
For what Society, the whole Citie brings,
Can with such Ornaments Adorne their Kings,
Their onely Robes of State, when they consent
To ride most glorious, to High Parliament;
And marke in this their Royall intent still,
For when it pleasde the Goodnesse of their Will,
To put the richest Robes of their Loues on
To the whole Citie, the Most, euer came
To this Society, which Records here proue,
Adorning their Adoruers, with their Loue;
Which was a Kingly AEquity:
Be carefull then, Great Lord, to bring forth Deedes,
To match that Honor, that from hence proceedes.

At the close of which Speech, the whole Triumph takes leaue of his Lordship, for that Time, and till after the Feast at Guild-hall, rests from Seruice. His Lordship accompanied with many Noble personages, the Honorable Fellowship of Ancient Magistrates and Aldermen of this Citty, the two new Sheriffes, the one, of his owne Fraternity (the complete Brotherhood of Skinners) the Right Worshipfull M. Sheriffe Deane, a very Bountifull and worthy Citizen, not forgetting the Noble paines and loues of the Heroyick Captaines of the Citty, and Gentlemen of the Artillery Garden, making with two glorious Rankes a manly and Maiestick passage for their Lord General, his Lordship, thorough Guild-hall yard; and afterward their Loues to his Lordship resounding in a second Noble Volley.
Now, that al the Honors before mentioned, in that Parliame^t, or Mount of Royalty, may arriue at a cleere and perfect Manifestation, to preuent

the ouer-curious and Inquisitiue Spirit; the Names and Times of those Kings, Queenes, Prince, Dukes and Nobles, free of the Honorable Fraternity of Skinners in London, shal here receiue their proper Illustrations.
Anno 1329. K. Edward the third, Plantagenet, by whom, in the first of his Reigne this worthy Society of Skinners was incorporate, Hee, their first Royall Founder and Brother, Q Philip his wife, yonger Daughter of William Earle of Henalt, the first Royall Sister, so gloriously vertuous, that she is a rich ornament to Memory, Shee both founded and endowed Queenes Colledge in Oxford, to the continuing estate of which, I my selfe wish all happinesse: This Queene at her death desired three curtesies, some of which are rare in these dayes. First, that her debts might be payd to the Merchants; secondly, that her gifts to the Church might be performed: thirdly, that the King when he died would at Westminster be interred with her.
Anno 1357. Edward Plantagenet, surnamed the Black Prince, sonne to Edward the third, Prince of Wales, Duke of Guien, Aquitaine, and Cornwall, Earle Palatine of Chester.
In the Battell of Poitiers in France, hee with 8000. English against 60000. French, got the victory,

tooke the King, Philip his sonne, seuenteene Earles, with diuerse other Noble personages, prisoners.
King Richard the Second, Plantagenet, this K. being the third Royall brother of this honorable Company, and at that time the Society consisting of two Brotherhoods of Corpus Christi, the one at S. Mary Spittle, the other at S. Mary Bethlem without Bishops Gate, in the eighteenth of his Reigne graunted them to make their two Brotherhoods one, by the name of the Fraternity of Corpus Christi of Skinners; which worthy Title shines at this day gloriously amongst 'em: and toward the end of this kings reigne, 1396. a great feast was celebrated in Westminster Hall, where the L. Maior of this City sate as Guest.
Anno 1381. Q. Anne his wife, daughter to the Emperour Charles the 4 and sister to Emperor Wenzlaus, whose modesty then, may make this Age blush now; she being the first that taught women to ride sideling on horsebacke; but who it was that taught 'em to ride stradling, there is no Records so immodest that can shew me, onely the impudent Time, and the open profession; this Faire President of womanhood dyed at Sheine, now Richmond, for griefe wherof K. Richard her Lord abandoned and defaced that goodly house.
Anno 1399. K. Henry the 4. Plantagenet, Surnamed Bullingbrooke, a forth Royall Brother: in his time, the Famous Guild hall in London was erected, where the Honorable Courts of the Citie are kept, and this Bounteous Feast yearely celebrated.
In the Twelth yeare of his Reigne, the Riuer of Thames flowed thrice in one day.
Q. Ioane, or Iane, Duchesse of Britten, late wife to Iohn, D. of Britten, and Daughter to the King of Nauarre; another Princely Sister.
Anno 1412. K. Henry the 5. Plantagenet, Prince of Wales, proclaimed Maior and Regent of France, He won that famous Victory on the French, at the Battaile of Agincourt.
Q. Catherine his Wife, Daughter to Charles 6. K. of France.
K. Henry the 6. Plantagenet, of the House of Lancaster.
K. Edward the 4. Plantagenet, of the House of Yorke.
This King feasted the Lord Maior, Richard Chawrye, and the Aldermen his Brethren, with certaine Commoners, in Waltham Forrest; after dinner rode a hunting with the King, who gaue him plenty of Venison, and sent to the Lady Maioresse, and her Sisters the Aldermens Wiues, 2.

Harts, 6. Bucks, and a Tun of Wine, to make merry, and this Noble feast was kept at Drapers Hall. An. 1463. Q. Elizabeth Grey, his Wife, Daughter to Richard, Wooduile, Earle Riuers, and to the Dutchesse of Bedford; she was Mother to the Lord Grey of Ruthen, that in his time was Marquesse Dorset.
K. Richard the 3. Brother to Edward 4. D. of Glocester, and of the House of Yorke.
Lionel Plantagonet, 3 Sonne to the 3 Edward, D. of Clarence, and Earle of Vlster; Philip his Daughter, and Heire, married Edward Mortimer, Earle of March, from whom the House of Yorke descends.
Henry Plantagenet, Grandchild to Edmond Crouchbacke, 2. Sonne to Henry 3.
Richard Plantagenet, Father of Edward 4. D. of Yorke, and Albumarle, Earle of Cambridge, Rutland, March, Clare, and Vlster.
Thomas Plantagenet, 2. Sonne of Henry 4.
Iohn Plantagenet, 3 Sonne of Henry 4. So Noble a Souldier, and so great a terror to the French, that when Charles the 8. was mooued to deface his Monument (being buried in Roane) the King thus answered: Pray let him rest in peace being dead, of whom we were all afraid when he liued.
Humfrey Plantagenet, 4 Sonne of Henry 4.
Iohn Holland D. of Exceter.
George Plantagenet brother to Edward the 4.
Edmond Plantagenet Brother to Edward the 4.
Richard Neuill Earle of Salisbury and Warwick. cald the Great Earle of Warwick.
Iohn Cornwell Knight, Baron Fanhope.

The Royall Somme.
7: Kings, 5. Queenes, 1. Prince. 7. Dukes. 1. Earle 21. Plantagenets
7. Kings, 5. Queenes, 1. Prince. 8. Dukes. 2. Earles. 1. Lord, 24. Skinners.
The Feast ended at Guild-hall, his Lordship (as yearely Custome inuites it) goes accompanied with the Triumph before him towards S. Paules, to performe the noble and reuerend Ceremonies which Diuine Antiquity religiously ordained, and is no lesse then faithfully obserued. Holy Seruice and Ceremonies accomplisht, his Lordship returnes by Torch-light to his owne house, the whole Triumph plac'st in comely and decent order before him, the Wildernesse, the Sanctuary of Fame, adornd with Lights, the Parliament of Honor, and the Triumphant Chariot of Loue, with his Gracefull Concomitants; the Chariot drawne with 2. Luzarns: neer to the entrance of his Lordships gate, Loue, prepar'd with his welcome, thus salutes him,




Loue.

I Was the first, Graue Lord, that welcomde Thee
To this Dayes Honor, and I spake it free,
Iust as in euery heart I found it plac'st,
And tis my turne againe now to speake last;
For loue is circular (like the bright Sunne,)
And takes delight to end where it begun,
Though indeed neuer ending, in true Will,
But rather may be sayd beginning still;
As all great workes are of Caelestiall Birth,
Of which, Loue is the Chiefe in Heauen and Earth.
To what Blest state then are thy Fortunes come,
Since, That both brought thee forth, and brings thee home*
Now, as in common course which cleeres things best,
Ther's no free gift but lookes for thankes at least;
A Loue so bountifull, so free, so good
From the whole City, from thy Brotherhood,
(That Name I ought a while to dwell vpon,)
Expect some faire Requitall from the Man
They'ue all so largely Honord. What's desirde?
That which in Conscience ought to berequirde,
Oh thanke 'em in thy Iustice, in thy Care,
Zeale to right wrongs, Workes that are cleere and faire,
And will become thy Soule (whence Vertue springs)
As those rich Ornaments thy Brother Kings.
And since we cannot separate Loue and Care,
For where Care is, a Loue must needes be there,
And Care where Loue is; tis the Man and Wife,
Through euery Estate that's fixt in Life;
You are by this the Cities Bride-groome proou'd,
And She stands wedded to her best Belou'd;
Then be, according to your Morning-Vowes,
A Carefull Husband, to a Louing Spouse;
And Heauen giue you great Ioy (both It and Thee;)
And to All Those that shall Match after Yee.



The names of those Beasts, bearing Furr, and now in vse, with the Bountifull Society of Skinners.

The most of which presented in the Wildernesse, where Orpheus praedominates!

ERmine, Foyne, Sables, Martin, Badger, Beare,
Luzerne, Budge, Otter, Hipponesse and Hare,
Lamb, Wolf, Fox, Leopard, Minck, Stote, Miniuer,
Racoone, Moashye, Woluerine, Caliber,
Squirrell, Moale, Cat Musk, Ciuet, Wild and Tame,
Cony white, Yellow, Black must haue a Name;
The Ounce, Rows-Gray, Ginner, Pampilion,
Of Birds, the Vu lur, Bitter, Estridge, Swan;
Some worne for Ornament, and some for Health,
All to the Skinners Art bring Fame and Wealth.

The Seruice being thus faithfully performed, both to his Lordships Honour, and to the Credit and content of his most generously-bountifull Society, the Season commends all to silence; yet not without a little leaue taken, to reward Art with the comely Dues that belong vnto it, which hath beene so richlie exprest in the Body of the Triumph, with all the proper Beauties of Workemanship, that the Citie may (without Iniury to Iudgement) call it the Maister-piece of her Triumphs; the Credit of which Workemanship, I must iustly lay vpon the Deserts of Master Garret Crismas, and Maister Robert Norman, ioyn'dPartners in the performance.


FINIS.


