



OF THE THREEfold
state of man.
The first parte of this treatise, wherein is
handled the first part of mans holinesse and sinfulnesse,
to wit his due subiection to God with
the contrarie rebellion.

CHAP. I.

Section. 1. Of the state of innocency
and life.
FOR the enlarging of
Gods glory (the which
is the ende of the creation
of the world) it was
needful, that of the creatures
some should be indued
with vnderstanding.
For euen as the strength, wisedome*
and beauty of a man cannot purchase vnto
him any commendation or credite, vnlesse
some others besides himselfe doe marke,
knowe and acknowledge those excellent
parts of nature and industrie: in like maner

the heauens,Of the state of innocency and life. the ayre, the water, and the
earth, although they be decked and replenished
with starres, birds, fishes, beasts, and
many other admirable creatures, and doe
containe in them infinite matter of Gods glorie,
yet they could not any iot encrease that
glory which God had before the creation,
vnlesse there were some other creatures able
to obserue, conceiue, declare, admire, and
extoll the power, wisedome, and goodnesse
of God shining in these thinges. For this
cause, God after that he had made the higher
and the lower world, the one consisting
of the heauens, the other of the elements,
he sawe it needfull for the illustration of his
glory, to create Angels and men to be the
inhabitants, and as his tenaunts of these glorious
palaces, yea to behold and confesse
the excellency of his workemanshippe in
themselues, and in the rest of the creatures.
For the which purpose he gaue vnto them,
faculties of vnderstanding, and speaking,
with many other, which he denied to the
rest.
Thus we see the excellent state of Angels
and men, beeing made to be witnesses,
and preachers of the glorie of God, and so
being admitted into the presence of God,
are there to beholde his glorie: yet with this

differe^ce, that the Angels doe behold it more
clearely in heauen, and man more obscurely
in earth. Heerein consisteth the good estate
of these creatures in that they are thus
made partakers, of the glorious presence of
God, and so ioyned to God. For heereof
it commeth that they are both happy and
holy, it being impossible that any thing
which is ioyned to God, who is happinesse
and holinesse it selfe, shoulde eyther lacke
any good and pleasant thing, or be any way
polluted, so that this coniunction of the reasonable
creature with God, wherein the excellency
of this first estate consisteth, is of
two sortes: the first may be called externall,
personall or locall, whereby Angels
and men enioying the presence of God,
are in place and after an outwarde manner
ioyned to God: this kinde of coniunction
is perfect happinesse, the other
kinde is inwarde and spirituall, when
as the inwarde faculties of the creature,
as his minde and will, doe wholly cleaue to
God alone. This kinde of coniunction is
perfect holinesse, and it is the meanes or the
condition of the former coniunction: for
as soone as the creature ceaseth to be holie,
in the same moment it ceaseth to be
happy, and is straight way cast out of the

presence of God. So that the goodnesse of
this first state consisteth in two things, happinesse
and holinesse, from both which it
hath the denomination: from the first, it is
called the state of life, for the scripture speaking
to man speaketh after the manner of
men, vnto whome nothing is so acceptable
as life, because in it all pleasures are enioyned.
From the second it is called the state of innocencie,
because in it man stoode righteous,
and free from all guilt of sinne before
God.



Sect. 2. Of the state of sin and death.
IN the next place we are to
consider the seconde state of
man, as farre different from the
first as is death from life, sinne
from innocencie, darkenesse
from light, wretchednesse from happinesse,
vsually and fitly called the fall of mankinde.
Forvnto the absolute perfection o^ the aforesaid
felicity, this onely was wanting, that it
was mutable: First of the causes, authors,
and workers of this lamentable ruine, secondly
of the manner of it. The actors in
this tragedie, are three, God, Sathan, and
Man, all which haue a stroke in this action,
yet after a farre diuerse manner, euen as their
natures are diuerse. For the first, as the holy,
glorious, and happy state of man; so this
sinful, vile and miserable condition commeth
from God: yet not after the same sort; for
the good estate is properly, directly, immediately,
and wholly wrought by God, but he
doth onely suffer the euill state to be brought
to passe by euill instruments: yet this his permission
is not idle, but effectuall and working:
for God is not an idle looker on, as if
he had cast off the care of the world and of

his creatures,Of the state of sinne and death. and left all at sixe and seauen
(as we vse to speake) but hee hath a
parte in this worke in that he did in his eternall
counsell make an immutable decree
of this fal of man, and the meanes therof,
and that for the setting forth of his
glorie, which is the ende of all his decrees
and actions whatsoeuer. For howsoeuer it
may seeme to derogate from the glorie of
God, that the reasonable creature, beeing
the fairest floure in his garden, and
the most excellent parte of his workmanshippe,
shoulde so soone be troden vnder
foote and brought to nought; yet in
trueth GOD is greatly glorified by this
meanes, for hereby it appeareth, first,
that God onely is constant, eternall, and
the same for euer in that his most excellent
creatures are so variable: Rom. 3. 4. Let
God be true, and euerie man a lyar, as it is
written,Rom. 3. 4. that thou mightest bee iustified in
thy sayings, and ouercome when thou art
iudged.
For the which purpose the consideration
of the shortnesse of the first state maketh
very much, for although it cannot be
certainly defined howe long it continued,
yet this is agreed vpon by all, that neither
the Angels themselues, nor yet man continued

many daies in their innocency, but fell
away from God soone after that they were
created. Secondly the fall of these creatures
doth shewe that God is iust in punishing
sinne. Thirdly it maketh a way for the state
of saluation, and so doth illustrate the mercy
of God, whereby he is most of all glorified;
yea the power, wisedome, trueth,
patience, and in briefe the whole glory of
God is by this meanes set forth and enlarged.
Thus much of the first actor. The other two
are the instruments whereby God bringeth
his eternall counsell to passe, and yet to all
reason of man considering the whole storie
of mans fall and the particulars thereof, they
are the onely agents, the first authors, and
chiefe workers of this woefull state, God
hauing no hande or dealing in this matter,
but onely barely permitting them to doe
what they list. For the further declaration
whereof it is needfull that wee make
a narration of the particulars of this action,
and that by supposing GOD to
speake to his reasonable creatures, to
witte, Angelles and men, in this manner.
You see howe that I haue made you
the most excellent of all my creatures,
indueing you onely, with a reasonable

mind and will, whereby you may knowe,
loue, obey, and honour me, and so consequently
enioy my presence wherein happinesse
doth consist. As long as you continue
holy by obeying my worde, so long
shall you continue happie by enioying my
presence. But if at any time you doe by disobeying
my commaundement loose this
your holinesse, you can no longer haue anie
place in my presence, or any fellowship with
mee, no more then darknesse and light can
be together, but shall incontinently be cast
out of my sight, and so become most wretched
and miserable. And therefore looke
vnto your selues and to your owne estate, beleeue
these my promises and threatnings to
be true, content your selues with that state
and degree wherein I haue placed you, obey
all my commaundements, for the perfourmance
whereof, you are endued with all graces
and faculties needfull, so shal you be happie:
otherwise you shall die for euer. In this
most louing and fatherly counsell, which
God in the beginning gaue to his children,
being created after his owne similitude, the
reasonable creature resteth for some shorte
time, but afterward maketh this reply, although
not in word yet in minde and heart,
yea in deed and in outward action; Wee hauing

considered your wordes, and our present
state, do see and find that neither the one
is wholly true, nor the other so happy as you
doe make it: we confesse that we are in betrer
state then other creatures, yet we cannot
heerein rest: for we see a higher degree of
honour, glory, pleasure and happinesse, yea
a greater measure of knowledge, whereof
we knowe that our nature is capable, and
whereunto we willby all meanes aspire, notwithstanding
your commaundement to the
contrary: not doubting but that by our own
strength, wit, endeauours and inuentions, we
shall become farre more happy then we are
by this your creation. Vpon this resolution
the creature disobeyeth the expresse commaundement
of God, and so falleth from
God into extreame misery.
Now whether the blame of this fall be to
be imputed to God, or to the creature it self,
let any reasonable creature iudge: for God
did neither commaund nor counsell it, but
did carefully forewarne them of it: yea he
did neither put any euill motion into their
mindes, nor yet withdrawe from them any
naturall grace, whereby they shoulde
haue beene vpholden: but left it to their
free choise whither they would be cleane and

obey him or else rebell against his worde. If
it be obiected that the necessitie of Gods decree
did compell the creature to fall, wee
answere affirming that to be vtterly vntrue.
For God did decre that the fal of man should
com to passe by his free will, and therefore
his decree did not take away, but establishe
mans free will.
If it bee thought impossible that the
same action shoulde bee both necessary
and contingent as wee make this action to
be: we answere, that to man it is impossible,
but not to God. For man cannot bring any
thing certainly to passe by vncertaine and
contingent meanes: but God can worke necessarily
by those meanes which to mans
reason fall out by chaunce and at hap hazard.
For there is no thing contingent or vncertaine
to God, whodoth foresee al the euents
of thinges, and so doth build his immutable
decree vppon the euentes themselues which
are necessary, not vppon the contingencie
of the causes. As in this instance; how easy
a thing was it for God foreseing that man
being indued with free will (whereby he
might doe either good or euill) woulde
choose the euill part, to decree the fall of
man by his freewill, and yet to leaue

man in the very action, free either to stand
or to fall? Againe if it be obiected that
God might haue vpholden man by some
extraordinary grace: we confesse that to be
true, but yet it doth not thereof follow,
that God was the cause of this fall:
for the naturall grace wherewith man was
endued, and which was inherent in
himselfe was sufficient, if he woulde
haue vsed it aright: and for supernaturall
grace, God was neither bounde to
giue any, neither did he thinke the creature
worthy of anie newe supplie of
grace, which did so vnthankefully abuse
his former bountie, or that the continuance
of this pure estate woulde illustrate
his glory so much as woulde the fall of
man.
Lastly it may be thought that God
might and ought to haue made these
his exellent creatures in a firme and permanent
estate, and that by takeing
from them all possibilitie of falling, and
all freedome of will in respect of euill, as
he doth to the elect Angels and men, and
as his owne nature is vncapable of euill.
Wherevnto we answer, that this which is alleaged

is a thing altogether impossible, for
the fredome of will doth not derogate anie
thing from the perfection of the creature
the which could not haue bene made excellent
without it. For where no will is, there is
no vnderstanding: As for the elect, both men
and Angels they are vpholden by the supernatural
grace of God, not by any such natural
strength and disposition of wil as cannot chuse
euil: the which if they had, they were not
reasonable creatures but either as brute
beasts and senslesse trees, or els as God himselfe,
who onely cannot be tempted with any
euil. So then the cause why the wicked angels
and man kind fell from their first state,
was their owne free will, choosing sinne, and
refusing life offerd by God: but God is no other
wayes the cause of this fal, then he is the
cause of all actions in the worlde both good
and euil* namely in that he is the cause of the
cause. For in that he made the freewil of man,
he did in some sort make the fal which came
of it, and secondly in that he gaue an effectual
occasion of it. But that is not the question,
for we enquire the true and proper cause of
this fall.
The whol matter may not vnfitly be declarred
by this similitude: A wise father purposing

to let his sonne see his owne wilfulnes and inte^perancie,
together with his loue and fatherly
affection toward him, resolueth with himselfe
to make him fall into some mortal sicknesse,
out of the which he knoweth himselfe
to be able to recouer him. This he wil effect
not by giuing him poyson to drinke, for the^
he should be the cause, and beare the blame
of that euil, but by laying it in his way, as it
were a baite in some sweete meate which he
knoweth that his sonne loueth, and will
eate as soone as he seeth it. And least that
he shoulde plead ignorance, and so auoide
the blame of wilfulnesse, he forewarneth
him of that kind of meate, charging him very
instantly to abstaine from it, as being vnholsome,
and hurtfull vnto him: yet he doth
not tell him, what he intendeth. This young
man coming where this pleasant meat is, reme^breth
his fathers counsell, and commandement,
yet is by the entisement of euil companions,
and his owne appetite moued to
eate of it, perswading himselfe that there is
no such daunger in it as his father woulde
make him beleeue: aud therfore no cause,
he shoulde obey him in that matter. So hee
eateth of it, and poysoneth himselfe: now
no man can denie, but that both the father
and the sonne haue a hand and play their

in this tragedy; yet not the father who giueth
the occasion only, but the young man
himselfe who doth willingly, or rather wilfully
take that hurtfull meat, is to be blamed,
and counted the cause of this euill.
In like manner God dealeth with man, he
decreeth his fall, yet doth not throwe him
downe but only layeth a stumbling blocke
in his way. He doth not infect man with
the poyson of sin but putteth it into a goodly
apple, which he knoweth that man will
deuoure greedely whensoeuer occasion is
offred: this he did by forbidding man to
eat of that fruite: by the which meanes he
made the eating of it to be sinne, that is,
deadely poyson, which otherwise was
good and pleasant. So then God is the cause
of mans fall, so as he who layeth a baite for
fish is the cause of their death: he vsing no
violence towards the^ but only suffring them
to followe their naturall appetite: But Sathan,
who is the second actor playeth a farre
diuers part, labouring by promises, pretences,
entisements, perswasions, and by all meanes
possible to bring man into the state of sinne
and death: God sitteth still on the banke
holding an angle rod in his hand with baite
and hooke hanging at it, waiting til man come
of his owne accord and bite. But Sathan pursueth

man vp and downe with a nette to entangle
him: man flyeth from sathans
nett as from a most hurtfull thing in that
he resisteth his temptations for a while.
But he commeth willingly to Gods baite
yea not only vncalled, but also flatly forbidden,
and eateth of it greedely: for he being
once caught and entangled, changeth his
minde and will, thinkeing that to be good
and holsome, which before he knewe to
be hurtfull and by al meanes to be auoided.
So that the fall of man came as hath been
declared of the freedome, or rather of the
preuersnesse of his owne will, according to
the eternall decree and purpose of God, by the
malitious instigation of sathan: who hauing
before fallen himselfe, did vehemently desire
the fall of man, and that for these reasons;
First for that he had now co^ceaued a veheme^t
and desperate hatred of God, hauing iustly for
his sin cast him out of his presence, the which
before his fall he enioyed in heauen. And for so
much, as he did easely see that his malice
could not reach to God himselfe, therfore he
thought that the next way was to despite and
dishonor him in his creatures, by defacing
ma^ who only of al the creaturs in this world,
was made according to Gods owne image,
yea further, to depriue god of al that glory and

ship that man should performe vnto him.
Secondly, Sathan desired to effect the fall of
man, that so he might haue the more company
both in his sinne and in his punishment.
He being thus affected towards Gods glorie
and mans saluation, ceased not till
that by his faire promises and plausible pretenses
he brought man out of the true paradise
into a fooles paradise, making him beleeue
that the ^ransgression of Gods commaundement
was the onely way for him to
become a God, and so he perswaded Eua
in the forme of a serpent, and Adam in the
forme of Eua, to eate of the forbidden
fruite.
It is doubted how Adam, being in the
state of innocency and knowledge, could be
so palpably deceiued, as to beleeue such a notorious
lie, especially seeing the Apostle
saith, that Adam was not deceiued but Eua.
But he meaneth that Eua was first, yea more
easely and grosly deceiued, for as her knowledge
was lesse, so we must thinke that her
infidelitie was greater then was Adams,
who, although he was made to distrust (in
part) the word of God, yet he was not, nor
could be so blinded by Eua as she was by the
delusion of the diuell: and therefore he sinned
more of wilfulnesse, then of blindnesse,

choosing rather to disobey God, then to displease
Eua, by reiecting her importunate
request, and refusing to take such part as she
tooke, who being his wife, yea his onely
companion, was no doubt a great pleasure,
ioy, and delight vnto him. Thus much of the
fall of Adam, which is the fall of all mankind:
For Adam being the father of al men,
did sustaine the publike person of mankind,
both in his innocencie and also in his fall, in
his happinesse and in his misery. If it be asked
why all mankind fell, seeing not all but
some of the Angels did fal: wee answere
that all men were in the very moment of the
fall, in Adams loynes, and therefore did both
stande and fall with him: but the Angels
doe not be get one another, being all created
immediately by God himselfe, and therefore
the sin of one Angell doth not take holde of
another, vnlesse that one by consenting to the
sinne deuised by another, doe make himselfe
sinful: as it was in the fal of the Angels, wherin
one or some few were the chief and authors
of this conspiracy, the rest approued it and took
part with them, as may be gathered by that
distinction which is made of them one being
made chiefe,Mat. 25. 41. or head, the rest his inferiours.
Mat. 25. 41. Goe ye into eternall fire prepared
for the Diuell, and his Angels.



Sect. 3. Of the state of regeneration
and saluation.
THE third state followeth,
which is the recouering of
the first state of life, wherein
man was created in the
beginning. For God in suffering
man to fall, did not
purpose the finall ouerthrow and destruction
of so excellent a creature, but rather the
illustration of his owne vnspeakable mercy
and goodnesse towards man, in pardoning
his sinne, and in restoring him to life. This
state we call the state of saluation, for that
man in it, is not onely indued with life, as
he was before, but also saued and deliuered
from eternall death, whereunto he fell by
his sinne. Yet not all mankind is restored to
life, but onely a fewe, that it might appeare
both how vnapt man is to do any good, how
vncapable of saluation he is made by sinne,
in that he cannot attaine vnto it, no not now,
when as God hath appointed the meanes
and the way of it, and as it were setting heauen
gates wide open doth offer saluation to
all men: and lastly that the iustice of God
might be declared in punishing the reprobate

for their sinne.Of the state of regeneration and saluatio^
And yet the state of mankind is happy in
respect of the Angels which fell; for none of
them are, or shal euer be restored to their former
state, and that for these causes. First and
chiefly because their fall was so great, as that
it is impossible that they shoulde recouer
their first estate: the greatnesse of their
fall commeth of that greate measure of
knowledge, light and grace wherewith
they were endued: and the which they did
tread vnder their feete and despise: for if
they had fallen onely from some small measure
of grace, a greater measure would haue
recouered them: but they hauing alreadie
reiected, and made of no force so much grace
as any meere creature is capable of, haue no
remedy left for their saluation. And as they
fell from the highest degree of grace, so they
fell into the lowest sinke of sinne, euen to
the highest degree of sinne that can be imagined,
which is a most desperate, deadly,
cruell, fierce, contumelious, shamelesse,
open, professed, wilfull and spitefull hatred
against God and all goodnesse, yea against
all his creatures both good and euill. This
came of the exceeding great strength of
their nature, which being once let loose
to sinne, coulde not stay or rest but in

the highest degre of it. Like vnto this remedilesse
fall of the wicked Angels, is that sinne
which is in the scripture called the sin against
the holy Ghost, when as one being endued
with a great measure of grace, doth fall into
this fearefull and desperate hatred of God,
and of all goodnesse, for as hee who falleth
from a steepe and high rocke into a
deepe pit or gulfe, can not possibly escape
death, whereas one whose fall is
lesse, may haue hope of life: so it is with
these wicked Angels whose sinne we may
truely call that vnpardonable sinne committed
against the holy Ghost. Further, the sin
of the Angels deserued more seuere punishment,
in that they were better able to resist
it, seeing the glory of God in heauen,
and therefore hauing greater means of knowing,
beleeuing and obeying God then man
had on earth: yea their sinne came from
themselues by the suggestion of their owne
mindes, and the inclination of their wils, but
man sinned by their prouocation, temptation
and delusion; who as if they had committed
a small offence in sinning themselues,
did adde to their owne sinne the sinne of
mankind. Moreouer, it was not needfull
that God should restore these rebels to their
former state, for the illustration of his loue

towardes this creature: forsomuch, as there
are yet in heauen in the state of happinesse,
many thousands of holy Angels which are
so many witnesses and preachers, of the endlesse
loue of God towards them. Againe it
was needfull for the working of the saluation
of the elect, that there shoulde be some
aduersarye power opposing it selfe and
labouring by all meanes to hinder it, that
so both the graces bestowed on men might
be stirred vp and exercised, and the power
of God preseruing them from so great danger,
made manifest. Lastly by this vncurable
state of these Angels it appeareth, that
there neither is, nor yet can be in any creature
any such absolute perfection, as that it
might be able of it selfe by any proper, inherent
and naturall vertue and strength,
(beeing not supported by the grace of God)
eyther to keep for euer, or to recouer any
good and happy estate. If it be obiected that
the Angels may repente and so obtaine
saluation: wee answere, first that it is vnpossible
by reason of the nature of their
sinne, beeing the sinne against the holie
Ghost, that they shoulde euer truely repent:
and secondly that if they coulde after
some sorte repente, yet they are altogether
vncapable of saluation, because God

hath not taken vnto himselfe the nature of
Angels, as he hath done the nature of man,
and so by ioyning it to himselfe, who is life
it selfe, made it a liuing and holy nature:
the which is needfull for saluation, as will appeare
more at large in the treatise of iustifying
faith, Chap. 4. Sect. 3.
But to leaue these foule spirits in the bottomlesse
pit of hell, let vs returne to the consideration
of this third state of man, the
which although in substance it be nothing
but the first estate restored, yet it is to be
preferred before it in these respectes. First
because it is certaine, immutable and eternall,
it being impossible that any who is once
brought from death to this state of saluation,
should returne backe againe: but the first
state of man was not onely variable, but
very short and momentanie, as hath beene
declared. This ariseth not of any naturall and
inherent strength of man, but of the meere
grace and loue of God supporting all his elect
seruants in this state, and watching ouer
them least at any time they should fall
away. Secondly both the partes of the
goodnesse of this estate, which are the outward
and inward coniunction of man with
God, or more plainely, his happinesse and
holinesse, are greater then they were before*

The increase of happinesse the next section
doth declare, and for the other we cannot
doubt but that the loue of man, yea all the
other partes of his holinesse are increased
and doubled towardes God, who nowe
is not onely his Lorde and creator, but
also his sauiour and redeemer. As he must
needes loue more to whome manie sinnes
are forgiuen, then he who is saued by his
owne holinesse: for life is not of it selfe
so acceptable at any time as it is after
death. Whereof more at large in the
laste Chapter of the third parte of this
treatise.




CHAP. II.

Sect. 1. Of the happinesse wherein
man was created.
HAppinesse is the enioying of
the greatest, highest and chiefest
good, to wit that which
is fully, perfectly, primarely,
eternally, essentially and onely
good, as is God onely. Math* 19. 17. There
is none good but God onely: Thus doe the Angels
in heauen enioy God,Mat. 19. 17. whose face (or
more plainely) whose glory shining as clerely,
as the grace of a man doth in his face, they
doe continually behold. Likewise man before
his fall liued thus happily in the presence
of God, with whome he had daily, and as
wee may say, familiar conuersation: yea
God did many waies reueale himselfe and
his glory to him, especially in the garden,
wherein he placed him. This is perfect felicitie,
for hee who hath God who is the fountaine
of all blessings, ioy and pleasures, hath
all thinges belonging to happinesse. Psal. 16
11.Psal. 16. 11. Thou shalt make me knowe the path of life,
for there is fulnesse of ioy in thy face or presence,
and in thy right hande there are
pleasures for euermore.

From this fountaine of happinesse there flowed
many streames,Of the happinesse wherein man was created. euen all blessings, whatsoeuer
the preseruation or dignitie of the
body, soule or of the whole person of man
did any way require: first for his body it
was in respect of the outwarde forme and
proportion maiesticall, beautifull, gracious,
purchasing feare and reuerence of the
other baser creatures, and fauour euen in
the sight of God, for whose glory maketh
whatsoeuer is any way commendable
in the creature:1. Chro. 12, 8* this remaneth in parte euen
in the corrupt estate.Acts. 7. 10. 1. Chro. 12. 8. Dauids
men of warre had faces like Lyons Act. 7. 20.
Moses being new borne was gratious in the
sight of God. Secondly the body of man
was immortall: whereof there is no question
to be made, seing that the scripture doth
euery where teach vs that death came in by
sinne 1. Cor. 25. 56. the sting whereby death
killeth is sinne.1 Cor. 15. 56 Rom. 5. 12. by Adam sinne
came into the worlde,Rom. 5. 12. and by sin death.
If we shoulde examine this doctrine by
naturall reason, it woulde be found very
doubtfull: for it may seeme that the body
of man, being made of earth, shoulde of
necessitie at length be resolued into earth
againe, as well as the bodies of all other cretures:
yea that it consisting of contraries

continually fighting, and consuming one another,
coulde not possibly but be at length
destroyed. For nothing that is deuided in
it selfe can continue for euer. Yea besides
this naturall death, mans body may seeme
to haue bene subiect to outward violence:
as if it shoulde haue bene pierced with a
sword, or throwen downe from a high rocke,
no reason can shewe howe the immortality
of it shoulde be preserued. Whereunto we
answere, first that we are not to doubt of the
word of God, howsoeuer our shallow heads
are not able to sound the depth of it. Secondly
that we may as wel suppose man to be immortall,
as to liue almost a thousand yeares,
as we read Gen. 5. 27. that Methusela^ did: for
we may well thinke that those long liues of
the fathers before the flood,Gen. 5. 27. were euen the
reliques of that immortalitie wherewith Adam
was endued at the first: neither are we to
think it impossible to God, to endue mans body
with such an exact and equall temperature,
as should continue for euer. As for violent
deaths, although we cannot deny but man
was subiect to them, if violence had bene offred,
yet there could none happen in this pure
state. For then there were no wilde beasts to
deuoure and teare in peeces, no euill constitutio^
of the aier to distemper or infect, no inordinate

affections in a mans minde, whereby he
himselfe might be the cause of sickenes, hurt
or death to himselfe, but all the creatures
were so disposed as that they should euery
way further, and by no meanes impaire the
good estate of man. Lastly if it be granted
that Adams body had no such strange temperature,
which coulde continue for euer,
no one qualitie getting the vpper hand ouer-any
other, neither any such immunity against
violent deaths, but that he might by ouersight,
forgetfulnesse or some humane infirmitie,
be ouertaken with hurt, sicknesse, age
and death, the which opinion is rather to be
receaued; yet he had this supernaturall priuiledge
of immortalitie granted vnto him
by the worde of God, and confirmed by the
tree of life, the fruite whereof being taken
and eaten had this vertue in it (not by
nature, but by the miraculous and extraordinary
worke of God) to make man liue for euer,
by freeing him from all daungers,
hurts, woundes, sicknesse and age.
Likewise this happines was in regard of the
soule of Adam exceeding greate, he hauing
not onely a mind illuminated with the true
knowledge of God, and of all other thinges
which did any way belong vnto him, but also
his wil and affections free from al immoderate
desires, or greiuous passio^s, which might any

way molest or trouble him. The which state
of the soule as it is a part of mans holines in
that it is agreeable to the will, worde and
image of God, so in regarde of the incomparable
pleasure and ioy, arising of the
true contemplation of God, of a quiet conscience
and orderly affections, it containeth
in it a great parte of mans felicity. Likewise
the whole person of man was adorned
with this crowne of glory, that he was a
monarch here on earth, hauing the Lordshippe
and dominion of these inferior creaturs
giuen vnto him. So that to conclude this
point, the happinesse of man was very wonderfull
in that he enioyed all good things
whatsoeuer, euen God himselfe with all
the creatures
This was the happinesse of mans first estate:
whereof this question may be asked,
whether it was appointed by God to continue
for euer, or else to be but an entrance
to a greater happinesse in heauen: whither
some doe thinke that man should at length
haue bene translated, although without
death, yet not without some change of his
earthly body. But hereof we cannot say any
thing, haueing learned nothing in the
worde of any other happinesse of this first estate
then this which hath in some sort bene

described, and which although it may seeme
to come much short of true happinesse, and
to be rather a terrestrial then a celestial, yet in
trueth it was perfect happines (although not
absolute: because it was mutable;) for wheresoeuer
God vouchsafeth to the creature the
fruition of his presence, there is full and perfect
happinesse; whether it be in heauen or on
the earth.


Sect. 2. Of the miserable state of man
since the fall of Adam.
MAn by his sinne did separate
himselfe from God, lost the
coniunction which he had
with him, both spiritual which
is perfect holinesse, and personall
or local which is happinesse* and was
cast out of the presence of God, and out
of paradise, in the which place, being a terrestriall
garden, God did reueale himselfe
and his glory to man after a speciall manner,
and so he loosing the fountaine of happinesse,
he did withall loose all the streames which
flowed from thence belonging either to his
body or soule: his body which was before
beautifull and maiesticall, became deformed

and contemptible,Of the miserable state of man since the fall of Adam. being, as the experience
of all ages doth teach vs, often many
waies crooked, ridiculous, foul, yea somtimes
horribly monstrous and vgly. For continuall
health he hath infinite diseases, infirmities,
sickenesses and sores. For his former felicitie he
is subiect to as many daungers as there are
thinges in the worlde, there being almost nothing,
which may not become mortall vnto
him by some meanes or other: his immortalitie
he hath chaunged with death, often dying
before he be borne to liue: sometimes in
the flower of his age; and if he liue many years,
yet al his life is nothing but misery, yea euen
death it selfe, it being the beginning of eternall
death. Likewise in regard of his soule, he is
most miserable: his vnderstanding, which before
was as cleare as is the sun at noone day, is
now ouershadowed and filled with palpable
darkenesse, grosse errours, blockishe ignoraunce,
and an accusing conscience. His will
is become peruerse, abhorring whatsoeuer is
good, and cleauing to that which is euill. His
affections are raging and in ordinate lusts: and
in briefe there is nothing in the whole nature
of man, but horrible confusion. For the outward
dignity of his person, he is now cast out
from the company of God and of his holy angels,
who before were his familiar friends, but

nowe are armed with a sword against him. Again
he is not now Lord of the creatures; for
they do oftener tyrannise ouer him, deuouring
him and tearing him in peeces,Gen. 31. 24. the^ perform any
seruice vnto him, vnlesse they be constrained.
Yea he is and that by his own iudgment, more
base the^ the earth, and therefore is often sold to
perpetual slauery for a little gold, siluer, brasse
or any baser mettall, yea he setteth his whole
mind, and bestoweth al his labour vpon them:
he prostrateth himselfe before the wedge of
gold, as before his God, he loueth it as his life,
and accounteth al his happines to consist in it.
Besides many miseries do happen in this life,
which might becounted a kind of happines, if
that they might haue an end with death, but
how can we look that, that should be the end
of it, which is but the beginning of that vnspeakable
misery which hath no end, but shal co^tinue
for euer. For al the miseries of this life,
whatsoeuer, and death it selfe, are but an entra^ce
to that eternal misery which is prepared
for sinners. The greatnes wherof co^sisteth in ^
things: first in that intolerable griefe which is
co^ceiued by the lack of the co^trary happines
prepared for the faithfull: in which respect it
is called vtter darknes, and the lowest pit. Secondly
in the sustaining of those paines where
with the wicked shal be torme^ted in body and

soule the which are vsually compared to a
burning fier, or Furnace, because there is no
thing so fearefull to man, as is fire: which
consumeth all thinges where of it can gette
holde; but in trueth there is no fire, yea although
it be augmented by infinite riuers of
brimstone, that burneth so hote, and is so vnquenchable
as is the anger of God, which
in the day of wrath shall be powred foorth
vpon the wicked.


Sect. 3. Of the renewed happinesse of
man.
THe renewed happines of man
is partly in this life, and partly,
or rather perfectly and wholly,
in the worlde to come: for
howsoeuer it may seeme an
impossible thing to finde any felicitie in this
vaine and transitorie worlde, especially in
the godly, who of all men are most miserable,
yet God in his mercie vouchsafeth to
his seruantes the beginning, and as it were, a
taste of that endlesse ioy which is laide vp
in store for them in heauen, by the which
they may be comforted and vphelde in the
mids of those infinite miseries, which accompany

them whiles they abide in this
world.Of the renewed happinesse of mn. This happinesse is not outward and
apparant to mens eyes, but inward and spirituall:
for the bodies of Gods elect are as
much subiect to sores, sicknesses and to death
it selfe as are the bodies of the reprobate, yea
in their wiues, children, friends, kinsfolke,
goods, posterity and in all outward respects
they are no lesse, yea vsually much more miserable
then the reprobate (although if wee
speake properly, these outward euils doe
not make them miserable, but doe make
for their good and eternall saluation) and
therefore wee are to seeke for this beginning
of our happinesse in the soules of Gods
children: and chiefly in their mindes and
vnderstandinges. For if happinesse doe
consist in seeing God, and in beholding his
glorie,Math. 5. 8* as Christ teacheth vs, Math. 5. 8.
Then wee are not destitute of a greate
part of it euen in this life, in the which
we doe many waies see God, although
not so fully as wee shall doe heereafter.
1. Cor. 13. 12.1. Cor. 13. 12. For heauen and earth, euen
all the creatures of God are full of the
glorie of God. Rom. 1. 20. The inuisible
thinges of God,Rom. 1. 20. to wit his Godhead and his
power are seene since the creation of the
world being considered in the creatures.

If by naturall men, of whome the Apostle
speaketh, how much more by spirituall? For
howsoeuer carnal and worldly minded men,
beholding the glorious creatures of God, are
no more affected then are the brute beastes,
which neuer once lift vp their eies to heauen:
yet the godly doe heereof conceiue matter
of great ioy. Besides, we see God daily in his
actions, in his iudgements powred on sinners,
in his mercies shewed towards the godly;
yea in his patience and goodnesse towardes
all men.
But besides all this, we haue yet another
meanes of seeing God, so farre excelling
the former, as the beholding of
the kinges owne person is more ioyfull to
his naturall subiectes then is the sight of his
stately palaces. For we haue the worde of
God, euen the doctrine of the Gospell,
wherein we see God in his mercy, that
is, in his greatest glorie: yea we see God
in Christ his onely naturall sonne, in
whome the glorie of God shineth more
clearely then in the heauen of heauens.
For hee is the expresse and liuely image of
the Father,Heb. 1. 2. the brightnesse of his glory, and
the engrauen forme of his person: and thus
we see God plainely as in a cleare cristall
glasse, with his face open or vncouered:

yea by this sight wee are transformed
into the same image from glorie to
glorie, euen as from the spiritte of God.
2. Cor. 3. 18.2. Cor. 3. 18. Thus all the faithfull beholding
God in Christ are truely happie,
howsoeuer they doe not with their bodely
eyes see the heauens open, and the sonne
of God standing at the right hande of the
Father as Steuen did,Act. 7. 56. Act. 7. 56. To this
felicitie of the minde is to be referred the
peace of conscience, the which being a
continuall feast, maketh a man happy and
ioyfull in the middest of the greatest sorrowes
and miseries. And, to be shorte in
the rest; answerable to this state of the
minde is the will with the affections, by
the which he cleauing to God, louing
him aboue all earthly pleasures, and delighting
in him, is replenished with vnspeakable
ioy.
This is the happinesse whereof wee
may be made partakers in this life; the
which eternall happinesse followeth, so
called because all the partes of it which
are nowe to bee mentioned* continue
and endure for euer without any chaunge
or alteration whatsoeuer. It consisteth in
these thinges.
First in immunitye or freedome

from all daungers, troubles, miseries, calamities,
crosses, sorrow, sinne, wants, imperfections
and infirmities whatsoeuer can
be named or imagined. The body shal not
be pinched with hunger, thirst, nakednesse,
or disgraced with any deformitie, or wearied
with labour, the darknesse shal not shut
vp our eyes and hinder them from seeing,
for there is continuall light: health shal not
be impaired by sicknesse, or beauty and
strength with age, the bodie shall not be
inflamed by choller or luste; or distempered
with surfitting and drunkennesse, or yet preserued
by the corruption of the carkasses of
dead beastes. It shall not be as it is now of
so lumpish and heauy a mould, that we cannot
without wearinesse and trouble, lift vppe
our handes or eies to heauen; but it shall be a
spirituall body, that is endued with such perfect
strength, beauty, agilitie, lightnesse, impassibilitie,
soliditie and incorruption, as if
it were a spirite rather then a sensible substance:
and yet it shall be still a sensible substance
endued with the same forme which
now it hath, but of farre diuerse qualities.
Likewise the minde being free from al ignorance,
errour and doubting, shall see God
clearely, and in him all thinges: there shalbe
no peruersnesse of the will or any inordinate

desires, no such vncertaine freedome of
will, as might endanger our estate by drawing
vs from God. To be short, we shall haue
daily conuersation in the presence of God,
Who shall be all in all vnto vs,Reuel. 21. 3. 23. we shall be glorious
in bodie and soule,1. Cor. 15. 28. euen as are the holy
Angels, yea euen as is Christ the sonne of
God according to his humanitie,Ioh. 3. 2. although
not in the same degree:Phil. 3. 21. but we are not able
to declare the particulars of this estate, the
which then shall be reuealed vnto vs: and
therefore we must conclude this matter with
that saying of the Apostle,1. Cor. 2. 9. 1. Cor. 2. 9.
Neyther eye hath seene, nor eare hath heard,
nor the minde of man once conceiued or imagined,
those* ioyes which God hath prepared for
them that loue him:Reuel. 21. Yet we haue a typicall
description of this happinesse. Reuel. 21.




CHAP. III.

Sect. 1. Of the holinesse wherein man
was created.
THus much of that happinesse
wherein man was created, the
which was not absolute but
conditionall: for it was giuen
to man with this condition;
That he should liue in perfect holinesse, conforming
himselfe to the will of God in all
thinges: in the performance whereof, if hee
did faile at any time, he was forthwith to be
wholly depriued of the said happy estate for
euer. Where we are not to imagine that
God did deale hardly with man in imposing
so straite a condition: for he could not possibly
haue done otherwise, as we will easely
confesse if we consider, that happinesse is nothing
else but the enioying of Gods presence
and company, into the which it is more impossible
for any to enter, who is not perfectly
holy, then it is for palpable darkenesse to be
there whereas the sunne shineth clearely at
noone day: and therefore seeing holinesse
is tyed to happinesse by such an vnspeakable
bond, it is needfull that wee do heere speake

of holinesse,Of the holinesse wherein man was created. wherewith as with a wedding
garment, euery one must be clothed who desireth
to enter into Gods paradise. Holinesse
therfore is as hath beene before touched; The
spirituall coniunction of the reasonable creature
with God,1. Cor. 6. 17. as happinesse is his personall
or locall coniunction with him. For then eyther
Angell or man is perfectly holy, when
as in his spirite or soule, in his vnderstanding,
will, affections and all the actions
proceeding from them, he cleaueth to God
in perfect obedience knowing, beleeuing,
choosing, louing, fearing and obeying
him aboue all thinges, so as not onely the
outward actions, but also the inward faculties;
yea the whole nature be pure in the
sight of God without any spot or blemish of
sinne.
Both which, to wit, the holinesse of the natural
faculties, and of the outward actions, we
will ioyne together in this treatise, for the
greater euidence of the doctrine. This
holinesse, although it might be handled
according to the order of the seuerall
partes and faculties of mans soule, yet we
will rather distinguish it into these two parts;
Subiection to God, and Conformity to God:
whereof, the first containeth all those parts of
mans holines which he oweth to God as to

his superiour, and which haue no resemblance
to any part of Gods nature, for that
God is in no respect subiect to any* the other,
those wherein man is like to God* resembling
some part of Gods nature, so as
that he may be said to haue those faculties in
common with God: although after a farre
diuerse manner: for man is then truely holy,
when as he is subiect to God in conformitie,
and like to God in due subiection. For so it
pleased God to put in man his owne image,
or the similitude and resemblance of his own
nature, yet not making him his mate or equall,
but euery way subiect and inferiour
to him.Mich. 6. 8. Mich. 6. 8. O man, God sheweth thee
what is good, that is, wherein thy holinesse
doth consist, namely in this, that thou humble
thy selfe to walke with thy God. For the
first, the subiection which man oweth to God
is not of one kind, but generall containing in
it all kindes of subiection whatsoeuer: to wit
that which the loyall subiect oweth to his
prince, the sonne to his father, the seruant to
his master, the scholer to his teacher, the creature
to the creator: in all which respectes
man ought to be subiect to God, performing
all those dueties to him which any inferiour
oweth to his superiour, as in particular consideration
will more plainly appeare.



Sect. 2. Of the sinfulnesse
of man.
MAn by that one offence
committed against God,
in eating the forbidden
fruite, did wholly loose
both the iustice of his person,
and also the inherent
purity of his nature. For the first, we
knowe that disobedience and rebellion against
God appeareth as well in one wilfull
transgression as in many: for no man is to
be counted iust and innocent, who is stained
with any one grieuous crime, and therefore
as we read Iam. 2. 10.Ia. 2. 10* whosoeuer keeping
the whole lawe beside, transgresseth any one
part or precept, he is guilty of the breaking
of the whole lawe. But the resolution of the
other question is much harder, for it is not
so easy to shew, howe that one sinne did
cleane take away the holynesse which was
inherent, infixed and euen ingrauen by the
finger of God in the nature of man, as we
know that the transgression of Ada^ depriued
both him and his posterity, of that light
of the minde, of the actuall in clmation of
his will to good onely, and of whatsoeuer

else was good in him.Of the sinfulnesse of man. For as the Poets doe
fable of certaine men who by drinking a
charmed potion, were made of reasonable
men, brute and sauage beasts, so we know
that the eating of the forbidden fruite, did
make as great a metamorphosis or change
in Adam: who by this meanes was stript
naked of all and euery parte of that
holynesse wherewith he was before endued.
But whence came this wonderfull altertion,
whether from God, spoling man of
all those holy garmentes wherewith he
had decked him before, or from man
himselfe, makeing a totall apostasie from
God? Not from God, whose giftes are without
repentance, and whose nature is farre
from any such inconstancie, but from
man. Yet not from any wilfull desire or
purpose of renouncing God and all holynesse,
but by the craft of sathan, and the
nature of sinne which as leauen once
getting place, neuer resteth till that it soure
the wholle lumpe be it neuer so great:
So man after that he had once inclined
his will to disobey God, and admitted
vnbeleefe into his minde, coulde not
keepe his affections and actions from
the contagion of sinne. Adam perhaps

thought that to eate the forbidden fruite,
was but a single and small offence, but
sathan knewe very well, that it
was a grieuous and an vniuersall Apostasie
from God, as it prooued in the euents.
For whilest the sweetnesse of the fruite
was yet in the mouth of Adam, the venim
and poyson of it did pierce into the
most secret partes of his soule, leauing
no part vncorrupted or free from the
filthynesse of sinne. For when as once the
light of his minde was darkned by the
delusion of the diuell, in somuch that
he thought euill to be good, and the
way leading to extreame miserie to be
the onelie meanes of the greatest happinesse,
it coulde not be but that his
will, affections, actions, and all the faculties
both of body and soule should be
corrupted, for that one of them doth followe
the disposition of an other, so that a
corrupt minde bringeth a peruerse will,
and a sinnefull will maketh inordinate
affections, both which encrease the darkenesse
of the minde, and also defile all the
outward actions. Thus Adam lost the

puritie of his nature by continuing in his sin
whereinto he had fallen, and adding one measure
of sinfulnesse to an other, till at length he
came to a constant habit and naturall disposition
of sinfullnesse. And as he was himselfe
sinfull, so he left his sinfulnesse to his
posteritie, the which in respect of him is
called originall corruption. Ps. 51. 7. I was
fashioned in sinne,^^salm. 51. 7. and in inquitie did my mother
conceaue me. This originall sinne is
that corrupt estate of mans nature, wherein
all the faculties and powers of it are altogether
vnapt and impotent to the doing of
any good, and wholly disposed and enclined
to the committing of sin, or more briefly,
the spiritual separation of man from God,
whereby it commeth to passe that he neither
doth nor can, either knowe or beleeue, either
loue or feare, either obey or honour
God, or be in any respect so affected towards
him, as he ought to be. This spirituall separation
hath tow parts, Rebellion and Deformity,
in the which tow thinges the whole sinfulnesse
of man consisteth, being nothing else
but a defection from all subiection due to
God, and from that image of God wherein
he was created.



Sect. 3. Of the renewed holinesse
of man.
AS God hath in great mercy
decreed that man should not
vtterly perish by Adams fall,
but rather by his mercy recouer
that happinesse which he
both had, and lost, so he hath
in wisdome and iustice appointed the same
meanes of attaining it, to wit, the perfect holinesse
of man, without the which it is impossible
that any creature shoulde see God. And
therefore as god did in the beginning create
in man perfect holynesse, as the meanes of
attaining happinesse; so he doth for the same
end recreate holynesse in him. This action
of God is called in the Scripture regeneration,
and the holynesse it selfe, the new man,
or the newe creature: because the former
holynesse is so cleane decayed and abolished,
no one parte of it remaining, that the
restoring of it againe doth make man to be
a newe, yea almost another creature, working
in him a totall chaunge of his nature,
and giuing him a newe minde, a newe will,
new affections, and a newe course of life, not
that this change is in the substance of the soule
or bodie, of the minde or will of a man, for

that is the same both in a carnall and in a
regenerate man:Of the renewed holynesse of man. but onely in quality and co^dition:
and yet it is truely called a second creation,
because there is no roote left in man
from the which holynesse might be produced,
no in clination to good, whereby it might
be furthered, no facultie remaining in him,
whereby it might be effected. For howsoeuer
some do erroneously thinke and teach,
that some part of regeneration is to be ascribed
to the naturall faculties of mans soule,
as if men did of themselues see, choose, embrace
and loue the truth: yet the scripture teacheth
vs to thinke farre otherwise, to wit, that
man hath no hand in this worke, but onely
the spirite of God. For euen as in the naturall
generation of any liuing creature, there
must two thinges concurre, first the agent or
worker, the which the philosophers call principium
actiuum, (and it may be resembled
to the workman in artificiall thinges) the
which giueth the forme, and being to
the creature: secondly the matter whereof
the thing is made and framed called principium
passiuum, the which cannot be
saide to worke, but onely to suffer the operation
of the other: so it is in regeneration.
First the spirite of God is the workman
in it, he is the begetter of this newman,

the fashioner of this newe creature.
Secondly the minde and will of man are
the matter whereof this newe creature
is made, not working together with
the spirite of God, but onely suffering the
working of it. For regeneration is nothing
but a sanctified or renewed minde and
will.
The begetter of this new man is God himselfe,
euen the holy spirite of God changing
our minds and heartts, and framing in them
all holinesse.Ioh. 3. 6. Ioh. 3. 6. That which is borne of
the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne
of the spirit, is spirite. And that although
by the ministerie of man and the preaching
of the worde of God (as it is 1.
Pet. 1. 23. Being borne againe not of
corruptible seede but of incorruptible euen
of the worde of God which abideth for
euer) yet by a straunge and supernaturall
worke,1 Pet. 1. 23. which no witte, eloquence,
deuise, strength or power of man or Angell,
but onely the finger of GOD
himselfe is able to bringe to passe,
Math. 19. 26.Mah. 19. 26. With man it is impossible,
but not with God: it being not in
the power of anie creature to chaunge
in one moment the minde, will, affections
and the whole nature of a man,



espceially to that state which is repugnant,
and cleane contrary to his naturall disposion,
as regeneration is to the nature of a
carnall man, for it is not so in this spirituall
work as it is in the carnal generation, wherein
one thing begetteth another like to it selfe
by a naturall vertue and power which God
hath put into each liuing creature, without
any extraordinary worke or blessing from
God. And therefore it is able (being in the
naturall disposition) whensoeuer it listeth,
to bring forth the effect without failing. But
no minister of the word, although endewed
with most excellent giftes, can beget
this new man by the sole vertue of his mimisterie;
for then regeneration, woulde be
a common and an ordinarie thing, as is the
preaching of the worde. But we knowe
it to be farre otherwise, and that vsually of a
hundred hearers, there is scarce one truely
conuerted. So that in the begetting of this
new man, the ministery of the word is but the
instrument, whereby the spirit of God
worketh, without the which it is no more able
to forme this newe creature, then the tooles
belonging to any worke, are able to bring
the same to passe without the hand of the
artificer: And therefore as the first creation,
so also the regeneration of mans holinesse

ought to be acknowledged, to be the hand,
and worke of God, yea in trueth an immediate,
supernaturall and miraculous worke:
we say immeditate, not that he vseth no
meanes in regenerating the faithfull, but for
that the force, vertue, and abilitie of working,
is not any iot in the meanes, but
wholly and onely in GOD. Againe it
is a supernaturall worke, for euen as sinne,
yea the retayning, exercising, and increasing
of it, is naturall to man, so the resisting,
renouncing and forsaking of it,
and especially the seeking, attaining, keeping,
exercising and encreasing of the
contrarie holinesse, is no lesse contrarie
to the nature of man, then it is for him to
flie vp to heauen. Hence it followeth that
this regeneration is a miraculous worke:
for whatsoeuer is so contrary to the naturall
disposition and ordinarie course of
thinges, as that the reason of man can
not finde out and comprehende the cause
of it, that driueth men to admiration
and astonishment, and so becommeth a
miracle vnto them. If it be heere obiected
that regeneration is an ordinarie matter,
which commeth to passe daily and
vsually in the Church, and hath done
in all ages, and therefore is no miracle:

we answere confessing that it is not so much
wondred at as it ought to bee. For carnall
men doe not beleeue that there is any such
matter, as we may see in the example of
Nicodemus,^^hn. 3. 4 Iohn. 3. 4. Howe can a man be
borne which is old? can he enter into his mothers
wombe againe and be borne? And therefore
doe not wonder but rather laugh at it:
and they who by experience know it, are not
for the most part so affected with the serious
cogitation of it as they should be. Yet this
doth not chaunge the nature of it, for if
God should often raise vppe men from the
dead, men would at length cease from wondering
at it. But notwithstanding the opinion
of men, it is a great miracle, yea in truth
greater then is the raising of the deade to
life: for God hath often giuen to mortall and
sinfull men the glorie of restoring the dead
to life, but he neuer gaue to any of his prophets
or Apostles, the power of regenerating
men. So that to conclude this first
point, as the first, so the second creation of
mans holinesse, ought to be acknowledged
the proper worke and action of God, as
the scripture doth plainely teach vs in many
places,Gal. 2. 8. Gal. 2. 8.
Nowe we are to consider other pointes
in this wonderfull worke of God, as namely

these. First the meanes which God vseth.
Secondly the manner of working. Thirdly
the time. Fourthly the differences of regeneration.
Lastly the signes of it. The meanes
is eyther ordinary or extraordinary: the ordinary
meanes, is as hath beene touched; the
ministery of the word of God, appointed
by God for this end and purpose, the which
he doth accompany with the secrete operation
of his spirite, in the hearts of all those,
whome he hath ordained to saluation. And
therefore whosoeuer desireth to be made
partaker of this regeneration, he must with
all care and diligence giue himselfe to the
continuall hearing of the worde of God
preached in the assemblie of the Church:
and withall he is to vse all priuate meanes
whereby hee may bee prepared for the
publicke ministerie, so as it may be profitable
vnto him; as namely the continuall
companie and conference of those
who haue alreadie attained to that which
he desireth, and who hauing trauailed
in the waye of Godlinesse, may the
more easely direct him in the same. Secondlie
hee muste giue himselfe to the
reading, studying and meditating of the
worde of GOD, and to the carefull
vse of all those meanes whereby hee may

be made to vnderstand, know, and remember
it. But especially he is to desire this
by earnest prayer at the handes of God, who
onely is able to graunt his desire, and without
whose working, the most painefull vse of
all meanes, is altogether in vaine: but hee
that carefully vseth these aforesaid meanes
(yet not trusting in them, but relying himselfe
on the mercifull promise of God, who
hath promised to be readie at hande to all
those that seeke him) shall finde by experience
that no man doth in vain seeke for help
at the handes of God.
As touching the manner how regeneration
is wrought,Iohn. 3. 8 Christ teacheth vs Iohn. 3. 8,
That no man knoweth it: for euen as, saith he,
thou hearest the noise of the wind when it bloweth,
but yet thou canst not see it, or discerne
whence it commeth, or whither it goeth; so although
we heare the word of God sounding
in our eares, and knowe that God doth by
that sound beget men, yet no man knoweth
how this is: that is, regeneration is not anoutward,
visible, and sensible, but an inward
and secret worke. For euen as a man being
suddenly taken with the plague, or anie
infectious sicknesse, saieth, he knoweth
not how it happened, onely he seeth the
effectes of it: euen so the action of regeneration,

in it selfe is secret and vnknowen, but
manifest in the effectes which followe of it.
We may (not vnfitly) compare it to that
suddaine and straunge change which befell
Saul,1. Sam. 10. ^ whereof we read, 1. Sam. 10. 9. For
when as God was about to aduance Saule
from his priuate and base estate, to the kingdome
of Israell, he sawe that it was needefull
to make him a newe man endued with
a newe minde, will, and affections: to take
from him his rude and base conditions, and
to endue him, with an heroicall spirite of
wisedome, courage, and of all giftes needfull
for so high a calling. And therefore,
euen as he turned his backe to goe awaie
from Samuell, God chaunged him, and
gaue him an other hearte, and made him
another man. Euen so doth God, by
changing the mindes and willes of his elect,
so secretlie, as that they themselues
knowe not which way it is done, make
them newe men, and prepare them for
his euerlasting kingdome.
The time of regeneration, are the
yeares of descretion, for this worke hath
no place in infantes, beeing not as yet
endued with the actuall faculties of a reasonable
minde and will. The which must

first existe, before they can be chaunged,
and be actually defiled with sinne,
before they can be clensed.
Secondly in the yeares of discretion,
there is no set and appointed time of regeneration:
for as we are taught, Math.
20. in the parable of the worke men,
some are called at the first houre of the
day, some in the middest of it, some in
the laste houre: Some in their younge
yeares, some in their middle age, and
some in olde age. Yet no man ought
in this respect to deferre the seeking after
regeneration, for so he will be more
and more vnfitte and vnwilling to take
anie paines in this behalfe, and be at
length so hardned and benummed with
a longe custome of sinne, and of deepe
hypocrisie, that there wilbe farre lesse
hope of winning him to the true obedience
of Christe then there was before.
Thirdly, regeneration, although
it doe continually encrease, as long as
a man liueth, yet it is wrought and begun,
in one houre, in one moment
of time; euen as there is but one
houre of birth, although there be many of

life.
If it bee asked, whether that euery regenerate
manne, doth knowe the speciall
howre of his calling: wee answere,
that regeneration, beeing an vniuersall
chaunge of all the faculties of a mans
soule, and so consequentlie of all the actions
of his life, may easely be felt and
perceiued, especially ^y him, in whome
it is wroughte: and further this time of
a mans conuersion, ought moste carefullie
to be marked and registred, that so it
may with continuall and vnspeakable ioy
and thankesgiuing euermore be remembred.
For if, as it is vsually thought, the day
of a mans naturall byrth which in it selfe
is the beginning, although of temporall
life, yet of eternall death and miserie, be
worthie to bee not onely diligently noted
and kept in minde, but also solemnly
celebrated with greate ioy: howe
much more is it meete, that men shoulde
marke the day of their spirituall birth, it
being the most happy daye which can
be seene, and in deede the beginning of

eternall happinesse. And yet oftentimes
this particular time, is neyther marked
when it is present, nor remembred when
it is past, namely by them, whose conuersion
is not so straunge and violent, but
light and easie, the which difference
wee are nowe in the fourth place to propounde.
The diuersitie of regeneration is verie
great, for that we may vse our accustomed
similitude, as man in his naturall
birth is brought into the worlde, sometimes
with greate facilitie, and safetie,
at other times in so greate paine,
anguish and daunger, that he may seeme
to enter into life, through death: euen
so this newe man is sometimes borne without
any trouble, sorrowe, or delay: but
often, with such horrour of conscience
such fearefull panges of desperation, such
extreame sorrowe, feare, and humiliation,
that he may truely be saide to passe
to heauen, through the middest of hell.
Againe some of these new men are borne
in so greate strength and perfection, as
if they were not babes, but growen
men in Christe. As was the Apostle
Paule who came into this spirituall world,

not onely a perfect man, but also a mighty
giant, euen an notable apostle: whereas
others in the beginning of their regeneration,
are so weake in the performance
of the actions of spirituall life, that it may
be greatly doubted, whether they haue any
life or no.
Lastly the signes of regeneration, are
as many, as are the seuerall partes and heads
of sanctification, and therefore whosoeuer
desireth to knowe, whether that this new
man be begotten in himselfe, or no, let
him consider diligently, that which followeth
in all the third sections of this treatise, and
applying it to himselfe, see whether that
he finde this straunge change in his own soul
or no: whether that he be fully perswaded of
the trueth of Gods worde, which saieth
that the dead shall one day be raised vp to
life, and that all those who did beleeue in
Christ shall enioy eternall happinesse in heauen:
or doe secretly in his mind doubt of
the trueth of these thinges: whether that
for his good estate in this world, he depend
on GOD, or vpon his owne wisdome,
strength, riches and friends: whether that he
feare God or man more: whether that his
chiefe delight be in seruing God, in praising
God, in hearing, reading, and meditating, on

the worde of God or in worldly pleasures,
in eating, drinking, sleeping, in pastime, in the
pompe and outwarde shewe of the worlde:
whether that he haue the grace to pray
dayly to God, for all spirituall graces distinctly
and seuerally one by one: or that he
prayeth seldome, lightly and but for fashions
sake: whether that he loue those who
feare God, as he doth his owne brethren
or children, or else is effected to them no
otherwise then to other men: by these
signes and many other, which are hereafter
to be declared at large, this regeneration
may easely and certainly be knowen. And
therefore it standeth euery man in hand, who
desireth to escape the second death, to examine
himselfe whether that he haue anie
parte in this first resurrection: as the Apostle
doth exhort.2. Cor. 13. 5. 2. Cor. 13. 5. saying, Trie your
selues, whether ye be in the faith or no:
knowe ye not that Christ is in you except ye
be reprobats?
Lastly as the happinesse, so also the holynesse
of this third estate excelleth the first
holynesse of man, in that it is perpetuall
and cannot by any meanes be lost: for
whereas this seed of regeneration is once
sowen by the hand of God, there it remaineth
for euer, and bringeth foorth fruite

to life euerlasting. 1. Ioh. 3. 10. Euery one
that is borne of God doth not sinne, neither
can sinne,1. Ioh. 3. 10 because the seed of God is in him.
Where by sin he meaneth a totall apostasie
from God, not a particular sinne, the which
the faithfull do often commit without indaungering
their saluation. Which doth
not depend on their owne righteousnesse
as Adams did, but vpon the righteousnesse
of Christ. This certainty of perseuerance in
the faith co^meth not of any strength of man,
but of the goodnesse of God who confirmeth
vnto the end all those whom he doth
once effectually call.



Chapter. 4.

Sect. 1. Of faith in generall, and of legall faith.
THe first kind of subiection which
man oweth to God, is that, which
the subiect or tennant oweth to his
king or liegelord, of whom he holdeth his
houses, lands and possessions, by whose fauour,
procured by dutifull obedience, he liueth in a
good and happy state, and whose anger would
be to him extreame miserie and euen death
it selfe, and may be called affiance or dependaunce.
Thus was man in his first

creation,Of faith in generall, and of legall faith. affected to God, on whom onely he
did depende, and relie himselfe for a happie
estate. This subiection is in holy scripture
called faith, because the obiect of it,
is the faithfulnesse of God, and the trueth
of his worde, and promises. For as in the latin
phrase, habere fidem is to giue credence
to another, so in diuinitie, to haue faith is to
attribute faithfulnesse to God, or to acknowledge
him to be faithfull in all his promises,
both by beleeuing them as also by depending
on them. Thus Sara is saide Hebr. 11. 11, To
haue had faith in that she iudged God to be
faithfull in his promises.Heb. 11. 11
This faith is of two kindes, the faith
wherewith Adam was endued in his first
creation, and the faith which God giueth
in regeneration: the first is called vsually
legall, the other Euangelicall. The which
two kindes, although they doe differ the one
from the other, yet they agree in substance,
being of the same nature in generall,
and therefore we wil first declare the generall
doctrine which is common to both
the kindes of faith, and then see what is
proper to each kind, and wherein the one differeth
from the other. Fayth in generall
is thus defined: Affiance in Gods promises
propounding eternall happinesse, to

the perfect holinesse of the reasonable
creature, or to man being perfectly holy.
Or thus; Faith is the trust and confidence of
a mans heart, relying himselfe wholly on
God for eternall happinesse to be had by
perfect holynesse. Or thus; Faith is the affiance
of the hearte, arising of an effectuall
perswasion of the trueth of Gods worde,
which promiseth happinesse to man being
perfectly holy,Iam. 1. 19. and threatneth eternall misery
to him being polluted with sinne. Iames. 1.
19. The diuels beleeue and tremble.
These definitions being in substance all
one, offer diuerse poyntes to be considered:
and first what part or facultie of mans soule
is the Subiect and Seate of faith, whether
the minde, the will, or the affections, whether
one, some, or all of them. For answere
hereof, in that we say that faith is affiance,
trust, or confidence, we doe plainly put it
among the affections. For so it seemeth to
be of the same kinde with hope, loue, feare,
and the rest of the spirituall graces: al which,
and especiallie faith, although they spring
from a former knowledge, and are alwaies
ioyned with it, yet they are in nature to
be distinguished from it. As in this instance,
faith hath the originall and beginning in the
minde, for a man can neuer relie himselfe

wholly on God for happinesse, vnlesse
he be perswaded, that God both can and
will make him happie. Yet not the bare
contemplation and perswasion of the mind,
but the affiance and affection of the heart
is faith; and yet, for somuch as it is impossible,
that a man shoulde be fullie
perswaded in his minde, of the trueth of
Gods promises, and not together set his
whole affiaunce and fayth on him, or that
he shoulde be by faith rightly affected towarde
GOD, vnlesse first he haue the
knowledge of GOD and of his promises,
hence it is, that fayth is often
placed in the minde, knowledge being
put for affiaunce, as the cause is often
put for the effect.Coll. 2. 2. Thus Coll. 2. 2. Faith
is called (...) the full assurance
and certaine preswasion of the vnderstanding,
and so throughout the wholle
scripture, faith is made nothing else
but beleefe, and to haue faith, nothing
but to beleeue that the worde, promises
and threatnings of GOD are true. But
in trueth to make vp the full nature of
fayth, there must be added to this action
of the minde, an action of the heart and

will, to wit, affiaunce. We confesse that
there is a kinde of faith which is a meere
perswasion of the minde, as namelie
that which is called the fayth of miracles,
whereby a man being perswaded
of the power and will of GOD, for
the effecting of strange thinges, doth
by vertue of that knowledge, worke miracles:
but this fayth doth not concerne
the saluation of man, and therefore doth
not belong to our purpose.
In the second place the definition
giueth vs to vnderstand, that the obiect,
or thing whereat fayth aimeth, and
where about it is conuersant, is not anie
particular blessing or good whatsoeuer,
but full and perfect happinesse,
which containeth in it all graces, blessings,
pleasures* and ioyes whatsoeuer
doe anie waie make for the good and excellent
estate of man.
Likewise the promises of GOD, whereon
faith relieth, are those which are
made concerning happinesse. Yet sometimes
it pleaseth GOD, to make some
one particular and temporarie blessing a

signe and pledge of eternall and vniuersall
happinesse; and then the faith of the beleeuer,
relieth it selfe first and immediatly vppon
the saide particular promise, and on the
blessing therein contained, but it doth not
rest there, but through that particular obiect
doth see and take holde of eternall happinesse.
Thus GOD promised to Abraham,
being nowe stricken in yeares a sonne:
this promise Abraham did fully apprehende
by faith, and by this meanes became happie,
and was accounted iust before GOD.
Rom. 4. 22.Rom. 4. 22. Abraham beleeued God promising
a sonne vnto him, and this his particular faith,
was accounted to him for righteousnesse: for
that, in that one blessing, he saw the infinite
treasures of Gods mercy, loue, and
bountie propounded vnto him. Although
we might answere another way, saying,
that the obiect of Abrahams faith, was
not onely Isaac, but also Christ the sauiour
of the worlde, who was to come of Isaac
and to make all the nations of the earth,
happie.Mat. 9. Likewise Math. 9. The man sicke
of a palsey, vnder his bodily and temporarie
health, looked for eternall saluation, as
Christ the searcher of the harte, doth witnesse,
saying to him, thy fayth hath saued and
purchased to thee thy former health, and withall,

pardon of sinnes, vvhich is euerlasting
happinesse.
Heereof ariseth a third point to be considered,
to vvit, that this faith doth after a speciall
manner, both tie man to God, and so
bring forth all the rest of the partes of holinesse,
for as this is ingrafted into the nature of
all liuing creatures to preserue themselues in
a good estate so especially those vvhich are indued
vvith reason, namely Angels and men
as soone as the exist, they do in the first place
bend all the force of their mindes, to seeke
out some meanes of continuing and increasing
their ovvne happinesse. The meanes
vvhich doe in this consideration offer themselues,
are of tvvo sorts, the first is, the onely
true meanes, euen God the fountaine of all
happines, on whose word and promises made
touching their happy estate, they by faith depend,
and rely themselues, and so they are
ioyned to God for euer. The other means
is the creature it selfe, trusting not in
God, but in it selfe, vvhereof hereafter. Thus
faith in that it ioyneth vs to God, it conueyeth
from God to vs, as all happinesse, so
also all spirituall graces, and holinesse the
meanes of happinesse, in the vvhich respect
it may be called the fountaine of all the holinesse
follovving: euen as vvhen vvater is

brought from a fountaine or spring, to any
place somewhat distant by pipes of wood,
lead, or clay, the first pipe which ioyneth all
the rest to the fountaine, may be said to giue
the water to the rest, so doth faith conuey the
graces following to vs, and that both by the
immediate and extraordinary blessing of God,
who multiplieth his graces vpon the creature
cleauing vnto him in ful affiance, as men vsually
giue howses, land, and all thinges needful,
to those that rely themselues vpon them,
as also by meanes inherent in the reasonable
creature: the which loueth, honoureth,
and serueth God, not for nought, but as the
giuer of all happinesse, and so doe all the
rest of the affections, and faculties of mans
soule follow both that light of the minde
which faith bringeth with it, or rather which
bringeth forth faith, commonly called beliefe,
and also faith it selfe. The last words of
the definition which mentio^ the perfect holines
of man, giue vs to vndersta^d, that the only
means of being happy, is to be first perfectly
holy, as hath been heretofore often declared.
Thus much of the generall doctrine of
faith,Of legall faith. now we come to the kinds of faith, the
which are two in number, the first is, the faith
of the first estate, to wit, that wherewith Adam
was indued in his creation, the second is
the faith of the third estate, to wit, that wherof

all the regenerate are made partakers, so
that the first is a created, the second a recreated
faith. The which two kindes as they do
agree in all those pointes which haue beene
declared in the former section, so they differ
in that which followeth. The difference ariseth
of the diuers kinds of that perfect holines
which is mentioned in the generall definition
of faith. For the faith of the first estate,
looketh for happinesse by righteousnes inherent
in the person of the beleeuer, and by his
own natural holines, but the faith of the third
estate maketh men happy by imputed righteousnes
and supernatural holines. The cause of
this difference is this God created man perfectly
holy, and therefore he might wel looke
that he should retaine that holines which was
bestowed vpo^ him, but man by his fal lost his
holines, and therefore being now sinful and vnrighteous,
must in this third state cloth himself
with the righteousnes of some other. So
that in both states, perfit holines is the means
of attaining happines, but in the first state this
holines is inherent in Adams person, in the second
it is had from another. And therefore the
first kind of faith is to be defined, affiance in
Gods promises propounding happines to the
natural, proper, or inherent holines of the reasonable
creature whether man or Angell.
This faith is vsually called legall faith,

although not properly, seing that this name agreeth
also to the euangelical faith, the which
doth require perfect obedie^ce, and the absolute
fulfilling of the morall lawe: for whosoeuer
beleeueth in Christ, fulfilleth the lawe, and
hath legall iustice, by the death of Christ,
and legall holinesse; although not perfect in
this life by his spirit. Yet because the morall
law was giuen for this end, to shew man his
vnrighteousnesse, by commaunding inherent
righteousnesse, hence it is that by legall
righteousnesse is vsually meant proper or inherent
righteousnesse, and so by legall faith,
is meant that faith which looketh for hapinesse
by inherent righteousnesse, the which
may more fitlie be called naturall faith, because
it was ingrauen in the nature of man,
as the other kinde is supernaturall; yet
we call it legall faith, because perfect inherent
righteousnesse, is nothing but the perfect
keeping of the lawes and commaundementes
of God, as sinne is defined. 1. Ioh. 3.
(...),^ Iohn. 3. sinne is the breaking of the
law, whether it be the morall lawe, written,
Exod. 20. (the which was ingrauen in the
heart of Adam in his first creation) or any other
law,^xod. ^^ yea euen of things in nature indifferent
inioyned to man by God: the transgression
wherof is a transgression of the morall

lawe; for the creature sinneth, whensoeuer
he disobeyeth the voyce, word, lawe,
and commaundement of God, whether in a
thing in nature indiffere^t, or simply vnlawful.
Thus did Adam sinne, and fall away from
God by eating the fruite of a certaine tree,
which he was forbidden to touch.
So that by this legall faith, none can trust in
God for eternall happines, but onely he who
in his owne person fulfilleth the whole law of
God, and that in deed, in word, in thought,
in will, and in affection, yea in the vniuersall
puritie of this nature, being free from all
curruption of sin. The which thing forsomuch
as it cannot possibly be performed by any of
the sons of Adam, all being stained with that
originall impurity, which cannot by any
meanes in the world be shaken off. Hence it
followeth that this naturall faith cannot haue
place in any of them, onely the holy Angels
which continue in their naturall purity and holinesse
are endued with it, for they trust for
happinesse, by the meanes of their owne perfect
righteousnesse. Yet this their happinesse
is not so to be attributed to their proper obedience,
as that it be wholly denied to the grace
of God,Rom. ^. ^. for where the Apostle saith, Rom. 4. 4
If saluation bee by works, it is not of grace,
he meaneth, the meere fauour of God remitting

sinne, the which hath place i^ the other
kind of faith, yet euen the holy Angels although
they be saued by works, that is, by
their owne perfect holines, yet their holines
co^meth from the grace of God, without the
which supporting them in all temptations
suggested by their own free minds and wils,
or by the reprobate Angels* they coulde not
stand.


Sect. 2. Of infidelitie.
THus much of faith. Nowe we
come to the first kinde of
rebellion, wherby man falleth
away from God, called infidelitie,
for that it is both in
name and nature cleane contrarie to faith.
For by it, man ceaseth to trust and depend
vppon GOD, renouncing his patronage
and protection, as being altogether
vnable to bestow any good thing, much lesse
perfect happinesse vpon his clients: and
therefore he seeketh for another Lorde and
king in whom to trust. So that as faith is affiance
on Gods promises, so this kinde of rebellion,
may not vnfitlie be called and defined
defiance, or distrust in Gods promises propounding
happinesse to the holinesse of the
creature, and eternall miserie to his disobedience.

The first example of infidelitie,Of infidel^^^ is
the diuell with his wicked Angels, who,
not acknowledging God to be the giuer of
happinesse, did beginne to seeke for it else
where: in the which consultation, he saw
that as there was no creature more excellent
then himselfe, so there was no meanes
of attaining happinesse so like, as for to
relie himselfe vpon himselfe, vpon his owne
strength, power, wit, policies, and inuentions:
by the which he did perswade himselfe,
that he should become far more happy, then
he could be by continuing in that obedience
and alleagance, which he did owe to God.
The second example of infidelitie was Adam,
who was by the deceit and perswasion
of Sathan, drawen away from trusting
in God and on his worde, to trust in the
^euill, and in that meanes of attaining happinesse
which he did shew vnto him. In Adam
all mankind fell from faith to infidelitie,
wherein it remaineth, all men being bred,
^orne, and brought vp, without any affiance in
God, relying themselues for their happinesse
onely on themselues, their owne wit, lear^ing,
beauty, strength, friendes, riches, nobil^tie,
yea on sinne, Sathan, and this present
world, and no more depending vpon God,
t^en if there were no God. For victorie

they trust in chariots, and horsemen; for
health, in the phisition; for life, in meate and
drinke; for riches, in their owne industrie, or
in their parents; for glory and honor, in vvorldly
preferments and dignities, not once vpon
any occasion acknovvledging God, or looking
vp to heauen.
This infidelitie or defiance of God, commeth
of vnbeliefe, which is the blindnesse
of the minde, or the ignorance of man, not
seeing the euident trueth of Gods promises;
but beeing perswaded that his worde is altogether
voyde of trueth, and that his promises
are nothing, but faire pretences, his
feareful threatnings, nothing but vaine skarcrowes,
terrifying and fraying none, but
religious fooles: and that the whole course
of the worlde is not ordered by his decrees,
will, and prouidence, but by nature,
chaunce, fortune* and the counsell o^
man. So we reade Ephe. 4. 18. The Gentiles
haue their vnderstanding darkned,Ephes. 4. 18. and
so are alienated or estraunged from God b^
the ignoraunce which is in their mindes
and 2. Tim. 3. 8. Men of corrupt mindes an^
reprobate as touching faith.^ Tim. 3. 8. Lastly this blindnesse
of minde, the companion and cause
of infidelitie commeth by our naturall corruption,
from the fall of Adam, for wheras

once the light of his minde was darkned
by the delusion of the Diuell, insomuch
that he thought euill to be good,
and the way leading to extreame misery,
to be the onely meanes of the greatest happinesse,
it could not be, but that his will, affections,
actions, and all the faculties
both of bodie and soule, shoulde be corrupted,
for that one of them doth followe
the disposition of an other, so that a corrupt
mind bringeth a peruerse will, and a
sinfull will and inordinate affections doe
darken the minde as hath bene alreadie
shewed.
Hereof it followeth that infidelitie doth
both separate a man form God, and also
depriue him of all the partes of holynesse,
yea insteed thereof filleth all the parts and
faculties of a mans soule and body, with
the corruption of sinne. For man renouncing
God, is wholly separated frome him,
neither can any longer receiue any blessing
from him: for euen as a subiect or tennant,
discliaming his king and Lorde, and
relying himselfe, vpon a newe master, euen
one who is a deadlie and professed
enimy to his first maister, doth incontinently
depriue himselfe of all those farmes,
landes, houses, prefermentes, and commodities

whatsoeuer, the which he did enioy
whilst he liued in alleagance to his
lorde; so the case standeth with man, when
as by infidelitie he falleth from God. For
then he looseth all manner of blessings, belonging
either to his happinesse, or to his
holynesse, yea it is impossible, that a man
shoulde either loue, feare, honor, or obey
God, from whome he looketh for neither
good nor euil, and therefore infidelitie is
to be accounted the roote of all euill.Heb. 3. 12. Heb.
3. 12. Take heed brethren least that there be
in any of you an euill heart of vnbeleefe to
depart away from the liuing God. Thus
much in generall of infidelity, the which
(as hath bene said of faith) is of two sorts:
Legall, and Euangelicall; legall infidelitie, is
to distrust Gods promises, propounding happinesse
to the inherent holinesse of the creature,
as did the wicked Angels who were
perswaded that they coulde not become
happy by continuing in holynesse: Likewise
Euangelicall infidelitie is to distrust Gods
promises, propounding happinesse to man relying
himselfe on the mercie of God in
Christ, as most of all the men in the worlde
haue alwaies done, do at this day, and will
do as long as the world endureth.



Sect. 3. Of the faith of the gospell, vsually
called iustifying fayth.
IT hath been declared, that the
renewed holynesse of a man regenerate
hath two parts, Subiection,
and Conformity. The
first kinde of renewed Subiection
being opposed to infidelity, is called, as
in the first state, by the name of faith. The
nature and force whereof, is to repaire
that breach which infidelity hath made betwixt
God and man, and to ioyne man to
God, in due subiection, as he was in his first
creatio^, so that it is as it were the ha^d, whereby
man being before separated from God,
doth lay holde on him, by beleeuing his promises,
and by putting all his trust and affiaunce
therein. But what bond can be imagined
so strong, as to be able to knitte God
and man (being nowe polluted with originall
and actuall sinne) together in any
manner of coniunction, being far more con^^ary
and repugnant, the one to the other, then
(...) fire to water, or light to darknesse, or any o^her
thing in the world? All which doe only in

qualitie fight one against another,Of iustifying faith. but sinne
is contrary to the very nature and essence
of God, and therefore although that affiance
in God which was in Adam, were renued
in vs, yet it woulde not serue to ioyne vs
to God, because we want that perfect holynesse,
without the which, no faith can
ioyne any creature to him. So that before
that faith can either ioyne vs to God, or be
any thing auailable for our saluation, it is
needefull that we shoulde haue perfect holynesse:
the which whosoeuer goeth about
to effect in himselfe, will finde it a thing altogether
impossible, and that in these respects.
First, because man in the very moment
of sinning doth make himselfe guilty
of eternall death, and so he being once
deade, cannot raise himselfe vp againe, or
make himselfe capable of holynesse, muchlesse
worke it, fully and perfectly in himselfe.
Secondly, if that this be attributed,
to the patience, and longe suffering of God,
that man is not straight way, as soone as he
sinneth, vtterly destroyed, and so consumed
to nought, by the anger of God, but
that he doth still exist in nature, and so
consequently is not altogether vncapable o^
holynesse. Yet it is impossible for him, either
to shake off that originall sinne, which

cleaueth inseperably to his nature, or yet
to fulfill the lawe of God, by actuall obedience,
both which are needfull for perfect
holynesse. Lastly if man coulde not onely
doe away his sinne already committed, but
also restore himselfe to his first integritie, yet
this woulde not serue for his eternall saluation,
because he were as like to fall away
againe, from GOD, as he was before.
So that before man can be ioyned againe
to God in hapinesse, he must do foure things,
whereof euery one is altogether impossible
to be performed, either by man himselfe,
or by any other creature. First he must by
sustayning eternall death, satisfie the iustice
of God for his sinne already committed,
the which if he doe (as he must doe
if God be iust, that is, if he be God) howe
can he euer liue, who must dy for euer? Secondly
he must wholly change his own nature,
create in himselfe a newe minde, harte,
will, and euen a new man, the which thing
belongeth to God onely. Thirdly he must
performe, absolute and perfect obedience,
to the lawe of God. And lastly he must
continew in the saide obedience for euer.
Howe then? is there no meanes of saluation
left for man? can there no way of performing

these impossibilities be inuented?
Let all the men in the worlde lay their
heades together, and consult of this weightie
matter: let them haue the wisdome of
Salomon, the counsell of Achitophel, the
naturall wit of Aristotle, the learning of
the greatest Philosophers, the diuining spirits
of the southsayres: what can they all say
to the first question? howe will they make
man to liue, who must dy for euer? they will
confesse that death and life cannot be together,
and therefore they must come to
this last refuge, that man shall not die in
his owne person, but get some other to dy
for him, and so satisfie Gods iustice. Well?
this is good paiment, if he who dyeth for
man be in nature and dignitie equiualent
to him: but where shall this mediatour be
founde? As touching man, euerie one
desireth to liue, and abhorreth death, yea no
man will dy for a iust man, much lesse for a
sinner. But yet perhaps some one wil find such
a friend, as will not refuse to dy eternally for
him. Will this serue the turne? no truely, except
he haue moe liues then one, because he
must first dy for his owne sinne, and what
then is left to discharge other mens debts?
But we may fly to some saint or holyman,
to S. Peter, S. Paule, S. Mary: whose righteousnesse
is so great, as that it wilbe a ransom both

to doe a way their owne sinne, and the sinne
of others also. But there is no merite or righteousnesse,
which can proceede from any of the
sons of Adam, no more then sweet water can
flowe from a corrupt fountaine, yea no
righteousnesse of any saint whosoeuer, will
serue for himselfe, or satisfie Gods iustice
for his owne sinne, but when he hath done
all that he can, he is an vnprofitable seruant,
and (for any helpe he can haue by his own
holynesse) in the same state of eternall death,
wherein others are: his greatest righteousnes,
comming in the name of merite, being in
the sight of God no better then a filthy
and defiled clout. So then there is no
meanes of mans saluation in man. Neither
can the oblation of brute beastes serue the
turn, or stand in the place of a reasonable creature,
for sinne is not purged by the bloud of
bulles and gotes. Heb. 10. 4.Heb. 10. 4 neither will
God accept a thousand rams as a sufficient ransome
for the sinne of mans soule.Mich. 6. 7. Mich. 6. 7. so
that we finding no succor in this worlde, are
constrained to fly to the holy Angels, and to
craue their helpe in this behalfe. But what
can be hoped for at their hands, whose righteousnes
be it neuer so greate, is no more,
then they doe owe to God for themselues,
being bounde to serue him with
their whole mind, hearte and the whole

strength and power of their nature. If it be
imagined that their death might deliuer vs
from death; we answere, first, that no man
can finde such fauour, in their sight, as that
they will suffer themselues to be accursed
for him, from the happy and glorious presence
of God, which they haue enioyed in
heauen, euer since the first creation thereof.
Secondly if that we shoulde suppose such
an impossible and inordinate loue in them,
yet the death of many angels, coulde
not satisfie Gods iustice for the sinne of mankinde,
but onely for the sins of some number,
much lesse performe all those things
which are needfull for the effecting of our
saluation and therefore euery one may say
of him selfe, O miserable man that I am,
whom no creature either in heauen or earth
can deliuer from sinne, and from the punishment
of eternall death due vnto it.
Seing therfore that no creature can satisfie
Gods iustice for the sin of man, it remaineth
that God shoulde either saue man without
takeing any satisfaction for his sinne, or else
himselfe be this mediator (for it hath already
bene declared, that God hath certainly
decreed the saluation of man) but both
these are impossible: for God can no more
saue man, without satisfaction made to his

iustice, then he can cease to be iust, or to be
God. Againe it is no lesse impossible for God
himselfe to make this satisfaction: for first,
sinne cannot be imputed to the godhead,
but onely to some nature which is capable of
sinne; but the diuine nature cannot any way
be made, or imagined the subiect of sin, no
more then the fire can be made the subiect
of extreame cold: secondly if this impossibilitie
were supposed, that God could some way
take the sinne of man vpon himselfe, yet he
could suffer no punishment for it; for his nature
is such that it can no way suffer, much
lesse sustain the punishment of eternall death
due vnto our sinne. What then can all the wit,
wisedome, pollicie, and inuention of man
say to this case, but onely acknowledge that
mankind is in a most wretched and miserable
case, quem ipsa salus seruare non potest: whom
God himselfe cannot saue?
But when man is brought to a bay and
euen at his wits ende, there the wisedome of
God doth most appeare, and that which seemeth
impossible to man, is possible with
God, who as he hath decreed mans saluation,
so he is able to bring it to passe, and that, not
by taking away his owne iustice and essence,
but by satisfying and establishing it: not by
polluting the Godhead with the sin of man,

but by purging man from sin, by the infinite
power of the Godhead, not by translating
sinne from man to God, but by making the
nature of man able to beare the own burden
by ioyning it to the nature of God: not impairing
his owne iustice, but punishing the
sinne of man more then it deserued, and yet
not consuming man in his wrath, but declaring
the endlesse riches of his mercy in sauing
him from death: that so all the praise,
glorie and thankesgiuing of our saluation
might redound to God, who is the beginner,
worker, and finis^^r, yea the very meanes of
it, and who as he did in the beginning, without
the helpe or meanes of any creature, create
man in perfect holinesse and happinesse;
so againe he himselfe, and that by himselfe,
doth restore him to perfect righteousnesse,
holinesse and eternall glory.
But it is needfull that we make a more
plaine declaration of this mysticall and wonderfull
doctrine, especially it being the most
happy and ioyfull doctrine, which euer sounded
in the eares, or was at any time vttered
by the tongue of man, the summe of it is this.
The onely meanes whereby God coulde restore
man to his first estate, was, that he himselfe
should take vnto his diuine nature the
nature of man, so that he might in that nature

take vpon him both the guilt, and also the punishme^t
of our sin. For this cause, the sonne of
God, euen God himself, did take vpon him
our nature, consisting of a body and a soule, indued
with al the naturall powers and faculties,
which are in man, yea subiect to all humane
infirmities, yet without sinne. This humane
nature, was begotten not by ma^, but by God,
it being formed and fashioned, not by the seed
of ma^, but by the power of the godhead, in the
wombe of the virgin Mary, (who was of the
linage of Dauid) of part of her substance, it
being first sanctified by the holy Ghost, from
the inherent corruption of sinne, and so this nature
being from the first moment of the conception,
vnited to the godhead, in one person
called Iesus the Sauiour of the worlde, the
promised Messias, or the annointed, or holy
one of God, and consisting of the diuine,
and a humane nature, was brought foorth into
the world, in Bethlem in the land of Iury,
according as the prophets had foretold, in
the raigne of Augustus Caesar, and so liued
about 33. yeares, till that in the daies of
Tiberius Caesar it suffered a shamefull and violent
death; the which death of this humane
nature, was more then a sufficient ransome,
for the sinnes of the whole worlde,
because it was the death of God (tho not

of the Godhead) and therefore it was of
infinite merite and dignity; yea it was more
then the eternall death of all the men in the
world, although it had lasted but one moment
of time, as it continued but three
daies. For it is, and that in the iudgement of
any reasonable man; a farre lesse matter,
that all the creatures in the world should die
for euer, then that God himselfe the creator
of all things, the Lord of glory and giuer
of life, yea who is glory and life it selfe, should
suffer death one minute of an houer. So that
the humanity of Christ, gaue the possibility of
suffering death, as the diuinitie gaue the sufficiency,
excellency, and merite of this ransome
or paiment made to God, for the debt of man.
This incomprehensible mysterie of Gods
wisedome, and eternall counsell, may be declared
after this manner. Suppose that there
is in this, or that countrey, an absolute, maiesticall
and glorious monarch or king,
against whome many thousands of his subiectes
rebell, refusing to performe loyall obedience
to his lawes. The King seeing this
rebellion, purposeth so to deale in reuenging
it, as that not onely his iustice, but
also, and especially his mercy and loue towards
his naturall subiectes, may appeare:
and therefore he meaneth to punishe their

offence in himselfe, by putting to death his
owne onely sonne, who is of his owne
nature and essence, euen bone of his bone,
flesh of his flesh, and bloud of his bloud,
who is a liuely picture, yea a liuing image of
his owne person, representing after a most
plaine manner his stature, forme, beauty,
strength, complexion, behauiour and conditions,
yea who doth raigne ioyntly and equally
with him, being partaker of his riches
treasures, glory, maiesty, power, office and
authority. This death of this prince being
decreed by the king his father, it is needfull,
that for the suffering of the course of the law,
together with the sentence and punishment
of death, he should debase him to the condition
of a subiect, yet retaining the aforesaid
prerogatiues. So that there is in one person
the condition, and as it were the nature both
of a king and of a subiect, the one maketh that
he may be put to death, the other maketh,
that this death (tho it be the death, but of
one person) is more then a sufficient ransom,
for the offence of ten thousand of his subiectes,
as the people of Israell doe confesse,
2. Sam. 21. 17.2. Sam. 21. ^^ That it were much better
that ten thousand of themselues should perish,
then that King Dauid whome they call the
light, that is, all the glory of Israell, shoulde

be in danger of death.
In like manner there was no way, whereby
God the glorious monarch of heauen
and earth, could preserue both his owne
iustice and man, but that he should giue his
owne onely naturall and eternall sonne, the
brightnesse of his glory, the expresse forme
and charecter of his Godhead, beeing partaker
of his owne essence, glory, maiestie,
power, authority, wisedome, iustice, mercy,
and in breife of his whole diuine nature, to
be a ransome for the sinne of man. For the
which purpose it was needful, that he should
to his kingly and diuine estate, take vnto himselfe
the base condition of a subiect, and creature*
and in that condition submit himselfe
to the law of God* and to the sentence of
death pronounced by God the father, as by
a most iust, seuere and righteous iudge. By
faith in this death of the sonne of God, saluation
is brought to mankind. For it freeth
the beleeuer from all manner of guilt of sin,
whether original or actual, whether past, present,
or to come. And further as this mediator
doth redeeme vs from death, and indue
vs with perfect righteousnesse by his death,
so by the vertue of the holy spirit, proceeding
from his diuine nature; the beleeuer is endued
(although not at the first) with perfect

holinesse and preserued for euer from falling
from this estate. Thus wee haue
summarily declared the doctrine of fayth,
as it hath beene published to the worlde,
by the ministery of the Apostles, whose
doctrine we doe hartely embrace, and
openly confesse, professing that there is
no other name, meanes, nor mediatour in
heauen or earth, which can giue saluation,
then Iesus the sonne of Mary.
Now that we see what is the obiect of this
iustifying fayth, we are in the next place to
gather out of this doctrine the difference betwixt
legall and euangelicall fayth, betwixt
that fayth wherewith Adam was indued,
in the state of innocencie, and that which hath
place in this state of regeneration. Both
kindes are affiance in god for happinesse to
be had by the meanes of perfect holynesse,
but the first kynde looketh directly on the
godheade, without any mediation; the second
beholdeth the godheade, through the
humanitie of Christ, as through a vaile or
couering: for man being now polluted with
sinne, dare not looke on god without a mediatour,
as he did before the fall. Secondly
euangelicall fayth co^teineth in it forgiuenes
of sin, which was not in the first estate. Thirdly
the righteousnesse whereby legall fayth

trusteth for happinesse is naturall to man, inherent
in the person of man, and his owne;
but the righteousnesse of the other kynde is
borrowed from an other. The first kinde
maketh man trust in himselfe, but the seco^d
maketh him to renounce him selfe and to fly
to Christ for righteousnesse. The first kinde
relyeth it selfe on the equity and iustice of
god, the which rewardeth the righteousnesse
of the creature with life. But the other flyeth
to his loue and mercy in Christ, the which
pardoneth and saueth a sinner.(...). 4. 5. Rom. 4. 5. Legall
fayth cannot of it selfe iustify a man, it
being but one part of mans holynesse, called
by the diuines Sanctitas Fiduciae, that is, the
holynesse of the affectio^ of trust, or co^fide^ce,
or a holy confidence, besides the which
there is required for perfect holynesse, the
holynesse of hope, of loue, of feare, of reuerence,
and of all the affections, yea the
holynesse of the will, and of the mynde, and
to be shorte, the holynesse of the wholle nature,
and of all the actions of man: so that if
we should suppose, that Adam did euen
in the very moment of sinning, and also after
he had transgressed gods commaundement
still retaine this part of his holinesse, to wit,
affiance in god, yet we coulde not thinke
that he did continue in the state of life, which

is lost by one sinne; but not kept by one part
of holynesse. But it is farre otherwise with
this euangelical fayth, the which, although in
the owne nature it be but the holynesse of
one affection, namelie of confidence or
affiance, as legall fayth is, yet it bringeth
with it perfect righteousnesse or iustice*
making the righteousnes of Christes death
to belong to the beleeuer. In the which
respect it is called iustifying fayth, not that
^his fayth can be without some measure of
^he other parts of holynesse, or giue the
possession of eternall glory without perfect
^olynesse, but that in the matter of our iu^^ification
onely faith hath force, in so much
^hat he who beleeueth in the last moment
^f his life, as the theefe on the crosse did, Luc.
^3. 42.Luc. 23. 42. hauing neither time to doe any one
^ood worke, nor yet strength to speake one
^ood worde, or yet almost to thinke a good
^ought, is as surely and as fully purged
^^om all his sinnes, as he who hath liued a
^ousand yeares in the greatest measure
fayth, godlynesse, zeale, loue, patience, so^ietie,
chastitie, humilitie, and of all other
^^rituall graces whereunto any man can at^^ne
in this life. For inherent holynesse (com^only
called sanctification) be it neuer so
^at, is imperfect, and therefore as little auailable

for our iustification, as if it were none
at all. For imperfect holines doth no more iustify,
then no holinesse doth, neither is there
any other account made of it before the
iudgment seat of God, in the matter of our
iustification, howsoeuer there be necessary
vse of sanctification for saluation, as we
are hereafter to consider. And yet although
this one part of mans holynesse doe serue
for our iustification, we are not thereof to gather
that we are saued by it, as a parte of
inherent holynesse, for faith doth not iustifie
vs, as it is a parte of holynesse, but because
this affection hath (by the goodnesse
of God, decreeing mans saluation by this
meanes) this naturall propertie or qualitie,
to appropriate to a man Christ with his
righteousnesse. Lastly the first kind is easie
to be had, and attained vnto by supposition
of perfect inherent holynesse, it being agreeable
to naturall reason, yea there being
some reliques of it in the gentils themselues
who know good and euil, and also that the punishme^t
of death, is due to the one, and the re^ward
of happines appointed for the other. B^
Euangelicall fayth is supernaturall, yea it
contrarie to our naturall disposition, and c^^
not be attained vnto without the mighty ^^peration
of the spirite of God, whereof her^^after.

This wholle doctrine may be gathered
into one summe or definition in this manner:
Euangelicall fayth is affiaunce in Gods
promises propounding eternall saluation
to all those who rely themselues wholly on
the mercy of God in Christ. Or more briefly
thus; It is affiaunce in Christ for happines.
Or thus; It is trust or confidence in Christ,
whereby his death and the righteousnesse
arising thereof are appropriated to the beleeuer.
Nowe we are out of the seuerall
parts of these definitions to search out more
particularly the true nature of faith, to what
kynd or head it is to be referred, whether it
be a part of regeneration and sanctification,
or something diuerse from both these. Secondlie
what is the place and subiect of it,
whether the minde, the wil, or the affections.
Thirdly by what meanes it may be wrought
and attained. Fourthly by what signes and
markes it may be knowen. Fiftly whether
it may be lost or no. Lastly howe it hath this
force, that it is of it selfe able to iustifie
and to saue a man.
For the first; Regeneration* and sanctification,
or the newe creature or recreated
holynesse: or thus; The newe man and holynesse,
signifie all one thing, to wit, regenerate

sanctitie, or in plaine English, renewed
holynesse, so that faith, if it be a part of
the newe man, it is a part of regeneration, and
of holynesse; and contrariwise, if it be a part
of mans holinesse, it is a part of regeneration,
of the newe man and of the newe creature.
That it is a part of mans holynesse we
cannot doubt, seeing it is a holy affection,
euen the affiaunce and confidence of the
heart, relying it selfe on God: the which
affection was also in Adam, and therefore
it is a part of regeneration, and of the newe
man. For although there be great difference
betwixt legal and euangelical faith as touching
the meanes of saluation, the which is in
the one the iustice of God, in the other his
mercy, yet both of them are to be referred
to the same heade of mans holynesse. Legall
faith being a part of the created holynesse
of man, as Euangelicall faith is a part
of his regenerated, or recreated holynesse.
The truth hereof may easely be gathered,
out of the section written of faith in generall:
for Legall and Euangelicall faith agree in a
common definition, and in all those points
which are there mentioned. The which
doth also shew vs what to thinke of the subiect
of faith, to wit, that it is in the will of man*
being nothing but a holy affection of confidence,

trust or affiaunce.
If it be obiected that faith is vsually in the
scripture called beleefe, as infidelity is vnbeleife,
the which is an action not of the will
but of the minde, giuing assent or dissent
to the worde of God: we answere, that beleife
is put for faith or affiaunce, because it
doth alwayes not onely accompany it, but
also after a sorte beget it, and is the cause
of it. For when as a man doth without doubting
beleeue Gods promises being fully perswaded
of the trueth of them, he cannot
choose, but rely himselfe vpon them; so that
beleife although it cannot be separated from
faith, yet it may and ought to be distinguished
from it. If it be obiected that Euangelicall
fayth, cannot be made a parte of
mans holynesse, seeing it is not commaunded
in the morall law; we answere that it is commaunded
in the morall law, as the other kind
is, in that it is all one in substance with naturall
faith, both kindes being affiaunce in
God for happinesse to be attained by the
meanes of perfect holynesse: and therefore
both kindes are commanded in the first co^maundement.
Iehoua, shall be thy God: the
which law doth enioyne, that all the affections
of man, to wit, his loue, feare, hope, reuerence
and with the rest, his whole affiaunce

or confidence be set whollie o^
God, as well after his fall to be saued by the
mercy of God in Christ, as in the state of
innocencie to be saued by his owne righteousnesse.
Yea this first precept commaundeth
al men to beleeue God in his word, as wel
in his Gospell as in his lawe: and therefore
whosoeuer doth not knowe, beleeue and imbrace
the Gospell, he doth transgresse this
first commandement.
In the third place we are to co^sider that the
meanes of attaining faith, is to get the knowledge
of the worde of God, first of the lawe,
which shewing sinne, death and damnation,
doth bruse and wound the harte: and secondly
of the gospell, which teaching faith,
righteousnesse and saluation, healeth the aforesaide
woundes, and comforteth the sinner,
with pardon of his sinne, and hope of eternall
life. This knowledge must of necessitie
goe before faith: for the minde of a man
must be inlightned to see the trueth, before
the hart and affections can loue and embrace
it. The meanes which God doth ordinarilie
vse in bringing men to knowe his
wil, is the publick ministery of the word, performed
by men indued with spirituall gifts
fit for this purpose, yet as hath bene said of
regeneration, so we are to thinke of faith, and

all other spirituall graces, that they come
not by vertue of the meanes, but by the
power and worke of Gods spirit, without
the which it is impossible that any man
shoulde vnderstand, beleeue and imbrace
the doctrine of the Gospell. But howe
commeth it to passe that man being a
reasonable creature, indued with an vnderstanding
soule, whereby he is able not onely
to conceiue any thing that is taught, but also
him selfe to inuent new things not heard of
before, shoulde be so brutishe and blockish
in learning the worde of God? We answere
that this commeth of the nature of the doctrine
of the gospell, the which being contrary
to mans reason, cannot be conceaued
by it. Yea as soone as it is hard, it is straight
way reiected as absurde,1 Cor. 2. 14* ridiculous and
foolishe, so we reade 1. Cor. 2. 14. The naturall
man perceiueth not the things of GOD,
for they seeme foolishnesse vnto him, neither
can he perceiue them, because they are spiritually
discerned.
Thus (to make instance in one point of this
doctrine, to wit, in the resurrection from
death) we see, Act. 17. 32. that when the
wise philosophers and men of Athens harde
Paul mention it,Act. 17. 32* they mocked him. And
so we are to thinke of the cheife pointes of

(...) religion. For who seeing or hearing
of Iesus the sonne of Mary. liuing in so
miserable a condition, and dying so shamefull
a death as he did, would either beleeue
him to be the eternall, and omnipotent God
of heauen and earth, or to be able to saue
others, who did not saue himselfe from
death? or what man, especially if he were
indued with naturall witte, and humane
wisdom, would forsake all the commodities,
profites, pleasures, and ioyes of this present
world, and indure the sorrowes, reproches,
troubles, losses, dangers, and manyfolde crosses
whereunto the godly are subiect in this
life, in hope of an other life, which is to all reason
not onely vncertaine, but also incredible?
Hence it is, that the number of beleeuers is
as nothing, in respect of the infinite multitudes
of vnbeleeuers, who are almost as many
as there are men in the world, and that
the more a naturall man, doth excell in wit
and wisdome, the more vncapable of faith
he is.(...) 1. 27. 1. Cor. 1. 27. Brethren (saith the Apostle)
beholde your calling, that not many
wise men after the fleshe, not many noble,
mightie or riche, are called to fayth, but God
hath chosen foolish and weake things to confounde
the wise.
Yea this difficultie of beleeuing is greater

in these last dayes, then euer it was before,
as Christ himselfe teacheth vs, Luc. 18. 8.
saying,Luke. 18, 8* Thinke ye that the sonne of man when
he commeth,Mat. 24. 12. ^ shall finde fayth on the earth?
And to the same effect, Mat. 24. 12. 22. Because
iniquitie shall abound, the loue of many
shall wax colde, insomuch that vnlesse those
dayes were shortned, no fleshe should be saued.
The cause of this defect of fayth, is first
the aboundance of sinne before mentioned,
in that the sinnes of all ages, doe euen flow
together into the last, as into a common
sinke. Secondly the state of the Church,
vnto the which God doth not reueale himselfe
so manifestly and sensibly as he did in
the first ages of the world, in apparitions of
Angels in visions and dreames, invisible
formes, and sensible voyces, speaking familiarly
with his seruants as one man doth with
another, in holy oracles giuing answere to
euery question propounded, in temporall
blessings bestowed on the faithfull, and in
corporall punishments laid on the wicked*
in the extraordinary giftes of prophecy, and
immediate reuelation, of speaking straunge
languages, and working miraculous things.
By these and diuerse other meanes, God did
so plainely reueale himselfe to the old world,
that they who did not beleeue his word, may

be said to haue bene such, as would giue no
credence to their own senses. But in these last
ages, God hauing once reuealed himselfe in
his sonne and in the gospell, sufficiently for the
saluation of the elect, (yea in trueth farre
more clearely then euer he did before) doth
not any longer reueale himself by any of the
aforesaid meanes, but as it were hideth himselfe
in secrete, insomuch that he seemeth to
most men, eyther not to exist at all, or
else to haue wholly cast off the care and gouernment
of the world: and therefore men
cast off all faith, beleife and feare of God.
In regard of the which difficulties, it standeth
euery one in hand who tendereth his
owne saluation, to be both watchfull in preseruing
faith, and also diligent and carefull
in seeking for it. For howsoeuer no carefulnesse
can without the blessing of God, work
faith in the hartes of men, yet it is in the
power of man to vse the outward meanes of
attaining it; the which whosoeuer doth as
he ought to doe, he neede not doubt of successe,
for so much as God is neere at hand
to al those who seeke him. Yea further, whenas
we suppose, that we are indued with a
true sauing faith, we are to take heede least
we be deceaued with that common errour
of men, who when they are ignorant of

God, and of his word, and haue in their harts
scarse any shadowe of true faith, yet they are
not ashamed to professe that they doe, and
alwaies did trust in Christ, whereof if anie
man doe doubt, and beginne to examine
their faith whether it be true or counterfait,
then they are grieuously offended, and thinke
they haue great iniury offred. But we are to
thinke farre otherwise, and knowing that true
faith is a very rare thing, not easelie to flatter
our selues in a false opinion of it, but rather
to take a straite examination of our faith, the
which that we may the better doe, we will
now come to the fourth point, namely to
the signes whereby true faith may be discerned.
The signes are (...), euen so many as
there are in a regenerate man spiritual graces
and seuerall partes of holinesse, all which
come from faith as from a fountaine or roote,
and therefore will certainely declare the sincerity
of it, as good fruite and sweete water
shewe the goodnesse of the tree and
fountaine: and therefore he that would know
^ow vnfained his faith is, must looke at the
sincerity of his knowledge, loue, feare, re^erence,
and obedience which he oweth to
God: if these graces be plentifull in his life,
his heart is truely replenished with faith, but

if this fruit doe not appeare, his faith is not a
liuing tree planted by the riuers of Gods
blessings, but a dead stocke hauing nothing
but the outward forme of a tree But we shall
haue better occasion to entreate of the
signes of true faith, when we compare it,
with that temporary faith, which often hath
place in the reprobate.
The fift question, is, whether this faith
may be lost, or no; whereunto we answere,
as hath beene said before of regeneration in
generall, that where it is once truely imprinted
in the heart, by the finger of God, there
it remaineth for euer: and although it be subiect
to many alteratio^s in regard of the greatnesse
or meannesse of it, yea although it
seem somtimes to be cleane dead at the root,
bringing foorth little or no fruit, yet there remaineth
life hidden in the heart, as there doth
life and sap in trees in the middest of winter,
when they seeme to be dead and withered.
For the conuersion of a ma^ from infidelity to
faith, worketh such a total and strange change
in him, that it is impossible, that one should
become of a faithfull man an vnbeleeuer.
The last question is, how it commeth to
passe, that of all the spirituall graces, which
are in the mind, will, and affections of man
and of all the partes of mans holinesse, this

onely should haue in it this wonderful vertue
and force to apprehend Christ, and to make a
man perfectly iust before the iudgement seat
of Christ: and why not the true knowledge
of God, vnfained loue, the feare of God, or
a generall holinesse of life and conuersation,
should not as well iustify a man, as this one
affection of confidence or affiance? Whereunto
we answere, that this meanes of iustifying
men by faith onely, doth most of all
make for the glory of God (the which is the
last end of al the decrees and actions of God)
for if man were accounted righteous for
his holinesse or loue, he might impute his
saluation to his owne desert: for perfect
loue deserueth loue, and holinesse will chalenge
life, as of due debt. But affiance implieth
a humble, loyall, and duetifull subiection,
acknowledging the vnworthines, basenesse,
insufficiency, and weakenesse of man,
and together the mercy, goodnesse, loue, fauour,
bounty, trueth, and power of God.
This reason is vsed for this purpose,Rom. 3. 27. Ro. 3. 27.
what law, or meanes of saluation doth take
away all boasting from man, and so giueth
all the glory of our saluation to God? not
the law of workes, or inherent holinesse, but
the law of faith: yea of all the graces which
are in man, faith onely hath in it this naturall

property to make a man partaker of Christes
death and righteousnes, and so of saluation.
For euen as a tennant inioyeth his house and
landes, not for that he loueth or feareth his
lord, or for any vertue wherwith he is indued,
but only because he doth depe^d on his Lord,
and so doth purchase vnto him worship and
honour by relying himselfe wholly vpon his
loue, fauor, liberality, constancy, ability, and riches:
so standeth the case with man in respect
of his saluation. For no grace saue
onely this affiance on God, and on his mercy
in Christ, can conuey vnto vs remission
of sinnes and eternall life. In the which respect
it is commonly said in holy scripture
that faith doth iustifie, not as it is a parte of
mans holinesse, whereof no one part, no not
all the partes of it if any one be wanting, will
serue to make a man righteous before God,
but as it hath in it this proper vertue, to make
the death of Christ, the death of the beleeuer,
and so the righteousnes arising of the said
death the righteousnes of the beleuer:Rom. 6. 7. For he
that hath suffered death is iustisied from sin.
Thus much of the obiect, nature, and attributes
of euangelical faith. It remaineth that
before we proceed to the rest of the partes
of mans holines, we should declare the relatio^
which is betwixt faith and them. It hath bene

said of faith in general, that it is as it were the
root fro^ the which other graces do spring, in
that it tieth vs to God the fountain of al graces,
as to the only giuer of all happines: the
which thing is true of this euangelicall faith
after a special manner. For in that it ioineth vs
to Christ, it maketh vs partakers of the spirit
of Christ: or rather causeth an increase of all
spirituall graces. For regeneratio^ is, although
not in time, yet in nature before faith. Therefore
this faith is made the subiect of the spirituall
life of the new man,Gal. 2. 20. euen as the hart is
in the body the fountaine of heat. Gal. 2. 20. I
liue, yet not I but Christ liueth in me, and in that
I now liue in the flesh, I liue by the faith of the
sonne of God, who hath loued me, and giuen
his life for me. And Act. 15. 9. Peter saith
that God did purifie the hartes of the gentils,Act. 15. 9.
that is, as it is expounded. verse 8. worke
sanctification in them by faith. In the which
respect, it is compared to the foundation
of a house, where vpon the whole buylding
standeth: and to the roote of a tree,
which giueth heate, sappe, and life to all
the partes of it,Col. 1. 2^* Coll. 1. 23. If ye continue
founded and established in fayth: and to a
fountaine of liuing water.Iob. 7. 38. Ioh. 7. 38. He
that beleeueth in me, out of his bellie shall flow
riuers of the water of life. And therfore it is put

before all other graces 2. Pet. 1. 5. Ioyne to
your fayth vertue, and to your vertue knowledge,
temperance,Pet. 1. 5. patience, godlynes, brotherly loue
and kyndnes. Hence it is that it is vsually distinguished
from the rest of the partes of
sanctification they being called by the name
of loue,Thess. 3. 6. or of the holy ghost. 1 T^ess. 3. 6.
Tymothie hath brought vs tydinges of your
fayth and loue.Act 6. 5 So it is saide, Act. 6. 5. That
Stephen was a man full of fayth and of the
holy spirit; not that faith it selfe is not a worke
of the holy spirite, and a parte of the spirituall
holynesse of man, but because it is
the first worke of Gods spirite, and the
foundation of mans holinesse and saluation,
who must be by fayth freed from sinne and
death, before he can be endued with positiue
holynesse and life. Thus the Apostle
doth often exhorte vs to fanctification and
holynesse of life, by an argument drawen
from iustification which is the proper effect
of faith,Rom. 6. 14. as we may see. Ro. 6. 14. sinne
shall not haue dominion ouer you, because
you are not vnder the lawe but vnder grace.
But it may be asked, how iustification
doth bring foorth sanctification, especially
seing that to mans reason, it is rather a motiue
to a wicked and dissolute life, that by
the multitude and hainousnesse of our sinnes

the mercy of God, whereby they are pardoned,
might the more appeare.Rom. 3. 7. and 6* 1. Rom. 3. 7.
and 6. 1. We answere that iustification doth
of necessitie bring foorth sanctification, and
that diuers wayes. For first, the sense of
the vnspeakeable loue of God, whereby
we are deliuered from eternall damnation,
doth inflame the hart of the beleeuers with
a greate loue of God: the which cannot be
shewed any other way, then by keepeing
his commaundementes, and by laboring to
glorifie his holy name, by a holy life. Secondly
God doth saue the faythfull, not as
stockes or stones, without requiring anie
worke, action, or duety at their handes,
but so as that he maketh them to be his fellow
workers: not that man can do any thing
of him selfe without the grace of God,
but that man being endued and renewed
by grace, doth after a sort worke his owne
saluation, not by any naturall vertue, but
by the power of Gods spirite: and therefore,
as Christ taketh away the guilte of
sinne being committed, so the faythful ought
to endeuor that sin be not co^mited. Otherwise
if they shoulde still of set purpose
committe sin they should crosse Christ in the
worke of their owne redemption, defiling the^
selues with sin, whom he hath clensed with his

bloud, yea they should crucifie him againe,
and treade vnder foote his bloude as a vile
thing. Thirdly the faithfull doe labour for
sanctification, as for the onely testimony of
the soundnesse of their fayth, and of the
truthe of their iustification. For fayth without
the other partes of holynesse, is but adeade
and vnprofitable fayth. Lastly the
faythfull man knoweth that fayth is not of
it selfe without the rest of sanctification,
sufficient for the attaining of saluation.
For although it alone dothfully iustify, that
is, bring perfect remission of all manner
of sinne whatsoeuer; yet before that a man
can enter into the kingdome of heauen.
he must be endued with perfect positiue
holinesse, the which cannot be made perfect
in the worlde to come, vnlesse it be
begun and carefullie sought after in this
lyfe.



CHAP. V.

Sect. 1. Of the hope of mans first state.
THe second head of mans
holinesse, and subiection
which he is to performe
to God, as to his king, is
called hope, the which
floweth from fayth after

a speciall manner,Of the hope of mans first state. yea in truth it is nothing
else but a particular fayth, or an affiaunce
on God for some particular good. For
when as the happines whereof faith taketh
hold, is not present but to come either in
part or in whole, there commeth out hope,
which is an expectatio^ of the accomplishme^t
of Gods promises already apprehended by
fayth.Rom. 8. 24. So that hope can haue no place there,
where ful and perfect happines is present. Rom. 8.
24. Hope that is seene is no hope: For howe
can a man hope for that which he seeth? That
is, if the thing hoped, or which we desire,
be present, then the nature of hope is cleane
taken away and ouerthrowen: for it is impossible
that a man shoulde hope for that,
as being to come hereafter which he presently
enioyeth. Whereby it appeareth that man
in his first estate of happinesse, had either
none or little vse of this grace, because his
happinesse was present. For howsoeuer the
happinesse of Adam in his innocency, were
not so great and excellent, as that whereof
the faithfull shalbe made partakers in the
world to come, yet he then enioyed both
perfect and present happinesse. Neither doth
it appeare in the scripture that God did promise
any other happinesse vnto him, then
that which he presently enioyed; and therefore

it had not bene holynesse, but presumption
and sinne for him to haue hoped or
looked for any other. Howe then can we
make hope a part of that holynesse wherein
man was created. We answere that although
Adam in his innocency looked for no other
happinesse, then that which he did presentlie
enioy, yet he did hope that God would
both continue that happinesse, and also reueale
himselfe and his glory to him, after
some other manner, then he did at the first,
and so encrease his present happinesse.


Sect. 2. Of desperation or the want
of Hope.
MAn falling from faith to infidelitie,
fell from hope to desperation
(for so we call that want
of the hope of saluation which
is in all carnall men) neither
could he otherwise doe. For as he who taketh
away the roote and the foundation, taketh
away the tree and the house, yea all that
groweth on the one, and is built on the other:
So when fayth falleth, the whole
holynesse of man falleth to the ground; but
especially hope, the which hath a nearer
coniunction with faith, then other graces,

haue,Of desperation. and is more naturallie grounded vpon
it: as it is saide, Heb. 11. 1.Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the
groundeworke, or foundation and subsistence of
things hoped for. For happinesse must first
be beleeued in the minde, and apprehended
by the will, before it can be hoped for. So
that seeing man since the fall, doth not by
faith depend on God, he can not hope to
receiue any good thing at his handes: neither
doth he once thinke of any other happines,
then is the enioying of the carnall and sensuall
pleasures of this present worlde. The
which being ended by death, all the ioy,
pleasure, and happynesse of one vnregenerate,
seemeth to him to be at an end, as it is
indeed. For either he thinketh (as most
carnall men do) that he shall die like a beast,
and that neither he himselfe nor any other,
shalbe raised vp againe to life, to receaue
either good or euill, or if he haue some knowledge
and beliefe of the word of God, wherby
he thinketh that there shalbe another
worlde, wherein some shall haue happines,
others miserie and sorrow, yet he being destitute
of fayth, whereby his sinnes shoulde
be remitted, and his person indued with perfect
holynesse and righteousnesse, can looke
for nothing, but the eternall anger of God.
Thus the Apostle describeth an infidell, that

he is one without hope. Ephe. 2. 12. 1.Eph. 2. 12. Thess.
4. 13.Thess. 4. 13.
The signes whereby this desperation may
be knowen, are these. First the generall
signe of the want of any one grace, to wit,
the want of other graces, which are in a
man truly regenerate. For such is the nature
of this renewed holynesse, that where one
parte is present, there is no parte wholly
wanting: and therfore we may know ourselues
to be without hope, if that we feele that we
are destitute of the true knowledge of God,
of a liuely faith which is the mother of hope.
Secondly a proper signe of this desperation
is, when as a man is not affected with an vnspeakable
ioy in regard of the life to come
but heareth it mentioned as an ordinarie,
common, and light matter: whereas if he
had any true hope of eternall glorie, he
would be replenished and euen rauished
with ioy; and that in the middest of all troubles
and miseries by the consideration of it.
But because a man may more surely iudge,
by that which he feeleth to be in himselfe,
then by that which is wanting, therefore
men are to gather this desperation by these
notes, to wit: By an immoderate care for
the preseruing, and prolonging of this present
life, together with an excessiue feare

of death in our selues, or sorrow for the
death of others, 1 Thess. 4. 13.1 Thess. 4. 13. I would not
haue you sorrow for the dead, as other doe
which haue no hope. And such other notes
plentifully mentioned in the scripture.


Sect. 3. Of renued hope.
THe vse of this hope is not so little
in the state of innocency, but it is
as great in the state of regeneration,
in the which although man be restored
to his former happinesse, yea to more
excellent happinesse then he had before,
yet it is not present in this world as Adams
was, but for the greater part to come in
the world to come, and therefore it can
not be here enioyed, but onely hoped
for. If it be asked why God doth not grant
to his elect children the present fruition of
that happinesse, especially seing that the
deferring of so great a good, cannot but
be very grieuous vnto them: for as the desire
when it commeth is a tree of life, so
the deferring of the thing hoped for, is the drying
of the bones. Prou. 13. 12.Prou. 13* 12. To this we answere,
confessing that this deferring of the
happinesse appointed for the faithfull is,
and ought to be very grieuous vnto them.

For as he who is poore,Of renewed hope. sicke, weake, in
prison, exile, and in all kindes of miserie hath
good cause to desire riches, honour, health,
strength, liberty, and to see his own natiue cou^trie,
his parentes, kinred, and friends, and
in breife to be happie: no lesse cause haue
the faithfull to desire to be dissolued, and
to be with Christ. But God hauing regard,
rather to their good then to their desire,
hath in wisdome appointed that it should be
otherwise, and that their happinesse shoulde be
hoped for, for some space of time, before it
be enioyned. Yea this delay is needful for the
good of the faithfull for that otherwise they
could not be prepared and made fit for the enioying
of eternall glory. And that in these
respects.
First in that the faithfull are left for a
while in crosses, troubles, sorrow, sinne, and
all manner of misery, they haue time giuen
vnto them to consider, both their owne
naturall estate howe wretched they are of
themselues; and also the excellencie of that
glory, which is prepared for them in heauen,
and so see and acknowledge the vnspeakable
goodnesse of God, who hath
freed them from the one, and will at the
appointed time, bring them to the other.
The which thing cannot be so duelie waied

and considered by man, when he is in the
state eyther of extreeme misery, or of absolute
glory, as it is by the faithfull in this present
life, the which is a mixt state consisting
partly of sinne and misery, and partly of holinesse
and happinesse, partly of life, and
partly of death: so that as a man cannot at
any time so well di^cerne a thing to be black
or crooked, as when he layeth it beside that
which is white or straight; so the faithfull
doe more easely and truely conceiue their
owne misery and Gods mercy in this life,
wherein they doe sensibly feele them both,
then eyther they did before regeneration, in
which time they knew neither themselues
nor God, or then they shall doe in the world
to come, wherein their naturall misery is
not felt in their owne bodies and soules, as it
is in this life, but onely remembred and beheld
in the reprobate. Wherein God dealeth
with sinfull man, as earthly kings deale
sometimes with rebels and malefactors, whom
although they purpose not onely to pardon
their offence, but also to receiue into fauour
and loue, and so doe restore them from death
to life, from shame to honour, yet they doe
not at the first admit them into the highest
degree of their fauour, to their secret counsell,
or to their personall presence. Thus

did King Dauid deale with Absolon, 2. Sam.
14. 22.^ Sam. 14. 22. who after that he was pardoned, and
receiued into fauour, was two yeares in Ierusale^
before that he saw the kings face. And
thus doe the faithfull, after that they are fully
iustifyed from the guilt of their sinne, they
doe not forthwith rush into heauen, but remaine
heere on earth, in the outward court
of Gods palace, waiting till they may be admitted
into the glorious presence of God in
heauen. For we are not to thinke, that there
ought to be the same manner of the first creation
of man, and of his regeneration: and that as
in the first, so also in the second birth man
ought incontinently as soone as he doth existe,
to be made perfectly happy, as if happinesse
were a small and light matter, which
might be lost in one moment of an houre,
and recouered in another. And therefore we
are to put a difference betwixt the first and
the second happinesse of man: the first
beeing giuen immediately by God, whereas
the other is gotten, although not by the
helpe, yet by the meanes of man; who
is in some sort to worke his owne saluation,
and must be endued in this life with some
measure of grace, whereby hee may
be prepared for the fulnesse of it in the
worlde to come: the which thing cannot

be done, vnlesse his saluation be deferred:
for otherwise there woulde be no triall of
his faith and loue, yea no vse of hope, patience,
praier and such other spirituall graces,
for the working whereof God doth
defer the happinesse of his elect. This the
Apostle doth plainely teach vs, Rom. 8. 24.
25. 26.Rom. 8. 24. 25 26. saying, If the thing hoped for be seene,
hope is no hope, for how can a man hope for that
he seeth? but if we hope for that we see
not, then we doe with patience abide for it.
Likewise (our hope being thus deferred) the
spirit helpeth our infirmities in praying for vs,
with sighes which cannot be expressed. Thus we
see how it commeth to passe, that hope
hath so necessary and great vse in this third
estate.
Now we are to declare the nature of it
more particularly, by shewing first what
it is: secondly what relation it hath to faith:
thirdly what are the vses and commodities
which it bringeth: lastly what are the
signes, by the which it may be knowen. For
the first: Renewed hope is an expectation
of celestiall glory or of eternall glory in heauen.
This definition giueth vs to vnderstand
that the obiect whereat this holy affection
aimeth and looketh, is not present but to
come, and yet not any future thing, but

that which is good, for not onely hope, but
all other affections, and the whole will of
man, yea euen when they are sanctified,
and in their purest and holiest estate, doe
abhorre and eschew all euill, whether present
or future, and doe cleaue onely to that
which is good for man. And yet not any
future good is the obiect of this hope, but
the chiefest good, which indeed is all manner
of good, and euen happinesse it selfe.
For so we are to thinke that as faith trusteth
in God for happinesse, so hope waiteth
for it. And although both faith and hope
sometimes take hold of a particular good,
as Abraham both trusted and hoped in God
for Isaac: and as the man sicke of the palsey
did for bodily health, yet neyther faith
nor hope rest in a particular good, but onely
through it looke at the generall good, vsing
it as a meanes, way, token or pledge of
the generall good and happinesse. Yea further
there is this difference, that faith and
hope doe for the most part apprehende a
particular good, whether it be a temporall
blessing, or a spirituall grace doubtingly,
vnlesse there be a special promise of it, as was
that which God made to Abraham of Isaac,
as not being absolutely needfull for their
happinesse, and therefore not needfull to

be graunted by God: but they lay holde
on happinesse, which is the vniuersall good
without doubting or any exception whatsoeuer.
So that by hope we meane hope of
eternall glory; in the which sense this word
is vsed throughout the writings of the Apostles.
Lastly, the obiect of hope is not any
terrestriall good or happinesse, as was that
wherein Adam was created, but a celestiall
happinesse, as it hath beene in parte described
heretofore.
In the second place we are to declare the
nature of hope, by comparing it with faith,
with the which it agreeth in these respectes:
First faith is the cause, and as it were the mother
of hope, for a man cannot hope to come
to heauen, vnlesse he be first taught by faith
the right way, and true meanes of saluation.
Yea he is more then madde who thinketh
once to enter into the glorious presence
of God in heauen, being not first cleansed
by faith from the filthinesse of his sinne,
but whome faith iustifyeth, him hope glorifyeth.
Againe as faith bringeth foorth
hope, so hope like a louing and gracious
childe cherisheth and vpholdeth faith: for
how coulde any man rely himselfe wholly
on God for happinesse, if, as there is
nothing but misery to be seene in this world,

so there were no good to be hoped for hereafter.
Where this question may be mooued,
whether that faith cannot possibly be without
hope, as if a man should trust in God
without regarde had to any rewarde, yea
tho he knewe neyther of heauen or hell. To
this we answere, that seeing God hath so
plainely reuealed his will as touching eternall
glory prepared for the faithfull, we are
not to thinke that he hath faith who is destitute
of hope,1. Cor. 15. 1. 2. as appeareth, 1. Cor. 15. 1. 2.
yet if we doe generally consider the nature
of these graces, we shall finde that if God
had reuealed nothing of the life to come, a
man might haue beleeued not onely without
hope, but euen against hope, seeing no
likelihood of obtayning any good, and as it is
saide of Abraham,Rom. 4. 18. Rom. 4. 18. Against
all hope to beleeue in hope. In the which
wordes we see that Abraham beleeued
with hope, and against hope: That is, that
he had a generall and confused hope,
whereby he certainely looked for the accomplishmente
of Gods promise, although
he sawe no particular meanes or
manner howe it should be accomplished.
In like manner faith beeing affiance in
GOD for happinesse, doth necessarilie
imply happinesse eyther present or to

come,Of renued hope. and therefore when it seeth no present
happinesse* it incontinently bringeth
foorth hope to waite for it in time to come:
yet it is not needefull that this happinesse
should be particularly determined and defined,
what, when, where, and how it is
to be hoped for. For if it had pleased God to
haue appointed it so, it had bene sufficient
for man liuing in this miserable state, to
hope that God woulde make him happie,
although no particular circumstances of his
happines had bene set downe. But now our
hope is not confused, for we know when,
where, and in what manner we shall be happy,
as hath bene heretofore declared. So that
here we see, how fayth and hope doe differ,
fayth looking at happinesse in generall,
without minding the particulars of it. But
our hope teacheth vs to looke for one certaine
happinesse, which is the inioying of
the glorious presence of God, of Christ,
and of the holy Angels in heauen, where,
before many ages passe ouer, all the electe
shall meete.
Now we come to the commodities,
which the faythfull reape by hope, and
that especially in these respectes. First it
strengtheneth them against all crosses, miseries
and euils whatsoeuer may befall

them in this life,Of renewed ^ope. whereby their fayth
might be shaken, and they ouercome, and
euen swallowed vp of griefe, sorrow, shame,
impatiencie and distrust: against all which
they are comforted and vpheld by calling
to minde that vnspeakable happinesse
which abydeth them in heauen: euen as
the Husbandman indureth all manner of
toile in hope of haruest, and as the Mariner
is not dismayed with any tempest,
when he seeth his harbour and hauen to
be neare at hand. In regard whereof the
Apostle calleth hope the helmet of a Christian,
whereby his heade, euen his fayth
is armed against all assaultes. Secondlie*
hope serueth to preserue and increase in
vs all the other partes of sanctification,
it maketh the faithfull man contemne all the
vaine delightes and pleasures of this world,
all which are not a shadow of that ioy,
whereof he shall be made partaker. It
maketh him clense himselfe from all sin,
that he may enter into Gods presence, and
sit at the heauenly banket in his wedding
garment. Thus we reade, Ioh. 3. 2. 3. When
Christ appeareth,Ioh. 3. 2. 3* we know that we shalbe
made like to him in glorie: and therefore every
one who hath this hope purifieth himselfe,
that he maie be holy, euen as he is

holy.
Lastly these vses of hope may be vnto
vs true and infallible signes, whereby
we may try and examine our selues, whether
this grace be effectually wrought in
our hartes or no. For if we be (as most men
are) dismaied vtterlie, and euen cleane out
of hart when as any worldly euill, as pouertie,
contempt, shame, slander, reproch,
sicknesse, losse of goodes, of friendes, or
any other such crosse doth befall vs, it
is euident that we haue not this helmet of
hope, by vertue whereof the godlie doe
not onely not despaire, but so much the
more reioyce in their greatest miseries;
whereas the vnbeleeuers are stricken dead
with the least crosse that doth befall them.
Againe, if we finde in due examination
that our minde, affections and desires,
are set wholly or chiefly vpon the pleasures
and profites, the riches and dignities of this
world, and that we haue small careof our
estate in the worlde to come, little or no
delighte in spirituall exercises, in reading,
meditating and heareing Gods word, in
praying to God, and in performing the
actions which tend to godlynesse, let vs
not deceaue our selues, for we are as yet
without hope of eternall saluation: yea whosoeuer

he be that being thus affected, saieth
with himselfe or to others, that he hopeth
to be saued as well as others, the
which is the common opinion and saying of
carnall men, his hope is nothing but a vaine
presumption, the which will not be anie
way profitable vnto him.



CHAP. VI.

Sect. 1. Of the feare of God.
NOw we are to proceed
in declaring the subiection,
which man being in
the state of innocencie
did owe to God as to his
king and liege-Lord,
who may of right require
at the hands of his subiect and seruant
as trust and hope,Ios. 4. 14 so also feare. Ios. 4. 14.
2. Kings 8. 40. But it may seeme that fayth
and feare cannot agree together.2. Kings. 8. 40. For how can
man both feare to receiue euill at the handes
of God, and also by faith trust for happines,
which is all manner of good. For answere
hereof, we are to consider, that the feare
of mans first estate, was not such a slauish
feare, as rebels and malefactors beare toward
seuere and righteous magistrates; or

slothfull and carelesse seruantes to their
masters,Of the fear^ of God but that feare wherewith loyal subiectes
are affected toward their naturall
kings, and dutifull children toward their
louing parents, whome they feare, not in
regard of any deserued punishment, for there
is no offence commited, but because, First
of the power and authority which they haue
ouer them. Secondly in regard of their maiestie
compared with their owne meane condition.
Thirdly in regard of the infirmity
of their owne nature, whereby they may
fall into some offence, and so displease and
dishonor them, and shewe themselues vnthankfull
for so many benefits receaued.
For the first it is agreeable both to the word
of God, and euen to reason it selfe, and to
the nature of man, to feare all those who
haue authoritie ouer them. Thus the subiect
ought to feare the magistrate, Rom. 13.
7. the seruant the master,Rom. 13. 7. Eph. 6. 5. the sonne
his father,Eph. 6. 5. the wife her husband; and thus
man is commaunded to feare God,Leu. 19. 4 Leu. 19
4. the which co^maundement is a part of the
morall lawe, and therefore it belonged to
man in the state of innocencie. This the heathen
oratour witnesseth, saying, All they
who are in the handes and iurisdiction of any
other doe feare. For although they be perswaded

of their loue and mercy, yea of
their owne innocency, yet they doe consider
not onely what they will doe, but also
what they may doe.
The second cause of this feare, was the
surpassing and incomprehensible glorie
and maiestie of God, the which being fully
reuealed hath force, not onely to astonishe
and amase, but also to confound and
consume any creature whatsoeuer, yea although
the saide creature be not stained
with sinne, and so not subiect to the anger
of God. For euen as a brittle glasse being
filled with some extreame strong liquor, cannot
but burst in sunder, not because of any
antipathie which is betwixt them, but because
the glasse is not of sufficient strength
to containe the liquor: So is it with the creature
when God doth appeare in perfect
glory, in regard whereof the Angels themselues
are said to couer their faces least they
shoulde behold it;^. 6. 2* howe much more then
hath man, who is but dust and ashes, and
whose life is in his nosethrilles, iust cause of
feare. Yea the brute beastes, and senslesse
creatures themselues, who neither doe nor
can sinne, are sayd to be affected with this
feare of the glorious maiestie of God.^alm. 29. Thus
we read, Psal. 29. The voyce of the Lord shewing

it selfe foorth in power and glory, doth
breake the cedars of Libanus. It maketh them
skip like young calues, yea it maketh the desert
to quake; the hindes to calue, the mountaines
to smoke, and in breife, all creatures
what soeuer to melte away before his face.
And thus did man feare God in the state of
innocencie, for although he had daily conuersation
with God, yet he knewe that as
a vessel of glasse, clay, or any brittle matter,
often meeting with vessels of brasse or
yron, may easely get a knock, and so be
broken to shiuers; so might he be confounded
by the glory of God, if God did at any
time reueale the same fully vnto him.
Thirdly man being in his first state had iust
cause to feare God, in regard of the weaknes
and mutability of his owne nature, which
might easely be ouercome with some
temptation, and that in regard of the freedome
of his will, which might easely forsake
God and imbrace euill: by the which
meanes, he should not onely be subiect to
the anger of God, and to eternall death,
but also displease and dishonor God, who
had shewed him selfe so louing and bountifull
a father and creator vnto him.
Thus we see the causes of this feare, nowe
we are to consider the vses of it. First it serued

as a bridle to restraine man from falling
from God by disobedience. For although
man in this holy estate did obey God more
for loue, then for feare of punishment, yet
it pleased God to vse all meanes possible to
keepe him from sinne, and therefore he propounded
not onely the rewarde of life to his
obedience, but also the punishment of eternall
death to his disobedience whensoeuer
it should happen, as we read, Gen. 2. 17.^en. 2. 17.
In the day wherein thou shalt eate of the tree
of knowledge of good and euill, thou shalt incontinently
die. Secondly this feare serued
to keepe man as fro^ sin, so from all presumptuous,
bold, and vndecent behauiour in respect
of God. For we know, as it is commonly
saide, Familiar conuersation will easelie
breede contempt. Lastly man was by
this feare put in minde, and made to acknowledge
as the basenesse, infirmity and
mutability of his owne nature; so also the infinite
power, authority and maiesty of God.


Sect. 2. Of the want of feare.
THe third heade of mans rebellion,
is the want of the aforesaide
feare of God: for
since the fall man hath no
regard, either of the power,

might and maiesty of God,Of the want of feare. or yet of the
weakenesse of his owne nature as he had
before, but conceiueth amisse both of God
and of himselfe. But what maruaile is it
that man doth not feare, in consideration
of the weakenesse and mutabilitie of his nature
which may fall into sinne, when as he
feareth not the iustice of God, and his eternall
anger due vnto him selfe for sinne already
committed? For if man in his innocencie
had iust cause of feare, as hath bene
declared, howe much more ought he being
sinfull? For if he being righteous is
scarslie saued, howe shall he nowe appeare
before the iudgment seate of God, being
guiltie of sinne? And yet man in this sinfull
state hath although greater cause of feare,
^et lesse feare then he had before, yea in truth
^one at all, but is benummed with a senselesse
securitie, hauing no remorse of conscience,
nor feare of punishment for sinnes
^ommitted, neither standeth in awe of the
glorious presence of God. This appeareth
^oth by the testimony of scripture in many
^laces, as namely Rom. 3. 18.Rom. 3. 18. where a carnall
^an is described by this note, That he hath
(...) feare of God before his eyes: as also by
^ayly experience which sheweth vs, that
^ery few in the worlde doe in their actions

regarde, whether they be good or bad,
whether pleasing or displeasing to God,
and so whether they be such which will
bring vppon the doers some heauie iudgement
or no: whereas if mens hartes were
possessed with the feare of God, they would
thinke him to be alwaies present with them,
and to beholde their doings, and so they
woulde be both restrained from euill, and
pricked forwarde to doe good, but we see
it to be farre otherwise: for in committing
sinne, men thinke that they are safe, and
all is well, if they can doe it so secretlie,
as that they may auoyd the shame, slaunder,
reproch and anger of men, together
with the punishment prescribed by humane
lawes. But we need not stand in the inlarging
of this point, which is so manifest.


Sect. 3. Of renewed feare.
THe third head of renewed subiection
is the feare of God, the which
is a singular grace and hath great
vse in regeneration, howsoeuer it may
seeme to fight with fayth and hope mor^
then it did in the state of innocency, seeing
that the faithfull can not loose that holy
and happy state wherein they are placed

and therefore need not feare any euill,Of renewed feare. being
not only happy, but also sure to co^tinue so for
euer. To this we answere, that although the
feare of eternall death and misery cannot
stand with perfect faith and hope, whereby
life and happinesse is certainely expected,
yea although the faithfull neede not feare the
mutability and freedome of will, beeing
certaine of their finall perseuerance in faith,
yet there are many causes by the which they
ought to be moued to feare God. Hither
we are to referre the causes of feare in the
state of innocency: whereof the most ought
to be of more force to moue the faithfull to
feare God, then they were to man in his
pure estate. For shall man being in happy
innocency, the holy Angels being in perfect
glory, yea the brute and senselesse creatures,
feare in regard of the glorious maiesty
of God, and shall the faithfull, being sinful
and miserable, not be affected therewith?
But we know that the seruants of God haue
alwaies feared his glorious presence. Thus
the people of Israell make it an impossible
thing, that a man shoulde see the glorie of
God and liue. And Manach Sampsons fafather
saith, Iudg. 13. 22.Iudg. 13. 22. We shall die because
we haue seene God. Further the faithfull are
not freed from the feare which the committing

of sinne bringeth with it, for although
they know that no sin, tho neuer so hainous
can depriue them of the eternal loue of God
in Christ, or of eternall saluation, yet they
ought so much the more to feare to displease
or dishonour God, then Adam did in his
innocency, because God hath shewed himselfe
more louing, gratious and bountifull
to them in their regeneration, then he did
to Adam in his first creation, for God sheweth
his loue farre more in bringing some
fewe from the common death of mankind
to eternall saluation, then he did in creating
all in a common state of life. Neyther are
we to thinke that the faithfull liuing in this
worlde, are so exempted from sustaining the
punishment of sinne, as that they doe not
in this regard also feare God: for although
(if we speake properly) it cannot stand with
the iustice and equity of God to punish the
faithfull for their sinnes, the which he hath
already punished to the full in the death of
Christ, yet the fatherly chastisements which
he layeth vpon them for their great and presumptuous
sinnes, to keepe them and others
from committing the like, are often so sharpe
as that they doe not without cause seeme
to be grieuous and fearefull punishmentes.
Hence it is, that this sentence is annexed to

those grieuous iudgementes which befell any
of the people, That all Israell may heare
and feare the Lord.Deut. 19. 2*
The vses of this grace are as before, to restraine
the faithfull from sinne, for although
that be true which the heathen poet saith.
Od^runt peccare boni virtutis amore: oderunt
peccare mali formidine poenae, yet two motiues
are more effectuall then one, especially
in this corrupt state, wherein the faithfull retaining
some reliques of their corrupt nature,
are often frayed from sinne by feare,
when as the loue of God is not able to
restraine them. Pro. 16. 6. and 3. 7. and
14. 16.Prou. 16. 6. ^ 3. 7. and 14. 1^* A wise man feareth and escheweth euil.
In this respect, The feare of God is called the
beginning of wisedome, that is, of an holy and
vnblameable life, Psal. 10. 10. Pro. 11. 7.Psal. 10. 10: Pro. 11. 7.
because the godly man doth alwaies behaue
himselfe, as in the presence of the great and
fearefull God of heauen. Hitherto the rest
of the vses mentioned in the first section of
this chapter are to be referred, which it is
not needfull to repeate. Yet there is one
speciall commodity which the faithfull reape
by this grace, to wit, immunity from temporall
plagues: for euen as it is said of a fierce
and roring Lion, that in the heate of his rage
he spareth those beastes which yeelding

themselues to his power, doe by feare and
trembling aske mercy at his handes, so when
as God is so prouoked to anger by the sinnes
of his seruantes, that no praiers or vowes can
pacify him, yet this submisse feare of his wrath
doth quench the burning heat of it: by the
which meanes it commeth to passe, that this
feare of God doth not breed any trouble or
disquietnes in the minds of the godly, but rather
freeth them from the feare of all euill
whatsoeuer: and therefore to conclude this
chapter, euery faithfull man ought to labour
with all care, both to haue in his heart, and
to expresse in his whole life and behauiour,
this singular grace of the feare of God, that
so he may call God his feare, as he is called
the feare of Isaac, Gen. 31. 42. 53.^en. 31: 42: 53 where Iacob
doth sweare to Laban, by the feare of
his father Isaac, that is, by God, whom onely
and no other thing in the world Isaac feared.
Thus we are exhorted, Heb. 12. 28.^eb. 12. 28. Let vs
labour to please God with reuerence and feare.
For euen our God is a consuming fire.




CHAP. VII.

Sect. 1. Of the subiection which man in his innocency
did owe to God, as to his father.
THus we see the first part
of mans subiection with
the particular dueties
thereof; the second kind
of subiection, is that which
the sonne oweth to the father:
for God was to man in the state of innocency,
not onely a liege Lord and soueraigne
King, but also a gracious and louing
father: and that by vertue of the first creation
the which is a kinde of generation. For the
creator giueth being and existence to the
creature, as the father doth to the sonne. Yet
not all the creatures are in this respect to be
accounted or called the sonnes of God: no
more then men doe account those senselesse
things which they fashion and make of clay,
woode, or any such matter, to be their
children although they be their workemanship,
and therefore there is somewhat
else in man which maketh him the sonne of
God, to wit, the likenesse or similitude of
man to God: for man doth resemble God,
so as we see the sonne doth his father, not in

the outward shape of his body,Of filiall subiection. for God
hath no shape, neyther can be resembled
to any thing that either is, or can be imagined,
but in the inward holines of his soule,
the which is called in scripture, The image of
God, whereof more hereafter. Yet this is
here to be noted, that although man be
by his originall and naturall state, the sonne
of God, yet he is not so his sonne, as is the
second person of the Godhead: who partaketh
the very essence of the father, whereas
man hath not in him any part of gods essence,
but onely a shadow, or light resemblance of
it. So that the second person is the sonne of
God, as is the natural sonne begotten by any
man; and therefore is of the substance of his
father not differing from him in any respect,
saue only that the one is the father, the other
the sonne: but man is the sonne of God, so as
he who is a son by some accidentall meanes;
as by law, by adoption by tuition, by susception,
or by any other way beside natural procreation.
For these sonnes do not participate
the nature and essence of their fathers, but only
do resemble them perhaps in countena^ce,
conditions, name, or in some such outward
respect; whereas in nature, kinde, and substance
they are far differing from them. But
to proceed: Man being not a senselesse, or

brutish, but a reasonable creature, is the son
of God, and not he onely, but also all the holy
Angels, who being likewise indued with the
image of God, are called the sonnes of God,
Iob. 1. 6.Iob. 1. 6. The sonnes of God came on a day, and
stood before the Lord: and thus Adam is called,
Luke. 3. 38,Luc. 3. 38. The sonne of Seth, the
sonne of Adam, the sonne of GOD.
This fatherhoode is the cheife, and as we
may say: the father of all other kinds of
fatherhoode. Hence it is that Christ forbiddeth
vs, Math. 23. 9,Math. 23. 9. To call any our father
here on earth, because we haue one father in
heauen, whome we must all acknowledge
to be our first, cheifest, highest, and best
father.
And therefore looke what dueties anie
sonne oweth to any terrestriall father,
the same ought man to performe much
more to God his heauenly father, as namely;
First that he reuerence him: secondly that
he imitate him: and thirdly that he seeke
vnto him for those thinges, whereof he standeth
in neede. For the first, to reuerence is,
In an ingenuous kynde of awe to giue honour
as to one who is euerie way our better
and superiour, as the father doth excell the
son in wisdome, strength of bodie, in age, authoritie,
and in all other respectes. This dutie

God requireth, Mal. 1. 6. saying by the
prophet,^al* 1. 6. The sonne doth vse to honour his
father, and therefore if I be a father, where
is my honour? Yea in truth we may well
thinke, that this affection of reuerence is too
meane to be giuen to God, whose authoritie
ouer man is so greate, that it requireth
rather a iust feare, then this modest
awe, as his incomparable excellencie doth
deserue rather glorie then honour. The
second duty due to God in regarde of this
fatherhoode, is Imitation, the which fathers
doe, and that iustly require of their children,
whome they doe not suffer to vse the
fashions and behauiour of straungers, but
rather do conforme them to their owne
conditions, manners, and gestures. Yea
children for the most part doe performe
this duty of their owne accord: for they
being of the same constitution of bodie and
disposition of minde, whereof their fathers
are, and hauing beene continually brought
vp in beholding their manner of life, cannot
so degenerate but that they will, more
or lesse tread in the steppes of their fathers.Ioh. 8. 39.
Ioh. 8. 39. If ye were Abrahams children,
ye would doe the workes of Abraham. In
like manner man in this his first state, did
wholly fix his eyes on God, as on the only

perfect patterne of holynesse, making his
actions presidents and examples for imitation,
so farre forth as they might be followed
by him; the which caution is necessariy
to be added: for it were not holinesse,
but presumption and greate impiety, either for
man or Angell to take vpon him to imitate
God in the actions of omnipotencie, and in
such other respectes which are not agreeable
to the condition of any creature: otherwise
man may and ought to imitate God, as Christ
teacheth vs,Math. 5. 45. Math. 5. 45. saying, Do good to
them who do euill to you, that so you may be, or
may appeare to be the sonnes of your father in
heauen, who suffereth the sunne to shine and
the raine to fall vpon the iust and vniust: be
ye therefore perfect as your heauenly father
is perfect.
The third and last dutie belonging to this
heade is supplication for thinges needfull:
for as children in all their wantes and necessities,
haue straightway recourse to their
parents in assured confidence of hauing their
wants supplied by meanes of that tender
affection, which parents beare to their children;
so ought man vpon euerie occasion to
seeke by humble praier for helpe at the
handes of his heauenly father, whose loue
farre exceedeth the affection of any earthly

father or mother to their children. This
Christ himselfe (who in all his doctrines
which he deliuereth, hath recourse to the
first creation of man) teacheth vs, Math.
7. 9.Math. 7. 9. What man is there among you, which if
his sonne aske him bread will giue him a stone?
If ye then which are euill can giue to your children
good giftes, how much more shall your
heauenly father giue good things to them that
aske? To this agreeth the practise of Christ,
who in that forme of prayer which he propounded
to his disciples, taught them
to pray to GOD not as to their master,
Lord or King, but as to a louing father.
Math. 6. 9.Math. 6. 9. Praie after this manner; Our
father which art in heauen. Lastly if it be
here obiected that there could not be any
vse of this duety in the state of perfect happinesse,
wherein nothing was wanting, and
therefore nothing could be asked: we answere,
that mans happinesse although it were
perfect. Yet it might haue bene greater, and
that he had not so many blessings, but that
he might by praier haue obtained moe at
the hands of God.



Sect. 2. Of the want of filiall subiection.
It hath bene declared that of
all earthly creatures, man
onely was created the sonne
of God, because he onely was
endued with the image and
likenesse of God the heauenly father, in perfect
holinesse and happinesse: the which
whenas he did loose by his disobedience,
he did together loose the name, title and
prerogatiue of being the sonne of God. Yea
withall he lost all abilitie of performing any
dutie to God, which the sonne oweth to
his father, being nowe affected to God not
as a dutifull sonne, but as an vngratious,
stubborne and lewd runnagate, who hath
openly forsaken, and disclaimed his father.
For (that we may insist in those duties
which are named in the former section)
he is so far from yeelding due honour and
reuerence to him, that he doth euery way
dishonor him, he standeth in no awe, neither
maketh he any reuerent account of the
presence of God, yea farre lesse then of
the presence of any sinfull man like to himselfe,
in whose sight he woulde be ashamed
to commit any hainous sinne, or to

speake any filthie worde without vsing
some preface of reuerence vnto him:Of the want of filiall subiection. whereas
the consideration of Gods presence and
of the reuerence due therevnto, cannot
either restraine him from sinne, or anie
thing abash him in committing it. Further
whereas the sonne shoulde honour his father
by yeelding humble attention, and
carefull obedience to his sayings and commaundements;
man doth in this respect so
notoriously dishonor God, that it is a shame
to speake, howe base and vile account
he maketh of Gods word, how he doth continually
without any remorse of conscience
or shame of face, breake euerie one of
his commaundementes. But we will not
stand in amplifying the irreuerent behauiour
of man towards God.
As touching the second duty which is
imitation of God, we knowe that the heauens
are not so farre distant from the earth,
or the east from the west, as the waies of
man are from the waies of God. Yea as
Christ telleth the Iewes plainely,(...). 8. 41. Ioh. 8. 41.
man hath chaunged his father and therefore
he doth the workes of his newe father the
deuill, his lustes raigne in man, he is a liar
and the father of liars. He fell away from

God, and this his damnable rebellion man
did imitate, and so continueth following
his example, motions, and entisements
in all things. Lastly as touching supplication
which we make the third filial duty,
man is so wholly alienated from God, that
what necessitie soeuer do pinche him, he
hath not either the minde or the will* and
as we vse to speake, neither the heart
nor the face once to go to God by humble
prayer for helpe. He flyeth to worldly
meanes, as to his own wisdome, strength,
riches and friendes: and if all faile, yet he
will rather seeke for helpe by sorcery and
witchcraft, at the hands of his newe father
the diuell, then he will by prayer call vpon
the name of God. Thus are all vnregenerate
men affected, howsoeuer in a shew
of religion, or as a common prouerbe they
will somtimes say, God helpe me, or God
be mercifull to me: whereas in trueth, they
being destitute of faith, haue no confidence
in God, neither any hope of obtaining any
thing at his hand. Neither is there any
cause why they shoulde thinke otherwise:
for God doth not heare and helpe,
but detest and plague vnbeleeuers.



Sect. 3. Of filiall subiection renewed.
THus we see how man is altogether
spoiled by the malice
of Sathan of this excellent
dignitie of being the
sonne of God, but by the
mercie of God he recouereth
it in the state of regeneration in as ample
manner as he had it in his first creation.
For as all naturall men are in Adam vngratious
bastardes; so they become the
sonnes of God in Christ, not by partaking
his eternall and essentiall filiation (whereof
no creature is capable) but by being renewed,
and made conformable to the holinesse of
his humaine nature. For as man lost this
dignitie by loosing the image of God, to
wit, his perfect holinesse, by vertue whereof
he onely of all earthly creatures was the
sonne of God; so being nowe by the spirite
of God restored to the saide image
of God, he is together restored to the
dignitie of being the sonne of God.Ioh. 1. 12. Ioh.
1. 12. As many as beleeued in him to those
he gaue power to be the sonnes of God.^. Pet. 1. 4. For
as we read, 2. Pet. 1. 4. We are made partakers
of his diuine nature, (that is, of the

image or resemblaunce of the diuine nature)
in that we fly the corruption of lust
which is in the world.Of filiall suiection rene^ed. From this prerogatiue
of being the sonnes of God, the
scripture, (speaking to men according to the
manner of men, whose sonnes do in time
enioy their fathers possessions) stirreth vp the
faithfull to an vndoubted expectation of
eternall glory. Gal. 4. 7. We are no more
seruantes but sonnes and the heires of God
through Christ:Gall. 4. 7. and Rom. 8. 17.Rom. 8. 17. If we be sonnes,
then are we heires:1. Iohn. 3. 2 the heires truly of God, and
the fellow heires of Christ: and 1. Iohn 3. 2.
We are nowe the sonnes of God, although our
inheritaunce doth not appeare till Christ appeare.
Nowe to proceed: As the faithfull are
restored to this dignitie; so they are indued
by the spirite of God with the disposition
belonging to it, being so affected
to God as children ought to be to their naturall
fathers. They reuerence him aboue
al thinges in the worlde, in worde and deed,
in minde, harte, and in all their behauiour.
The great securitie and certainty which
they haue of their owne good estate, doth
not make them any way presumptuous neither
doth the familiarity which God vouchsafeth
to haue with them as with freindes

Ioh. 15 15. Breed in them any contempt
of God, but they stand continually in awe
of him,^oh. 15. 15. and of his glorious presence, yeelding
to him his due honour both in word,
deed and affection, whensoeuer they
haue any occasion to deale with him. This
we may obserue as in the other seruants of
God, so especially in Abraham, who although
he was the friend of God, as he is
called Iam. 2. 23.^am. 2. 23. And had familiar conuersation
and talke with God,^. Chro. 20. 7* as one
friende vseth to haue with another,^sa. 4. 8. yet
he durst not speake the second time to
God in the behalfe of the Sodomites without
vsing some preface of reuerence, saying,
Gen. 18. 27.Gen. 18. 27. 30. Behold I haue taken vpon
me to speake to God who am but dust and
ashes, And againe, Vers. 30 let not my lord
be angrie if I speake for them. This affection
of the faithfull is described,Psal. 123. Psal. 123* As
the eyes of the seruant are vpon his lord, and
as the handmaid doth modestly waite in presence
of her mistris; so are we affected to God.
Likewise for the second duty which is Imitation,
the faithfull man endeuoureth by all
meanes to conforme himselfe to the absolute
puritie and holinesse of God. Whereof
the Apostle hauing wise consideration,
vseth the examples of Christes death and

resurrection as most forcible argumentes to
enforce the mortification of sinne, and the
viuification of all holynesse in vs,Rom. 6. Rom. 6. and
Eph. 5. 1.Ephe. 5. 1 Be ye followers of God as beloued
children.
Lastly, As a sonne being pinched with any
griefe or want, doth straight way run
to his father for reliefe; so doe the faithfull
in the manifolde miseries and crosses of this
present life seeke for helpe at the handes
of their heauenly father. For the which
purpose they are indued with a notable gift
of God, called the spirit of prayer, that is, the
grace, ability or faculty of praying wrought
in them by the holy spirite. This grace of
God is diligently to be declared and considered,
for that of all the partes of mans holinesse,
none is a more vnfallible signe of true
regeneration, then is this gift of prayer,
whereby a man is made able, willing and
ready, to pray aright vnto God as the present
occasion doth require. For this gifte
consisteth of many particular graces of
Gods spirit, the which are needfull for the
right performance of this duety, and cannot
be founde in any carnall man. First there is
required the true knowledge of those things
which belong vnto the good and happy state
of man, which is not attained but by the

worke of the holy spirite, Rom. 8. 26.Rom. 8. 26. We
know not for what to pray, as we ought, but
the spirit helpeth our infirmity. For all men
generally and naturally feele their temporall
wants, as pouerty, sicknesse, shame, and
whatsoeuer belongeth to the maintenance
of this present life: but as for spirituall graces,
as the knowledge and feare of God,
faith, loue, patience, and the rest which
concerne their eternall saluation, they neuer
trouble themselues in seeking them, or
are greeued for the want of them, nay (for the
most part) they neuer thinke of any such matter
or knowe what these thinges meane.
Besides, none can pray aright, yea although
he be enlightned with some knowledge
of the spirituall state of man, and haue
a glimmering of the thinges belonging vnto
it (as a carnal man may haue) vnlesse he haue
true faith, wherby he may be assured that god
both loueth him, and wil graunt his requests,
Rom. 10. 14.Rom. 10. 14. The Apostle maketh it impossible
for him who doth not beleeue in
God to call vpon him. But the beleeuer hath
receiued not the spirit of bondage to feare,
to dread and fly from God, as from a iust
iudge, as the carnall man doth, but of
adoption, whereby he crieth Abba Father.
These and many other graces are needefull

for the performance of this duety of
prayer. Whereof it followeth, that whosoeuer
hath receiued this spirite of prayer,
is vndoubtedly one renewed by the
spirite of GOD, and that where this
grace is wanting, there is no regeneration
or sanctification. And least that any
man deceiue himselfe by thinking that
he hath this grace of praying to GOD,
when he hath it not, wee will heere set
downe a fewe notes or markes wherein
the praying of a faithfull man differeth
from that kinde of praying which a carnall
man may vse.
First therefore a faithfull man conceiueth
his prayer himselfe, in his owne
minde, hauing considered what thinges
are most needfull to be prayed for at
that time, and in that company, if he
be with others, and so he doth, as it were
poure out his prayer from the bottome
of his heart: Whereas the carnall man,
although he be in worldly matters a iolly
wise man, yea and can tell his tale before
whome soeuer, as readely as the best,
yet he hath neither the witte to conceiue,
nor the tongue to vtter two sentences of
prayer before God, or if he must needes
haue prayers eyther by himselfe for a shew of

religion, or in some blinde deuotion, or
in his family, least he shoulde seeme
wanting in his duety, then he is forced
to get some prayer booke into his hand,
and so reading so many as he thinketh
good, therein resteth. The which thing
although it may be done at some times,
and is to be commended in respect of their
atheisme, who neuer pray eyther for themselues
or any other, yet it is not sufficient,
because the prayers of particular
men ought to be framed according to their
owne particular state, and the present
state of those in whose behalfe they
pray.
The second difference is this, if a carnall
man pray without booke, it is but in
two or three wordes, as, Lorde haue
mercy vpon vs: God fende vs the light
of heauen, God send vs this or that thing:
the which are not to be called prayers,
but wishes: whereas the prayer which commeth
from a faithfull heart, is vttered in
a competent number of wordes, as it is
meete and needfull. We doe not denie
but that one may offende in vsing too mamy
wordes, the which fault Christ forewarneth
vs of, Math. 6. 7. 8.Math. 6. 7. 8. and it is
at this day to be seene in those dotrels who

thinke that they serue God in mumbling
ouer so many doozen of Creeds, Pater nosters,
and Aue Maries: yea further we
confesse, that the force of prayer is not
in the wordes of the mouth, but in the
faith of the heart, the which alone will
make the prayer to be heard, although
wordes be altogether wanting, as we
reade, 1. Sam. 1. 13.1. Sam. 1. 13. of Hanna Samuels
mother, who prayed so effectually that her
request was graunted, and yet she vttered
no wordes, but onely moued her lippes
and prayed in her heart. And yet for all
this, faithfull prayers are and ought to
be, if there be no hinderance, plentifull
in wordes: for although thou pray alone to
God, who vnderstandeth thy thoughtes as
well as thy wordes, yet God must be serued
not onely inwardly in thy minde, but
also with the members of thy body, especially
with the tongue which is giuen to thee
for this ende. Yea the wordes of thy
mouth doe stirre vp thy affections, and
make thee more feruent in prayer. But if
thou pray in the company of others, it is
needefull for their edification that thou vtter
wordes, not onely in a generall and
confused manner, but so as that the seuerall
petitions conceiued in thy minde

may be plainly declared, and distinguished
one from another. For sinnes
must be confessed, graces wanting desired,
plagues and iudgementes remooued,
benefits remembred, the brethren commended
to God, not in grosse (vnlesse it
cannot well otherwise be) but in particular,
that so the hearers may be the more edified.
If it be heere obiected, that this dexteritie
and facultie of vttering prayers in the
aforesaid manner, is not to be looked for
at the handes of ignorant and vnlearned
men, who cannot so much as helpe themselues
by reading the holy scriptures, and
the writinges of godly men: Wee answere;
That as Sathan hath in former
ages defaced the true worshippe of God,
and aduaunced superstition by no meanes
more, then by bringing into the Church
a generall barbarisme and decay of learning;
so ought Christians in this time of
grace, to furnish themselues with all things,
which may further their edification; and
although all cannot attaine to learning
for diuers hinderances, yet all may and
ought to be able to reade: by the which
meanes, being diligently vsed, they may
soone come to haue their senses exercised
in spirituall matters, and acquainted with

the language and words belonging therevnto,
farre aboue their owne hope and expectation.
Yea euen those who being of ripe years,
cannot reade, ought to be ashamed rather
of this barbarous and brutish rudenesse,
then of learning that which will make
greatly for their profite, comfort and eternall
saluation. Againe, he who is endued
with inward graces needfull for prayer will
finde words whereby to vtter his minde be
he neuer so vnlearned: for the spirite of
God giueth vtterance, openeth the lippes, and
vntieth the strings of the tongue to all those
whome he sanctifieth. Neither neede this
seeme strange, for as one saith, all me^ are eloquent
enough in that which they know and
like. Put case the vnlearned man, who thus excuseth
his Atheisme and want of religion (for
where there is no prayer, there is no iot of true
religion) by his rudenesse, were put in minde
by some friend that such a nobleman
had a rich farme in his handes, the which
he might easely obtaine, if so be he could
tell his tale well before the said noble man.
I warrant you he would not loose it for
asking, neither woulde he come bluntly to
him and say, Sir I pray you giue me this
farme, but he would and that without any
teacher finde store both of reasons, and

of wordes fit for his purpose. He would say,
may it please your Lordship, to be my
good Lord and maister: I am a poore wretched
man, hauing sustained so many losses, haning
so many maimes, wounds, and infirmities;
hauing a greate charge of children, of whom
so many are not able to put on their owne
clothes: and therefore I am bold to trouble
your Lordship in such a matter; the which
if I may obtaine, I shall pray for you as
long as I liue, and will by Gods grace be
as faithful and dutifull a seruant, as euer
your Lordship had. I haue no friendes to
helpe forward my sute, but doe wholly rely
my selfe on your goodnesse, and pittifull
disposition. These and many moe like, and
more effectuall perswasions and fit phrases,
prouerbes, tearmes and sayings the simplest
man in the world could vse for a temporall
commoditie: how much more able
would he be to call vpon God by prayer,
wherein there is farre more matter offred,
whether we regard the wretchednesse of
the suter, or the mercie and goodnesse of
God?
But to returne to the matter in hande,
the third difference is, that the carnall man
prayeth very seldom, yea for the most neuer
but vpon some vrgent cause, as when he is

pinched with some grieuous crosse, as sicknes
or pouertie, or when he is in some great
danger as being in battaile on Land, or in
a tempeston the sea;Ionas 1. 5. as we reade, Ionas. 1. 5.
The Infidels in extream danger fell to praier.
These extremities will wring out of the
most irreligious atheist some kinde of praier,
but not till he see that all other meanes
do faile: For till then he neuer thinketh
on God. But it is farre otherwise with the
faithfull man: for he praieth daylie and hourly
to the Lord he neuer wanteth matter of
praying, but taketh euerie occasion to pray,
if not openly and in wordes, yet secretlie
in his heart. Yea the faithfull in all their
dangers, troubles, miseries, and affaires
whatsoeuer, do not put the means in the first
and cheife place, reposing their confidence
therein; but first they seeke for helpe at the
handes of God, and then trusting that he
will giue a happie successe, vse the meanes
with all care and diligence. Fourthly the
carnall man doth not in praying vse either
perseuerance in continuing his sute till
it please God to heare him, or yet patience
in suffering with a quiet minde the delay
of that which he desireth: But if he be
not heard at the first, he straightway giueth
ouer: yea most commonly he waxeth so

prophane and godlesse that he will neuer
afterward pray to God, tho he haue neuer
so greate need: and not resting herein
he murmureth against God, and in greate
rage curseth all things that come in his
sight or minde: but the godly man is neuer
wearied with calling vpon God, but is content
to tary the Lords leasure, considering
that God knoweth what is good for him
better then he himselfe.
Fiftly, the carnall man prayeth onely for
temporall blessings, as health, peace, riches,
honour, and such other. And if so be
that he haue some knowledge of the life
to come, he will indeed desire that he
may after this life be in heauen; but you
shall neuer heare him desiring to go in
that way in this life which leadeth to
heauen. He desireth to be happy in the
worlde to come, but not to be holy and
righteous in this worlde. He would gladly
be partaker of the ioyes of heauen, but yet
not with the condition of forsaking his
earthly pleasures. He thinketh it no wisdom
to forgoe a certaine and present happinesse,
for that which will perhaps come, but he
knoweth not when, neither can any man
make him, as he thinketh, any good assurance
of it: but the faithfull man counteth

all worldly pleasures to be, as they are in
deed, but as drosse and dung in comparison
of spirituall graces: and therefore
his prayers are cheifly of those things which
concerne his eternal saluation. Sixtly the carnall
man prayeth onely for him selfe, for
his children and friendes, by whom he
may haue some temporall comfort or profit:
neuer remembring the affliction of Ioseph,
that is, hauing no fellowe-feeling of the miseries
of the church of God, and of the
particular members thereof: whereas the
faithfull desire the good of their brethren,
yea euen with their owne hurt, if so it stand
with the good pleasure of God. Lastly
(which is the maine difference of all) the
carnall man prayeth without faith, and
therefore he cannot pray aright, Rom. 10.
14.Rom. 10. 14 doubting (as he hath good cause)
whether God will heare him or no: whereas
the faithfull man is vndoubtedly perswaded,
that God will graunt his desire,
if it be needfull for his saluation: otherwise
if it be some temporall blessing, or
some particular grace without the which
he may be saued, he knoweth that God will
either graunt his request, or make him
plainely see and confesse that it is more
for his good, that his minde be not fulfilled

in that behalfe.
Nowe for a conclusion, we see howe
greatly it behoueth euery one, who would
be accounted in the sight of God and man
a true Christian, to giue himselfe carefully
to the attaining of this gift of prayer, and
to the performing of this dutie both by
himselfe alone, and also with his family,
especially if we do duely consider the manifolde
commodities both temporall and
spirituall, which may be reaped by this
meanes. For as touching this present life,
hearty and feruent prayer comming from a
faithfull man, is health in sickenesse, riches
in pouertie, safetie in daunger, comforte in
all aduersity, yea it is all in all. But farre more
notable are the vses of it in regard of the
spirituall life of our soules: for prayer is
the exercise of a mans soule, as the worde
of God is the foode and nourishment of
it. So that as a man cannot keepe* his
body for any long time in health and strength,
vnlesse he vse some exercise, yea although
he doe fil it with meate, and feede it most
carefully: euen so although a man doe heare
the worde of God euery day preached vnto
him, yet vnlesse he do by this spirituall
exercise of prayer, drawe the sayd heauenly
foode into the seuerall partes of his

soule, he shall sensibly feele his faith,
loue, patience, and all other partes of
holinesse to decrease by little and little
vntill at length they come to nothing; yea
as the exercising of the body doth not onely
preserue it in the naturall vigour, but also
encreaseth the strength of it, and keepeth
it from sicknesse; so by the dayly vse
of prayer, we shall finde that the Lord will
encrease in vs all spirituall graces, farre aboue
our owne expectation, or the opinion
of any other. And therefore let vs
giue eare to the Apostles exhortation,
Eph. 6. 18.Eph. 6. 18. Take to you the helmet of your
saluation which is the word of God, and withall
pray alwaies with all manner of prayers
and supplications in the spirit, and watch therevnto
withall perseueraunce, not onely for your
selues, but also for all saints.
Thus much of the duties of renewed
filiall subiectio^ which man oweth to God his
heauenly father. To the which one other duty
of filiall subiectio^ must be added, to wit, patience
in regard of those manifold and grieuous
afflictions wherewith God doth chastise,Prou. 3. 11. 1^*
trie, and nurture his children. For as
the goldsmith intending to make pretious
and excellent vessels fit for the vse of great
kinges, doth cast his gold into the fyre,

that so it may be come pure from all drosse,
so before that the faithfull can be vessels
of honour, fitte for the seruice of God in
the kingdome of heauen, they must be
cast into the furnace of affliction, and there
be weaned from the vaine delightes and pleasures
of sinne, yea tried to be sound in
the profession of the faith, and corrected
for their former misdemeanour. Nowe
these afflictions are of their owne nature as
bitter as galle vnto vs, and therefore it
is impossible that flesh and bloude, being
not strengthened with some speciall grace
of God shoulde receaue this loathsome
potion, without repining, murmuring,
distruste, despaire and many such inconueniences.
For the auoiding whereof it hath
pleased God to giue vnto his faithfull seruantes
this gift of patience whereby they
do quietly, constantly, yea chearefully
and ioyfully suffer any affliction, as comming
from God, who is not to them a cruell
enimie, but a louing and tender hearted
father, remembring mercie in the midst
of anger, euen as a father, spareth his owne
naturall sonne making his mone vnto
him.
This doctrine is declared at large.Heb. 12. 5. 6. 7. etc. Heb.
12. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. the

wordes are many, but being very fit for
this purpose it shall not be irkesome to sette
them downe. Forgette not the exhortation
which speaketh to you,Prou. 3. 12. Prou. 3. 12. as vnto
children; My sonne despise not the correction of
the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked
of him. For whome the Lorde loueth, him
he chasteneth, and scourgeth euerie sonne whom
he receaueth. If you endure chastening, God
offereth himselfe to you, or declareth himselfe
to be your father: for what sonne is there
whom his father doth not correct? But if ye
be without this chastening, then truly ye are
not right sonnes but bastards. Moreouer, we
haue had our carnall fathers our correctours,
and haue stoode in awe of them: shall we not
then much more obey our spirituall father and
so liue? for they chastised vs for a few daies
according to their pleasure, but God chasteneth
vs for our profit, that so we might be
made partakers of his holynesse. Nowe all
chastisement bringeth with it for the present
time sorrowe, not ioy; but afterwarde it
giueth the fruite of peace and righteousnesse,
to those who are exercised with it. And
therefore let vs lift vp our faint handes and
our weake knees. etc.
Lastly as touching this dutie of filiall
subiection, it had not so greate vse in the

state of innocencie, in the which man was
not subiect to crosses, afflictions, and miseries
so as the faithfull are in the state of
regeneration. Yet man in his innocencie was
not altogether destitute of this grace, or
without some vse of it: For it was his duty
to take in good parte whatsoeuer it
pleased God to do vnto him, if not in laying
any euil vpon him, whereof his happy
estate was not capable, yet in withholding
or withdrawing from him some particular
blessing whereof he had great desire,
and which woulde be very pleasant
vnto him.



CHAP. VIII.

Sect. 1. Of seruile subiection.
BEsides the aforesaid kinds of subiection,
man oweth to God
all such duties as the seruant is
bound to performe to his lord
or maister, as namely, to obey, to serue or
minister vnto him, and lastly to profit him;
for man according to his first creation is
Gods seruant: the which is not to be accounted
a base condition, derogating from
the dignitie of this his glorious estate, seeing

that the holy Angels,Of seruile subiection. which doe farre
excell man in glory, are not ashamed to
weare Gods liuery, and to be called his seruantes.
The first duety is obedience, the which
is to be performed of all inferiours, to those
who haue any authority ouer them, whether
kinges, magistrates, fathers, or teachers,
but especially it is to be performed by
seruantes to their masters,Ephe. 6. 5. Ephe. 6. 5. Seruantes
be obedient to your maisters in simplicity
of heart as vnto Christ. So was man
affected to God in his innocent state as doth
euidently appeare in that his innocencie is
nothing else but perfect obedience to God,
to his word, lawes and commaundements.
Whereof it followeth that he did performe
vnto God the second duety, to wit, faithfull
seruice, in performing with all care and diligence,
whatsoeuer worke it pleased God to
imploy him in. Thus did Adam before his
fall serue God in doing those thinges
which were enioyned him: and thus do the
Angels in heauen continually waiting and
attending in the presence of God, ready
to goe whither he sendeth,Heb. 1. 14. and to come,
when he calleth, as we reade, Heb. 1. 14.
They are ministring spirits sent out for the
electes sake: and more plainely, Psal. 103. 20.

Blesse the Lord ye his Angels which excelling
in strength doe his commaundement and obey
his voice:^^hl. 103. 20. blesse the Lord all ye his hoastes, his
seruants which doe his will.
But there may some doubt be made
as touching the last duety, how man should
profit God: we answere that Gods riches
consist in his glory, the which the more
that it is encreased and enlarged, the more
is Gods aduantage procured. This we may
see in the parable of the talents,Mat. 25. 14. Mat. 25.
14. the meaning whereof is this, that God
giueth his graces to men to this ende, that
they should vse and encrease them for his
aduantage. Yea God there compareth
himselfe to a couetous vsurer that is so greedie
of gaine, that he reapeth where he did
not sowe, and gathereth, where he did not
scatter, that is, he laboureth by all meanes
to gaine glory to himselfe. But what shall
we say to Elephaz,Iob. 22. 1. 2. Iob. 22. 1. 2. who seemeth
to deny this, saying, shall man profit
God? is it any gaine to the almighty, that thou
art iust, and walkest in a perfect way? The meaning
of those wordes is this, that God is not
so tyed to man, but that he can set forth his
glory without him, or his righteousnesse; yea
he can glorifie himselfe in the vnrighteousnesse,
and destruction of man, but mans

goodnesse it doth profit himselfe and other
men like to himselfe,Psal. 16. 1. as we read, Psal.
16. 1. My goodnesse doth not extend it selfe
to thee O Lorde, but to the saintes heere on
earth. And yet it pleaseth God in mercy
(that so he might stirre man vp to all holinesse)
to count only that glory gained which
is gotten by the obedience and saluation of
his seruantes.


Sect. 2. Of the want of the aforesaid
subiection.
MAN by falling from the obedience
of God, became a
fugitiue (and as it is saide of
Cain the first of this sinfull generation,
Gen. 4. 14.Gen. 4. 14.) being
cast forth from the presence of God, for his
sinne, is now a vagabond on the earth. And
as is this his miserable and vi^e condition, so
is his disposition. For he hath cleane lost all
the properties of a good seruant, and all abilitie
of performing any acceptable duety
to God. In steede of obedience, he doth
continually breake all Gods commaundementes,
in all his thoughtes, wordes, deeds,
and in the whole course of his life.
Neither doth he waite on God to doe seruice

vnto him,Of seruile rebellion. for he serueth Sathan, sinne,
and his owne corrupt desires, Iohn. 8. 34.
Verely I say to you (saith Christ) that euery
one who committeth sinne,Iohn. 8. 34. is the seruant of
sinne, in that he doth not obey the voyce of
God commanding a holy life, but the vnlawfull
motions of his sinfull flesh:Rom. 6. 16. and Rom. 6. 16.
Know ye not that to whomesoeuer you giue your
selues to obey, his seruantes you are, whether of
sinne to death, or of holinesse to life? Yea a
carnall man is a bondslaue solde into the
iurisdiction of sinne, Rom. 7. 14. that looke
as a slaue,Rom. 7. 14. whome they vsed in old times, (as
they doe still in some countries) to buy with
money, as horse, sheepe and oxen, was
no more his owne man (as we say) then
were the aforesaid brute beastes, but was
compelled to fulfill his masters will in all
thinges, whether good or euill; so it fareth
with man, who of the seruant of God, is
become a most vile slaue of Sathan, alwaies
attending his will and pleasure, and
performing the same with all his might and
strength, yea with all the faculties of his
minde, and the members of his body. The
particular functions whereof, are by the Apostle
cited,Rom: 3. 13. Rom. 3. 13. Out of the olde
Testament, His throte is an open sepulchre, his
tongue speaketh nothing but deceipt: his lips,

whereby he prete^deth frindship, haue vnder
the^ the poyson of Aspes: his mouth full of cursing,
his feet swift to shed blood: and so all the rest
of the members of a mans body, haue their
taske allotted vnto them, the which they do
not grudgingly and vnwillingly as vsually
bondslaues do, but most readely, greedely, and
ioyfully, delighting in nothing but in that
which they know pleaseth the humour of
their master. So that all men naturally are
in a greater bondage vnder sinne, then any
of them is vnder their temporall maisters
or owners. For there is no slaue of so base
a minde (the which cannot be found among
the brute beastes) but that tho his body be
oppressed, and kept vnder chaines, yet he
desireth freedome, and so he being detained
against his will, keepeth a free minde
and will: but man being in this most filthy
and wretched thraldome, thinketh himselfe
to be in the most happy state that may be,
and therefore neither doth nor can desire to
be freed from it.
Lastly as touching the third duety of a
serua^t, man doth not bring any aduantage of
glory to God, but doth dishonour him by all
meanes, leading his life so as if there were no
God, or as if he neyther could punish sinners
for their wickednes, nor yet doe any good to

the righteous ma^, and yet wil he nil he, he shal
one day glorify God in being an open spectakle
of his wrath and iustice: when as he
shal heare that sentence pronounced againe
by Christ, Take this slouthfull and vnprofitable
seruant, and cast him into vtter darkenesse,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.


Sect. 3. Of seruile subiection
renewed.
THus we see the wretched estate
of man beeing the
vassall and slaue of sinne,
with whome it fareth, as
it did with Pharaohs seruantes,
which had sinned
against their Lord,Gen. 40. Gen. 40. For some as
they liue, so they die in that slauery: and
therfore they die eternally, others, to wit the
faithful are pardoned, and restored to their former
dignity: insomuch that being by Christ
reconciled to God, they doe boldly enter
againe into his presence in the which they
doe alwaies stande, attending his pleasure,
obeying his commaundements, performing
whatsoeuer seruice is enioyned them, and
so procuring Gods aduantage as good

and faithfull seruants do to their earthly maisters.Of seruile s^^^iection rene^^ed.
Yet not al after the same manner and
in like measure: For as among earthly seruantes,
so also in the house of God (which
is his church) there are diuers functions and
degrees of ministrations, and as some seruing
immediately and directly about the person
of their maister, are in higher estimation
with him; so some of the faithfull do
serue God in publicke functions, and do in
greater measure glorifie him, then others
do. In this order are to be accounted the
faithfull patriarches, preistes, prophets, Kings,
magistrates, Apostles and ministers: whose
seruice commeth neare to God, and doth
directly and properly enlarge his glory: and
therefore in lue of their long and faithfull
seruice God doth rewarde them with this
most honorable title, calling them his seruantes.
Thus God calleth Abraham,Gen. 2. 6. 24* Gen.
26. 24. I will blesse thee for Abraham my
seruants sake.Iosu. 1. 7. And Moses Iosu. 1* 7. On
whome this epitaphe is written* Deut. 34. 5.
There died Moses the seruant of the Lord.Deut. 34. 5.
Thus God calleth Dauid, often sparing
Ierusalem in the midest of his anger, For his
seruant Dauids sake, and thus are Iosua, Daniell,
and others called. And all they whose
godlinesse, faith and loue was greate and

notable as Iob and others, Iob. 1. 8. Yea of late
daies the church imitating God herein,
hath most thankfully and worthily giuen this
glorious title to those,(...). 1. 8. who haue bene zealous
in beating downe superstition, and in
aduancing the gospell, kingdome and glory
of Christ.
These are gods cheife seruants and as it
were the golden vessels of his house, besides
the which he hath other vessels of
honour, wherewith he is serued: euen all
true beleeuers, and true harted christians, who
also are Gods faithfull seruants, yea although
they spende all the daies of their liues in such
callings, as may seeme to appertaine nothing
to God, neither any way to set forth his glory.
For example, in the first ages of the gospell
manie Christians were bond seruants to
infidels, whereby it came to passe that they
were continually imployed in their maisters
affaires, the which had no more to do with
the seruice of God, then darknesse hath with
light: yet these Christians were accounted
Gods faithfull seruants, in that they performed
faithfull seruice to those infidels. Thus
we read Col. 3. 22.^oll. 3. 22. Seruants obey your maisters
in all things, not with eye seruice, but in simplicitie
of heart as those that feare the Lord:
Yea he addeth; and what soeuer ye do, do it not

as to men but as to God: knowing that ye shall
receiue a reward for it of the Lord, so that a
godly and vpright life in what kinde soeuer
it be,Rom. 6* 17. is the true seruice of God. Rom. 6. 17.
Thankes be vnto God, that although ye were
once the seruants of sinne, yet now ye are made
the seruants of righteousnesse, and therefore
as you did before present your bodies before
vncleannesse and all manner of sin readie
to commit sin: so now present your bodies
before righteousnesse, as being readie to
all holynesse of life.
This exhortation is carefully to be followed
of all that desire to be accounted the seruants
of God, that as whilst they were in
the seruice of sinne, they did no manner of
seruice to God; so now being the seruants
of God, they labour to shake cleane from
their neckes the yoke of sinne. For as Christ
saith, Math. 6. 24.Math. 6. 24. We cannot serue two maisters,
both God and Mammon, but must of necessitie
cleaue to the one and forsake the other.
The which we cannot but do, if that we consider
that this new seruice is not like to the
old, It is not a painfull, dolefull and ignominious
co^dition, but an easie, pleasant and glorious
state. For the yoke of Christ is easie, and
the burdens which he laieth on the shoulders
of his seruants, are light, at the least no heauier

then they are able by his grace to beare.
Yea this is such a seruice as that the faithfull
may more truely and fitly be called
Christes friendes, then seruants.
So then to conclude this chapter, we may,
and that not vnfitly compare the spirituall
state of all the faithfull, to the outward state
of one of them named Onesimus, of whome
we reade in the epistle written to Philemon:Philem. 1.
who hauing fled from his maister, was by
the Apostle Paul conuerted to the faith, and
afterward reconciled to his maister, as all
the beleeuers are to God the father, by
the intercession not of anie Saint or Angell;
but of Iesus Christ the sonne of God
who speaketh to his father in this manner:
I beseech thee for thy elect children who
are begotten to the faith by the ministery of
my gospel, and who in time past were vnprofitable,
but now are profitable both to thee and
to their brethren, although (such is their desire
to aduance thy glorie) when they haue done
all that they can, they thinke it nothing, and
count themselues vnprofitable seruants.
They departed from thee for a season, that
thou mightest receaue them for euer,
into an immutable state of grace and happinesse,
from the which it is impossible
that they shoulde fall. Receaue them

therefore not as seruantes, but aboue seruantes,
euen as friendes, and as my beloued
brethren. For maisters doe not
vse to make their seruants of their counsell,
but I haue reuealed thy wholle will
vnto them. If they doe owe thee anie
thing, as they haue sinned griuously against
thee, that put on my accountes: score it vpon
my crosse, I will pay it: nay I haue already
paide it to the full. Thus we haue
for the greater euidence of this matter allegorized
the Apostles wordes, although
contrarie to our vse, yet not without the
warrant of the practise of the Apostle in diuers
places.



CHAP. IX.

Sect. 1. Of mans subiection to God as
to his teacher,
THe fourth kinde of subiection,
which man being in the state of
innocencie did owe to God, is
the subiection of the scholler, or disciple
to his teacher or maister. For man before
his fal had no other schoolmaister then
God himselfe, no other teacher, preacher
or instructer: for then God was to

man all in all:Of mans subection to God as to his teacher. he did instruct him immediatly
by his owne voice without the ministerie
of man. For as a man need not light a
candle wherewith to see, whenas the sonne
shineth clearely in his eyes; no more needed
man in his innocencie to be taught
by man, seeing that he enioying the
bright sunne-shine of Gods presence, did
therein as in a most cleare cristall glasse
see all thinges which were needfull to be
knowen. So that as in the fourth estate of
man, which is the second state of glorie,
tongues shall cease, yea prophecies with all
ecclesiasticall functions shall be abolished
and haue an end,^ Cor. 13. 8* as we read, 1. Cor. 13. 8.
so in this perfect and happy state, which
was the first state of glorie, they had not
as yet any beginning.
For we are not to thinke that in the
state of innocencie of men some were
wise, learned, and endued with vnderstanding,
and others foolish, rude and ignorant,
as they are nowe in the world: seing
that the naturall knowledge of all men was
perfect, although it might haue bene increased
either by the holy Angels, who
excell man in all giftes and therefore in
knowledge, or by the immediate reuelation
of God himselfe. Yet the Angels

were not the teachers of man (vnlesse
that it pleased God to vse their ministery at
some times) for they had not any such
function commited vnto them, neither did
they knowe all thinges which concerne
mans estate: for the reuealed will of God
was knowen to man (so farre foorth as
it did concerne him) as well as to the Angles.
And as for that which was not as
yet reuealed, it was vnknowen to the Angels,
as well as to man. Yet we doe not meane,
that man in his innocency, had no need of
teachers in the time of his childhood, or
that being nowe come to ripe age, he
might not receaue encrease of knowledge
by the meanes of some other man, as we are
to declare in the third part of this treatise: but
that he being of perfect age, was able of himselfe
without the teaching of any other, to
attaine to the true and perfect knowledge
of God. But here it may be asked, what
this is that man being endued with perfect
knowledge, coulde learne of God. We
answere, that although man wanted no knowledge
which was any way needfull for his
present state, or which might be required
in perfect happinesse, yet it was ordained by
God that his knowledge shoulde continually
encrease, as God shoulde from time

to time reueale himselfe more and more
vnto him. For the euent of thinges in the
continuall administration of the worlde,
woulde haue laide open many of Gods
counsells, decrees, and actions which
coulde not be foreseene by man in the
beginning, neither were reuealed to him
by God.
Thus we see the subiection it selfe:
the duties belonging vnto it, are these
two; The first, that man be ready to
learne of God, whatsoeuer it pleaseth
him to teach. The second followeth or
rather goeth before the first, to wit, that
he beleeue whatsoeuer God sayeth vnto
him. For discentem oportet credere, nothing
can be learned vnlesse the teacher be beleeued.
These duties are such, as that
man might easely performe them vnto
God. For howe is it possible, that he
shoulde not learne, hauing such a teacher,
as is able to put knowledge and wisdome
euen into stockes and stones? And howe
shall he not be beleeued, who is truth
it selfe? For euerie thinge that is true, is
therefore true because it commeth from
God. He is the fountaine of trueth: for
there is no trueth in the creature, but that
which it receaued from God. And therefore

as a man may boldly drinke of the
fountaine it selfe, because the water of it cannot
as yet be corrupted, but if he let the said
water runne some distaunce of place from
the fountaine, so that he be constrained
to take it at the second hand, it hauing
runne by many weedes, ditches, and whatsoeuer
thing it might meete withall, he
may easely be deceaued, and drinke filthy
and noysome water, for that which is
pure and holsome: so if man learne of God,
he neede not feare any false or corrupt doctrine
with the which he may perhappes
meete, if he be instructed by any creature,
whether man or Angel.


Sect. 2. Of mans rebellion to God his
teacher.
ANd yet for all this, such is the
graceles vntowardnesse of sinfull
man in this his corrupt estate,
that like a trewantly boy, he
forsaketh God his heauenly teacher,
altogether refusing to be taught and nurtured
by him. This Salomon teacheth vs in
the booke of the prouerbes, wherein he
doth at large describe the foole refusing
to heare the voyce of wisdome, criing

openly in the streetes: that is, the carnall
man reiecting the knowledge of
God, and all godlinesse (which onely
is true wisedome) Pro. 1. 20.^ou. 1. 20
But man will alleadge in his owne
defence that there is good cause, why he
shoulde refuse to haue God to be his teacher:
seing that if he, being nowe defiled
with sinne, shoulde come into the presence
of God, it coulde not be but that he should
be consumed, euen as pouder, flax, straw
or any such matter when it meeteth with
fire. To this we answere, that this feare
of man is iust and not without cause, it being
impossible that he should come before
God, being as he is polluted with sinne,
and not be incontinentlie destroyed: yet
that this is no sufficient defence of this rebellion,
for so much as God (that he might
make the wicked more in excusable, and
more fitly saue his elect) hath in greate
mercie appointed that man, being now
sinfull, shoulde be instructed in the knowledge
of God by the ministerie of sinful
men, like vnto himselfe in all respectes,
of whose presence he need not be affraid:Iob. 33. 6. 7* and
yet such men as are furnished by God
with sufficient giftes for the performance
of this worke. For although there be in the

men themselues much ignorance, many
infirmities: yea oftentimes great corruption
of sinne, yet their ministery is by the blessing
and worke of God straungly powreful
and mighty, in bringing men from ignorance
and sinne, to the knowledge and obedience
of God: that which they teach, being
the true and certaine word of the eternall
God, the heauenly Manna and foode
of mans soules, howsoeuer it be set before
men in base and earthen vessels, to wit, in
weake men consisting of flesh and bloud as
the hearers themselues doe.
But how doe men receiue this ministery
of man? are they not so thankefull to God for
this mercy, that howsoeuer, they did before
altogether abhorre from learning the
worde of God, for feare of being destroyed
by him, yet they are now so desirous of
knowledge, so carefull to prouide themselues
of able and sufficient teachers, so diligent
in resorting to the places of Gods
worship, so attentiue in hearing the worde
preached, and so carefull to practise it in
their liues, as that nothing more can be required
of them? nay are they not as vntoward
and vngratious as they were before? Yes
truely: yea they are further off from learning
then they were: they did before feare

to be taught by God himselfe, now they
disdaine to be taught by men, whome they
thinke no better then themselues: if
God were their teacher, they could take no
exception against him, but onely of their
owne sinne. But now they finde a hundred
faultes with their teachers, sometimes they
say that they haue no learning, no knowledge
in the artes, or in the tongues, they
are not cunning in the antient fathers, they
want eloquence, vtterance, fit wordes to
expresse their meaning: sometimes they
finde faultes in their liues: for if they see
them eate and drinke, mary wiues, prouide
for their children, build houses, or
purchase liuing, and keepe company,
they call them epicures, drunkardes and
worldlings, if they abstain from these things,
they say they haue no good nature, and want
manners.
This naturall state of man we haue most
liuelely pictured out vnto vs in the people of
the Iewes, who hauing God not onely for
their king, father and master, but also for their
doctor or teacher, did desire that God would
not speake immediately to them, appearing
in his glory and maiesty, as he had done:
because that it was impossible for any man
to heare the voyce of God and liue, but rather

would vse the ministery and mediation
of Moses for the declaration of his will to
them. But when they had this their request
graunted,Deut. 5. 25. how they did submit themselues
to this ministery of man, Stephen telleth
them to their faces,Act. 7. 15. Act. 7. 15. saying,
Ye stifnecked and of vncircumcised harts
and eares, ye haue alwaies rebelled against the
holy Ghost: as your fathers did so do you: which
of the Prophets, haue not your fathers persecuted
and slaine? whereunto Christ giueth
witnesse,Mat. 21. 33. Mat. 21. 33. with all the Prophets,
of whome there is not one from
Moses, who was their first Prophet, to
Christ, who was the last (for in him all
prophecies were fulfilled) who doth
not complaine, that they doe continually
stretch out their handes and voyces to a
rebellious and gainsaying people,Rom. 10. 22* Rom.
10. 22.
Yea they reiected the ministery both of
Iohn Baptist and of Christ himselfe, saying
of Iohn, who liued an austere life, that he
was possessed of a diuell; and of Christ,
who (to make them inexcusable) vsed their
owne fashions, as farre as might be done
without sinne, that he was a glutton, a drinker
of wine and a companion of publicans
and sinners. Thus are all vnregenerate men

disposed. For howsoeuer for a shew of religion,
and to auoyde the reproach of men,
and the punishment of lawes, they doe
goe to the Church to heare sermons: yet
they take no delight in hearing (vnlesse it be
in the eloquence of the preacher) and tho
their bodies be present, yet their mindes
are about some worldly pleasure or profit.
Yea it goeth in at one eare and out at
another. For when they come home they
neuer take account of themselues, their
wiues, children or seruantes, what they
haue learned, but falling to their ordinarie
talke of worldly matters, or going about
some buisinesse, which they haue in
hande, neuer once thinke on the worde
of God, but forget it for euer, as if they
neuer heard of any such matter, and so they
are alwaies in learning, and yet they doe neuer
learne or come to the knowledge of the
trueth,2. Tim. 3. 7. 2. Tim. 3. 7. They doe not delight
in reading the scriptures, and other
bookes, which might helpe them forward
in learning religion, but if they can
get a booke of stories, or of some pleasant
conceites finely penned, there is their
delight.
By what maruaile is it, that men do not
learne Gods word when as they doe not beleeue

it? for although they be content to
say as other men say, and to beleeue as the
Church beleeueth, Yet they say in their
heartes there is no God,Psal. 14. 1. Psal. 14, no heauen
or hell: let vs eate and drinke, for after
death there is no pleasure. Neyther is
it any great marueile, that the vnregenerate
man doth not beleeue the worde of
God, seeing he is so dull and blockish, that
he cannot conceiue it,1. Cor. 2. 14. 1. Cor. 2. 14. The
naturall man perceiueth not the thinges
of God, neither can he, because they are spiritually
discerned, whereof more heereafter.
Hence it commeth that it is so harde a
matter to bring men to any true knowledge
of GOD,Heb. 5. 11. Heb. 5. 11. These spirituall
mysteries are hard to be vttered, because
ye are dull of hearing. And therefore
men muste be taught religion as
children are taught to reade, learning one
letter to daie and another to morrowe,
one poynte nowe, and the rest hereafter,
as the prophet complaineth of the
dulnesse of the Iewes. Esay. 28. 13.Esay. 28. 23.
But it may be heere obiected that if naturall
men be so dull and vnable to vnderstande
Gods worde, they are not to
be blamed for not learning, and for
not doing that which they cannot doe.

Whereunto we answere that this dulnes
of men commeth through their owne
defaulte, in that they cannot by any
meanes be brought to bestowe their naturall
giftes, their time, and labour in
learning. The which thing if they would
once carefully and heartely doe, and so
continue without being wearie in seeking
to knowe GOD, and in vsing the meanes
of their saluation, ioyning with their endeuours
heartie prayer to God for his blessing,
they woulde soone see that it is an
easie matter to learne these thinges, the
which are of that nature, that one poynt
of them being well learned, all the reste
will followe of their owne accorde: so
that all the hardnesse is in beginning to
learne. Yea GOD is harde at hande,
and easie to be founde of all that seeke
him, howsoeuer it be impossible for man
by his owne wit or industry, without the
grace of God, to attaine the true and sauing
knowledge of God.



Sect. 3. Of the renewed subiection of man
to God his teacher.
In the third place we are to consider
the contrary disposition
of those, who being renewed by
the spirit of God, giue the^selues
vnto his discipline to be instructed
by him in all things. For although
they attaine to their knowledge by the means
and ministerie of man, whereby it hath
pleased God rather then by his owne voice,
or by immediate reuelation that the saluation
of his elect should be wrought: yet not
man, but God himselfe is the author and
worker of this knowledge, who as he did
in the state of mans innocencie; so doth he
in his regeneration reueale himselfe and his
will vnto them by his holy spirit,Iob. 32. 8. Iob. 32. 8.
There is indeede a spirit iu man, but it is the
spiration of the almightie that giueth vnderstanding.
Math. 13. 8. 10. Callnot any man
Rabbi maister or doctor,Math. 13. 8. ^ For you haue one
doctor, euen Christ, and all ye are brethren:
That is, you are not to thinke that because
you heare men preach vnto you, that therefore
your mindes are enlightned by them;
for they are your brethren, that is, men like

to your selues,Of mans rebellion to God his teacher. who cannot without the speciall
worke of my spirit learne any thing
themselues, much lesse teach others: so that
Christ is the heade maister in the schoole of
his Church; who although he be absent
from it according to his humaine nature, yet
he is present in it by his spirit, by the which
he teacheth the faithfull all things needefull,
and that without any errour or shaddow
of any. For as hath bene declared, it is impossible
that God should deceiue or be deceiued,
and therefore the holy ghost is called,
The spirit of truth. Ioh. 14. 16. and 15.
26.^^h. 14. 16. and ^^. 26. Christ promiseth that, When he commeth
he shall leade them into all truth.^^h. 17. 13.
Ioh. 17. 13.
And as God is the teacher, so the faithfull
are his scholers, as all those who did
beleeue the gospell,^ Thess. 4. 9. are vsually in the booke
of the actes called Disciples, and 1 Thess. 4. 9.
Men taught by God. Ineede not (saith the
Apostle) to write to you of brotherly loue, for
you are taught of God to loue one another.
That is, the spirit of God hath alreadie engrauen
the doctrine of loue in your mindes
and heartes, and ther fore ye haue not so
greate neede and vse of my ministery in
this behalfe, as they whome God hath not
taught after this manner. Thus the prophet

Dauid often praieth to God that it would
please him to instruct him in his commaundements,
as we may reade often. Psal.
119.Psal. 119.
Lastly they performe to God the second
dutie of this subiection, which is to beleeue
his word in all things: reiecting whatsoeuer
is contrarie thereunto. Yea tho an Angel did
preach it fro^ heauen: all antiquitie, Churches,
councels, all the wise and learned men in
the world do maintaine and affirme it, yea tho
their owne wittes and senses do witnesse the
truth of it: so that the faithfull may in this respect
be co^pared to the scholers of a certaine
philosopher named Pythagoras, who if they
once hearde any thing vttered by their maister,
they held that as a most certain truth,
without inquiring any further into it. And
so among the true disciples of Christ his
holy word is of so absolute authoritie, as that
no doubt is made of anie thing, therein contained.



CHAP. X.

Sect. 1. Of mans subiection to his creator.
THe last, and greatest kind of mans
subiection is that, which he oweth
to God, as to the creator of all things

whereof there is no question to be made;Of mans subiection to his creator.
and therefore we neede not stand to proue
it. The duties of this subiection are three; The
first is to glorifie God: the second to be
wholly moued in him or by him: the third
to rest contented in his will. For the first
as the chiefe and last ende of the creation
of the world, and of al things therein contained,
is the glorie of God; so it is meete
and needefull, that all creatures iointly and
seuerally do performe this dutie of glorifying
him. Yea there is no creature either so base,
or so excellent that it should be exempted
from this dutie. The greatest and mightiest
creature must stoupe to the performance
of it, as the weakest and seelyest thing
in the world is able to set forth the glorie
of God,Psal. 145. 9. 10. Psal. 145. 9. 10. The Lord is good
to all, and his mercie is ouer all his workes.
All thy workes O Lord shall praise thee. They
shall shew the glorie and beautie of thy kingdome.
Thus we see that it belongeth to all
creatures to praise GOD, as they are
exhorted particularlie.Psal. 148. Psalme 148. and as
we reade. Reuel. 5. 13. And all the creatures
which are in heauen,Reelu. 5. 13. on the earth, vnder
the earth, and in the sea, all thinges
that are in them, I hard saying praise, honour,

glory and power be vnto him that
sitteth on the throne, and vnto the Lambe
for euermore. Yet they do not all performe
this duety after the same manner:
for those creatures which are void
of reason, do it onely by giuing to men
and Angels matter of the actuall setting
foorth of Gods glory. For the reasonable
creatures are as it were, the trumpeters
of Gods glory, which they do enlarge
and publishe, as by all other their
actions, so cheifly by those which tende
directly to God himselfe, and are vsually called
the worship of God. For although al the
actions of man in his pure estate, euen the
common actions of life, as eating and drinking,
did make for the glory of God: yet
these do not make the worship of God,
because they do not directly tend to his
glory. But the worshippe of God in this
state of innocencie consisteth especially in
cenfession, which is an open acknowledging
and declaring of Gods glory in
regard of his infinite and vnspeakable
power, iustice, wisdome, trueth, loue and
bountie, shining in the creation and administration
of the worlde, and especially
in them selues the most excellent and
happy creatures.

Thus do the angels in heauen worship
God.Of mans subiection to God ^s to his creator. Reue. 7. 11. 12. And all the
Angels stood round about the throne, and the
elders and the foure beastes,Reu. 7. 11. 22 and they fell
before the throne on their faces and worshipped
God, saying, Amen: praise, glorie,
wisdome, thankes, honour, power and might
be vnto our God for euermore, Amen. Thus
shall the faithfull worshippe God in the
state of glory, and therefore this was
Gods worshippe in the state of innocencie,
wherein we are not to thinke that Adam
offred sacrifices of beastes and other
thinges to God,Gen. 4. 3. 4. as we reade that his
two sonnes Cain and Abel did, Gen. 4. 3. 4.
for there were no types in this state, because
the mediatour was neither promised nor
prefigured: yea there was no sinne in it,
and therefore no effusion of bloud in sacrifices:
the which two, namely sinne and
death goe together. But the sacrifices in
this state were the calues of mans lippes,
euen his continuall giuing of prayse and
thankes to God. Yet there was vse also
of prayer or inuocation as hath bene declared
Chap. 7. Sect. 1.
Secondly it is the duety of the creature to
moue in the creator, that is, to feele,
perceaue, knowe and acknowledge, that

all the motions of it selfe,Reu. 7. 11. 22 all the mutations
which may any way happen to it, as the
first comming of it into the worlde, the
encreases which it hath, yea all the faculties
of performing any action come
from God.Act. 17. 28. Act. 17. 28. In God we liue,
moue and haue our being. The last duety
of the creature is to rest contented,
howsoeuer it pleaseth God to dispose of
it, without murmuring or repining, no
not at the vtter distruction of it selfe. This
the Apostle teacheth vs, not to be so
presumptuous as to aske of God, for what
cause he hath elected some men to life,
and reiected the rest,Rom. 10 saying, Who art thou
o man that pleadest with God, shall the
thing formed say to him that made it, why
hast thou made me thus? hath not the
potter power ouer his clay, to make some vessels
to honour, some to dishonour?


Sect. 2. Of mans rebellion against his
creator.
THe last kinde of mans rebellion
is that, whereby he
is wanting in that duety, for
the performing whereof, he
and all other thinges in the

worlde were created.Of mans rebellion against his creator. The duety is, the aduancing
and setting foorth of the glory
of God, the which man in his corrupt estate,
doth not onely, not enlarge, as
he shoulde doe, but also in all his actions,
and in the whole course of his life,
greatly hinder and obscure: for although
he do in his eternall confusion glorifie
God, by manifesting his power and iustice:
yet this glory is not giuen by
man, but taken and extorted by God: and
therefore it is no holy duety; wherein this
is especially required, that it be performed
voluntarely without compulsion.
As touching the worshippe of God,
whereby he is chiefly glorified, the Apostle
teacheth vs,Rom. 1. 21 Rom. 1. 21. that although
man haue some little knowledge
of God by nature, yet he doth not glorifie
him as God, neither is thankefull vnto
him, but becommeth extreamely foolish,
in turning the glory of the incorruptible
God, into the similitude of the image
of corruptible thinges, and as of beasts*
birds; yea of creeping things, the basest of all
other. And so doth dishonour God, more
then can be spoken. Thus do all carnall
men worshippe God, for although they
be not all so mad as to cast them selues

downe before stocks and stones, yet they
are all Idolatours making either their monie,
their belly, their honour, or some other
worldly thing their God, whom
onely they serue in deed, and heart.
Likewise as touching the other duety,
whereas they shoulde be wholly moued and
ordered by God as by the fountaine and
beginning of all thinges, and directed by
his spirite in euerie thing, that they do,
they are moued by the spirite of Sathan, by
his suggestions, and by the corrupt lustes
and desires of their owne flesh to all euill.
Likewise for the last dutie, namely contentation:
men are contente that God should
do good to them, but they take it in snuffe,
that he shoulde dispose of them otherwise,
then they thinke is for their good: whereof
to let other instances passe, it commeth,
that the doctrine of Gods eternall
reprobation is so curiously scanned, so hardly
receaued; yea oppugned and reiected by
many.



Sect. 3. Of the renewed subiection
of man to his creator.
BVt it is farre otherwise with
the faithfull, who as soone as
they are renewed by Gods spirite,
and so made newe creatures,
doe foorthwith make the glorie of
God, the square and rule of all their actions,
alwaies doing that whereby it may be
most aduaunced: yea they make it the last
marke and end whereat the whole course
of their liues shall wholly aime: insomuch
that they make this account with
themselues, that if they can hit this marke
by procuring Gods glorie in any good
measure (yea tho it be with the losse of their
owne liues) they thinke that they gaine
much by the bargaine. They glorifie God
first, in the common actions of their life, for
they meet with nothing so meane and base,
which will not afforde them some matter to
acknowledge the wisdome and goodnesse
of God. Secondly in giuing to God his
due worshippe: by praying vnto him as
to the onely giuer of all good thinges, by
giuing thankes vnto him from whom they
haue receaued all those blessings, whether

temporall or spirituall,Of the renewed subiection of man to his creator. which they enioy:
and lastly by praising God, as in all other respectes,
so especially for that great and vnspeakable
mercy which it hath pleased him
to bestowe vpon his elect seruants.
In the state of innocency man praised
God for his wisedome, power and goodnesse
shewed in the creation of the worlde:
for his iustice, in rewarding the holinesse of
his reasonable creatures with life and happinesse:
but now God hath put a new song
of thankesgiuing into our mouthes, wherein
the faithfull sounde out the praises of that
most louing, gracious, mercifull, and pittifull
God, who hath forgiuen them all their
sinnes,Psal. 103. 3. 4. and pardoned their iniquitie, who hath
redeemed their soules from the pit of euerlasting
confusion, and hath crowned them with
mercy and compassions. Psal. 103. 3. 4.
And therefore this was an vsuall forme of
thankesgiuing vsed in the Church from
time to time,Psal. 136. Confesse vnto the Lorde, or
praise him,2. Chro. 5. 13. and 7. 3. 6. and 20. 21. and why? because he is good,
because his mercy endureth for euer and euer.
As we may see, Psal. 136. in euerie
verse,1. Esd. 3. 11. 2. Chro. 5. 13. and 7. 3. 6. and 20.
21. 1. Esd. 3. 11.
This celebrating of the praises of God
the godly count the greatest pleasure and

happinesse in the worlde: Psal. 62. 6. My
mouth is filled euen as it were with marrowe
and fatnesse (that is, with the most sweete and
pleasant thinges) when as I prayse the Lorde,Psal. 62. 6.
saith the prophet:Psal. 84. 5 and againe, Psal. 84. 5.
Blessed are they, that stande in thy courtes o
God, for why? they shall euermore be praising
thee. For although the faithfull might
praise God, though they liued out of the
Church in a wildernesse: yet for the greater
aduancement of Gods glory, they desire
and labour that they may praise God,
not among wilde beastes and trees, but
in the assembly of Gods people, as it were
before many witnesses.
Nowe as touching the second duety of
the creature which is to moue onely in
the creator, and by vertue receiued from
him, we knowe, that as the bodies of the
faithfull doe not moue themselues, but are
moued by the power of the soule, within
their bodies; so neyther their bodies nor
soules are moued by any other power,
but by the holy spirite of God: for they
doe not thinke their owne thoughtes, desire
their owne pleasures, speake their owne
wordes, or doe their owne workes, but
are wholly moued and ordered by the spirite
of God. Lastly this property of a

faithfull man is worthy to be noted that he
is not onely patient, in regard of the greatest
euils, which can be laid vpon him, in
in this worlde (as hath beene declared in
the chapter of Filiall subiection) but also
woulde be content if that it shoulde please
God to destroy him vtterly,Iob. (...) and eternally.
Iob. 13. 15. If God kill me,2. Sa^^ shall I not
trust in him? so Dauid saith, 2. Sam. 15. 26.
If I haue found fauour in the eies of God, hee
wil bring me backe againe to see the place of his
worship,(...). 5. but if he say, I haue no pleasure in him
(what then?) beholde here I am, let him doe
to me, whatsoeuer seemeth good in his owne
eyes.



CHAP. XI.
Of mans subiection to God as to an
husband.
THus wee see the diuers
kindes of the renewed
subiection of man, correspondent
to the kindes
of created subiection: to
the which there is one other
kinde of subiection to be added, the
which was not in the state of innocency,
and therefore coulde not be lost by the fall

of man.Of mans subiection to God as to a husband. This is the subiection of the wife
to the husband, by the which bond it hath
pleased God of his vnspeakable mercy and
loue, to tie the faithfull to himself, so that they
should be to him, not onely as subiectes,
sonnes, seruantes, schollers, and creatures,
but also as his espoused wife. This straunge
mariage is celebrated and extolled in that
song of songes, the which is wholly to be
vnderstood of this spirituall mariage betwixt
God and the faithfull: likewise it is
set downe,^phe. 5. ^2. Ephe. 5. verse. 22. to verse 33.
The husband is the wiues head as Christ is the
head of the Church, therefore as the Church
is in subiection to Christ, so ought wiues to
be to their husbands.
This kinde of subiection is called, Ephe.
5. 32,^phe. 5. 32. A great mysterie, and therefore it needeth
to be explained after this manner. The
riches of the loue and mercy of God, redeeming
man from sinne and death, is so exceeding
great, as that he thinking it a small
matter to restore him to that perfect and excellent
estate from the which he fell, doth
aduance him to a higher degree both of holinesse
and of happines. Hence it co^meth that
man is more nearely ioyned to God, then he
was before, both in subiectio^ and in conformity.
But what bond of subiectio^, can ioine man

more neerely vnto God then the sonne is to
his father? after the which manner, man
was before ioyned to God, as hath beene
declared. We answere that although this coniunction
which is betwixt the sonne and the
father be verie great: yet the worde of God
teacheth vs that a greater may be giuen, to
wit, that which is betwixt the wife and the
husband: for this coniunction maketh two
distinct persons to become one person, and
one flesh,Mat. 19. 5. Mat. 19. 5, but that other coniunction
hath no such strange effect. And therefore
it hath pleased god in mercy to tie and knit
man to himselfe, not only with those bonds
of subiection, wherewith he was tied to him
in the state of innocency, but also with this
newe and most straite bonde, taking all the
faithfull vnto himselfe, not onely as his loyall
subiectes, as faithfull seruantes, as toward
schollers, as orderly creatures, and lastly as
naturall sonnes, but also as a most deare and
beloued wife ioyned to himselfe with such
an indissoluble bond of loue on his part, and
such loyall affection on their partes, as shall
neuer be broken, euen as the husband taketh
to himselfe his beloued spouse, on whom he
will bestowe all his loue, riches and care, and
whome he will defend against all euils and
dangers whatsoeuer.
This contract made betwixt GOD,
and his Church is set downe, Ezech. 16.^^ech. 16. the
wordes are many, yet worthy to be remembred.
Nowe when I went by thee and looked
vpon thee, behold^ thy time was come, yea,
euen the time to wooe thee: then spred I my
clothes ouer thee to couer thy dishonesty, yea,
I made an oth vnto thee, and contracted my self
with thee (saith the Lorde God) and so thou
becamest mine owne. Then washed I thee with
water, and purged thy bloud from thee, and
I annointed thee with oyle, I clothed thee with
broidred worke, and shodde thee with badgers
skinne, and I girded thee about with fine linnen,
and couered thee with silke. I decked thee
with costly apparrell, I put braselets vpon thy
handes* a chaine about thy necke, and I put a
frontlet vpon thy face* and earings vpon thine
eares, and a beautifull crowne vpon thine head.
Thus wast thou decked with gold and siluer, and
thy raimente was of fine linnen and of silke,
and of broidred worke: thou diddest eate fine
flowre, home and oyle, marueilous wast thou,
and thou diddest luckilie prosper into a kingdome,
and thy name was spread among the
heathen forthy beautie. etc.
For the further declaration hereof, if we
do consider the notable resemblance which
is betwixt mariage and this new coniunction

of man to God, we shall haue greate
cause to admire the wisdome of the holy
ghost, who in enditing the scriptures doth
paint out such darke mysteries with so liuely
colours, and doth so fit earthly types to spirituall
thinges. The grounde of this newe
coniunction whereby man is more nearely,
firmely, and surely tied to God then he was
before, is the incarnation of Christ, wherein
our nature was inseparably vnited to the
godheade in one person, euen as the wife
(which before was of a diuers kinde, bloude
and name) being now espoused to her husband,
becommeth one flesh, bloude and
bone with him, yea one person called by
one and the same name; so that as the
wife being thus, as it were incorporated to
her husband, is more nearely ioyned to him
then anie other whosoeuer, whether sonne,
kinsman, orfriende, and may more confidently
looke to be enriched and protected
by him: so the faithfull being now in the
humaine nature of Christ thus espowsed and
made one person with GOD, are more
nearely ioyned to him then man was in
the state of innocencie, wherein God did
not take vnto him selfe the nature of man,
and therefore did not acknowledge man to
be as his beloued spouse, and a part of

his owne person, but only as his subiect,
seruant, scholler, creature and sonne. All
which are distinct persons from the King,
maister, teacher, creator, and father: and
so may more certainly and vndoubtedly
looke to be not only protected and saued
from death, by the strength of God their
new husband, but also to be enriched by
him with all spirituall and heauenly blessings
belonging to a holy and happie estate.
Thus we see the manner of this new subiection,
the duties belonging to it are all
those, which a dutifull wife oweth to her
husband: as namely, that she please him,
and cleaue inseparably to him. For the first
as the Apostle writeth, 1 Cor. 7. 34. As she
that is maried careth for worldly things how
she may please her husband;^ Cor. 7* 34. so ought the
faithfull endeauour by all meanes to please
their heauenly husband, by being pure both
in bodie and soule, doing all those things,
which they know are acceptable in his sight:
especially by performing the second duty,
to wit, that they renounce all other things
in the world, and cleaue fast to God without
separation: euen as the wife forsaketh
father, mother, sisters, brethren, kinred and
acquaintance, and betaketh her selfe wholly
to her husband. This dutie of the church

to Christ is notably described, Psal 45.
11. 12. Heare o daughter, encline thine
care, forgette thy people and thy fathers house:
so shall the King haue pleasure in thy beautie,Psal. 45. 11. 12:
for he is thy Lord, and worshipp thou him. Yea
there can no wife haue so good cause to
performe all loyall dutie to her husband, as
the faithfull haue in respect of God. For
if it should please some greate prince to
aduance some base, poore and miserable
woman to the dignitie of being his
wife, all men would say, that she could
not by any duties of subiection, shew her
selfe sufficiently thankfull, how then shall
sinfull man, who of himselfe is the most
wretched creature in the world, but is now
espowsed to God the King of Kings, behaue
himselfe in any measure so dutifully as he
o^^ht?




The second part of this
treatise wherein is handled the
second part of mans holinesse
and sinfulnesse, to wit,
his conformitie or likenesse to
God with the contrarie vnlikenesse
or defermitie.

CHAP. I

Sect. 1. Of the image of God in man in
his pure estate.
IT hath bene declared, that the
good estate of the reasonable
creature whether man or Angel,
consisteth in this, that he be
ioyned to God, the fountaine
of all goodnesse, both personally or locally
in happinesse, and also spiritually in perfect
holinesse. The which holinesse hath two
partes: Subiection and Conformitie. For so
it hath pleased God in greate wisdome to
ioyne these two together in his reasonable
creatures, least that they should be too much
either debased by the one, or lifted vp by
the other. For if they had beene made
like to God without subiection, they woulde
easely haue bene brought to thinke the^selues

^quall to God,Of the image of God in man in his pure estate. and if they had bene subiect to
^od without any likenes or rese^blance to him,
^ey should haue lacked that wherein their
^hole excellencie and dignitie doth consist,
^ haue bene in the same condition with the
^ute beastes. Thus God hath created the
^ule of man, in an equal temperament
^f contrarie qualities, that so the one might
^ualifie and preserue the other. The sub^ection
of man is already declared: nowe
^olloweth his conformitie, which is that
^arte of mans holinesse, wherein he resembleth
God, or is like vnto God, vsuallie
^alled in scripture the image of God: for
as there is a likenesse and similitude betwixt
^n image, and that whereof it is the image,
so there is in respect of this parte of mans
holinesse a likenesse betwixt God and
man.
For the better vnderstanding of this
matter, and the easier resoluing of those
manifolde doubtes, which are moued about
it, it is needfull that we declare what
God is, to whom we make man to be like.
The essence of God is so infinite, secrete,
and hidden that it cannot be conceaued in
our mindes, much lesse expressed in words
to the capacitie of others. For whereas it
is saide,Ioh 4. 24. Iohn. 4. 24. That God is a spirite, the

meaning is, that the nature of God is not
visible and sensible, but mysticall and wonderfull
as are spirites. For otherwise the name
of spirite as it is giuen to Angels, is too grosse
to expresse the essence of God. Yet it
hath pleased God in mercie to make himselfe
knowen vnto vs by his properties, vsually
called by the diuines, the attributes
of God, as his knowledge, wisdome, iustice,
mercy, loue, power, eternitie, and such
other. For as we in common speache going
about to describe any man, doe mention
his vertues, qualities and conditions, saying
that he is honest, gentle, faithfull, liberall,
iust, and learned: so we haue reuealed
vnto vs in scripture no other essence or
nature of God, but the aforesaide attributes,
and therefore if we woulde describe God,
we must say that he is a certaine essence,
most simple without any manner of composition,
existing of it selfe, and from whom
all creatures and actions doe exist, being
eternall without beginning or ending, infinite
in knowledge, wisdome, iustice,
mercie, loue, strength, power, and in all
goodnesse, holinesse, and puritie.
Thus we see in part what God is: now
the image of God in the creature is, whenas
it is like to God in some of the aforesaid

^espectes: as when the creature is endued
with knowledge, wisdome, iustice, power,
^oue, mercie, or any other of the attributes
of God. But it may be here obiected, that
^f the attributes of God, which are his
essence may be giuen to any creature, then
^t shoulde be partaker of gods nature, and
so be a God. We answere, that the attributes
of God may be in the creature, although
not so as they are in God: for example;
God hath strength and the creature
hath strength, euery one more or lesse. Yet
there is this difference, that the strength
of God is essentiall vnto him, and a part
of his nature: but the strength of the creature
is a qualitie or accidental thing, which
may be spared: as when we see two sunnes,
the one is a true substance, but the other
is onely the reflexion of the beames of the
true sunne. In God it is primarelie as in the
fountaine, but the creature hath his strength
from God: in God it is infinite, in the creature
it is finite; God hath all strength, the
creature hath but some, yea the strength
of the mightiest creature, is great weakenesse
in comparison of the power of God.
Againe, some man may obiect, if all
thinges be infinite in God, and finite in
the creature, there can be no proportion

or similitude betwixt them.Of the image of God in man is his pure estate. We answer^
that there may be tho no proportion, ye^
similitude betwixt an infinite and a finit^
thing: as for example, one drop of water i^
like to the great Ocean: both being of th^
same matter, and of the same forme, both
being water and rounde. Againe, to take
our first similitude, the body of the sunne
may be said to be of an infinite greatnesse
(although no creature be simplie infinite)
for philosophers doe teach that it is far greater
then the whole earth, and yet a man
may see the likenesse and image of it in a little
dishfull of water: Lastlie not all the attributes
of God, but onely some of them
can be giuen to the creature, for no creature
is eternall, infinite, or existing of it selfe*
In the which respect, we call this resemblance
which the creature hath to God, rather
a likenesse, then an image; for we know
that an image is like to the thing it selfe in
euery respect, as the image of a man seemeth
to be a man, the image of the sunne or
moone in the water, seemeth to be the
sunne or moone it selfe. But no creature
seemeth to be God, because it is vnlike to
God in moe respects, then it is like, for a
beast may be like a man in many respects,
as is an Ape: yet we doe not say that it is

the image of man, because the vnlikenesse
and difference is greater then the likenesse.
But to applie these thinges to the matter
in hand. It will be here said, why then
doth the scripture say, that man was created
according to the image of God? we
answere, that the holy Ghost in enditing
the scripture, hath more regard to our capacitie,
then to the exact proprietie of
speache and therefore calleth the likenesse
of man to God, by the name of Gods image,
that he might distinguish it, (as
being farre greater) from the likenesse,
which other creatures haue to God. For
as a man speaking of beastes, may say that
a horse or any other beast is like to a man,
because it hath a heade, eyes, mouth,
breast and bellie as a man hath: but when
he commeth to the Ape, or to the Satyre,
there he findeth so great likenesse, that he
sticketh not to call it, though vnproperly,
the verie image and picture of a man. So
the scripture sayeth that euerie thinge hath
some likenesse to God. For the starres are
glorious, the heauens are simple, the fire
is pure, the ayer is subtill, the thunder is
fearefull, the winde is mighty, the raine
is good, the rockes and many other things

in a manner eternall, the birdes of the aire
and the beastes of the field are carefull to
preserue those which they bring into the
worlde, and are louing and pittifull towards
them, as God is affected towardes all his
creatures; and therefore euerie creature
hath alikenes to God. Whereof it commeth
that God doth often in the scripture compare
himselfe, euen to his senslesse and brutish
creatures,Esa. 5. 29. as may be seene Esa. 5. 29.
Hosea. 5. 14.Hosea. 5. 14. yea we read, Gen. 1. 31. That
God looking on his creatures,Gen. 1. 31. saide, That
they were all good. Whereof it followeth
that they are all like to God, who is goodnesse
it selfe, and is saide to be onely good,
Math. 19. 17.Math. 19. 17. But when as the holie
ghost in the scripture commeth to speake
of a man being endued with reason, vnderstanding,
knowledge, wisdome, and memory,
with iustice, equitie, courage, temperance,
chastity, loue, pitty and all manner
of holynesse, with a beautifull proportion
of body and excellent giftes of
the minde, yea with lordshippe and dominion
ouer all these earthly creatures, he
sayeth of him, that he is the very image of
God, as if he were a finite and a created
God. And yet he doth not meane that man
is either a God, or the image of God: for

there can be no image of God, eyther
found in any creature, or imagined by the
minde of any man or Angell; onely Christ
the eternall and essentiall sonne of God is the
expresse character and engrauen forme
of the father, being so much more his image
then any man or Angell is: as a naturall
sonne begotten of the body of his father,
being of the same substance, flesh,
bloud, bone, stature, colour and conditions
with his father, is more his image, then
is an ape, horse, or any other beast.
Thus we see that the image of God in
man, is, that greate similitude, which he
hath to God, whome he doth resemble not
onely in one, or in a fewe respectes as other
creatures doe, but in many, yet not in all.
In this sense God after that he had made all
other creatures,Gen. 1. 26. saith, Gen. 1. 26. Let vs
make man in our owne image, according to
our owne similitude. Where we see that the
image and similitude of God are all one,
both signifying the difference of excellencie,
which is betwixt man and other creatures
there named. In like manner, if we
compare man with the Angels, we shall
finde that as he doth farre exceede the other
creatures; so the Angels doe farre
exceede him, in bearing the image of

God.Of the image of God in ma^ in his pure estate. For they are indued with a greater
measure of vnderstanding, knowledge,
wisedome, strength, purity, holinesse, and
of all goodnesse, then any man is capable
of, and so they approach nearer to the nature
of God, and are liker to God then man
is. Againe, of men, they who haue a greater
measure of the aforesaid attributes, haue
more of the image of God; as the magistrate
who hath greater power and authoritie
then priuate men, and therefore are in the
scripture called Gods: the man who hath
greater strength then the woman, and therefore
is said to be the image of God, whereas
the woman is made the image of the
man,1. Cor. 11. 7. 1. Cor. 11. 7. and so the rich, noble,
learned, wise, aged man, in respect of him
who hath a smaller measure of these giftes,
may be called the image of God. So that
if we goe from the basest worme creeping
on the earth, to the most glorious Angell
in heauen, as each one is more excellent
then other, so it is liker to God: yet the
scripture vouchsafeth this title of Gods image,
to none saue onely to man and Angels.
This is the generall acception, and in
this sense the image of God is also vsually
taken by diuines writing of mans holinesse.

Thirdly it may be vsed yet more specially,
to signifie not all the holinesse of man,
but onely that part of it, whereby he resembleth
God more notably then in the other:
for as touching all those partes of mans holinesse,
which haue beene declared in the
first part of this treatise, they cannot be properly
said to be any part of the image of
God, because there is no such thing in
God, he being ouer all and therefore ackngwledging
no manner of subiection to
any, neither any duety of subiection, as
affiance, hope, feare, reuerence, imitation,
inuocation, seruice, worship, thankes,
or any other of that kinde. But if we speake
of mans vnderstanding, knowledge, wisedome,
loue, hatred, or any other of the
faculties of his minde or will, we may call
these very fitly the image of God, because
man doth in these pointes resemble God, in
whome the like thinges are founde. Yet the
scripture, and those learned men which follow
the phrase of the scripture, doe not speake
improperly in calling the whole holinesse of
man by this name: seeing that holinesse in
generall is gods image, who is perfectly
holy; and therefore he that looseth the first
part of his holinesse, namely the due subiection
of man to God, or is wanting in the

performance of any duety belonging vnto
it, as the wicked Angels rebelling against
God, and yet keeping a great part of their
conformitie to God in knowledge and wisedome,
strength, and many other respectes
haue done, he is vnlike to God, who is not
perfectly holy, and hath lost the image of god.
So that to conclude, we are in this seconde
parte to entreate of the image of God in
this third sense, it signifying the second part
of mans holinesse, wherein he doth more
specially resemble God, and which for the
excellency of it hath the name of the whole
giuen vnto it. But because the image of God
is vsually taken more generally, therefore we
will call this second part of mans holinesse
the likenesse, similitude, or conformitie of
man to God, the which is the right and orderly
disposition of those faculties of mans
soule, wherein he doth resemble God,
to wit, of his minde and will: whereof
hereafter in particular.



Sect. 2.
Of mans deformity or vnlikenesse
to God.
AS God created man so like
vnto himselfe in perfect happinesse
and holinesse, that
he might in some sorte be
said to beare about with him
the image of the great and
glorious God of heauen; so man by his
fall lost that pretious iewell which was vnto
him as a chaine of golde about his necke,
yea as it is called,Psal. 8. 6. Psal. 8. 6. A crowne of
honour and glory: And so became miserable
and vnholie as vnlike to God, as darknesse
to light, and hell to heauen. And yet the
image of God, is not so cleane abolished, but
that there are some reliques of it to be seene
in man: for looke in how many respectes
eyther of happinesse or holinesse, man since
his fall doth excell the rest of the creatures;
so much of the image of God doth remaine
in him. As for example, one part of mans
happinesse was the outward dignity of his
bodie, the vse of Gods creatures, in the
which respectes man hath, euen in this his
corrupt estate, euident reliques of Gods
image. Likewise for the other part of Gods

image,Of mans deformity or vnlikenesse to God. there remaineth in the minde of man,
some small knowledge of God, of good and
euill, the which if it were perfect, were
the holinesse of the minde.
Yet these reliques doe not make, that
any one part of Gods image doth remaine:
the which is wholly defaced, although not
vtterly abolished. It may now be compared to
a fayre picture of some beautifull ma^, whereof
euery part is blemished, stained, and
mangled. Yet not so, but that the proportion
of it may be discerned, and each part distinguished
from other: or (as it is commonly)
to the ruines of some stately pallace: or
lastly, to a dead childe, wherein although
we may discerne the likenesse and image of
the Father, yet it is but a vile, lothsom and rotten
carcasse. Therefore these reliques do not
make man to be eyther happie or holy in
part: only they serue for these vses: First to be
monuments of the great bounty and goodnes
of God, shewed to man in creating him
after his owne likenesse. Secondly to be as
meanes whereby God might worke the saluation
of his elect, and suffer the reprobate
(who by this meanes become inexcusable) to
work their own eternal damnation. Thus we
see the general deformity of man, consisting
in wretchednes and sinfulnes, the particulars

whereof we are not here to declare:Of mans deformitie or vnliknesse to God. because
the former part hath shewed both the wretchednesse
of man, and the first part of his
sinfulnesse: onlie we are here to entreate of
that speciall deformitie of man, wherby some
partes of his holinesse are defaced, namely,
those wherein he did so rese^ble God, as that
he might haue bene said to haue the^ in co^mon
with God, as are the minde, memorie, will,
and manie of the affections, and in briefe the
chiefe faculties of the soule of man, all which
are strangelie corrupted and whollie peruerted
from that good, holie and orderly disposition
wherein they were created.


Sect. 3.
Of the renewed Image of God in man.
AS the fall of man defaced the Image
of God in man; so the grace
of God doth wholly restore the
same, both in happinesse and also
in holinesse, as hath beene declared in parte
alreadie: onlie there remaineth that part of
renewed holinesse to be handled, which
may most properlie be called the image of
God; consisting in the renouation of the reasonable
minde and will, euen the faculties
of mans soule: not that God hath a soule,
or any such faculties of a soule as man hath,
but only it hath pleased him to resemble

his incomprehensible essence to our nature
for our capacitie:(...) the renew^d Image of God in man. for the faculties of a reasonable
soule, being in due order, doe greatly
resemble the nature of God, which is reasonable,
or rather reason it selfe. And therefore
although in truth not like to any created
nature, yet liker to reasonable creatures,
then to any other. Yet we haue rather chosen
to call it the conformitie of man to God:
because the image of God is vsually taken
more generally: sometimes for the wholle
coniunction of man with God, both outward
in happinesse, and spirituall in holinesse;
And sometime only for one part of it,
namely for renewed holynesse. Col. 3. 10
and for renewed happinesse.Coll. 3* 10. 2. Cor 3. 18.2 Cor. 3. 18.
But the image of God is taken more specially,
for the speciall coniunction of man to
God in holinesse, especially in the writings
of the Apostles, who doe not speake so
much of the renouation of mans happinesse
(because that is not present, but to come in
the world to come) as of his holinesse, the
renouation whereof the faithfull are to labour
for in this life, leauing their happinesse
to the time appointed by God.




CHAP. II.

Sect. 1.
Of the created holinesse of the minde.
Among the faculties of ma^s soule,
the first and chiefe place is giuen
to the mind, or vnderstanding
parte it being the first
both in nature and also in dignity:
for it is the beginning and fountaine from
the which the other faculties, yea all the motions
and actions of the whole man do flow:
and is of so greate dignitie, that by reason
of it, man doth not only farre excell all other
visible creatures without comparison, but
also approacheth very near to the excellencie
of the Angels, and doth in some sort resemble
the all-knowing essence of God. This
did Sathan know verie well, that man was
like to God in nothing so much as in his vnderstanding,
and therefore he perswaded Eua
to eate of the forbidden fruite, by promising
that by that meanes shee should attaine to
a greater measure of knowledge, and so consequentlie
greater likenesse to God then
she had. For so he saith, Gen. 3. 5. God knoweth
that when ye shall eate of this fruite,
your eyes shalbe opened,Gen. 3. 5. and ye shalbe as gods,
knowing good and euil.

But to leaue the dignitie of the minde to
them who take in hand the naturall description
of man:Of the created holinesse of the minde. we are here to consider
the spirituall state of it in respect of God,
to wit, the holinesse of it. That the minde
was created holy, no man can denie, but
he who sticketh not to reproch his maker,
as hauing erred in the most excellent part
of his worke: and therefore it is more needfull
that we declare the particulars of this
holinesse. First, what it is, or wherein it consisteth,
secondly the seuerall partes of it: for
the first.
The holinesse of the minde consisteth in
the perfect knowledge of God, and so it
may be briefely defined. Where we saye
perfect, we meane that perfection and measure
of knowledge, whereof the nature of
man is capable, for there is a more perfect
and excellent knowledge in the Angels, then
can be in any man. Againe there is more
perfect knowledge of God in God then in
any Angell. For God is knowen perfectly
and essentially to himselfe only. These transcendent
kindes of knowledge, which are
without the compasse of humaine nature, are
not required at the handes of man; and therefore
he wanteth them without sinne. Againe,
we doe not meane by perfection

the highest degree, or the greatest measure
of knowledge which may be attained
vnto by man: for in this innocent estate,
one man may want that great measure of
knowledge which an other man hath, and
yet want no part or iot of the holinesse of
his minde; onely by perfection we meane
that knowledge wherein there is no parte
wanting, which is any way needfull for the
holy and happie estate of man: that is, whenas
a man knoweth all those duties which he
oweth to God, and whatsoeuer thing belongeth
necessarilie to his owne good estate.
The second worde of the definition is
knowledge, whereby we meane both actuall
and potentiall knowledge; Actuall knowledge
is that which is already really in the
minde: Potentiall knowledge is that vertue
or facultie which conceaueth thinges
offered to the minde by any meanes. The
first is to haue knowledge, or the habite
of knowledge: the second is to be able to
gette that knowledge which as yet is wanting:
of these two heereafter in particular.
Lastly by the knowledge of God, we
meane all manner of knowledge, whereof,
although there be diuerse kindes, (as
there are many thinges in the worlde besides

God to be knowen) yet the holines
of the minde consisteth in this, that it knoweth
all thinges in God, and nothing any
otherwise then as it commeth from God, and
hath relation to him. For God is all things
in all, and all thinges do exist in God: and
therefore euerie thing may be knowen in
God, and God knowen, yea seene and
felte in euerie thing, euen in the least and
basest creature. The wicked Angels are
in this their corrupt estate endued with
a great measure of knowledge, but this
their knowledge is voide of all holynesse,
because it hath no relation to God and
his glory: for this onely is to be accounted
the holinesse of the minde: not barely
to knowe the natures, properties and
differences of thinges, but to see and acknowledge
the wisdome, power goodnesse
and glorie of God in them. For holinesse
hath relation to God onely, it seeth
God through the meanest thinges, and
doth not rest in any thing, till it come to
God.
Yet we are not to thinke that the minde of
man is in this his innocencie a confused chaos,
or heape of knowledge: for God the
maker of man is not the author of confusion:
And therefore we are to distinguish

this knowledge into the seuerall kindes
and partes of it, whereof the first and cheife
is the knowledge of God, that is, of the
proper nature, attributes and actions of God:
the second is, the knowledge of the creatures.
The first kind may be called diuine,
be cause it tendeth directly and immediatelie
to God himselfe. Where we doe not
meane that man could possiblie comprehend,
within the narrow compasse of his
shallow braine, the infinite and vnsearchable
essence of God, the which thing the
Angels cannot doe. Yet we are not to doubt,
but that he did thinke aright without any
errour of the nature of God. And no maruaill
seing he did see God face to face as the
scripture speaketh, that is, was daily conuersant
in the presence and company of
God, as the Angels in heauen are, although
not in the same measure: from this knowledge
as from a fountaine, springeth the
knowledge of the creatures (commonlie
called humaine knowledge) because all the
creatures belonging to man, and seruing
for his vse, are knowen for his good onely.
For as a man may easely see all thinges, being
there where the sunne shineth clearely;
so man liuing in Gods presence, coulde not
haue the nature of any creature hid from

his sight. From both these kindes of knowledge,
came the knowledge of euill: for, Rectum
est index sui et obliqui, a streight rule
or line sheweth the crokednesse of any
thing; and so all trueth, good and right shining
in God and in his creatures, did shewe
to man what was false, wrong, hurtfull, vnlawfull,
or any way euill: for although Sathan
did promise to man a greater measure of
the knowledge of good and euill then he
had,Gen. 3. 5. Gen. 3. 5. as if his knowledge had bene
imperfect in that behalfe; yet he knewe
what was euill, better before his fall then
afterwarde, although by his fall he gott^
the sense and experience of euill which he
wanted before.
Thus much in general of mans knowledge,
the which is nowe to be considered more
particularlie in the two kindes of it, Potentiall
and Actuall. Potentiall knowledge
is the aptnesse and abilitie of the minde, to
conceaue and comprehende whatsoeuer
it shoulde please God to reueale. Here i^
may be asked, by what meanes man in his
innocent estate did attaine to knowledge*
We answere, that Adam the first man was
created in perfection as of body and soule
so also of actuall knowledge, not gotten
by sense, experience, obseruation, and by

his owne industrie, (and yet it was afterwarde
to be encreased by these meanes) but
engrauen in his minde by the finger of God,
and inspired by God together with his mind.
But his children were not to come so lightly
to knowledge, to whom he could not
propagate his actuall knowledge, but onely
his potentiall: for they were to be borne
as in weakenesse of bodie; so with mindes
voide of all actuall knowledge, not hauing
the formes, similitudes and vniuersall notions
of thinges (called Ideae or species)
engrauen in them by nature, but being appointed
by God to seeke for knowledge
by some outward meanes, and so to replenish
these emptie roomes with all varietie of
knowledge. The which thing was done in
this state farre more easely, certainlie, and
sooner then any man can get knowledge in
the sinfull state of man.
First for humaine knowledge, it was to
be gotten by the aforesaide meanes of sense,
experience, obseruation, and collection.
For the which purpose man had great subtilitie,
and quicknesse of outwarde senses,
arising of the exact temperament of his
bodie, and being able to receaue aright
without errour the impression of any obiect.
And accordingly were the faculties

of the minde disposed, the which as it is
commonly saide, followe the temperature
of the body, and by the which man was
able with great quicknesse, facilitie, certainety
and trueth to conceaue and vnderstand,
to imagine and inuent, to compounde
and deuide, to collect and inferre,
to reason and discourse, to iudge and determine,
and in summe to performe all the
duties, actions, and motions in any naturall
and finite obiect without failing or erring
in his worke. Thus we see that man
was to come to the knowledge of the creatures,
called humain knowledge, not by
immediate inspiration, or any supernaturall
reuelation from God, but by the
meanes of the naturall faculties of his body
and minde: for as it is in the corrupt estate;
so in the state of innocencie, the outward
senses of the body did let knowledge into
the minde, as light commeth into a house
by the windowes of it. Yet man did not
gette knowledge onely by opening his
eyes, but by diligent vsing and imploying
all the faculties of his minde in this worke.
Hereof we may inferre these things; First
that man knewe not any thing which might
not be knowen by the aforesaid meanes of
his naturall faculties. As for example, he

could not giue any certaine iudgement of
the effect, where the causes were contingent,
as in his owne actions, he coulde not
foresee his owne fall, whether he shoulde
resist or giue place to temptation, because
the trueth hereof did depend on the extemporall
motion of his freewill, which might
encline it selfe to eyther part: Secondly that
he knew not any particular thing, which had
not at any time beene apprehended by his
outward senses, and therefore he could not
know the secret thoughtes of another man,
nor define the number of thinges infinite, as
to tell how many stones, or fishes were in
the sea: these thinges he did not know, neither
was it needfull for him to know them.
Againe, hereof it followeth, that man in
his innocency had not any perfection of
knowledge till he were come to ripenesse
of age: for that during the time of his infancie
and childehood, the faculties of his bodie
and minde were weake, and therefore
not able to performe their seuerall functions
in any perfect manner: Yea further that in
his youth he was to be trained vp in learning
and in vsing all the meanes of attaining
knowledge. Wherein we are not to thinke
that he was so slow, dull, and vntoward as
are the wittiest and most forward ones in

this corrupt estate, but that he did profite
in knowledge farre more easely then any
can doe in this sinfull time. Lastly in that
man was to get knowledge by the aforesaid
meanes, it appeareth that all men were not
endued with the like measure of actual knowledge;
for howsoeuer the naturall faculties of
the minde, seruing for the getting of knowledge
were much alike in all without any
great differe^ce, (for it could not be but that
there should be some difference as in the te^perament
of the bodies, so also in the minds
or greater, their actual knowledge was lesse
of men,) yet as men did giue the^selues more
or lesse to the vse of the meanes, and to the
searching out of the trueth of thinges.
Thus we see what was the meanes of mans
humane knowledge: but how shal we think
that he came to the knowledge of god, who
is not subiect to sense, and therfore to be knowe^
by some other meanes? For the answere
hereof, we are to distinguish the knowledge
of God in to two parts: The one is the knowledge
of gods nature; the other is the knowledge
of his actions, counsels, decrees,
and will: this latter part was altogether vnknowen
to man, but so farre foorth, as it
was extraordinarily reuealed to him by
God, otherwise, no man, yea no Angell

in heauen knoweth the minde of God,
or is admitted into his secrete counsell,
as no Angell knoweth when the worlde
shall haue an end, Math. 24. 36.Math. 24. 36. Thus man
in his innocency was ignorant of his owne
fall, and of the whole worke of our redemption
by Christ: for these thinges
were not reuealed vnto him, neither had
he any neede of this knowledge. Yet God
did from time to time reueale his counsels
vnto man so (farre foorth as was needfull)
and that by visions, apparitions,
dreames, ^ ectasies, inspirations, and by the
ministerie of Angels, but most commonly
by a created voyce, as he spake to Adam
in the garden. This parte of diuine knowledge,
being reuealed by God, might
easely be attained to by man, who was
able to conceiue, vnderstand and remember
that God had decreed and would doe
this or that thing. But for the knowledge of
Gods essence and nature, which is euery way
infinite, howe shall we thinke it possible to
be comprehended by man, although the
same were reuealed by God: seeing that it is
impossible for God himself to make a finite
thing co^prehend that which is infinite.
Againe whatsoeuer man knoweth or
conceaueth in his minde, he conceiueth

it by a similitude, or image of the saide
thing abstracted from it by his outwarde
sense: but whereunto shall man resemble
or compare God, who is not like to
any thing eyther truely existing or which
can be imagined? We answere confessing
all this to be true, and agreeable to the
worde of God, for it is impossible for a
man to knowe GOD fully, as a man
may knowe the whole nature, forme,
force, matter, vertue and abilitie of a tree,
beast, or any other creature. But howe
much soeuer we doe giue to God in our
mindes, yet there is more due vnto him.
And yet man may in some sort comprehend
the nature of God, euen by knowing
it to be incomprehensible, and get a
likenesse or forme of it, by knowing it to
be incomparable to any thing, and vnlike
to all thinges. Whereof ariseth this knowledge
of God in the minde of man, God
is a certaine thing or nature incomprehensible
and incomparable.
But this is nothing to the purpose: for it
is not sufficient for man in regarde eyther
of his happinesse, or of his holinesse to
haue a generall and confused knowledge
of God, that he is a certaine thing or nature,
there being innumerable natures beside

his in the worlde: or to haue a priuatiue
knowledge that God cannot be comprehended
of any creature, or resembled
to any thing, for this knowledge, is nothing
but a confession of ignorance: and
therefore it is needfull to search out not only
what God is not, but also what he is: but
this cannot be done by any creature, and
therefore let vs aske counsell of the scripture,
and learne the nature God, of God
himselfe to whome onely it is fully knowen.
This may be done, Iohn. 4. 24.Iohn. 4. 24. where it is
said, That God is a spirite. But so are the
Angels also, Heb. 1. 7.Heb. 1. 7. howe then? shall
we thinke, that God and the Angels, which
are creatures, are of the same nature? God
forbid: for that thought were no holy knowledge
but a blasphemous errour; yea the
scripture meaneth no such thing, as that
God is a spirite, but onely that he is of an
inuisible, subtile, and pure nature, as are
the Angels, and as is the winde and ayre
(from the which the name of spirits is
taken) or as is the flame of fire,
which is made the synonymum, that is, of
the same signification with the name
of spirite: Heb. 1. 7.Heb. 1. 7. He maketh his Angels
spirites, and his ministers, flames of
fire.

If this be true, as it is most true, then
we are but where we were, for hereby
we learne onely that GOD is not
a visible or sensible thing. And therefore
we must haue recourse againe to the
mouth of GOD, and with Moses aske
boldlie what he is,^xod. 3. 13. 14. and desire to haue
his true name and nature reuealed vnto
vs. The answere which GOD giueth
is this, I am that I am, or I will be that
I will be, that is, I am no chaungling but
the same for euer. But neyther these places,
nor any other in the scripture, doe
flatly define what the essence of GOD
is, what then is to be done in this
case? shall wee thinke that GOD, who
made man so happy, and was so bountifull
vnto him, did enuie to him
the knowledge of his owne nature? that
cannot bee: Wee are rather to gather
by the silence of GOD in this behalfe,
that this is too high a pointe of knowledge
for man to reach vnto; yea such
an one whereof the minde of man is not
capable: And therefore man in his innocencie
was not to busie his heade in sounding
the bottomelesse depth of Gods
essence, or to thinke that the tongues of
all the Angels in heauen were able to vtter

so significant a word as shoulde containe
in it the forme and substance of Gods
nature.
How then may man knowe God, or at
the least come neare to some manner of
knowledge of him? We answere that neither
God nor anie other thing can possiblie
be conceiued by man, but by some resemblance
or Image, and therefore the only way
to attaine to this light and imperfect knowledge
is to imagine of God, by that which
is of al other things most excellent in nature,
and so approacheth nearest to the nature of
God, and which all men know to be the
most excellent of all others. In this contemplation
the nature of the reasonable creatures
doth first offer it selfe, as farre excelling
all other natures, and therefore man
must be faine to gather out of himselfe, or
else from the Angels, if they were so well
knowen vnto him, an Idea, Image or notion
of God, not by thinking him like to anie
creature (for that were idolatry) but by appyling
the best, highest, greatest and most excellent
things which he findeth in himself to the
nature of God. This meanes of attaining to
the knowledge of God, is so naturall to
man, that it remaineth euen in his corrupt
estate, wherein nothing is more co^mon then

to thinke and speake of God as of a man for
ignorant men knowing nothing more excellent
then themselues, doe thinke
their owne nature to be likest to the nature
of God.
Well, then let vs vse this meanes seeing we
haue no other, and see if we can conceiue of
the greate ocean by a droppe of water. What
then is counted most excellent in the nature
of man? what but his vnderstanding,
knowledge, wisdome, counsell, his reasonable
wit and orderlie affections, his loue,
fauour, mercy, pittie, his iustice, purity, and such
other vertues, his strength and power, his
Lordshippe ouer the creatures, and his,
glorie arising thereof? In these things doth
the excellencie of man consist, and therefore
man, as it were, putting his owne coate
on God, is to conceiue of him in his minde
as of a nature surpassing, yea infinite in
knowledge, wisdome, counsell, in will, loue,
hatred, fauour, and reuenge, in mercie and
compassion, in puritie and iustice, in might,
power, dominion and glorie, and no maruaile
that man doth thus conceiue of God,
seeing GOD in regarde of the weaknesse
of mans capacitie, hath reuealed him
selfe to man in this, and in no other
manner, euen in the person, likenesse,

and nature of man, and yet this is the
onelie nature of GOD which is reuealed.
Now as touching the meanes whereby
man in this his innocencie attaineth to the
knowledge of this nature of God (which
being after a sort his owne nature, is familiar
vnto him and may easilie be conceaued)
they are two. The first are the naturall faculties
of his soule and bodie, to wit, his senses
outward and inward, by the which he
did plainly and certainly gather out of
the creatures, the actuall knowledge of gods
attributes, wherein as hath bene saide, his nature
being otherwise incomprehensible is reuealed,
as namely, of his infinitenes, eternity,
wisdome, iustice, power, and loue, all which do
shine so clearelie in the creatures, that man euen
since his fall doth by this meanes attaine
to some knowledge of God: as we read. Rom.
1. 20.Rom. 1. 20. The inuisible things of God, to wit, his eternitie,
power and godheade are plainele seene since
the creation of the world, being considered or
vnderstoode in the creatures. If by man being
sinfull, how much more by him being in
his pure estate? For what maruaile is it that
one who hath both his eyes, and is cleare
sighted, doth see the light of the sunne shining
in his eies, which is so cleare of it
selfe, that a blinde man maye perceiue

it?
The second way or meanes of knowledge,
was immediate reuelation: for as it
shalbe in the seconde, so in the first state of
innocencie, GOD did reueale himselfe
and the glorie of his power, wisdome, loue,
and of the rest of his attributes immediatlie
by himselfe, and that diuers wayes
as it seemed best vnto him, vouchsafing to
haue familiar conuersatio^ with his reasonable
creatures, and to speake with them face to
face as one friende vseth to doe with another.
This second meanes did make perfect
the actuall knowledge gotten by man
himselfe out of the creatures, encreasing
it to a farre greater measure then can be
attained in the state of regeneration.
Thus much of the meanes whereby the
potentiall knowledge of man is made actuall:
whereby it appeareth that there was no
ordinarie ministerie appointed by GOD
in the handes either of Angell or of man
as it is in the state of regeneration as hath
bene declared in the first part Chap. 8. Sect.
1. For if we shoulde suppose that some one
man in this state of innocency did liue solitarelie
by himselfe, not hauing the companie
or helpe of any other; yet we are not to thinke
that he woulde haue bene ignorant of God,

but rather to be perswaded that howsoeuer
he might want the knowledge of some particulars
(the which doth not make an imperfect
knowledge) and also be inferiour to others
in measure of knowledge, yet he shoulde
haue bene endued with the perfect knowledge
of God. For as hath bene said, this
state of happinesse is of the same kinde with
the happinesse of the Angels in heauen, although
in degree of knowledge and all other
graces it be farre inferiour to it. For this
is a certaine and generall rule, that in all
states of innocency, whether they be in heauen
or on earth, whether in this world or in
the worlde to come, God doth reueale himselfe
to his reasonable creatures face to face,
that is, immediatlie without the mediation
of any creature, as God saieth, Numb. 12. 8.Numb. 12. 8.
That he spake to Moses face to face, mouth
to mouth. But he spake to the people by
the mediation of Moses. Thus, 1. Cor. 13.
12.1. Cor. 13. 12 To see God face to face, (as the Godly
shall in the worlde to come) is opposed to
the knowing of God by the ministerie of
man, as the faithfull doe in this life, wherein
God doth reueale himselfe to them by
his ministers, as one man speaketh to an other
by an interpreter or messenger, not in
personall presence. Yet this immediate

teaching doth not hinder, but that in this
state of innocencie one man might haue his
knowledge encreased by an other, as God
did reueale some particulars to one more
then to another, or that the weakenesse
of mans infancie and childehood shoulde
not be supported by teachers, as hath bene
declared.
Thus much of the potentiall knowledge,
called by philosophers, the suffering
vnderstanding, or facultie of the minde
the which in conceauing any thing doth
suffer the impression of knowledge, as waxe
doth suffer when as any forme is imprinted
in it. Nowe we come to actuall knowledge,
called the agent facultie, because knowledge
being once gotten is not idle, but working
in the minde, and doth not onely moue
it selfe, but also is the beginning of motion
to all the other faculties of the bodie
and soule.
As touching the measure of mans actuall
knowledge in his innocencie (the which
poynt onely resteth to be considered) it is
to be defined by his happinesse, and by
comparison made with the knowledge of
the faithfull in their regeneration. For first
man knewe whatsoeuer might any way
make for his good and happie estate, as

namely, he had the perfect knowledge of
God (which is a great parte of happinesse)
beholding him daily and continually, although
not in his essentiall forme, which
is incomprehensible, yet in the cleare euidence
of his glory. Besides he had the
knowledge of all the creatures, whose
formes, kindes, natures, properties, vertues,
qualities and commodities, he did perfectly
comprehend: as appeareth in that
Adam gaue to euery beast a name agreeable
to his nature. He knew howe to gouerne families
and common-wealthes, with meete
orders and lawes, and in generall, whatsoeuer
thing did any way belong to the necessitie,
vse, pleasure or commoditie of humaine
life.
Secondly we may gather the measure
of the created knowledge by comparing it
with renewed knowledge. For if we should
put together in one man, the knowledge of
the best and most learned diuines, politicians,
physitions, logicians, mathematicians, philosophers,
and of all that are most excellent
in any kinde, yet it is not so great, sound,
pure, subtil and perfect as the knowledge of ma^
in the state of innocencie. And no maruel seing
he had far more excelle^t meanes of knowledge
whether we regard his own nature, and

therein the puritie and integritie of all his
senses and faculties, both outward and inwarde,
or yet his scholemaister and teacher
who was Godhimselfe.


Sect. 2,
Of the sinfulnesse of the mind or of the
ignoraunce of man in his corrupt estate.
THus much of mans knowledge
in his pure estate, from the
which we come to his corrupt
state as out of the cleare
sunne-shine into a darke dungeon:
for as before the fall of man his minde
was enlightned with the perfect knowledg of
God and of al things in the world; so since the
fal, it is ouercast and euen wholly possessed with
palpable darknesse, being destitute not onely
of all actuall knowledge, but also of all
abilitie of attaining the true knowledge
of God by any facultie, vertue, industrie
or any meanes inherent in himselfe, the
which in the former section we call potentiall
knowledge: for the first kinde of
knowledge, namelie actuall, reall or that
which is already gotten, it is euident to the
eyes of all that list to consider it, that
the naturall knowledge of man is mere
darknesse and ignorance. By naturall knowledge
we meane that knowledge which is^

and may be seene in all vnregenerate men,Of the sinfulnesse of the minde.
who are come to yeares of discretion, and
haue neither encreased nor decreased that
knowledge which they haue of themselues.
Both which accidentes may happen to carnall
men, as we are to declare in the third
part of this treatise. Chap. 6.
In this sorte of men we are to account
all ignorant people, who hauing beene
brought vp in rudenesse and ignorance, not
vsing the meanes of getting knowledge,
as the heareing, reading and learning of
the worde of God, haue no other opinion
of God and of religion, then those rudimentes
and beginnings, which they brought
from their mothers wombes, and which
they haue gotten (or rather which haue
crept into their mindes by little and little
they not seeking or looking after any knowledge)
not out of the bookes of the scripture,
but out of the creatures: The which
being dayly, beheld, felt and enioyed, can
not but leaue some impression of the knowledge
of God in the mindes of those who
haue any sparke of reason remaining in
them. Hence it is, that man euen in this
his corrupt estate, thinketh that there is a
God, that this God is of great power and
therefore to be feared: that he is the giuer

of all good thinges: and therefore to
be worshipped and honored in way of thankfulnesse,
that he is iust, and there fore will
punishe sinners, and rewarde good and innocent
men. Likewise he hath some knowledge
of the second table, yea more then
of the first, whereby he can decerne right
from wrong, honest thinges from vnhonest,
so that he condemneth theft, oppression,
incest, adulterie, murther and such
like grosse sinnes. For although many doe
diminishe this light of nature and become
such detestable atheistes, as to fay in their
heartes, that there is no God, yet man naturally
thinketh otherwise, as appeareth
plainely both by the word of God, and by
common experience.
For the first we haue this doctrine, Rom. 1.
19. 20.Rom. 1. 19. 20. that which is knowen of God (that
is so much as God hath made knowen to
all men generally not onely to his Church,
but also to the heathen and infidels) is manifest
euen to the gentils. For God hath
made it knowen vnto them: for the inuisible
things of God, as namelie, his eternall
power and Godheade, are seene since
the creation of the worlde, being by reason
or the vnderstanding gathered out of
the creatures. This appeareth also in al ages

and nations which haue beene since the beginning
of the world: for although fewe of
them haue had the knowledge of the true
god, and of his true worship, yet all generally
haue had and worshipped some God:
yea almost euery particular country, citie,
towne, village, and familie hath had their
proper gods, whereby it is plaine, that
there was in their mindes the aforesaid knowledge,
to wit that there is a God.
Neyther could it be otherwise, for whenas
man seeth the creatures, to wit, the heauen,
the earth, the sea, he must needes
thinke with himselfe, that these dead and
senselesse creatures coulde not make themselues:
yea that no man, nor any other
creature coulde make eyther them or
yet it selfe: for how shoulde any thing worke
or doe any thing before it doe exist it selfe.
Thus we see what is the naturall knowledge
of naturall men: but what is this incomparison
of that knowledge which man had in
the state of innocency, but mere and grosse ignorance?
For man in his pure estate had more
perfect knowledge of God (although not
the same particular knowledge) then all the
^earned diuines in the world haue had, haue,
or shall haue heereafter. But since the fall he
hath not by nature the knowledge of the true

God: for we cannot say that he that thinketh
his idoll to be a God, knoweth the true
God. Besides, this naturall knowledge, of
God is not a setled and grounded perswasion,
but a light and wauering opinion, a
meane betwixt knowledge and ignorance,
and therefore little regarded or followed in
life, and easely lost out of the minde: whereof
it commeth that those reliques of the
knowledge of God, are so soone lost, and
by the least perswasion or occasion turned
into senselesse idolatrie, wherein GOD
is thought to be like to man and other baser
creatures.
But to proceed, although the actuall ignorance
of the naturall man be so palpable,
as that it cannot be denied, yet he will not
yeeld to potentiall ignorance, that is, he will
not confesse himselfe to be so blockish, dull,
and vncapable of the true knowledge of God,
but that he might easely attaine vnto it by his
owne strength, and by the naturall faculties
of his body and minde, if so be he listed to go
about it. For the proofe wherof, he will alledge
the examples of many natural and vnregenerate
men, who although they neuer
knewe indeed what spirituall regenerationment,
but did alwaies laugh at it, and secretly
scorne the professours of it, being in

their whole liues carnall, worldly and dissolute:
yet for knowledge in all pointes of
diuinity they were counted the most profound
men of all others. To this we answere, as
we are taught by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 2. 14.
That the naturall man doth not conceiue or co^prehend
the thinges of God,1. Cor. 2. 14. for they are
foolishnes vnto him, neyther can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned, that is,
the carnall man is not onely actually ignorant
of God, but also vnable to conceiue
and vnderstand heauenly things. For although
he labour most earnestly in a presumptuous
opinion of his owne wit and learning
to know God, yet it is a thing altogether
impossible for him to attaine to the true
knowledge of him. To this agreeth dailie
experience, for who seeth not that the word
of God is preached diligently, plainely, and
painefully in many places, in the which most
of the hearers remain as ignorant of religion,
as if they had neuer heard tell of such a matter?
whereas if a man did tell them a tale of
any worldly matter, belonging to their profite
or pleasure, they would vnderstand it at
the first, and cary it away so well, that they
would be able to instruct others very readely
in it.
As touching the great measure of knowledge

which may be seene in diuerse vnregenerate
men; We answere, First, that God
doth bestow his spirituall giftes not onely on
the elect, but also on the reprobate (as we
are to declare at large in the next part)
and therefore they are not meere carnall
men, because they haue a shadowe of regeneration:
Secondly, the knowledge of these
men, howsoeuer it cary a glorious shew, yet
in strait examination will be found to be
nothing but ignorance. For it beeing not
wrought effectually in their mindes and
heartes by the spirite of God, but onely borrowed
out of the bookes and sermons of
other men, hath no steedfast ground in them,
but in mingled with much doubting, vnbeleef,
error and ignora^ce. For who knoweth not,
that it is an easie and common matter for men
to talke, and reason at large of matters which
they doe not vnderstand? 1. Tim. 1. 7. They
would be doctors of the lawe,1. Tim. 1. 7. and yet they know not
what they speake, nor whereof they affirme. So
many did prophecy in the name of christ, who
neither knew Christ nor shalbe acknowledged
of him:Iohn. 3. 10. so we read, Iohn. 3. 10. of Nicodemus
who although he were a teacher in Israel,
yet he was ignorant of the doctrine of regeneration,
that is, of al religio^. So many preach
of God, Christ, faith, the resurrection fro^ the

dead, and dispute very cunningly and subtillie
of these things: who thinke in their hearts
that they are but vaine and false doctrines, inuented
perhaps for a good end, to make men
liue an honest and orderly life, but such as
haue no trueth in them, neither shall euer be
seene to come to passe.
If any do maruel how men of singular wits,
of great capacity, learning, reading, iudgment
and wisedome should be so dull, or
rather dead and senselesse, as not to vnderstand
the doctrine of God, of his nature and
actions, which is so plainely taught, and so
often iterated in the scripture, the reason
heereof is giuen in the place before cited.
1. Cor. 3. 14. Because the thinges of
God are spiritually to be discerned.1. Cor. 3. 14. That is because
there is a repugnancy and contrariety
betwixt the reason of a naturall man, and the
thinges of God. For the naturall man trieth
the trueth of all things by his owne senses, esteeming
that impossible and false, which ca^not
be effected by ordinary and natural causes:
but the word of God, especially the
doctrine of the gospel, hath in it many things
which are impossible in nature, and therefore
incredible in all reason: as namely, the incarnation
of God, the miraculous conception
of Christ, the spirituall regeneration of the

faithfull, the resurrection of the body, eternall
glory, and many other: the full knowledge
and vndoubted perswasion whereof, is
farre more hardly attained by those who excell
in naturall wit, worldly wisedome, profound
learning, then by those who are simple
and vnlearned.^. Cor. 1. 26. 1. Cor. 1. 26. Brethren you
see your calling that not many wise men are chosen:
the reason heereof is euident: for it is
needful that he who would beleeue the word
of God, should renounce his own knowledge
so farre as it is contrary to the other. But the
more wit and learning a man hath, the more
he attributeth to it, to himselfe and to his own
strength. Whereas they who haue a small
measure of these giftes, doe not trust so much
vnto them: as the wise man witnesseth, saying,
That there is more hope to win a foole to
wisedome, then one who thinketh or knoweth
himselfe to be wise, and so is wise in his
owne eyes.
Thus we see the great ignorance of God,
which is in all vnregenerate men: nowe for
the knowledge which man hath of the creatures,
we may say with the prophet, Ier.
2. 13.Ier. 2. 13. Man hath forsaken God the fountaine of
wisedome, and then what wisedome can be
in him? For as he is ignorant of God, so
is he of the creatures of God, being naturallie

so void of all manner of knowledge, as
that he seemeth not to differ from a bruite
beast, but onely in the outward proportion
of his body, and the faculty of speaking. Nay
he is more ignorant then are the brute
beasts, whereof there are almost none,
which knoweth not and that without any
teacher, euen by the secrete instinct of nature,
what is good and euill for it selfe,
yea the secret vertue of some hearbes or of
other things which may stande them in stede:
but man being anie way distressed, knoweth
not how to goe either to God or anie naturall
thing for helpe: being so farre from
knowing other things that he knoweth not
the partes, temperamentes, frame, disposition,
infirmities and diseases of his owne bodie,
or anie thing belonging to it, or the preseruing
or healing of it, saue only the outward
members and fashion of it. Neither is
there any cause why man should bragge of
that greate knowledge, which he is able to
attaine vnto, whenas he giueth himselfe to
search it out. We do not denie but that God
graunteth thus much to the labour of industrious
men, that they attaine to knowledge,
some more, others lesse: but the learnedest
philosopher in the world cannot denie, but
that he is not only actually ignorant of many

things, but also naturally vnable to pearce
into the depth of the wisdome of God in the
creatures, and that by reason of the dulnesse and
shallownesse of his wit, which cannot finde
out the true causes, formes, reasons and vertues
of naturall things: as why the load-stone
draweth iron to it, of the which kinde infinite
instances might be brought. And if they
chance to finde out the vertue and qualitie
of anie thing, it is done not by considering
the causes, but by marking the effectes; and
so not by knowledge or anie good cunning,
as we say, but by chance and by experience
the schoole-maister of fooles.


Sect. 3. Of renewed knowledge.
IT remaineth that we consider
how God of his greate mercie
and goodnesse, doth renewe in
all his faithfull seruants, this first
and chiefe parte of his glorious
image. We call it the first and chiefe part,
because that in the worke of regeneration,
the illumination of the minde, with the true
knowledge of God, both hath the first place,
and also is the cause of all the rest of mans
holinesse.Math. 6. 23. For as Christ doth teach, Math. 6.
23. If the eye haue light in it, it doth enlighten

the wholle bodie, but if it be darke, there is nothing
but darknesse in the bodie. That is, if the
minde of man which is the eye of the soule,
be trulie sanctified and renewed with knowledge,
there followeth holinesse in all the
faculties of the soule, and in the whole man.
But if there be darknesse and ignorance in the
minde, there is nothing but sin in all the partes
of man. Neither can it be otherwise: for as
it is impossible that a man should either trust
or hope in God, or loue, feare and obey him, or
performe any dutie of holinesse vnto God,
whome he doth not know in his mercie, loue,
goodnesse, promises, power, iustice and the
rest of his attributes: so is it no lesse impossible,
that any man should know, and be fully
perswaded that God is true in his promises,
mercifull, bountifull, and iust, and not
be affected to him accordingly. And therfore
the first action of the holy spirit, framing
the new man in the elect, is to take out of
their mindes their naturall dulnes, vnbeleefe
and ignorance, and to make them able to
conceiue, vnderstand, beleeue and know
God.Rom* 12. 2. Thus the Apostle teacheth. Rom. 12.
2. Be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mindes, that ye may approoue the good and acceptable
will of God: so,Eph. 4. 13. Eph. 4. 13. Be renewed
in the spirit of your mindes and (so) put on

the new man.Of renewed knowledge, Thus he praieth for the Colossians,
Col. 1. 9. That they might be filled
with the knowledge of the will of God, inCol. 1. 9. all wisdome
and spiritual vnderstanding. And thus
it is saide.Act. 16. 14. Act. 16. 14. That whilst Paul
preached the gospel, although the reprobate
did not conceiue or vnderstand it, Yet God
opened the hart (that is the minde) of Lidia
to beleeue his word.
This illumination of the minde, is the most
sensible and euident thing in regeneration,
and that whereby they that denie the work
of the holy spirit in renewing the faithful,
may most plainly be conuinced, for what
is more wonderful, then that men, who before
were dull, rude, simple and vnlearned,
yea vncapable of any kinde of knowledge,
should on a sudden become able to comprehend
in their minds most stedfastly, and to expres
in words very se^sibly the hidde^ mysteries
of christia^ religio^? Yet this experience teacheth
to be true, and the Apostle witnesseth the
same.^ Cor. 2. 15. The spirituall man discerneth all things.
This commeth not by anie naturall strength,
but by the worke of God: yet he doth not inspire
this knowledge immediatly, but by the
meanes of the ministerie of his holy word.
And therefore it behooueth euerie one, who
would feele in himselfe this wonderfull

worke of God in changing his minde, to
giue himselfe diligently and continually to
the hearing, reading and meditating of the
word of God.
Lastly this renewed knowledge is not either
so greate, or yet so generall as was the knowledge
of man in his pure estate, wherein he
knewe God, and all other things perfectlie:
but the faithful know God, his word, will
and actions, so farre forth only as is needful for
their saluation. As for the knowledge of the
creatures, that is to be hoped for in the life to
come wherin we hope for our ful adoptio^ euen
the rede^tio^ of our bodies: the senses and faculties
wherof are, whilst we remaine in this
life, as dul and weake in the faithfull, as in the
vnbeleeuers. And therefore they remaine
as ignorant as touching this secundarie
knowledge of the sensible creatures, as
doe the other. Yea the knowledge of God,
as all other partes of their holinesse, is imperfect,
1. Cor. 13. 14. While I am a child (that
is,1. Cor. 13. 14 while the faithfull liue in this worlde) I
vnderstand like a childe, I thinke and speake
as a childe: nowe I knowe in part, but then
I shall knowe euen as I am knowen.




CHAP. III

Sect. 1. Of the conscience of man in his
pure estate.
BEside the generall knowledge
(whereof we haue spoken in the
former chapter) there is in the
mind of man a particular knowledge,
the which for the great vse which it
hath in the spirituall state of man, hath a
proper name giuen vnto it (being called
Conscience) as if it were a distinct facultie
of the soule, whereas if we speake properlie,
it is nothing els but an action of the
minde, and the knowledge of one partilar
thing, to witte, of mans estate before
God, whether he be righteous or sinfull,
and so consequently whether he be in the
state of life or of death, as the worde doth
plainly signifie. For conscience is sui
scientia, or scientia cum vel coram deo;
that is conscience is a mans knowledge of
himselfe; or a knowledg with God, before
God, or in the presence of God. And therefore
we may define it thus: Conscience is
the opinion or perswasion of a mans minde
concerning his estate before God. Or thus:

It is the testimony or iudgme^t that the mind
giueth of innocency or guiltines,Of the consc^^cence of man in his pure estate. of righteousnes
or sinfulnes of life or death. So it is de,
fined Rom. 2. 15.Rom. 2. 15. To be the accusing or excusing
of a mans thoughts or of his minde. So that
we may call the conscience the witnesse,
which before the tribunall seate of God,
being in the iudgment hall of a mans minde,
doth either excuse and iustifie his seuerall
actions, and whole life and person and so pronounce
the sentence of life vnto him; or else
doth accuse and condemne him in regard of sin
committed, and so adiudge him to eternall
death.
Thus much of conscience ingenerall: now
as touching the conscience of man in his
pure estate, we cannot doubt but that it
did wholly iustifie him, being as then without
any spot of sinne: from this true excusing
conscience, commeth confidence, whereby
man is imboldened to conuerse in the
presence of God, to heare him speake, to
see his glory, and so to haue a kinde of familiaritie
with him, as man had in his innocencie:
where as an accusing conscience breedeth
feare and shame, as we see plainlie in Adam,
who so soone as he had sinned, was
compelled by this accusing witnesse (for
there was no other to accuse him) to runne

into a hole and hide himselfe among the
trees, when he perceaued God to be present:
but hereof more in the next section.
Lastly if it be asked, how conscience can
be made a part of mans conformitie to God,
seing as it may seeme there is no such thing
in God; we anwere, that conscience, to wit*
this clearing conscience hath place in God,
who in him selfe and before himselfe doth
see and knowe himselfe to be puritie, and
holinesse it selfe and so free from all shadow
of sinne.


Sect. 2. Of a corrupt conscience.
AS touching mans conscience
in his corrupt estate, this
must of necessitie be granted,
that where the whole
is corrupted, there euerie
seuerall part is corrupted: and
therfore seing the whole knowledge of mans
minde is darkned with blindnesse, this particular
knowledge must needs be in the same
case: so that nowe the conscience is a false
witnes, and doth iudge of right and wrong,
of life and death so as a blind man iudgeth
colours, saying that blacke is white, and
white is blacke, that euill is good, and good,

euill:Of a corrup^ conscience. and yet as the minde is not so wholly
blinded, but that there remaine in it some
reliques of knowledge, trueth and light:
So the conscience hath his part as well of this
light, as of the aforesaide darknesse, and by
vertue thereof, doth sometimes speake
the trueth, euen as the greatest liers vse
to doe.
First of the false witnesse of the conscience
because this is more common, then
of the true testimony of it. The false testimonie
of the minde or conscience is of two
kindes; the first and most vsual kinde, is when
as it doth falsly excuse: the second is, when
it doth falsly accuse. The first hath place in
all those who thinke that to be no sinne
which is a sinne in the sight of God. And it
is of two kindes, for either it doth not accuse
a man where it shoulde accuse him, or
else it doth iustifie and absolute him for that
for the which it shoulde condemne him.
The first may be seene in all those in whose
opinon and iudgment that is no sinne which
is accounted sinne in the sight of God: as
namely in them, who being therefore called
libertines (but as it is saide of them, are
too shamefully licentious) thinke that there
is no sinne, and that they may doe what they
list. And so are not checked by their consciences,

no not when they commit most
hainous sinnes. This kinde of a false excusing
conscience is in those also who thinke
originall sinne to be no sinne, or not to deserue
eternal death: or who doe any way extenuate
the hainousnesse of sinne, thinking
some sins to be veniall in their owne nature.
And also in them who thinke wicked
thoughtes, or vaine wordes to be no
sinnes.
Lastly this conscience is in a manner in
all vnregenerate men, especially in those
who liuing a ciuill and honest life, free
from grosse sinnes, as adulterie, murther,
theft, periurie and such other, thinke
themselues iust before the iudgment seate
of god. This presumptuous opinion was in
the pharisies, who had a great conceite, and
made no smal bragges of their owne righteousnesse,
as we may see, Luc. 18. 20.^uc. 18. 20. And
also Mar. 10. 20.Marc. 10. 20. in one of their schollers,
who was not ashamed to affirme, and that
before the face and visible presence of God,
that he had kept all the commaundements
of the morall lawe, and that not onely in
some part of his life, but continually euen
from his youth vp. Yea this is the fond opinion
of most men, who thinke themselues
to be no sinners, because they are

not notorious malefactors: to fulfill the law
of God, because they doe keepe the lawes
of men: to be innocent and iust before God,
because they liue irreproouably (as very fewe
doe) in the eyes of men. But this is a very
fearefull and dangerous estate, and that
which is the cause of most mens destruction:
for they neuer seeke to know the gospel, and
to haue remission of their sinnes in Christ,
because this their flattering and lying conscience,
doth beare them in hande that they
are righteous enough of themselues, and
therefore neede not to be clothed with the
righteousnesse of Christ, as we read, Reuel.
3. 17.Reuel. 3. 17. They say with themselues euery one
in his owne minde, I am rich and want nothing,
where as indeed, they are wretched, poore, blind,
naked, altogether sinfull and in the state of
eternall damnation.
The second kinde of a false excusing conscience,
is that, which doth not onely excuse,
but also iustifie a man, for that for
the which it should condemne him, such is
the senselesse blockishnesse of a corrupt
minde. This conscience is in those who
serue God after a false and deuised manner,
and so thinke that their will-worship doth
make them acceptable to God, which in
^rueth is most abhominable in his sight.

They thinke that they aduance his glorie,
when as they set vp idolatrie, and that when
they persecute the true ministers, Apostles,
and seruantes of God, They doe God good
seruice,Iohn. 16. 2. as we read, Iohn. 16. 2. They thinke
that they shalbe heard of God for their much
babling sake.Mat. 6. 7. Math. 6. 7. for saying ouer and
ouer so many creedes and pater nosters. And
lastly that they shall be saued for those actions,
the which howsoeuer they cary a shew
of religion and deuotion, yet they are grieuous
sinnes before God, and those for the
which the doers should be condemned, although
they had not sinned in any other
kinde.
Thus much of a false excusing conscience.
Now followeth a false accusing minde and
conscience. This is contrary to the former
kinde, for it accuseth where it shoulde excuse,
and iudgeth that to be vnlawfull which
is lawfull. This false testimony of the conscience
commeth of the ignorance of
christian liberty, accounting things in nature
indifferent, as altogether vnlawfull,
whereof it commeth that men thinke it a
sinne to eate this or that meate, on this or
that day, to mary, to be in this or that company,
to weare this or that apparrell, to vse
this or that kinde of recreation and so of

many other thinges, which are neither commaunded
nor forbidden in the word, but left
indifferent, and in the which a brother or
sister is not in bondage, but God hath called
them in peace: the which although it be
not so euill and dangerous as is the other
kinde, for that it is safer and better for a
man to feare in doing that which he might
boldly doe, then to be bolde in doing that
which he ought not doe, yet it is an euil and
sinfull conscience, displeasing in the eyes
of God, who as he hath in great mercy giuen
vs great liberty in Christ, so it is his will
that we should, although be sparing in the
vse of it, whenas it doth not further our edification
and saluation, yet not babes in
knowledge and vnthankfully ignorant of the
great benefits bestowed on vs.
If it be heere obiected, that this false accusing
conscience cannot be truly said to be
in the vnregenerate man, because whatsoeuer
is done by him, being destitute of faith,
it is a sinne, although it be in the vse of things
indifferent, and might be lawfully done by
a faithfull man: We answere, that the con^cience
of an vnregenerate man shoulde
not accuse, because he doth vse any indifferent
thing, as because he eateth or drinketh
(as it vseth to doe, and therefore it

is a false accuser) but because he doth it
without faith, whereby both his person, and
all his actions should be made acceptable
to God: Thus we see what is the false or lying
conscience.
Nowe let vs see how it is a true witnesse, for
according as the light or knowledge of the
mind is more or lesse, so is this true testimony
of the conscience,Rom. 1. 15. sometimes excusing truly,
and sometime accusing truely. Rom. 1. 15.
For although it be impossible, that the conscience
of an vnregenerate man should truly
cleare him of sinne, and the punishment
thereof, because his whole life, yea euery
particular action of his life, and euery part
of his body, and faculty of his soule is polluted
with sinne, yet as a carnall man may
be free from some particular sinne; so his
conscience may truely excuse him in that
behalfe. But the chiefe vse of the conscience
is to accuse truely for sinne committed,
in the doing whereof it is very forcible,
and as it is commonly said, in steede of a
thousand witnesses: therefore hath God
in greate wisedome left some light in the
minde of sinfull man, that he might be
conuicted by himselfe, and so left inexcusable:
Yea sometimes it commeth to
passe, that this conscience is not onely

the witnesse, but also the executioner,
stirring vp such fearefull stormes of anguish,
feare, sorrowe, shame, and desperation,
as are most intollerable, and
may be truely said to be the very flames
of hell fire. This is verified by the tragicall
ende of the traitour Iudas, at whose
horrible treacherie, whenas all men held
their peace, this witnesse, euen his owne
conscience stept foorth, and did not onely
accuse and conuince him by his owne
mouth, which saide vnto him, thou hast
sinned in betraying innocent bloode, but
also did execute him with his owne hands,
which brought him to a fearefull and shamefull
ende.
Yet this witnesse is not alway thus diligent
in doing his duety, but onely eyther
after some hainous sinne be committed, as
in the aforesaid example, and chiefly whenas
it is stirred vp and awaked by some iudgement
powred out vpon the sinner. Thus
did the conscience of Iosephs brethren sleepe
till their trouble and danger which befell
them in Aegypt,Gen. 42. 21. did awake it. Gen. 42. 21.
or at the least, til the iudgme^t be denounced
against him,Act. 2. 37. thus we read, Act. 2. 37. That
many of the Iewes were pricked in their harts,
that is, were troubled in their consciences

and mindes, by hearing of their horrible sin
committed in crucifying Christ. Otherwise
the conscience is idle for the most part, and
lulleth men a sleepe in sinne, deferring the
doing of his duety til the day of iudgement,
wherein the volumes of all mens consciences
shall be laid open: this is called a seared,
benummed or senselesse conscience: and
surely it is the most fearefull estate that any
man can be in, and yet it is a common thing,
for who seeth not how most men goe on
from day to day, euery man in his owne
sinfull waies, hauing no remorse of conscience,
but put farre from themselues the euill
day, as if there were neither heauen nor
hell, and that God would neither doe good
nor euill? Lastly it may heere be asked,
whether this true testimony of an accusing
conscience, be a sinfull, or a lawfull action of
the minde. Whereunto we answere, that
whatsoeuer thing is holy, that is lawfull; for
this light of nature which is in the mind and
conscience, is a relique of the image of God
and of the same nature with it: and that the
sinne which the conscience doth truely accuse,
doth no more make it impure, then
the guiltinesse of a fellon or traitour doth any
way touch him who giueth true testimonie
of it.



Sect. 3. Of a renewed conscience and of the
certaintie of saluation.
THis particular knowledge
and motion of the minde,
which we call conscience,
hath place and force in the
faithfull, both in accusing
and also in excusing. For the
first, we know that the faithfull haue both
the true knowledge of sin, by the generall
renouation of their mindes, and also
sin it selfe by the infirmitie of the flesh. And
therefore they haue an accusing conscience,
which is nothing else but the sight or knowledge
of sinne in themselues. Hereof follow
diuers effectes in them, as namely feare in respect
of those temporall punishments, whervnto
they by their sins haue layde themselues
open. Secondly an encrease of humiliation
in regard thereof. And lastly this accusing
conscience is as a bit to restraine the faithful
from sinne, checking them as it were in the
teeth with the iudgments of God, which
they doe by committing sin pull vppon the^selues.
Thus we see what is the accusing
conscience of the faithfull: which then worketh
when they fall by force of temptation

into some greate sinne:Of a renewed conscience. otherwise it doth
not greatly vex and trouble them. Yet as
sinne is neuer wanting, so it is neuer altogether
idle.
Now let vs consider the contrarie worke
of the conscience, excusing the faithfull before
God: the which it doth first in regard
both of their owne inherent righteousnesse,
and also of the imputed righteousnesse of
Christ. In the first respect their conscience
excuseth them, not as being perfectly iust,
but as those who are Gods faithfull seruants,
performing vnto him, tho imperfect, yet true,
vnfained and heartie obedience. Thus doth
the Prophet Dauid often in the psalmes offer
his innocencie and integritie to the triall
of God.
This excusing conscience dare not shewe
his face before the iudgment seate of God,
where it would be found as a filthie and defiled
clout: but it commeth into the court of
Gods mercie and loue, who rewardeth the
Godlinesse of his seruants with temporall
blessinges, and security from temporall iudgments.
But the true excusing conscience
loketh on the perfect righteousnes of Christ,
by vertue whereof it doth iustifie, and absolue
the faithfull, as being fully and perfectly
iust, and free from all guilt of sinne. This

excuser is he who only can abide the triall of
Gods iustice,Of a renewed conscience. and of the cer^tainty of salua^tion. who maketh the faithfull reioyce
in all miseries; yea secure in regard of
danger. It maketh them triumph ouer sinne,
Sathan, hell, death and damnation, and replenisheth
their heartes with such a perfect
peace, whereby they feele the ioyes of heauen,
euen whilst they liue vpon earth, wherof
whosoeuer hath once tasted, may counte
himselfe thrise happie. This kinde of excusing
conscience commeth of a true faith, as
doth the former kinde of the other partes
of sanctification and of holinesse of life: the
one freeth the faithfull from the feare of
temporarie euils, as the other doth from the
feare of eternall death.
Of both of them ariseth the assurance of
saluation, which is the vndoubted perswasio^,
and certaine knowledge of a faithfull man,
that he is one of those who shalbe made
partakers of eternall glorie. But against this
doctrine many do obiect and say, that it is impossible
for any man to attaine to any such
knowledge, seing that the eternall counsels
and decrees of God are so secret, that no
man hath at any time knowen the minde of
God, or beene of his counsell in that behalf.
Againe that this knowledge is to be gotten,
if by any meanes, then either by immediate

reuelation or by arguments drawen from
a mans owne estate, as from some fayth
or holinesse which he fyndeth in himselfe.
The first meanes is generallie reiected. The
other being vncertaine ca^not be a sure foundatio^
whereon to build this certaine perswasions.
Lastly that by this meanes there would
a dore be set open to all licentiousnesse and
Godlesse securitie. For what neede he who
knoweth certainly that he shal be saued, take
paines, and sustaine trouble and griefe in working
his owne saluatio^ by a Godly and holy life?
To this we answer, confessing that the number
of the reprobate or elect ca^not be knowen,
and also that this knowledge is not gotten
by any immediate reuelation, yet affirming
that euery faithfull man may be, and ought
to be assured of his owne saluation and that
by that wounderfull worke of regeneration
wrought in him by the holy spirite: the
which doth euen leade the faithfull man
as it were by the hande into the secrete
counsell of GODS eternall election, and
doth there let him see (not the state of other
men) but his owne name written in
heauen. For they who are truelie regenerate
are truely called, they who are
truely called are iustified they who are
iustified are (that is they shalbe as certainly

certainely as if they were already) glorified,Of a renewed conscience, and of the certain^ty of saluatio^.
Rom. 8. 29. 30. And therefore the scripure
speaketh of the faithfull as of those who
haue already attained eternall saluation.Rom. 8. 29. 30
Ioh. 3. 8.Ioh. 3. 8. Yea this is done not without good
cause. For the regeneration of this life and
the eternall glorie of the life to come, are
not two diuerse states or conditions, but
onely diuerse degrees of the same condition:
eternall saluation being nothing else, but
the perfection of holinesse and happinesse,
whereof the faithfull haue in this life receaued
some parte, as a pledge and earnest-pennie
of the whole. So that they
hauing alreadie as we say, one foote in
heauen, and gotten possession of it, neede
not doubt of their saluation: but may confidently
say as it is, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. We knowe,
(not we hope or gresse) that we are translated
already (not that we shalbe hereafter)
from death to life (not by any immediate reuelation)
but because we loue the brethren:1. Ioh. 3. 14
that is, because we feele our selues endued
with renewed holinesse, whereof the loue
of the Godly is a notable part. And with
the Apostle,Rom. 8. 38. Rom. 8. 38. I am perswaded
that neither death nor life, neither Angels
nor principalities, neither thinges present nor
thinges to come can separate me from the loue

of God in Christ.
But it may be further obiected, that
although true regeneration be a certaine
signe and forerunner of saluation, yet it is
hard for a man to knowe whether his regeneration
be true, or onely a shadow and resemblance
which is often in the reprobate;
and although he haue true faith and holinesse
at one time, yet he may loose and
lack them at an other, and so dispossesse
himselfe of that estate of saluation wherein
he was. In both which respectes, He that
thinketh that he standeth, ought to feare least
he fall, rather then to boast of the certaintie
of his saluation. We answere that true
regeneration is not so small a matter, neither
maketh so light a chaunge in a man, but
that it may be plainely discerned where it
is present. Neither is it any vncertaine thing
which may be lost, but wheresoeuer it is,
there it doth euidently appeare at one time
or at an other: and where it once appeareth
there it alwaies abideth. For regeneration
being a totall and a supernaturall change
of the minde, will, affections, thoughtes,
wordes and dedes of a man, cannot be hid
or doubtfull for any long time, but will
shewe it selfe both to the eyes of other men,
and much more to the conscience of the beleeuer

himselfe.Of a renewed conscience and of the certainty of saluation. For all though it commeth
often to passe, that the infirmities and
sinnes appeareing in the life of a faithfull
man, make the sinceritie of his religion
doubtfull to others; yet he himselfe feeling
the inwarde worke and motions of
Gods spirite, is vndoubtedly perswaded
that he is the childe of God. We confesse
that a man truly regenerate may haue his
faith sore shaken, and the holinesse of his
life greatly blemished by the force of temptation:
and so may for a time want in part or
wholly this assurance of saluation. Yet this
doth not hinder him from hauing it at an
other time, yea all the daies of his life, as
may be seene in most of the faithfull.
Lastly we are not to thinke that this assurance
of saluation is, or can be to a faithfull
man a motiue to sinne, and dissolutenesse
of life, with the which it cannot stand. For
as it is gotten by holynesse, whereby a man
seeth that he is endued with the spirite
of God, and effectuallie called to beleeue
the Gospell, so it is lost by a sinfull and
wicked life, the which sheweth plainlie
that a man is destitute of true faith and of
Gods spirite, for by the fruite the tree is
knowen: nay there is nothing of greater
froce in restraining the faithfull from sinne

then this that they knowe that the committing
of any one wilfull sinne doth
wound their owne consciences, and diminish
this notable treasure of assurance of saluation.
For as he that taketh one or a fewestones
out of a wall, although he doe not
ouerthrow the building, yet he maketh it
the weaker; so a fewe sinfull actions in the
life of a faithfull man, although they can
not depriue him of this assuraunce, it hauing
bene gathered, and as it were builded
vp with the holinesse of many yeares, yet
they doe diminishe it, and can not but
trouble his conscience.



CHAP. IIII.

Sect. 1.
Of the created holinesse of mans
memorie.
IT had bene little auailable,
for the holy and happie estate
of man, that he was endued
with those notable faculties
of conceauing, vnderstanding
and knowing Gods will and word
when God did reueale himselfe vnto him,
if he had not bene made able to retaine
the saide knowledge for the time following.

For otherwise God shoulde haue powred
his graces into a bottomlesse or broken
vessell,Of the created holinesse of mans memorie. which coulde not keepe, or containe
any thing, and man shoulde haue
reaped little profit by that which woulde be
as soone lost as gotten. For this cause
God in great wisdome did endue the soule
of man, with a speciall facultie vsually called
memory, by vertue whereof man in
this state of innocencie doth safelie keepe,
whatsoeuer the minde doth truely conceaue,
and so when occasion serueth, doth
giue the saide knowledge backe againe to
the minde, to be thought vpon, meditated,
vttered in worde, and followed in peed
so that the memory is the storehouse of the
soule, wherin thinges both newe and old
are carefully laide vp, and faithfullie preserued,
and as it were, the register of the
minde, taking a note of euery thing which
commeth into it. This facultie as all the
other of mans soule, was in the state of innocencie
so perfect and of such strength, as
that by it man might at any time call to
minde, not euerie trifling thing which he
had heard and seene a thousand yeares past,
(for so his memorie shoulde haue bene confounded
and in a manner infinite) but whatsoeuer
thing had at any time bene reuealed

vnto him by God, or was conceaued
by his naturall faculties, if so be it were a
matter of any importance, the knowing
and remembring whereof, might serue to
some notable vse and profite vnto him. As
for other common matters of life, which
it was more gaine to loose then to keepe,
in these, humaine infirmitie preuailed to forgetfulnesse.
For we are not to thinke, that man was
in this respect or any other as God is, whose
nature being euerie way infinite, doth in
one moment, and with one motion of mind,
remember or rather knowe all particulars
that haue bene done at any time. For God
doth thinke of all thinges together without
confusion, but the minde of man being
not onely finite, but also hauing in it a kinde
of weaknesse (if we compare him with the
Angels) can not thinke of many, much
lesse of infinite thinges at once, but of one
thing after an other: and so doth the memorie
remember those particulars, which
were committed to the custody of it, letting
goe matters of no vse, that there may
be place for thinges of importance, as
are the actions, comaundementes, apparitions,
reuelations and worde of God. In
the knoweing and remembring whereof,

the happinesse and holinesse of man did consist:Of the create^ holinesse of mans memory.
and therefore it stood him in hande to
commit these thinges to sure custodie, the
which we are not to doubt but that he did
so, as that after many thousand yeares he
was able to remember that, which might any
way serue for his good. Neyther ^^ede
we maruaile thereat, considering the frailtie
of our owne memories, which are neuer
good when they are at the best, and are
soone cleane lost by sicknesse, age or any
such meanes. For as is the strength of the
bodie, whereby as by an instrument the
soule worketh; so are the faculties of the
minde: and therefore as the body of man
did continue in perfect vigour for many
thousand yeares, yea for euer, so did his
minde or memorie retaine the first vigour
without being diminished. Whereby we
see that man in this facultie of memorie,
whereby his knowledge was made eternall,
did notablie resemble God, whose nature
is eternall.



Sect. 2. Of the sinfulnesse of mans memory.
AS in all other respectes, so also
in regard of this faculty
man since the fall is so changed
from his first estate, that
he scarse seemeth to be the
same creature that he was, hauing as wholly
lost this faculty of a reasonable soule, as
if he had neuer beene endued with it. For
howsoeuer in regard of earthly, worldlie
and sensible things, this faculty is after a
sort remaining in man, yet it hath no manner
of force or power to retaine heauenlie
and spirituall matters, and the true knowledge
of God: and no maruaile; for how shal
the memory keepe when as the mind cannot
conceiue it? But mans corruption cannot
so be cloaked in this behalf, as if it it were
wholly in the minde, and not in this and other
faculties. For although the fountaine
of it be in the minde, which is the moouer
and gouernour of the other faculties, yet
each faculty hath his peculiar fault, the
which may plainely be seene in the memory.
For suppose that, which doth daily come
to passe, that a carnall man doth not onely
heare the word of God for fashions sake,

but also marke and in some measure vnderstand
it;Of the sinful^nesse of mans memory. a man would thinke that all were safe
and brought to a good passe: the minde
hath done his duety in conceiuing the trueth
of the word, as the body hath done in hearing;
so that now the word of God is come
to the memory, and desireth to be laide vp
there and preserued. But doth the vnregenerate
man lay vp in the treasure of his memory
that which he hath heard and vnderstood
of the word of God? surely nothing
lesse: but as we may plainely see in most
men, doth straight waies forget, and as the
prouerbe is he letteth it come in at the one
eare, and so passing through the minde, out
at the other without troubling himselfe any
more about it. Whereby it commeth to
passe, that many hauing beene continuall
hearers of Gods word for the space of many
yeares, doe not remember any part or iot of
it, no more then if they had neuer heard of
any such matter.
The reason why the memory is thus wanting
in her duety, where the minde doth
that which belongeth to her part, is, because
diligence, care and affection, (all which are
wanting in carnal men in respect of God and
his word) are needfull for the safe preseruing
of things in the memory. For as it is truely

said by one, Senes quae curant meminerunt,
the oldest man that is, doth remember where
he laid his golde: and no man forgetteth that
which he thinketh any way to concerne his
good. But men thinke that there is no good
to begotten by the word of God, and therefore
as soone as they come from the place
where the worde was preached, they giue
themselues wholly to thinke and talke of
worldly matters, whereas they should call
their memories to account for that which
was committed vnto them, and so by repeating
it, and conferring with others about it,
imprint it firmely in their mindes and memories.


Sect. 3. Of a renewed memory.
BVt it is otherwise in the faithfull,
to whome God giueth, as an vnderstanding
minde to conceiue,
so also a firme memory to keepe
that knowledge, which he doth by any
meanes reueale vnto them. Hence it is that
they are vsually in the scripture distinguished
from hypocriticall hearers, by this note of
laying vp in their heartes, that is, in their memories.
For the hypocrite he heareth the
worde, vnderstandeth it, and receiueth it

with ioy,Of a renewed memory. but goeth no further: whereas the
faithfull man taketh better holde of it, and
putteth it into his memory in safe custody, as
it were vnder locke and key, and so maketh
it his owne for euer. Thus did Dauid
remember that God had somtime deliuered
him from a Beare and a Lion, and hath this
ready at hande for his vse,1. Sam. 17. 34. 1. Sam. 17. 34.
Thus did Mary the mother of Christ lay vp
in her heart, all the sayings and actions of
Christ.Luc. 2. 51. Luke. 2. 51. And thus ought euery
Christian to keepe carefully in his memory
whatsoeuer thing he hath seene, hearde or
red, which is of any moment for the increase
of holinesse.
As first and chiefly the whole scripture:
not the wordes or syllables of it, (as do the
Iewes, who greatly brag of their cunning
in this behalfe, as knowing how oft euerie
worde is in the olde testament) for that is
and endlesse labour and impossible, but the
chiefe precepts and examples contained in
it, the which may easely be brought to passe
by the daily reading, hearing, and remembring
of some part of it. Secondly he ought
to keepe in memory all the actions of God
which he himselfe or any other hath obserued
from time to time, as namely, his fearfull
iudgements vpon sinners, his prouidence

watching ouer the godly and preseruing them
from euill, yea his fatherly chasticements and
afflictions laid vpon them: and in brief whatsoeuer
thing may any way further him in the
way of godlines. For the which purpose he
ought to vse all those helpes, which are of
force for the deep imprinting of these things
in his mind: as namely the daily remembring
of them, the applying of them to his present
vse, the rehearsing of them to others:
for so they will be made familiar vnto him,
and his owne foreuer. Yea he ought to goe
yet further, and suspecting the frailty of his
memory (which being very narrowe and
shallow, cannot containe many things together,
and therefore being full it is constrained
to let one thing goe as it receiueth
another,) to haue his note booke, and therein
as in a sure storehouse to register those
things which he would reme^ber. For if men
be so carefull in worldly matters, that they
wil not trust their memories with their reckonings
and matters of moment, but wil be
sure to note them downe, and so make sure
worke* what a shame is it, that we should be
so negligent or slothfull in spirituall matters,
as not to vse this, and all other
helpes?




CHAP. V

Sect. 1. Of the created holinesse of the will.
BEsides these faculties of the
soule which haue alreadie
beene declared, and which
may be called speculatiue,
there is an other kinde co^monly
called practicall; because
they are exercised in action, as the other
are in contemplation. This latter kinde
is necessarilie in regard of the perfection
of mans soule added to the former, that as
by the one he seeth and knoweth what ought
to be done, so by the other he might moue
himselfe to the doing and performing of it. For
howsoeuer they be ioyned to the other, not
as superiours in authoritie, for they are blinde
of themselues, and therefore must not leade
the way, or sit at the helme: nor as equals,
for so there might discorde and contention
be raised in the soule of man; but
as inferiours to be guided and gouerned by
the light of the minde: yet if we speake properly,
we must confesse that all the outward
actions come directly from them, and not
from the other. Whereby it may be easelie
gathered that these practicall faculties, hauing

the greatest stroke in our actions,Of the created holinesse of the will. do conteine
in them a greate part of mans holinesse,
and that whereon all the rest doth depend.
For the will, which is the chiefe of these
practicall faculties, compelleth the members
of the bodie to any action, but cannot
be compelled by the minde. For a man doth
this or that thing, not because he thinketh
that it ought to be done, but because he will
do it; so that the will is the absolute monarch
in aman, and the minde is his wise counseller,
to whome, although this monarch ought
to yeelde, and in some fort to obey, yet he
neede not except he list; For he hauing the
whole authoritie in his owne handes cannot
be compelled by any.
The holinesse of these practicall faculties,
which is vsuallie in the scripture called loue,
is their due subiection to the faculties of the
mind, whereby they are moued to the doinge
of those things only, which the minde commandeth
or rather counselleth. For although
in the corrupt state of man, the holinesse of
these faculties cannot be defined by their
conformitie to the minde, which being it
selfe sinfull and out of order, cannot be a
rule of holinesse to any other part, yet in
this state of innocenc^e, the minde propoundeth
nothing as good to these faculties,

but that which is indeede good, and
to be imbraced by them.
These practicall faculties are of two sorts,
to wit, the will and the affections. First
of the will, then of the affection. As touching
this facultie of mans soule called the
will, although it be proper to reasonable
things (for a reasonable will cannot be seuered
from a reasonable minde) yet there is a
resembla^ce of it in all those creatures, which
being indued with sense, haue by it a naturall
appetite choosing one thing and refusing an
other, the which may fitly be called a brutish
will. And therefore that we may the more
plainlie see what force this facultie hath in ma^,
we will consider and define it in generall, as it
agreeth both to reasonable and to vnreasonable
things, and that in this manner: Will is the
free inclination of any thing (which hath in
it selfe the whole fountaine of naturall motion)
to that which is apparently good and agreable
to the owne nature. Frst we say that will
is an inclination: for the proper action of it, is
to bende the thing wherein it is to that thing
which it liketh: wherein is contained or rather
insinuated vnto vs, the contrarie action of the
will, which is to withdraw the thing wherein
it is, from that thing which it disliketh.
Secondly this inclination is free, that

is, it commeth of the thing it selfe, and is
not extorted by any outward force: for
although the will be stirred vp, and set forward
by motiues both inward and outward:
yet it cannot be compelled, compulsion
and willingnesse being contrarie each to other.
If any man do here obiect, that manie
are constrained by force to doe that which
is sore against their willes: We answere, that
the outward action may be constraned, but
not the will: for violence may make one
do that which he is vnwilling to doe, but
it cannot make him willing to do that which
he is vnwilling to do.
Thirdly we are to consider what thinges
maybe said to haue wil, not stocks or stones,
but onely those which haue in them life
and motion: neither all such thinges, but
onely those which hauing in themselues
the wholle fountaine of motion doe perfectly
liue and moue. For trees haue life
and motion, but not will; because their life
and motion is imperfect not comming wholly
of any facultie and vertue inherent in
themselues, but depending of some other
outward force: Whereof it commeth that
their motion is not free but forced: for the
motion or action of a tree in bringing
forth fruite, commeth not wholly from it

selfe, but chiefely from the Sunne, the heat
whereof forceth the tree to turne the
moisture of the earth into leaues, flowers,
and fruite. But it is farre otherwise with
beastes, birdes, and all thinges which haue
sense in them. For these haue perfect life,
and motion, hauing within themselues
the whole fountaine, beginning, abilitie
and facultie of motion, not depending on
any other outwarde thinge, but being entire
in themselues, do moue and performe
all naturall actions of themselues. And
therefore being free from all outward force,
may either doe or not doe, moue or rest,
go or stand, eate or drinke, goe hither or
thither when themselues list. As when
a birde flyeth toward the east, rather then
towarde the west, it is not blowen that
way by force of the winde, but caried by
the proper and free inclination of it selfe.
But when it being taken is caried vp and
downe in a mans hand, this motion commeth
not from it selfe, but from an other,
not of inherent will, but of outward
violence and compulsion. Againe man
hath will, because he is of perfect life and
motion, hauing in himselfe the whole fountaine
of action and power of mouing himselfe,
without the helpe of any other thing,

and therefore he also can sitte downe or
rise vp, speake, laugh, go about this or
that businesse or worke, thinke of this or
that thing, as he himselfe listeth and is disposed.
Thirdly the Angels both good and
euill haue will, for they are natures of perfect
life and motion, in that they haue in
themselues the wholle fountaine of motion
and therefore they are free in all their naturall
actions.
Thus we see what creatures haue freewill:
where we are to thinke that this freedome
of will, is as great in the least and
weakest of these creatures, as in the greatest;
in a sely flie, as in a man or Angel. If
any man do heare obiect that all creatures
moue in God, and without him are not
able to doe any thing: We answere that
God hath put into euerie creature a naturall
vertue and power of doing all thinges
belonging to it selfe, by the which, being
not withdrawen or hindered by God, the
creature: is able to performe all naturall actions,
without any extraordinarie helpe
from God: as when any creature doth this
or that thing, the action commeth of it
selfe, in that the facultie of performing
it is inherent in it selfe, and yet the same
action commeth from God. But ro retourne

to the matter. Lastly, God hath will because
he is such a nature, as hath in it selfe
the whole fountaine of perfect motion, yea
that which is the fountaine of all fountains,
and therefore he doth al things of his
own free will, the which differeth from the
will of the creatures, as in other respectes,
so also in that it cannot be hindred by any
force, but can hinder the will of any creature,
as we knowe that God brideleth the
will, euen of the deuill and his Angels, the
which otherwise are mightie creatures.
Thus we see the subiect of will: now
we come to the obiect of it, or that wherevnto
the will of any thinge inclineth. First
therefore the will of any thing inclineth
it selfe to that which is good, and in any
respect conuenient, pleasant, and profitable,
as we knowe that euerie thinge doth
abhor and decline from that which is any
way euill, hurtfull, daungerous, grieuous,
inconuenient, and vnprofitable. Yet the
will doth not incline it selfe to any good,
but onelie to that which is apparantly good:
for although the will of God inclineth
alwaies to that onely, which is good indeed
and in trueth, because he cannot be
deceaued in any thing, yet the creature
doth often thinke euill to be good, and good

euill, and so abhorreth that which is good,
and inclineth to that which is in trueth euill,
yet good in shewe and appearance.
Lastly not any apparant good is the obiect
of the will, but that which euery thing
thinketh to be good for it selfe: for a man
doth not incline himselfe to that, which he
thinketh to be good for a beast, vnlesse he
thinke it good for himselfe also. Yea euery
thing followeth the naturall disposition
of it selfe, desiring those thinges onely
which are agreeable to the owne nature.
Thus much ingenerall of will: the which
is of two kindes, brutishe, and reasonable,
the which hath place in all those natures,
which are inducd with reason, as namely
in God, in Angels, and in man. But to
let passe the will of God, and of Angels,
as being no part of the matter in hand, we
are to consider the created holinesse of mans
will, which is the inclination of man onely
to that which is truely good: Or thus, The
due subiection or obedience of the will to
a holy and cleare minde, shewing without
any errour good and euill: or more breifly,
The conformitie of mans inclination to his
knowledge, or of mans will to Gods will.
For then this facultie is perfectly holy, whenas
it chooseth for action those thinges

which the minde iudgeth good, right,
lawfull, and agreeable to the will of God:
and contrarily reiecteth and refuseth whatsoeuer
it saieth to be euill, vnlawfull and
forbidden: and lastly when as touching those
thinges, which are not as yet fully determined
by the minde, to be either good or
bad, conuenient or inconuenient, to be
done or to be left vndone, it staieth it selfe
in the middest, not inclining to the one or
to the other.
Thus we see what was the actuall will
of man, euen his full inclination to good.
But there was another will in him, which
we may call potentiall, as hath beene said
that man hath both an actuall and a potentiall
vnderstanding: this potentiall will commonly
called Freewill, is the power which
man had of inclining his will, eyther to
good or to euill: Or more briefly, The possibility
of willing eyther of good or euill. It
may be made plaine in this manner. Suppose
a man to beare good will to his friend, and
a loyall and duetifull affection to his prince,
as many do, this is his actual wil: But againe,
that man may change his will, and become
altogether disloyall to his prince, and a hater
of his friend: this is his possible and potentiall
will. So man inclineth really and indeed

onely to good, but in possibility eyther
to good or euill. Yet not equally, but more
to good then to euill, as he that nowe loueth
his friend, although heereafter he
may loue or hate him, yet it is liker that he
will loue then hate him. That this potentiall
will was in man, we neede not prooue
by argumentes, being sufficiently prooued
alreadie by the euent it selfe, and the woefull
experience of man-kind, the which by
the meanes of his potential wil, hath lost that
holy, and happie estate, wherein it was created.
For man being enabled by God to will
either good or euil, and being co^maunded by
God to wil good only, did chose rather to satisfie
his own peruerse and sinfull desire in willing
euil, then to obey the will of God in willing
good. If any man doe aske why God did
put into man this potential, doubtful and vncertaine
will, seing that if he had bene created
without it, he had beene sure from falling,
being actually and immutably disposed
to good. To this we answere, (...), we ought
to rest contented in the will of God, thinking
well of all his doings, although we cannot
see, or giue any reason of the same. Secondly,
that man could not haue beene created
without his potentiall* will? for so his
nature should haue beene vncapable of sin.

For if his will had beene inclined to good
actually and immutably, it coulde neuer
haue bene inclined to euil, and so he could not
possibly haue committed sin, because of the
want of the free and potentiall will. But he
by whome this doubt was propounded, will
maruaile to heare that brought against his
opinion* which he did alledge as the onely
reason and strength of it: and that any man
should thinke freewill to haue beene needfull
in the state of innocency, because without
it man could not haue sinned, when as
he thinketh that it might very well haue
beene spared for that cause: seeing that as
sinne it selfe, whereby Gods glory is obscured,
and mans happinesse vtterly lost,
so all the meanes, occasions, and inducementes
of it ought by al meanes to be auoided:
To this reply we make this answere,
that Gods glory is impaired much by the co^mitting
of sinne, but much more by this supposed
impossibility of committing sinne:
for immutability, and vncapablenesse of
sinne, are a great part of his glory, and inseparable
attributes of his diuine essence, and
therefore they cannot without the great dishonor
of God be co^municated to any earthly
creature* Now as touching man himselfe,
(whose patrone although he yeeld to this,

yet he thinketh it impossible to be proued,
that this impossibility of sinning is not good
and profitable for man) what reason is it,
that his good shoulde not giue place to
Gods glory, for the which he was created,
seeing that the wanting of potentiall wil, and
the impossibility of sinning arising thereof,
doe directly obscure the glory of God, but
not necessarily hinder the happinesse of
man? who cannot thinke that GOD
doth eyther compell, or any way cause
him to sinne, in that he hath made it possible
for him to sinne? But what will be saide
for this impossibility of sinning, if so be it be
found hurtful to man himselfe, as it is indeed,
as will easely appeare to him who considereth
that it depriueth man, not onely of all
praise and commendation (which being
receiued at the handes of God, is not lightly
to be esteemed by man, who thinketh it
a great matter, Laudari a laudato, to be praised
by a worthy man) but also of holinesse
it selfe. For what is more ridiculous, then
that man should looke for any commendation
for not sinning, when as he coulde not
so much as be willing to sinne, seeing that
the brute beastes, yea stockes and stones
in the which there is no sinne, nor shaddow
of any, may as iustly looke for praise in that

respect, or for performing positiue dueties of
holinesse, comming not of a willing and
ready minde which God regardeth* but of
necessity and constraint, and as the due
praise of holinesse, so also holinesse it selfe is
taken away by this impossible possibillity of
sinning, for nothing can properly be said to
be the subiect of holinesse, which naturally
may not become sinfull; as nothing is saide
to haue life, or sight, which may not become
dead or blind. And therefore we doe not
say that stones and brute beastes, haue in
them any holinesse, because they cannot
haue sinfulnesse which is the priuation of it.
How then will this curious questionarie
say, can the holy Angels fall from God, and
doe ye make the nature of God a fit harbour
of sinfulnesse? not so neither, but we say
that God is not properly the subiect of holinesse,
(although it hath pleased him to set
foorth his incomprehensible nature to our
capacity, by taking to himselfe this and other
attributes of the creature) for God is
the rule of holinesse, and any thing is then
truely holy, whenas it obeyeth the will and
commaundements of God: but we cannot
in proper speech say, that God eyther commaundeth
or obeyeth himselfe, as for the
holy Angels, they retaine as all the rest of

their natural faculties wherewith they were
indued in their first creation, so also this free
and potentiall will: and if it be possible that
any of those which doe now keep their standing
in holines and happines, should fall from
God; yet this is to be ascribed, not to any natural
impossibility of sinning, which is not
to be admitted or supposed in any creature,
no not in the humane nature of Christ, to the
which the sinne of mankind could not haue
beene imputed, if it had beene naturally vncapable
of sin) but to the loue and grace of
God, who doth continue and vphold them in
their holy state, not by mangling their nature
and detracting any natural faculty, as potentiall
will, or any other: but by co^firming their
actuall will in the natural inclination of it to
good onelie. Lastlie this natural impossibilitie
of sinning, would make man either a
God, as hath beene said: or which is liker, a
senselesse stocke, not hauing in himselfe perfect
life, and the full power of mouing himself.
For how can we suppose that Adam shoulde
haue been created a liuing and a reasonable
creature, and not to haue beene able to will, and
to eate the forbidden fruit, or to do any other
thing incident into his nature? If it be saide,
that God might haue confirmed him with
his grace; We answere, that that is true, but

he neither was bound to doe it, neither did,
or could thinke man worthy of more grace,
who did abuse so many and so excellent
graces as he had by nature.


Sect. 2.
Of the sinfulnesse of the will.
AS there is nothing but horrible
confusion in that co^monwealth
wherein neither the prince can
rule, nor the people obey, the
one wanting wisedome and counsell whereby
he should make righteous lawes, commaunding
good and forbidding euill: the other
due moderation, whereby they might
be restrained from euill: and so the raynes of
licentiousnesse being let loose to the furious
multitude, all is filled with thefts, murthers,
adulteries, and all manner of hainous enormities:
and (that we may come nearer home,
making the se^sible misery of the body a type
of the spirituall misery of the soule) as when
one blinde man leadeth another, it cannot
be but that both of them should fall into the
ditch: So the case standeth with the sinfull
and disorderly soule of man, wherein the mind
being voyd of knowledge, is not able to direct
the practicall faculties from euil to good.
And if happily there be some good motion
suggested by the minde, wherein there is a

little light remaining since the first creation,^f the sinful^esse of the ^ill.
yet it is not followed and obeyed, but frowardly
reiected by the practicall faculties,
and so the vnderstanding faculties which are
darkened and blinded by the fall of man, leading
the practicall faculties, which by their
owne nature are blind, and by sinfulnes peruerse,
cannot but lead man into the pit of
sinne, and of eternall destruction.
But let vs consider these practicall faculties
in particular, first the will, then the affections.
As all the other faculties of man,
so also the will hath lost the created holines,
and what maruaile is it, that the will it selfe
is sinfull, seeing by it all the other faculties of
mans soule and body were made sinfull? Yea
it is more sinfull then the former faculties,
and so is iustly punished, for being the cause
of mans sinfulnesse: for it doth more, (if
more can be) abhorre and refuse good, then
the minde is ignorant of it. The meanes
whereby the will became sinfull, was the
owne default: for it being created by God,
actually onely good, and potentially more
good then euill, did by refusing good and
choosing euill, make it selfe for euer vnable
eyther to choose good, or to refuse euill: and
that by continuing in that wrong way,
wherein it had made one step in choosing

forbidden fruit, and by adding one degree of
peruersnesse to another, till at length it became
habituall and naturall to it.
The sinfulnesse of mans will in this his
corrupt state, is the actuall and potentiall
inclination of it only to euill. This definition
needeth some explication and proofe, it
being greatly controuerted and oppugned
by many, who as if they were not of the progenie
of Adam, thinke that his fall doth not
belong vnto them: neither hath taken from
them the created holinesse of will, and therefore
they affirme and defend, that the will
of man euen in this corrupt estate, is, if not
actually inclined to good, yet so free that it
may of it selfe incline it selfe and the whole
man either to euill, whereof no man doubteth,
or yet to good, wherein the whole controuersie
standeth. But this opinion is not to
be receiued, for it is an enimie both to gods
glorie, in that it taketh a way the supernaturall
worke of his spirite in regenerating
the faithfull, and ascribeth the saluation of
man, not to the loue, mercie and power of
God, but to the naturall faculties and inherent
strength of man: and also to the saluation
of me^ whome it deceaueth with a vaine
shew of conuersion, faith and holinesse. And
therefore that the truth of this matter may

appeare. We will first set downe the state of
it, by shewing what is good and euill, and
what it is to haue freewill in regard of both (or
rather) either of good or euill.
Good therefore is to be defined by God: who
only is good and therfore the only rule of goodnes:
for whatsoeuer in the creature is agreeable
to the goodnesse of God, that is straigth and
good; as whatsoeuer is disagreeing fro^ it, is
crooked and euill. Yet this goodnesse of God is
not that which is essentiall to his nature, and
cannot be comprehended by anie creature,
but a finite, created, and accidentall goodnesse,
which God hath put into euerie one of
his creaturs, as a shadow of his infinite goodnesse.
Now in man this goodnesse is his holinesse
and happinesse not deuised by himselfe,
but appointed by God, and reuealed
in his word. Contrarilie, euill is the sinfullnesse
and wretchednesse of man: yea although
it haue neuer so greate an appearance
of goodnes, holines and happinesse, yet if
it be not that holinesse and happinesse which
is agreeable to the will of God, it is euil, sin and
misery: This goodnes is the obiect of ma^s wil
or the thing wherevnto he enclineth himselfe
who in the state of innocencie had power to
will and choose true goodnes; yea he did actuallie
choose it, being in all his thoughtes,

wordes, deedes, faculties, and in his whole
nature and state, made by his owne freewill
conformable to the will of God.
But as touching the will or proper inclinatio^
of man in this his corrupt state, we do
vtterly denie that he is able by any naturall
facultie in himselfe, by anie imagining,
inuenting, or discoursing; by anie wit, wisdome,
learning, reading, or knowledge;
by any good education, instruction and exercise:
or ingenerall by anie meanes that a
naturall man can vse, or that all the men or
Angels in the world can vse in his behalfe
(without the supernaturall worke of Gods
spirit changing his nature) to incline himselfe
to that which is good, that is, to that
holinesse* and happinesse which is agreeable
to the will of God. Or more plainly, he
cannot say thus with himselfe and doe accordingly.
This is the true and only happinesse
appointed by God for man: This holinesse
is the only way which God hath appointed,
that man should walke in, as in the way leading
to that happinesse: This is the onlie happinesse
which I do of my selfe propound to my
selfe, and that in this way of true holines I will
walk all the daies of my life: I will by co^tinuall
studying and hearing the word, by restraining
my owne desires, and auoiding all

occasions of sinne, and by such meanes as
I can vse, get the true and sound knowledge
of God, true faith, and hope of eternall
glorie, and of the resurrection of the deade,
true repentance, mortification of sin, and
of all my corrupt affections, yea an vnfained
loue of God and of all goodnesse, and in
summe all the spirituall graces which are
the partes of mans holinesse, and the means of
saluation. This I haue resolued with my selfe
to doe, not that I thinke that I am able to
attaine the perfection of these things, but
yet my whole will, inclination, affection,
desire, care, studie, indeauour and labour
shalbe set on these things. This is to haue
free will to good, not for a man to say, I
desire to be a holy man, and to be in heauen
after this life, but to incline and bende his
wholle bodie, soule, and all the faculties of
them both to holy and heauenly things.
The which thing is as impossible for a naturall
man to doe, as it is for him to flie
vppe to heauen. But how can this be proued?
First the scripture saieth:Gen. 9 5. Gen. 6. 5. All
the motions of the thought of man are onlie to
euill.^ Cor. 3. 5. 2. Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are able to think
any thing as of our selues, but our sufficiencie
is of God.^oh. 6. 44. Ioh 6. 44. No man can come vnto
me vnlesse he that sent me, doe draw him.

For the which doctrine of the impossibility of
naturall inclination to good, it is said.Vers. 4. 66. Ver.
4. 66. of the saide Chapter, that many left
Christ, as dispairing to attaine to that which
he affirmed to be impossible in respect of the
strength of man.Ioh. 8. 43. And Ioh. 8. 43. Ye do not know
my doctrine, because ye cannot heare it. That is,
because ye ca^not of your selues vnderstand and
beleeue.Rom. 8. 7. Rom. 8. 7. The cogitations of the
flesh neither are subiect to the lawe of God,
neither can be, they that are in the flesh cannot
please God.Rom. 9. 16. And Rom. 9. 16. It is not in
him that willeth, nor in him that runneth,
but in God that sheweth mercie 1. Cor. 2. 14.1* Cor. 2. 14.
The naturall man doth not perceaue spirituall
things, for they are folishnesse to him,
neither can he perceaue them, because they
are spiritually discerned.Gal. 2. 8. Gall. 2. 8. Ye are
saued by grace in faith, and that not of your
selues, it is the gift of God.
Besides this euident voice of the scripture
(the authoritie whereof ought to be sufficient
without any other proofe) we see this
error of freewill to be plainly confuted by
the experience of all times and places. For if
man were by nature free to choose either
good or euill, why shoulde not the choyse
of good, of holinesse, and of the way which
leadeth to saluation, be, if not as common

as the other yet a very common and ordinary
matter. But we see, that of the naturall
men which haue liued, and doe liue in the
worlde, not one of a thousand haue once
set foote in the right way of regeneration
and saluation. And no maruaile, for howe
shoulde a man choose that as the onely good,
which he did neuer knowe, and whereof
he neuer dreamed or hearde? in the which
state all men are by nature, being altogether
ignorant of the true God, his worde,
worshippe, and religion, and so hauing
no meanes of knowledge, but their owne
senses, which doe reiect that God, worshippe
and religion, which is not agreeable
to the iudgement thereof, the which
doth plainely shewe the impossibilitie of
this freedome of will. For nothing hath
freewill to that which is against the nature
of it, as God hath not freewill to euil, a
man to flie, a horse to speake.
If it be obiected that a man may haue a
desire, inclination, and will, to that which is
impossible for him to doe and accomplishe:
We aunswere that this is nothing to the purpose.
For when we deny that there is in
man any freedome of will to good, we doe
not deny that a carnall man may wish that
he were holy and happie, but that he cannot

accomplishe or begin the worke of his
regeneration and saluation. The which beginning
and working of grace, commeth
from the will, which is the fountaine of action,
enclining men with all the faculties
of soule and body to any thinge. Now regeneration
is a thing contrary to the corrupt
nature of man, for that faith and humaine reason
do fight together, no lesse then doe wisdome
and foolishnes.1. Cor. 1. 18. 1. Cor. 1. 18. And so in
all the other partes of holinesse.
This is confirmed also by continuall and
daily experience. For if regeneration were
agreeable to mans nature, it woulde be
common and ordinarie, whereas it is and
alwaies hath bene a rare miracle, not to be
founde among many thousandes of men.
Nay which is more, men doe neither of
themselues and their owne inclination seeke
after it* nor can by any meanes which they
can vse be brought vnto it. In other studies,
faculties, and exercises men doe daily profite
and go forwarde; none being so dull
and blockish, but that he may with paines
in continuaunce of time be brought to
knowledge. But no paines, no time, no excellency
of giftes in the minister can make
men religious, or to be endued with
the true knowledge and obedience of

God. Yea for the most part the more that
men are taught religion, the more blockish
and backwarde they become, and so
continue all their life time. We confesse,
that God doth sometime bestow on carnall
and reprobate men spirituall graces,
yea a shadowe of regeneration, whereby
both the mindes of men are inlightned to see
the trueth, and also their wils and affections
lightly enclined to loue and embrace
it. As we are to declare in the last part of
this treatise. But this chaunge commeth not
of man but from God: neither is it an effectuall
and totall inclination to good,
and therefore not that which is ment in this
question of freewill.
But the maintainers of freewill will perhaps
yeeld to this, that no man can choose
the right way before he doe deliberate of
it, and that nothing is deliberated of which
is not first knowen. And therefore that
freewill is not actually in an ignorant man,
but being as it were fettered and chained
by ignoraunce, is stirred vp and set loose by
the knowledge of the worde of God, with
the which whosoeuer is endued, hauing
the right and the wrong way propounded
vnto him by the preaching of the gospell,
the same man hath freedome of will, either

to choose or to refuse eternall saluation
with the meanes of it, yea although he haue
not as yet any supernaturall grace bestowed
on him. To this we answere, confessing
that the true illumination of the minde can
not be seuered from freedome of will, but
yet that neither the one nor the other can
be attained vnto by the naturall inclination
of the will: who although he may by
naturall meanes get a superficiall, and as
it is vsually called, an historicall knowledge
of all the pointes of religion, yet is it impossible
for him to gette any such true
knowledge, as will be effectuall to moue
his will in the choyse of good. For howsoeuer
many carnall men seeme to haue
a great measure of diuine knowledge, yet
they are farre from being firmly grounded
in the trueth, but doe make a faire shew of
religion, faith and holinesse, whenas their
heartes are full of Atheisme, vnbeleife and
all sinfulnesse, in the which (for the most
part) they are more wilfull, stubborne and
desperate, then they who are altogether
voide of knowledge. Neither indeede is
it any maruaile, that a naturall man should
be vnable to resist and offer violence to
his nature, to denie himselfe and all worldly
pleasures, to forsake his sinnes which

are more pleasant to him then life it selfe,
and all for hope of eternall saluation, whereof
he neither seeth any probability for the time
present, nor can haue any certainty, and
assuraunce for the time to come.
If it be here asked what shoulde be the
hinderaunce, why man being now sinfull
cannot as well enclin^ himselfe to good, as
he being innocent did choose euill, and
so returne to his first state by the same way,
whereby he fell from it? We answere, that
as a man hauing his sight and life, hath in
his owne power either to keepe them, or
to spoile himselfe of them, by putting out
his eyes, and by killing himselfe: yet after
that he is blinde and deade, he is not able
to take againe vnto himselfe his sight
and life: so man being in his innocency endued
with spirituall life, and a ready inclination
to all good, had power to continue
in that estate, if he had so thought good:
but after that he had once by freedome of
will, lost the goodnesse of his will, and
wholly depriued himselfe of the spirituall
life of holinesse, he coulde not being
nowe deade in sinne restore himselfe to the
state of life. And therefore he hath no
more power of choosing good, then a dead
man wanting the fountaine of motion, is

able to mooue himselfe about any businesse.
If it be further asked, why the word of God
biddeth men beleeue, forsake their sinnes,
turne themselues to God, repent, be holy,
refuse euill and choose the good, if so be
they are by nature altogether vnable to do
any of these things, or how that men can
be iustly blamed, or condemned for not
doing that which is not incident into their
nature, neither possible to be performed
by any naturall man: and lastly why men
shoulde trouble themselues in vsing the
meanes of attaining to regeneration and saluation,
seeing that all their labour is in vaine
without the supernaturall worke of God, and
not rather sit still and expect the time wherein
the Lord wil change their natures, and make
them capable of holinesse. We answere in
one word to all these doubtes: that the scripture
bidding men to choose good and become
holy, doth commaund nothing but
that which is in their power to do; and therefore
doth not meane that men should goe about
to change their owne corrupt natures,
and indue themselues with spirituall graces:
but onely that they should be carefull in vsing
the meanes of holinesse, as namely, the
abstaining from those sinnes whereunto they

are giuen, the auoyding of the occasions of
them, the hearing of the word of God, and the
doing of whatsoeuer is effectuall for this purpose,
and may be done by an vnregenerate
man: but whenas men are altogether carelesse
of their owne saluation, contemning
the word of God and all other meanes of
it, yea adding one measure of sinfulnesse to
an other, who can deny, but that they make
themselues subiect to the iust sentence of eternall
damnation? And therefore this naturall
impotency of will, which is in man, ought
not to make any man cease from vsing the
meanes of saluation: for howsoeuer it be
impossible for him or any other creature to
change his owne heart and nature, yet he
shall finde God to be ready and neare at
hand to all those that call vpon him, and
neuer to be wanting for his part.
It remaineth that we doe briefly shewe,
what liberty and ability of will is remaining
in man in this corrupt state, wherein if he
haue no will, he hath not in him the whole
fountaine of life and motion, and so he is no
man, yea in truth worse then any brute beast:
and if he haue a will, it is eyther a free will or
else no will, yet this freedome of will is not
indefinite, neyther doth it make him omnipotent,
and therefore we are to see how farre

it reacheth. For the knowledge whereof,
we are to distinguish betwixt the natures of
thinges indifferent, and of those which are
simplie good or euill. In the first kinde we
are to recken all common actions, as to eat,
to drinke, to mary, to sleepe, to build, to
plough, to learne, to teach, to study, to
speake, to thinke, and all other thinges of
the same kind, which are neither commanded
nor forbidden in the word of God. In
all these man hath freewill, being able of
himselfe to incline himselfe, to the doing or
not doing of any of them, as daily experience
doth plainely prooue. But it is not so with
him in the other kinde of thinges, eyther in
choosing good or in reiecting euill, yet he
hath some freedome in these thinges also:
first of good, then of euill.
In the good thinges we are to consider
the outward action and the inward grace, in
the outward action, a carnall man hath freewill,
being able to encline himselfe to the
doing or not doing of it. For example a carnall
man may heare the word of God, or
not heare, worship God, or not worshippe
him, relieue the necessities of the Church,
or not doe it, suffer martyrdome for the profession
of the gospell, or performe the outward
action of any christian duety: but

as touching the inward grace, it is not in
his power to get it, but only to leaue it. As he
cannot indue his owne mind with the true
knowledge of God, with the feare of God,
with the loue of the godly: and therefore his
outward action is but a painted sheath or
sepulcher, not effectuall to his owne saluation,
yea in trueth not to be esteemed good.
Againe, an vnregenerate man may of himselfe
seeke and get inward graces, as some
knowledge of God, iustice, temperance, chastity,
patience, and such other: Yet this
doth not make him to haue freewil to good:
for first in the question of freewill, this word
Good signifieth not any one, or a fewe particular
graces or actions, but a generall holinesse
effectuall for happinesse. Secondlie,
these giftes although they be partes of renewed
holinesse in the beleeuer, in whome
they spring from the roote of a true faith:
yet in an vnbeleeuing and vnregenerate man
they are not spirituall graces, but naturall
giftes, vnable eyther to sanctifie or to saue
him that hath them. Thus much of doing
good.
Likewise in the committing of euil, a naturall
man hath freewill not onely to doe it,
but also to leaue it vndone; for he may sinne
if he will, and he neede not except he list.

Of the first no man euer doubted, but the second
needeth to be explaned in this manner.
As good, so also euill is of two kindes,
inward, and outward: the inward corruption
of sin cannot be auoyded by any means:
for beside the originall sinne which is common
to the regenerate, and to the carnall
man, it is impossible that the inward faculties
of a carnall man should be free from actuall
sinfulnesse, dulnesse, ignorance, obliuion,
and peruersenesse, and therefore in regarde
of this inward corruption of the faculties of
the soule man hath no freewill, but sinneth
of necessity. Againe his outward sinnes are
of two sortes, the one is of those which are
sinnes not in their owne nature, but as they
come from the inward roote of infidelity, as
namely, all the indifferent actions of a carnall
man, his eating, drinking, speaking, working,
buying, selling, and all other of that
kinde. Yea his good actions, as namely, his
hearing Gods word, his praying, his giuing
of almes, his temperate, honest and iust
actions; all these are sinnes in the sight of
God. And therefore the carnall man hath
not freewill in this kind of outward actions.
For whatsoeuer he doth it is a sinne, and if
he doe nothing, yet that his doing nothing
is sinfull, yet in particulars he hath freewill,

or liberty of not sinning, for although he
cannot but sin in euery thing that he doth,
yet it is in his freewill whether he will doe
that indifferent thing or no, and so whether
he will sinne in that particular or no, as
namely, a carnall man purposeth to builde
a house: if he doe it, he cannot choose
but sinne, because he cannot purge
himselfe from infidelity, yet he neede not
sinne in that particular except he list, because
he neede not build the house except
he list.
The second kinde of outward sinnes, is of
those which are sinnes in their owne nature,
as being directy forbidden in the moral law,
as idolatry, periury, murther, adultery, theft,
and such other: in the committing whereof, a
carnall man hath freewill, it being not needfull
that he should commit them, as we see
in many vnregenerate men, whose outward
liues are irreprouable: for the inward force
of originall corruption, and of corrupt desires
enclining the will to sinne, doth not make
any necessitie of any particular sinne, because
they may be repressed by naturall
strength and hindred, although not from
breaking foorth into any sinne, yet from
bringing forth this or that particular sin. For
whenas a man co^mitteth adultery, or murther,

he doth it of a free, although a corrupt
will, and not of any force or necessitie.
Thus we see in how manie respects the freedome
of will remaineth, the which being
not distinguished from a true and generall
good, consisting in holinesse and happinesse,
haue beene the occasion of manie
errors in this point of doctrine, whilst many
haue thought that either a man hath freewil
by nature, or els he is able by learning and
knowledge to get an artificiall freedome of
will, and that in the worke of regeneration,
the will worketh together which grace, if
not strongly, yet weakly and faintly, as we
see a sicke man goeth about his businesse,
but the word of God teacheth vs to thinke
the will of man not only weake, but cleane
dead in respect of true holines, as hath beene
declared, and that an vnregenerate man is
no more able of himselfe to enter and goe
on in the way of godlynesse, then a deade
man is able to goe about the affaires of this
temporall life.


Sect. 3.
Of the renewed will of man.
WHen as that happie hower commeth
wherein it pleaseth God of his infinite
loue and mercie, to call anie

of his elect children out of the bondage and
slauerie of Sathan,Of the renew^^ will of man. into the glorious libertie
of the kingdome of Christ, he then sendeth
downe his spirit into the heart of that man,
whome he purposeth to call, and by the
mightie operation thereof, doth change
him into a new creature, taking from him
the dulnesse and ignorance of his minde,
the vntowardnesse of his wil and affections,
and enduing him with the contrarie graces.
This change is wholly to be ascribed to this
supernaturall working of the spirite, and
not in anie respect to the naturall force
of mans will: who howsoeuer perhappes
he before his conuersion, vsing the outward
meanes of regeneration and saluation, may
after a so^^ desire holinesse, and eternall
life: yet he is no more able to work
it by himselfe, then he was in his creation
able to take to himselfe created holinesse,
before the same were inspired into him by
God. For the will of man, as also all the
rest of his faculties, is not an agent or worker
in this action, but only doth suffer the worke
of the holie spirit, to whome it is as easie to
sanctifie the will of that man, who abhorreth
and detesteth all the outward meanes
of holinesse, as of him that is so carefull and
diligent in vsing them, that he might seeme

to haue chaunged his owne will from euill
to good. This we see in the conuersion of
the Apostle Paul, whose will being most
spitefully bent against the Gospell, was in
one moment chaunged to the true loue of
it.
But how is the will after this worke of regeneration?
Is it as idle and vnable to doe any
thing as before? Or is it now able of it
selfe without the immediate worke of Gods
spirite, to choose and doe good? We answere,
that although the holy spirite of God doth
neuer forsake him, whome he hath once renewed,
but doth to the ende of his life, yea
for euer accompanie and assist him, yet there
is a greate difference to be put betwixt the
first act of regeneration, and the continual
course of renewed holynesse arising thereof.
For a carnall man is renewed by the sole
worke of the spirite of God, without any
helpe, action or motion of his owne will (vnlesse
we will say that it moueth, in that
it is moued) but a faithfull man being already
regenerated doth choose, imbrace, follow
and do good, and performe all the duties
of renewed holinesse by the proper and
inherent facultie and motion of his owne
freewill. That the renewed holinesse of the
will, and of all the other faculties of a faithfull

man, are proper and inherent in him no
man can doubt: for his knowledge of God,
and his inclination to good, although it were
wrought in them by the holy spirit, yet it is
not the proper holinesse of the holy spirite,
whose holinesse is perfect, infinite, vncreated
and essentiall, but this holinesse of the
faithfull man, is vnperfect, finite, and accidentall:
not inherent in the nature of the
holy spirite, which is not capable of it, but
in the naturall faculties of the faithfull man.
Yea this holinesse is now made naturall vnto
him, for although it be contrarie to his
corrupt nature, yet it is agreeable to his created
and renewed nature. So that the first
renewing of holinesse is a supernaturall,
miraculous, vnknowen and diuine worke:
But the continuall vsing of it is an ordinary
euident, and a humaine action. For as in the
first creation of man, it was a maruaile to see
a sensible lumpe of red earth turned into a
liuing and reasonable man, hauing free will
to doe either good or euill, but after that
man was once created, it was noe maruaile
to see him vse those faculties which he had receiued
from God: So in his second creation,
it is as greate wonder to see a blockishe, ignorant,
froward, corrupt, sinfull, and earthly
man to become pure, holy, and heauenly

in al the faculties of soul and body, but after that
he is renewed and sanctified, it is no maruaile
to see him choose and doe newe and holy
actions. And therefore we are not to thinke,
that the holy spirite worketh the continual
course of holines in the faithful, as in stocks
or trees, although he beginne it in them
in that manner, but that first he giueth to
them holy faculties, by the which they
worke the residue of their owne holinesse,
he created in them a holy will; then by
meanes and inherent power of that will,
they themselues choose and doe good.
Thus much ingenerall of the renewed
holinesse of the will, the which differeth
from the created holinesse, which it had
in the state of innocencie in two respects.
First whereas the created will of man, did
for the present act incline it selfe whollie,
onely, and perfectly to good, this renewed
will, (although it also doth actually
encline itselfe to that which is truely and
onely good) yet it doth this imperfectlie
and impurely. For by reason of the reliques
of sinfulnesse which are in it, it doth
in part encline it selfe to some particular euils,
as to this or that sinne: we say to particular
euill, because it is impossible that this
renewed will shoulde reiect in generall the

true good,Of the renew^d will of man. consisting in true holinesse and
happinesse, the which maketh the second
difference betwixt the created and the
recreated will of man. For the created wil
of man might (as it did indeede) refuse good
and choose euill in generall: the which
thinge cannot happen to the recreated will:
for it is impossible that one truely renewed,
shoulde euer make a generall declination
from good, which is a totall apostasie
from God, yet he may chuse and accomplishe
many particular sinnes.
So that to conclude, the will in this state
of regeneration hath freedome and ability
of choosing good and reiecting euill: yet
this libertie is not so perfect that it can
wholly incline it selfe from euill to good,
but may be compared to one who hath
bene a captiue or prisoner all his life time,
and is nowe set at liberty, so that he may
goe whither he list, and doe what he thinketh
good: Yet hauing his fetters hanging
on his heeles is so shakled and hindred
with them, that he cannot runne vp and
downe so readely and freely as otherwise
he woulde, yea they make him to stumble
often, and sometimes to fall on the
grounde: so the faithfull are freed from the
bondage of sinne, and set at liberty by Christ,

yet they are so shakled with the naturall
corruption of sinne remaining in them, that
they cannot so perfectly choose good and refuse
euill, but that they do often stumble, yea
fall into great sinnes. Yet as this renewed holinesse
of the will is during the time of this
short life, inferiour to the created holinesse
of it in the perfection of actuall freedome to
good, so it is to be preferred vnto it in respect
of perpetuitie and immutabilitie. For
this imperfect freedome of will is so continually
vpheld by the secrete and mightie
grace of God, that it ca^not possibly be wholly
lost: whereas the perfect freedome of
the created wil, was soone brought to an end.
Yet this difference is not to be put in the nature
of the renewed will: for as the will of
all creatures, so also the will of regenerate
men is mutable, and for any inherent and
naturall facultie which either is, or can be
in it, may loose the goodnesse and liberty
of it, but to be ascribed to the immutable
and supernaturall grace of God, assisting
the renewed willes of the faithfull, whereas
he left the created will of man to destroy it
selfe, that so by the weakenesse of the creature,
the glorie of his power might the
more plainely appeare.




CHAPTER. VI.

Sect. 1. Of the created holinesse of the
affections, and especially of loue and
hatred.
THe last head of mans holinesse,
is the holinesse of his
affections, which are the
diuers dispositio^s of man, stirred
vp in him by the diuersitie
of obiects, and may be called so many particular
wils or motions of the will, for so much
as they are nothinge but diuerse inclinations
to apparant good, or declinations from
apparant euils. To make the nature of them
plaine by familiar examples: a man going
in the streete meeteth with his owne father,
sonne, or some friende whom he loueth
dearely, straight way he feeleth a change
of his disposition, which before was quiet
and setled, his will enclining it selfe towards
that obiect, whereof commeth the affection
of loue: annon he meeteth with his
deadlie enimie, at the sight of whom his
stomacke riseth, he abhorreth from him
as from an euill, there is a contrarie disposition
called the affection of hatred. Afterward
he espieth a poore, impotent, sicke,

lame,Of created loue and hatred. and naked man, whose extreame
miserie he cannot beholde for griefe, and
therefore he turneth away himselfe and
sigheth: there is pitty, mercy or compassion.
Not farre off there appeareth a great
rich man, him he enuieth, although he
ought not either to hate or enuie. Straight
way he spieth a pleasant picture, or heareth
some good newes: there he is made glade
and reioyceth: but going a little further,
he seeth his friendes house on fire, then
his ioy is turned into sorrow or greife. If
he meete a man whom he knoweth to be
wise and iust, and seeth to be aged, him
he reuerenceth: but he contemneth a base,
vile, and lewd person: an offence committed
kindleth anger, as a lawfull action
worketh contentation. Lastly if he see any
thing, that he standeth in neede of, and is
greatly for his vse, that he desireth: but if
he chaunce to see a rotten carion or any
lothsome thing, that he abhorreth.
Thus much of the nature of the affections,
nowe we come to the holinesse of
them. For although they be so suddainly
stirred vp in a man, that they may seeme
to come rather of foolishe rashnesse then of
reason and due regard, and make so great
a chaunge in him, as if the obiect did lay

violent handes vpon his minde (in the which
respect they are called passions of the mind,
and therefore were disclamed by those philosophers
which professed constancie and
exact vertue) yet they containe in them
a part of mans holinesse and of the image
of God who cannot suffer, and in whom
there is no shadow of chaunge. But thus
it hath pleased him to shadowe out his
owne incomprehensible nature, by the
likenesse of our nature, resembling it, as
to the other faculties of the soule of man,
so also to these affections, yea so that a
greate parte of his glorie reuealed to his
church consisteth in them. For although
he hath manifested himselfe to the heathen
in his wisdome and power shining in the
creatures: yet in his church he is most glorious
and renowned in respect of his mercy,
compassion and loue in Christ. The
which affections, as also anger, hatred, and
all the rest, are euery where in the scripture
attributed to God. In man they are then
holy whenas they are agreeable to the
nature of the obiect; as, when a man loueth
that onely which ought to be loued,
and hateth that which by the will and word
of God ought to be hated: and that
with due measure and moderation. Thus

they being ordered by reason and the word
of God, are not contrary to holinesse, but a
part of it. Yea they are as bellowes blowing
vp and encreasing spirituall graces, and
doe cary man forward to a high degree of
holinesse.
Nowe we are to declare these affections
in particular, but because the former part of
this treatise (wherin those affections which
imply subiection, as faith, hope, feare, and
reuerence, are already handled) is growen
in length farre aboue our purpose, as also
that there may be some place left for the
third part of this treatise, which in no case
may wholly be omitted, we will omit the
seuerall explication, and onely choose out
some fewe of them, which are the chiefe and
of most notable vse. In the which ranke
the first place is to be giuen to loue, being
taken not generally for that pleasure which
is taken in the fruition of some good thing,
in the which sense a man is said to loue this
or that thing, this or that kinde of meate, as
it is said of Isaac,Gen. 27. 9. Gen. 27. 9. But as the obiect
of it is some reasonable thing, to wit God,
Angels, or man, in the which sense it is vsually
called charity, and may be described,
A hearty and vehement desire of the good
of an other, arising of an inward pleasure

taken in some good which we see in him.
This affection is first and chiefly to be set on
God who onely is good, in the fruition of
whome there are infinite pleasures. And
therefore man ought to desire his good (in
the aduancement of his glory) aboue all
the thinges in the world. For he that loueth
father or mother, sonne or brother, or
any creature whatsoeuer more then God,
is not worthy to enioy those fountaines of
pleasures, which the fruition of God doth
yeelde to the hearty and vehement louer,
Math. 10. 7. From this loue of God proceedeth
the loue of the reasonable creatures,^ath. 10. 7.
which being endued with the image of God
are for his sake to be loued. Euen as we
knowe that he that beareth hearty and vehement
loue to his friend, cannot but loue
his friends sonne, being a resemblance of
his father. Hence it followeth that all the
reasonable creatures are not to be loued alike,
but more or lesse as they are more or lesse
endued with the image of God. And therefore
greater loue was due to Angels then to
men: and among men to those who did excell
others in measure of holinesse and of
spirituall graces.
This is the first streame of loue flowing
from the loue of God as from a fountaine:

beside the which there is an other fountaine
of loue, namely, the naturall affection which
euery liuing thing in the world beareth to it
selfe, whereby it taketh more pleasure in it
selfe, and doth more desire the good estate
of it selfe, then of any other thing. This naturall
loue hath place in man who, euen in
this his innocent estate, doth beare a greater
measure of loue to himselfe then to any
other creature. The which selfeloue is not
to be reprehended, it being not onely in all
liuing creatures, but also in God himselfe,
who (as good reason is) doth delight more
in himselfe, then in any other thing, and
doth more desire his owne glory then the
good of any creature. From this fountaine
of selfeloue flow many streames of speciall
loue, whereby a man is more affected to
those who doe anie waie come nearer vnto
himselfe, then to the common sort of men.
In this respect he beareth a greater, and as it
were a partiall loue to his naturall parentes,
children and kinsfolkes, being of the same
substance, flesh, bloud, and bone with himself:
to his wife who by the institution of God
is vnited into one person with him, Gen. 2. 24Gen. 2. 24.
to his speciall friend who is ioyned with him
in a perpetuall couenant of loue, Iohn. 20. ^.Iohn. 20. 2.
The disciple whome Christ loued and is to himDeut. 11. 6.

as his owne soule. Deut. 11. 6. To his acquaintance,
alliance, companions and neighbours,
and to all those to whome he is bound
by any speciall meanes;^ut. 11. 6. this loue is to be exercised
and declared in the performance
of all Christian dueties to our brethren, in
communicating vnto them al those blessings
both temporal and spirituall, which we haue
receaued from God, so farre foorth as their
necessity shall any way require. If these duties
be wanting, our loue is eyther verie
weake, or rather hypocriticall and pretended.
Thus the Apostle saith, that he exhorting
the Corinthians to contribute to the
Church of Ierusalem, did thereby trie the
naturalnesse and syncerity of their loue,^ Cor 8. 8. 2. Cor.
8. 8. likewise,^ Iohn. 3. 17. 18 1. Iohn. 3. 17. 18. He that
hath thinges pertaining to the maintenance of
this naturall life, and seeth his brother want,
how is the loue of God in him? therefore let
vs not loue in word and tongue, but indeede
and trueth.
Thus much of loue, whereunto hatred
is contrary, the which also hath place, and
some vse in this state of innocency, although
not so great as loue hath, because there were
more good obiectes then euill. This affection
being contrary to loue is in generall an
abhorring from any euill, but as it is referred

to those thinges which are endued with
reason, it is a desire of euill to happen to
that person which is hated, arising of some
inward griefe conceiued by meanes of him.
But what vse could there be of this affection
in the state of innocency, or who was
the obiect of it? not God, for he is pleasure
and good it selfe, and therefore doth neither
deserue to be abhorred, being in no respect
euill; nor yet giueth any occasion of hatred
to man by grieuing him: not the Angels,
nor man himselfe who also are good both
in themselues and towards man, and therefore
there remaine the wicked spirites only,
the deuill with his helhoundes, on whome
this affection is to be exercised. The which
thing man might lawfully do, requiting their
accursed and spightfull hatred of God, of his
glory, creatures, and specially of man and
his saluation, with a vehement hatred desiring
their eternall confusion, not simply because
they are sinfull and miserable; for they
are in that respect rather to be pittied, but
because of the nature of their sinne, which
being a desperate hatred of God, hath belonging
vnto it the imprecation of the
Church of God. Yet the deuill himselfe the
Captaine of this wicked crewe is not so vehemently
to be hated, as God is to be loued:

because he is not so euill, as God is good: for
God is simply, infinitely, and essentially
good: but the deuill is not infinitely euill,
because he is a creature: nor absolutely, for he
hath some good in him, as is the created
might and power of his nature: nor essentially,
for the substance of his nature remaineth
vncorrupt, as in the holy Angels.


Sect. 2. Of corrupt loue and hatred.
OF all the faculties of mans soule
none are so much stained with the
corruption of sin, as are the affectio^s:
for as the wil is more froward fro^ good
then the minde is ignorant of it, so the affections
are farre more outragious then the
will is froward: and no maruaile, for they
being of so violent a nature, as cannot without
much a doe be kept in due order, by the
force eyther of created or renewed holines,
how great shall we thinke their disorder and
sinfulnesse to be in this corrupt state, wherin
they may runne at random as farre as they
list, being not restrained by any superiour
power? Whereof it co^meth that as they being
sanctified and set on good, doe procure a
great encrease of holinesse, as hath bene said,
so they being in a carnall and sinfull man (esspecially

where they are strong by natur) do
encrease his sinfulnesse vnto the highest
degree:Of corrup^ loue and h^tred. the which as it is strong in the other
faculties of the soule, so in the affectio^s it may
well be compared to a mad man set on horsbacke,
yea on a wild horse which cannot eyther
stay himselfe, or be staied by any other
means, till he haue run himselfe out of breath
and life in all outrage of sinne. The sinfulnesse
of the affections consisteth in this,
that they are moued by contrarie obiectes:
for those which shoulde be stirred vp by the
euilnesse of the obiect to abhorre it, doe in
that respect embrace it and moue toward
it: and contrarilie those which shoulde be
moued by the goodnesse of the obiect to
embrace it, doe in that respect abhorre and
auoid it, as will appeare more plainly in the
particulars; as namely, in loue and hatred,
the which affections are both common and
strong in carnall men, yet not holely and rightly
disposed in them: for they doe rather loue
that which they should hate, and hate that
which they shonld loue, then loue and
hate that which ought to be loued and
hated.
First as touching God on whome man
ought to set his whole loue, a carnall man
doth not know God, much lesse loue him,

it being impossible that one should loue
that which he doth not know, as it is commonly
saide Ignoti nulla cupido. Yea if a naturall
man doe by anie means attaine to some
knowledge of God, yet he is as farre of from
louing him as he was before: and which
is more* although God doe bestow neuer so
many blessinges and pleasures vpon him,
as what hath he that he hath not receiued
from God: yet he cannot by them nor by
any other meanes purchase his loue, so greatly
is the affection of man alienated from
God. Yet we cannot say that man doth by
nature hate God (for then his fall were
as greate as the fall of the deuill, and the
rest of the wicked spirites, which is not to be
thought) especially seing that we knowe,
that all men by the instinct of nature delight
to haue a God, according to their owne Imagination,
and him they will loue and
honour. Yet this may be truly-saide, that it is
naturall for man to encrease, as in all other
partes of his naturall sinfulnesse, so also and
especiallie in the want of the loue of God,
in so much that although not all, yet many
become haters of God, as appeareth, Rom,
1. 30.^m. 1. 30. For although men, especially liuing
in the church, be restrained by the shame of
the world and the feare of punishment from

professing them-selues to be haters of God,
yet in that they doe hate the ministers and
seruants of God, which do zealously preach
and professe his gospel behauing themselues
spightfully, contumeliously, and malitiously
towardes them, it is euident that in their harts
they doe hate God himselfe. As Christ witnesseth,
Ioh. 7. 7. The world cannot hate
you but me it hateth, because I testifie of it that
the workes of it are euil.Ioh. 7. 7.
From this fountaine of the want of the
loue of God, commeth the want of loue towardes
men. For if the carnall man doe
not loue God himselfe, surelie it is not like
that he loueth man for Gods sake, and because
he is created or recreated after the likenesse
of God. What then doth sinfull man loue?
For we haue saide that this affection hath a
strong and common vse in this corrupt estate
surely he loueth himselfe (if that may be
called loue and not rather hatred which
bringeth to euerlasting destruction) and all
manner of worldly and fleshly pleasures:
soft apparrell, and to goe brauely, sweete
meates, and to fare daintily, faire buildings
for outward pompe and vaine-glorie; riche
coffers without anie scarsitie, new pastimes
and mery co^panie, sleepe, ease, idlenes, warmnes
and whatsoeuer may please the minde, or

tickle the outward senses,Of renewed loue and hatred. that is the thing
which man loueth. But what say ye to the
streames which come from this self^ loue?
Doth not man in this sinful estat loue his parentes,
children, wife, friends and acquaintance?
We answere that he loueth all these by
the instinct of nature, and yet by the encrease
of his naturall corruption it doth vsually
come to passe, as experience doth
teach, that most naturall men loue neither
father nor mother, sonne nor daughter,
sister nor brother, wife nor friend, kinsman
nor neighbour, nor any other saue only themselues.
So that man maketh himselfe an Idol,
loueing hinselfe wholly and only as he should
doe God, and bearing no heartie affection
either to the godlie for gods sake, or to his
owne for his owne sake.


Sect. 3, Of the renewed holinesse of the
affections and specially of loue and hatred.
AS the created, so much more
the recreated holinesse of man
admitteth all the kindes of affections:
by the violence whereof
as it is somtimes hindred
and impaired, so vsually it is set forward and
augmented: for euen as a shippe houlding
her right course and hauing her sailes filled

with a greate gale of wind, maketh a speidie,
gainfull and happie voiage, howsoeuer if that
she chaunce to meete with a rocke, or to
runne vpon some sand she is in greater danger
then if she had made lesse hast, and borne
a lower saile: So where the strength and force
of these affections is wanting, there is as lesse
danger in respect of sudden falles, so lesse abilitie
of aspiring to any high degree of holines,
for that the graces of the holy spirit wanting
their sailes, or being be calmed for want of
winde, often lie floting vp and dowen, and
doe not make so euident or notable progresse
in their course.
Of these renewed affections the most
notable is called loue, an affections so often
commended vnto vs, and so highly
extolled in the scriripture, as if it contained
not one part onely, but euen the wholle
substance of created holinesse: in the which
respect it is saide to be The fulfilling of the
lawe,Math. 22. 14. Math. 22, 40.Rom. 13. 8. Rom. 13. 8. and the
one halfe of renewed holinesse, the which
is vsually co^prised in these two words,1. Cor. 13. 13. Faith
and Loue, which is sayde, 1. Cor. 13. 13. To
be greater then faith.
But that we giue neither more nor lesse
to this affection then is due vnto it this is
to be held, that holinesse whether created

or recreated doth not consist either in any
one or in a fewe, but in many graces; amongest
the which loue hath the first place
assigned vnto it, yea often the denomination
either of the wholle holinesse of man, or
more commonly of the holinesse of all the
practicall faculties. Not as if it were the only
grace, for there are many distinct graces,
euen as many as there are distinct faculties
of mans soule required in perfect
holinesse; or yet as if it were the chiefe
grace, for faith hath the first place, although
in nature it be not so excellent as loue which
is an heroicall grace, being the foundation,
and as it were the subiect and ground-worke
not onely of loue, but also of all
other graces, and of all holinesse whether
created or renewed. Why then is
loue more spoken of, and inculcated in
the scripture then faith or any other grace?
We answere that the spirit of God, hauing
continually in enditing the scripture respect
to the capacitie of men, propoundeth and
commendeth vnto them holinesse, not so
much in grosse and in generall, as in some
particulars, which are more easely, surely
and certainly conceaued then the generall:
in the which respect loue is preferred
before faith, as being more euident,

apparant and sensible, and therefore a
more sure and infallible marke and note of
generall holinesse. The great appearance of
loue ariseth of these two causes. First because,
whereas faith hath relation to God
onely, loue extendeth it selfe both to God
and men. Secondly where as faith lieth hidden
in the heart and minde, loue is outward
practical, and therefore more apparant
and sensible. Againe loue is preferred
before all other practicall graces, because
holinesse consisteth as partly in duties
to be performed in respect of our selues,
so cheifely in duties to be perfourmed to
others, namely to God and to men: the
which a man cannot performe as he ought,
vnlesse he beare a loue and a harty desire
of the good both of God and of man.
Thus much of loue in generall. The particulars
of it are these. First the regenerate
man loueth God aboue all the thinges in
the worlde, desiring his good in the aduancement
of his glory much more then
his owne saluation. From the which fountaine
of the loue of God, springeth the
loue of all men, but especially of the Godly,
who are renewed according to the image
of God in holinesse and iustice,Psalm. 16. 3. Psal. 16. 3.
All my delite is in the holy ones which are here

on earth and cheiflie in those which excell in
vertue. This loue of the saintes is an infallible
signe of true regeneration and of the
true loue of God, namely, whenas a man
loueth an other, hartelie and vehemently,
euen as it were his owne naturall sonne or
brother, for this cause onely (he being otherwise
astraunger vnto him) for that he seeth
in him manifest signes and argumentes
of true and vnfained godlinesse, 1. Ioh. 3.
14.1. Iohn. 3. 14 We knowe that we are translated from
death to life,Ioh. 13. 35. because we loue the brethren.
And Ioh. 13. 35. By this shall all men knowe
that ye are my disciples if ye loue one another.
Nowe we come to the other fountaine of
loue, namely, selfe-loue, the which also
hath place in the regenerate, although in an
other manner then in carnall men. For
they loue themselues, yet so as that they
loue God more by infinite degrees, and
their brethren as themselues. Againe, they
doe not shewe or vse this selfe-loue in prouiding
earthly and sensuall pleasures for
their bodies, but in procuring the eternall
saluation of their soules, and yet they doe
and ought to loue themselues more then
they doe any other, yea to be more carefull
for the good estate of their owne bodies
and soules, then of the bodies and

soules of their brethren. Yet this must be
vnderstood in equall comparison: for a
faithfull man ought not to loue his owne
bodie and to desire the safetie thereof more
then the eternall saluation of his brother: the
which ought to be procured, yea with
the losse of our owne temporall liues Ioh.
3. 16.Iohn 3. 16. As Christ laide downe his life for vs,
so we ought to lay downe our liues for our brethren.
Yet a man neede not depriue himselfe
of life for the safetie of the temporall
life of his brother being a priuate man,
nor of eternall life for the procuring of his eternall
saluation.
If any man doe here obiect the examples
of Moses and Paul, of whom the one desired
to haue his name blotted out of the booke
of life: and the other to be accursed from
Christ for the good of the Iewes. We a^swere
that the Iewes were then to be co^sidered not
simplie as me^, but as the whol visible church
of God, the confusion whereof coulde not
but be a great hinderaunce to Gods glory,
the which ought to be procured, euen with
the eternall confusion of our owne soules,
if the case doe so require. For so Moses alledgeth
that if God did destroy his owne
people, the Egiptians who were spitefull
enimies to God and his worshippe, would

laugh at their distruction and blaspheme
God himselfe. And so we cannot doubte
but that the glory of God shall be wonderfully
enlarged by the conuersion of the
Iewes, and therefore it may be more desired
then our owne saluation.
From this fountaine of selfe loue flow
the afore saide streames of speciall loue,
whereby the faithfull man is affected more
to those who doe any way come neare
himselfe, then to those who are estraunged
from him. This partial loue is good and
lawefull, for why shoulde not man encline
and cleaue more to those whom God hath
ioyned more nearely vnto him? Hence commeth
the speciall loue due to parentes,
which cannot be wanting but in him who
is notoriously vnnaturall, vnthankfull, and
vnholy. For if a man loue the houses and
places wherein he hath beene and liued
sometime, shall he not much more loue
his parentes from whose bodies he came.
Secondly the loue of children, with the
loue of whom he that is not touched
and enflamed, may be accounted lesse affectionated
then God himselfe, and more
senslesse then are the brute beastes. An example
of this fatherly affection we haue in Iacob,
of whom it is saide that he did loue

his son Beniamin so dearly that his soule was
so tied to the soule of Beniamin, that he could
not liue but would inco^tinently dy for sorrow
if so be he were taken from him,Gen. 44. 36. Ge. 44. 36.
This fatherly affection is so strong by nature,
that if it be not wel looked vnto, it wil as
a great riuer or streame rise aboue the bankes
and due limites of it, and cary a godly man
beyond all due regard eyther of reason or
of religion, as appeareth plainely in that
notable man of God king Dauid,1. King. 1. 6. of whom
it is said. 1. King. 1. 6. That he did cockour
his sonne Adonia, and could not finde in his
heart to grieue him, no not with a sharpe word.
And we know how he loued his vngratious
sonne Absalon, being more sorrowfull for
his death (who for his monstrous vnnaturalnes
was not worthy to liue on the earth,)
then he was glad for the victory which he
himselfe had gotten, and for his owne safety.
And therefore he did so bitterly lament
his death, saying, O Absalon, Absalon, O my
son Absalon, would to God I had died for the.
Thirdly from this fountaine commeth the
speciall loue of those who are tied with the
faithfull man in any outward bonde, as in
mariage or speciall friendship: for the first,
^o the mutuall loue which ought to be be^wixt
the husband and the wife, the scripture

doth often exhort by arguments drawen
from the institution of God, who hath
made them one person and one flesh. Thus
Ephe. 5. 29.Ephe. 5. 29. No man euer hated his owne flesh,
but doth nourish and cherish it. And therefore
a man ought to loue his wife, euen as his
owne bodie, and as Christ hath loued his
Church. Yea there is great reason and necessity
of a great measure of mutuall loue
betwixt man and wife. For seeing they doe
forsake their fathers, mothers and kindred,
not dwelling any longer with them, but betaking
themselues to their owne house, and
to each other as to a perpetuall companion
and partner in good and euill, in ioy and
misery, how should not their loue be exceeding
great?
The seconde outward bond of loue is
friendship, whereby we doe not meane any
common good will and acquaintance,
but a speciall contract of perpetuall loue^
such an one as was betwixt Ionathan an^
Dauid,1. Sam. 18. 1. whereof it is saide, 1. Sam. 18. 1^
That the soule of Ionathan was tied to th^
soule of Dauid. And Dauid himselfe wh^^
had best experience of it, witnesseth th^^
greatnesse of Ionathaens loue,2. Sam. 1. 26. 2. Sam. 1^
26. Saying, how am I grieued for thee (...)
brother Ionathan, thou was sweete and pleasa^

vnto me, thy loue was wonderfull to me passing
the loue of women. Lastly from this fountain
of selfeloue, commeth the loue of kinsfolks,
alliance, acquaintance, companions, neighbours,
and of all whome God hath ioyned
more nearely to vs then he hath done others.



CHAP. VII.

Sect. 1. Of ioy, sorrow, and pittie in
the state of innocency.
BEside the foresaid affections of
loue and hatred, there were many
other created in man, as
namely, to let the rest passe ioy,
and sorrow, which is contrary to it. The
first is a delight or pleasure conceiued by the
present enioiing of some good thing, whereby
a man is mooued to seeke and embrace
the said good, as sorrow is the abhorring of
some present euill as being bitter and vnpleasant.
Both these affections had place
and vse in this first estate, yet not equally:
for a great part of happinesse consisteth in
ioy: yea happinesse may be said to be nothing
else but the ioyfull fruition of good
and pleasant thinges, whereas sorrowe is

contrary to happinesse,Of ioy, sorrow ^nd pitty in ^he state of innocency. howe great cause
and continuall vse of ioy man had in his
innocency, we may easely gather by those
infinite blessings wherewith he was euen
compassed about, liuing not onely free from
all troubles, crosses, afflictions, daungers,
wants, incumbrances, and whatsoeuer
thing might any way grieue or hurt him, but
also in abundance and superfluity of al pleasures
belonging both to his body and soule,
in perfect strength and health, in wealth,
peace and liberty, in honour and glory, and
which is all in all, and in trueth the fountaine
of all true ioy, in the fauour and loue of
God.
The holinesse of this affection, consisteth
in this, that it be correspondent, and proportionable
to the goodnesse and excellency
of the obiect, and that the ioy which man
conceiueth by the fruition of any thing be
greater or lesse, as the thing it selfe is more
or lesse excellent, a greater or a lesse good,
and therefore man was chiefly to delight
himselfe and to reioyce in God who is the
chiefe and first, yea the onely infinite good^
in the fruition of the presence and fauour of
God, in seruing and praising God and in meditating
on the creatures, workes, wisedom*
power, mercy and goodnesse of God*

Secondly as God hath put into euery one of
his creatures,Of ioy, soro^ and pittie in the state of i^nocency. a finite and proper goodnes; so
it was lawfull for man to be affected accordingly
with the pleasure flowing from the
said thing. For example, God created for
the vse of man great variety of trees bearing
sweete and pleasant fruite, all which man
might lawfully vse with ioy and pleasure.
Yea this ioyfull vse of the creatures was not
onely permitted to man, but also comaunded
by God:Deut. 26. 11. for so we read, Deut. 26. 11.
Thou shalt bowe thy selfe, before the Lord thy
God, and thou shalt reioyce before him in all
the good thinges which he hath giuen vnto
thee, thou and thy whole family. For why? he
that reioiceth aright in the fruition of the
creatures, reioyceth in God, the maker
and giuer of them, and by them is stirred
vp to greater alacrity in seruing and praising
God.
Now as touching sorrow, it had also place
in the pure nature of man which was subiect
to this passion, howsoeuer he being in perfect
felicitie, had not any great vse of it, yet
we may suppose some causes of sorrow, euen
in this happie estate, both in man himselfe,
who might be moderately grieued for
the want of some particular good, and in
some other respects, as also in other creatures,

for the miserable estate of the wicked
Angels hauing beene so glorious and
happie, especially the dishonour which they
did many waies procure to the name of God,
could not but worke sorrow in the heart of
man. So that the sorrow of man in this
first state, being rather in regarde of others
then of himselfe, ought to be called pitty
rather then sorrow. The holinesse of this
affection consisteth in this, that it be in
greatnesse correspondent to the greatnesse
of the euill, diligently waied with the seuerall
circumstances of it, and also moderated
and qualified with contentation in respect
of the will of God, by the which the
said euill came to passe.


Sect. 2. Of corrupt ioy and sorrow.
THese affections ioy and sorrow doe
remaine in the corrupt state of man;
yet after a farre diuerse manner: for
whereas before the ioy of man was chiefly
in God and in spirituall things, now it is wholly
in carnall, sensuall and earthly pleasures:
before man neuer thought himselfe well but
when he was praising and seruing God, and meditating
on his loue, and the manifold blessings
receiued from him, now man neuer thinketh
on God: and if he by some outward meanes, as

the lawes of me^,Of corrupt ioy and sorrow* or the auoiding of the sham
of the world, be drawen to some spiritual exercise,
as is the hearing of the word, praier, or
any other, he taketh no manner of pleasure in
it: Yea it is irkesome and tedious vnto him, his
minde and affections being set vpon worldly
pleasures, as namely in the abundance, vanetie,
goodnesse and sweetnesse of meates
and drinkes, in sleepe and idlenesse, in carnal
and filthy lustes, in pastime and merie
companie, in gorgeous apparrell, statelie
buildings, large reuenewes, in health, stre^gth,
riches, honour, and preferment, in children,
friends and prophane knowledge, or in some
other of the same kind.
Not as if there might not a lawfull pleasure
be taken in corporall and outward blessings,
as hath beene declared, but man passing
by God the giuer of all these blessinges
placeth his whole ioy and felicitie in the fruition
of them, and so maketh them his Gods.
As the Apostle doth plainlie witnesse that the
coueteous man is an idolatour. He is not stirred
vp by the sweetenesse which he feeleth
in the vse of the creaturs to reioyce and delight
himselfe in God the giuer of them, but is
by them more alienated from God, and being
euen drunke with sensualitie forgetteth
and contemneth God, much more in prosperitie

then in aduersitie; and therefore God
doth so often forewarne the people of Israel
of forgetting him, whenas they come into
that pleasant land flowing with milke and
honny whither they went.
Hence it commeth that the ioy of a carnall
man is vnconstant, vncertaine and
momentany, euen as is the matter of his
ioy. For as no worldly thing is constant, so
the ioy which ariseth of worldly things must
needes be vnconstant. Yea while it doth
continue it is not pure and sincere ioy, but
mingled with much sorrow and vexation
of minde, it being impossible that any man
should haue such perfect ioy in this world
in respect of worldly blessings, as is voide of
all manner of crosses and griefe. And therefore
Salomon saith,^roue. 14. 13. Prou. 14. 13. That the
hart of the wicked man is heauie euen while he
laugheth and that sorrow is the end of his ioy.
Thus we see the sinfullnesse of mans ioy in
this corrupt state.
Likewise his sorrow is not such as it ought
to be: he is indeede often grieued, but not
for the want of the fauour, presence and grace
of God, not for his sins by the which he doth
displease and dishonour God, not for the miserable
estate of his soule rotting in ignorance,
atheisme and infidelitie. These things neuer

trouble him,Of corrupt Ioy and sorrow* but if he be in anie worldly miserie,
if in pouertie, sicknesse, danger, prison,
in the displeasure of any greate and
mightie man, then he is ouerwhelmed, and
euen stricken deade with sorrow. As for the
miseries wherein he seeth other men to
be, the scripture doth often teach vs, and
daily experience doth testifie the same, that
a carnall man is cruell, mercilesse, voide of
all pittie and compassion.


Sect. 3. Of holy ioy and sorrow.
IT now remaineth that we declare
the holines of these affections
in the state of regeneration,
wherein both ioy and sorrow
haue so greate and continuall
vse as that they may seeme to striue
for the preheminence whether of them
should beare the greater sway in the faithful.
Renewed ioy ariseth of the inward sense
and feeling of the loue and mercie of God
in Christ, whereby a faithfull man knowing
assuredlie that he hath attained remission of
all his sinnes, safetie and freedome from the
anger and iudgements of God, eternall
happinesse with all spirituall and temporall
blessings tending therevnto, is (and that not

without good cause) replenished in his soule
with an exceeding and vnspeakable ioy in
regard of this his happie state:Of holy ioy and sorrow. the greatnes
whereof no man either knoweth or can expresse,
but he in whome it hath pleased God
to worke it by his holie spirite. Yea if we shall
compare this renewed ioy with the ioy
which man had in his first estate, we shall
see that the faithfull haue both greater cause
of reioycing, and greater ioy then man
had in his perfect happinesse: in that he
hath not only attained to a more perfect,
absolute, and certaine happinesse, but also
hath escaped the contrarie miserie, euen
the eternall wrath of God due vnto him for
his sinnes, whereof man had no taste in his
first estate. This ioy differeth from the ioy
of the carnall man in many respectes: the
one reioyceth in God, the other in the creatures:
the one in temporal, vaine and momentanie,
the other in spirituall, heauenlie,
and eternall things, the one in the good
estate of his bodie the other in the good
estate of his soule: The one sheweth his ioy
in the vse of carnall pleasures: the other, in
spirituall exercises Eph. 5. 18. Be not drunke
with wine wherein is excesse,Eph. 5. 18. but be ye filled with
the spirit, speaking to your selues in psalmes
and spirituall songs, making melodie to the Lord

in your heartes.Of holy ioy, and sorrow. And lastly the one is continuall
and constant abiding, yea florishing so much
the more in the middest of the greatest afflictions,
Rom. 5. 3.Rom. 5. 3. Act 16. 15. The other is short
and vncertaine,Act. 16. 25. being cleane dashed with the
least crosse that doth happen.
This renewed ioy, although it be so exceeding
great as hath beene saide, yet it is
mixed and indeede tempered with much
sorrow: so it hath pleased God in great wisdome
and mercy to giue to his children
in this life, not the absolute perfection of
that ioy and happinesse which he hath prepared
for them; but rather to temper the exceeding
sweetnesse of it with sorrow and
afflictions, that so the bitternesse of the one
might make the other the more welcome
and acceptable vnto them. The causes of
this sorrow are diuerse, some in the faithfull
themselues, some in others: in themselues
first and cheifly their sinnes whereby they
doe displease and dishonour God, who hath
shewed himselfe to them so gratious,
bountifull and mercifull. Secondly the
manifolde temptations, crosses and afflictions
which doe daily befal them: these howsoeuer
by the gratious assistaunce of Gods
spirit, they doe often encrease this spirituall
ioy, yet being bitter and oftentimes

intollerable to flesh and bloude they doe
preuaile against this spirituall ioy, by reason
of the infirmitie of the flesh: and although
they cannot cleane extinguishe it, yet they
coole and diminishe it; yea and so driue it
into a corner, as that it doth not any way
appeare. Yea euen the ordinarie misery
and vanitie of this life, being compared
with the happinesse of the life to come, doth
worke in the faithfull sorrow, sighes, and
grones, as we read, Rom. 8. 13.
Beside this matter of sorrow which they
haue in themselues,Rom. 8. 13. they are continually
sore grieued, and euen tormented in themselues,
when as they beholde the vaine and
wretched estate of the creatures, being
moued to pittie, euen by the miseries of
the brute beastes, the horrible sinnes
which abounde euery where, and the generall
atheisme which raigneth in the
worlde, to the greate dishonour of the
name of God. And much more whenas
they consider the calamities, miseries, abuses,
corruptions and defections of the churches,
professing the name of Christ. These
thinges doe, and that iustly worke continuall
greife in the heartes of the Godly, yet
this greife is moderated with patience, and
contentation in the will of God, and so

it be commeth a godly sorrow, which doth
not bringe them to desperation and death as
carnall sorrow doth; but is at length the
cause of greater ioy. And thus omitting for
breuities sake the rest of the affections,
which haue not so common and notable
vse in the life of man, we conclude this second
part of mans holinesse, to wit, his conformity
to God.




The third part of this treatise,
of the chaunges hapening
in the three estates* or of
the degrees of holinesse and
sinfulnesse

CHAPTER. I.
Of the chaunges hapening in the three estates
of man in generall.
THe mutabilitie of the creature
(whereby the identitie
of God is illustrated)
appeareth not onely in the
generall diuersitie of mans
state, which sometimes is

innocent and happie,Of the chaunges hapening in the three estates of man. other times sinfull
and miserable, and againe becommeth holy
here on earth and glorious in heauen:
but also in the particular chaunges hapening
in his seuerall states, whereof none can
make him so immutable as that he may say
truely of himselfe, I am that I was, and will
be that I am and no otherwise. As touching
his created holynesse it coulde not be
either so firme and stedfast, but that it
might be in some sorte diminished, or so
absolutly perfect, but that it ought daily to
be encreased. But this vncertaintie and
mutabilitie appeareth farre more plainelie
in his other estates, the one of naturall sinfulnes,
the other of renewed holines, of both
which there are in a ma^ner as many degrees
as there are carnall and regenerate men in the
world. For although the corruptio^ of sin, haue
already so possessed all the partes and faculties
of body and soule, and be as deeply imprinted
into the soule of man, as the spottes are in
the skin of a leopard, and therefore may
seeme not to admitte any encrease by reason
of the greatnesse or any decrease by
reason of the naturalnes of it; yet both these
chaunges may be seene, the one vsually in
most vnregenerate men, who doe daily
plunge themselues deeper and deeper in

to the pit of sin, adding one sin to another, and
thirst to drunkennesse, as the scripture speaketh:
the other in diuerse both within and
without the church. Likewise in regeneration
the faithfull man neuer standeth at
one stay, but doth alwaies grow either vpwarde
or downewarde in godlynesse. For
as vsually he encreaseth his spiritual strength,
chaunging his christian infancie with a ripe
and constant age, and adding grace to
grace till he become a perfect man in
Christ: so sometimes he decreaseth in holinesse
as we see the bodies of men doe in old
age, and so as it were returning the same
way he came, falleth into one sinne after
another, and so decreaseth in holinesse,
although not totally and finally, yet greiuously
and fearefully. Thus the spirituall
state of man chaunging it selfe from lesse
to more and from more to lesse, from
good to euill and from euil to good, yea
from good to better and from euil to worse,
is as variable as is the moone, which continually
decreasing or increasing in light,
appeareth euerie night in a newe forme.
These chaunges, differences and degrees
are necessarie to be knowen of all christians,
that so they may be either sought after
or auoided, as they are either good or

euill. And therefore we are here to declare
the degrees both of the holinesse and also
of the sinfulnesse of man: not the conuersion
of one estate into another, the which
is the argument of the two former partes of
this treatise; but the proper chaunges of each
state as first, howe Adam continuing in
the state of innocencie, might either haue
decreased or increased in holinesse. Secondly
howe a carnall man abiding in his naturall
sinfullnesse may be more or lesse sinfull.
And Lastly howe a regenerate man
may decrease or increase in spirituall graces.
Of these in order, if first we put the
reader in minde that these chaunges are
made from that measure of created holinesse,
of sinfulnesse and of renewed holinesse,
which hath bene declared in the two
former partes of this booke: wherein although
sometimes for illustration a higher
degree both of holinesse and of sinne be
mentioned, yet we haue indeauoured to
sette downe that mediocritie, as it may be
called, of holinesse both created and renewed,
which is to be seene ordinarily and vsually
in men, in the state of innocencie and
of regeneration: and likewise that measure
of sinne which is naturall to all men, and
may be seene in many vnregenerate men:

not in all, because in some it is diminished,
nor in most, because vsually it is encreased,
as afterward will appeare.


CHAP. II.
Of the chaunges of created holinesse.
IT may be doubted how man
liuing and continuing in his
innocent and happy estate,
could decrease in holinesse, especially
seeing that (as hath
beene said in the first part* Chap. 3. Sect. 2.) all
the partes of his holinesse were so tyed and
linked together, that he could not loose any
particular grace without loosing all, nor
commit the least sinne in the state of innocency,
because by committing sinne* and
in the very act, and moment of committing
it, he should fall from his innocency into
a sinfull state. Wee answere, that although
all this be true, yet there must a difference
be put betwixt the want of a grace
and the small measure of it, and so betwixt
the committing of sinne, and the decreasing
in holinesse, which may be without
sinne: and that in this state, if so be it be
with these conditions: first that this decrease

be not so great as that any grace or part of
holinesse be wholly wanting:Of the changes of created holinesse. for thereof
sinne would necessarily follow. Secondly,
that it be not continuall or finall, but onely
for some short space of time. In this manner
we may well thinke that particular graces,
as faith, loue, temperance might be
in man in the state of innocency sometimes
in great and sometimes in small measure.
For as he did cary about with himselfe the infirmity
of humane nature consisting of flesh
and bloud, and was outwardly subiect to
the temptations of Sathan, so we cannot
doubt but that by these meanes his faith,
and withall, all the other partes of holines,
might receiue some wounde, although not
be cleane ouercome, and mingled with
doubting and wauering, although not wholly
turned into it. Likewise the loue of God
and of his glory, might be abated for some
space of time by force of temptation, and he
made lesse zealous of Gods glory, and lesse
chearefull in seruing him, yea dull and
lumpish and without his wonted alacrity
The trueth hereof appeareth in the example
of Christ, whose humane nature although
it were endued with farre more firme and
plentifull holinesse, then was man in his innocency,
yet in that it was a humane, that is

a created and weake nature, it could not be
freed from this mutabilitie whereunto all
creatures are subiect. Whereof it came,
that the vnspeakable force of his last agony
wherein he felt the infinite anger of God
due to the sinne of mankinde, did giue his
faith a great blow, yea it made an euident
decrease of it for a short time: insomuch
that he burst foorth into these wordes, My
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me.
Where we are not to thinke that his faith did
faile, which appeareth plainely in those
wordes my God my God. But as the most valiant
champion receiuing a mighty blow is
made to reele and stagger by the force of
it; so was the faith of Christ shaken by this
temptation, as is a strong house by a greate
blast of winde, yet without daunger of being
ouerturned: now to proceede.
As mans holinesse might haue beene diminished
in regard of the measure of particular
graces; so it might also haue beene
encreased in the same respect; not that we
suppose it to haue beene imperfect, but for
that, that which is already perfect, may become
more perfect. As namely that we may
make instance in some particular, the
knowledge wherewith man was endued in
his innocency was exceeding great as hath

beene shewed, yet no man can doubt but
that the same would in processe of time haue
beene continually encreased, as God did
reueale himselfe, his word, counsels and
actions daily more and more. This encrease
of holinesse in the vnderstanding, all the otheir
faculties do follow: for the more that
man knoweth God, the more he trusteth,
loueth, feareth, obeyeth, worshippeth and
honoreth him: the oftner that man were deliuered
from danger by the goodnesse and
power of God, the greater woulde be his
affiance in God: the more blessings that he
doth receiue, the greater is his thankfulnes.
So that the life both of man and of the Angels
in their innocency being a continuall
exercise of holinesse, cannot but haue a
continuall encrease of it. Yea we may well
thinke, that both many of the Angels and
all mankinde were so easelie drawen from
God and brought to a fearefull ruine, because
they were tempted to this Apostasie in
the beginning of their liues, immediately
after their creation, before they could encrease
and confirme their holinesse by obseruation
and holy experience. By the which
meanes we are to thinke that euen the holy
Angels themselues, which doe continually
behold the face of God in heauen, haue

since their first creation continually encreased
their holinesse, and so are a great deale
further from falling and sinning against God,
then they were in the beginning, being vpheld
in all temptations suggested eyther by
their owne thoughtes, or by the wicked
Angels, although by the supernaturall
grace of God, yet not without the means of
this naturall encrease of their created holinesse.
Againe this encrease of holinesse hath
place as in particular men, so also generally
in the ages of this innocent state: for as in
this sinfull estate wherein we liue, the latter
ages are more sinful then the former, because
they partake the sins of all the former
ages; so if the state of innocency had continued,
the latter ages being taught by the first
would haue exceeded them in knowlege and
in all other partes of holinesse. Lastly this is to
be noted, that we do not here speake of that
increase of holinesse which was in the childhood
of man in his innocency, during which
time he did grow both in stature of body, and
in holines of soule, as it is said that Christ did
in his innocency and infancy, Luke. 2. 25.Luke. 2. 25. But
of the progresse in holinesse, after that he was
come to ripenes of age, and the ordinary state,
measure and degree of holinesse, to wit, that

wherein Adam the first and the last man, of
this innocent generation was created.


Chap. 3. Of the naturall decrease of sinfulnes.
IN the next place we are to consider
the changes which happen in
the sinfull state of man, the which
being the worst of all states ought not in
constancy to excell all other. First of the
decrease, then of the increase of sinne. By
the decrease of sinne, we meane the increase
of the reliques of Gods image, and so consequently
the decrease of the corruption of
sinne which is contrary thereunto; as namely,
when as the light and knowledge remaining
in the minde of man after his fall is by
any meanes encreased, and so the contrary
blindnesse and ignorance in part expelled.
This decrease may happen in al the parts of
mans sinfulnesse, for by it the dulnesse and
ignorance of the minde, the peruersenesse
of the will and affections, the wickednesse
of life in outward actions may be diminished.
For the better vnderstanding of this
point, it is needfull that we set downe what
is the naturall state and degree of sinfulnesse
the which is sometimes diminished, and
sometimes augmented in men, that by the
mediocrity the extreames may be knowen.

It is hard to giue any real example of it,Of the natural decrease of sinfulnesse. because
the nature of man being in continuall
motion, is alwaies either vnder or aboue,
this state of sinfulnesse, yet it may be described
after this manner. Suppose a man of
ripe yeares of a soft and simple disposition
the which is to be founde in men whose
bodies are of some cold complexion
(for hote and fierie natures haue strong,
quicke, vehement and vnconstant motions,
able to change themselues without any outward
meanes, and therefore doe alwaies
runne into the one or the other extreame)
hauing liued in some solitarie place not acquainted
with the fashions, corruptions
and sinnes of the world, not hauing giuen
himselfe either to continuall meditation or
beene instructed by others in the knowledge
of religion: looke what measure of sinfulnesse
is in this man, the same or there aboute
is the naturall sinfulnesse which all men take
from Adam, and bring with them out of
their mothers wombes into the world. Againe,
suppose or rather beholde with your
eyes (for the liuing examples of the encrease
of sinne are infinite) one brought vp in the
companie of lewde and wicked men, and
indued with wit, beutie, strength of nature,
riches, honour, and all manner of worldly

things, such a one may become a vertuous
and holy man, but vsually he is so in euery
respect, that a man may see plainly in him
a patterne of the encrease of naturall sinfulnesse.
Lastly spie out one of a gentle nature
and ingenuous countenance, vertuously
brought vp from his first infancie, hauing
neuer vsed any euill companie, but being
continually giuen of himselfe to get learning
and all manner of knowledge, yea carefully
inured by his parents, tutors and teachers
to the dayly practise and exercise of what
soeuer thing is honest, good, right, and any way
co^mendable, and lastly who hath no tru touch
of religion, and is indued with a competent
portion and measure of the giftes of nature, and
of fortune (as they are ignorantly termed) this
man although he may by the peruersnesse
of his corrupt nature treade all these things
vnder his feete, and become verie vitious,
yet vsually he may be an example of the
decrease of naturall sinfulnesse.
These three men are all carnall and sinfull,
yet there is greate difference among
them, the which that it may the more plainly
appeare, we will compare them and their
diuers degrees of sinfulnesse together. The
first is the right naturall man. The second
is on his left hand hauing augmented his

sinfulnesse. The third on his right hand hauing
diminished it. The first is altogether
ignorant of the true God and of his worship,
yet he thinketh that there is a God in heauen,
and doth worshipe his God verie diligently
one way or other after his fashion.
The second is fully resolued in his mind by
arguments inuented by him selfe and suggested
by the deuill and other Atheists like
to himselfe, that there is no GOD, and
therefore that it is but follie to worship any.
The third man is persuaded by manie reasons
that there is a God, yea he knoweth
the true God, and performeth some parte
of his true worshipe. The first knoweth
not what to thinke of God, or to what thing
to resemble him, yet he thinketh him to be
powerfull, mightie and bountifull, ascribing
all his mishapes and his good lucke to his
false God. The second giueth all to blinde
fortune, wise counsell, and hardie aduentures,
yea he defieth God in his hart, thinking that
to trust in him is the next way to all mishap.
The third knoweth and acknowledgeth that
all thinges both good and euill come from
that only true GOD, who is euery way
infinite and incomprehensible, and yet knoweth
not God in Christ as he ought to doe.
Likewise for the sinfulnesse of the will

the mere naturall man cannot choose and
incline himselfe to anie God, religion or
worshipe which is not sensible, and therefore
he cannot choose the true God, and
true holinesse, the which are spirituall and
contrarie to sense; no not if these were propounded
to his will, either by his owne mind,
or by some other, but chooseth for his part,
eating, drinking, sleeping, ease, pastime,
pleasure, and voluptuousuesse. The second
man who is supernaturall in sinfulnesse detesteth
and abhorreth the name of God
and of any thing that is good, but the third
may haue an inclination to good. Lastly
the first man doth not in his life commit
horrible sinnes, such as are murther, incest
adulterie, robberie, or periurie being
restrained euen by his owne conscience,
condemning these hainous sinnes: and although
he beare no loue to any but to himself
and to his owne, yet he meaneth harme to no
man. As for the second he abstaineth from
no sinne, tho neuer so hainous wherevnto
he is intised by any meanes. Whereas the
third man leadeth a life without all spot,
shew or suspition of any such matter, yea
he is good to euerie one as occasion is offered,
being farre from hurting any. So that
to be short, the first man may be called a

brute beast which is giuen to al sensualitie,
yet without either knowledge or practise
of good or euill. The second a deuil incarnate,
the third a carnall and sinfull saint.
Thus we see both by the naturall state
of sinne, as also by the increase of it, what
is the decrease of it. Whereof we are to
thinke and holde, first that although it
may be generall in any, or in all the partes
of mans sinfulnesse, yet it can not be totall
in any one, much lesse in all, for no part
of it can be wholly diminished in an vnregenerate
man. Secondly this decrease doth
take away the corruption of sinne, more
then it doth put the contrarie grace in the
roome of it: being in schoole termes rather
pruatiue then positiue. And therefore
the carnall man in this decrease of sinfulnesse
doth not so much knowe, approue,
embrace and follow the true God and his
worshippe, as he knoweth all false gods
to be no goddes, condemning and detesting
all idolatry. And so in life although
he can refraine himselfe from doing euil,
yet he is not able to performe the contrary
Christian duties. For the light of nature
being increased by such meanes as a naturall
man may vse, will teach and may enable
him to abstaine from grosse sinnes.

But the true knowledge and practise of
good, commeth onlie from the worke of
gods spirite; whereof it commeth that this
decrease of sinfulnesse is not to be counted
true holinesse, neither any parte of it,
and so it is not effectuall to saluation.
Thus much in generall of the decrease
of sinfulnesse, nowe we come to the seuerall
kindes of it, the which are two in
number: naturall and supernaturall. The
first kinde (whereof the third of the aforesaide
carnall men may be a shadow) we
call naturall: not that it is a naturall thing
for a man to decrease in sinfulnesse, in the
which he groweth as naturally as the smoke
goeth vpwarde, and therefore it is a violent
motion contrarie to his naturall inclination,
but because it may be attained
by a naturall man, in whom there is neither
true regeneration, nor any shadowe
of it, and that by naturall meanes without
the worke of the holy spirite, and therefore
it may be seene not onely in carnall
men liuing in the Church, but also (and
that more plainly) in many heathen and
professed infidels, who neuer heard tel of the
true religion and worshippe of God, of whom
many as it were laying violent handes on
themselues, and their naturall dispositions

enclined to all vice and sinfulnesse, haue
gotten the habite, that is, the constant and
permanent disposition of morall vertues, as
namely, of iustice, temperaunce, sobriety
and chastitie, in somuch that they haue
not onely led a life pure from the spottes
of grosse sinnes, but also haue after a sort
chaunged their wils, mindes and affections
from an euil and vitious, to a good
and vertuous disposition. This the Apostle
witnesseth, Rom. 2. 19.Rom. 2. 19. The gentils hauing
not the written lawe of God, doe by nature,
that is without spirituall grace, the
thinges contained in the lawe, and so are a
lawe vnto themselues. Of this decrease
we haue many and manifold examples euen
some of all sortes of men, but especially
it appeareth in those who in old times
professed themselues to be philosophers,
that is, seekers and practisers of wisedome
and vertue as namely Socrates, Plato, with
many others, as Aristides, Cato, Seneca,
whose vertues we can not thinke to haue
bene mere hypocrisie, it being well knowen
that they were so affected inwardly in their
mindes as they professed outwardly in their
liues. Yet we confesse that this decrease
of sinfulnesse is not a like in all: for in some
it is inwarde and true as hath bene saide,

but in others yea most commonly it is onely
in outward life.Of the naturall decrease of sinfulnesse. For many doe leade an
honest and irreproueable life, being vitiously
disposed in their mindes, some for
feare of ciuill punishment, or of publike
shame, others for vaine glories sake, as did
the pharisies. Againe this decrease is more
generall in some who abstaine from many
kindes of vices, then it is in others, who
are faulty in many respectes. And Lastly
this decrease is more firme and permanent
in some continuing the wholle time of
their life: but in others it hath place in their
young yeares by force of good education,
but is afterwardes altogether forgotten
and reiected. In the heathen it is more in
regarde of the duties of the second table,
the which are more easelie knowen then
are the dueties belonging to the worship
of God. But in hypocriticall Christians, the
outwarde decrease of sinfulnesse is greater
in the dueties of the first table. For they
will be verie deuout, and diligent in the
outwarde seruice of God, and yet liue verie
wickedly in regard of their brethren.
These and many other degrees and differences
of this naturall decrease, may easely
be obserued in many both within and
without the Church, and also in all histories

whether diuine or humaine, but are too
many to be handled in this short treatise.


CHAP. IIII.
Of the supernaturall decrease of sinfulnesse.
AS the increase of light doth
make a decrease of darkenes,
it being impossible that two
thinges of contrarie natures
sholude be together in one
subiect, the one not expelling the other,
either wholly or in part: so the spirituall graces
of God (which are the matter of mans
holinesse) bestowed on vnregenerate men,
doe worke in them a decrease of sinfulnesse,
makeing them lesse sinfull then
otherwise they woulde be, and then vsually
vnregenerate men are. This decrease
we call supernaturall, because it cannot be
attained vnto by those naturall meanes of
diminishing sinne, mentioned in the former
chapter, and therefore it is not to be
found in the most innocent and vertuous
pagan that euer liued, but is to be accounted
a worke of Gods spirite, brought
to passe by the ministrie of his worde sounding
in the eares of those who are members

of the visible church,Of the supernaturall decrease of sinfullnesse. without the
which, this decrease of sinne is not ordinarily
to be founde. Nor yet in all the members
of the church, of whom many doe
exceede the heathen in sinne, but onely
in those who doe yeelde obedience to the
gospell, although not in such manner as
the faithfull doe, yet in so greate measure
that this decrease of sinne may very
fitly be called a shadowe of true regeneration,
there being no grace effectually
wrought in the faithfull whereof a resemblaunce
may not be found in this sort of
men. For not onely their life is agreeable
to the worde of God, but also they
are inwardly enlightned to see the trueth,
and are well affected towardes it, and endued
with a kinde of faith, hope, loue, patience
and all other graces: and that not
in hypocrisie though many doe make an
outwarde shew and profession of those graces
whereof there is not any shadowe in
their heartes, but in trueth. As we read
Heb. 6. 4. 5.Heb. 6. 4. 5. It is impossible that they
who were once enlightned, and haue tasted
of the heauenly gift of the good worde
of God, of the ioyes of the worlde to come
and (in generall) were made partakers of the
holy Ghost, if they fall away etc. If it be

asked why God doth bestow these excellent
graces on the reprobate, as it were throwing
pearles among swine; we answere that
he doth it especially for these three causes:
first for the setting forth of his owne glory.
For by this worke, his loue, mercy, goodnesse,
wisedome and trueth, appeareth euen
to the reprobate: on whom as he letteth the
raine to fal, and his sun to shine, as wel as on
the faithfull; so he powreth foorth his graces
as well on the one as on the other, although
not after the same manner: for although
the eternall loue of God which bringeth
with it eternall saluation, doth belong to
the elect onely, yet there is a generall, and as
we may terme it, a temporary loue which
God beareth to all his creatures and in them
towardes all men, both elect and reprobate.
Secondly this is done in regard of the elect,
for whose sake God blesseth the reprobate
with whome they liue, both in temporal and
spirituall things, and whose saluation is furthered,
and some time wrought by the
giftes and ministery of these men. Lastly,
God doth by this meanes make them who
are indued with these graces, the more inexcusable,
in that they contemne and treade
vnder foote so great mercy.
Nowe we are to declare the difference,

which is betwixt true regeneration and
this supernaturall decrease of sinne, which
is a shadowe of it. First therefore true
regeneration is generall stretching it selfe
ouer all the faculties and partes of the soule
and body, and working an vniuersall holines
as the leauen which being put into a greate
lumpe of dow, neuer ceaseth spreading it
selfe abroad, till the whole lumpe be seasoned.
Luke. 13. 21.^^c. 13. 21. But the shadowe faileth
for the most part in one point of holinesse
or other, yea often many partes of sanctification
are wanting, as the minde is often
enlightned with the knowledge of the truth
whenas the obedience of life and outward
actions is wanting,^ Cor. 8. 1. 1. Cor. 8. 1. We haue
all knowledge, knowledge puffeth vp, but loue
edifieth. Againe there may be seene in
them good affections without knowledge.
Rom. 6.Rom. 9. I beare witnesse (saith the Apostle)
that the Iewes haue the zeale of GOD,
yet not according to knowledge. Yea often
the minde is enlightned in part, and in
part remaineth in ignorance, as in those who
professing and holding in iudgement
the trueth of the gospell, to witte of the
fund amental and chiefe doctrines of it,
doe together maintaine many errours and
heresies. We doe not deny, but tha^ one

truely regenerate, may be in some errors
(for we all knowe but in parte, 1. Cor. 13.)
yet this is the force and propertie of a regenerate
minde to be able to discerne the
trueth from errour when as both are laide
before it,1. Cor. 13. 1 howsoeuer it did not see it before.
And therefore when as we see a man,
although endued with many giftes yet to
be of a corrupt minde, and vnsound iudgement,
enclining alwaies to the wrong part
in matters of religion, his regeneration
may in that respect be suspected to be vneffectuall.
This the Apostle doth plainely
testifie,1 Cor. 11. 19 1. Cor. 11. 19. There must be heresies,
that those who are approoued may
be made manifest: that is, God doth suffer
schismes and diuisions to be among
you, that by this meanes it may appeare
whose holinesse is sounde, and whose is
hypocriticall, or at the least light and ineffectuall.
Secondly men truely regenerate,
receiue a greater measure of particular
graces as of faith, loue, and patience
then the other doe: Yea they doe daily increase
in grace, whereas the other doe
commonly stand at a stay, neuer attaining
to any great measure of godlinesse, but
abide in a certaine indifferent kinde of mediocrity
being neither hotte nor colde.

Besides true graces are fruitfull, but the
shadowes are barren, eyther wholly or
in part, as the faith of these men doth
not worke and shewe foorth it selfe by loue,
their loue is without workes of compassion
and Christian communion, their good works
without alacrity. Lastly the shadowe of regeneration
doth often come to nothing and
is turned into meere Atheisme, and want of
all religion: but true regeneration can neuer
wholly decay, as Math. 3. 20. Some
receiue the worde with ioy,Math. 3. 20. and afterwarde
fall away:Heb. 6. 4. 5. and Heb. 6. 4. 5, we reade of
those who being once made partakers of
the holy Ghost: doe afterwardes fall away
from Christ, yea while they doe retaine this
resemblance of true sanctification, they are
not constant, but variable in doing good,
Iam. 1. 8.Iam. 1. 8. A double minded man is vnconstant
in all his waies: that is, a man halfe carnall,
and halfe regenerate doth not keepe
throughout the course of his whole life a
constant tenour of godlinesse, but often
changeth his minde, opinions, affections,
and practise.
By these and such other notes which may
be obserued in the scripture, and by daily
experience, this shadowe of holinesse may
be discerned from the trueth: yet we ought

not peremptorely to iudge, or rashly to condemne
any man: for there may be found
euen in men truely regenerate many wants,
errours, sinnes and alterations, as afterwards
will appeare. Therefore we ought to thinke
the best, where we see any likelihoode
of good: and where there is none, to hope
for better in time to come: and so leauing
other men to Gods iudgement, to
censure our owne profession and regeneration
by these rules. Yet it is both lawfull
and needfull, that we shoulde knowe
howe to distinguish trueth from falshoode,
right from wrong, good from euill, the
shadowe from the bodie in the professions
of our brethren. The which it is
the parte of euerie Christian to marke
and consider, to trie and thinke of it,
according to the trueth of the worde of
GOD: but in iudging and speaking to
vse greate moderation and wisedome.



CHAP. V.
Of the particulars in this supernaturall decrease
of sinfulnesse.
THe first and most vsuall part of this
supernaturall decrease of sinne, is
the illumination of the minde,
whereby a carnall man, who before did
not beleeue the doctrine, eyther of the law
or of the gospell, is brought to see and acknowledge
the trueth of the one or of both.
To beleeue the law of God to be true, is to
haue a sight and a sense of sinne: to see sinne
is for a man to know himselfe to be so sinfull
in nature, in soule, and body, in life and actions
as indeed he is. To feele sinne is to know that
for his sinne he is subiect to the wrath of God
which is eternall death. This first part of illumination,
is far more easely and ofte^ wrought
in a naturall man then is the other: because
by the light of nature man hath some knowledge
of good and euill, and that the righteous
are to be rewarded as the wicked are tobe
punished. Hence it is that many make this
first step in this shadow of regeneration, and
goe no further. Thus Cain and Iudas with
many others did see their sin and the punishme^t
due vnto it, but yet had no beliefe of the
doctrine of the gospel* for remission of sinne.

The second part of illumination is,Of the particu^lar decrease of sinfulnesse. to
thinke the doctrine of the gospel to be true,
namely, that remission of sinnes, and eternall
glorie is to be had by faith in Iesus
Christ.Heb. 6. 4. Heb. 6. 4. This knowledge GOD
worketh by his spirit and word in manie
reprobates.Act. 8. 13. Act. 8. 13. Simon magus beleeued
and was baptized: of whose reprobation
although we can affirme nothing, because
the Apostle doubteth of it Vers. 22.
Yet it is plainely out of the 21. verse, that he
was not as then truly regenerated. Yea many
carnall men attaine to so greate a measure
of knowledge, that there is no point
or heade of christian religion which they
doe not in some sorte conceiue, vnderstand
and beleeue, although not fully, for that
is impossible, yet so as that they are able to
performe the duty of teachers in the Church,
in laying open plainly and euidently to the
capacitie of the hearers, the mysteries of the
gospel, in resoluing al doubtes, co^trouersies,
questions, obiections and arguments which
are moued about anypoint of doctrine. Thus
did the teachers at Corinth of whome the
Apostle writeth 1. Cor. 13. 2. Though I had
the gift of prophecie,1 Cor. 13. 2. and knew all secrets and
knowledge, and haue not loue, I were nothing.
So Math 7. 22.Math 7. 22. Prophecie in Christes name

whome he doth not acknowledge as his.
This knowledge is commonly called
an historicall faith: a gift common to the
elect and the reprobate, yet not so common
as it seemeth to be. Yea in truth more rare in
respect of the greate multituds of professours
and christians, then it is common in respect
of the small number of true beleeuers. For
to let passe those who know nothing of
religion, we are not to thinke that all they
who are learned, and as we say great clarkes
in diuinitie and profound schoole-men, do
in their mindes and iudgments hold these
things to bee true. Yea it appeareth plainly
in the example of Iudas (who although he
did preach the gospell with his tongue,
yet he did not beleeue it himselfe: as Christ
witnesseth Ioh. 6. 64)(...). 6. 64. that manie doe goe
about to perswade others, that to bee true
which they them-selues thinke to be false.
And no maruaile: for why should it bee
thought easie and common for a naturall
man to beleeue that which is contrarie to
naturall reason?(...). 3. 12 we se Ioh. 3. 12, that Christ
could not or rather did not make Nicodemus
a teacher in Israel beleeue the doctrin
of spirituall regeneration. And so we may
well thinke that many otherwise learned,
thinke that it is no such supernaturall work,

but that it may be attained by natural means.
Likewise how many, thinke wee, are perswaded
in their heartes that this worlde
shall neuer haue an ende, or that there shal
be a new world, wherein the bodies of men
which were consumed to nothing many
thousand years before, shalbe raised vp and
liue for euer.
But to proceede: of the decrease of ignorance
commeth the decrease of infidelitie.
For as the minde is enlightned; so often
is the hearte affected: by the which
meanes it commeth to passe, that of the
aforesaide knowledge doth often spring
in vnregenerate men a kinde of fayth,
commonly called temporarie, because for
the most part it is lost in processe of time.
It is to be discerned from effectuall and
true faith by the fruites of it. For as we
cannot iudge what life and vertue is in the
root of a tree which lieth hid in the ground,
but by the branches, leaues, and fruit which
it sendeth foorth; so faith which is hid in the
hearte of man, cannot be tried by any other
meanes. The fruites of true faith are al other
spirituall graces, all good and holy actions
the which it sendeth forth plentifully, and
so carrieth with it a greate traine whereby
it may be knowen: but this temporarie faith

is naked and destitute of these thinges either
wholly or in greate part, as hath beene
saide of this shadow of regeneration in the
former chapter. But that which is doubtful
whilst this saith standeth, is in time made
manifest: when as the finall and totall decay
of it doth shew what manner of faith it
was. For true faith abideth for euer, but
this temporarie faith may be lost by many
meanes as first by heauie crosses and afflictions,
whereby it pleaseth God to trie his seruants,
as the pure golde is seuered from
the drosse by the fier.1 Pet. 1. 7 1. Pet. 1. 7. Reioyce
in your manifould temptations, that your faith
being tryed may be founde to be sound. But of
this sort of beleeuers Christ saith* Math.
13. 21.Math. 13. 21. That their faith dureth for a season,
but hauing no deepe roote, it faileth when tribulation
and persecution come. True faith
saith, although God should kill me, yet
will I trust in him, but this light faith is clean
dismaied and euen nipt in the heade in time
of any greate miserie. Likewise it is lost by
the force of sinne, and of worldly pleasurs,
which make men to forget God and all the
affiance which they had in him, and so seeke
for happinesse in this present world, euen as
the naturall life of man being in the heart is
so^times kept down with extream sorrow, and

sometimes dissolued with excesiue ioy, 1.
Tim. 5. 11. 12. Younger widowes will waxe
wanton against Christ,Tim. 5. 11. 12. hauing damnation,
because they haue made voide their first faith.
By this meanes it commeth to passe, that
many who in their younger yeares haue had
notable graces in them, become in processe
of time key colde in religion, mere
worldlings and cleane voyde of all faith.
For the longer that a man liueth, the more
he feeleth the pleasures of the worlde, and
so laying faster holde on them, decreaseth
in faith till it be vtterly lost, as appeareth
in many of the kinges of Iuda who
were at the first sincere in the worshippe
of God, but in processe of time fell away.
Thus much of the decrease of infidelitie,
from the which there commeth a
decrease of the other partes of mans sinfulnesse,
and a resemblance of all that holinesse
which hath bene declared in the first
part of this treatise: for the carnall man
hauing this knowledge and faith of God,
doth serue and worshippe him by hearing
the worde and that with gladnesse, by
praying vnto God and by all other meanes.
Likewise he obeyeth God in the wholle
course of his life, he forsaketh his sin and

is humbled with sorrowe in regard of them.
He liueth vnblamably in the eies of men,
yea and may be indeede iust, vpright,
honest in all his dealing, and finally doth
in euery respect resemble the true beleeuer,
and yet the one is truely renewed vnto eternall
life, the other is but lightly affected
and chaunged and that to his greater
condemnation.


CHAP. VI.
Of the naturall, and supernaturall encrease
of sinfullnesse.
NOw we come to the increase
of sinne, the which being
as naturall to man as it is
for the smoke to fly vpward,
may be more commonlie
founde, and more euidently
seene, then the decrease of it: but the
more that it is knowne of it selfe: the lesse
explication it needeth, and therefore it
shall suffice to declare it breifly after this
manner. The encrease of sinne, is the diminishing
of the reliques of Gods image
in man. Or thus, to increase naturall sinfulnesse,
is to be sinfull, against the lawe

and light of nature.Of the natura^^ and supernaturall encrease of sinfulnesse* For beside, that man
from his first infancie as he groweth vp in
strength of body and minde, doth also
growe in sinfulnesse, till he come to the
state and ripenesse of it, which hath bene
declared in the second sections of the first
and second partes, there is an other encrease
of sinne, whereby man goeth yet
further, and so exceedeth himselfe and his
naturall corruption. This pointe of doctrine
is set downe at large,Rom. 1. Rom. 1. from
the 18. verse to the end of the Chapter.
Where the Apostle sheweth first the encrease
of sinne against the first table of the
lawe, in that the gentils did worshippe
God in the likenesse of man, or of bruite
beastes, whereas man by the light of nature
shining in the creation of the world,
seeth that God is of a farre more excellent,
powerfull and wonderfull nature then is
man, or any other creature. Then from
the 24. verse to the end, he sheweth
the encrease of sinne against the seconde
table* in that they were giuen to vnnaturall
lust, to the violating of all common
equitie, trueth and honestie, in lying, breaking
couenantes, in commiting horrible
murthers, in wanting all naturall loue and
affection to their parentes and kinsfolkes,

in being cruell, mercilesse and sauage, euen
as are bruite beastes: and which is worst of
all in being professed inuentors of newe
sinnes, and open maintainers of wicked
and lewd men. In this catalogue of the
encrease of sinne against the second part
of the lawe of God, and of nature, the
Apostle inserteth one sinne of the first table,
to wit, that many of the gentils became
haters of God. Whereas man naturally
hath a kinde of deuout loue vnto
his God: for so we are to distinguishe the
fall of man, from the fall of the wicked
angels, as in other respectes so also in
this, that they by reason of the great
measure of naturall strength and grace which
was giuen vnto them, fell from the highest
degree of holinesse into the contrarie
extremitie of sinne, being nowe so farre
from louing God as they did before, that
they beare a most desperate and extreame
hatred vnto him, as to their deadly enimie,
desiring and endeuoring by all meanes
to hurte and despite him by obscuring his
glorie: whereas man naturally and commonly
hath a blinde affection towardes
God, desiring both to worshippe and to
honour him. If we desire examples of this
increase of sinne, although it hath not place

in all vnregenerate men, of whome some
doe diminish their sinfulnesse by meanes
either of naturall or of spirituall giftes as
hath bene declared, and farre mo doe so
restraine it that it cannot encrease, in the
which ranke all men outwardly and ciuilly
honest may be reckoned, yet there is no
age, country or story which doth not aford
many examples of men who haue exceeded
in impietie against God, and in iniustice
towarde men and in all manner of
wicked behauiour, the ordinarie and common
sorte of sinfull men by manie degrees.
The cause of this encrease of sinne, is the
crooked and corrupt diposition of mans wil,
which is wholly bent and set vpon sinne,
and doth so greedely and insatiably pursue
after it, as that vnlesse it be restrained
by some meanes, it can not rest, till it
come to the highest degree of wickednes.
For the which purpose it imployeth all the
partes and faculties of the body and soule:
yea all inwarde and outwarde blessings what
soeuer: it maketh the minde deuise newe
wayes of commiting sinne, newe excuses,
pretenses, coulours and defences for it,
being commited: so that the greater gifts
of the minde and of body that a man hath

ceaued, the fitter instrumentes hath his
will and his corrupt desires to encrease
sinne. Here of it commeth, that not idiots,
simple and vnlearned men, not the
weakest in body, or the basest in condition,
not the poorest nor the youngest,
but the most witty, learned, strong, noble,
rich, aged are these notorious wicked ones.
The most horrible monsters in all outrage
of sinne, which any story doth mention
were greate Emperours and mighty
men, as Nero, Caligula and such other, and
who are so wretched, couetous, worldly,
so peruerse and obstinate in ignoraunce, superstition,
infidelitie, yea in hatred of all
goodnesse, as are they who by yeares haue
gotten wisedome, experience, riches, and
honour, so that we may easely acknowledge
the trueth of that the Apostle writeth
1. Cor. 1. 26 Not many noble,1. Cor. 1. 26. wise, riche
or great men are called, to the sincere obedience
of the gospell.
Hence it is that sinne doth more abound
in this last age of the worlde, then it did
in old times, wherein men were more rude,
simple and ignoraunt then children are in
these daies, who are so soone ripe and expert
in all wickednesse, as if they had bene
borne perfect men, not weake infauntes:

and no maruaile,Of the nat^^rall and sup^^^naturall de^crease of sin^fulnesse. seeing that this last age is
as it were a common sinke, wherein all the
sinnes, errours, heresies, superstitions, all
the shifts, craft, deceipte; yea all the wicked
inuentions and practises of all ages are
gathered together. And therefore it bringeth
foorth so great multitudes of expert
practitioners in sinne, who besides that
which their owne inuention doth afford, are
furnished with the examples and tryed experiments
of all ages. This the spirit of God hath
foretold in the scripture, as we see it is come
to passe.Math. 24. 12. Math. 24. 12. Because iniquity
shall abound in the latter times, the loue of many
shall waxe colde.2. Tim. 3. 1. 2. Tim. 3. 1. This knowe
that in the last daies shall come perilous times,
for men shalbe louers of their owne selues, coueteous,
proude, cursed speakers, disobedient to
parentes, vnthankefull, vnholy, without naturall
affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
intemperate, fierce, hauing no loue to those
who are good, traitours, headie, high minded,
louers of pleasures more then of God, hauing a
shew of godlinesse, but denying the power
thereof.2. Pet. 3. 3. And againe, 2. Pet. 3. 3. This first
vnderstand, that in the latter daies shall come
mockers walking after their owne lustes, saying
where is the promise of his comming. In these
and other places of scripture, the spirite of

God hath foretolde,Of the natu^^ll and super^aturall en^rease of sin^^llnesse. and euen painted out
the great corruption and sinfulnesse of these
daies, that we might beware, least that we
be drawen away by the infidelity and other
hainous sinnes which raigne euerywhere, and
so saue our selues as out of the fyer, from
this froward and godlesse generation, wherein
we liue.
Lastly, as the excellencie of naturall
giftes and outward blessings, being abused,
is the meanes of the excessiuenesse of
sinne, not of it selfe but by the corrupt disposition
of our nature; so the spirituall graces
of God, bestowed vpon men liuing in
the Church, doe often by the iust iudgement
of God, worke the same effect, and
that in far greater measure. For as it is impossible
that among heathen men, they who are
of smal wit, capacity, knowledge, strength,
and riches, should be wicked in so high a
degree as they who excell in the foresaid respectes:
so it is not possible that any, who
hath not receiued some of the spirituall
graces of God, shoulde come to so high a
degree of sinne, as they in whome it hath
pleased God to worke that shadowe of regeneration,
which hath beene declared in
the former chapter. Hence it is that none
can fall into that extreame impiety which is

the highest degree of sinne, euen the sinne
of the deuill and his Angels, called in scripture
the sinne against the holy Ghost, which
can neuer be forgiuen, but they who did
sometime before receiue grace from God,Heb. 6. 5.
to see, loue and obey the trueth, Heb. 6. 5.
It is impossible, that they who were once made
partakers of the holy Ghost if they fall, namely
into this sinne, which is an open, wilfull and
desperate hatred of God, of his glory, of his
religion, of his feruants and of all good
thinges (as many of the hebrewes did to
whome this was written) should be renewed
by repentance. This excellency of spirituall
graces abused* was the meanes whereby the
wicked Angels fell into that extreamitie of
sinne wherein they are: and so it commeth
to passe in men, in whom this sinne by reason
of the monstrous hugenesse of it, is rare,
and happeneth not but in those, who for
their cruell, spitefull, desperate and malitious
hatred to God and to the godly, are
rather to be counted diuels incarnate then
reasonable men. For it is harde for a Christian
who hath once knowen God, to cast away
all feare of God, and shame of men,
and for to burst forth into such outrage. Yet
(as the scripture hath not for nought taught
vs it) so it commeth to passe although seldom,

yet oftner then it is well marked.(...) the natu^^^l and super^^^urall de^^ease of sin^^^^nesse. This
encrease of sinne, called supernaturall (because
it cannot happen but in a man after a
sorte regenerate) is taught by christ in the
parable of the euil spirite, which retourning
to the place out of the which he was cast,
goeth not alone but taketh with him seuen
other wicked spirites euerie one worse
then himselfe: and so the ende of that man
is worse, that is, farre more sinfull then
the beginning. Euen as we see it commeth
to passe in naturall thinges, as namely in
water which after it hath bene a little warmed,
becommeth more colde then if it
had neuer had any heate in it. And so men
who haue had some heate of religion kindled
in their heartes by the spirite of God, if
they contemne and abuse the saide graces,
become more wicked and irreligious then
they who neuer knewe what religion ment.


CHAPTER. VII.
Of the decrease of renewed holinesse.
ALthough the faithfull man being
nowe truely regenerate by the spirit
of God, may boldely boast and
say, the hauen is founde, then farewell all

daunger and hap-hazard,Of the decrease of r^^newed hol^^nesse. being, although
not in full possession of happinesse in heauen,
yet past al peraduenture of perishing here
on earth, yet it commeth often to passe,
that such fearefull tempestes are raised by the
malice of sathan, the vnrulinesse of the flesh,
and the entismentes of the worlde, that
both the faithfull themselues and also others
beholding them doe not without
cause feare shipwracke of faith and of good
conscience, and so the losse of eternall saluation,
the which pretious iewell they cary
in these weake vessels. For as sometime
they are by the grace of God, and the
powerfull workeing of his spirite, euen lifted
vp to heauen in the aboundaunce of spirituall
graces, and the great measure of santification
wherewith they are endued: so at
other times they are by the frailtie of the
fleshe plunged into grieuous sinnes, and so
in a manner cast downe into hel as men void
of all goodnesse. This commeth to passe
first and cheifely by the will and pleasure of
God, withdrawing the assistaunce of his
spirit from the faithfull man, and so leauing
him to the temptations of sathan and his
owne flesh, suffereth him to fall not to his
destruction, but for the encreasing of his holinesse.
For euen as a man by his intemperance

or any other kinde of misgouerning his
body falling into some daungerous sickenes,
hath after his recouery more perfect helth, and
greater strength then he had before his sicknesse,
because he is now schooled and taught
by wofull experience to know his owne
strength which he seeth now to be but weaknesse,
whereof he did presume so much be
fore and whatsoeuer thing is of force either
to preserue or to impaire his health, and so to
be carefull and diligent in vsing the one, and
wary in auoiding the other: so fareth it with
a christian in regard of the spirituall health
of his soule: for he being now by the mercie
of God: raised vp from some grieuous
fall, receiueth a greate encrease of holines
and of spirituall graces. He seeth his own
weaknes, how vnable he is of himselfe to
resist temptation, or the corrupt motions
of his owne flesh, and so he is humbled
both in respect of God and of his brethren,
which is a grace much esteemed in the
eyes of God. Further he becommeth more
carefull in auoiding all occasions and prouocations
of sinne, and in vsing all holie
exercises of hearing the word, of praying
and all other means whereby he may be
strengthned and encrease in holinesse. Hence
is is that this decrease of holinesse is in a

manner co^mon to all the faithful, although
not in the same measure. For so it pleaseth
God to leaue the^ at one time or other to
themselues and to the temptations of sathan,
that so he may both see what is in
them,2 Cro. 32. 31. as he did to Ezechias 2. Chro. 32. 31.
and also shewe to them their greate weaknesse.
The means of this decrease is the crafty
malitiousnes of that old serpe^t, who goeth
about continually seeking which of the
faithfull he may most hurt, vsing al that liberty
which God graunteth vnto him and imploying
his whol time about no other busines, but
in putting euill motions into the mindes and
willes of men, and in casting baites before
their eyes and other senses wherewith to
catch them. Secondly this decrease commeth
by reason of the reliques of sin which
remaine in the faithfull, as long as they
remaine in the flesh, and which doe continually
send forth som sinne or other, euen
as the roote of a tree being left in the ground
will sproute forth although the bodie of the
tree be cut downe. Hither we are to referre
the manifould occasions of all manner of
sinnes, which doe offer them selues in the
course of manslife, and therefore it is no
maruaile that there happen to a Christian,
manifould chaunges, and decreases of godlinesse,

no more then it is, that a man is
wounded being in the midst of many
malicious enimies, that he is scorched
who is forced to cary fier in his bosome,
or lastly that he is defiled, who is alwayes
among vessels ful of pitch.
But to declare this doctrine more particularly,
as the greate vse and necessitie of
it doth require: in that we speake of the
decrease of renewed holinesse, we suppose
a certaine state and ripenesse, which ought
to be in all Christians, and is to be seene in
most of those men who are truely regenerate,
which is a holy and vnblamable
life proceeding from a sanctified soule, being
endued in some good measure with all
and euerie one of those partes of holynesse
which haue beene described in the thirde
sections, of the first and second partes of this
treatise. This state may be called the ripe
age of a Christian, who as he doth from his
infancie and childhoode (whereof hereafter)
grow vp till he come to a ripe man
in Christ: so when he is come to this state,
he doth not there stand at a stay, for there
is not any setled estate in this life, either
of holinesse or of sin) but somtimes groweth
on to a greater measure of perfectio^ (wherof
in the next chapter) or else he decreaseth

in holinesse, and so groweth backward, euen
as we see it to come to passe in the bodies
of men, which being come to their ripnes
do daily decrease in strength and vigour,
till at the length they become as weake and
impotent as they were in their first infancie.
This decrease is now to be considered in
the diuerse kindes of it which are two, Particular
and Generall, Particular decrease
is when as some one part of holinesse is lost,
the other remaining: for although no one
part of holinesse can be wanting, but the
whole soule of man is the worse in that respect,
as we knowe that if any one member
of the bodie be brused or maimed all the
rest doe suffer with it, yet one part either
of bodie or soule may be out of order the
whole being in the naturall disposition.
This particular decrease hath many degrees.
The first is when as the holinesse of
a man regenerate doth faile in some outward
action, by giuing place vnto some euident
and palpable sin. For as for light and
small offences commited in thought, inword
and in some kindes of deeds, these are not
to be accounted any decrease of holines,
because they cannot be auoided, but will
alwaies, be found euen in the^ who are endued
with the greatest measure of sanctification

but great sins such as are murther, adultery,
theft, periurie or any other of that sort,
are seldome found in men truly regenerate,
and being founde they doe impaire the outward
holinesse of their liues, For no man
doth account that life so holy wherein grosse
sinnes are somtimes found, as that which is
without spot of grieuous sin. This decrease
doth often happen to the faithfull, as we
know Peter sinned by denying Christ, Dauid
by committing adulterie and murther,
Noah in drunkennes, Lot in incestand many
others in other kinds of sins, being thereto
caried by the force of te^ptation, as in a great
tempest by a mightie gale of winde before
they could be thinke themselues,
what they were about to doe, or what would
be the issue of it. Whereof it commeth, that
this decrease of holinesse, staying it selfe
in one or a few actions, doth not necessarily
argue any inward want of the contrarie
grace, or anie inward decrease of holinesse,
either going before or following after: because
a man may fall into it as of a sudden,
before he be aware, and immediatly recouer
his former station by true and vnfained
repentance. As we are not to iudg either Dauid
voide of continencie for that adulterie
committed with Berseba, or Peter to haue

wanted faith, because he did at one time
renounce the faith, or Noah to haue beene
an intemperate person, because he was once
drunke, no more then we are to thinke him
a weake man, who stumbleth by chaunce
at a blocke lying in his way, and yet doth
streight way saue himselfe from falling.
Yea sudden sinne may be with greater
graces, then they haue who are free
from the aforesaide sinnes of Noah, Lot,
Dauid, Peter, being farre inferior in
holinesse to them. Yet it is the dutie of all
who professe themselues the serua^ts of God,
to labour by all meanes to keepe themselues
pure and free as from the least and most
secret sin, so especially from open and grosse
sins: and that for these causes.
First because by them they dishonour God,
his religion, worshippe and name, opening
the mouthes of Atheistes and infidels to
blaspheme his holy name: the which thing
ought to be more grieuous and bitter vnto
them then a thousand deathes and torments.
Secondly they prouoke God to lay some
fearefull punishment vppon them: who
howsoeuer he suffereth the reprobate ones
to goe on all their life time in sinne, yet he
neuer suffereth any notorious sinne of his
seruantes to goe vnpunished. Thirdly, they

wound their owne consciences by a feareful
expectation of Gods heauie iudgmentes,Of the decrease of renewed holinesse.
they grieue the holy spirite, against whose
will they commite that sinne, they offend
their brethren, shewing themselues to be
if not wholly destitute of that speciall grace,
wherewith they shoulde haue bene restrained
from sinne, yet but weake Christians in
that respect, as we may be bold to iudge
that the faith of Peter, the continency of
Dauid, the temperaunce of Noah, were
at the time of their falles but weake, howsoeuer
they were endued with a great measure
of other graces. Lastly one hainous
sin is to be auoyded, because vsually it draweth
moe after it; for when as a man hath once
taken a tast of sinne, and felt the sensuall
sweetnes of it, he is farre more easely drawen
to it, then he was before, and so he goeth fro^
the first degree of the decrease of holynes to
the second, namely, to an habit of some one
sin, or the want of some particular grace* the
which appeareth by the often committing
and iterating of the same sinne, yea after that
the faithfull man hath often by repentaunce
laboured to purge himselfe from that sinne,
and by prayer to obtaine the contrarie
grace at the handes of God. This decrease
also hath somtimes place in a man truely regenerate,

especially in that kinde of sinne
whereunto he is either by the naturall constitution
of his body and minde, or an euill
custome gotten before his conuersion,
naturally enclined, whether it be pride, anger,
couetousnesse, or any other sinne. But
as it is farre more grieuous then the first degree;
so it is with greater care to be avoyded,
for it doubleth and tripleth the wrath
and heauy iudgementes of God, the offence
of the godly, the reproach of the gospell, the
dishonour of God, and the corsiue of a
gnawing conscience: and Lastly it maketh
a ready way for higher degrees of decrease
to wit the habites of diuers sinnes, the want
of many particular graces, and so to the
highest and most fearefull degree, which
is a generall decrease of holynesse: which
is nowe briefly to be declared.
Where first we are to put a difference
betwixt a generall, and a totall decrease: A
generall decrease is when all the partes of
renewed holynesse, and of spirituall
graces receaued, are diminished: but a totall
decrease is an vtter decay of holinesse,
as whereby nothing is left. This can not
happen to any one who is truely regenerate,
who in the greatest extremitie and
depth of his fall, retaineth some reliques

of Gods spirite and of grace receaued, yea
somelife of faith whereby he liueth to God
in christ, howsoeuer he be to the eyes of
all men, and euen in his owne coscience a
deade rotten stocke. Euen as we know that
the trees haue heate and life in their rootes
in the middest of the coldest and sharpest
winter, yea as many beastes ly all the winter
long in holes of the earth, without eating,
drinking, stirring or hauing any
iotte of heate, sense or life in any of their
outwarde partes, and yet there is a remnant
of life and of heat lurking in the hearte
which being in sommer stirred vppe doth reuine
the beast, so that it is able to go or runne
vp and downe, and to performe all naturall
actions, in the same manner as it did before.
This Christ doth plainely teache Ioh.
4. 14.Ioh. 4, 14. saying, Whosoeuer drinketh of the water
which I shall giue him (that is, whosoeuer
beleeueth in me, as it is expounded,
Iohn 7. 38) shall neuer be more a thirst,^oh. 7. 38. but
the water that I will giue him, shall be in
him a well of water, springing vp into euerlasting
life:Ioh. 3. 9. and 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Whosoeuer is borne
of God sinneth not (totally) for the seed
of God remaineth in him, and therefore he
can not fall cleane away from God, because
he is borne of God, yet a man regenerate

may decrease not onely in one, in a fewe, or
in many graces, but also generally in all spirituall
graces.
This decrease of renewed holynesse,
is of two kindes, for as of bodilie diseases,
some begin at the hart which is the
roote and fountaine of life in the body, and
so spreade themselues ouer all the members
of the body: others haue their beginning
in some outwarde and inferiour
partes and pierce in till that they come to
the hearte: so of these generall decreases of
holynesse, which are as grieuous diseases
of the soule, some begin at faith which is
the roote and fountaine of spirituall life,
and so hauing stopt the fountaine, doe
easily drie vp the streames issuing from it:
others begin at the meaner and baser partes
of sanctification, and so first kill the fruite
then the braunches and the body of the
tree, til at length they take hold of the roote
it selfe. Both these waies doth sathan vse
to destroy this wounderfull worke of regeneration,
wrought in the faithfull by the
spirite of God. The first way is the nearest
and readiest, for if faith once faile, all
holinesse falleth to the grounde: whereas
faith may stand in some sorte, although
most of the other partes of santification

be wanting as the body may liue although
it lacke the armes, legges and other partes:
but if the heart be once wounded, death is
then hard at hand, and therefore Sathan doth
most of all and in the first place, labour to
ouerthrow the faith of the faithfull man,
desiring to strike through the hart at the
first stroke, that so as Abisai sayeth, 1. Sam.
26. 8.^ Sam. 26. 8. he might saue the laboure of striking
twise. This Christ telleth Peter, that sathan
had desired to tempt him,^ak 22. 3 2. but he had
praied for him, that his faith, whereat sathan
woulde directly strike, shoulde not faile.
The weapons wherwith he vseth to strike at
faith, are many and diuerse; as namely these;
First the crosses and miseries of this present
life which God layeth on his children for
the triall of their faith, 1 Pet. 1. 7.Pet. 1. 7. But they
feeling them bitter, and after a sorte intollerable
to flesh and bloud, labour by earnest
and continuall prayer as also by all other
meanes to be freede from them. The which
thinge when as they cannot bring to passe,
being suffered to languishe, yea often to perishe
outwardly in their troubles, they
straight way are moued by sathan to thinke
that God hath forsaken them, and that there
is no helpe or good thing to be looked for at
his handes. This pollicie sathan himselfe

doth bewray and confesse, Iob. 1. 11
Doth Iob feare God for nought? thou hast
blessed him in all thinges, but lay thy hand vpon
him in outward crosses and thou shalt see
that he will be so farre off from trusting in
thee,Iob. 1. 11. that hee will curse thee to thy
face.
The temptation is then most forceable
when as the faithfull in their greatest
miseries are exasperated, and, as it were, haue
their teeth set on edge by the great prosperity
of the wicked: insomuch that they often
repent themselues that they haue not
chosen that course and manner of life, whereby
they see them to flourish. But it is to be
withstood by considering that God doth
chastice his children, and purge them in the
furnace of afflictions, that so he might make
glorious and heauenly vessels of them
whereas the wicked are as sheepe fed fat
against the day of slaughter: that they are
by this meanes made conformable to Christ
their head: that the greatest afflictions of
this world are not to be compared to the
eternall happines of the life to come: and that
^s it is, Luke. 16. 25.Luk. 16. 25. as the wicked in this
life haue pleasure and the godly paine: so in
the world to come the godly shall be comforted
and the other tormented. And therefore

they are to be vndoubtedly perswaded
of the trueth of that which we reade,
Eccles. 8. 12.Eccles. 8. 17. Tho the wicked man doe euill an
hundred times, and yet prolong his daies, yet
I know that in the ende it will be wel with them
that feare God, and with no other. Againe the
faith of the godly is often tempted by consideration
had of the impossibilities of the
doctrine of the gospell, as of the resurrection
of dead bodies. For so by measuring
the trueth of God by their owne shallowe
reason, they stagger at it, and sometimes
fall flat downe. 2. Tim. 2. 18.2. Tim. 2 18. Hymeneus and
Philetus taught, that the resurrection mentioned
in the scripture was already past, and
so they did subuert the faith of many: but
for this we are to knowe, that nothing is impossible
to God. The thirde temptation
is the obscure, secret and hidden manner
of Gods working in these last ages:
wherein he hauing reuealed himselfe fullie
in his sonne, and in the gospell, doth hide
himselfe from the eyes euen of the faithfull,
in that he doth not appeare so in visions, reuelations,
dreames, the giftes of miracles
in temporall punishmentes and blessings o^
in any other sensible manner, but suffereth
all thinges to goe on and worke after their
owne inclinations, as namely, tyrants to rage

and oppresse his Church, to persecute his
people, to erect idolatrie, to deface his
worship, to blaspheme his name, so as if
he had cleane cast off the care of all things
here in this world. But this ought not to
trouble vs, for sensible apparitions, blessings,
and actions were for the infancie of
the Church which now is come to her ripe
age, and yet the actions of God are no lesse
wonderful then before: yea they are as manifest
to spirituall eyes, as euer they were to the
carnall eyes of men. The last weapon, wherwith
Sathan striketh at faith, is ministred
vnto him by the faithfull themselues, to wit,
their manifould and grieuous sins, especially
those whereinto they fall againe and againe
hauing often repented them, and wherof
they cannot by any meanes get the vpper
hand. Here Sathan thinketh that he hath as
much aduantage against the faithfull, as he
himselfe desireth. For in the other temptations
he did feight against the word of God
the which now he seemeth to haue on his
side, for whereas the scripture doth eueriewhere
teach, that all who are iustified are
sanctified from a sinfull, life, and haue
power giuen them by the spirite of GOD
to resist and mortifie sinne, especially great
and hainous sins, hereof he inferreth after

this manner: thou hast no such power or
grace to resist sinne, thou canst not for thy
life abstaine from committing it, but doest
adde one fal to another, one sin to another,
euen against thine owne conscience and therefore
thy faith is nothing but eyther meere hypocrisie
and vnbeleefe, or at the most, it is but
some light shadowe of faith, which may be
found in many reprobates. This argument
is harde to be answered, and therefore it driueth
many faithfull men to their wittes end,
and euen to despaire of themselues, and of
the loue and mercy of God, which is a
most fearefull thing, killing all holinesse euen
at the roote, and therefore to be auoyded
by all meanes, especially by learning,
if we be as yet ignorant, how to answere
this argument thus cunningly compacted
by Sathan. The best answere that
can be made is, that he who is thus
tempted, laboure by fasting, prayer, continuall
reading, meditating, and hearing
of the word of God, by auoyding all occasions
of sinne and diligent waying the nature
and manifolde euils ensuing of it, to
purge himselfe of the sinne wherewith Sathan
doth so buffet him: and so to wring his
weapon by force out of his hand. But if
this cannot be brought to passe, as often

the faithfull cannot get the maistery ouer
their sinnes, and the corrupt desires of
the flesh, then we must answere, that a true
and sauing faith may be at some time without
some fruite, as the trees are in the winter
season, as appeareth manifestly by the
examples of diuerse faithfull men, as namely
in Dauid that notable man, who did not
onely commit adultery which is a most grieuous
sinne, the harme whereof cannot by any
meanes be amended, yea and added
murther to it a more horrible sinne; but also
as may be probablie gathered, seemeth to
haue continued long in these sinnes without
repentance. Yet no man denieth but that
he was at that time and long before truely
regenerate, and endued with true faith. But
heere Sathan will reply and say, if it be so,
that sauing faith may be ioyned with a sinful
life, what difference is there betwixt the
elect and the reprobate, who may haue
a barren faith, yea a faith which will bring
foorth the fruite of an vnblameable life?
how knowest thou that the tree hath life,
but by the fruit, or that thou art in any better
state then a reprobate or then I my selfe,
who doe beleeue and tremble? To this he
maketh answere in this wise: I know and
confesse that no true faith is fruitlesse, neither

is my faith so: For first I doe remember
the time when as my faith did bring forth
plentifull fruites in all respectes, both towardes
God and my brethren, my life
being free from the least spot of any greate
sinne, and I trust to see that time againe ere
long. Yea euen at this time wherein it hath
pleased God to humble me by giuing
thee power to tempt and ouercome me,
there is difference betwixt me and any hypocriticall
reprobate whatsoeuer: for my
life is not defiled with many sinnes, seeing
thou canst not charge me with any saue
only this or that sin: to the which I doe giue
place not alwaies but seldome, not of any
obstinate wilfulnesse but of humaine infirmitie,
not of set purpose, but against my
will, and my flat resolution, hauing often fully
determined with my selfe neuer to commit
it. Yea I will neuer cease fro^ vsing al meanes
possible of being freed from it: neither will
I euer thinke my selfe in good case, or that
I can stoppe thy mouth, till by the mercie
of God that be fully brought to passe. Thus
much of the temptations of faith, the which
because of the great danger, wherevnto the
faithfull are brought by them, are called by
the Apostle, Eph. 6. 16, The fierie dartes of
Sathan.^phe. 6. 16. Now to proceed: from this decrease

of faith whether it be lesse or greater commeth
the like decrease of euerie part of renewed
holines, euen as the diste^peratures of
the heart, and the hurt of the roote of a tree,
haue place in all the members of the bodie,
and in the whole stocke and euerie seuerall
branch of the tree. For as, where there is
no faith, there is no holinesse, so where there
is litle faith, there is litle holinesse, as hath
beene declared more at large in the chapter
of faith.
There remaineth the other kinde of generall
decrease, to wit, that wherein first the
inferiour partes of sanctification are diminished,
and afterwardes faith it selfe: the
which way although it be not so readie and
dangerous as the former, yet it is more vsual:
for as whe^ a theife goeth about to spoile
any ma^ of his goods, if he offer to break in at
the broadside of his house, he is streghtway
espied and receiueth the repulse, but if he vnder
mine the house, he may be within it, and
on the dweller before he be aware: so when
as Satha^ co^meth as it were blu^tly to a christian,
and doth at the first dash moue him to
forsake and renounce God by infidelitie, his
malicious purpose is soone espied, and for the
most part so carefully resisted, that he hath
not any hope euer to preuaile by that means

and to robbe the regenerate man of his
renewed holinesse: so that he is driuen to
take an other way by the end (for he will neuer
giue ouer) and to go more closely to work.
First therefore whereas the faithfull man is
not only godly, after the vsuall and ordinarie
manner in abstaining from grosse sins
and performing those duties which are loked
for at the handes of euerie Christian,
but also is verie forward and zealous in seruing
God, in setting forth his glorie, in procuring
the good of his Church, and the edification
of his brethren, he maketh him
to be wearie of this kinde of life, and at length
to giue it quite ouer: yet so, as that he yet
remaineth as sincere a Christian, as vnblamable
in life and as diligent in seruing God
as neede to be: only whereas before he was
more forward then was needfull, (as Sathan
will make him beleeue) and too busie in
setting forth the gospell of Christ by all
means so farre as his calling did permit, now
he imployeth all his time and care in procuring
his owne safty, ease, pleasure, wealth
and honour, all which he did verie much
neglect before: yet not by any euill means,
but so far forth as a Christian may do lawfullie,
and with a good conscience. Afterward
the same temptation co^tinuing, the loue of

God and the practise of godlinesse doth
daily decrease, till at length he become after
a sort benummed, dead, and euen keycold
in matters of religion, giuing himselfe wholly
to the seeking and inioying of worldly
pleasures, so as if he looked for no other
happinesse: whereby it commeth to passe,
that his faith and affiance in God doth greatly
decaye. Thus the Apostle writeth 1.
Timo. 5. 11. 12.1 Tim. 5. 11. 12. That many younger widowes
did shew the decrease of their
faith, loue, and holinesse, by leauing off to
minister to the Church as they had done
somtimes. And this he plainly affirmeth of
Demas,2 Tim. 4. 10. 2. Timo. 4. 10. That he had forsaken
him, and the affaires of the Church, and had
embraced this present world. And this may
be seene in many Christians, whose faith,
loue, godlinesse, and zeale compared at
one time with that measure of grace which
sometimes appeared in them, will seeme
to be nothing at all.
This kind of decrease happeneth especially
in the time of prosperitie and of age. For as
affliction and miserie doe strike at the fayth
of a Christian; so the inioying of worldly
pleasures in the time of prosperitie doth
diminish the other partes of sanctification
by the immoderate and vnlawfull seeking

and vsing of earthly pleasures. Likwise although
this decrease may happen in any
part of the life, as hath beene declared of
the younger widowes, yet most commonly
it is seene whenas Christians are somwhat
growne in yeares, and haue gotten great
wisdome and experience in the worlde (the
which doth by litle and little steale away the
heart of man from God to it selfe, if great
watchfulnesse and care be not had) and are
more linked and wedded to it then younger
men, although in all reason they should
esteeme lesse of it. This appeareth in the
examples of the kinges of Iuda, of whom
many did in their age loose their first loue of
God and of his worshippe. Thus did Salomon,
Rehaboam, Asa, Ioas, Achasia and
Huzzia. Lastly this kinde of decrease, although
it be not so violent, as is that other
which beginneth at faith, yet in this one
respect it is more daungerous, namely,
because it cannot so soone be amended and
repaired. For as it vseth to be many yeares in
growing before it come to the full, so it
gathereth to it selfe the strength of many
reason, pretenses, defenses, worldly polices
and shifts, by the which a man flattereth
himselfe in that palpable decrease, as if
he were in as good an estate as euer he was.

So that we may compaire the decrease
of faith, to a violent feuer, the which as it
may soone kill a man, so it may soone be
amended: but this latter kinde is like vnto
a lingering consumption, wherein as a
man pineth away by little and little, not on
a suddaine, but liuing in it for the space of
many yeares, so he cannot be cured of it
but in some longe space, because it is so confirmed
in all the members of his body. Yet
both these kindes of decreases are most
fearefull conditions, and those, from the
which it standeth euery Christian in hande
dayly to desire the Lorde for his mercy sake
in Christ to deliuer him, and rather to take
him out of this world being in the state of
perfect godlinesse, then to suffer him to
fall so grieuously: as no doubt he doth to many
of his deare seruauntes.
Lastly it may here be asked what is the
issue of these great falles, which happen to
the faithfull, whether they continue in them
till death, or else recouer their former estate.
We aunswer, that God as he doth
for a time humble them vnder the tiranny
of sinne, Sathan, and their owne corrupt
fleshe, so he doth in his good time, shewe
forth the powerfull and mighty vertue of his
holy spirit, which all this while lyeth lurking

in the heartes of the faithfull, being
in the first moment of their regeneration
giuen vnto them, as an vnseparable guide
and ruler, to bring them through the manifolde
temptations of Sathan and the hinderaunces
of their saluation to the glorious
presence of God in heauen. By this meanes
it commeth to passe, that the faithful man
doth after long struggling with his enimies,
yea after that he hath bene a long time in
bondage vnder them, yea cleane dead in
outward appearaunce, not onely recouer
his former degree of holinesse, but also become
more strong in all spirituall graces,(...). 40. 29.
then he was before, as we reade, Es. 40. 29.
God will giue strength to him that is cleane
wearied, so that he shal goe from strength to
stre^gh and renew his age as doth the eagle, he
shall bring fourth more fruite in his age, and
become more zealous in seruing God,
then he was at any time before. Yet sometime
it pleaseth God to make an end of these
spirituall conflictes, not by withdrawing
the force of the temptation from the faithfull,
but by taking them fro^ it, and out of this
worlde, which is the kingdom of sathan,
to that state wherein they shall no more
be troubled with any such temptation, as
may endaunger their saluation. So that the

faithfull doe sometimes departe this life, as
in the middest of temptation, so in the decrease
of holinesse. Yet we are not to doubt
of their saluation: for he that is once engrafted
and vnited to Christ by a true faith,
as all the regenerate are, whether he dy in
a holy life, or in some sinne, whether in
repentaunce or in impenitency, whether in
full assuraunce of faith or in much doubting,
yea although he seeme to despaire of himselfe,
alwaies he dieth in Christ, and therefore
in the fauour of God and in the state
of eternall life. For in the greatest decrease
of holinesse which can befall to a faithfull
man, there remaineth some sparkes of grace:
but especially the loue of God, of his glory
and of his children will shewe it selfe, (and
also the roote of faith, otherwise perhaps
inuisible) in the greatest agonie or tempest
of temptation whatsoeuer.



CHAP. VIII.
Of the encrease of renewed holinesse.
AS in the naturall birth of man
his body commeth into the
worlde not so greate and strong
as afterwarde it becommeth, but
little, weake and impotent: so in the spirituall
birth of regeneration, the soule of
man is not in the first moment indued
with perfection, but with a small measure
of renewed holinesse, from the which it is
to growe and goe on forwarde to a perfect
estate. For the first act of regeneration,
doth put into the faculties of the soule not
the actuall habit of spirituall graces, but
the seedes and beginning of them, which
are continually to be increased by the worde
and spirit of God. Hence it is, that the
newe man in the faithfull hath his infancie,
wherein the graces of gods spirite are as
yet in small measure. In the which respect
it is compared to a graine of mustard seede,
which being at the first the least of all seeds,
becommeth verie great: and to leauen,
which at the first is in some one parte onely
of the dowe but in time spreadeth it selfe

ouer the whole lump.Of the encrease of renewed holinesse. This meannesse of spirituall
strength appeareth euen in the Apostles
themselues whome being as yet his
disciples and schollers, Christ doth often
put in minde of the weakenesse of their
faith Ioh. 6. 12.Ioh. 16. 12. I haue many thinges to say
vnto you,Act. 19. 2. but ye can not beare them now. And
Act. 19.. 2. There were at Ephesus certaine
beleeuing disciples, who were so
weake in knowledge, that they were ignoraunt
of the holy Ghost. Likewise the
Apostle writeth to the Corinthians 1.
Cor. 3. 1. 2.1. Cor. 3. 1. 2. That he coulde not speake vnto
them, but as vnto babes in Christ (not in
knowledge, but in practise) and there
fore coulde not giue vnto them any stronge
meate, but onely milke to drinke. Of this
weakenesse in capacitie and knowledge,
there is mention made,Gall. 4. 19. Gal. 4. 19. Rom. 6.
19.Rom. 6. 19. Hereof commeth weaknesse in faith.
Rom. 14.Rom. 14. And also necessarily the weaknesse
of all the other partes of holinesse:
wherein no Christian ought to rest as contenting
himselfe with that small measure of
grace, but ought rather to be caried forwarde
to perfection. Especially seing that
this state of spirituall infancy is easely ouerthrowne
and brought to nothing by the
malice of sathan, it being weake, and

not able to resiste the force of temptation.
And therefore although some doe abide
longe in this weake estate and perhaps end
their dayes in it, yet vsually God giueth to
those who are truely regenerate, a daily
increase and a newe supply of grace: insomuch
that in a competente time they become of
ripe age and of perfect strength in Christ.
Wherevnto a christian is then come, when
as he is not destitute of any grace needfull
for the performance of any christian duty
but leadeth a life in euery respect holie
and vnblamable, proceeding from those
spirituall graces which haue bene described
in the third Sections of the first and second
partes of this treatise.
And yet this perfect estate of a christian
is not the highest degree of grace,
which may be attained in this life: for besides
and beyond that measure of grace,
which the faithfull doe ordinarely attaine
vnto, it pleaseth God to endue some of
his seruantes with a more plentifull abundaunce
of all spirituall graces, as he promiseth,
Math. 25. 29. That to him that hath,
there shall more be giuen,Math. 25. 29. and hee shall haue
abundaunce. And it is said of diuers in the
booke of the Acts, that they were full of
faith and of the holy ghost. This abundance

in the minde is called Plerophoria, a certaine
and vndoubted perswasion, said to be in
Abraham Rom. 4. 21. Hereof cometh abundaunce
of faith,Rom. 4. 21. of loue, Rom. 5. 3. and
15. 13. and of all graces,Rom. 5. 3. and 15. 13. as 1. Thess. 1. 3.
the Apostle mentioneth the worke of their
faith,1. These. 1. 3. their laborious loue,2. Thes. 1. 3. and their patient
hope. And 2 Thess. 1. 3. that their faith superaugescit,
that is, encreaseth aboue the
common and ordinarie measure, and that
their loue did abounde accordingly. This
aboundaunce of grace is to be seene in the
prophets, Apostles, martyrs, and many
other of the seruantes of God, who therefore
are made types and patterns for vs to
imitate and set before our eyes, as lanternes
full of light, and as shining and
blazing starres, that we might both admire
and labour to ouertake them in their excellent
graces, and especially in their particular
vertues. For thus the scripture mentioneth
the vprightnesse of Enoch, who walked
with God in all his waies,Iam. 5. 11. the patience
of Iob. Iam. 5. 11, the faith of Abraham, the
meeknesse of Moses, the courage of Iosua,
the faithfulnesse of Samuel, the absolute
perfection of Dauid being a man according
to Gods owne hearte, the wisdome
of Salomon, the zeale of Phinies, Iosias and

many others. Thus Paule mentioneth his
owne painefulnesse in preaching the gospel
to be farre aboue the labours of the rest of
the Apostles. Thus he sayeth, Rom 16. 7. That
Andronicus and Iunia were men notable among
the Apostles,Rom. 16. 7. and of Timothie, that none
was like to him in faithful labour, and care for
the good of the church Philip. 2. 20.Philip. 2. 20.
The notes and markes, whereby this abundaunce
may be knowen, are these; a burning
zeal of gods glorie, of setting forwarde his
worship and gospel, a vehement hatred of
idolatrie, and all shadowes of superstition, a
tender and bountifull loue toward the godly,
a minde vndaunted with any torment,
death or miserie, a constant course of godlinesse
in all outward chaunges whatsoeuer,
as the Apostle sayeth of him selfe, Philip. 4.
13.Philip. 4. 13. That he coulde want and abounde, be full
and empty, and that he coulde do all thinges: a
life free from any grosse sinne, an extraordinary
contempt of all worldly pleasures. Lastly
a manner of freedom from being either
ouercome, or almost tempted by any grosse
sinne. For although the corruption of flesh,
and the impudencie of Sathan who was not
ashamed to tempt Christ to commit sin, be
so great that no man be he nener so holy,
may lay away his weapons, and be secure

in respect of temptations, yet by the blessing
of God and a long practise of all godlinesse,
the faithfull come sometimes to such a surpassing
strength in grace, that as the couragious
horse going into the battel, scorneth
the feareful sounds and noyse of the trumpets:
so this godly man (wherof we speake in this
chapter) laugheth at the temptations of Sathan,
and the entisementes of the world yet
not presuming on his owne strength, but relying
himselfe wholly on the mighty power
of the spirite of God.
The meanes of attaining to this high degree
of holinesse, is to seeke it by earnest
prayer at the handes of God, from whom
onely commeth euery good and perfect
gift. But the meanes which God vseth in
giuing it, are diuerse: some good, some euil
in themselues, and therefore not to be vsed
by vs: of the first sort are all holy exercises
appointed by God, for the begetting and continuall
encrease of grace: to the carefull, diligent,
long and continuall vse whereof, God
doth often graunt this happie successe, euen
as he blesseth the diligent and painfull hand
with greate plenty in temporall thinges. Of
the second sort is the abundaunce of sinne
before regeneration, the which it pleaseth
God, some time to chaunge into this abundaunce

of grace, as we see that the highest
floudes follow the lowest ebbes. This God
doth to make manifest the great power and
efficacy of his spirit in renewing the elect:
which is able to bringe the greatest measure
of holinesse, out of the greatest wickednes,
as cleare light out of palpable darkenes. This
Christ teacheth vs.^uk. 7. 41. Luk. 7. 41. In the parable
of the two debters, whereof the greater
had greater cause and also a greater measure
of loue. And in the example of the woman,
verse: 47. Who loued much, because many
sinnes were forgiuen vnto her:^ers. 47. sowhere sinne
doth abound, there grace aboundeth much
more. Yea for this purpose God doth sometimes
vse the hote fiercenesse of affections,
and the violent disposition of nature, the
which as of it selfe it carieth a man headlong
into the most outragious sinnes: so being
sanctified by Gods spirite, it becommeth
the whetstone of holinesse. Thus was
the Apostle Paule, both naturally and spiritually
affected: and therefore being an infidell,
he was a most superstitious pharisie
more then mad in persecuting the church,
and becomming a faithfull man, passed all
others in vnquenchable zeale of Gods spirite.
Lastly as touching this abundance
of grace, no man can attaine so high a degree

of it, as that he may sitte downe as
being at his iorneis end: but as the greater
riches that a man hath the greater is his
gaine, desire and encrease of riches, so the
more holinesse that any man hath, the more
carefully ought, and the more fruitfully may
he laboure in encreasing it. Phil. 3. 13. Brethren
saieth the Apostle,Phil. 3. 13. I count not that I
haue attained vnto any such perfection: But
still I doe forget that which is behinde, and
endeuore my selfe to that which is before: That
is, I doe not minde that holinesse, which I
haue already receaued, but doe continually
thinke on that, which I doe want as yet.


CHAP. IX.
Of celestiall holinesse.
ALthough we haue now gone
as far in declaring the renewed
holinesse of man, as any
man can in this worlde, either
in hauing or in practising
it, yet we are not here to rest, as being
come to the end of our iorney. For if the aforesaid
aboundaunce of spirituall graces
(which be it neuer so great, cannot possibly

be voide of sinne) be absolutelie
the highest degree,Of celestiall ^olinesse. this inconuenience,
which is in no wise to be admitted, would
of necessitie follow, that man doth not in
regeneration recouer as good a state and as
great a measure of holinesse by the mercy
of God in christ, as he had in his first creation,
and lost by his owne sinne in Adam.
And therefore we are to goe on a little further
in this treatise, and in our desire till we
come to such an absolute perfection of renewed
holinesse, as is free from the least
spot of sinne whatsoeuer. This perfection
may without all question, yea must necessarely
be attained vnto. For man can not be
perfectly happie by enioying the presence
of God, into the which nothing being sinfull
can enter, as long as he is imperfectly
holy. Yet he that seeketh for it in this world,
doth no otherwise then if he shoulde labour
to finde out in some parte of the earth,
a mine of so pure golde, as is not mixed
with earth, base mettall, or any manner of
drosse. And therefore we are with the Apostle
2 Cor. 12.2 Cor. 12. to thinke that the grace of
God is sufficient for our saluation although
it be not altogether free from sinne. And as
for this angelicall purity, it is to be hoped
for not in this worlde, but in heauen where

all the faithfull shall both in happinesse and
in holinesse be made like to the angels, yet
it being reuealed in the worde of God,
may be knowen of vs in this life, yea it
being the marke whereat we must ayme
in this life, although we are not to hope to
hit it, it is needefull to be knowen. And
lastly it is to be handled in this place, because
it is nothing else but the absolute
perfection and highest degree of renewed
holinesse. For as the bodies and the soules
of the faithful shallbe the same in the world
to come, that they are in this world, so also
shall their holinesse. Neither can it be
otherwise: For God is the same both in
earth and in heauen, to day and to morrow,
now and for euer. The subiection of the
creature to God, and the image of God in
the creature is the same at all times in substance,
although some particulars, haue
not so greate vse in the state of perfecte
happinesse as they had before, to wit, all
those the obiectes whereof, are either future
or euill, as namely hope, sorrow, pittie,
and such other affections: yet these also
shall haue both place and vse in the world
to com, although not so greate as the other.
In the which respect, we may declare this
celestiall encrease of renewed holinesse, by

comparing it with the created holinesse
of mans innocent estate, the which commeth
verie neare vnto it, and is as a mean
betwixt the greatest abundance of holines
which can be had in this life, and this celestiall
holinesse: for as it is greater then the
one, so it is lesse then the other. So that
if we would know what is the holinesse
wherewith the faithfull shallbe endued in
the world to come, and shall shine as the
glorious Angels in heauen, let vs haue recourse
to all the first Sections of the two
former parts of this treatise. For al the parts
of the holinesse of mans first estate as well
of his subiection as of his conformitie to
God belong to his last estate in heauen,
wherein man is not exempted from subiection
to God, but still remaineth first his
subiect, and therefore ought to trust and
hope in him, yea to feare him, secondly
his sonne, and therefore he ought to reuerence,
imitate and seeke vnto him, and so
in the other kindes of subiection there
declared. Where this is to be noted that of
the two kindes of faith, legall and euangelicall,
handled in the first part of this
treatise, not the latter but the former is
part of this celestiall holinesse. For in the
life to come, the elect shall be restored to

that perfect inherent holinesse, wherein Adam
was created: by vertue whereof, without
any inputed righteousnesse borrowed
from anie other, they shall looke for happinesse,
euen as the holie Angels doe. Likewise
for the other part of holinesse, which
we call the conformitie of man to God,
we are not to doubt but that the faithfull
shall in the world to come, haue the faculties
of minde, memorie, will and affections
so disposed, as hath beene declared.
For all these are common to all thinges
which are indued with reason. Now as
touching the difference, it is this, celestiall
holinesse is more excellent and exceedeth
the other: for as the bodies of the faithfull
shalbe more glorious, pure, and after
a sort spirituall, then was the bodie of Adam
in his innocenceie, as we reade 1. Cor.
15. 48. So also shall the faculties of the
soule and bodie be more able,1 Cor* 15 48* readie, and
quicke in performing their seuerall duties
and functions. We shal haue more full and
certaine affiance in him as in our King and
be more like to him as to a father, more
quick in obeying his commaundementes,
as seruants ought to be to their maisters;
our mindes shalbe more capable of knowledge
and more enriched with actuall

knowledge 1 Cor. 13. We shall see God face
to face, that is, we shall haue familiar co^uersation
in the presence of God and as full and perfect
a knowledge of God,^ Cor. 13. of his will, word,
actions, and creatures, yea greater then that
which man had by his first creation. Likewise
the will, although of it selfe it shalbe
as it was before, free either to good or euill,
yet it shalbe by the grace of God continually
enclined only to good, and preserued
from vsing the naturall freedome, in
choosing euill. Whereof it commeth, that
this celestiall holinesse is not mutable,
and vncertaine, as was the created
holinesse of man, but
immutable and the same
for euer, and therefore
much more excellent.
FINIS


