


A Table of the Conclusions introductiue to the Reuelation, and proued in the first Treatise.
The first Treatise, is an introduction to the knowledge of the Reuelation, expounding by proofe and demonstration the meaning of
Dates and chiefe reckonings laid vnder tearmes.
Vulgare and vsed, such as
generally, a day for a year a week for seuen years, a moneth for 30. yeares, and a yeare for a yeare of yeares. or three hundred and three score yea es, proved in the 1 proposition.particularly 12. moneths 1260. propheticall daies: three great dayes and an half, and a time, times, and half a time, prooued to be all one date, proposition 15. and euerie one of them to meane a thousand, two hundred and threescore Iulian yeares, proposition. 16.New and strange, wherewith is dated
the historie of S. Iohn his daies, vnder the tearms of 7. seales, whereof the firste begins, An. Chri 29. prop. 8. the last An. Christi, 71. proposition 7. and euerie one of them indureth seuen yeares, as is prooued by the ninth proposition.The prophecy to the worldes end, wherof
The progres is dated by 7. trumpets, or 7. vials which both ar proued to be one proposition 2. and euerie one of them doeth endure 245. yeares, gathered by the thirde and fourth propositions, and prooued by the fift proposition: and the first beginneth, Anno. Christi. 71. proposition 6. and the last beginneth, an. Christ. 1541. and ends Anno. 1786. at the farthest. prop. 10.The ende and last daies, are dated by 7. thunders. and 7. Angels of Gods haruest, both proued to be one, prop. 11. and to beginne Anno Christi, 1541. prop. 12. and euery one of the first three that goeth before the day of iudgement, to indure 49 yeares, prop. 13. making the latter day to fall betwixt the years of Christ 1688. and 1700. by prop. 14Affaires and chiefe matters concerning
Gods seruantes. whose true and holie
Church with her contents is tearmed Gods Temple in heauen, Pro. 20 and a woman cled with the Sunne, prop. 22.Religion is tearmed God his throne in heuen, pro. 17. whereof the written word is testified by the two witnesses, prooued prop. 21. to be the two Testaments, whereof
The twenty four books of the olde Testament, are called the twenty foure Elders, proposition 18.The foure Evangels of the new Testament are called the foure beastes, proposition 19.Gods greatest enemies, as
Sathan who is bound a 1000. years, beginning An. 300. prop. 34. yet bond but only from raising of vniuersal warres, prop. 35.Wicked kingdoms which are set out vnder the tearmes of
Two nations, Gog and Magog prooved [by the thirtie and two proposition] to bee the Papistes and Mahometans, whose armies are all one with those of the sixt trumpette or viall, as is proved in the thirtie three proposit.Two Beasts
A two horned beast, signifying the Antichrist only, by the twentie fiue proposition, who is proved to bee the Pope, by the twentie sixe proposition, whose raign of a thousand, two hundred sixtie yeares, beginneth anno Christi 300. or 316. at the farthest, proposition, 36.A ten horned beast, signifying, by the twentie foure proposition, the whole Latine or Romane Empire, with the Antichrist descending of the same, of which Romane or Latine Empire, the seat and Metropolitan^ Citie, Rome, is meaned and represented by Babylon in the twentie three proposition. To this ten horned beast and Roman or Latine Empire [as is proued in the twentie seuen proposition] appertaineth
An Image, prooued by the 28 proposition, to be these degenerate princes that onelie in name and shewe, are Romane Emperours.A mark, prooued by prop. 30. to be the league of seruitude professed to the Romanes, by their subiects noted afterwarde by the Pope with visible marks, which, by the 31. prop. are (...) and crosses of all kinds.A name, prooued by the twentie nine proposition. to be the name of the Latine or Romane Empire, (...)A number of 666. assigned by the text.
These Propositio^s ar set in this table after their natural order, but in the tretise follovving, they ar placed demo^stratiuely, to the effect euery proposition may be proued by the former propositions.



THE FIRST AND INTRODVCTORY Treatise, conteining a searching of the true meaning of the Revelation, beginning the discouerie thereof at the places most easie, and most euidently knowne, and so proceeding from the known, to the proouing of the vnknowne, vntill finally, the whole groundes thereof bee brought to light, after the manner of Propositions.

THE FIRST PROPOSITION. In propheticall dates of daies, weekes, moneths, and yeares, euerie common propheticall day is taken for a yeare.
THIS Proposition is proued by apperance, by a law, by practise, and by necessitie. By appearance, because the common weeke is called a weeke of daies,Gene. 29.27, as in Genesis (according to Ieroms translation) Imple hebdomadam dierum. i. Fulfil a weeke of daies. And the common year is called a year of daies,Iere. 28.3.11, as adhuc duo anni dierum: Within two yeares of daies:1. Mach, 1.30. and Post duos annos dierum: After two years of daies: inferring therby that there is another week of yeares, containing seuen yeares, as the common week containes seuen daies. And another yeare of yeares, containing 360. years, as the common year (not intercalar) among the Hebrews and Grecians, containedIosephus Scaliger de emend. Temp, 360. daies. Secondly, by the Leuiticall law, (which is the figure of all propheticall veritie) it was instituted, that as in the common weeke, six daies were for labour, and the seuenth for rest: so shuld there also

be a weeke of yeares, in the which the land should bee six years laboured,Exod. 23. Leuit, 25. and rest the seuenth: Making so the common week of daies, to rese^ble the figuratiue week of yeares, and so consequently, euerie day to resemble a yeare. Thirdly, by the propheticall custome and practise, euery day represented a yeare: as in Numb. Iuxta numerum 40. dierum,Num. 14.34 quibus considerastis terram, annus pro die imputabitur, and 40. annis recipietis, etc. After the number of fourtie daies, in vvhich ye searched out the land, the year shall be counted for a day, and in fourtie years yee shall receiue etc. And in Ezech. Ego autem dedi tibi annos iniquitatis eorum numero dierum, etc. And I haue giuen thee the yeares of their iniquitie by the number of daies. And afterwardes, Et Assumes iniquitatem domus Iudae 40. diebus,Ezech. 4.5.6 diem pro anno, diem inquam, pro anno dedi tibi. And thou shalt beare the iniquitie of the house of Iuda fourtie daies, a day for a yeare, euen a day for a yeare, I haue giuen thee. Fourthlie vpon necessitie of saluation, al christians must confesse, in the seventie weeks of Daniel, a day to be taken for a yeare, extending in the whole to 490. yeares; otherwise, that prophecie of the Messias comming wold not fal vpon the just time of Christs comming,Dan. 9.24 as necessarily it ought to do. So then a propheticall day is a yeare, the weeke seuen yeares, the moneth thirtie years (because the Hebrue and Grecian moneth hath thirtie daies) and conseque^tly the prophetical year is 360. years.Iosephus Scaliger de emend. temp. Beside this common propheticall day, there is another greate and extraordinary day, whereof hereafter shall be spoken.


2. PROPOSITION. The seuen Trumpets of the 8. and 9. chapters, and the seuen Vials of the 16. Chapter, are all one.
THis is proued, in that both the seuen Vials, and also the seuen Trumpets are the seuen last plagues: The seuen vials, in that by the text they are called, The seuen last plagues: these same being hereafter called, The seuen golden Vialles,Ap, 15.1. and 7 and the seuen Vials of the wrath of God.

As to the seuen Trumpets, the last conteineth the day of judgement, as testifies the Angels oath, swearing,Apoc. 16.^ Quod tempus non erit amplius, sed in diebus vocis septimi Angeli, cum coeperit tuba canere,Apoc. 10.^ consummabitur mysterium magnum Dei, etc. That there shal be no more time, but in the daies of the seuenth Angell, when he shal blow the trumpet, the great mysterie of God shall be finished. Which mysterie, Paule to the Corinthians, maketh the latter day and resurrection; saying, Ecce mysterium dico vobis, etc. Beholde, I declare vnto you a mysterie. And againe, In momento, in ictu oculi,1 Cor. 15.5^ in novissima tuba (canet enim tuba) and mortui resurgent: In a moment, in the twinkling of an eie, at the last trumpet (for the tru^pet shall blow) and the dead shall arise. And seeing then the seuen tru^pets follow one another in order, in the eight ninth, tenth, and eleue^th chapters, and the last containeth the day of judgement, and generall resurrection; Therefore, must the seuen trumpets be also the seuen last plagues, and consequently, they and the seuen vials must be al one. Moreouer, for confirmatio^ hereof, they agree in their principall tearmes; the second trumpet with the second Vial; the third trumpet with the third Viall; the fourth trumpet with the fourth Viall; the sixt trumpet with the sixt Vial; the seue^th trumpet with the seuenth Vial: So, that thereby we may be sure, and conclude both those trumpets, with those Vials, and also the rest of the trumpets with the rest of the vials, respectiue in purpose, meaning, time, and in al other circumstances, to be one and the selfe same thing.


3. PROPOSITION. The star and locusts of the fift trumpet, are not the greate Antichrist and his Cleargie, but the Dominator of the Turkes and his armie, who began their dominion, in anno Christi 1051.
BY the former proposition, the fift vial is al one with the fift tru^pet: But in that vial (saith the text) there

arose such a plague against the seat of that Antichristian beast, that his kingdome was darkned, and they did gnaw their tongues for sorrowe. So that this may no waies be himselfe that arose against himself, but rather some other godlesse tyrant like him, whome wee shall prooue to be the Apostate Mahomet, and his locustes the Turkes: first, by the name of their Cheiftanes: secondly, by the length of their raigne: Thirdly, and last of all, by all the tokens and circumstances contained in the text. As to the first, they shall haue (saith the text) their King, whose name shal be in Hebrue Abaddon, and in greek Apollyon, and in Latine (as S. Ierome translateth it) Exterminans:Hier. de int. nominum, and in English a destroier, or a waster. But so it is, that trying fro^ language to language the names of Princes, ye shall onlie find both their temporall and spiritual kings names to signifie the same that Abaddon in hebrue, and Apollyon in greeke doeth: for their temporall king is called Turca, which is asmuch to say, as a Waster or destroyer, as testifieth P. Melancton in Carion hisChron. lib. 1, fol. 8. and lib. 5 fol. 107. Chronicles. And their spiritual kings name MahometHier. de int. nominum., signifieth delens, a destroyer or waster: and beside that, it signifieth also a Messenger or Angel, most agreable with this text, where he is also called, the Messenger or Angel of the depthes. Therfore, these locusts by the name of their Chieftaine, agreeth certainely to bee the Turks. Secondly, as to the space of their dominion, the Turkish Dominators raigned 150. yeares, and so long lasted these Locustes, to wit, fiue moneths: which being prophetically taken, (because this is a Prophecie) maketh just 150. yeares, as is prooued by the first Proposition. And so long lasted the dominion of the Turks, before they were subdued by the Tartarians: to wit, from the daies of Zadok, their first Dominator, an. Christ. 1051. to the time that Changius Chan of Tartarie subdued them, An. Christ. 1201. So then, in length of dominion these Locusts agree to be the Turkes. Thirdlie and last of all, the whole circumstances and tokens

of the text, agrees most conuenientlie with the Turk, as at length our paraphrastical and historical discourse shall prooue. Wherefore, the Star that in the fift trumpet fel downe from heauen, and his Locusts that arose, must needs be the Mahomet, who fell from his former Christian profession, and became an Apostate, and out of the smoke of his heresie, stirred vp the Turkes to be his armie.


4 PROPOSISION. The kinges of the East, or four Angels, specified in the sixt trumpet, or sixt vial. Cap. 9. and 16. are the four nations, Mahometanes beyond and about Euphrates, who began their empire by Ottoman, in the yeare of Christ, 1296. or thereabout.
FOr proof hereof, there nedeth no other argument, than the perfect concord of the whole tokens of the texts, cap. 9. and cap. 16. agreeing so in euerie point with that historie, that no other historie can be applied therto. For first, cap. 9. they are called Angels; that is to say, Messengers euill or good, executers of Gods will: So were these Mahometanes messengers sent of God, to scourge the Christians falling away. Secondlie, cap. 16. they are called Kings of the East: and so are these Mahometanes indeed Kinges of the East. Thirdlie, they were in number foure (saith the text) so were there of these Mahometanes foure chiefe nations; to wit, Turks, Tartarians, Saracens, and Arabians: and foure imperiall or royall families; to witte, Assimbeis, Candelors, Caramannes and Ottomannes. Fourthlie, they were hitherto bound (saieth the text) about the riuer Euphrates: and so haue they their residence about Euphrates, where they were so bound and tied by ciuill and intestine warres, that they came not by west Euphrates to make conquest, till after this yeare of Christ 1296. which time the whole Mahometicke Empire ouer the most part of the said four nations, came from the other three families,

in the onlie hande of Ottomannus their first Emperour. Fiftlie, these were appointed (saith the Text) at this time to slay the third part of men. And so did they, what by corporall, and what by spirituall death, slay, conquest, and poyson with heresie, all Asia and much of Europe, euen the large third part of the world. Which propertie can bee attributed to none other hitherto, but to the saide Mahometike Armie, which exceeded far, anie Armie hard of in Christian histories. And therfore, sixtlie, ar they numbred to so great a multitude in the text, to wit, two hundred thousand thousands horsmen. Seuenthlie, as out of the mouthes of the Deuill, the Antichristian beast, and this fals Mahomet, proceeded out three vncleane spirits, stirring vp the world to battel, as the Text specifies: So, by the historie it is found, that out of their mouthes proceeded such inspirations of the Deuill, and deuilish exhortations, that stirred vp (in fierie wrath, in smoking heresie, and in sulphurious and bitter auarice) the whole worlde to battell: that is to say, these Mahometanes, Emperors of the whole Orient, against the Antichristian beast, supreame head of the Occident,Hier. de int. nominum to fight in Armageddon: that is to say, to fight in the mountaine of the chosen fruite, and in the mountaine of the Euangell: euen in Asia minor, and Europe, and in other landes of the Christians, and among Gods elect fruit, and chosen professors of his Euangell, troubling them on both sides, which at length and orderlie shall be founde in our paraphrasticall and historicall Discourse, together with all the rest of the smaller circumstances contained in the text. So, then by these perfect properties wee conclude, the sixt Trumpet or Viall, to bee spoken of the great Empire of these four nations Mahometanes, which began in Anno Christi 1296. vnder their first Emperour Ottomannus.



5 PROPOSITION. The space of the fift trumpet or vial containeth 245. years, and so much also, euery one of the rest of the trumpets or vials doe containe.
SEing at the powring out of the fift vial, or sounding of the fift trumpet, the Turkes began their dominion vnder Zadok, in Anno Christi 1051. by the thirde proposition: and by the fourth proposition, at the sounding of the sixt Trumpet, and powring out of the sixt Viall, the whole foure nations Mahometanes began their great Empire in anno Christi 1296. Therefore, the fift Trumpet or Viall indured from the 1051. yeare, to the 1296. yeare, which is the space of 245. yeares. Nowe, that euerie one of the rest of the Trumpets or Vialles doeth containe the same space, it is probable by these reasons. First, because in euerie distribution, aequalitie is most apparant and probable, and so these seuen ages, termed by trumpets and vialles, appeare to haue no reason, why one should bee longer and another shorter, but rather all alike. Secondlie, as in those 245. yeares the effectes of the fift Trumpet and Viall were performed (as now is prooued) so by our paraphrasticall and historicall Discourse you shall finde, that in the former 245. years, the effect of the fourth Trumpet and Vial, and in the 245. yeares before these, the effect of the third Trumpet or Viall was perfourmed: and consequently, the effects of euery one of the rest of the trumpets or vials were perfourmed in their owne space of 245. yeares, ingendering so in these intervals of 245. yeares a perfect harmonie and analogie betwixt the prophesie and historie. Thirdly, because every one of these ages are tearmed and distinguished by the sounds of trumpets here, as the Iubelees were inLeuit. 25, 9 Leviticus. For there, at the end of every 49. year, and beginning of the 50. yeare the tru^pets sounded, making betwixt everie sounding thereof 49. yeares precisely for a Iubelee interuall without any oddes, as the name Iubileus betokens,

which signifieth a Tru^pet or Cornet: Therfore, must those ages also contain certain whole Iubelee interualls,Hier. de int. nominum. preciselie without any ods: otherwise, appara^tlie, they woulde not haue bene limited here by the soundes of Trumpets, as the Iubelees are. Then, if euerie one of these ages doeth containe foure Iubelees, which is 196. yeares, or sixe Iubelees, which is 294 yeares, the one shall be so few, and the other shal bee so manie, that the historie could not agree thereto: Therefore, fiue Iubelees, which is 245. yeares (as the middest betwixt extremities) agreeth exquisitlie. Fourthlie, it is found in histories, that great mutations of Empires followed 245. years one after another: as, Ierusalem was destroied An. 71. An. 316. Constantine tra^sported the Imperiall seat from Rome to Byzantium, and in Rome Pope Syluester began the Papisticall kingdome. Anno 561. or thereabout, Totila king of Goths burned Rome, and vsurped the dominion thereof. Anno 806. Charlemaign receiued the newe Empire of Germanes and Romanes. Anno 1051. Zadok began the first dominion of the Turkes. Anno 1296. Ottoman began the first Empire of the foure nations Mahometanes. Last of all, about the year 1541. arose our true professors against the kingdo^ of Antichrist. And euerie one of these great mutations followed 245. yeares one after another. And this moueth Carion, and other Historiographers, to affirme by diuers obseruations, that fiueCarion. lib. 4. de Henr. 4. Imp. hundred yeares (as groslie they thinke, or rather exactlie, 490. yeares) is fatalis periodus imperioru^: the fatal period of Empires, for that it is about twise 245. yeares. Fiftlie, 245. yeares, is the just halfe of the greate Iubelee, or seuentie weekes of Daniel, containing 490. yeares: And because the worlde would not stand whollie seuen of these great Iubelees; therefore S. Iohn by the Spirite of God deuideth seuen halfs of the great Iubelee, among the seuen Trumpets, or vials. Sixtlie, ther are books of the Iewes, containing (as they alledge) doctrines proceding fro^ the mouthes

of the Patriarches, affirming euery great Angel of seue^ to rule the world 490. yeares: which wee (wanting the warrant of Scripture) can neither affirm nor condemn. Alwaies (if it be so,) the halfe thereof, to wit, 245. years is taken in steade of the whole, because (as is saide) the time to come to the worlds end, woulde not containe seuen whole, and to containe fewer diuisions than seuen, that had bene repugnant to the propheticall manner, that deuides all by seuen: as seuen seales, seuen tru^pets, seuen vials, seuen thunders, etc. So then, for conclusion, euerie trumpet or viall endureth 245. yeares.


6 PROPOSITION. The first Trumpet or Viall began at the Iubelee, in anno Christi 71.
SEing by the third Proposition, the fift trumpet or viall began in Anno 1051. And that by the fift proposition euerie trumpet or viall containeth 245. years, it must needs followe by just count, that the first trumpet or viall began in Anno 71. The second in An. 316. The third in An. 561. The fourrh in An. 806. The fift (as is already prooued) in An. 1051. The sixt also in An. 1296. The seuenth in An. 1541. And that this 71. yeare of Christ, and consequentlie, the first yeare of euerie trumpet or viall was Iubelee, you may consider by the Discourse of Iosephus Scalig^^ de emendat. temporum.


7 PROPOSITION. The last of the seuen Seales, and first of the seuen Trumpets or Vials, begin both at once, in An. 71.
THis appeareth euidentlie, for euen by the text (cap. 8.) the seuenth seale being opened, that verie hour the seuen Angels receiued their trumpets to blowe; for hauing said in the first verse, and when hee had opened the seuenth seale, there was silence in heauen about halfe an houre: he subjoyneth immediatelie (ver. 2.) And I saw the seuen

Angels, etc. receiue their seuen Trumpets. And further, after he hath shewed (ver. 5.) how Christ powred out the fiery coales of his wrath, in reuenge of the blood of his Saintes (which doubtles, was vpon Ierusalem, which shead it) incontinent hee subjoyneth (verse 6. and 7.) that then the seuen Angels prepared themselues to blowe. And the first blewe his Trumpet, etc. So therefore, justlie at this destruction of Ierusalem, in Anno Christi 71. make wee both the last seale, and first Trumpet or Viall to beginne. And this is also confirmed by the former calculations, which come backwarde from the fift Trumpet or Viall preciselie, to the yeare of this destruction.


8. PROPOSITION The first Seal beginneth to be opened, in Anno Christi 29. compleat.
THis is prooued by this reason. The opening of the first Seale (cap. 6.) and outgoing of one riding vpon a white horse, etc. is interpreted to bee the word of God, in the 19. chap. vers. 13. which passed out victoriouslie, conquering and piercing our heartes with the arrowes of feruencie and godlie zeale. This behooued onlie to beginne at that time that Christ was baptized, and began to preach and open vp the sealed doctrin of our saluation, which was in the end of the 29. yeare of the age of Christe: and about the beginning of his thirtieth yeare (as Luke testifieth) So,Luke. 3, v. 23 then consequentlie, the first seale beginneth to be opened about the end of the said 29. yeare of the age of Christ.


9. PROPOSITION. Euerie Seale must containe the space of seuen yeares.
THe first Seale beginning to bee opened in Anno Christi 29. as by the former proposition is prooued,

we say, that the second seal beginneth in An. Christi 36. The third beginneth in An. 43. The fourth in An. 50. The fift in An. 57. The sixt in An. 64. And finallie, the seue^th beginneth in An. 71. proceding ever aequally by seuen yeares interual, for these reasons. First, becaus in al distributions, aequalitie is most apparant and probable: and trueth it is, that the first seale could not begin at the terme and yeare of Christ 29. proued by the former proposition, and the seue^th seal at the term of the yeare of Christ 71. prooued by the seuenth Proposition, and proceed aequallie: vnlesse that euerie seale containe seuen yeares. Secondlie, because in proceeding, and giuing seuen yeares to euerie seale, ye shall finde the effect of euerie seale to bee perfourmed within the seuen yeares of that seale: And so the harmonie to bee perfect betwixt these seales and the just historie, as in our paraphrasticall and historicall Discourse shall appeare more at large. Thirdlie, because all comptes of yeares within a Iubelee, were reckoned among the Leuits and Prophets by weekes of yeares,Exod. 23 Leuit. 25 euerie weeke containing seuen yeares, as the Iewes doe obserue yet vnto this day: and this space of seals opening, proceeding from the yeare of Christ 29. to the Iubelee in An. 71. is lesse than a Iubelee interuall, for it is but 42. od yeares: and therefore, the diuision ought of necessitie to fall by weekes of yeares, or by seuen yeares. Fourthlie, the Angell in Daniel reckoneth 70. weekes of yeares betwixt the commandement to build Ierusalem,Dan. 9.24 and the latter destruction of Ierusalem, including the Messias comming. And this Angell calleth his wordes closed and sealed, Sermones clausi and signati: words closed and sealed:Dan. 12.9 wher by justly these 70. weekes may be called sealed weekes. Now, because these 42. od yeares of the seales are certainlie a part of the seuen sealed weeks of Daniel: Therefore, wee may justlie affirme these seales to bee sealed weeks, and so consequentlie euerie one of them to containe seuen yeares.



10 PROPOSITION. The last Trumpet and Viall beginneth anno Christi 1541 and should end in anno Christi 1786.
SEing by the third Proposition, the fift Trumpet or Viall began in Anno 1051. And by the fift proposition, euerie Trumpet or Viall containeth 245. yeares: it must needes followe, that the seuenth Trumpet or Viall began in Anno Christi 1541. and consequentlie it should end 245. yeares after: which is in Anno 1786. Not that I meane, that that age, or yet the world shall continew so long, because it is said,Mat. 24, 22 that for the Elects sake, the time shall be shortned: but I meane, that if the world wer to indure, that seuenth age should continew vntill the yeare of Christ 1786.


11 PROPOSITION. The seuen Thunders, whose voices are commanded to bee sealed, and not written (cap. 10.4.) are the seuen Angels, specified cap. 14. vers. 6.8.9.14.15.17.18.
THis tenth chapter doeth agree with the twelth of Daniel almost in euerie point: there doth he likewise shewe, that those verie selfe same mysteries are sealed, yet but for a time, saith the Angell, in these wordes,Dan 12, 4. and 9.13. Tu autem Daniel, claude sermones, and signa librum vsque ad tempus statutum, etc. But thou, O Daniel, close vp the vvordes, and seale the booke, vntill the appointed time. And againe, he saith, Vade Daniel, quia clausi sunt signatique sermones, vsque ad praesinitum tempus. Goe thy vvay, Daniell, for the vvordes are closed and sealed vntill the appointed time. This time that these mysteries were closed, appeareth to be the time of darknesse alreadie past, vnder the Antichristia^ errors, now hope we in God, that those mysteries ar able to be found out, seing that time is expired. The^ to our purpose, let vs confer the tokens of the seue^

Thunders, with the tokens of the seauen Angels, specified Chap. 14. And wee shall finde them to agree. For first, at the comming of the seuen thunders, Christ doth offer the open book of his truth. So cap. 14. the first of the seuen Angels bringeth the euerlasting Gospel, and openly precheth out the same. Secondly, cap. 10. Christ by the mightie voice of his worde,Apoc 10.2.8 9.10.11. Apoc. 14.9 as a roaring Lion in the mouthes of his preachers, proclaimed the trueth: then came the seue^ thunders; so also (cap. 14.) the voice of Gods heauenly elect is heard as the mightie sounde of waters, and as thunder (vers. 2.) Then came orderlie the seuen Angels (ver. 6.8.9.14.15.17. and 18.) Thirdlie, (cap. 10.) the seuen thunders are sealed vp as a mysterie. So likewise (cap. 14) those seuen Angels are preparers and reapers of Gods greate haruest, and what mysterie is more sealed than that, as testifieth MarkeMark. 13.31. saying, De die autem illo vel hora, nemo scit, neque Angeli in coelo, neque Filius nisi Pater: But of that day and houre knoweth no man, no not the Angels which are in heauen, neither the Sonne but the father: And Paul to the 1. Cor. saying, Ecce,1. Cor. 15.5^. mysterium dico vobis, etc. Behold I shewe you a mysterie, etc. Fourthlie, (cap. 10.) the thunders are commaunded to be sealed and not to be written plainly. So (cap. 14.) they are so sealed, that they are neither named dulie with their former name of thunder; neither are they placed in their due place, which should haue bene in the tenth chapter, but here are called Angels, and placed in the 14. Chapter. Fiftlie (chap. 10.) they be called thunders and yet are sealed: So (chap. 14.) though they be sealed with the name of Angels,Apoc. 14.2. yet for a token that they be the seuen thunders, hee describeth the sounde of great thunder going before them. Then for a conclusion, in respect of the harmonie betwixt the seuen thunders, and seuen Angels of Gods great haruest, we conclude them both to be one.



12 PROPOSITION The first of the seuen thunders, and the seuenth and last Trumpet or Viall, begin both at once in An. 1541.
IN the eleuenth Chapter it is saide, that at the blast of the seuenth trumpet, the kingdome of the worlde becommeth Christ his kingdome: that is, the kingdom of the Antichrist, and all other prophane kingdomes shall fall, and Christ his kingdome shall bee spread and enlarged ouer all: And this can no other wayes come to passe, but by the preaching of the Euangell, which was of new opened vp, and preached at the comming of the first Angell, whome the Text saith, to haueApoc. 14.6 Euangelium aeternum, vt euangelizaret sedentibus superterram An euerlasting Evangell, to preach vnto them vvhich dwell vppon the earth. Which Angell, by the former proposition, is prooued to be the first of the seuen thunders: Therefore, it followeth consequently, that the newe restoring of the Evangell, the seuenth Trumpet or viall, and the first Thunder or thundering Angell, come all at once. And therefore, by the tenth Proposition they began in anno Christi 1541. For confirmation hereof, after the end of the sixt Trumpet, completed in the ende of the ninth chapter: in the beginning of the tenth Chapter, where the seuenth Trumpet appeareth to beginne (the sixt being newly ended) yee shall finde there declared, howe Christ proffereth the open booke, and manifest doctrine of the Evangel, and then immediatelie that very time, while as Christe by his Ministers, preached and proclaimed out that manifest word, as with the mightie voice of a Lyon: incontinent (I say) that verie time (verse 3.) the seuen thunders began to vtter their voice: And so the beginning of the voice of the seuen thunders, or voice of the first thundering Angell commeth at once with the completing of the sixt trumpet, and beginning of the seuenth; although

though the verie latter blast of the seauenth Trumpet be not then come.


13 PROPOSITION Euery one of the first three thundering Angels containeth a Iubelee, and then the last foure al at once compleateth the day of iudgment.
THE first part of this proposition, is at the command of the Angell inDan. 12.9 Apoc. 10.4 Daniel, and in the Reuelation so sealed and closed, that be no part of those textes may it be gathered, how long every thunder or Angell of the greate haruest doth follow after other: yet after the custome, both of the Leuites and Prophetes, who deuide all greate dates by Iubelees: and small dates by weekes of yeares, wee judge most apparantly, this last age to be deuided by Iubelees: and so euerie thunder or Angell of these three, that ar said in the text (cap. 14 ver. 6.8. and 9.) to preceede Gods great haruest, to containe 49. yeares, beginning the first (by the former proposition) at the yeare of Christ, 1541. who vers. 6. and 7.) preached his euerlasting Euangell to the yeare of God, 1590. Which yeare, beginneth the second thundering Angell (verse 8.) and continueth proclaiming the finall decay and fall of Babylon, to the yeare of Christ 1639. Which yeare, the thirde thundering Angell beginneth, who (verse 9.) is stiled the third Angell, and he continueth exhorting and threatning these of the last dregs of the Antichrist to repentance, to the yeare of Christ, 1688 VVhere the fourth thundering Angel, euen Christ himselfe (v. 14. and 16) enters actually vnto his great haruest, to gather vp his elect, at the warning of the fift Angell, euen Gods holy spirit (verse 15) Like as contrarilie, the sixt thundering Angel, executer of Gods fierie and fierce wrath (mentioned v. 17. and 19) is admonished and warned (v. 18) by the seuenth angel co^mander therof, to cut down and tread out the vines of the earth, in the winepresse of Gods wrath: And so by

these last foure Angels or Thunders (to wit, by Christ himselfe, and by his whole ministering Angels, vnder the figure of these last Angels) all the whole great day of Gods haruest, and latter judgment is accomplished.


14. PROPOSITION. The day of Gods iudgement appears to fall betwixt the yeares of Christ, 1688. and 1700.
Mar. 13, 32ALthough it be said in Mark, that the day of judgment and houre therof, none doth know: yea, not the Sonne, but the father only: yea let none be so base, of judgment as to conclude thereby, that the yeare or age thereof, is also vnknowne to Christ, or vnable to be known any waies to his seruants; by reason, that first in that same part of Marke, Christ letteth vs not only see, that he knew the age and yeares, neere the which that day should fall, but also to the effect, that we may likewise foreknow the same, he giues vs diuers indices and foretokens, which hee could not, nor would not haue forewarned, if he had bin vtterly ignorant of the time thereof, or yet had minded that we should neuer haue foreknowne the age, and appearant yeares thereof, although the precise day and houre be onely knowne to God. Secondly, although the Spirite of God hath hitherto concealed these misteries from them whom the knowledge thereof might haue endammaged: yet that prooueth not, that the same shall be hidde from vs, to whom the knowledge thereof might bring repentance and amendement: for as the foreknowledg of death, to him that were to liue long, might make the foreknower negligent of his dutie to God, and carefull to prouide inordinately for his long life here: Wherethrough God hath made the houre of death vncertain till it approch: Euen so, if the foreknowledg of the latter day had bin granted to men any waies long before it come, that long assured continuance of the worlde,

foreknowne by them so long before, had made them to become more carefull per fas and nefas: for their families and posterities, that were long to stande, than for that heauenlie kingdome, that was long to bee delayed. And therfore, was that mysterie justlie by the prouidence of God closed from our predecessors: but contrarilie, so soone as that day beginneth to approch, God by his Scriptures, shall make the age and years thereof to be manifested, as a spurre in his mercie, to mooue the elected sinners to repentance, and a testimonie in Gods justice, against the hard hearted misbeleeuers, continuing in sinne. Thirdlie, and for confirmation of the former, Christ testifieth, that his comming shall be lik vnto the floud of Noah, before the which,Mat. 24, 37. the world being admonished, both by Noahs preching, and by the visible building of the Arke, woulde not the more repent, nor amend their liues, till vnawares they were all destroyed: and is God now otherwise tha^ he hath bin?1. Reg. 15 29 Is he (saith the scripture) a man that he shal repent that now, which he did then, and forbeare the like? Nay, but contrarilie, he shall make his own to be forseene of this time, as wel as of that time, seing it is now as necessarie, that Gods Ministers exhort vs to repe^ta^ce of that coldnes of charitie, and al other vices that abound in this last age, and to terrifie vs with the certeine and assured approching of the latter day, and destruction of the worlde by fire, as well as the longsome building of the Ark, the deeds, gesture, and apparant preaching of Noah,Gen. 6 3 1. pet, 3.19 was a forewarning 120. years to the olde world, that for their vnlawful lusts, and other their horrible vices, they should be destroied by water. Fourthlie, that the yeares or age of the latter day is not vnknown to Christ, nor euer vnsearcheable to his seruants, is certain by Daniell, to whome, although it is said, Vade Daniel,Dan. 12.9 quia clausi sunt signatique sermones hi: Got thy waie Daniel, for these vvordes are closed and sealed: As to the Apostles, Non est vestrum scire tempora: It is not for you to knowe the times,Act, 1, 7 for that their time was far from the latter day: yet, saith Daniel of the time of reuelation,Dan 12, 4. Signa librum ad tempus statutum, multi pertransibunt, and multiplex erit s^ientia, Seale the booke till the appointed time, manie shall goe to and fro, and knowledge shall be encreased: meaning, when as the due

time beginneth to approch, these dates shall be knowne, for knowledge shal then abound. And again he saith, Impie agent impii,Dan. 12.10 neque intelligent omnes impii, porro docti intelligent. The wicked shal doe wickedlie, and none of the wicked shall haue vnderstanding, but the vvise shall vnderstand. Fiftlie, this age or apparant yeares of the latter day, are neither vnsearcheable to Christs seruants, nor vnknowne to himselfe, seeing it is euident, that the Deuils haue a certaine foreknowledge thereof, in that they said to Christ, Venisti huc, ante tempus torquere nos? Art thou come hither,Mat. 8.29 to torment vs before the time? meaning, that althogh they are continuallie reserued in feare and dread, yet (as Peter and Iude testify) their chief torment is not vntil the latter day,2. pet. 2.4 Iude. 7 which they knewe, was not to be at that time. Againe, it is said in the Reuelation, Laetamini coeli, etc. Vae autem terrae and mari,Apoc. 12.12 quia descendit Diabolus ad vos, habens iram magnam, sciens quod modicu^ tempus habet. Therfore, reioyce ye heauens, etc. and wo to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea, for the deuil is come down vnto you, which hath gret wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time. So then, seeing the Deuill hath great wrath in the latter daies, and doth know that his time is short, shal we say, that Christ shall be ignorant of that, which the Deuill doeth know. Sixtlie, to what effect were the Prophecies of Daniel, and of the Reuelation giuen to the Church of God, and so manie dates of yeares; and circumstances of time, foreshewing the latter day, conteined therintil, if God had appointed the same to be neuer knowne or vnderstood before that day come. Therfore, assuring our selues, that all these Prophecies of the latter day shall be known and manifested to Gods Church, before Christ come to judgment: let vs confer al these prophecies and propheticall figures thereof together, and wee shall finde them come so neere to one time, that verilie the matter is wonderfull. And first (beginning at the Symbole of the the Sabboth) it is thought by the most learned, that the sixe daies of labor, weekly obserued, doth mean and bear the symbole of 6000. yeares, that mankinde shall indure the trauels and cares of this world: and that is confirmed by Peter, who speking of the day of judgment,2. Pet. 3, 8 noteth, that a thousand years shal be as one day in Gods sight: and a day as a thousand yeares: And

so consequentlie, the sixe dayes of worke, to represent sixe thousand yeares: after the which sixe thousande yeares of worldlie trauels and cares, then shall come our aeternal Sabboth and rest, in the glorie of heauen, signified by the seuenth daies rest: For that truelie, there is no institution appointed by God to Moses, which (besides the ciuill commoditie) had not also a spirituall figure: And sure it is, that no figure appeareth more consonant with these sixe dayes of worke, and seuenth day of rest, than the present miseries of this worlde, and aeternall Sabboth hereafter. Secondlie, and agreeable with the former, there is a sentence of the house of Elias reserued in al ages, bearing these wordes: The vvorld shall stand six thousand yeares, and then it shall be consumed by fire: two thousande yeares voide or without lawe, two thousand yeares vnder the lawe: and two thousand yeares shall bee the daies of the Messias: And for our offences, which shal be manie and great, shall these yeares lacke which shall lacke. Thus farre saith Elias: Now, the term of these 6000. yeares doeth expire, about the 2000. year of Christ, which term, both by the said saying of Elias, and by Christs owne saying in Mat, appeareth to be shortned. And therefore, thirdlie,Mat. 24.22 Dan. 12 by Daniel we shal approch nerer that term: for he in his 12. cap. intreating both of the first resurrectio^ (which is the resurrectio^ fro^ the Antichristia^ errors) and of the second resurrection, which is the general resurrection from the dead: such an Angel, as afterwards appereth to Iohn (Reu. 10) teaching him co^cerning the latter day,Ap. 10.5.6.7. doth here appear to Daniel, swearing solemnly a term of prophetical daies, to euerie one of those questio^s, doubted of by the Prophet: of which, the greatest terme is expressed to be 1335. prophetical daies, which (by the 1. proposition) meaneth 1335. yeares,Dan. 12.11. whose beginning are determined in these words, And fro^ the time that the dayly sacrifice shal cease, and the abhomination put to desolation (or made desolat) shal be 1290. daies: blessed is he that awaiteth and abideth to the 1335 day. As if he wold say, fro^ that time that both the Iewish dayly Sacrifice shal vtterlie cease, and the abhominable rites of the Gentiles be abolished, to the co^pleating of the gret resurrection from the Antichristian errours, and vtter decay of his kingdome, shall

be 1290 years, and then blessed shal he be that abideth and remaineth constant in the small time, that shall be betwixt that and the latter day, which shal fall in the 1335 year, from the taking away of the said Iewish ceremonies, and Gentiles superstitions. But so it is, that these were neither actually taken away by Christes passion, neither in the destruction of Ierusalem, neither other waies els, till miraculouslie in the daies of Iulian the Apostate, Anno Christi 365. This Apostate hauing in despite of Christ, ordained the Iewes to build vp and repaire their Temple of Ierusalem on the one part, and on the other part, hauing sent his Legats to offer Sacrifice in the chiefe Ethnick Temple of the Gentiles in Delphos, and to consult with that Oracle of Apollo there, God sent his thu^der from aboue,Cation, Chron, lib. 3 and earthquake from beneath, and thereby ouerwhelmed both those chiefe Temples about one time, so vtterlie, that to this day all the Iewish daylie Sacrifice of the one, and the abhominable Ethnick superstitions of the other, haue ceassed, and bene put to vtter confusion and desolation. But if (after the opinion of some learned men) this text doth mean in the original Hebrue, not the Abhomination to be put in Desolation, but contrarilie, a desolating and wasting Abhomination to be set vp; together also, with the taking away of the former and foresaid daylie Sacrifice: In this case appearinglie, the same date is not the lesse established: for who was a more horrible and wasting Abhomination, than was the foresaide Iulian, that blood-thirstie Apostate, together, with his detestable, idolatrous and magicall decrees, which publiklie he erected and set vp, to bring Christianisme to vtter desolation. So that howsoeuer this Abhomination be expounded, either passiuely, to be made desolate; as the Gentiles chiefe abhominable and idolatrous Oracle of Apollo at that time was made desolate, or actiuelie, that the Abhomination shuld make a wasting or desolation, and that that wasting Abhominatio^ shuld be then erected, as the abhominable Tyrant and Apostate Iulian was promoted Emperour, and his cruell decrees of persecution at that time set out: Euen alwaies in that verie same 365. yeare, all the foresaid accidents occurred: for, in that one year both first the foundations of the Iewish Te^ple

of daylie Sacrifice: as secondlie (in the passiue sense) the said Temple of the Ethnickes Abhominations in Delphos, were by thunder and earthquake both destroyed: as thirdlie (in the actiue sense) that abhominable Iulian, and his decrees for desolating and deuouring Gods seruants, were then set vp. Therfore, from this yeare of Christ 365. wee are commaunded to reckon 1335. years, which falles in An. 1700. And then (saith Daniel vers. 6) shall be the end of all wonders, euen the wonderous and great day of the Lord: But yet, as this Prophecie doth abridge the foresaid prophecie of Elias, so also Christs foresaid saying in Matthew, that came after this Prophecie,Mat, 24, 22, doth appara^tly abridge somwhat of this time: for the which, now we proceed to the last Prophecie in the Reuelat. Fourthlie therfore, it is reasoned in the former proposition, that euerie thundering Angell of three, contained 49. yeares, and then comes the great day of the Lord: and by the 12. Proposition, the first thundring Angel, began in An. 1541. to which ad thrise 49. yeares, which is 147. yeares: and so by that account, the latter day will fall in An. Christi 1688. Wherfore, appearinglie betwixt this 1688. yeare, according to the Reuelation, and the 1700 yeare, according to Daniel, the said latter day should fall. And for further confirmation hereof, there is a number put in the end of the 14. chap. of the Reuelation, which appears to be a date of the latter day: for that chapter altogether speaketh of the Lordes great haruest, and latter judgement. There (saith Iohn) The blood came out of the Wine-presse vnto the Horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and sixe hundred stades or courses: as if appearinglie, he would meane metaphoricallie, as wine may be thought to flowe from the presse, or the blood of slaine men in a fielde, to ascend to the horse bridles: so, aeternallie shall the torment of the wicked ascend, after that a thousand and sixe hundred yeares be accomplished: For, these Stades agree well to meane yeares, seeing a stade is that race or course, that one may be thought to run with one breath, before he begin to renewe his breath againe: as one yeare is that race or course, that the Sunne maketh in a circuit, before he begin to renewe his circuit againe. Nowe, counting

therefore, a thousande and sixe hundreth yeares, from the time that this was written, which was about the 97. yeare of Christ, as Eusebius in his Chronicle saith, or in the end of the raign of Domitian, as Irenaeus saith, which was in Anno Christi 99. The end of the count shall fall about the yeare of Christ 1697. or the yeare 1699. which is betwixt the saide terme 1688. and 1700. And so the difference of these dates is but small, and if the time of histories wer surely written and obserued, it may be thought, that the difference would bee either lesse, or vtterlie nothing at all.


15. PROPOSITION The 42. moneths,Dan. 7 25. Dan. 12 7 Ap. 11, 12 Apoc, 13. a thousand two hundred and threescore propheticall daies, three greate daies and a halfe, and a time, times, and a halfe a time mentioned in Daniel, and in the Reuelation, are all one date.
EVerie moneth among the Graecians, contained thirtie daies preciselie,lib. de emend. temp. as witnesseth Iosephus Scaliger, and so consequentlie, fourtie two monethes are aequall to a thousande two hundred and threescore daies. Also, three great daies and an halfe, are aequal to them for these reasons. First, by reckoning, because three daies and an halfe, after the propheticall manner (prooued in the first proposition) is three yeares and an halfe: and then counting (after the Graecian maner) twelue moneths in the yeare, and thirtie daies in euerie moneth, these three yeares and a halfe (called in the text, three daies and a halfe) will bee fourtie two monethes, or a thousand, two hundred and threescore daies just. Secondlie, they must be all one, for that in purpose they agree: for it is said, that the Antichristia^ beast,Apoc. 11.7. at his rising, slew the two Witnesses of God (which hereafter are prooued to bee the two Testame^ts) and their dead carcases (or naked letter) lay three daies and an halfe, and then were they reuiued, and at that time of their reuiving, come a gret decay on the Antichristian citie: So that both by this text, and other good reasons, it appeareth that these Witnesses of Gods trueth, lay dead and silent,

and their testimonie neither buried in our brests, nor ingraued in our harts, during al the daies of the Antichrist. And so the time of their lying dead, and the time of the Antichristes raigne to be all one date. Now, the time that they lay dead, is called three daies and an halfe, and the time that the Antichrist raigned, and oppressed Gods Church, is called 42 moneths: wherefore, three great daies and an halfe,Apoc. 11.2 Apoc. 13.5 are all one with 42. moneths, or 1260. daies: It resteth then, to prooue a time, times, and half a time, to be likewise aequall to them, which must needes be for these reasons. First, because it is said, (Cap. 12.6.) that the Woman (which hereafter is prooued to signifie the Church of Christ) fled into the wildernes, where she was nourished 1260. daies: And againe (verse. 14) it is saide, that shee fled away in the wildernesse, where shee was nourished for a time, times, and halfe a time. So then, a time, times, and halfe a time, and 1260. daies must bee both one. Secondlie, this time, times, and halfe a time, or three times and an halfe, correspondent with the foresaid three greate daies and an halfe, are aequall to 1260. daies for this cause. A time taken simplie and without figure, meaneth a yeare, as in Daniel, Nebucadnetzars seuen times that he remained a beaste,Dan, 4.13 20.29 are taken for seuen yeares: Then three times and an halfe, are three yeares and an half, which being counted, wil make 42. moneths or 1260 daies: And so finallie, for conclusion, seeing the raigne of the Antichrist, his blaspheming of God, and oppression of Gods Sainctes, the treading of spirituall Ierusalem vnder feet, the prophecying of Gods witnesse vnto the true and visible Church in humble maner, and their lying deade and silent, vnto the outwarde, visible pretended Church. And the flying of the Spouse and Church of Christ to the wildernesse, and becomming inuisible, by matters concurrent and adjunct, such as apparantlie must at one time begin together, continue together, and end together. Therefore, most necessarilie the dates that the text attributeth to their continuance, to wit, 42. moneths, 1260. propheticall daies, three great daies and an halfe, and a time, times, and halfe a time, must be all one date.



16 PROPOSITION. The 42. moneths, 1260 propheticall daies, three great daies and a halfe: And a time, times and halfe a time, signifieth euerie one of them, 1260 Iuliane yeares.
SEing these dates are prooued by the former proposition, to be aequall, therefore necessarilie what one is, al is, then we com to these 1260 daies, which we say, must needs be either vnderstood so manie natural dayes, or els so manie propheticall daies, which are prooued to bee yeares in the first proposition: But natural or common dayes they can not be, for these causes. First, when the prophetes in number, or great dates mean of natural dayes, they vse to adjoin the definition thereof, by morning and euening, defined in Gene. chap. 1. as Daniel doeth chap. 8. vers. 14. and 26. But that is not done here, this being a prophecie: and therfore, these ar not naturall and common daies, but consequentlie, are propheticall daies. Secondlie, it is not apparent, that so manie Prophets would haue written so much: for onlie a raigne of 1260 of common daies, which is but three yeare and a halfe, seeing manie cruell tyrantes and hereticall Emperours, that did raigne longer ouer Gods Church, were not prophecied of in particular, as Nero, Domitian, and others. Thirdlie, if these were naturall and common daies, then shoulde the Antichrist raigne, but 1260. common daies, which is three yeare and an halfe: but contrarilie, it is certaine, by the Revelation cap. 20.4.5. that the Antichristian beast had authoritie, and did raign at the least a thousand yeares, martyring the sainctes of God, and persecuting them that reuerenced not him and his marke, etc. but spirituallie raigned, and liued as true Christians these thousand yeares, and that the rest of the people should lie dead and drunken in his errours, vntill the end of these thousand years: and should not* while then, begin to rise in the firste resurrection, which is, to rise from their errors. So then consequently, these daies (which exceed 1000. yeares) cannot be 1260. of common daies, but 1260. propheticall daies, which are prooued by the first proposition to be 1260. yeares: and so apparantlie, the Antichrist raigning

mightily 1000. years: the re^nant, 260. years ar attributed to the falling and decreasing of his kingdom, making therby his whole raign 1260 yeares, to the which, seeing by the former proposition, three great daies and an halfe, or three times and an halfe is aequall, it must needes bee, that euery great day, or euery time, must not simplie signifie a common year, as Nebucadnetzars times did, but must signifie a prophetical time, or yeare,Dan, 4.13 20.29 prooued by the first proposition to be a year of years, or 360. years precisely. For co^firmation, wherof, it is to be vnderstood, that the first makers of times, to wit the Chaldaeans, Graecians and Astrologes in their directions do agree with this description of time: for they devide the Equinoctial into 360. degrees, and attribute a yeare for euery degree of their directions, wherby the whole time of the great revolution or direction of the whole Equinoctial, wil bee 360 years: and conseque^tlie, three of these great times and a halfe, or three times and a halfe, revoluing of the whole Equinoctial, will containe 1260. yeares. And so Daniel, writing in the Chaldee tongue to the Chaldaeans, and S. Iohn also writing in the greek tongue to the Graecians, observed their manner of counting times, as being a vulgar compt to them. But now, although it is prooved, these dates to be 1260. yeares: yet, forasmuch as 1260. of Graecian yeares, are but 1242. Iulian yeares, and 8. moneths, or there about: and 1260. Iulian years, are 1277. and an half of Graecian years, making therby, neer 18. years of difference. It rests therefore, to prooue what kind of yeares these be. These (we say) ar common Iulian years, for two causes: First, although the Graecian common year contained but 12. moneths, and 30. daies in every moneth, yet do they adjoin certain intercalar daies, which doth mak every year overhed to co^tain 12. moneths, fiue daies and a quarter, which is 365. daies and a quarter; and so co^sequently, ar ouerhead equal with our common Iulian year. Secondly, among the Hebrue Prophets, where a day is taken for a year, althogh the common year contain but 12. moneths, yet almost euery third yeare, they adjoined an intercalar moneth, by dobling the moneth Adar, which made their Hebrew years ouerhead aequall also with our Iulian years, as testifieth Ios. Scal. de emend. temporum. Hitherto are the difficulties of dates resolued: now followeth the resolution of the principal termes and matter.



17. PROPOSITION. The description of the throne of God in the fourth chapter, is not the description of the maiestie of God in heauen, but of his true religion, wherein he is authorised and sits in the throne among his holy elect on earth.
BEcause it is said in the text, that this throne is set in heauen: therefore, some thinks this to be a vision of Gods glorie in heauen, but that can no waies be for these reasons. First, because heauen, for the most part prophetically, is taken for Gods heauenly Elect or true Church vpon earth. Secondly, because it were superfluous curiositie for vs to know any farther of Gods heauenly estate, and glorie of his majestie, than the simple points of our salvation. Thirdly, because the Scripture testifies, that no pen can describe, nor wit comprehend, the glory of Gods majestie in heauen. Fourthly, because the foure Beasts and 24. Elders, who here are coherent members of his throne, confesseth them selues toApoc, 5, 9, 10 raigne vpon earth, and that Christ hath redeemed the^ with his blood. Fiftly, because it is said, that among them, even among these four beasts, arose aApoc. 6. 6. famine and dearth of Barley and Wheat. Therfore, this throne can not be Gods throne in heauen, but must needs be his throne vpon earth among his heauenly elect here: and consequently, are either his Church or true religion: but his Church is not properlie his throne and seate, but rather are these ouer whome hee sits. Therefore, this throne must needes be his trueth and true religion, wherein he sitteth, abideth, and making his residence, therein is authorised and inthronized here vpon earth, among his heauenlie elect servants.


18 PROPOSITION. The 24. Elders, are the 24. books of the old Testament, and (metonymice) all the true professors thereof.
THese 24. elders, being prooued by the former proposition to be vpon earth, because that the glory of the whol throne (whereof they are one coherent part) is vpon earth,

we say now farther, that they do represent the 24 bookes of the old testament for these reasons. First, ab officio, because these ancients are saide in theAp. 4, 10.11 text, to glorifie God day and night, and what thing in earth is God more glorified by, tha^ by his scriptures and holy writings? whereof these be the first. Secondly, because in name they do agree, for these 24. ar called the auncients, so are these 24. books called the old Testame^t. Thirdly in number they do agree, for these auncients ar 24. so there be 24. authentik books of the old Testament no minate by Ierome, in Prologo galeato. Fiftly, and finallie, what soever is spoken in the Reuelation, in name and behalf of any of the 24 Elders: The same shal ye find specially written in one of these 24. books of the old Testament, as particularly shall be noted in their dewe place of our principall discourse. As to the second part of this proposition, that vnder the name of these 24. books, both the true writers and true professors therof be metonymice included, it is certaine, otherwaies they could not say, that Christ hath redeemed them,Ap. 5 9, 10 and that they raigne vpon earth.


19 PROPOSITION. The foure beasts are the foure Evangelles with all the true writers and professors thereof.
THat these four beasts are on earth, is also proued by the 17. proposition, in respect the glorie of the whol throne (whereof they are one coherent part) is vpon earth. Wee say now farther, that they do represent the four Euangelles for these reasons. First ab officio, for that these foure beasts doeth here decore the throne, and neuerApoc, 4.8 ceased from praysing God day and night. And what thing on earth doth more adorne Gods true throne and Christian religion, then doeth these foure Euangelles and their true professors, who neuer cease from praising God continuallie? Secondly, they agree in number, for there be foure beastes; so are there foure Evangelles. Thirdly, in their particular and distinct titles or faces, they agree, hauing consideration of the custome of the auncients, that vsed for to intitle the

bookes according to the beginning thereof, as in Hebrue, Genesis is called Bereschith, becaus it beginneth Bereschith bara Elohim, etc. and such like other books: as wee also entitle our booke of lawes, Regiam Maiestatem, because it beginneth so. Then in comparison, the faces of these Beasts, are compared to the titles or beginnings of these bookes: because, as men or beasts are readiliest knowne and distinguished by their faces: so are bookes by their titles, and beginninges. And to come in particular; like as in the Reuelation, the Beasts, and in Ezechiel, their faces were, one like a man, another like a Lion, the third like a Bullocke, the fourth like an Eagle. So, of these foure Evangelists, Matthew begins his first face or leaf, at the Genealogie of Christ, as he is a man: and Marke begins his first face or leafe at the voice, crying (like a roring Lion) in the wildernesse, Prepare the vvay of the Lord, etc. And Luke beginneth his first face or leafe, at Zacharias offering incense (as it were a Bullocke) at the alter. And Iohn begins his first face, or leafe, at the high and diuine essence of Christs God head, flying so high in his stile, that he is compared to an Eagle. Fourthlie, in their order of prioritie, according as they first wrote, they agree with Ezechiels order, where the first was a Mans face, that is Matthew, who first of all wrote, and that in Hebrew. The second was a Lions face, and that is Marke, who was the second that wrote, and that in greek. The third in Ezechiel, is a Bullockes face, and that was Luke, who was the third that wrote, and that in Greek. The fourth was the Eagles face, who is Iohn, that wrote the fourth Euangell, and that in Greeke. And so the order of their first editions, agrees preciselie with Ezechiel his order. Fiftlie, their order of translation or edition in Greeke, doeth agree with the order that here Sainct Iohn (who wrote both in Greeke, and to the Greeke Churches) setteth them into: to wit, The Lion, Mark wrote first of all in Greek. The Bullocke, Luke wrote second in greek: Than was the mans face, that is, Matthewes Evangel, tra^slated in greek, who now is the third, and before was the first: Afterwards, last of all, the Eagle, Iohn (as before) wrote the fourth Euangel. And so correspondentlie, as Ezechiel, the hebrew Prophet, writing to the Hebrews, preferreth

Matthewes hebrew Euangell, for that it was first written. So Sainct Iohn, a Graecian Prophete, writing to the Graecians, spake of Matthewes greek Euangel, and setteth it in the third order, for that it came after both Markes and Lukes. Sixtlie, the precise time of their firste writing, and occasion why they did write these foure Euangelles, agreeth with the history and time of the foure first Scales, where their first comming is mentioned. For first, when the word of God passed out on the white horse in the first seale, betwixt the yeare of Christ 29. and 36. then (saith the text) one of the four beasts said, come and see, etc. that is, Matthew the Apostle, who came that time, and wrote his first Euangel in hebrew, exhibiting the same to be seen of the Iewes expresly, for conuerting the^, that Gods word of his new couenant might victoriouslie go out among them, to conquer and ouercome (as saith the text) Then, in the second seale, when S. Steuen and S. Iames were martyred, and greate persecution rose against the Church of God, viz. betwixt the 36. and 43. year of Christ, then (saith the text) the second Beast saith, Come and see: that is, the second Euangel was at that time set forth by Mark, to be seen and read, in comfort of the afflicted Church. Afterward, in the third seale, when hunger and dearth arose, betwixt the 43. and 50. year of Christ, the third Beast saith, Come and see, and this is Luke, whose Euangell came to light at that time, and was set forth to be seen, and also writeth of the same dearth, in his booke of the Acts of the Apostles. Lastly,Act, 11.28 in the fourth seale, when deadlie heresies arose against the Diuinitie of Christ, betwixt the 50. and 57. yeare of Christ. Then (saith the text) came the fourth Beast: and so indeed at that time did Iohn write the fourth Euangell, beginning at the description of Christs Diuinitie, expreslie against the said Heretiks. Seuenthly, these foure Beasts wings, eies, and all their other tokens and circumstances, contained both in Ezechiels Prophecie, and here in the Reuelation, doeth so properlie agree with the foure Euangelists, that they cannot be so conuenientlie attributed to anie other, as shal be shewed at length in the principall Treatise. Eightlie, it appeareth by Hierome and others learned, that these indices and tokens, so aptlie

agreeing to these foure Euangelists, and to their faces, haue confirmed the ancient Fathers of the Church, both to receiue these foure Euangelles true and certaine, as also to repell manie false Euangelles, written in the name of Thomas, Matthias, Bartholomaeus, and other Apostles. Also the Evangels of Basilides,Luk. 1.1 Apelles, and Nicodemus. For Luke testifieth, that manie pretended to write Euangelles. Then certainlie, seeing there could not, nor cannot redounde to the Church of God so greate a commoditie, by interpreting these foure Beastes anie other waies, we haue great occasion, by all these aforesaid reasons, to repose vs also vpon this interpretation. As to the seconde part of this proposition, that vnder the name of these foure Beastes or four Euangels, both the writers and the professors thereof are metonymice included: it is certaine, otherwise (as in the discourse of the former proposition is declared) they could not say, that Christ hath redeemed them, or yet that there aroseApoc. 5.9. Apoc. 6 6 famine among them, for neither can that redemption, nor such famine properly convene to any but to men.


20 PROPOSITION. Gods Temple, although in heauen, is also taken for his holy Church among his heauenly Elect vpon earth, and metonymice for the whole contents thereof.
IN figuratiue speakings, heauen is taken for Gods holie Elect vpon earth, whome hee hath preordained to inherite heauen, as is alreadie shewed by the 17. proposition, where, by the throne of God in heauen, is meaned his trueth and true religion in earth among his heauenlie Elect here: So in this place also we say, that Gods Temple in heauen, is more properlie his Church among his heauenly Elect vpon earth, than among the glorified bodies in heauen: for that glorified number, called theApo. 21.22. new Ierusalem, ar said properly, to haue no distinct Temple among them, for Iohn saith thereof, Et templum non vidi in ea, etc. I saw no temple therein, etc. So, no Temple being there, this Temple properlie must be among Gods heauenlie Elect vpon earth, and consequently his holie and true Church. As to the second part of this proposition, it agreeth

verie well with Christs speaking, saying of the material Temple, Qui iurat in altari,Matth. 23 20.21. iurat in eo and in omnibus qui super illud sunt, and quicunque iur auerit in templo, iur at in illo et in eo qui habitat in ipso: Whosoeuer sweareth by the altar, sweareth by it and by al things vpon it, and vvhosoeuer sweareth by the Temple, sweareth by it, and by him that dwelleth in it. Euen so likewise, vnder the name of this spiritual Temple, is not onely meant Gods true Church among his heauenlie Elect vpon earth, but also is meaned metonymice the whole contentes thereof, to wit, Gods truth and true religion; yea, (although vnproperlie) euen the verie Majestie of God himselfe, because he dwelleth in his Church, and they in him: for proofe whereof, though Iohn saith first, I saw no temple therein, because ther is no distinct Church properlie, where all is the Church, yet doeth ^e subjoyne immediatlie, Dominus enim Deus omnipotens templum eorum est and Agnus: For the Lord God almightie, and the Lambe are the temple of it: calling the Deitie to be their Church that are glorified, or rather to them in stead of a Church; although more properlie the Deitie is the thing contemplate, not the Temple it selfe. From this Temple in this sense,Ap. 14.15.17. that is from the majesty of God, ar said to go out the last Angels of Gods great haruest and latter judgment, to gather in his Elect, and to destroy the wicked. And so the Temple of God in heauen, is properlie taken for his heave^lie elect Church vpon earth, and for their true doctrine, profession, and religion: yea, and (although improperlie) euen for the Deitie it selfe. Hereupon followeth this corollar, agreeable with al the former senses: that when this Temple is said to be open, then it meaneth Gods true Church to be visible, his trueth and true religion preached and opened vp; and finally, the Majestie of God to be knowne, and reuealed by that preaching of his trueth. And when againe, that Temple is closed or filled with fume, it signifieth Gods true Church to lurke, and become inuisible, his trueth, and true religion, and knowledge of the Deitie and diuine Majestie to bee obscured, darkened, and closed vp. As in confirmation hereof, it is saide,Apo, 15.5.8 That the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimonie was open in heauen, and the seuen Angelles of the last plagues come out of the

Temple, and afterwardes no man was able to enter into the Temple againe till these seuen plagues were fulfilled: which agreeth preciselie with the euent after all the former senses, to wit, that the true Christian Churches, professors of Christ his true testimonie, wer visible and patent, their true doctrin and Christian religion opened vp, and the majestie of God thereby made known, and manifested in the daies of the Apostles: and afterwards, vpon neglecting their testimonie, and vpon the contempt of the manifestation and opening vp thereof, there proceeded all the whole plagues of the seuen last ages, during the which, the fume of Gods wrath was so great, that by the Antichrist he made his true Church lurke and become invisible, and his truth and true religion, and knowledge of the divinitie to be obscured and darkened: so that none might visiblie enter or haue accesse to the knowledge therof, til by the seuenth and last plague, that the Antichrists kingdome began to fall, and then after 1260. yeares darknesse, was that true Temple of God opened and made manifest, as is plainlie saide in theApoc. 11.19 seuenth Trumpet or age. So then, this Temple, the opening closing, and opening againe thereof, agrees so well with the Ecclesiasticall historie in all points after the former senses, that we must conclude, by this Temple of God in heauen, to bee meaned his holie Church among his heauenly elect vpon earth, with the whol contents and pertinents thereof, to wit, his trueth, true religion, and (after a maner) the verie Deitie it selfe.


21 PROPOSITION. The two witnesses mentioned (Reue. 11) are the two Testame^ts, and (metonymice) the whole true professors thereof.
THis is prooued by their number, name, and office, and by the whole circumstances of the text. First, by their number, they are two witnesses: so are they two Testaments. Secondlie, by their name they are called Witnesses: so in that language of Latine, wherein they haue bene vsed most, these 1200. years and more, they are called Testamenta fro^ the word Testis, which is to say a Witnesse, as being witnesse of Gods wil:

all other doubtfull testimonies of men being refused, as testifieth Christ, saying,Ioh, 5, 34, 39 I receiue not the testimonie of men, etc. But afterwarde hee saieth, Search the Scriptures, for they are they vvhich testifie of me. Thirdlie, concerning their office, (as Oliues) they annoint vs Kings and Priestes to God: And (as Lanterns) they illuminate vs with knowledge of the true way of saluation. So that who (as the text saith) that woulde peruert them, God shall consume him with the aeternall fire of hell; therfore, it is said, Omnis sermo Dei-ignitus,pro, 30, 5 and clypeus est sperantibus in se, ne addas quidquam verbis illius: Euerie vvorde of God is fierie, and he is a shield to those that trust in him, put nothing vnto his vvordes. Lastlie, the whole circumstances of the text (which here for breuitie are omitted, and at amplified in the principall Treatise) doe so harmonicallie agree with these two Testaments, that necessarilie, they bee the two Witnesses here made me^tion of. As concerning the witnessing of men, because it is said, Omnis homo mendax: Euerie man is a liar:psal. 116, 11 Rom, 3, 4, Ioh, 5.34 And againe, Non ab homine testimonium accipio: I receiue not the record of man: Therfore, no men are simplie to be accepted in place of these Witnesses. Yet notwithstanding, so farre as men doe professe these Testamentes, and doe purely preach the simple doctrine thereof, in that case these men, are metonymice included vnder these Testamentes, for that their worde is not their owne worde, but the worde of these two Testaments.


22 PROPOSITION. The Woman clad with the Sunne (chap. 12.) is the true Church of God.
THis is prooued; first, by the Song of Salomon, where Salomon, bearing the figure of Christe, who descended of him: his beloued Woman and Spouse, throughout al that Canticle beareth the figure of Christes Church. Secondlie, spirituall Hierusalem, which is Christes Church by diuerse Scriptures, is also called Christes Spouse in the Reuelation.Apo. 21. Ephes. 5^ 23 Thirdlie, bodilie marriage, is by Sanct Paule called a Symbol, and a Sacrament of the vnion of Christ and his Church: whereby the husbande representeth Christ, and the Woman

espoused representeth the Church. Fourthlie, in the whole Scriptures, idolatrie being called spiritual whordome, necessarily the true worshipping of God is represented by perfect Spousage, and the true Church that worshippeth him, is his Spouse, and so the Church of God is figured by a Woman. Last of all, the whole tokens of this Woman, contained in the text so viuelie and perfectlie agree with Christes Church (as is declared in the principall treatise) that necessarilie wee must conclude, this Woman to meane the true Church of God.


23 PROPOSITION. The Whoore,Apoc. 14, 16, 17.18 Cap. 19. who in the Reuelation is stiled spirituall Babylon, is not reallie Babylon, but the verie present Citie of Rome.
IN the former proposition was described the holie Spouse of Christ, here is to bee described the filthie Whoore of Sathan, there that Ladie, who is adorned with the Sunne, Starres, and heauenlie vertues: here that Adultresse, who glories in golde, siluer, precious stones, and worldlie pleasures: there shee, who is persecuted by the Dragon, here she vnto whome the Dragon doeth giue authoritie: There she, who is chaced into the wildernes, and hath no lodge to hide her in; here she who impireth aboue all people, and is the Metropolitane citie of the world. And finallie, seeing in al things this Whoore, or whoorish Babylon, is contrarious to Christes holie Spouse, lette vs, and all Christians trie her out, as our detestable and deadlie enemie, and see what Babylon she is. We say then, that this Babylon, is not that reall Babylon of Chaldee, but Rome, for these reasons. First, for that this Babylon is calledApoc, 17, 5 mysterium Babylon, that is to say, mysticall or figuratiue Babylon: Therefore, it is not Babylon it self in Chaldee. Secondlie, that olde Babylon in Chaldee was destroied long before Sa^ct Iohn wrote this, as was prophecied by Esay, by Ieremic, and by Dauid, and neuer rose to authoritie: But this Babylon, euen when Sanct Iohn wrote, raigned ouer theEsa, 1^, 17 Ier 51, 11 psal 136 Apoc, 17, 18 Kinges of the earth: Therefore, it is not olde Babylon, but meaneth Rome, which at that time, and a thousand and foure

hundred yeares after that, had Empire ouer the whole earth. Thirdlie, this mysticall Babylon, is said by the text, to  be set vpon seuen hilles, and therefore it is Rome,Apoc. 17.9. which is called Septicollis, as Virgil testifieth, saying,
Septemque una sibi muro circumdedit arces:Virgil, lib. 2 Geor, and lib. 6. aeneid.Within the vvalles of that citie, co^tained ar seuen hilles hie.
And Propertius saith,
Septem urbs alta iugis, toti quae praesidet orbi,On hilles seuen that citie stands, that hath empire aboue al lands.
Againe, Sanctparte, 2, tra. 5, Epist, 59 and part, 3, tract, 8, Epist. 30 Ierome libro Epistolarum, in diuerse places approoueth the same: and Eutropius in his Historie, and Publius Victor de descriptione vrbis Romae, and diuerse other doe name these seuen hilles, this way, as Palatinus, Coelius, Ianiculus (otherwise called Capitolinus) Aventinus, Quirinalis, Viminalis, and Esquilinus. Fourthlie, because the manner of Families, Kinges, and Kingdomes, is to entitle themselues by the name of the first Conquerours, or most notable personnes, as the whole Romane Emperours were called Caesares, according to the name of the firste Emperour Iulius Caesar. So Rome hauing obtayned the Monarchie ouer the whole kingdomes of the earth, whereof the Babylonians were the first Conquerours, therefore, justlie is called Babylon, as succeding in her place. Fiftlie, per Icona, scu  a simili, for that in idolatrie, pride, couetousnesse, and exceeding crueltie against the Sanctes of God, Rome was nothing inferiour to Babylon. Sixtlie, becaus by vse and custome of ancient  and learned Writers, Rome is verie often called Babylon, as by. Ierome, lib. Epistolar.part 2 trac^ 6. Epist, 80 ^ part. 2. tract 5. Epi. 9 8 part. 3. trac^ 8. Epist, 30 Also by Tertullian in his booke against the Iewes, and lib. 3. against Marcion. And for final confirmation hereof, al they that would prooue S. Peter to haue remained at Rome, say, that by Babylon in the end of the firste Epistle of Peter, is meant Rome, from whence he then wrote, as Ierome saith, in his Prologne vpon Marke, in these wordes, Ec Petrus in Epistola prima sub nomine Babylonis, figuraliter Romam significans: And Peter in: his first Epistle, vnder the name of Babylon, figuratiuelie signifying Rome.
And so for assured certe^ty, this whorish and mystical Babylon.

is verilie Rome. But some seeking sophistical subterfuges wil say, that this Babylon meaneth olde Rome, and not this present Citie of Rome, that now is, as though both were not one, euen builded both within one wall, and vpon these selfe same seuen mountaines: and finallie, one selfe same towne, both in name, seate, and gouernement, and in all thinges else, onelie that where one house was ruined, destroyed, or burned by the Gothes, and other enemies, another within the same walles is builded vp againe. Of these then it is to be demaunded, if olde Rome hath bene so destroyed, that it is not to be founde, or that neuer inhabitant hath dwelt in it since that time, neither euer so much as a candle hath shined therein hitherto, as is prophecied of Babylon in the Reuelation, chap. 18, But the contrarie beeing true: Therefore, it is not onlie this olde Rome: but all whollilie Rome that is called Babylon, and as yet, resteth to be that way for euer destroyed.


24 PROPOSITION. The great ten-horned beast, is the whole bodie of the Latine Empire, whereof the Antichrist is a part.
FOr proofe hereof, the moste notable tokens assigned by the text to this Beast, doeth onelie agree to the Latine or Romane Empire:Apoc. 17.18 For firste (saieth the Text) the Woman that sate vpon this Beast, is the great Citie, that sitteth ouer the Kinges of the earth: So the chiefe seate and citie of the Latine or Romane Empire, is that great citie Rome, that had Empire ouer all the kingdomes of the earth. Secondly, saith Daniel,Dan. 7 17. there shal foure cheif kingdomes arise vpon earth, vnder the figure of foure beastes: Whereof (by plaine interpretation hee saith) the fourth beast that had these ten horns,Dan. 7.23 is the fourth kingdome of the earth: And so it is, that the firste greate kingdome or Monarchie being of the Babylonians: The seconde, of the Medes and Persians: The thirde, of the Graecians. The fourth and laste, is certainlie the Monarchie of the Latines or Romanes: and therefore, that fourth beaste

which both there in Daniel, and here in Iohns Reuelatio, hath ten hornes, must necessarilie be the Romane or Latine Empire. Thirdlie, this Beast, whereon the said whoorish woman or Babylonical citie sitteth, hath seuen heads, which the textApoc. 17 ^ interpreteth to be seue^ mountaines: Euen so Rome, the chief city or Metropolitane seat of the Latine Empire, is set vpon seuen hilles, nominated and proued in the third reason of the former proposition. Fourthlie, there be here seuen kings (saith the text) that is, seuen sorts of royal gouernme^ts:Apoc. 17. for a King is oft taken for a whole race of Gouernors of one sort, as in Daniel cap. 7. So had Rome seuen royal gouernments, to wit, Kinges, Consulles, Dictators, Trium vires, Tribuns, Emperours, and Popes: Of which (saith the text) fiue ar fallen, one is, and another is not yet come: Euen so was it indeede, that before S. Iohns daies, those fiue gouernments, viz. the Kinges, Consulles, Dictators, Trium-uires, and Tribuns wer past, and in his daies raigned the Emperours, and the Popes were not come to the gouernement while after his dayes. Fiftlie, (saieth the text) this Beaste that Sainct Iohn did see, was, and is not, and shall rise of lowe estate, and shall goe into decay: Was (saith hee) because the Romane Empire, and gouernment of Emperours, was before that time, that hee wrote: Is not (saieth hee) because the time wherein hee wrote, the Emperour Domitian was dead, and the Empire waked, for the nexte Emperour Nerva Cocceius was not yet chosen, as appeareth by Irenaeus, who saieth, that Sainct Iohn sawe these visions, in the end of the raigne of Domitian. Then (saith hee) Hee shall rise of lowe estate: Euen so arose there a new Emperour, not of the noble ancient blood of Romanes, but of base estate, to wit, the saide Nerva Cocceius, who was the first straunger, or Barbarian Emperour: This (saith hee) shall goe into decay: that is, shall goe shortlie into decaie: for otherwise simplie, all fleshe must goe at some time into decay: And so was it indeed, that this Nerua goeth shortlie into decaie: For hee liued Emperour but one yeare, three monethes, and nine daies, and then he died. Againe, the Beaste (saith that same text) Was, and is not, and yet is, that is to say, there were Emperours before Sainct Iohn wrote, none when he wrote, and

yet when he wrote the Empire stood, and the gouernment by Emperours was vnabolished: for, incontinent vpstart Nerua, and manie moe Emperours after him: so that the Empire might be said at that time, in a manner not to bee, and in a maner to be. Sixtlie (saith the text) the Beaste that was, and is nor, is euen the eight, and is one of the seuen: and that meaneth, that that royal gouernment of the Empire by Emperours, which was immediatelie before S. Iohn wrote, and vaked when hee wrote, by the decease of Domitian, that same gouernment shal be the eight gouernment, and was also one of the said seuen gouernmentes: and euen so was it, that after the Romane Emperours (who was the sixt gouernement) were abolished, by the Hunnes, Gotthes, and Vandalles, and thereafter, Rome seuenthly gouerned be the Popes, then eightlie, start vp by Charlemaign a newe race againe of Emperours, intituled of Germanes and Romanes. So that euidentlie the Emperours wer the eight estate that gouerned Rome, and were also one of the former seuen, euen the sixt gouernment thereof, as is alreadie said. Seuenthlie (saith the text) one of these seuen heads receiued a deadlie wound, and that deadlie wound was healed: So the chief of the seuen gouernments of the Romane Empire, to wit the Estate of Emperours was cut off and abolished by the Hunnes, Gotthes, and Vandalles, and vaked from the daies of Augustulus, Anno Christi 475. vntil that Charlemaign came, in Anno 806. At which time, the estate of Emperours was of new repaired, and whollie made vp again. Eightlie, this beast hath ten crowned hornes, that is, ten kinges (saith the text) which when Sainct Iohn wrote, had not receiued their kingdoms, but should receiue their kingdome at an houre after the beaste, and then (saith he) shal they giue their power againe to the Beast, and all at once shall make warre with the Lambe: but at length (saith he) these shal hate and destroy that harlot beast: Euen so came it to passe of the Romane Empire, that long after S. Iohns daies, when that old Empire began to fal, the estate of Emperours to be abolished, (as is said) immediately thereafter sprang thereof ten Christian Kinges, who againe gaue their power, assistance and fortification, to the next Gouernours

of the new Latine Empire, which was to the Pope, authorising him, as their supreame heade, with whome they concurred, fighting against Christ, as hereafter shall be shewed: But at length shal these ten Christian Kinges, destroy that spiritual harlot and idolatrous Empire, as (praised be God) England and Scotland, with some others haue alreadie begun. Ninthlie, that beast is the Latine Empire, and the chiefe seate thereof is Rome: because in the text, both the plain name of the Latine Empire is figuratiuely expressed, and the figuratiue name of Rome is plainlie expressed. As to the first, howe the plaine name of the Latine Empire, which is (...), is figuratiuelie expressed, read the 29. proposion following.Apoc. 17.5 As to the second, how the name of Babylon (which is plainly said to be the figuratiue name, that was written in the Womans forehead that sate on the beast) is the perfect, certaine and accustomed figuratiue name of that citie Rome, that sitteth ouer the Latine Empire, is most euident by the former proposition. Finallie, all the rest of the smaller circumstances of this ten-horned beast, contained in the text, doe so properlie and fitlie agree with the Latine Empire (as in the principall treatise shall be found at length) that we must necessarilie conclude, that selfe same Beast to meane and signifie the whole Romane Empire.
Resteth then the second part of this Proposition, to proue the Antichrists Kingdome to be a part of the greate Romane or Latine Empire. Seeing then it is prooued, that this whole ten-horned beast signifieth the whole Romane Empire. Necessarilie, it that one part of this beast signifieth, must also be a part of the Romane Empire: But one part of this beast signifieth the Antichrist: Therefore, the Antichrist must needes be a part or me^ber of the whole Romane Empire. That one parte of this beast, to wit, the litle blasphemous horne thereof in Daniel, and the blasphemous mouth therof in the Reuelation, doeth signifie the Antichrist: it is certaine by the tokens set downe in the text, wherein it is said, that that blasphemousApo. 3, 5 6 mouth andDan. 7.25 horne, should speake proud blasphemie against God, and against his Sanctes, and against them that bee in heauen: And should chaunge times, and lawes, and should make warre against

Gods Sanctes, and ouercome them, and subdue them vnder his tyrannie, for the space of 1260 propheticall daies, prooued to be yeares in the 1. and 16. proposition. So this muste necessarily be the Antichrist, that hath so wicked and so long a raigne: And consequentlie, the Antichrist must rise of the Romane Empire, and be a member thereof. Secondlie, his raigne must bee of that Romane Empire, for that he must sit in spiritual Babylon, which by the former proposition, is proued to be Rome. And so Rome should become the den of all diuelishnesse and Antichristian errours, as in the principall Treatise vpon the 17. and 19. cap. shal be shewed.


25 PROPOSITION. The two horned Beast, is the Antichrist and his kingdome, it alone.
PAule describing the2, The, 2 Antichrist and his kingdome, among certaine speciall notes to knowe him by, giues manie of these same tokens of this two horned beast: to wit: here in Iohn,Apo, 13, 11 this Beast hath two hornes like the Lambe: that is, double power, spirituall and temporal: so there in Paul, he sheweth himselfe to be like God,2, The, 2, 4, 9 and hath te^porall power, wherby he is aduersarie to Gods seruants: and spirituall power to work wonders, albeit lying wonders. Secondly (saith Iohn) he shall speak like the Dragon: so saith Paule, hee shall come by the working of Sathan, etc. Thirdlie, (saith Iohn,) hee wrought great wonders and signs,Ap. 13, 13, 14 and deceiueth men therby: So in Paule, he came with power, and signes, and lying wonders, and in all deceaueablenesse of vnrighteousnesse. Whereby (doubtlesse) that man of sinne, and sonne of perdition, euen the verie Antichriste, whome Paule there described, is this very same two-horned beast, mentioned here by Iohn. And for confirmation hereof, the properties of this two-horned beast (cap. 13) are the selfe same properties of the false Antichristian Prophete (cap. 19.) For this two-horned Beaste is saide toAp, 13, 14, 15 worke greate miracles, before the first tenne-horned Beaste, and to deceiue them that dwelt vpon the earth, whome hee caused to worshippe the image

of that firste beaste and to receiue his marke. Euen so, the false Prophete, which muste needes be the Antichrist, is saide alsoApoc. 19.20 to woorke miracles before that firste beaste, whereby he deceiued them that receiued that beasts marke, and worshipped his Image. Wherefore necessarilie, as of this two horned beaste, and of that false Antichristian Prophet, all the tokens be one: so must also consequently they them selues be both one.


26 PROPOSITION. The Pope is that only Antichrist, prophecied of, in particular.
AMongst the pluralitie of Antichristes, spoken of in the Scripture to be generallie in all ages: there is one particular Apostatik kingdome, who is the chief and principall of al Antichrists, and is that great Antichrist, whom Paul calles the man of sinne, and sonne of perdition, adversary to God, and an extoller of himselfe aboue all that is called God, with diuers other epithets conteined 2. The. 2. Leauing therefore al other smaller Antichrists, this great Antichrist and chiefe heade of all Antichrists, is he whome here we haue to trie out, whom (for remoouing of all doubts) wee say cannot be the Mahomet, neither any Turk, Iewe or Ethnick. First, because it is not apparant, that the spirit of God, wold trauel so carefully, to point them out to vs, by dark mysteries, and secreet signs to be the Antichrist, who when they come, doe with most cleare confession graunt and aduouch the^selues to be Antichristians, as all Iewes, Turks and Ethnicks do plainly confesse: and therfore their owne confession is sufficient to knowe them by, and al farther secreet tokens, wer superfluous. Then must he needs be a latent and not a patent enemie, that the spirite of God so carefully points out: and so no Turk, Iewe, nor Pagan; yea, no plaine Wolfe must he be:Mat, 7, 15 and Act, 20, 19 but a Wolfe in a Lambs skin, even an Antichrist vnder the name of a Christian. Secondly, he must sit, saith Paul, in the Church of God:2, Thess, 2, Therefore an alledged Christian must he be: for no Turke, Iewe nor Pagan hath other sitting, than in their owne Temples: these be not Gods temples, onely the societie of Christians is Gods temple,

of their nomber therefore must the Antichrist call himselfe: and among them must he, sit, as a pretended Christian: and consequently must he be no Iew, Turk, nor Ethnick. Thirdly, apart must his raigne be of the Latin Empyre, as is prooved (Proposition 24.) and one pretending friendship thereunto, yea, hee must sit in that spiritual Babylon prooued to be Rome: Then must he not be the Mahomet, nor any Turk, or other Ethnik, but a pretended Christian Prince. Finally, and in a word, this Antichrist is no Turk, Iew, nor avouched Ethnik, because on the one part, all the notes and tokens of the Antichrist, giuen vs by the scriptures, are most evident properties of the Pope, and doth altogether agree to him. And on the other part, the special points of doctrine and conversation, of Christ and his Apostles, ar altogether co^troverted into his perso^: Him therfore shal we proue, both by the synthesis or sympathie, that his properties hath with the Antichristiane tokens, as by the antithesis or antipathie, that hee hath with Christ, to be the very selfe greate. Antichrist prophecied of in particular.
 And first, to account his most notable Sympathies with  the Antichrist. Rome (vnder the name of Babylon) is the  Antichrists seate: so in Rome doth the Pope sitte. In the2 Thess, 2, lib. 5 sexti can. Foelicis ^n gloss. and ^ib. 3. sexti. ^it. 16. can. periculoso. Church of God must the Antichrist sit: over Christian Churches doth the Pope sit, professing himselfe their supreame head. The Antichristian kingdome must be a part of the Latine Empyre, and thereof must it proceed (Proposition 24.) so is the Popes kingdom, a part of the Latin or Romane empyre,  for in Rome doth hee sit. The Antichrist (who is meere impiety and wickednes) was transported figuratiuely, as in a close vessel, to the land of Shinar, which is Babylon, where he shuld haue his dwelling builded, Zacharie 5. So in figuratiue Shinar  or Babylon els prooued to be Rome, doth the Pope dwell and remaine. Christ shewes that there shall arise false Antichristian Prophets,Matt, 24, 26 who shal say, there Christ is in the desert, or he is in the secreet places etc. So the Pope and his Clergie saith, that there Christ bodelie is that hoste, which sometime they carrie in procession in desert and barre^ fields, to bles the fruits thereof; at other times they close it vp again in their

secreet box beside their Altars. The Antichrist speaking lyes  through hypocrisie, shal1, Tim, 4, 3 forbid al his to marrie, and shall commaund abstinence from certaine meates: so doth the Pope vnder hypocrisie, and lying pretext of chastity and abstinence, forbid al his Clergie to marrie, and to eat flesh in Le^t, or on frydaies. The false Antichristian Prophets shall priuilie  bring in damnable errours, thereby denying the Lorde that redeemed them, and through couetousnes, they shall with fained wordes make marchandise of Christians (as saith Peter) and shall sell their soules, as saith the Reuelation: so hath the Popes Clergie brought in pardons and indulge^ces,2. pet 2 Apoc, 18, 13 whereby they promise remission of sinnes and the kingdome of heaven, priuilie and in effect therby, denying Christ to be their onely redeemer, and so haue they through covetousnes vnder fained pretext of religio^, made marcha^dise of poore Christians, selling by such deuillish wares, even their soules to the Devill. The Antichrist the son of perdition shall  extol himselfe against al that is called God,2. Thes, 2 Dist, 96 can, satis euidenter so doth the Pope style himselfe God, and causeth Emperours and Kinges to kisse his feete. And Pope Alexander the third trod with his feete vpon the neck of the Emperour Frederick Barbarossa, his clergie singing, Super Aspidem and Basiliscu^ ambulabis et Leonem and Draconem pedibus conculcabis: In Daniel that blasphemous  Antichristian horne, that sprang of the fourth monarchie,Dan, 7.25 and in the Revelation, that blasphemous mouth that was giuen to the Romane beast, had the saints of God vnder his hand,Ap, 13, 5. impyring over them and persecuting them 1260 propheticall daies, prooved by the first and 16. Propositions, to be 1260 yeeres: so the Popes kingdome which is of the Romane impyre, hath had power and authoritie over al Christians, and of these that were most true Christians, such as Iohn Hus, Hieronymus Pragensis, Hieronymus Sauonarola, and of many thousa^d mo, hath he bene a persecuter these 1260. yeeres, even from the time that Sylvester the first,Dist, 96 and first Pope vnmartyred receiued his three crowns and large patrimonie of the Emperour Constantin, as is alledged betwixt the yeere of Christe 300. and 316. to the year of God 1560. which time the notable decay of his kingdom began. The Antichrists co^ming (saith




Paule) is by the working of Sathan,^. Thes, 2 with all power, and signs, and lying woonders in all deceiuablenesse. So of Popes, 22. knowne (saieth Platina and others) came to the Popedome, being abhominable Necromancers, and exercised their mightie imperiall power ouer whole Christianitie, subdewing and ouerwhelming the most mightie Princes and Emperours thereof: And whereas Paule saith, that hee shall worke with signes and lying wonders in all deceiuablenesse: So hath the Pope aduanced his credite, deceiuing the simple sorte, by his fained fables, and alledged miracles of the Legendary, and de vitis Patrum, and by such juglings, as the holie blood of Wales, and the Maiden of Kent in England, and the fained miracles of Lauret in Scotland; and latest of all, by such as the Spanish Goddesse, with her fiue bloodie wounds, Prioresse of the Abbay of L'Annunciata, in this last 1588. year of Christ, now prisoner there, as a deceitfull witch. And shortlie all the whole indices and tokens of the Antichrist, contained in the Reuelation, (beside these before specified,) doe most perfitelie agree to the Pope, his seate, kingdome, and Cleargie, as shall bee particularlie discussed in our principall Discourse, beeing here for breuitie omitted. It resteth then to shew a certaine of the notable contrarieties betwixt Christe and his alleadged Vicar, the Pope, whereby he shall be found not his Vicar, but his aduersarie: yea, not a Christian, but the Antichrist.
 And first (saith Matthew) Christ came so soberlie, and so meekelie,Matt, 12 20 that he woulde not haue broken a bruised reede. The Pope came proudlie, ouerwhelming the most mightie Empires: Hee changed the kingdome of France from Chilperike the lawfull king, to Pipin the Popes confederate: he extinguished the king of the Longobards, and broks their kingdo^e to this day: he bereft the Exarchat of Ravenna from the Emperour of the Orient, he trode with his feete vpon the neck of Frederike Barbarossa, Emperor of the Occident. Christ wold not worship the Deuil for al the kingdoms of the world, as testifieth Matthew: Twe^ty two Popes bound the^selues slaues to the Deuil for euer, to be made Popes, as testifieth Platina and other  vnsuspected writers. ChristMatt, 21, 12 casteth out the merchandes

out of the Temple, the Pope establisheth his marchands in the Temple to sell his Pardons, Masses, and Indulgences. Christ washed his poore Disciples feete: The most rich and  mightie Emperours kisse the Popes feete,Iohn. 13, 5 and he doth tred on their neck. Christ honoured marriage in Cana of Galilee, had  someIohn 2 Mat. 8 14 1 Cor. 7, 2 married Apostles, and commanded all to marry that culd not liue chast: The Pope forbiddeth his Clargie to marie, though they were never so filthie whoremongers. Christ  forbiddeth whoredome of al kinds. Of Popes, 13. were adulterers, three were common brothellers, foure were incestuous harlots, eleuen were impoisoned with vile Sodomie, seve^ wer whormongers and erecters of brothel houses. Finally one was a whore, and died of childe in open procession; and all these are named in their own hystories. God forbiddeth  that the price of a harlot beDeut 23 18 offered in his sanctuarie. The Pope receiued of everie whoore in his brothels weeklie, a Iulian pennie, which wil amount som yeers, to 40000 Ducats  by yeere. Christ payed tribute to the Emperour: the Pope bereft the Emperour of both landes and tribute within Italie.Mat. 17, 27 Christ had not of propertie, so much mony of his own, as to  pay his tribute pennie.Mat. 17.27, The Popes propertie is said at this hour to be 18000. Ducats every day:Palmerius also Pope Iohn of Avinion left in store 25. millions of gold. Christ grants libertie of all  meats, saying that nothing enters in the mouth that defiles the soul, and commanding vs to eate of al thing, that isMat, 15.11 1. Cor. 2 10 verse 25 solde in the market. The Pope forbideth fleshe in Lent, Friday, and other his fasting times. God misliketh the obseruing of daies, moneths, and years.Galat. 4.10 The Pope commaunded to obserue his festiual and holie dayes, septuageses, Lentes, and years of Iubilees, and indictions. Christ is the onely Mediatour betwixt God and man. The  Pope makes and canonizeth his own saints,1 Tim. 2, 5 whome he cals Mediatours betwixt God and vs. Christ is both God and man: The Pope is styled, neither God nor man. The fowls of the aire,In prologo Clementina rum in glosstore haue their nests and beasts haue their dennes (saith Christ) but the Son of man hath not where to repose his head, the Pope hath store of Towres, castels, and princely pallaces.Mat. 8.20 Christ threatneth  Peter for drawing his sword: the Pope vsurpeth both the te^porall  and spirituall sworde:Math, 26 52 for proofe whereof, Pope Boniface

the 8. shewe himselfe the one day in his pontifical apparel of a Bishop, the next day cled in armour as an Emperour, beating before him two swordes, proclaiming these words, Ecce duo gladii hic, Behold here the two swordes. God forbiddeth in hisExo. 20.4 second commandement, not onely the worshipping of Images, but also to make any so vile figures, to represent his so incomprehensible maiestie. The Pope and his Clergie, not onely make they vile images to represent God and his saints, but also, they command to reverence them, to come in pilgrimage bare-footed and bare-headed, kneeling before them, praying such prayers to them, as are intituled in their books; A prayer to the Image of Christ, a prayer to the crosse  of Christ,Deut 11 18 19.20 and such others. God hath comma^ded to engraue these ten commandements on the posts of our houses, and on all patent partes: yea, and in our hearts. The Pope and his Clergie leaues out the second commandeme^t, and to make them seeme ten, they devide the last commaundement into  two and teacheth them that way to the people. Christ commandsMat. 6.7, vs not to make much babling, nor oft repetitions of prayers as the Heathen. The Pope commaundeth to repeat over your prayers, as to say fiue Pater nosters, fiue Avees, and to say a Trental of Masses, which is 30. Masses, and so to obserue a number as the Witches do, and asLib. Meta. morph. Ovid saith of the Witch Medea in these wordes.

Verbaque ter dixit placidos facientia somnos,
Quae Mare turbatum, quae flumina concita, sistant
Thrise from her lips did wordes redounde, which moueth sleepe and slummering sound.
And staieth storms of roaring seas, and furious floods do set at ease.

And for better proofe hereof, they must haue beads to keep their cou^t with. And to speak briefly of their doctrin in one  worde, Christ teacheth a religion whollie in spirit and void of all externall ceremonies, except his two sacramentall seales. The Pope hath constitute a religion, consisting wholly in bodily rites, and ful of al external superstitions, partly Ethnike, partly Iewish, which Christ hath vtterly abolished. Finally,  both Christ was mocked with a crowne of thorns, and the

Pope contrarily honoured with a threfold imperial crowne. As also, Christ shed his blood once, that we might raign spirituallie. The Pope sheds our blood daylie, that he may raign temporallie. And so, although in al points of doctrine and conversation, Christ and he be altogether contrary, yet for the breuitie of this treatise, we must pretermit the rest at this present, trusting these foresaide to be sufficient to instruct the found judgment of him, whose hart God hath mollified: as to the Reprobate, the wordes of Christs owne mouth: yea,Luk. 16.31 the Lawe nor the Prophets, neither finally the rising of the dead to teach them, could any waies convert them. And yet, for the more superabundant certaintie of this matter, we wil also remoue certain doubts of Scripture, which might moue the simple sort (by adhearing to the literal sence,) to beleeue that al the Antichrists that were to come, were alredy come, and past in the daies of the Apostles; or that might any waies seeme to purge the Pope from being the Antichrist.
And first, where it is said in saint Iohn. These are the last daies, and ye haue heard that the Antichrist shall come: Euen now are there manie Antichrists, and again saith he,1. Iohn. 2.18 but this is the spirite of the Antichrist,1, Ioh 4 3 of vvhome ye haue heard that hee shuld come, and now he is in the world. It is to be answered hereunto, that the meaning of the first text is not, that that present time, but the whole age after Christ, is the last age and dayes of the world, in the which, the great Antichrist should come. And euen then, saith he, there were many Antichrists, not that he saith that the great Antichrist was any of the^, but rather, that he meaneth, that there were so many small Heretiks and Antichrists risen vp, that thereby the comming of the great Antichrist was porte^ded: for Paul maks this placeplain, where he speaks in expres words,2, The, 2 that the mystery of the Antichrists iniquity was euen then begun to work, but himselfe shuld not come, while he who held shuld yet hold stil a while, and then be devided or remoued out of the way: meaning that the mystery of his iniquitie, and spirit of his errours, was then begun to work in these small Antichrists, forerunners of the greate Antichrist, vnto whose errours (saith2. The. 2.12 hee) because the worlde hath attended, and hath left the spirite of veritie,

whereby they should haue bene saued: therefore, God shal send vpon them the efficacie of errors, that they may beleeue lies,2, The, 2 11 that is to say, God shall send the greate Antichrist to worke his miracles of lies, etc. As to the second text, it is not spoken of the person of the greate Antichrist, but plainly by the text is meant, of the spirite of his errours, or (as Paul calleth it) the mysterie of his iniquitie, which euen then was in the worlde and wroght in his forerunners, whome Saint Iohn calleth also Antichrists: So be these texts, rightly conceived, it is gathered, that many small Antichristes, (in whome wroght the spirite and mysterie of the great Antichrist) were come in the daies of the Apostles, but yet not the greate Antichrist himselfe. Moreover, in cace it be doubted howe the Pope can be this Antichrist, seeing saint Iohn saith, that the Antichrist denieth the Father and the Sonne,1, Iohn. 2 22 whereas apparantly the Pope denies neither of them. To this it is answered, there be two denialls, the one in mouth and profession plainely, and that way the Pope seemeth a Christian, and not to deny Christ, otherwise he would not be credited of Christians, neither could hee be a meete Mediatour betwixt the Dragon and them, as the Antichrist must be. The other deniall is in heart and deed tacitely, and that way the Pope hath denied altogether, both the Father and the Sonn: for who so denieth the Son, the same (saith the same text immediatly after) denies also the Father,1, Iohn 2.23 and consequently them both: But so it is, that the Pope denies Christ, in that he establisheth other mediators of his canonized Saints, betwixt God and vs, and vindicates to himself power to remit sinnes, and so craftelie maketh Christ but a cipher, without either office of mediation, or of remission of sinnes. Wherfore, in effect the Pope denies the Son, and consequently, both the Father and the Son. And besides this former reason, is not this, certain, that the 22. Necromantik Popes already spoken of, could not be Necroma^cers, vnles they had by priuat and tacit paction, renounced both the Father and the Son, and became slaues to the Deuil for ever? Also, hath not diuers of them bin espyed and noted with Atheisme, such as Pope Leo the tenth, who when Cardinal Bembus was in commoning with him, of certaine

Evangelical histories, made this godles answere. Quantum nobis and nostro coetui profuerit ea de Christo fabula satis est saeculis omnibus notum. It is known evidently to al ages, how much this fable of Christ, hath bene profitable to vs and our Clergie. Of this godles number, there were eight Popes nominated in true register, beside the foresaid Necromantik Popes, and others vnspied Atheists. Here then haue we after foure diuers manners discovered the Antichrist: first, by proouing him to be neither Iew, Turke nor other Ethnik, but a pretended Christian Prince. Secondly, by applying of the speciall tokens of the Antichrist precisely to the Pope. Thirdly, by declaring the notable contrarieties in doctrine and conversation, betwixt Christ and the Pope. Fourthly and last of all, haue wee expounded and remooued certaine doubts, which woulde seem to excuse the Pope, and purge him from being the Antichrist: so that nothing needes more to be said, if it pleaseth God to bestowe his spirit vponthe auditour: otherwise, in vaine doth the Sun clearly shine to the blinde mould-warp. The Lord open the eies of all men, and inspyre the hearts of Princes (as in the Revelation is promised) to destroy that idolatrous seat,Apoc, 17, 16 and bring the Antichristian kingdome thereof to an end.


27. PROPOSITION. The Image, marke, name, and number of the beast: are of the first great Romane beast, and whole Latine impyre vniuersallie, and not of the second beast, or Antichrist alone in particular.
SOme hath mixed confusedly, the tokens of these two Beasts through other, and so haue thought to apply this Image, marke, name and number, to the Antichrist in particular: but here say we, the same doth appertaine to the great tenne horned Beast, and whol Latin Empyre in generall, and not onlie to the Antichrist in particular, and that we proue by these resons. First it is said,Apoc, 16, 2 that in the time of the first Vial, which was betwixt the yeare of Christ 71. and 316. there fell a greate plague on them that had the marke of the beast, and on them that worshipped

his image. But at this time, the second Beast or greate Antichrist was skarsly come: as by the 9. synthesis of the former proposition is showen, and shalbe more at length in the 36. proposition. Therefore the Image and mark, must be of the first gret Roman Beast or Latin empire, and not of the seco^d Beast onely. And where it is saidApoc. 13, 14 16.17.18 that the second Beast and Antichrist, caused to make the image of the first greate Romane Beast, and caused al men to receiue his marke, and that none might buy or sel, that had not the mark or the name of the Beast, or the number of his name; it followes not thereby that there was no Image, mark, name, nor number of the beast, before the Antichrist come; but rather, that the second beast or Antichrist, causeth to repair the^ after they wer almost abolished; and that he did confirm and approoue them of new, as in the next proposition is declared. Seco^dly, this marke, Image, name and number of the name, appertains to the first gret Roman beast, because it is plainlyApoc, 13, 14 saide, that the image is of the greate Romane beast vvhich receiued the deadly vvound: And thereafter it is said (or at the lest may be gathered by the text,) that not onely the image and the marke,Apoc, 9, 20 Apoc. 13.14 16.17.18 but also the name and number doth appertaine to one selfe same beast. And therefore necessarilie the image, marke, name and number of the name, must al appertain to the great Roman beast and Latin Empyre, and not to the second Antichristian beast onelie


28 PROPOSITION. The Image of the Beast, is these degenerate Princes, that in name onely were called Romane Emperours, and were neither Romans of blood, nor Emperours of Magnanimitie.
SEeing that great ten-horned beast, is the Romane Empyre (by the 24 proposition) and (by the former proposition) this Image, is the image of that Empyre, and (by the text) this image must haue a spirite, and must speake as the Antichrist inspires him. What els can this liuely and speaking Image then be, but a man? yea, even such a man, as doeth represent and beare the figure of that Romane Empyre: and

therefore (as saith the text) doe all men woorship and reuerence him. This image then is of two sorts, the one wer these vnworthie Emperors (not of the auncient blood of Romans) in whome the empyre did decay. Of these there were in the daies of this first Vial, as is saide in the discourse of the former proposition; the last of these were extinguished by the Hunnes, Gotthes, and Vandalles. The other sort wer the new Emperours, called the Emperours of Germanes and Romanes, of whome Charlemaigne was the first. These also were but a figure of the first old empyre, and were but onely Romane Emperours in name, and neither of their auncient blood, neither hauing such authoritie as they. These did the Pope crown and inaugurat as Emperours, or rather as images of the first empyre. These inspyred he with the spirit of his errours, and made them to speake as he willed them, and then confirmed he their empyre, and proclaimed them Emperours, and caused all men to reverence them, as is said in theApoc. 13.14.15. text. So then for conclusion, al the properties of the beasts image, agree so fitly with these degenerate Emperours, both of the first sort and last sort (which neither Romanes of blood, neither Emperours in effect) that we can cal none other, than the^ to be the Images of the ten horned Beast, or Romane and Latin empyre.


29 PROPOSITION. The name of the beast expressed by the number of 666. (cap. 13.) is the name (...) onely.
MAny hauing mistaken this text, haue judged this number to be the number of the Antichrists name in particular, as if it were the number of the second Beasts name, which we haue proued by the 27. propositio^ to be of the first beasts name. Here then say we, that name is (...), for these reasons. First, becaus the name of the beast is proued (by the said 27 propositio^) to be the name of the ten-horned Roman beast or Latine empyre in generall, and not of the Antichrist onelie, and so it must either be Romanus or Latinus, but of these two, Latinus is the eldest style: for King Latinus (from whome that people were called Latini, and their cuntrie

called Latium) was long before King Romulus, of whome the Citie was called Rome, and the people thereof Romanes. Secondlie,Apoc. 13.17 18. it must bee the number of a mans name (saieth the text) so is Latinus the name of a man, euen the name of one of their first Kinges. Thirdlie, forasmuch as the Graecians had a custome in their mysteries and Oracles, to obserue the number of names, as ye shall finde in diuers partes of Sybilla: And as in that countrey, the name of the flood (...); is celebrated as holie, because it containeth the number of the daies of the year 365, as Carion testifieth, Chro. lib. 4. wher he describeth the Cattes and Hesses. Therfore, Sanct Iohn (obseruing the custome of them to whome hee writeth) saithApoc. 13, 18 that the number of the Beast, or rather (as he termed it in the former 17. vers.) the number of the Beasts name, is 666. And euen so it is, that (...) contained the number of 666. for l is 30. a is 1. t is 300. e is 5. l is 10. n is 50. o is 70. and @ is 200. which altogether make sixe hundred three score and sixe. Therefore, (...) is the verie name of the Beaste, meaned by the saide number. And for better confirmation of this forme of interpretation, Irenaeus Martyr (who was Disciple to Polycarpus, the Disciple of Sanct Iohn) about the ende of the fift book de haeresibus, approoueth this manner of interpretation, saying, Et testimonium perhibentibus his; qui facie ad faciem viderunt Iohannem, and ratione docentibus, quoniam numerus nominis Bestiae, secundum Graecorum computationem, per literas, quae in eo sunt sexcentos habebit and sexaginta sex, etc. And these bearing testimonie, that face to face haue seene Sanct Iohn, and by reason teaching, how that the number of the beastes name, doeth containe sixe hundred three score and sixe after the Graecian reckoning, by the letters that are therein. And thus far saith he generallie, concerning the maner how this text shall be interpreted, as appearingly he had his warrant, receiued mouth by mouth from Sanct Iohn. But as to the particular names, although he reckoneth out (...), with other of his own conceptio^, yet, becaus he had not such particular warra^t mouth by mouth therof, he leaues off to speak determinatly therof: But by the eue^t now fallen out, we may more co^sta^tly affirm

this same. For conclusion, seeing by the 24 proposition, the first great ten-horned beast is the Roman Empire, wherof (by the 27 propositio^) the number of his name, is the number of 666, and that (by the text) the same must be the number of a mans name: Therefore, this number of 666. cannot bee yeares, as some do interpret it, nor (...), for (...), which is to denie, nor (...), neither Dic Lux: because although these contain the number of 666. yet these be neyther the names of a man, neither the names of the Latine or Romane Empire, as is proued, that the name of the said number oght to be. Also this name is neither (...) nor (...), because although they both answer the said number, as likewise are the names of a man or masculine, yet are they not the names of the first beast, or Romane Empire. And therfore that name necessarilie must be (...), as beeing not onelie the name of a man, but also the proper name of the firste beaste: as thirdlie containing in it the saide number 666. conforme to the three properties and tokens thereof, warranted by the text.


30 PROPOSITION. Then marke of the Romane beast, is that inuisible profession of seruitude and obedience, that his subiects hath professed to his Empire, since the first beginning therof, noted afterward by the Pope, with diuers visible markes.
IN the ninth cap. of Ezechiel,Ezech. 9.4 it is said, that the Angel marked Gods Elect within Ierusalem, with a marke on their foreheads: the like is said in the Reuelation:Apo. 7 3 4 yet in no historie of these daies, it is hard that anie such visible marke was set vpon the faithfull: wherethrowe that marke must of necessitie mean nothing els, but that profession of seruice and obedience towardes God, which with bolde faces we aduouch as constantlie and openlie, as if we wer visiblie marked therwith. And semblablie, on the co^trarie part, this mark of the Roman beast or Latin Empire, is nothing els, but that professed seruitude, obedie^ce, confederacy, or concurre^ce, which the subjects thereof haue advouched to obserue thereunto. And for confirmation hereof, it is saide in the Reuel.Apoc, 16, 2 that in

the daies of the first Vial, there fel a greate plague on them that receiued the beasts mark,Apoc. 16.2 and worshipped his Image: but at that time, (which was betwixt the yeare of God 71. and 316) there was no visible marke, that can be attributed vnto them of that empyre, nor any difference betwixt them and the enemies of the empyre, but onely their foresaid profession; which therfore doubtles must be called in that text, the mark of the empyre. But as to the second part of this propositio^, howe soone the Antichrist, that two-horned Beast came, he caused all men to receiue a mark, which the text discribes so specially, with such notes, as it must needs be a more notable and visible mark, nor the simple profession onlie; for the former mark of simple profession, is but simply called the mark of the beast (Revel.Apoc, 16, 2 16.) but the marks that fell in the time of the Antichrist, are not only said to be marked in their foreheades or right hands: but also, the forme and shape of the mark is expressed by the text,Apo, 14.11, Apo. 15.2. where the same mark is said to be, the mark of the Beasts name or number thereof: as if he would say, there are marks taken out of the beasts name, or rather number thereof, which all his subjectes shall beare or weare sometimes on their foreheads, some times in their handes: which, what they be, followeth in the next proposition.


31 PROPOSITION. The visible marks of the Beast, are the abused characters, of (...) and crosses of all kindes, taken out of the number of the first beasts name.
THese visible marks, whatsoeuer they be, haue fiue notes or tokens, assigned by the text to knowe them by. First they are called the marks of the Beast, Reuel. 13.17. and 14.9. that is to say, marks of the first and great Romane beast, as is proued by 27. Proposition. Secondly, and more especially, they ar called marks of that Beasts name. Reu. 14.11. Thirdly, and most especially of all, they are called the marks of the number of that beasts name, in these words, Reuel. 15.2. And these who obtained victorie of the beaste, and of his Image, and of his marke

of the number of his name, worde by word out of the originall greek: And so this victorie is not spoken of his mark, (and) of the number of his name, as some translats, but of his mark of the nu^ber of his name; meaning so expreslie, that his mark, is a marke of the number of his name: that is to say, is deriued or composed of the number of his name, but the greeke number of his name is, (...), as expreslie saith the text, Reuel. 13.18. Therfore, in these numeral letters (...), ar these marks contained, and this wee haue very specially for the third token. Fourthly, these markes must be deuised, injoyned, and appointed: by the second Beast or Antichrist, as prooues the text, Reuel. 13.16. Fiftly, these marks must be vniuersall vpon all men, rich and poore, free and bound, and that no man might vse his traffike of marchandice or lawful affaires, who had not receiued these marks, as testifies the text. Reuel. 13. 16. and 17. Then, vnto whatsoeuer marks all these fiue tokens do agree, the same are the Antichristian markes: But vnto the abused characters of (...), and crosses of al kinds, doth all these fiue tokens agree: for first (...) is justly called the marke of the first Beast and Roman Empyre, for two causes; the one for that all these of that Empyre, are entised vnder colour of the name of Christ, to reverence that character, being neuerthelesse, as it is abused, nearer to the name of the Antichristian and Latin kingdome, nor to the name of Christ, as hereafter shall be said. The other cause is, for that these marks of (...) are gathered of these letters (...), which are the number of the name of that Latin kingdome and Romane Beast (as hereafter more specially shal be prooued) Therfore, justly ar the marks of (...), called the marks ofthe first Romane Beast, agreeing with the first token. Secondly, and agreeable with the former, because (by the 29. propositio^) that beasts name is (...), whose numeral letters (...), represents and yeelds the marks of (...) (as more specially immediatly shal be said.) Therefore (...) agreeth with the second token, to bee called the mark of that Beasts name. Thirdly, and according to the third token, this mark (...) is contained vnder the numerall letters of that beasts name (...), and is hereby perfitly represented, the two extreme letters respectiuely agreeing in one,

and the smal disagreance of the middlemost: to wit, betwixt x and r^ to be vpon very necessitie: for where as S. Iohn here speakes expreslie of numerall letters, he could haue no one numeral letter to represent both r and his crowne, this way r^, more like it nor x, whereof the vpper parte represents the Crown, the nether part the figure of r. Moreouer there is yet greter affinitie betwixt ^ and r, for r or rather r after this form fn the greek, and x in this Beasts language and co^mon writte^ letter in Latin is r, which is al one in figure, and so the marks of (...) agrees with the third toke^. Then fourthlie the mark (...)
is deuised, and take^ vp by the seco^d Beast the Pope and his Clergie, to represent as they say, the name Christ thereby, but rather the contrary, as followeth hereafter. Fiftly, and according to the fift token, the Pope and his Clergie ordains vniversallie all theirs, (whome only they cal Christians) to reverence the verie naked figure of (...) and bare character thereof, as hauing a divine vertue in it, transferring and distracting our zealous reverence from Iesus Christ our Saviour, who is God with vs, to such bare characters, and to such dead and naked wordes in an vnknown language, as IHS @ Xp^s @ SOTER @ IMMANVEL @: And therfore appoint they all men to beare and weare this foresaid character (...), with such like other bare names, in their rings, amulets, pe^daries, breastplates, tablets, Principios and Agnus Deis: Abusing it in way of sorcerie, as in a thousnd papisticall charms and conjurations, not onely in the Clergies priuie bookes, but also in their publike service, called Exorcismus, is to be seene. So then, seeing these fiue tokens do agree with (...), it followeth necessarily, that that abused character is one of the Antichristian marks. It remaineth then to proue the like concerning their crosses of al kinds. And first, the crosse is justly called the mark of the first greate Romane beast and Latin Emperours, for three causes, the one because that the Emperour and all his subjects generally, ar some times marked therewith, and bears the same, as shall be said. The other cause, because the Emperour Constantine illuded by a crosse shadowe in the clouds, taketh vp at the deuis and perswasion of Sylvester the first, and first Antichristian Pope, the marke of the crosse, and that the

rather, because (as these fabulous histories report) his mother Helena was said to haue found Christs crosse, and so justly may the crosse be called the mark of the first Beaste and Romane Emperour. The last cause, why the crosse is called the mark of the Romane Beast, or Latin Emperour is, for that it is taken out of his name, even out of the three numerall letters thereof, as presently you shall heare. So then the first token of the Antichristian mark, agrees with the crosse. Then agreeable to the second token: forsomuch as by the 27. proposition (...) is that Beasts name, at the least vndoubtedly, the numeral letters of his name are (...), out of the which are gathered crosses of al kinds (as immediatly shal be said.) Therefore these crosses, are justly called the markes of this Beasts name. Then thirdly, according to the third token, in the said numerall letters (...), ar contained crosses of diuers kindes, both in figure and in name: In such manner, as both the Greeke Churches and Latine Churches, are certified thereof: for among the Grecians the forme of ch is a crosse, and among the Latins x which is X, is also a crosse, and these bee crosses asidewaies called S. Andrewes crosse: Therefore the third and last letter is a double letter of abbreuiation, containing these two letters @. t. wherof the last is called a headles crosse, likest to the crosse, which they cal our Lords crosse: And so alwaies and of euery letter hereof ariseth the figure of the crosse. As to the names of the crosse, in latine crux, and in greeke (...), it is not possible for them to be expressed vnder so fewe letters more viuely, nor they are here, for here haue you their cheif letters, even both their capital and their final: for by ch and x, haue you in Latine C. and X. making crux, or. C H. and X making barbarouslie CHRVX, as I haue seene and heard it so in print and pronounced. And againe by the last letter (...) haue yee the greeke name of the crosse (...) likewise expressed, by his capitall and final letters. So then according vnto the thirde token in (...), which ar the greek nu^ber or numeral letters of the beasts name, are contained crosses of diuers kindes, both by figure and by name evidently expressed, to both the orientall or greeke Churches, and to the occidentall or latine Churches, and what

is more evident? Fourthly, and agreeing to the fourth token, these crosses (I meane the abuses thereof) were deuised by the second Beast, the Pope and his Clergie, as magical marks of sorcerie, gree by gree, to withdraw that godly meditation that we ought to haue of Christs passion, and that reuere^ce that wee ought to haue towardes Christ, for suffering death for our sakes, and to bestowe the whole merite, honour and vertue thereof, first, to the material crosse, whereon he suffered, and then to bare figures and marks therof, and last of al, to other curious sophistical figures and marks, such as ^
which they cal the crosse of Ierusalem, and such as this crosse ^ which is to be seen vpo^ diuers old Church walles. Which figures are so degenerat gree by gree fro^ crosses to co^passes, crooks and rammald, that altogether they haue no rese^blance of Christs passio^. Finally, and according to the fift and last token: these crosss were so vniuersally vsed, that (beside their daylie crossings with their right hande on their fore-heads, which they cal saning) all manner of persones, behooued to beare and weare, euen visible markes thereof, at appointed times on their forheads, or in their hands; such as to be crossed with ashes on their forheads on Ashwednesday, and to bear Palme crosses in their ha^d on Palmsunday, otherwise they wer thought to be Hereticks, and cursed from the communion of Christians: And these excommunicates (as saith the Bull of Pope Martin the fift, Fol. 134) shal not be permitted to keep houses or lodging, or to make any block or bargain, or to occupie any traffike or trade of marchandize, or to haue any societie with Christians. Then, seeing these crosses agree now with all these fiue tokens of the Antichristian marke, as a litle before (...), was prooued to do. Therefore, necessarilie these markes of (...) and crosses of al kindes, must bee the beasts visible marks. Let no man grudg hereat nor grieuously tak it, objecting, that we haue made these to be the marks of the Antichrist, which men haue hitherto deuised (as they say) to represent the name of Christ, and his passion. For certainlie these same thinges, which not men, but God hath deuised and appointed; how soone they are misused, they ar called by the Spirit of God, abhominations. Appointed not

God the brasen Serpent to be erected, as healthful, but after that it was worshipped, it was destroied by4. Reg. 18.4. Ezechias as damnable? Appointed not God the Sacrifices and incense offerings, and yet saith he in Osee,Osee. 6.7. Misericordia^ volui and non sacrificium: I desired mercy and not Sacrifice: And in Esay, Ne afferat is vltra sacrificium frustra: incensum abhominatio est mihi:Esa. 1.13. Bring no more Sacrifice in vaine: Incense is an abhomination vnto me? Seeing the Lord then doth reject those ordinances which himselfe hath instituted, and calleth the^ Abhomination, when they are abused, how much more ought we to reject these sophisticall marks of (...) and crosses of all kindes; such as these @ which they cal our Lords crosse, and @ S. Georges crosse, and X, S. Andrews crosse, and ^ the crosse of Ierusalem, and ^ the Crosse of Dedication, besides the Popes Crosse, and manie Crosses moe, and esteeme the^ as abhominable Antichristian badges, wheras we see the^ not onelie deuised by men, but also abused by them in way of sorcerie and magicke: imputing vnto these naked figures, a vertue and sanctitude in their charmes and exorcisms, as thogh, the whol vertue of Christ and his passion, wer transferred ouer into the^. And althogh they say, that they haue deuised (...), to represent the name of Christ (...) therby, and crosses of sundry kinds, to represent his passion therwith: yet the Spirit of God lets vs see euidently by this text, that he doeth reject and cast ouer these their magicall characters and sorceries to themselues againe, as liker to the numeral letters of their name, tha^ to his name, eue^ liker to (...); than to (...) and so let none doubt, but these foresaide figures, as they are vsed, or rather abused, are the verie markes and tokens of the Beaste, agreeing with the foresaide tokens of the text, in all pointes and properties.


32 PROPOSITION. Gog is the Pope, and Magog is the Turkes and Mahometanes.
THis is prooued three waies, to wit, first by the signification of the names, secondlie, by comparison; and thirdlie,

by their linage: As to the first, Gog doeth signifie Tectum;Chron. lib. 1 fol. 21 that is to say, Couered: and Magog (as Carion doeth testifie) signifieth De Gog, or Detectum, that is to say, Discouered, as many learned do affirme, thought others esteeme it rather to mean detecto, of a covering, nor detcctum, discouered. So then, there being in these latter daies onlie two great notable and mightie enemies to God: the one the Pope, a couered enemie and a dissembling Christian: the other the Turks and Mahumetans discouered and open professed enemies: It must needs be, that that secreet enemy Gog, is the Pope, and the open enemie Magog, is the Mahometans. As to the second like as by comparison, Gog was an Israelite borne, the Israelites the^ being the Church of God.1, Chro. 5, 4 Gen. 10.2 And as Magog was a borne Ethnike: so is the Pope borne among Christians, which nowe are Gods Church: And the Turks and Mahumetans are born Ethnikes.Genes, 49, 4 And againe, as Gog was of the tribe of Reuben, who was accursed for incestuous whoordome. So is the Pope chiefe of that Romish seate, which is called that spirituall whoore and accursed Idolatresse,Apoc, 17, 2 with who^, the Princes of the earth haue committed Idolatrie and spirituall whoordome. As to the third concerning their linage: Ezechiel defines Gog to be the chiefe Prince of Tubal and Meshech:Ezech, 38 and 39 then read Ierome de interpretatione nominum etc. vpon Italia and Tubal, and ye shall find of Tubal to be descended, Iberi or Iberes, which hee cals the Spaniards or Italians in Europe, and likewise of Meshech to be descended the Cappadocians in littell Asia: which all hauing embraced the Christian faith, doth accept the Pope as their supreame head or chief prince: And so Gog, the chiefe prince of Tubal and Meshech, must be the Pope, seeing he is supream head of these Tubalists in Europe, and Meshechists in Asia. And as co^cerning Magog,^en. 10, 2 he was the son of Iaphet. Of this Magog descended the whole Scythians which nowe ar the Turks and Mahumetans, according to the opinion of all writers. Then by these three reasons (by and besides the whole notes and tokens of the 20. cap. contained in the principall treatise) it appeareth evidently that Gog is the Pope, and Magog the Turk or Mahumetike Emperour,



33 PROPOSITION. The armies of Gog and Magog (cap. 20) are all one with the armies of the sixt Trumpet and sixt Viall.
THis is sufficientlie prooued, by the harmonie of the whole tokens assigned by the Text of the Trumpets and Vialles, and by the text of Gog and MagogApoc. 20.. For these of the sixt Trumpet and Vial, dwelt beyond and about Euphrates, and wer kings of the East: so here doth Magog, for that he is proued latelie, to meane the Mahometanes. They are there called in the sixt Trumpet foure, as indeed they are foure families, and foure nations Mahometanes: Here likewise, are they termed the people of the foure quarters or corners of their land. There were these foure nations bound at Euphrates till their due time, and then loosed to mak war-fare: Here is the Deuill bounde from stirring them vp or entising them, till their due time, and then is loosed to stir them vp to battell. There are these Mahometanes alone reckoned, to two hundred thousand thousandes of horsemen: Here are both the Armies, euen both Gog and Magog, compared to the sea sand in number. There, doeth three diuelish inspirations (called spirits of Deuils) gather and stir vp all those people to battell: Here, the deuill himselfe is loosed to stirre them vp to battell. There, doe they convene to fight in Armageddon,Hier. de int. nominum. which is the mountaine of the Euangell, and landes of the Elect and chosen people: Here, doe they compasse the whole lands, companie, and armie of Christians, and their elect cities. And finallie, these foure of that sixt Trumpet or Viall, are prooued by the fourth proposition, to bee the foure nations Mahometanes. The same is this Magog, prooued to be by the former proposition. And consequentlie, the armies or Gog and Magog, whome Sathan here in this 20. cap. doeth stirre vp to warre-fare, are the selfe same armies of Papistes and Mahometanes, that made greate warres in the daies of the sixt Trumpet or Viall.



34 PROPOSITION. The thousand yeares that Sathan was bound (Reuel. 20.) began in Anno Christi 300. or thereabout.
FOr proofe hereof, it is euide^t by histories, that after the co^tinual and successiue tyrannie of Ethnick Emperours, and last of Diocletian, (who in one moneth made seuenteene thousand Martyrs) there arose about this 300. year of Christ, Constantine the greate, a Christian and baptized Emperour, who, and whose successors (except a few of short raign) maintained Christianisme and true religion, to the abolishing of Sathans publique kingdome: and therefore, say wee, this yeare Sathan is bound. Secondlie, shortlie after this time, was the first publike and generall godlie counsell, holden by the Christians at Nice, in the which the Apostolicall beleefe was published, the authentik Scriptures authorized: and finallie, the true Christian religion so receiued, that all Sathans outwarde opposition was banished, and his publique tyrannie and kingdome ouercome: although yet, by his Lieutenaunt the Antichriste, euen then began his dissimulate and hypocriticall kingdome. Thirdlie, seeing by the former proposition, Gog and Magog are the armies of the sixt trumpet and Viall: and these (by the fourth proposition) were loosed about the yeare of God 1296. to make warres. Therefore, about the yeare of God 1296. or rather (as histories preciselie report) about the yeare of God 1300; were the armies of Gog and Magog loosed, and so Sathan was then loosed, to stirre them vp to battell: from the which 1300. yeares deduce the thousand years, that Sathan lay bound, and it will consequentlie followe, that Sathan was first bound in Anno Christi 300. Fourthlie, and for confirmation of the former, theApoc. 20.7. text saith, that howe soone the Deuill is loosed, he passeth foorth to stirre vp and seduce, these Papistical and Mahometicke armies of Gog and Magog, to strife and warre-fare. But in that 1300, yeare, began (by Sathans instigation) that proude strife betwixt them for supremacie, both of them chalenging to themselues the Empire of the whole earth: for Pope Boniface the eight, instituted the first Iubelee, that

yeare, and clothed himselfe the one day in the Pontificals of a Bishop, and the other day in the robe-royall, of an Emperour, and hauing borne before him two swords, proclaimed these words, Ecce duo gladii hic: meaning thereby, that he was ful Monarch, and more than Monarch: For; thereby he vsurped to himselfe vniuersallie both spirituall and temporall power. Likewise, on the contrarie parte, that same yeare, the whol nations Mahometans crowned Ottoman the great, their first Emperor: And so betwixt these contrarie Empires, euer from thenceforth followed out such vniuersall and terrible warres, that the Deuil (doubtles) from that 1300. yeare of God forth, ran loose among them, stirring vp these warres, and consequentlie, he lying bound 1000. yeares afore, behoued to begin that bondage, in Anno 300.


35 PROPOSITION. The Deuils bondage a thousand yeares (cap. 20) is no waies els, but from stirring vp of vniuersall warres among the nations.
SOme by this bondage of Sathan, haue sought out to find the visible Church of God a thousande yeares pure and vncorrupt, or beleeued that the true Church shoulde enjoy 1000 years peace: But the plain contrary appeareth here by the fourth and fift verses, where it is meant expresly, that in the time of these 1000. yeares, should the Antichristian beast raign, and shuld slay and behead those, that worshipped not him, nor reverenced his mark and image, but liued and raigned with Christ Iesus, as true Christians, all these 1000. yeares: and that all the reste of the people lay deade in his errours; and rose not therefrom, til these thousand years were expired. And so, seeing both by this text, these Antichristia^ Ethnicks raigned in this time, as also by the chap. 11.2. they possessed the outward visible Church: Therfore, could neither the true invisible church injoy peace vnder the Antichrist, neither yet could that visible Church be pure and incorrupt, during these thousand years, but rather after the said 1000. years, because it is meant (vers. 5,) that the rest, who were dead in Antichristian

errours shoulde not reuiue, or rise there-from, till after these thousand years. And beside this, it is not said, that the Deuil is bound from troubling the Church of God (which euer he troubleth) but from seducing or deceiuing the Gentiles or Nations; which for the most parte, are taken in the Scriptures in an euill part, for the idolatrous, wicked, and leud people of the worlde, to whome God here granteth these thousand yeares peace; because they (Reuel. 11.2) do possesse the outward and visible Church, and haue the true invisible Church lurking vnder their feete, which by their continuall trouble might also bee troubled. Then resteth the affirmatiue parte of this proposition, to wit, this bondage of Sathan to bee from stirring vp of these Nations, to anie vniuersall warre-fare, while the end of these thousand years. For proofe whereof, when he was loosed, then (saith the text) he passed foorth to stir vp the whole nations, of the foure quarters of the land of Gog and Magog, to war-fare and vniversal bloodshed: whereas contrarilie, by histories it is found, that all the 1000 yeares praeceeding, there were no such huge imperial armies nor terrible bloodshed as nowe, when the whole Papistes and pretended Christians on the one side, against the whole Mahometanes on the other side, euen the whole Occident against the whole Orient, vnder the names of Gog and Magog, were conuened in number as the sand of the sea, as the text saith. So that in comparison hereof, all small ciuill warres, skirmishings and incursions, that occurred during those thousand yeares, were thought nothing but peace; and consequentlie, those terrible and vniversall warres, that fell out from this time forth, were the onlie troubles and seditions, from entising and raising whereof, the text meaneth, that Sathan was bou^d and restrained al the former 1000 years, and not from stirring vp of errors, heresies, martyrdom, and provincial warfare.


36. PROPOSITION. The 1260. years of the Antichrists vniuersal raign ouer Christians, begins about the year of Christ 300. or 316. at the farthest.
THis is proued, by reasons of Gods apparant mercie, and of the Deuils subtiltie, and by diuers necessarie reasons

of Scripture confirmed by histories. And first, seeing on the one part, it was meete for the iniquities of the world, that sometime a generall Antichrist shuld come: but on the other part, whilest as Sathan ranne at libertie, and his kingdome, publikely florished by the tyrannie of Ethnik Emperours, by whome Gods Church was extreemely persecuted: It was vnmeete at that time, that the Antichrist shuld also rise: lest on both sides, Gods Church were vtterly extinguished: and therefore it is not apparent, that God in his mercie woulde suffer the Antichristian kingdome to rise, vntil the empyre of Ethnike Emperours were first remoued, and Christian Emperours established in their place; and so Satans publike tyrannie bound and restrained. But this came to passe, in Anno. 300. that the first race of Christian baptized Emperours, is begun in Constantine the greate; and Satans publik and imperiall tyrannie suppressed: Therfore, at this time it is most apparant, that God in the temperature of his justice and mercie, would rathest set vp the Antichrists kingdome; and herewith agreeth the saying of Paul, that he that holds,2 Thess ^ must hold stil a while, till he be taken out of the vvay or remooued, and then must that man of sinne or Antichrist come; meaning, the wicked Emperours that held the empyre, must holde still the same till they be remooued, and then shoulde the Antichrist start vp: and so the one enemie of God to giue place to the other, and not both to stande. Secondly, by the Deuils craft and subtiltie (herein permitted by God) it is very apparant, that whil as his publik tyranny, that he vsed by his Ethnik Emperours, was new lie extinguished, and himselfe in a maner, to be bound and restrained for 1000. yeares; hee would in this his bondage from publike tyrannie, rather establish the Antichrist, as his Lieftennant, to vse dissimulate tyrannie, rather tha^ at any other time: but this his bondage and Christianisme of Emperors, beganne about this 300. yeare, by the 34. propositio^: Therfore, about this 300. year, it appears rathest that the deuil by his subtilty, hath substituted the Antichrist and made him to begin his kingdome. Thirdly, these 1260 yeares of the Antichrists raigne, or three great daies and an halfe, that the witnesses or testaments of God lyeth deade

(which by the 15. proposition are al one date) being ended then (saith the text) Shall the tenth part of the Antichristian citie fall,Ap. 11.13. euen the tenth part of all the Abbacies, Monasteries, Nunries, and Papistical policies be destroyed. But so it came to passe, that neere about the year of God 1560 these papistical pollicies, were destroyed in England, Scotland, and in some partes of Germanie, Fraunce and other cuntries, euen their large tenth part, from the which 1560 yeare, deduce 1260 for the years of the Antichrists vniuersall reigne, so rests 300. yeares to be the year of Christ, about the which the Antichrist began his kingdome.2 Thess 2 7, 7 Fourthlie, Paul testifieth, that those that hold, must hold still a while till their seate be transported, deuided, or remooued out of the way, and then shall the Antichrist reueale and open vp his empire, for he shal sit in their seat, ouer the Church of God, extolling himselfe as God. etc. And so it came to passe, that the Romane Emperours sate that time, and held the empyre of Rome, till Constantine, Emperour thereof, transported the seate of the empyre to Bizanrium, which he called Constantinople, leauing the seate of Rome to Pope Sylvester the first and his successours, who was the first Pope or Bishoppe that reigned in Rome vnmartyred, and the first that euer possessed patrimonie, rent or dignitie, from which time, their kingdome euer hath increased vntill our daies; and therefore, justlie about his time, which beganne in the yeare of God 313. or thereby, establishe wee the beginning of the Antichristian and Papisticall reigne. Fiftly, because it is saide byDan. 7.25. Daniel and by theApo. 13.5. Revelation, that hee must all the saide space, haue power and authoritie ouer the Sanctes of God, and by Paule in the saide text, that hee must be extolled against all that is called God. Therefore must wee begin our compt, at the time of the Popes first power and authoritie, euen his very first coronation and this was about the yeare of God 316. or thereby: for then Constantine Emperour, gaue to the saide Pope Sylvester the towne of Rome, and greate landes and dominions thereabout, and gaue vnto him the triple Crowne, to bee crowned therewith, in token that hee made him supreame head ouer al the Churches in Asia, Africa and Europ; as his gift, co^teined in the decrees, Distinct. 96, at le^gth

proportes, the date whereof is, Data Romae. 3. Calend. April. a Constantino Augusto quarto consule, and Gallicano quarto consule, which date repugneth in it self, for we find by co^mon writers that Constantin his fourth co^sulship, and Licinius his fourth consulship, wer together in anno Christi 315. or according to Haloander in anno 316. But we find never, where Constantine and Gallicanus were consulles together, neither yet that Gallicanus was four times Consull: Whereby, not onely the date of this gift is vncertain, what yeare of God it befel, but also, by this repugnance, and diuers other reasons, some thinks this whol gift to be false and fained, yet alwaies in this purpose be it true or false, it is al one matter: for seeing they acclaime it as true, and thereat makes their beginning: it pertaineth not to vs to reason here, whether their beginning was trulie giuen, or falslie vsurped, but to make the beginning of our compt, where they begin their kingdome: to wit, at the saide gift, falling betwixt the years of God 300. and 316. whereas the precise yeare thereof, is (as is said) vncertaine. Sixtly, by Platina the Popes familiar, in vita Syluestri primi, and by diuers others of their owne histories, it is reported, that the time that this foresaid Sylvester the first, receiued from Constantine (or otherwise vsurped) this foresaide large authoritie and rent, there was a voice heard from heauen crying, Nowe is poyson sowen in the Church of God, which miraculous voice, apparantlie establisheth and maketh plain to vs, that at this time began the horrible and detestable kingdome of the Antichrist, as a poysonable venome vnto the Church of God. Seuenthly, at this time began the first Antichristian mark, proued be the 31. proposition to be the abused marke of the crosse, which now was induced among Christia^s, by the fabulous allega^ce of two fained miracles: the one that Queen Helen the Mother of Constantine, admonished by an heauenly vision past, and did finde that very reall crosse whereon our Lord suffered: the other that Constantine her sonne, fighting against Maxentius, saw appear in the aire the figure of a crosse with these words, In hoc signo vinces, by this mark thou shalt ouercome, with which mark and inscription, the Portugal ducat and some other coines of late are imprinted. And therefore

here, where the first publike and visible Antichristian marke beginnes, esteeme we justly the Antichristian kingdome to begin. Eightly, about this time, even anno Christi 312. the 24. of September, at which time the saide Emperour Constantine overcame Maxentius, and was also the first year of Pope Syluester the first, and first Pope vnmartyred, euen that very daye and yeare, beginneth the common account of the papisticall kingdome, by Indictions in place of the olde Olympiads; and therfore,Ottoman. Iose. Scal. de emen. temporu^. are called Indictio Constantinianae Pontificiae: Of these, the first yeare falleth betwixt the said year of Christ 312. the 24. of September, and the 24. of September, In anno 313. and so proceedeth for 15. yeares, and then beginneth againe the first yeare of a newe Indiction; keeping thereby, the exact memorie of the current yeares of their kingdom, within every fiftene, and dating therewith all their papisticall evidences, even like the Iewes, who keeped compt of the od and curre^t yeares of their Iubilees, from their conquest of the land of Canaan: The number of whol Indictions, and of whole Iubilees, being more easie to keep account off, nor their current yeares. Therefore, justlie at this firste yeare of the first Indiction and account of their kingdom, euen betwixt the yeare of Christ 312. the 24. of September, and 313. the 24. of September, which yeare also the said Sylvester began, ought wee justly to begin the Antichristian kingdome. So by these eight former reasons, we conclude, that betwixt the yeare of Christ 300, and 316, hath the Antichristian and Papisticall raign begun, reigning vniuersallie and without any debatable contradiction 1260. yeares; and so (as is said) about the yeare of God 1560. began their first publike decay, and the open repining against their kingdom to their confusio^, ever more and more; till firste their rents: then their citie of Rome: last of all, by Christs owne comming, their latter dregs, be vtterly extinguished and exterminate, as in the principall treatise, vpon the 17. and 18. Chapters shalbe declared.
So ends this demonstratiue resolution of all difficulties of the Reuelation, first of all dates and times, and last of the principall termes and matters, as to the meaner termes and smaller matters, they are interpreted in the notes of the principall treatise.



CONCLVSION.
THen for conclusion, by these interpretatiue propositions, followeth foure thinges maruelous and notable. First, that the interpretation of every parte of the Reuelation, is accessorie or consectarie to other: that is to say, it is so chained and linked together, that every mysterie opens other to the discouerie of the whole. Secondly, that the first halfe of the book is orderly, that is to say, it containeth in order of time the most notable accidents that concerneth Gods Church, from the time of Christs Baptisme successiuely to the latter day. Thirdly, that euery historie prophecied, is limited or dated with his own nu^ber of years. Fourthly and last of all, that whatsoeuer historie is more orderlie and summarlie, than plainly set downe in the first orderlie parte of the booke, the same is repeated, interpreted, or amplified in the last part of the booke: which therefore wee call the amplificatiue parte of the booke, deuiding the whole Revelation according to the table following, before we proceed to the principall matter.




A TABLE DEFINITIVE AND Diuisiue of the whole Reuelation.
THe Revelation, is a discouerie of those notable matters that concerne the Christian Churche, from her beginning to the latter day, set out by visions, which Christ hath shewed to his Apostle Iohn: And it containeth

A particular admonition, which as an Epistle, is directed vnto the seuen Churches of litle Asia, and it containeth
The preface, which sheweth the director, the receiuer, and to whome the message is directed, set out spiritually, cap. 1.The message directed particulary to the Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, cap 2. And to Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea cap, 3. And it containeth
The reproofe of certaine pointes of their defection, threatning them to amendement.The commendation of certain of their godly doings, exhorting them to perseuerance.
A general discourse of all alterations, which generally doe concerne or interest the Christian Church from her beginning to the latter day, and it containeth
An orderly part, which deduceth successiuely, briefly, and in due order of time all alterations concerning the Christian Church: and it containeth
A historie of those thinges which wer accomplished before they wer written, expressed cap. 4.5.6.7. and beginning of the 8, vnder the termes of seven seales.A prophecie, forewarning all notable accidentes, alterations and changes, that concerne the christian Church, betwixt S. Iohn his dayes and the latter day: and it is
Secular, which forewarmeth such mutationes of earthlie kingdomes, and commotions of Empires as any way concerneth the Christian Church; and this is done in the rest of the 8. cap. and in the whole 9. chapter, vnder the termes of sixe of the seuen Trumpets. Hereafter followeth in the tenth chapter, an introduction to the seuen thunders, or seuen thundering Angels, which are mysteries of the seuenth trumpet and latter day.Ecclesiastical, which simply and altogether forewarneth the onely progress of Gods true church, and this is done Cap. 11.And amplificatiue part, wherein are more largely set downe and expounded those greatest and most notable maters, which wer ouer summarlie, briefly, or obscurelie expressed in the orderlie part, and this forewarneth the estate of the Elect
on earth by commotions
Ecclesiastical, wherin are described, the Antichristian beastes strife with Gods Church cap. 12. and that Beast his tokens and qualities cap. 13. and the progres of his falling, and the rising of the Evangell to the latter day, cap. 14. and the interpretation of the Beastes tokens cap. 17. and the decay of his citie and seat, Cap, 18, and the triumph also of Gods Church, cap, 19. And finallie is expounded briefly, cap, 20. how Gods publik and priuat enemies, striue against other, and both against his Church: but at length to their own wracke and confusion eternally. Amen.Seculare, which are introduced by preface, cap 15 and dilated in order, cap. 16. vnder the termes of seuen Vials.in heauen, described cap. 21. and 22. vnder the terme of new Ierusalem.




THE SECOND AND PRINCIPAL TREATIS, wherein (by the former grounds) the whole Apocalyps or Reuelation of S. IOHN, is paraphrasticallie expounded, historicallie applied, and temporallie dated, with notes on euery difficultie, and arguments on each Chapter.

CHAP. I.

THE ARGVMENT
These three first Chapters, being in way of Epistle, particularlie directed to the seue^ Churches of ASIA minor: he declareth in this first Chapter (in maner of preface) who is the director of this message, who are the bearers thereof, and thirdlie, to whome the message is directed: confirming the verity of al by an heauenlie vision, wherof in the end of the Chapter he yeeldeth the interpretation.


The Text.
1 THe reuelation of Iesus Christ which GOD gaue vnto him, to shew vnto his serua^ts things which must shortly be done which he sent, and and shewed by his Angell vnto his seruaunt Iohn.
2 Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Iesus Christe, and of all thinges that he sawe.
3 Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecie, and keepe those things which ar written therein: for the time is at hand.
4 Iohn, to the seuen Churches which ar in Asia, Grace bee with you, and peace fro^ him, Which is, and Which was, and Which is to come, and from the seue^ Spirits, wich ar before his Throne,
5 And from Iesus Christ, which is a faith full witnes, and the first begotten of the dead, and Prince of the kings of the earth, vnto him that loued vs, and washed vs from our sins in his blood,
6 And made vs kings and Priests vnto God, eue^ his Father, to him be glorie and dominion for euermore, Ame^
7 Behold, he co^meth with cloudes, and euerie eie shal see him: yea, eue^ they which perced him through: and all kindreds of the earth, shal waile before him, euen so, Amen.
8 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saieth the Lord, Which is, and Which was, and Which is to come, euen the Almightie.
9 I Iohn, euen your brother, and companion in tribulation, and

in the kingdom and patience of Iesus Christ, was in the yle called Pathmos, for the word of God, and for the witnessing of Iesus Christ.
10 And I was rauished in spirit on the Lordes day, and heard behind me a great voice, as it had bin of a trumpet,
11 Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and that which thou seest, write in a booke, and send it to the seuen Churches which are in Asia, vnto Ephesus, and vnto Smyrna, and vnto Pergamus, and vnto Thyatira, and vnto Sardi, and vnto Philadelphia, and vnto Laodicea.
12 The^ I turned back to see the voice, that spake with me: and when I was turned, I saw seuen golden candlesticks,
13 And in the midds of the seuen candlesticks, one lik vnto the Sonn of man, clothed with a garment down to the feet, and gird about the pappes with a golden girdle.
14 His head and haires vvere white as white wool, and as snow, and his eies vver as a flame of fire.
15 And his feet like vnto fine brasse, burning as in a fornace,

and his voice as the sound of many waters.
16 And hee had in his right hande seuen starres: and out of his mouth went a sharpe two edged sword: and his face shone, as the Sunne shineth in his strength.
17 And when I sawe him, I fell at his feet as dead: then he laide his right hand vpon mee, saying vnto me, Feare not: I am the first and the last,
18 And am aliue, but I was dead: and beholde, I am aliue for euermore, Amen: and I haue the keies of hel, and of death.
19 Write the things which thou hast seen, and the thinges which are, and the thinges which shal come hereafter.
20 The mysterie of the seuen stars, which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seuen golden candlestickes, is this, The seuen starres ar the Angels of the seuen Churches: and the seuen candlestickes which thou sawest, are the seuen Churches.


The paraphrastical Exposition.
1 THis is a book a reuealed by Iesus Christ, whereby God appointed him, to shew forth and open vnto his servants, thinges that must shortly be performed in the last daies, the which Christe hath sent his b Angelles to shew and reveal to his beloued Apostle c Iohn.
2 Who also is an Evangelist, and therby beareth the record of the word of God, and of the history of our saluation in Iesus Christ, and of al thinges that he hath seene, both then, and at this time.
3 Blessed is he, that reading and hearing the words of this Prophecie, doeth obserue and keep trulie the meaning and contents thereof: for shortlie, and in this last age of the world, must the same be performed.
4 I Iohn, vnto the seue^ Churches which ar in litle Asia, wish grace and peace fro^ God the Father, who is, and euer was, and who shal come and abide for euer: and from that holie, andd one Spirite of God, whose seuen fold vertues and perfections appeare, euer ministring before the throne of God.
5 And from Iesus Christ, God and Man, who in his own person, hath born a faithful testimonie of the resurrection of the dead, and of all that euer died, he is the e first born, and begotte^ before al eternity, and is the first fruits of the resurrection, euen the first among the dead that arose vnto heauen: and he is king and Lord ouer al the princes of the earth: Vnto him therfore, that so hath loued vs, that he hath washed vs from our sinnes, by shedding his blood to the death for vs,
6 And thereby hath made vs as Kinges, to raigne with God his Father, and as Priestes, to offer vp our dailie praiers and laudings; to him, euen vnto that Lord Iesus (I say) be glorie and dominion for euermore, So be it.
7 Beholde, hee shall come to judgment in the f cloudes, and all men shall see him with their eies, yea, euen they which wounded and crucified him, and the wicked of all the kindreds of the earth, shall quake and mourne before him, euen verilie, so shall it be.
8 I am the g first, I am the last, euen the first without any beginning, and the last without any ending, saith the Lord God, who present lie is, hitherto euer hath bene, and shal come and abide in all time hereafrer, euen for euer and euer, for I am the Almightie.
9 And I Iohn, your brother in Apostleship, and a partaker of tribulation with you for the kingdom of heauen, through patience in

Iesus Christ, was fugitiue in one of the yles of the Sporades, called h Pathmos, for professing the worde of God, and for bearing the true testimonie of Christ Iesus.
10 And there I was rauished in spirite, vpon that day of the weeke that our Lord rose from death, which is the iSunday: then heard I behind me a mighty voice, terrible and loud as a trumpet.
11 Saying, I am the beginning, and the ending, yea, the firste before all beginninge, and the laste after all endinge: All therefore, that I let thee see, write in a booke, and sende the same to the seuen Christian Churches, which are in litle Asia, to wit, to the Churches of Ephesus, of Smyrna, of Pergamus, of Thyatira, of Sardis, of Philadelphia, and of Laodicea.
12 Then I turned backe to see him, whose voice I had heard speaking to me: and when I had turned, I sawe seuen shining Candlestickes, bearing the type and figure of those seuenk Churches.
13 And in the middest of these seuen, Christ himselfe in his Deitie, vnder the l likenesse of his Humanitie, arrayed as in m long garmentes, betokening grauitie and wisedome: and in signe of ndiligence and readines, he was girded with the golden and pretious girdle of veritie, justice, and power.
14 His head and white haires, whiter tha^ wooll or snowe, importeth his o honourable and reuerent antiquitie and age from all beginning: his fierie eies do pearce the secrets of al heartes, and terrifie his enemies.
15 His feet are firme and stable to stand, as brasen pillers in defence of his Elect, and are swift and terrible as a consuming fire,

against the wicked, and his voice by his preachers is loud and open, as of a multitude of p people and waters.
16 And he preserued and keeped in his migh the hand of protection, the holy q teachers and instructers of these seuen Churches, who as starres of heauen, yeelded the light of Gods trueth among them, and out of his mouth, by his teachers, proceded the sword of r true doctrine two edged, conquering in his elect on the one side, and subdewing and destroying his enemies on the other side, and in the beautie of his face shined (brighter than the Sun) the bright light of aeternall life.
17 And when I saw his heauenlie majesty, I (lacking strength) fell at his s feet as dead: then extended hee his mercifull hand, and gentle protection ouer me, comfortably saying vnto me, be not affraied of me, I am thy Lord, without beginning, and without ending.
18 I rose to life, and doe liue, though I t was slaine to redeem you, yea, now behold, I liue for euermore, Amen: and I haue power ouer death and hell, to open and close the same at my will.
19 Write vp therefore, these things which thou hast seene by vision, both concerning these things that u ar, and these things which shal come to passe hereafter.
20 And be sure, the seue^ starres, which by vision thou didst see in my right hand, and the seuen golden candlesticks, are mysticallie to be vnderstood (as before is said) euen the seuen starres do meane the x seuen messengers or ministers, which God hath sent to instruct these seuen Churches: and the seuen candlestickes, which appeared to thee, doth meane those same seuen Churches.



Notes, Reasons, and amplifications.
a As God hitherto neuer left his Church destitute of doctrine, to instruct them, and of prophecies to forewarne them: So here hath his Majestie prouided, al the former bookes hitherto of the new Testament, to containe the Christian doctrine: and this book of Reuelation, to containe the whole Christian Prophecie to the worlds end. Apocalyps then is a Reuelation, and therefore, is this book so intituled; for, that by the will and ordinance of God, Christ hath reueiled the same, word by word, as it is written in the text, to his Disciple Iohn, and now doth daylie by his holy Spirit, reueile more and more the meaning thereof, to vs in this our age, for the which it hath bene chieflie instituted.
b Here is this booke described to proceed from God, and come to the seuen Churches by foure degrees: Firste, God giueth the same to Christ: Secondlie, Christ sendeth his Angell, or Angelles bearing commission: Thirdlie, the Angel instructeth Iohn: Fourthlie, Iohn wrireth the same to the seuen Churches. Not meaning hereby, that the Angelles onelie are appearers to Iohn: but sometime the Father, as chap. 4. sometime the Sonne, as in this chapter: sometime the holie Spirit, as chap. 14. 15. and other places: at which times, for confirmation of the smaller visions; the Trinitie in these great visions, sheweth his vnspeakable glorie, but in other smaller visions, concerning thinges to come, the Angels (as sayeth this text) are made reporters, shewers, and expositers, as chap. 17. 1. 7. and diuers other partes, as plainlie appeareth chap. 22. 8. 16. For, he saieth not here, the Angels are sent to shewe all the visions, or visions of Gods glorie, for it was the Trinitie it selfe that shewed it selfe, and appeared in his owne visions, and not the Angels, as hereafter [note l] shall be shewed: But he speaks here, of propheticall visions, which Christ saieth here, hee sent his Angels to shewe.
c Some haue vnaduisedly impugned the authoritie of this book, by diuers friuolous conjectures: and among the rest, because Iohn hath so often herein named his name, thinking it not agreeable to the Apostolique grauitie, to caste vp so oft his owne name: and therefore, esteeme they rather this booke to bee sette out in his name by others than by himselfe, for that hee doeth not the

like in his Euangell. But contrary to their opinion, in all the scriptures, the writers of doctrin, do not so often expresse their names, as the writers of prophecie doe: for the doctrine receiues the authoritie of the owne present veritie, and of the Spirite of God, but the Prophecy receiues the authority by the author, who is known to be a Prophet, wheras otherwise, the booke could not be known to be true before the perfourming thereof. Consider hereupon, Daniels prophecie, where ye shall finde his name more than threescore times repeated: yea, in the first person, ye shal find [I Daniel] repeated about nine times, in the 7.8.9. and 10. chapters: wheras Iohn repeateth his name but fiue times in all this booke. Hereby then no man can gather, but that this booke was written by that selfe same Iohn, who was both Christes beloued Disciple, and an Euangelist. And therefore, stileth hee himselfe here the seruant of Christ, who hath borne witnesse of Christ Iesus, of these thinges which he saw, as being one of the foure Euangelists that wrote the historie of Christ, which with his eies he sawe.
d There is but one holie Spirite, whose chiefe functions and graces are deuided into seuen: wherof read the note[e] of the fourth chapter. For the better comfort therefore of the seuen Churches, to supplie their beleefe and weake faith, hee letteth them vnderstand, that there is such a compleat perfection in Gods Spirit, that it hath as manie functions and graces to conserue them with, as are agreeable to their number of seuen.
e For two causes is Christ called the first born of all that died: First, because in the Leuitical Law, the first borne, and first fruites, or primices, were consecrated and offered vp vnto the Lorde, and because of al men that euer took life and died, onlie Christ is that first fruite, that is offred vp an acceptable Sacrifice to God the Father, as Paule testifieth, 1. Cor. 15.20. Therfore, he is called the first borne, euen in his humanitie figuratiuelie, although reallie manie others were borne neere foure thousand yeares before him. Secondlie, in consideration of his Deitie, euen of that worde, that is God, and long after took flesh: euen in consideration (I say) of the aeternitie thereof, because it was before all beginning: Therfore, is Christ (who is that word) called the first borne among the dead, Col. 1.15.17.18. Althogh not the worde or Deitie that took flesh, but the flesh it self died: and so in this sense, the being first begotten

is imputed to Christs Deitie, and aeternall word; and to die, is imputed to his fleshlie humanitie; and so to Christ, as hee is fullie both God and man, both these properties of being the first born, and of dying, are justlie appropriate, according to the diuers respects aforesaid.
f Euen in the clouds he ascended from hence into heauen, Act. 1.9.10.11. and that way shall he returne to judgment: read hereupon cap. 14. note m thereof.
g Of the greeke A, B, C, (in which language this book was written) Alpha is the first letter, and Omega is the last: and so God stiling himselfe the first letter and the last of that A, B, C, hee both thereby meaneth, as also incontinentlie subjoyneth the meaning thereof, saying, I am the beginning and the ending.
h Pathmos is one of the yles, that are called Sporades or Cyclades, lying in Mare Aegeo, by East the coast of Asia minor: Herein hid S. Iohn himself from the great tyrannie and persecution of Domitian, where he abode vntil Domitian died, and that yeare Anno Christi, 97. or 99. hee wrote this booke in that yle: as appeareth by Irenaeus and Eusebius.
i The day of rest and godlie exercises, while Christe his death was celebrated vpon the Saterday, which of olde was the Iewish Sabboth day, but in memorie of Christs resurrection, and victorie ouer death, the Apostolique Church transported the exercises of that day to the Sunday, which was the day of the week, that Christ arose vpon, and therfore is called the Lords day: the which day, the people (appearingly conuening to serue God) are desired by Paul 1. Cor. 16.2. to giue contributions to the poore, and there he calleth it the first day of the week: And so indeed, where the Saterday is the seuenth and last day of the week, the Sunday falles to be the first, and is vsed for our Christian Sabboth and day of the Lord.
k That these seven Candlestickes doe meane these seuen Churches of litle Asia, is plaine by the end of this same chapter. Further, how the olde Leuiticall Candlestick was also a figure hereof, is to be said in the fourth chapter, note ethereof.
l Because the text calleth this midmost not the Son of man, but like vnto the Son of man: Therfore, some may think this not to be Christ, but an Angell bearing the type and figure of Christ, whom Christ had deputed vers. 1. to signifie and represent these thinges



to Iohn, and so this Angell, not to be the Sonn of man, but like vnto the Sonne of man: But (after mine opinion) God, who in his second commandement, wil haue vs to represent him by no forme, wil also represent himselfe to vs by none other, but by himselfe, lest we otherwaies being abused, shuld giue the honour of God to Angels. And certain it is, that neither will God be the author, nor good Angels the instruments, so to illude mankind: And for confirmation then, that this midmost is Christ, and no Angell, nor other bearing the type of Christ: it is euident, that hereafter he calleth himself by the stiles of Christ, the first and the last, who liueth and vvas dead: and finallie (cap, 2.18) he calleth himselfe the Sonne of God: And these titles (I am sure) none in heauen will accept nor vsurpe, except Christ onelie, to whome they appertaine. But then may you demaund, why doeth not Christ call himselfe reallie the Sonne of man, but like vnto the Sonne of man? The answere hereof, making much against Transubstantiation, is therfore to be deduced at le^gth. I say then, that so long as Christ was in this world, appearing corporallie to man, he stiled himself the Son of man, as hauing his flesh and humane body conuersant with vs: but contrarily, both before his incarnation, as also since his ascension, when euer in all the Scriptures he did visibly appear to his Saints, his visible shape and appearance, is not called the Son of man, but the liknes of the Son of man, quasi Filius hominis, or similis filio hominis, as in Dan. 7.13. and Dan. 10. Reu. 14.14. and in this place, or wheresoeuer els: and yet by the whole properties of these self same textes, that same that appeared in vision, is knowne to be Christ, as this same, who here is called the likenes of the Son of man, or like vnto the Son of man, is hereafter in expresse terms, called the Son of God: neither maketh this anie repugnance or co^tradiction, to the essential nature of Christ, who is really both the Son of God, and the Son of man, being spoke^ of Christ, either before his incarnatio^, or since his asce^sion: for first, becaus his humanity could not be really seen of Daniel, before it was conceiued of the Virgin; therefore, Daniel saw Christs Godhead, euen that Word that is God, saw he transfigured (for his capacity) into the likenes of a man, or likenes of the Son of man, but not in a man, nor in the Son of man, till he tooke flesh of the Virgin. The like transfiguration is oft read to be also of Angels in the likenesse of men, but not in men. Also, secondlie,

since Christ his ascension into heauen, his humanitie hauing residence only ther, his Deitie being both there, and also euery where: that Deitie (I say) euen after Christs ascension, as before his incarnation, is said here to appeare, not in his humanitie, as the Son of man, but in the likenes of the Son of man, for that his humanitie, whereby he is the Sonne of man, is not here, but in heauen, and his Godhead which is here, taketh not the flesh of the Sonne of man, but the visible likenesse of the flesh of man, by such a notable difference, either in the vision, or in the Spirit of the Prophet, that he knew it to be Christ in his Deitie, and not in his humanitie, but bearing the figure and likenes of his humanitie. Some vnaduisedlie will thinke this, to meane a separation of Christes Deitie from his humanitie: But contrarilie, we say, that Christ his Deitie, conjunct in heauen with his humanitie, doth both make his chiefe residence with the same, and doeth also flowe therefrom ouer all the whole world infinitlie; as in comparison, the light beams and spirituall vertues of the Sun, are conjunct in heauen with the corporall and visible bodie of the Sun, wherein they haue their chiefe residence, and doe also flow from thence vnto euerie place: Also, the spiritual vertue and sight is in the body of the eie, as his chiefe seat, and doth likewise flow from thence toward all things visible: Can any man say, that the beame subsisteth it self alone, and is separate from the Sun, or that the sight subsists it selfe alone, and is separat from the eie, seeing the bodie of the Sunne is the verie locall seat of light, and the eie of the sight? No more mak we Christs Deity alone to be separate from his humanitie: the more that the Deitie is vniuersall and euerie where, and the humanitie locallie in heauen; for, the Deity (being euery where) is also in heaue^ with the humanitie, though it likewise from thence extendeth it selfe, and floweth ouer euery place. So that, for conclusio^, the Diuinitie of Christ, that here appeared to S. Iohn, brought not down his humanity fro^ heauen, for then hee had called that humanity that appeared, the Son of man, as (cap. 2.18) he calleth his Diuinitie the Son of God: but that Diuinitie took onlie, in presence of the Prophete, and for his instruction, a shape like a man, which therefore, he calleth not the Son of ma^, but the likenes of the Son of man. Hereof the^ followeth, that seing christ co^meth no otherwise into the world since his ascensio^, tha^ he cam before his incarnatio^, that is to say, by his



Deitie, and that his Deitie sheweth not his humanity, here on earth to his Saints, but onlie the likenes thereof (as saith the text) and so brings not down his real and naturall bodie from heauen while the latter day; therefore, his real bodie can neuer be in the Hoste, nor transubstantiate therein. Further hereof, reade note s following, and note d of the second chapter.
m Long garments or gowns were of old, and to this day ar worne of Doctors and Senators, to represent grauitie and wisedome, as may be seene, that euen in those daies the Scribes, Pharisies, and Doctors of the Law did vse, or rather abuse them: and therefore, are reproched of Christ, Mar. 12.38. But here by the right vse and wearing thereof, Christ doeth typicallie represent, his wisedome and perfect grauitie.
n Girding is a signe of readinesse: read Luke. 12.35. and Luke. 17.8. speciallie, readines in execution of justice, Esa. 11.5. Iustitia cingulum lumborum eius: Iustice shal be the girdle of his loynes, conjoined with power and strength, as Psal. 17.33.40. The girdle therfore, that representeth these excellent properties, is said to be of golde; that is to say, precious, and honorable, as likewise is to be saide, Reuel. 15.6. note e.
o White haires importe also grauitie, wisedome, and age, worthie and due of all reuerence, as saieth the Poet,
Magna fuit quondam capit is reuerentia cani:In old times men much honored, The old and graue white-haired head.
And seeing these properties of grauitie, wisedome, and honour, as also of antiquitie, belong to Christ, he therefore, for our capacitie, is described with white haires.
p Waters here may either bee literallie taken, or propheticallie, as Reuelat. 17.15. for people: alwaies meaning here the voice of God to be loude, open and publique.
q These seuen starres are in the end of the chapter, interpreted to be seuen Angels or messengers, which are the Ministers of the seuen Churches.
r As the tongue and euill speaking of the wicked, is called the sword of their mouth, Iob. 5.15. Psal. 56.5. and Psal. 58.8. and Prou. 5.4. whereby the Godlie are trapped, deceiued, and oftentimes destroyed: So also a contrariis, this two edged sworde of Christ, in his teachers mouthes, is the doctrine of trueth and true discipline

whereby the wicked are confounded, and the godlie are conquered, and brought in into Christs kingdome, Apoc. 19.15. And for further confirmation, that this two edged sworde is the true doctrine of God, read Paule to the Hebrewes, 4.12. saying, The vvord of God is liuelie and mightie in operation, and sharper than any two edgd sword and Psal. 148.6. And a two edged sword in the hands of the Saints.
s This vision is agreeable in this, and almost in all points with the vision of the man that was seene by Daniel, cap. 10.5. and therfore, as this is Christ, so is also he whome there Daniel sawe: but where he calles him a man, according to the shape he did beare, he againe incontinently interpreteth him, neither to bee a man, neither the Sonne of man, but like to the similitude of the Sonne of man. ver. 16. and like to the vision or figure of a man. ver. 18. and this example of Daniel, confirmes our former note l, where wee prooued Christ, neither before his incarnation, nor after his ascension, to appeare in his humanitie to his Saints, but euer in his Deitie vnder a figure, like to his humanitie: his humane bodie since his ascension, abiding in heauen vntil the latter day: read herupon l aboue written, and the note d chap. 2. following.
t Here may some, contrarie to the foresaide notes l and s, induce a sophisme, saying, hee who was dead, and reuiued aeternally appeared to Iohn: But Christ in his humanitie died, and reuiued againe aeternallie: Therefore, Christ in his humanitie appeared vnto Iohn. For opening the deceit of this caption: the subiect of the assumption is Christ alone, his attributum is to die in his humanity, and to reuiue againe eternallie, and therefore neither this humanitie, nor any part of this attributum ought to be repeated in the conclusion, but onlie the subiectum Christ, with the attributum, propositions after this forme: He was dead and liueth aeternallie appeared vnto Iohn: But Christ died in his humanitie, and reuiued againe aeternallie: Therefore, Christ appeared vnto Iohn. And to the effect that the vulgar capacities may vnderstand these fraudes: This is (as one would say, in a familiar example) He who caried this booke to you, wrote the same: But on horseback I caried this book to you: Therfore, on horsback I wrote this book: Wheras the right argument shuld be this waies disposed: He who caried this book to you wrote the same: But I caried this book to you on horseback; or rather only simply: But I caried this book to

you: therefore, I wrote this book. Praying therfore, the simple to beware of these and the like sophismes, I thought good in this due place, to yeeld this one by way of example.
u Hereby, and by the writing of the book within and without, mentioned cap. 5.1. appeares plainlie, that not only there are prophecies of things to come, written in this Reuelation, but also histories of such things past, as may be a briefe introduction to the prophecie, as ye shal find (chap. 6.) of the seven seales, which were al perfourmed, before they were written.
x Seing in the greek, al messengers of God ar termed by Angels, therfore, must these Angels of the seuen Churches without al question, mean these ministers or messengers, that God hath sent to teach them, as is prooued immediately by the next chap. where S. Iohn is commanded to write to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, of Smyrna, etc. This necessarilie, is to the ministers of the Churches, and not to the Angels that S. Iohn should write.



CHAP. II.

THE ARGVMENT.
The general preface to the seuen Churches, being premitted in the first chap. now in this chap. followes out the particular messages, direct to four of the said Churches, co^mending their wel doing, and exhorting perseuera^ce, and reprouing their defectio^, and crauing their ame^dment.


The Text.
VNto the Angell of the church of Ephesus: write, These things saith he, that holdeth the seue^ stars in his right hand, and walketh in the middest of the seuen golden Candlestickes.
2 I know thy works, and labor, and thy patience, and how thou canst not forbear the^ which are euil, and hast examined the which say they are Apostles, and are not, and

hast found them liers.
3 And thou hast suffered, and hast patience, and for my names sake hast laboured, and hast not fainted.
4 Neuertheles I haue somvvhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first loue.
5 Reme^ber therefore fro^ whe^ce thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first workes: or els I wil com against the shortly and wil remoue thy candlestick out of his place except thou amend.
6 But this thou hast, that thou hatest the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
7 Let him that hath an ear, hear what the Spirit saith vnto the churches, To him that ouer commeth, wil I giue to eat of the tree of life, which is in the mids of the paradise of God.
8 And vnto the Angel of the Church of the Smyrnians write, These things faith hee that is first, and last, which was dead, and is aliue.
9 I know thy works, and tribulation, and pouerty, (but thou art rich) and I knovv the blasphemy of them, which say they are Iewes, and are not but are the Synagogue of Satan.
10 Feare none of those thinges, which

thou shalt suffer: behold, it shall come to passe, that the Deuill shal caste some of you into prison, that yee may be tried, and ye shal haue tribulation ten daies: be thou faithfull vnto the death, and I will giue thee the crowne of life.
11 Let him that hath an ear, heare what the spirit saith to the churches. He that ouerco^meth, shal not be hurt of the second death.
12 And to the Angel of the Church which is at Pergamus, write, This saith hee, which hath the sharp sworde with two edges.
13 I know thy works and where thou dwellest, euen where Satans throne is, and thou keepest my Name, and hast not denied my faith, euen in those daies whe^ Antipas my faithfull martyr was slaine among you, where Satan dwelleth.
14 But I haue a fewe things againste thee, becaus thou hast ther the^ that maintain the doctrine of Balaam, which taught Balac to put a stumbling block before the children of Israel, that they should eat of thinges sacrificed vnto idols, and commit fornication.
15 Euen so hast thou them, that maintaine the doctrin of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate.
16 Regent thy selfe, or els I will come vnto thee shortlie, and will fighte againste them with the sworde of my mouth.
17 Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirite saith vnto the Churches. To him that ouercommeth, wil I giue to eat of the Manna that is hid, and will giue him a white stone, and in the stone a newe name written, which no man knoweth, sauing he that receiueth it.
18 And vnto the Angell of the Church which is at Thyatira write, These thinges saith the son of God, which hath his eies like vnto a flame of fire, and his feete like fine brasse.
19 I know thy works and thy loue, and seruice, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works, and that they are moe at the last than at the first:
20 Notwithstanding I haue a few things against thee, that thou sufferest the woman Iezabell, who calleth her selfe a Prophotesse

to teach and to deceiue my seruantes, to make the^ commit fornication, and to eate meats sacrificed vnto idols.
21 And I gaue her space to repent of her fornication, and shee repented not.
22 Behold, I will cast her into a bedde, and them that commit fornication with her, into gret affliction, except they repent them of their workes.
23 And I will kil her children with death: and all the Churches shall knowe, that I am he which search the reines and heartes: and I will giue vnto euery one of you according vnto your workes
24 And vnto you I say, the rest of them of Thyatira, as many as haue not this lerning, neither haue knowne the deepnes of Satan (as they speake) I will put vpon you none other burthen.
25 But that which you haue alredy, hold fast til I come.
26 For he that ouerco^meth, and keepeth my works vnto the end, to him will I giue power ouer nations,
27 And he shall rule them with a rod of iro^ and as the vessels of a potter shall they bee

broken: euen as I haue receiued that povver of my father.
28 And I wil giue vnto him the morning starre.
29 Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirit saieth to the Churches.



The paraphrastical Exposition.
VNto the Pastour or Minister of the Church of Ephesus write thou, and shewe that these things saieth the Lord Iesus, that holdeth the pastors of these seuen Churches vnder his merciful hand and protection, and is present himself in the midst of these his seuen holie Christian Churches.
2 I know thy a workes, o Church of Ephesus, and the trauell, and patience, thou hast for my sake, and how thou detestest, and reproouest all that doe euill, and howe thou hast tried out the false Apostles, and hast found them dissembling liers.
3 And thou hast endurrd trouble patientlie, and for my names sake, hast stil continued in all godlie exercises, without fainting or falling backe.
4 Neuertheles, I haue to reproue thee, that thou hast made b defection from that charitable loue, that thou sometimes had.
5 Remember therfore, of that defection, repent and amend the same, by taking vp againe thy former charitable doing, or els I will come shortlie in my justice, and remoue my Church from among you, vnlesse you speedilie amend.
6 But in this I praise thee, that thou abhorrest the common harlotry and confusion of the heretike c Nicolaius, which also ar abhominable in my sight.
7 Let him that hath judgment vndersta^d, what Christ, d spirituallie appearing, speaketh vnto his Churches: To him, saith he, that ouercommeth his temptations, shal I giue the food of euerlasting life, which he shall enjoy in the spirituall e paradise of heauen, with God the Father aeternallie.
8 And vnto the Pastour or minister of the Church of the Smyrnians write: These things saith the Lord Iesus, who is without beginning, and without ending, who suffered f death for mans sake, and now liueth aeternallie.
9 I know thy works, thou Church of the Smyrnians, and the trouble that thou endurest, and both thy pouertie in spirit, and conte^ning of worldly riches; but thou hast g treasure abiding thee in heauen: I know also the blasphemous intisement that certain dissembled Iewes mak vnto you, but they ar the very deuils disciples, and Synagogue of Sathan.
10 Feare not therfore these persecutions,

which you shal suffer: for behold, I foreshewe you, it shall come to passe, that the devil shall stirre vp his tyrants to persecute and imprison you, that ye thereby may bee tempted, and abide triall, and that persecution shall laste tenne h yeares: but bee thou faithfull euen to the death of the bodie, and thou shalt bee crowned with the glorie of aeternall life.
11 Let him that hath judgement, vnderstande what Christ,i spirituallie appearing, speaketh vnto his Churches: he that abideth constant, ouercomming his temptations, shal be deliuered from the k aeternall death and damnation of the soule.
12 And to the Pastour of the Church of Pergamus, write: Thus saith the Lorde Iesus, out of whose mouth proceedeth the two-edged sword of true doctrine and sharp threatninges.
13 I know thy works o Church of Pergamus, and what wicked companie you dwel among, euen among those where Sathan hath set his throne, and yet you worship my name and haue not denied the true Christian faith in the daies of the greatest persecution, when your l Pastor Antipas, my faithful martyr was slaine by those tyrants among you, in whom Sathan dwelleth.
14 But I haue certaine offences to lay to thy charge, because thou entertainest them, who teach to eat things sacrificed to idols, and co^mit whoordome, as Balaa^ did m teach Balac to put out their beautiful whoores of Moab, with their glistering sacrifices to idols, and allured the childre^ of Israel both to eat of their idolothytes, and also to commit fleshlie whooredome.
15 Euen so you entertaine them among you, that maintaine the like doctrine of the Nicolaitans, who confusedly make wiues, and all other thinges to be common, whose doctrine is abhominable in my sight.
16 Repent and amend thy self hereof shortlie, or els I will suddainlie come against thee, and will ouerthrowe them with the deuouring sword of my threatnings.
17 Let him that hath judgme^t vnderstand, what Christ, spirituallie appearing, speaketh vnto his Churches: To him (saith he) that ouercommeth his temptations, wil I giue my selfe, as foode to his soule, who am the true, spirituall and invisible n bread of life, that came from heauen: And as the ancients gaue a owhite stone in token of victorie and freedom: so shal I, who am the true corner stone, giue my self to dwel in him, and he in me, euen that stone shall he haue, which is intituled by my newe and sauing name of Iesus, which none p doeth rightlie knowe, but hee that receiueth saluation thereby.
18 And vnto the Pastor of the Church of Thyatira write: These things saith the q Sonne of God, the fierie flame of whose eies seeth the secrets, and terrifieth the thoughts of all heartes: and whose feet are firme and stable to stande, as brasen pillers, in the defence of his Elect.
19 I know thy works, thy charitable loue, thy true seruice, thy liuelie faith, and thy gret patience, and that thy good and holie works do increase, and growe mo in the end, than they were in the beginning:
20 Notwithstanding, I haue certaine offences to lay to thy charge, in that thou sufferest the diuelish woman Iezabell (who calleth

her selfe a Prophetesse) to teach and seduce my seruauntes entising them both to the filthy whoordome of the bodie, and to r spirituall whoordome with idolles, in eating of their ethnick sacrifices, and Idolothytes.
21 And I haue forborne her for a season, giuing her leisure and space to repent, and amend her whoorish idolatrie, but she repented not.
22 Behold, I shall cause her s busk and set out all her idolatrous intisements, and those that goe a whooring after her idolatries shal be cast with her, into most extreame afliction vnlesse they repent them of their wicked workes.
23 And her t idolatrous children shall I destroie to the death, and all the Churches shall know that I the Lord am he, which searcheth out the desires of the mind, and secretes of the heart, and I will rewarde euerie one of you, according to your deseruings.
24 And vnto you I say, euen vnto the rest of them that are at Thyatira, so manie of you as haue not imbraced this diuelish doctrine, nor learned that profounde knoweledge (as they terme it) of Sathan, I will lay vpon you no uburthen of other traditions,
25 But that which I haue alreadie teached you, that keepe, and holde fast and sure, till I come againe, to judge the worlde.
26 For to them that doe ouercome their temptations, and perseuere in good workes, keeping my precepts to the ende, will I giue power to raigne and triumph with mee ouer all the wicked x nations.
27 And I in them, and they in mee, shall subdewe these wicked vnder the scepter of our seruitude, and as pot-shardes so shall

these bee broken and destroyed, euen of mee shall they haue power, as I haue receiued that power of God my father.
28 And I shall giue vnto them the light of the Euangell, and shall adorne them with the morning beames, of the Sonne of justice.
29 Let him that hath judgement vnderstande what Christe, spirituallie appearing, speaketh vnto his Churches,


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a Such is the mercie of God, that these good workes that wee acknowledge to be done by his holy Spirit, working in vs, hee imputes them to be our workes. But contrarilie, let the presumptuous man assure himself, that if he esteeme these good works to be of himselfe, God in his judgment shall let him find, to his confusion, that only God is good (Mar. 10.18) and that no goodnes is in man. ibid. And that all flesh is subdewed to sin (Rom. 3.9.10) Woe therfore, to him who otherwise presumptuouslie judgeth.
b Hereby learne, that a great number of good workes, are not sufficient, but God requireth at our hande, that wee preasse by all means possible, to attaine to a perfection in euerie good worke, as Christ testifieth, (Matth. 5.48.) saying, Be ye also perfect, as your Father in heauen is perfect.
c The Nicolaitans were hereticks, affirming wiues, and al things to be common. Hereof read more amplie the note m following.
d This Spirite that speaketh to Iohn, and to the Churches, is neither an Angel, neither the person of the holie Spirit, but Christ himselfe: for, this same Spirite that speaketh, calleth himselfe immediatelie the First and the Last, and he who died, and liued again, (ver. 8) and the Sonne of God (ver. 18.) Where note, that he therfore, being Christ, calleth here himselfe a Spirit, because he appeared not to Iohn in his humanitie, but spirituallie in his Deitie, vnder a shape, like to the Sonne of man (as saith the text, cap. 1.13) and not in his perfect shape of the Sonne of man: Of this read the notes l and s of the first chapter.
e Paradise literallie in the Scripture, is that part in the earth, wherein Adam was first placed: But there is a spiritual taking of Paradise, called the Paradise of God, taken for that joy in heauen, which the elect soules, and glorified bodies doe possesse: Read therupon Luk. 23.43. and 2. Cor. 12.4.
f Christ, in the text of the former noted, calling himselfe a Spirite, because he appeared not to Iohn, by his humanitie (as there is said) yet doeth Christ here speake of his humanitie, howe it died, and rose againe, although his Deitie vnder an humane shape, and not his humanitie it selfe, did then appeare to Iohn.
g How gladlie worldlie pouertie is to bee imbraced for riches in heauen, Christ teacheth, Mat. 19.21. and Mat. 6.19.20.21.
h How among the Prophets, daies do meane yeares, is prooved by our first proposition, and so these ten daies are ten yeares, euen the last ten yeares of Traianus raigne, wherein was great persecution, beginning that yeare, that Ignatius, teacher of Antiochia, and this S. Iohn his Disciple was martyred, Anno Christi, 109. and continuing vnto the yeare of Christ 119. that Adrian the Emperor began his raigne.
i How this Spirite that speakes, is simply no Spirite, but Christ, who is both flesh and Spirite, consider the notes f and d aboue written, and l and s chap. 1.
k Here, and Apoc. 20.6.14. and Apoc. 21.8. mention is made of the second death, meaning two deathes, to bee euen the death of the bodie, which ofte^times in the Scriptures is called a sleep: and the death of the soul, which is eternal da^nation. This same destinction vpon the co^trary part ye shal find in the scripture of the soul, or life, taking it in the first signification for the soul and life that liueth here: and in the second signification, for the soul and life, that liueth eternallie, as Mat. 10.38. and 16.25. Also two resurrectio^s you shal find mentioned in the Scriptures, the one in this world from sinnes and errours, the other at the latter day, when the flesh shall rise againe. Apoc. 20. Consider therefore, these three distinctions of death, life, and resurrection, when in the Scripture they occur.
l Antipas (saith Aretas) was the pastour: and minister of this same Church of Pergamus, by whose example of martyrdome, Christe here exhorteth the rest of that Church to constancie.
m By, and besides the common Ecclesiasticall histories, which

do describe the heresie of the Nicolaitans, to be, in that they esteem wiues and all thinges common: Here S, Iohn doth also set out their confused opinion and double whoordome, by example and comparison to the wicked Prophet Balaam, who deuised a way to entise the children of Israel to perish by offending God, both in corporal and spirituall whoordom. Num. 25.1. and Num. 31.16. So then doubtles, the Nicolaitans hath bene a sect, that vsed their wiues and women as common, and spared not to eat the offerings made to idoles, expreslie against Paule, 1. Cor. 7.8. and 10.
n That this hid Manna is Christ Iesus, who is our spiritual food, all Christians must confesse. So then, the bread and the wine in the Sacrament, being publique and visible signes, patent to our eies, cannot bee that invisible and hid Manna, which is Christ: and so consequentlie, by transubstantiation, the bread and wine doe not become Christs bodie and blood: but contrarilie, that visible Manna and corporal food of bread and wine, that is taken with our hands, and incorporate in our bodies, and nourisheth our bodies in this transitorie life, betokeneth onelie, and representeth in the Sacrament, that the glorified and inuisible Manna Christ Iesus, who is ascended and hid in heauen, apprehended of vs by faith, and adjoyned to vs spirituallie, doeth nourish our soules to eternall life. And so, for conclusion, that patent Manna, is not this hid Manna by transubstantiation, as the Papists do judge: but contrarilie, the visible Manna doth represent the invisible, and assureth vs of the full fruit and fruition thereof.
o Aretas reporteth, that the ancients were accustomed to giue a certain white stone to him, that did get the victory in their plaies and games: and therefore, justlie here may be taken for a signe of victory, that Christ doth giue vs ouer our temptations. Moreouer, among the ancients, they that cleansed or absolued an accused person, did cast in a white stone: and they that filed or convicted him, did cast in a blacke stone, as Ovid testifieth, lib. 15. Metamorph. in these words:
Mos erat antiquis niveis atrisque lapillis,his damnare reos, ill^ absolvere culpa.Sentence was giuen in ancient times, by stones black and white,The black convicted men of crimes, the other did them quite.
So, in that sense, this white stone may well be taken for the absolution

of our sins, which Christ giueth to al that victoriously persevere in his faith. In the third sense, himselfe is called the corner stone, Mat. 21.42. And therefore, saith the text, There is written thereon a new name, or rather (as cap. 3.12) my newe name: euen that corner stone representeth Christ Iesus. For as Iehova is the old name of the Father and Creator, in the old testament, so is Christ Iesus the newe name of our redeemer in the newe Testament, Where note in Prophecies, that it is no absurditie to take a propheticall figure in diuers agreeable senses, as Apoc. 17.9. the seuen heads are both taken for seuen hils, and for seuen kings and gouernments: read that text it selfe.
p Whether by the former note, this white stone meaneth Christ himselfe, or that victorie and absolution, that proceedeth from him: sure it is, that by Christ onlie obtaine we Christ, and all his benefites: and the name of Christ and Christians receiue wee thereby, dwelling so inseparablie in him, and he in vs, that none doe perfectlie taste how joyful a thing it is to receiue him, and bee participant of his saluation, except those that receiue the same. This name (Apoc. 19.12) none is said to knowe but himselfe: meaning none to knowe Christ, but the whole bodie of Christe, who dwell in him, and he in them: for Christ and his members are called Christ, 1. Cor. 12.12.
q How this Sonne of God, who also suffered fleshlie death, vers. 8. is in the verses 7.11.17. and 29. called a Spirit, without any repugnance: read thereupon the notes d and f aboue written.
r By this text and the conference hereof with the former 14. and 15. verses, it is euident, that this Iezabel was a false Nicolaitan Prophetesse, teaching the verie doctrin of Balaam and Nicolaus.
s As the bed is the execution place of whoordom, so metaphoricallie, to lay this false Prophetesse in her bed, is no other thing than to set her gloriouslie at her altar and sacrifices, among her idols, where is meaned, that if anie there, following her idolatries, doe commit spiritual whoordom, and eat of her idolothytes, they shall perish with her for euer: Where note, that in the Scripture whoordome is oft taken in a spirituall meaning for idolatrie: as Deut. 31.16. Iudg. 2.17. and infinit other places.
t As the children of the true Church are those, who haue bene fostered vpon the word of life, and shall euer retaine the same, so

they that without recouerie, are poysoned with hereticall doctrine, are here called the children of these heretikes that haue teached them.
u Here doth our Sauiour expreslie note how sweete a yoak his yoak is, as Matth. 11.30. and how to adde vnto the pure and naked word of God, is so burthenous, that he himselfe will adde no farther traditions therunto, til his latter comming. Seeing Christ the^ wil adde no more than his simple word, by what authoritie doeth men, vnder pretext of Catholikes and Christians, adde to the Christian religion infinite traditions and ceremonies of mens inuentitions, against the which Christ speaketh both here, and in Mark. 7. and Luk. 11. and in other places.
x Though to governe all Nations vvith a Scepter of yron etc. bee a propertie onlie assigned to Christ in all the Scriptures, yet in his mercie, he so is in vs, and we in him, that therby we are made heires and partakers with him in his kingdom and glory; and so conseque^tly also in this preheminence ouer the wicked nations. Of this vnion and communion promised to vs, read Ioh. 14.20. and Ioh. 17, 21. and Mat. 19.28. and 25.34. Rom. 8.17. and 1. Cor. 6.3. Apoc. 3.21. And therefore, in this text, to the same sentence immediatly ar subjoyned these words, Euen as I receiued of my father: meaning, that hee giues vs power to raign ouer the wicked, as he hath receiued that power of his father, etc. And so I allow not this lection: Euen as I receiued of my Father, so wil I giue him the morning starre.



CHAP. III.

THE ARGUMENT.
The former four Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna. Pergamus, and Thyatira, being in the former chapter admonished to perseuere in their wel doings, and amend their euill doings, our Sauiour in this chapter, proceeds with the like admonition to the last three Churches of Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea.


The Text.
AND write vnto the Angell of the Churche, which is at Sardi, these things saith hee, that

hath the seuen Spirits of God, and the seuen stars: I know thy works for thou hast a name that thou liuest, but thou art dead.
2 Be awake, and stre^gthen the things which remaine, that are readie to die: for I haue not found thy workes perfect before God.
3 Remember therefore, how thou hast receiued and heard, and hold fast, and repent: If therefore thou wilt not watch, I will come on thee as a theefe, and thou shalt not knowe what houre I wil come vpon thee.
4 Notvvithstanding, thou hast a few names yet in Sardi, whiche haue not defiled their garmentes: and they shall walk with me in white: for they ar worthie.
5 He that ouercommeth, shall be clothed in white aray, and I will not put his name out of the book of life, but I will confes his name before my Father, and before his Angels.
6 Let him that hath an eare, hear what the Spirite saith vnto the Churches.
7 And write vnto the Angell of the Church which is of Philadelphia, these things saith

he that is holie and true, which hath the key of Dauid, which openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth,
8 I know thy works: behold, I haue set before thee an ope^ dore and no man can shut it: for thou haste a litle strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name.
9 Behold, I wil mak the^ of the Synagogue of Satan, which call themselues Iewes and are not, but do lie: behold, I say, I will make them, that they shall come and worship before thy feet, and shall know that I haue loued thee.
10 Becaus thou hast kept the worde of my patience, therefore, I will deliuer thee from the hour of tentation, which wil come vpon all the worlde, to trie them that dwell vpon the earth.
11 Beholde, I come shortlie: holde that which thou hast, that no man tak thy crown
12 Him that ouerco^meth wil I make a pillare in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I wil write vpo^ him the name of my God, and the name of the citie

of my God, vvhich is, the newe Ierusalem, which co^meth downe out of heauen from by God, and I vvill vvrite vppon him my new name.
13 Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirite saith vnto the Churches.
14 And vnto the Angell of the Church of the Laodiceans write, These thinges saith Amen, the faithfull and true witnesse, the beginning of the creatures of God.
I Know thy works that thou art neither colde nor hote: I wold thou werest colde or hote.
16 Therfore, becaus thou art luke warme, and neither colde nor hote, it will come to passe, that I shall spew thee out of my mouth.
17 For thou sayest, I am rich and increased with goods, and haue need of nothing, and knowest not how thou art wretched and miserable, and poore, and blinde, and naked.
18 I counsel thee to buy of me golde tryed by the fire, that thou mayest be made rich, and white raiment, that thou maist be clothed and that thy filthy nakednes do not appear: and annoint thine eies with eie-salue, that thou maist see.
19 As manie as I loue, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therfore and amend.
20 Behold, I stande at the doore, and knock. If any man heare my voice, and open the dore, I wil com in vnto him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
21 To him that ouercommeth, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, euen as I ouercame, and sitte with my Father in his throne.
22 Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirite saith to the Churches.



The paraphrastical Exposition.
ANd vnto the Pastour of the Church of Sardis write: These things saith the Lord Iesus, who hath the seuenfolde graces of his holie Spirite vnited in Godheade with him,

and therby holdeth the Pastors of your seue^ Churches vnder his protection. I knowe thy workes, o Sardis, thou bearest the aname, that thou liuest in mee by liuelie faith: but contrarilie, thou and thy faith are but dead.
2 Awake from thy slothfulnesse, and by godlie exercises strengthen and quicken vp againe, the small spark of faith, which as yet is in thee, but is in danger vtterlie to bee extinguished: for I haue no waies founde thy workes to be perfect before God.
3 Remember therefore, the doctrine that you receiued, and heard, and cleaue fast therunto, and repent thy sweruing therfrom: for if thou wilt not repent and be wakened from sin, I shall come as a b theefe vnawares vpon thee, and shall spoile thee of all my benefites, and thou shall not know the houre nor time when I come.
4 Neuerthelesse, I know ye haue a certain in Sardis with you, knowne to me by name, which yet haue not defiled their bodies, and these shall walke with me in the puritie and regeneration of the bodie, for I haue accepted them as worthie thereof.
5 He that ouercommeth his temptations, shal be clothed with a pure and glorified bodie, and I will not blot out his name from among the liuing, but I will aduouch him by name, as mine own before c God and his holie Angels.
6 Let him that hath judgment vnderstand what Christ, spiritually appearing, speaketh vnto his Churches.
7 And vnto the Pastour of the Church of Philadelphia write: These thinges saieth the Lord Iesus, who is holie and true in all his sayinges, and hath the key of the spirituall

d house of Dauid, euen his holie Temple and Church, to open vp the true doctrine thereof, which none thereafter shal be able to obscure: and to close vp the mysteries thereof, which none, but by him, shall be able againe to open vp.
8 I knowe, o Church of Philadelphia, thy good workes: Beholde, I haue made to thee an open accesse to the knoweledge of mine Euangell, and none shall be able to close vp or hide the same from thee: for thou art strong e in a parte, and haste firmelie kept mine holie word, and hast neuer denied my name.
9 Beholde, I will make these pretended Iewes, who are indeede the f Synagogue of Sathan, and are no true Israelites, but doe teach lies: Beholde, (I say) I shal make these, that now wold seduce and troble thee, to com and fall downe penitent g at thy feete, yeelding reuerence vnto thee and worship vnto me, when as they shall know that I haue loued thee.
10 And because thou haste kept my precepts and holy word, with patience and constancie, therefore, I will deliuer thee in the time h of triall and persecution, which shall come shortlie vpon the Christians throughout all the world, whereby their constancie shal be tried, in all the quarters of the earth.
11 Behold, it shall not be long to my last comming, hold therefore, and sticke fast, to thati doctrine that thou hast receiued, least thy glorious reward and triumphant crown be giuen to another.
12 Him that here ouerco^meth his temptations, will I promote hereafter to bear speciall rule in that heauenlie Temple and kingdome

of God, and hee shall no more swerue from mee, nor wander astray, for I wil intitle him by the name kof a godlie man, and by the name and stile of the citizens of Gods heauenlie kingdome and newe Ierusalem, euen of that glorious estate, that God from the highest heauen, shal vouchsafe to poure downe on his elect: and finallie, I wil stile and name him by mine owne newe name, a true Christian.
13 Let him that hath judgement vnderstand, what Christe, spirituallie appearing, speaketh to his Churches.
14 And vnto the Pastour of the Church of the Laodiceans write thou, These thinges saith l Veritie it selfe, euen the Lord Iesus the most faithfull and true witnesse, the m originall by whome all the creatures of God were created.
15 I know thy workes o Church of Laodicea, that thou art neither simplie ignorant, nor zealous and feruent according to thy knowledge, I would thou werest either colde by n ignorance, or feruent by knowledge:
16 But because thou art betwixt them luke warme, and neither a simple ignorant nor a feruent Christian: it muste therefore come to passe, that I cast thee out from these whom I professe with my mouth to be mine.
17 For thou vauntest that thou art riche, and increased with worldlie goods, and supposest that thou hast need of no other thing, but thou knowest not, howe in trueth thou hast but a wretched and miserable soule, an art poore and indigent of al heauenlie treasure, and art blinded with worldlie affections, and seest not the filthie nakednesse of thy sinnes.
18 I counsell thee therefore, by thy prayers and daylie supplications, to buy and purchase at my hand, the fine and o golden treasures of spirituall graces, that you may bee made rich in heauen, and that you purchase to be clad with the p merit, and innocency of my passio^, that being clothed therwith, the qfilth of thy sinnes be neuer discouered: adjoin also to thy dul senses my r cleare doctrine, that you may see the way of life.
19 As many as I loue, I doe rebuke and chasten them, be yee therefore feruent and zealous, and amend your former life.
20 Behold, I stand euer readie knocking at the doore of your conscience: whoso yeeldeth vnto mine admonitions, and opens his heart and mind, by penitence and remorse, I will certainlie dwell in him, and wil communicate al things with him, and he with me.
21 To him that ouercommeth his temptations, wil I grant power to s sit with me in my kingdom, partaker of my glorie, euen as I ouercame sin and death, and do sit with my father in his kingdome and glorie.
22 Let him that hath judgme^t vnderstand what Christ, spiritually appearing, speaketh vnto his Churches.


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a Hereby is to be noted, in what estate and danger of death stand all hypocrites, and these that in name onlie are called Christians, whereas God contrarilie, craueth of vs, that so far as we may, wee euer aspire to perfection in effect, and not in name.
b Of this metaphore and comparison of Christ his suddaine comming, and the comming of a theefe, read his own words Mat. 24.43. Luk. 12.39. and 1 Thes. 5.2. and 2 Pet. 3.10. and Apoc. 16.15. thereby exhorting vs to continuall watching and attentiuenes.
c This is a comfortable spur to mooue vs publiklie, boldlie and with constancie to the death, to professe and confesse the name of so worthie a Lorde: seeing hee before God and his Angels doth not spare by name to confesse vs, although we be most vnworthie creatures. Where, note the vnseparable communion betwixte Christ and vs, he doth here confesse our name: and vers. 12. hee writes on vs his name: read k following.
d Hereby plainlie doeth it appeare, that the Prophecie of Esay 22.20. of Eliakim, hath both a literall and spirituall meaning: A literall, whereby it is prophecied, that Eliakim the sonne of Hilkia, should beare the charge ouer the house of Dauid, as was performed 4. Reg. 18.18. A spirituall meaning, prophecied and meaned of Christe the true Eliakim, that is to say, the God of the resurrection, or God that rose againe (ex Hierom. de interpretatione nominum) who descended of Eliakim, Luk. 3.31. Whose father Hilkia is here in Luke, called Melcha. Els were there two severall Eliakims descended of Dauid. In this sense, Christ the true Eliakim is spirituallie prophecied of in Esay, and here expounded in this text, to bear the keies of the house of Dauid, etc. meaning, that hee beares the spirituall gouernement and censure of his Church, to open and close, etc. as is before said in the paraphrase.
e This litle strength or strongnesse in a part, being appearinglie no great strength, that God had giuen them for their talent: is neuertheles greatly commended of God, because they haue gained therewith, and neither haue lost it, nor the profite and gaine therof, but haue put it to profitable vses, according to the parable, Matth. 25. And therefore, most of all the seuen Churches, this Church is alwaies commended of God, and in nothing reproved.
f These appearinglie were some counterfeit Christians, and alledged Iewes, mentioned before, cap. 2.2.9. who purposed with their heresies to haue seduced these Churches from the trueth.
g This is a reuerence to be done by them to the Church of Philadelphia, and an adoration and worshipping made at their feet of Philadelphia, not to them by way of idolatrie, but to God: and therfore, is it subjoyned in the text, and they shal knowe that I haue loued thee: meaning, that they vnderstanding that I loue thee, shal therefore reuerence thee, and worship me at your feete, that I may also loue them: Otherwise it were idolatrie, and not onlie would not

be caused by God, but also would be forbidden by him, and by his Angels, as is done Reuel. 19.10. and Reuel. 22.8.9.
h This was (appearingly) that great and vniuersall persecution, during the last ten yeares of Traianus raigne, mentioned before, Apo. 2.10. and note h thereof.
i No rites, ceremonies, traditions of men, nor other burthen, but my simple word and sweet yoke, as before (cap. 2.24.25 and note u thereof) is said at length.
k This is an vnremooueable mark, a perpetual title, and consta^t profession, whereby euen to the death we are marked, named, and stiled by the name of God, godlie men, and by the name of his true Church, true professors: yea, and finallie, by that name that our Sauiour (who was before al aeternitie) had but newlie receiued, when he was called Iesus, or Sauior, and the onlie Christ: we are therefore (after his name) called Christians, and made participant of that salvation signified by that new name, Iesus, in the newe Testament of his blood.
l Amen most commo^lie is taken for confirmation of a true and certain thing, but likewise it signifieth trueth and veritie it selfe, and in that sense it is here take^, and is put as an epithet and stile of Christ, who is the fountaine of all trueth, and trueth it selfe, as he testifieth, Ioh. 14.6. I am the vvay, the trutth, and the life: and this stile of Amen, or truth, is set before, being purposed in the following text to shew immediatly of his faithful and true testimony and witnessing.
m Hereof read Coloss. 1.15.16.17. where ye shal find, that God by Christ created al things visible and invisible, and that Christ was before all things, euen before all aeternitie, and therefore, is here called the beginning and originall of all the creatures of God.
n Of men colde in true religion, or yet, exceeding hot and fervent in a wrong religion before their calling, there are infinite exa^ples, that God hath made the^ after their calling notable instrumentes in his Church, and zealous professors: But how dangerous the estate of these luke warm people is, who, after their calling, ar neither hot nor colde, but knowing the truth, do notwithstanding liue in a careles mediocrity and ydle securitie, Christ testifieth, Luk. 12.37. Matth. 11.20. Also of the terrible daunger of these, read Heb. 10.26.
o Gods word, wisdome and doctrin, is compared and preferred to gold or siluer, fined in the fornace: read Prou. 8.10.11. and Psal. 12.7. So, by this gold so fined, is meant the spirituall riches and treasure of these and all other godlie benefites.
p These white garments, are not onlie our mortified flesh, and regenerate bodies, but euen vnder the termes of garmentes Synecdochice expressed, is meaned that vniuersal puritie, both of bodie and soule, that we obtaine, being washed by the innocent blood of Christ Iesus, as is proued by these, who (Apoc. 7) had long white robes, who (ibid. vers. 13. and 14.) are saide to haue washed their robes, and made the same white in the blood of the Lambe Christ Iesus: and we knowe by the Christian trueth, that not particularly our robes, yea, not our flesh onelie, but vniuersallie, both in bodie and soule, we are washed in that blood, and obtaine ful remission of al our sinnes
q Nakednes of it self is no villany, as before the fal, Adam had no shame, but a sinful nakednes is indeed vile and shameful, which as God corporallie hid to Adam with garme^ts of skins after his fal: (Gen. 3.21) So Christ spirituallie hid the same, by his white garments of innocencie in his death and passion, whereby our offences are remitted, hid, and washed cleane away.
r This sight and eie-salue is spiritually taken (as in Christs parable, Mat. 7.34.5. and many other places) for the judgment and foresight of the mind, and helps thereof, such as studie, diligence, and exercise, which leads vs the right way of saluation: and can therfore, no waies be literallie imputed to the corporall sight.
s Here is a comparison, whereof we, vile creatures, are not worthie; to him bee glorie, that glorifieth the vnworthie. Then as I (saith Christ) haue obtained victory ouer al temptations, and therefore, raigne with my Father: so shal ye also (if ye obtein victorie ouer your temptations) raigne with me aeternallie. The cause hereof, is because wee are vnited in him, and hee in vs, as the Father is in him, and he in the Father: read chap. 2.26. and note x thereof.

And here endeth the first part of this booke, concerning the particular admonitions to the seuen Churches: Now followeth the general Discourse to the Worldes end.



CHAP. IIII.

THE ARGVMENT.
This vision the Spirite of God doeth premit, and set before the whole prophecie and historie following, as a most necessarie thing, to know the true throne of God and his word here in this world, and these authentike bookes and Scriptures, which teach the same, here set out in this chapter before, he proceeds to declare the tyrannie that the Antichrist, and his prophane Princes are to vse against that holie word and constant professours thereof, to the end of the world.


The Text
1 AFter this I looked, and behold, a doore was open in heauen, and the first voice which I hard was as it were of a tru^pet talking with mee, saying, Come vp hither, and I will shewe thee things which must be done hereafter.
2 And immediately, I was rauished in the spirite, and behold, a throne was set in heauen, and one sate vppon the throne.
3 And he that sate, was to looke vpon, like vnto a Iasper stone, and a Sardine, and there vvas a rainbow round

about the throne in sight like to an Smaragds
4 And round about the throne vvere foure and twenty seates, and vpon the seates, I sawe foure and twentie Elders sitting, clothed in white raiment, and had on their heads crowns of golde.
5 And out of the throne proceded lightenings, and thunderings, and voyces, and there wer seuen lamps of fire, burning before the throne, which are the seue^ spirits of God.
6 And before the throne ther vvas a sea of glas lik vnto crystal and in the mids of the throne, and round about the throne vvere foure

beastes full of eies before and behind.
7 And the firste beast vvas like a lion, and the second beast like a calf and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast vvas like a flying eagle.
8 And the four beasts had each of them sixe winges about him, and they were full of eies within, and they ceased not day nor night, saying, Holie, holie, holie Lorde God almightie, Which was, and Which is, and Which is to come.
9 And when those beasts gaue glory, and honour, and thanks to him that sate on the throne, which liueth for euer and euer,
10 The four and twentie Elders fel down before him that sate on the throne, and worshipped him, that liueth for euermore, and cast their crownes before the throne, saying,
11 Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receiue glorie, and honour, and power: for thou haste created all things, and for thy willes sake they are, and haue bene created.



The paraphrastical Exposition.
1 AFter this I beheld, and lo, the door of heaue^ly knowledge was opened vnto me, and a first, I was called, as by the mightie and fearfull trumpet of Gods Spirit, to arise fro^ earthly cares, and affections, to high and heauenlie conte^plations, that I might see these things, that hereafter should come to passe.
2 Then was I immediatlie rauished in spirit, and did behold and conte^plate the heauenly bthrone and te^ple of God, set here amo^g his faithfull, and in that throne, God by his word erected in honour, and set in authoritie.
3 And this majestie of God (though in him selfe he bee pure, bright and shining) yet in our dull apprehension it seemeth darke, and mixed with mysteries, as the Iasper stone is mixed with vaines and spottes, which our eies can not pierce: neuerthelesse, that weake apprehension is euer increasing, flourishing, and continuing greene, as the Iasper, holding fresh, and recent the memorie euer of Christes blood and passion, represented by the bloodie and fleshie hew of the Sardine, and this inferiour throne of Gods majestie, is circled so about with the

couenant of his e protection, as a rainbowe, that whosoeuer shall approch to his Majestie, are vnder the winges of his protection, for this couenant of protection, proceedeth from the throne and majestie of God, as the Smaragdus hath his beginning and growing from the Iasper.
4 And round about, and on euerie side is this majestie of Gods trueth and true religion, compassed, adorned, and set out by the honourable thrones and authorities of the d twentie foure authentike bookes of the old Testament, as wise Senators, sitting and consulting in Gods cause, clothed all in puritie, for that in them is found no lie, and crowned with victorie, for conquering, and enlarging Gods kingdome.
5 Forth of this throne and majestie of Gods trueth, and against the contemners thereof, proceedeth foreshewinges of tempestuous troubles, theatnings of warres, and finallie, the thundering out of all maner of plagues, in Gods justice: before this throne and majestie of God, brightlie shineth the e seuen speciall graces of Gods onlie Spirite, communicated to all the faithfull.
6 Before the eies of his maiestie, the raging seas and stormes of this world, ar made fixed and stable as glasse, that his elect (though perhaps they slide) yet they shall not bee drowned therein: yea, these drumlie seas of worldlie tyrantes are made cleare as Christal, and the secrets of their hearts disclosed. This holy throne of Gods trueth is adorned within and without, with the perfect testimony of his f four Euangelists, repleat with the eies of discretion, espying before the^ the prophecies of the Messias to be fulfilled in Christ, and

espying after them, that this our Messias should raigne for euer.
7 The first Euangelist Mark begins his first face or leafe, at the voice, crying like a roring Lyon in the wildernesse, Prepare the way of the Lord, etc. The seconde Evangelist Luke, begins his first face or leafe, at Zachariah his offering incense (as it were a bullocke) at the altar, etc. The third Euangelist Mathew hath his first face or leaf, of the genealogie of Christ, as hee is man. The fourth Euangelist Iohn, begins his first face or leafe, at the high and diuine essence of Christs Godheade, flying so high in his stile, that he is compared to an Eagle.
8 These foure, as with sixe winges, betokening threefold haste and expedition, proceed swiftlie in their function, opening the historie of Christ, and making the same patent to the eies of the whole worlde: so that day nor night, these neuer stay from vttering Gods praise, saying, Holie, holie, holie, Lord God almightie, which was, which is, and which is to come.
9 And as these Euangels and their professours doe vtter this glorie: honour, and thanks to God, that liueth for euer, for that hee redeemed vs in Christ,
10 The foure and twentie bookes of the old Testament, by the true professors thereof, kneele down in Gods presence, and worship him that liueth for euer and euer, acknowledging him to be the authour of their triu^pha^t victory, and glorious crownes, saying,
11 Thou only, o Lord, art worthy to receiue glory, honour and power of all thy creatures, for that thou hast created all things, and at thy pleasure and wil they subsiste, and to expresse thy glorie, they haue bene created.



Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a Before any accesse to heauenlie knowledge, wee must firste leaue off all worldlie affections.
b Howe and why this throne, that here is saide to appeare in heauen, is Gods heauenlie trueth and true religion, whereby he sits enthronized and authorised among his Saintes vpon earth, is prooued at length in our 17. proposition.
c The Rain-bowe was shewed to Noah, as a couenant of Gods protection, that the world should no more be destroyed by water againe, Genes. 9.15. and so generallie in mysteries, it is taken for the couenant of protection.
d Of these foure and twentie Elders, and how they meane the foure and twentie authentike bookes of the olde Testament, read the 18. proposition. These doeth S. Hierome in prologo Galeato nominate this way, Genesis, 1. Exodus. 2. Leuiticus. 3. Numeri. 4. Deuteronom. 5. Ioshua. 6. Iudges. 7. Ruth. 8. Samuel. 9. Kings. 10. Chron. 11, Ezra. 12. Hester. 13. Iob, 14. Psalmes. 15. Prouerbs. 16. Ecclesiastes. 17. Song of Salomon. 18. Esay. 19. Ieremies prophecie. 20. Ieremies Lamentations. 21. Ezechiel. 22. Daniel. 23. the twelue small Prophets. 24.
e These seuen Lampes, or seuen Spirites, illuminating Gods throne, are the seuen speciall and princincipall giftes, graces, and functions of Gods onlie Spirite, besides the innumerable smaller benefites thereof: of which read Roman. 12. and 1. Corinth. 12. And this septenarie partition hereof, to be receiued of old, is euident by the Hymne Veni Creator Spiritus, where after it is saide, Tu septiformis munere, etc. In these seuen Lampes, or seuen Candlestickes, chap. 1. or seuen grained Candlesticke, specified in Exodus, chapt. 25. and chap. 37. is also a further symbole or figure contained, to wit, both of the seuen Churches of Asia to whome Saint Iohn wrote, as also of the seuen Churches that Paule wrote vnto. And of the one and twentie Epistles and remanent books of the new Testament, figured by the one and twentie cuppes of the graines, of that Leuiticall Candlesticke, with the remanent bowles and floures thereof: Which Churches, books, and Epistles are planted and framed, by the seuenfold grace of Gods onlie Spirit, and being the first lights and lanternes of the primitiue

Church, are therfore here called seuen lamps, whereby the throne of Gods word on earth, is illustrated and adorned.
f That these foure beastes be the foure Euangelles, is prooued by our 19. proposition, including also metonymice* the true professours thereof: But how Ezechiel agrees thereto, and also with this Text is to be declared. Ezechiel therefore, cap. 1. seeth these beasts after a more ample maner, different from this Text in circumstance, but not in effect: For first, in Ezech. they haue foure wings, meaning speed in their future co^ming: here haue they everie one sixe wings, meaning much greater speed and diligence, in their present function. Secondlie, there euerie one of them, haue all their foure faces, and the wings of euery one joyned with others: meaning that euerie Euangelist agreeablie teacheth of Christ, borne as a man, sacrificed and slaine as a bullocke, victorious ouer sin and death as a Lyon: and finallie, rising vp and ascending to heaue^ as a flying Eagle. And both these four patent faces, and chiefe heads of Christianisme, as also euerie smaller head and point of doctrine, of anie one Euangelist to be contained in the others, and so one to be all, and all foure to bee as one, as true witnesses should be, and therefore, are their wings joyned, that where one flewe, all flewe, tending all to one purpose and scope: But here in the Reuelation, though their faces are seperate, there is no repugnance: for they are foure distinct witnesses indeed, but here also, are they agreeable with Ezechiel, in that by this text, they tend all one way, saying al in one voice, Holie, holie, holie, etc. Thirdlie, there they haue wheeles with the^, etc. that is, the armie and congregations of Gods elect, going the waies they go, eschewing the waies they eschew, reposing on the groundes, whereon they repose, eue^ on Christ the ground stone, for that the Spirit is all one, that is in them, and in vs Gods congregation, euen that Spirit of God that indited those foure beastes and Evangelles, instructeth vs his Armie and Chariots, to fight out valiantlie our spirituall battels. So on the other part, the Reuelation agreeth herewith, speaking (chap. 5.11.12.13) of infinit number of Saints and creatures, that with these Euangelists praised God. For conclusion, these and al other appearing varieties, and supposed repugnance of scriptures in circumstance, are mere harmonies, and perfect agreementes in effect.




CHAP. V.

THE ARGVMENT
As God never left his Church destitute of Prophets and prophecies, to comfort and forewarne them against al troubles: So here is described howe Christ his Church, and throne of his trueth and true religion, hath this booke of prophecie adioyned: Wherein is set out, what great grief and dolour it were to the Elect, if they lacked this foresight of the good successe, and prosperous end of their miseries: for the which cause, Christ here hath revealed this booke of prophecie to his Elect Church: like as on the other parte, his whole Saintes and elect congregation, doth render him praise and thankes therefore for ever.


The Text.
AND I saw in the right hande of him that sate vp on the throne, a Booke written within, and on the backeside, sealed with seuen seales,
2 And I sawe a strong Angel, which preached with a loud voice, Who is woorthy to open the booke, and to loose the seals thereof:
3 And no man in heaue^, nor in earth, neither vnder the earth, was able to open the Booke, neither to look theron.
4 Then I wept much, because no man was found worthie to open and to read the Booke, neither to looke thereon.
5 And one of the Elders said vnto me, weep

not: behold, the Lyon which is of the tribe of Iuda, the roote of Dauid, hath obtained to open the booke, and to loose the seuen seales thereof.
6 Then I beheld, and loe, in the mids of the throne, and of the four beasts, and in the mids of the Elders, stoode a Lamb as thogh he had bene killed, which had seuen horns, and seuen eies, which are the seuen Spirits of God, sent into all the world.
7 And he came and tooke the booke out of the right hand of him, that sate vppon the throne.
8 And whe^ he had take^ the book, the foure beastes, and the foure and twentie Elders, fel down before the Lamb hauing euerye one harps and golden vials ful of odours, which are the prayers of the Saintes.
9 And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthie to take the Booke, and to open the seals therof, becaus thou wast killed, and hast

redemed vs to God by thy blood out of euery kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.
10 And hast made vs vnto our God, Kings, and Priestes, and wee shall raigne on the earth.
11 Then I beheld, and I hard the voice of many Angels round about the throne, and about the beasts, and the Elders, and there vvere thousand thousands.
12 Saying with a loud voice, Worthie is the Lambe, that was killed to receiue power, and riches, and wisdome, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise.
13 And all the creatures which are in heauen, and on the earth, and vnder the earth, and in the sea, and al that are in them, heard I, saying, Praise, and honor, and glory, and power be vnto him, that sitteth vpon the throne, and vnto the Lamb for euermore.
14 And the foure beasts said: Amen, and the foure and twentie Elders fell downe, and worshipped him that liueth for euermore.



The Paraphrasticall exposition.
AND I considered, that onelie in the mercifull hand of the Almightie, that sitteth in the throne of his trueth, standeth the a reuelation of al thinges done hitherto, or that shall occurre and come to passe hereafter, and that these mysteries were hid and closed from the world, as if they b were seuen foldly sealed.
2 And I perceiued, that althogh the most mightie Angels of heauen were inquisitiue, and shoulde openlie proclaime, who were worthie to open these sealed mysteries, and to make the same patent;
3 They should finde no creature in heauen, earth, or vnder the earth, worthy or able to open the same, or to foresee them:
4 For the which cause, I (for the whole elect) greatlie mourned and lamented, that none was founde worthie to open these Euangelical mysteries of our redemption, and Christian historie following thereupon.
5 Till by one of the twentie foure bookes of the old Testament, euen c by Genesis (chap.

49.8.9.10.) wee receiued first this comfort, that out of the tribe of Iuda (which was the root and stocke, whereof Dauid and Christe sprang) should arise a victorious Lyon ouer all his enemies, who should be our true Shiloh and Messias, in whom al nations should be blessed, and shuld be the ladder (Gen* 28.12.) by which we should attain to heauen, and all heauenlie mysteries: so that no secretes, although they were seuenfoldlie sealed, could be latent or hid from him.
6 And behold, among these of Gods true Temple and holie religion, euen his foure Evangelists, and true professors of the foure and twentie bookes of the olde testament, this came to passe, and was perfourmed in Iesus Christ our Lambe, who was sacrificed for vs, and seeming vtterlie dead, did rise again, and liueth aeternallie, in d seuenfolde power and prouidence of that only spirit of God, which is dispersed seuerallie amongst the electe throughout the whole world.
7 For hee is nowe come fleshlie into this world, and hath receiued at the hands of his Father, perfect knowledge and reuelation of the whole mysteries of our redemption, and historie following thereupon.
8 Which as that immaculate Lamb receiued, and began to open and preach: his whole elect of the old and new Testaments, prostrate themselues before his majestie, and rejoicing as with timbrels, do offer vp their vials ful of the heauenly smel of their holie prayers.
9 Singing gladlie the joyful e song of our new redemption in his blood, confessing this their Lord, to be onlie worthy to receiue the doctrine of our redemption, and to open vp the mysteries, and whole historie following

therupon, for that euen he it is, that hath died for vs, and hath f redeemed vs in his blood; and hath reconciled vs to God, and of all the tribes, tongues, kindreds, and nations, hee hath gathered vs together.
10 And made vs Kings and Priests, to God, and euen with him shall we raigne, while wee are yet in this ff earth.
11 And I considered the joyful voice also, of infinite of Gods holie Angels, that stande awaiting on the throne of Gods trueth, and in defence of his holie religion, and doctrine of the new and olde Testamentes, euen thousand thousands beheld I,
12 Professing openlie, that immaculate Lambe, that was crucified, to be worthie to receiue power, and riches, wisedome, and strength, with honour, glorie, and praise.
13 And al the creatures which are in heauen, and on the earth, and vnder the earth, and in the sea, euen all that are in the^, vnderstood I to yeeld, euerie one in his own kind, the like praise, honour, glorie, and power vnto that Almightie, that sits in the throne of his trueth, and vnto this his immaculate Lambe for evermore.
14 And as the foure Evangelistes yeelded thereto their testimony, the 24. books of the olde Testament, euen all the true professors thereof (vnderstanding their prophecies and expectation of the Messias nowe compleate) doe prostrate themselues, and doe worship him therefore, that liueth for euer and euer.


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a That by a booke is meaned Prophecies, Reuelations, and admonitions, consider by the tenth chapter hereof: and Ezech. 3.1

But in that it was written without and within, it signifieth, that it contained patent histories of thinges in S. Iohns daies, and secrete prophecies of thinges to come after his daies, among the Christians, as euidentlie appeareth, Reuel. 1.19. and note u thereof: the like ye shal finde in Ezech. 2.10.
b That each of these seales doth containe seuen yeares, is prooued by our 9. proposition: but why, and in what respects they are called seals, appeareth to be these causes: First, becaus (as proposition 9. is said) they are a part of Daniels weekes, which indeed, are mysticall and sealed weekes, as saith the Angell (Dan. 12.9.) These vvordes are closed and sealed. Therfore, justlie may both these weeks and these Seales be called sealed weekes, or weeklie seales. Secondlie, because in the time of these Seales, containing the space of 42. yeares, the whole seales of our saluation were sufficientlie opened by the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, preached in that time (as Paul testifieth Rom. 10.18) throughout al the whol world: and in that space the Iewes, and other enemies wer brought to confusion. Thirdlie, this space of these 42. years, is justly termed by seals, because that short space, in co^parison of the rest of the years vntil the latter day, which are co^tained in this book, is as the time of the opening of the seals of letters, in respect of the longer time in reading the same. Fourthly, as seals must first be opened, ere the letter be reade, so these accidents of these 42. firste yeares, being first in time, must first be performed before the rest follow.
e Although this be Genesis, in the which this co^fortable promise of the Messias is first made to vs, yet al the rest of the 24. Ancients do also prophecie and forewarn the same, which moueth Iohn here not to say, only one Elder, but, one of the Elders, as if he wold say, the first of the^: and afterward, he repeates the same, for al the rest of the Elders, in the 8. and 9. verses: where they say al in one voice, Thou art worthy to tak the booke, and open the seals therof, etc. In which saying of this Elder ye shal not sturre, although ye find not these words mentioned word by word in Genesis, for Christ and his Apostles cite not their testimonies of the old Testament alwaies word by word, as ye shall find more ample in the note g Apoc. 7.
d Among the prophets, commonlie hornes are taken for Kings, Kingdomes, and powers, as in Daniel. 8. and Psalm. 74.4.5. And eies are taken for wisedome, prouidence, and foresight, as in

Esay. 35.5. and Mat. 7. meaning hereby the princelie powers and wise foresight, that is in Gods holie Spirit: but of their number of seuen, read e in the former chapter.
e That this song is the song of our new redemption, is prooued by the words following, to wit: And thou hast redeemed vs, etc.
f. ff That this, for this text and other causes, is a vision of Gods throne, not in heue^ but on earth, is proued by our 17. propositio^.



CHAP. VI.

THE ARGVMENT.
In these two former chapters, being described howe God adornes the throne of his truth and true religion, both with the present doctrine of saluation, and with the prophetical admonitons of al things needfull to be foreknowne. The first being taught by the 24. Elders, and four beasts, and other books and lamps of the new Testament: This booke of prophecies was adioyned in the second place, wherof the first part historical, now in this chapter, begins at Christs baptisme, An. Christi 29. and contineweth from thence 42. od years, euen to the destruction of Ierusalem, in the yeare of Iubilee in Anno Christi 71. vnder the termes of seuen Seales, whereof the historie of six seales is orderlie set downe in this chapter: The rest, to wit, how from the seuenth seale, in the yeare of Christ 71. continues the seuen trumpets or vials, to the year of Christ 1541. and how from thence to the latter day, continews the seuen thunders, in the chapters hereafter following shal be declared. Now first of the seuen Seals.


Historical application. 1 First Christ in his compleat age of 29. yeares is baptized, beginnes to open and preach the Gospel. In these seuen years Matthew writes his Hebrue Evangell, and publisheth it.
Yeares of Christ.29 Sabboth year The weeke of
the first Seale.
Paraphrase. 1 THerafter I saw when Christe opened the sealed doctrine of our redemptio^, in this first sealed week. One a of the four Euangelists in the mightie stile of Gods thundring
Spirite set out the same, willing vs to approch and co^sider it
The Text. 1 AFter, I beheld whe^ the Lambe had opened one of the seals, and I heard one of the foure beastes say, as it vvere the noise of thunder, Come and see.

Historical application. 2 Christ and his Disciples passe ouer al the world, bearing the testimony of the gospel, and true word of God; which by Christes doctrine, miracles, death, and glorious victorie ouer death, so touched and mooued the harts of all the faithfull, that sodainlie it spread, encreased, and triumphantlie it got victory ouer all the world.
Paraphrase. 2 And as wee beheld and considered that Evangel, lo, the b pure and holy teachers and Apostles, speedily went forth, ouer all the worlde, bearing with them Gods word, shoting the arrowes of zeale to pierce all godlie hearts: and this word of God was crowned with victory, for it passed ouer all the world, ouerco^ming and conquering.
The Text. 2 Therefore, I behelde, and loe, ther vvas a white horse, and he that sate on him, had a bowe, and a crowne was giuen vnto him, and he went foorth conquering that hee might ouercome.
Historical application. 3 Nowe after this firste seed of the Evangell once sowen, beginneth persecution, about the six and thirtieth yeare of Christes age. Within these seconde seuen yeares Marke writeth the second Euangel; in comforte of the afflicted Church.
Yeares of Christ.36 A sabbaoth or year of rest The weeke of the second
Seale.
Paraphrase. 3 And as Christ by his Apostles, opened the doctrine of our redemption, in the second sealed week, the second Euangelist spak out his gospel, that al me^ might come and see it.
The Text. 3 And when hee had opened the second seale, I hearde the second beaste say, Come and see.
Historical application. 4 And Saint Steuen suffered martyrdome for Christes sake, and Iames the brother of Iohn, likewise was beheaded (Act. chap. 7. and chap 12.) for euen then, and from thence foorth, the Roman magistrates, and Synagogue of the Iewes neuer
stinted from persecuting and putting to death by fire and sworde, all true Christians.
Paraphrase. 4 And that time proceeded c tyrannous and bloody Magistrats; sitting in the seat of tyrannie, to who^ power was giue^ to persecut Gods Saints on earth, and to depriue them of
peace, by causing all men to kill the^, abusing so the sworde of justice, that God had giuen them.
The Text. 4 And there went out another horse, that vvas red, and power was giuen to him that sate thereon, to take peace from the earth, and that they shoulde kill one another, and
there was giuen vnto him a great sword.

Historical application. 5 Notwithstanding this persecution, the Euangel ever more and more, is opened and encreased, so that within these third seuen years beginning in the yeare of Christ, 43. Luke also wrote the third Eva^gel and published it. At this time there fell a greate famine vniuersallie,
Yeares of Christ.43 A sabbaoth The weeke of the third Seale.
Paraphrase. 5 And while as the third sealed week (after Christ began to open his doctrine,) came, the d thirde Eva^gelist wrote forth his Euangel, that all men might come and see the same: the^ beholde, there came a deadly plague of famine, and therewith such skarsitie, that victuals wer weighed by weight.
The Text. 5 And when he had opened the third seal, I hard the third beaste say, Come and see. Then I behelde, and loe, a black horse, and hee that sate on him, had ballances in his hand.
Historical application. 6 Wherof Agabus prophecied, and foretold to the Euangelists and Disciples, and whol Church (Act. 11) and they contributed among them, and gaue succor to their poore brethren: in this dearth, the bushell of wheat was sold for fiue accustomed prices, and the bushel of barley for three: Of this dearth sheweth Suetonius and Dion, and other: but of the skarsity of other victualles we read not.
Paraphrase. 6 So that it was forespoken of, and came to passe amo^g the midds of the Evangelistes and Disciples of the primitiue Church, that the mesure of wheat was sold for no lesse than fiue ordinarie prices, and the measure of barley for three ordinarie prices, but there was no skarsitie of wine nor oyle.
The Text. 6 And I heard a voice in the middes of the foure beasts say, A measure of wheat for a pennie, and three measures of barley for a penny, and oyle, and wine hurt thou not.
Historical application. 7 Then, after the 50. yeare of Christ, in this fourth seuen yeares, S. Iohn wrote the fourth
Euangel, and published it, beginning at the description of Christs Diuinitie,
Yeares of Christ.50 AsabbaothThe weeke of the fourth Seale
Paraphrase. 7 And when the fourth sealed weeke
(after Christ first opened his doctrin) cam: the fourth Evangelist shewed forth his Eva^gel, that al me^ might come and see it.
The Text. 7 And when hee had opened
the fourth seale, I hard the voice of the fourth beast say, Come and see.

Historical application. 8 Expreslie against certaine Heretiks, for there arose manie in those daies, as Cerinthus, Nicolaus, and Ebion, and (in the Acts chapt. 13. and chap. 15.) Elymas the sorcerer, and certaine Pharisaicall heretikes, and others, procuring GOD his plagues against Iudaea, and other partes of Asia, where they resorted.
Paraphrase. 8 And beholde, at that time cam in e heresies among the people, bringing therewith the death of the soule, and procuring hel and aeternal damnation: and through that quarter of the earth, wher these heresies raigned, God gaue the^ ouer to the sworde, to famine, to death, and to the f tyrants of the world.
The Text. 8 And I looked and behold, a pale hors, and his name that sate on him was Death, and Hel followed after him, and power was giue^ vnto the^ ouer the fourth parte of the earth, to kill with the sworde, and with hunger and with death, and with the bests of the earth.
Historical application. 9 Then in the fift seuen yeares, euen the yeare of Christ 57 arose the tyrant Nero, on whome, and on whose bloodie seate, and successours, the blood of Saint Steuee and Saint Iames, martyred by his predecessours, and other Saintes martyred by himself,
Paraphrase. 9 And when the fift sealed weeke (after Christ firste opened his word) came, then (some newe tyra^t being risen) there appeared prostrate before the ff justice seat of God, the souls of them that had bin martyred for the worde of God, and for the testimonie of Christ Iesus, which they did beare.
The Text. 9 And whe^ he had opened the fift seal, I saw vnder the altar the soules of them, that were killed for the worde of God, and for the testimony which they maintained.
Historical application. 10 Cried vp to the heauens to God, to revenge their blood, vppon these tyrant Emperors of this bloody



Empire, but as God is euer holie and just,
Yeares of Christ.57 A sabbaoth The weeke of the fift Seale
Paraphrase. 10 Crying veheme^tly to God, holie and
true, to judge and reue^ge their blood, on these that had shead the same vpon the earth.
The Text. 10 And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, Lord, holie and true, doest not thou judge and auenge our blood
on them that dwell on the earth.

Historical application. 11 So within a short space after this, euen whe^ Peter and Paule, and othere of gods serua^ts had likewise suffered martytdom vnder the same tyrant Nero, then poured out GOD his greate vengeance on him, his seate, familie, and successours, as followeth,
Paraphrase. 11 These hath God clothed with his g innocencie, and willeth them to abide a litle while, vntil the number of their brethren and fellow seruants that must likwise shortly be martyred for the Eva^gel were also fulfilled.
The Text. 11 And long white robes wer giuen vnto euerie one, and it was said vnto them, that they should rest for a little seson, vntil their fellow seruants, and their brethren that shuld be killed, euen as they were, were fulfilled.
Historical application. 12 To wit, after the yeare of Christ, 64. euen in the sixt seuen yeares, a great change and defection came in al estates of the Roman Empire: for, now Nero raised great persecutions against the true spiritual professors, to haue vtterly darkened and extinguished the light of the Gospel, as also, hee became a vile incestuous tyrant and paricide, a polluter of his whole Empire, and estates thereof, with blood and tyrannie,
Yeares of Christ.64 A sabbaoth The weeke of
the sixt Seale.
Paraphrase. 12 And when the sixt sealed weeke after Christ, first opened, his word came, then is the gret empire of the earth shaken, and the Spiritualtie and bright light of the Gospel, darkned with persecution h and secular princes and Magistrates nowe are become bloody butchers.
The Text. 12 And I beheld when he had opened the sixt seal, and loe, there was a gret earthquake, and the sun was as black as sackcloth of haire, and the Moone was like blood.
Historical application. 13 Namelie, of Gods Saints, Peter and Paule and other martyrs, throwen downe without mercie.
Paraphrase. 13 And Gods ministers are yet throwen down as shaken fruite.
The Text. 13 And the starres of heaue^ fel vnto the erth as a fig-rree casteth her greene figs, when it is shaken of a mightie wind.

Historical application. 14 So that the true Church of God is forced to lurk in secret; for reve^ge wherof, and of the blood of other martyrs shead by other Emperours before God: mooueth the kingdomes of France, Spain, and Ile Britaine, to revolt from this tyrant.
Paraphrase. 14 And God his Church lurketh, as a closed letter: wher fore, euen now God
stirred vp gret kingdomes of k maine landes, and Ilandes to revolt from the the obedience of that Empire.
The Text. 14 And heaue^ departed away, as a scrolle, whe^ it is rolled, and euery mountain
and yle wer moued out of their places.
Historical application. 15 And these kingdo^s with the Princes, Tribunes, Co^suls, Senators and people of Rome, fled fro^ his tyranny, and left him and al his race of the Caesars blood,
Paraphrase. 15 And the kings that wer vnder that great Empire of the earth, with the Princes, Tribunes, and members thereof, small and great, free and bond, hid and absented the^selues, among obscure people from their Emperours presence, and fled vnder the protection of newe heads-men, and barbarous nations,
The Text. 15 And the kings of the erth and the greate men, and the rich men, and the chief captaines, and the mightie men, and euerie bond-man, and euery freeman, hid themselues in dennes, and amo^g the rocks of the mountaines.
Historical application. 16 And chosed Galba, a stranger, to be their Emperour, against Nero, whereuppon Nero (after hee had burned his town of Rome, murdered his Senators, mother, and chief kinsmen) horribly slayeth himselfe.
Paraphrase. 16 Crauing these Barbares to raigne ouer them, and to couer them fro^ the horrible tyranny of these Emperours, who represe^ted the face of Gods wrath and of Christ Iesus.
The Text. 16 And saide to the montains and rockes, Fall on vs, and hide vs from the presence of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe.
Historical application. 17 That same yeare the Emperours Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, cruellie murther ech other with manie thousande Romanes, in signe and token of Gods angrie face and vnresistable ve^geance.
Paraphrase. 17 For the great day of their wrath, and time of reve^ge, is come, and none is able to withstand the the same.
The Text. 17 For the gret day of his wrath is come, and who can stand?



Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a That this beast is Matthew, the order of time prooueth, for that in that time, he wrote the first Evangel in Hebrue: and therfore, is Matthew (vnder the term of a mans face) first in order by Ezechiel (as is said in our 19. proposition) and though he be third in Iohns former vision (Ap. 4) for that his Greek Evangel was third in order, yet here must the account be made by his first Ebrew Eva^gel, because it was that work that first passed out vnto the Iewes, and Ebrew Church: and began that Christian victorie, wherof the text here speaketh. The rest read in the said 19. proposition.
b That by this rider on the white horse, is meaned the word and testimonie of God, which his servantes doe beare and professe, is evident by the 19 chapter hereof.
c That this red hewe meaneth bloodshed, read Esay 63.1. and how persecution must follow Christs doctrin, read Matth. 10.34.
d This third beast agrees to be Luke two waies, both for that he wrot his Evangel that time, as also, for that he writes that historie in his book of the Acts. chap. 11. ver. 28.29.30.
e This must needs be false doctrine and heresies, which (beside temporal punishments) procured both death and hell.
f That these beasts be earthly kinges and tyrantes, read Ezech. 34. and Dan. 7. and Dan. 8.
ff It were vnproper here, and chap. 8.5. and chap. 9.13. and chap. 14.18. to interprete this altar to be Christ, seeing Christ was the Sacrifice, that was offered vpon the altar of Gods justice, for full satisfaction of his wrath. Therefore, as the Arke and couerture thereof, doth represent Gods mercie seat, Exod. 25. So must the altar represent his justice seat, for that the altar was the place of fire and bloodshed.
g This is a metaphore taken from them, that by the rash furie and ouerthrow of their enemies, haue bene ouertrode, and their garmentes pudled and defiled, and afterward knowne guiltles, are restored to cleane garments, betokening their innocencie: read thereupon, Apoc. 7.14.
h The Sun for the most part is taken for the spiritual estat, be it pure or corrupt: as in Esa. 24.23. and Esa. 30.26. and here, and in diuers other places: And sometimes also, it is taken for those thinges

good or evil, that are adjoyned to the spirituall* estate, as (Apoc. 12.1.) for the light of the Evangell, and (as in Mark. 4.6.17.) for persecution: whereof read the note i in the seuenth chapter following. As touching the Moone, she is somtime taken for the changeable world, as Apoc. 12.1. but oftest for the seculare estate therof, as here, and in Esay, in the verses aforesaid: and that both because of the great mutabilitie, of that estate, as also, because al seculare lawes and ciuil ordinances, are borrowed from the spirituall Lawe of God, and ministred to the people, as the Moone borrowed her light from the Sun, and reflexeth the same to the earth.
i That Starres betoken Gods Ministers, reade Dan. 12.3. and Apoc. 1. and notes q and x thereof. And that heauen betokeneth Gods Church here on earth, consider by Apoc. 19. conferred with the premisses.
k Mountaines to meane kingdomes and kinges, is evident by Esay, chap. 2. where hee expresseth the kingdome of Christ, to become erected aboue al kingdomes, by terme of mountaines. Farther, the kingdomes of the Chaldaeans and Idumeans ar called mountaines. Iere. 51.25. and Ezech. 35.3.



CHAP. VII.

THE ARGVMENT.
God hauing in the fift seale aboue written, promised the revenge of his Martyres blood, and in the sixt seale begun the same vpon the Romane Emperours, consenters thereunto* and being of purpose to doe the like against the Iewes, that were executers thereof: Here in this chapter he setteth out howe before that destruction of the Iewes, in this next plague, and also before the whole plagues, that are to come both on Iew and Gentile, in the seuen ages following, he wil first of his tender care, reserue and marke his owne of euery tribe of Israel, so that these with infinite of the Christian Gentiles shal reioice in that deliuery, and shal giue praise therfore to God.


The Text.
1 ANd after that* I saw four Angels sta^d on the foure corners of the earth, holding the foure

Spirites of his wrath, from blowing foorth as yet their vengeance on maine landes, Ilandes, or people of the world.
2 And I perceiued Easterlie b towarde Ierusalem, that Christe the greate Angel, and day spring from on high, who hath the c seales and badges of saluation, did by the mightie voice of his worde, commande these Angels, who had power ouer the saide destroying Spirites of the earth, and Ilands thereof.
3 Saying, Let ye them not hurte the landes, Ilandes, nor the people of the worlde, till wee haue sealed and put the marke of Gods protection d patentlie, vpon all his true seruants.
4 And I hearde the number of those that out of e all the tribes of Israell, Christ had sealed with the profession of his Evangell, and mark of his protection, to be an f hundred fourtie foure thousand.
5 To wit, of the Tribe of Iuda wer marked f twelue thousande Christians. Of the Tribe of Reuben wer marked twelue thousand Christians. Of the tribe of Gad were marked twelue thousand Christians.
6 Of the Tribe of Asher were marked twelue thousand Christia^s. Of the tribe of Nepthalim were marked twelue thousand Christians. Of the Tribe of Manasses were marked twelue thousand Christians.
7 Of the Tribe of Simeon were marked twelue thousand Christians. Of the tribe of Levi were marked twelue thousande Christians. Of the tribe of Ishachar were marked twelue thousand Christians. Of the tribe of Zebulon were marked twelue thousand Christians.
8 Of the tribe of Ioseph twelue thousand Christians: finally, of the tribe of Beniamin were marked twelue thousande Christians.
9 Then of the Gentiles I considered the Congregation to be out of number, euen of all kinreds, people, nations and tongues, who standing constant before this throne of Gods trueth, and in presence of Christ Iesus, clad with the white garments of innocencie of heart, and hauing the joyfull palmes of righteousnesse and vpright doing in their handes.
10 Publikelie professed with their mouthes, that al saluation commeth from God, that sits on the throne of his trueth, and from his Sonne Christ Iesus.
11 Like as all the whole Angels and heavenlie armie of God, that awaites about that throne of Gods trueth, in defence thereof, and of the holie doctrine of the twentie four books of the old Testament, and foure Evangelistes, prostrated themselues before Gods throne, and worshipping him confirmed the same.
12 Yeelding praise and glorie, wisdom and thankes, with honour, power, and might vnto our God for euermore, Sobeit.
13 And as g Esay one of the 24. Elders, writing (cap. 63.1) Who is this that commeth from Edom in red garments, from Bozra, he is glorious in his apparell, etc. I judged also by him, to know what they were that were arrayed in these white robes.
14 So I found in him (vers. 9) that these be Gods holy Israel, who^ he hath brought out of trouble, and redeemed them, and (as chap. 1.18.) hath made them white as

snowe, and clean as wol, though they had bene red as scarlet.
15 And that because (vers. 16) they ceas d to doe euill, and learned to doe good, etc* and so serued God continually, and haue God dwelling among them.
16 These, saith he (chap. 49.10.) shal no more haue h hunger, nor thirste in their souls, nor the burning Sunne, or the i heat of persecution to wither them.
17 For Christ, which is in the midds of his throne and true professours, shal guide them, and lead them to drinke of the liuelie doctrine and fountaines of his spirituall waters, and (chap. 25.8) shal wipe away the teares of dolour from their eies, and giue them spiritual comfort.



The Paraphrasticall exposition.
1 AFterward I considered, that on all the foure quarters of the earth, God had his holie a Angelles staying the

windes of the earth, that the winds shuld not blow on the erth, nether on the sea, neither on any tree.
2 And I sawe another Angell come vp from the East, which had the seale of the liuing God, and he cryed with a loude voice to the four angels, to who^ power was giuen to hurt the earth and the sea,
3 Saying, hurt ye not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees, til we haue sealed the servants of our God in their fore-heads.
4 And I heard the number of them, which were sealed, and there vvere sealed an hu^dreth and four and fourtie thousande of all the tribes of the children of Israell.
5 Of the tribe of Iuda wer sealed twelue thousand. Of the tribe of Reuben were sealed twelue thousand. Of the tribe of Gad, were sealed twelue thousand.
6 Of the tribe of Asher were sealed twelue thousand. Of the tribe of Nepthali were sealed twelue thousand. Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed twelue thousand.
7 Of the tribe of Simeo^ were sealed twelue thousand. Of the tribe of Leui wer seled twelf thousa^d. Of the tribe of Ishachar wer seled twelue thousa^d Of the tribe of Zabulon wer sealed 12 thousand.
8 Of the tribe of Ioseph were sealed twelue thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelue thousand.
9 After these thinges I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of al nations and kinreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with long white robes, and palmes in their hands.
10 And they cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvatio^ co^meth of our God, that sitteth vppon the throne, and of the Lamb.
11 And all the Angels stoode rounde about the throne and about the Elders, and the four beasts, and they fel before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God,
12 Saying, Amen. Praise and glorie, and wisdome, and thanks* and honour, and power, and might, be vnto our God for evermore, Amen.
13 And one of the Elders spake, saying vnto me, What are these which are arayed in long white robes? and whence came they?
14 And I said vnto him Lord* thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of greate tr bulation, and haue washed t eir long robes, and haue made their

long robes, white in the blood of the Lambe.
15 Therfore, ar they in the presence of the throne of God, and serue him day and night in his Temple, and he that sits on the throne wil dwel among them.
16 They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shal the Sunne light on them, nor anie heat.
17 For the Lambe, which is in the middes of the throne, shall governe them and shall lead the^ vnto the liuely fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all teares fro^ their eies.


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a Correspondent to the four quarters of the earth, the Prophet here by a prophetical phrase and conformitie of language, setteth downe foure Angels, and foure executers of Gods wrath, whereas they ar innumerable. The Iewes also haue books of antiquitie, deviding the government of the earth among foure great Angels, and vnder them to be many inferiour Angels: But these assertio^s being more curious tha^ certain, or pertinent to vs to know, we leaue this, and returning to the exposition of the text, what these foure Angels and winds be. We say, the four Angels appear by the text, to be good angels, bearing command ouer these winds, whom we esteeme to be euil Angels, executers of Gods wrath, at command of the other: for althogh these Angels (ver. 2) ar forbidden to hurt the earth, yet that inferres not the^ to bee euil Angels, more than where the like is said to God, Lead vs not into temptation; but contrarilie, in so far here as of the^selues, they stay these winds and blasts of Sathans tyranny, to hurt the earth, they must needs bee good Angels, and the winds evill Angels. And wheras these first foure, are by the text, readie to hurt, or not to hurt the earth, according as

they be commanded of Christ that great Angell. Yet for as much as that hurt seemeth to be executed not by them, but (ver. 1) by these winds, whom they haue power to loose or bind: Therfore, apparantlie, these foure Angels be the good Angels of God, and the foure windes, the Spirites of Sathan, and executers of vengeance.
b This day spring or rising in the East, may two waies be vnderstood, to wit, either as an epithet of Christes, as Zach. 3.8. and Luk. 1.78. called by Hieroms translation, Oriens ex alto, etc. Or then it may be vnderstood, that Christ arose vp, and abode Easterlie aboue Ierusalem, to seale his elect-Israelites there, with his protection: For Ierusalem lieth Easterlie, both from Pathmos, where Saint Iohn wrote, as also, from the Churches of Asia to whome he wrot.
c This mark is a comparison from shepherds, who as they mark their sheepe, so Christ our Shepheard, marketh vs with the marke of his profession and protection, alluding here to the Symbole of the Passeouer. Exod. 12.22. The like hereof read in Ezech. 9.
d Christ marketh vs with no secret marke, but pate^tlie in our foreheads, meaning thereby, that vowablie and with bolde faces, we must professe the marke of Christians. Saying with Saint Paul, I am not ashamed of the Gospel, etc. Rom. 1.16. For who denieth him here, he will denie them in heaven. Matth. 10.33. and 2. Tim. 2.12.
e Among these Tribes Dan is left out, and in his stead is put in the Tribe of Ioseph, meaning Ephraim, Iosephs yongest sonne: For Manasses, Iosephs eldest sonne, is put in for himselfe. Why Dan is so left out, the reason appeareth to be, that that Tribe hath bene more accursed than the rest: for by the Spirit of God, it is called (Gen. 49.17) a Serpent, or an Adder, and is called a Lyons whelp, Deut. 33.22. and for their golden Calues and great idolatrie, appeareth by Amos 8.14. that they fel, and neuer rose againe, and so could not be participant of this Christian mark.
f The Spirite of God here expresseth the number of an hundred fourtie and four thousand, to wit, twelue thousand of euerie Tribe, not that everie Tribe was aequall, or that the number was so in whole thousandes without oddes* as if there were neither more, nor fewer, as though we would addict the Spirite of God to resolue and satisfie our curiosities* but the meaning of the Spirit of God hereinto, is to satisfie our comfort, and not our curious scrupulositie, giuing to vs Gentiles and to the Christian Iewes, that

comfort, that whereas we rashlie feare that we bee left alone to serue Christ, and that none mo than we of Israel are chosen, as Elias judged (3. Reg. 19.18. and Rom. 11.3.4.5.) God will let vs knowe, that he hath sealed about twelue thousand of everie Tribe: where note for certaintie, that in speaking to men, and in accompting of men, the Spirite of God speaks after the phrase of men, in rejecting the ods, and in specifying the perfect or whole number, that is neerest the trueth, in steed of the trueth. And as to this number no maruell indeede it is, though in the long time of these seven plagues following, there be about 144000 of the Israelites elected Christians, of men, women, and children, seeing euen beside women and children, and impotent men, there wer at once of Israelites, in the only daies of Dauid, thirteen hundred thousand fighting men. For here is neither meaned, that these were all at this one time, neither that they wer altogether marked at this time, but hereby he meaneth, this to be a time of the beginning of troubles, from the which, alwaies he signifieth hereby, that hee will exeme his own, not onlie by preseruing the^ successiuelie, as they are borne in the worlde, but also by bringing their parentes for their sakes through these troubles, that of them they may be procreated. Of these read further. Apoc. 14.1. and note a thereof.
g Let none doubt that the 24. Elders do signifie the 24. books of the olde Testament; although these words, here spoken by one of the 24. Elders, bee not found word by word, and altogether in anie of the bookes of the old Testament; for the Testimonies cited by Christ and his Apostles, are not all to be found word by word in the olde Testament: as the words cited in Math. 27.9. out of Ieremie, are not to bee founde togither in any one parte of Ieremie, and in Zach. 11.12. that sentence is found neerest, but not word by word. Also that So^g, which in the Rev. 15.3. is called the Song of Moses, is not to be fou^d word by word in Moses Song, neither in any of the fiue books of his Pentateuchon. The lik is to be seen in diuers other places of Scripture: For God (as is said in the former note) trauels to satisfie our comfort, but not our curiosity. For, althogh not scrupulously in wordes, yet substantially in sente^ces, al spoke^ here by this. Elder, is contained in Esay. For, first, in describing vvho is he that was clad in red garments, etc. (Esay 63.) It foloweth of necessity tacitely, that he sheweth what it is also to be

clothed in white, seeing in this case they ar contraries: For wheras he interpreteth, that to be clothed in red, meaneth bloodshed, and slaughter: to be clothed in white garmentes, must meane puritie, innocencie, cleannes and holines: againe, yet more amplie (Esay. 1.18.) is expressed what is meant by cleane wool, white as snowe, and by red crimosin and skarlet, whereas hee saith, though thy sinnes vvere as crimosin and red as skarlet, they shall be made vvhite as snowe, and clean as wool. So then none can denie, but here Esay interpreteth sufficiently, that to be white as snowe, or to bee clothed in white garments, or in clean wool, is to be purged, and made cleane and holy from sin. And in like maner, as toward the rest of the sentences spoken here by this Elder, they are all expresly contained in Esay, as they are quoted in the Paraphrase, which seeing none of the other Elders or 24. books of the old Testament doe containe, Therefore without al doubt, Esay is this Elder here meant of.
h This hunger and thirst cited by Iohn here out of Esay, meaneth the hunger and thirst of our souls for the word of God, as is plainly interpreted in Amos. 8.11.12.
i Though the Sonne for the most part, is taken for the light of the Gospell, and for the spirituall estate it selfe: yet, when the burning heat thereof, is set opposite against the seede of the Gospel, and liuely springes of true doctrine (as here) then doth the Sunne mean the heat of persecutio^, this is plainly prooued by the fourth chapter and 6. verse of Mark, and by the 17. ver. thereof, that interpreteth the same. Read more hereof Apoc. 6. note. h. thereof.



CHAP. VIII.

THE ARGVMENT.
God in the former chapter, hauing first marked his elect Israelits, now in this proceedes to the destruction of Ierusalem, and reprobate Israelites, in reuenge of their tyrannie vsed against Christ and his seruants, at which destruction of Ierusalem, ends the historie by-gone, of the sealed weekes, and beginneth the prophesie then to come, of the seuen trumpets, euery trumpet conteining the space of 245. yeares, wherein, are orderly expressed, the notable accidents and alterations, that were to come among the christian kingdomes, in a maner to the worldes end. In this chapter, then is

intreated of the last of the seauen seales, and first four of the seauen trumpets, as followeth.


Historicall application 1 IN the seue^th seven years, beginning in the yeare of Christ 71 came the Christia^ Emperours, Vespasian and Titus, vnder whom the Church of God had peace a litle while.
Anno Christ71. a Iubile The opening of the seauenth Seale, and progresse of the first age or trumpet
Paraphrast. exposition AND as the seave^th sealed week (after Christ opened the Evangel) came, Gods Church had peace a litle while.
The Text. 1 AND when hee had opened the seventh seal, ther was silence in heauen about halfe an houre.
Historicall application 2 And here begins the seauen ages to the worldes end, this 71. yeare being Iubile,
Paraphrast. exposition 2 And beholde, here the a Angels of the seauen ages, beginne to receiue the seuen trumpettes of Gods wrath.
The Text. 2 And I sawe the seve^ Angels, which stood before God, and to them wer giuen seue^ trumpets.
Historicall application 3 And was that year in the which Christ Iesus procured the revenge of his blud, and the blood of his holie martyrs vpo^ the Synagogue of the Iewes (vpon whome the said innocent blood had hitherto craued ve^ge^ce.) So that nowe (by the intercession of Christ) God in his justice, stirreth vp the said Roma^ Emperours, Vespasian and Titus against them.
Paraphrast exposition 3 And the b great Angell Christe Iesus, came and stoode as our high prieste before the justice seate of God, hauing the office of intercession and many sweete acceptable prayers wer made to him of all Gods martyrs and elect, that he by his c mediation mig^ offer vppe the same before that justice seate of Gods throne.
The Text. 3 Then another Angel cam and stoode before the Altar, having a golden censer, and much odours were giuen vnto him, that he shoulde offer with the prayers of all Saints vpon the golden Altar, which is before the throne.
Historicall application4 And the continuall prayers of poore martyres, crauing the revenge of their blood now takes effect,
Paraphrast exposition 4 And the sweete request of these praiers were accepted, and granted by God the Father, through the
procurement and intercession of Christ Iesus.
The Text. 4 And the smoke of the odours with the prayers of the Saintes, went vp before God, out
of the Angels hand.

Historicall application 5 For the said Titus, acco^panied with many thousand Romanes, in closeth the whol Iewes celebrating the Passeouer within Ierusalem, wher they ar besieged and overcome, their citie destroyed, innumerable slaine, and the rest are taken, and solde as bond-slaues, abiding without land, libertie, or gouernme^t to this day. At this time God thundered out against them, all manner of plagues, of warres, both external and intestine, of famin and of pestilence, and the great Roman Empire, Monarchie of the earth, is now stirred and occupied in this destruction of the Iewes:
Paraphrast exposition 5. So that Christe took the cup of gods vengeance, and filled the same with the fierie wrath of his justice, and poured it out vpon the tyrants of the earth, murderers of the Saintes of God: and ther came greate thunderinges of Gods vengeance vpon the^, with forthshewings and threatnings of all maner of te^pestuous plagues, and the greate Empire of the earth was then aloft, and greatly commooved.
The Text. 5 And the Angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the altar, and cast it into the earth, and there were voices, and thunderings, and lighteninges, and earthquake.
Historicall application6 At which destructio^ begins the account of the seue^ ages to come to the worlds end.
Paraphrast exposition 6 At this instant, the Angels of the seven ages, hauing the seuen laste plagues, mak themselues readie to blowe out the same.
The Text. 6 Then the seuen Angelles, which had the seuen trumpets, prepared themselues to blowe the trumpets.
Historicall application7 In the first of the which ages, to wit, fro^ this 71 year of Christ, to the 316 year, the effeminate and soft Emperors, Macrinus, Heliogabalus, Philippus, Gallus Volusianus, Licinius, and
Gallienus, by their great sloth and coldnes: and the fierie and fierce Emperors. Domitian, Commodus, Didius, and Maximinus, by their fury and rashnes, mixt with the tyra^ny of the 30. tyra^ts that then raigned, as vnder them began the first decay of the Romane Empire. During this time the ministers of Gods word, chieflie in Europe, are persecuted: for even of Rome 33 Bishops, successiuely after other, wer martyred, and the weake in faith were constrained to make defection.
Paraphrast exposition 7 And the Angels of the first age blewe forth their plagues, and there were certaine effeminate Emperous, cold as haile, and other furious and fierce as fire, and bloodie tyrantes among them, who al were caste in the Empire of the earth. At this time the co^stant professours of Christe, thorowe the thirde part of the worlde, were persecuted, and the weak in faith vtterlie decaied, withered, and fell away therefrom.
The Text. 7 So the first Angell blew the trumpet, and there was haile and* fire mingled with blood, and they were cast into the earth, and the third part of the trees was
burnt, and all green grasse was burnt.

Historicall application8 Hitherto the Empire of Rome decaying, and nowe in this 316. year, the Emperor Constantine tra^sporting the seat therof to Consta^tinople, the whole Peninsul of Cethim which is interprete the gathering or tossing of the seas, and now called Italie, is left a pray to the Hunnes, Gottes, Vandals and other fierce nations
Anno Christ316 A Iubilee. The second age
Paraphrast exposition 8 And the Angels of the seconde age threatned out Gods judgment, and there came a multitude of people, fierce as fire, who entered vpon some d Peninsull of the sea, or landes named by the sea, and they consumed with the edg of the sword the thirde parte of that Peninsull and sea coast.
The Text. 8 And the seco^d Angel blew the trumpet, and as it vver a gret mountaine, burning with fire, was cast into the sea, and the thirde parte of the sea became blood.
Historicall application9 Who destroyed Rome, and subdued all Italie, slaying and spoiling of greate and smal euen every third man.
Paraphrast exposition 9 And the thirde part of the people of that Peninsull, who dwelt there, were slaine, and destroyed, even from the poore e Marriner and inhabitante to the great Pylotes, and gouernours.
The Text. 9 And the third part of the creatures, which wer in the sea, and had life, dyed, and the third part of shippes were destroyed.

Historicall application10 Then in the yeare of Christ 561. begins the thirde age, in the which, anno 591 (as the Arabians compts per an nos Hegirae) there arose the horrible Mahomet, who firste professing Christ to be that most high Prophet, thereafter made defection, and throgh pride and glory to raign, hee with the aid of Sergius a Monk, devised the damnable and bitter doctrine of the Alkaron, and by the assistance of the Saracenes, he began his conquest anno Christ. 623.
Anno Christ561 a Iubile The third age.
Paraphrast exposition 10 And the Angels of the third age, blew out Gods thretnings, and there fell fro^ the true Church a notable and f great Apostate, burning in pride, and wrath, and he entered and sowed his heresie in the thirde parte of the world, amongst the g liuelie fountaines of the pure doctrin of the Evangell
The Text. 10 Then the third Angel blew the trumpet, and there fel a great star from heuen burning like a torch, and it fell into the thirde parte of the riuers, and into the fountains of waters.
Historicall application11 And spred that bitter heresie through al Asia, impoisoning therby the souls of al these of Asia, that cam vnder his dominion, and receiued the same heresie.
Paraphrast exposition 11 And hee may justlye bee called h galle or wormwood to the soules, for hee made the doctrine of the third part of the world bitter as wormwood, so that many soules thereby dyed, euen all that spiritually dranke of that doctrine, because it was horrible and bitter heresie.
The Text. 11 And the name of the star is called wormwood: therefore the third part of the waters became wormewood, and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter.
Historicall application12 Thereafter in the fourth age beginning in the yeare of Christ. 806. this erroneous doctrine of the Mahomet, so on the one part increased, and on the other part such heresies and newe traditions are crept in and authorised by the Pope, that both Ecclesiastical doctors, secular Magistrats, and simple professors, are polluted and darkned with the Mahometik and papisticall errours, so that the third parte of the light of gods truth that shined somtime in the primitiue Church, is nowe extinguished, the oriental or Graecia^ Churches being seduced by the Mahomet; and the Occide^tal or Latin churches, by the Pope of Rome.
Anno Christ806 a Iubile The fourth age or trumpet.
Paraphrast exposition 12 And the Angelles of the fourth age blew forth Gods wrath, and the third part of the spirituall Preachers, ciuill Magistrats, and Christian professors, wer so plaged with these heresies, and were so blinded with mens traditions, that they loste that light of God his trueth that sometime shined in them, and neither the Oriental i or Easterly Church (where the day springs) nor the Occide^tal or Westerly (Church where the night gloumes) haue (by the third parte) that brighte light of Christs pure Eua^gel that they wer woont to haue.
The Text. 12 And the fourthe Angell blewe the trumpet, and the third parte of the sun was smitten, and the thirde parte of the moone, and the thirde parte of the starres, so that the thirde part of the^ was darkened, and the day vvas smitten that the thirde part of it could not shine, and likwise the night

Historicall application13 This must needs speedily procure Gods true Church to lurk in patience, and abide invisible, til God in his justice and just judgment, haue broght most terrible plagues and venge^ce vpo^ the world, for these errors and vniuersal defections, wherof the reuenging plagues shal immediatly follow and fal out in these three next ages yet resting.
Paraphrast exposition 13 Whereupon I beheld, and foresaw Gods speedie warning, as the k flight of an Eagle, going thorough the whol congregation of his Electe, proclaiming in his terrible threatnings, threefold l wo and wrack, yet to come therefore, vpon the wicked worldlinges, by the executers of the plagues of the three ages folowing.
The Text. 13 And I beheld, and heard one Angel flying throgh the mids of heauen, saying with a loud voice, Wo, wo, wo to the inhabitantes of the earth, because of the soundes to come of the trumpet of the three Angells, which were yet to blowe the tru^pets.


Notes, Reasons and amplifications.
a That at this year of Christ. 71. beginneth both the last of the seuen seales, and the first of the seuen trumpets, appears plainly

by this text, and is prooued by our seuenth proposition, and how thereafter, euery trumpet containeth the space of 245. yeares, or fiue Iubiles, is also prooued by our fift proposition.
b This other Angell must be Christ, for none standeth before the Altar of Gods justice, as high priest and mediatour, making intercession for vs, except onelie Christ, as in 1. Tim. 2. ver. 5. and Hebrues 7.8.9. chapters. We must not doubt hereof, though here he is simplie called but an Angell, for the like is founde in diuers scriptures, as in Malach. 3. ver. 1. Christ is called the Angel of the couenant, though hee was more than an Angel, as contrarilie, S. Iohn the Baptist, is there called the Angell that goeth before him, in Sanct Ieromes translation, although he be lesse than an Angell, as testifies Matthew. 11.11.
c These Orisons and prayers, though generally they meane all our prayers, which indeede Christ offered vp before God his father, yet in this place is specially meant, the prayers made for reuenge of the late martyrdomes specified. cap. 6. in the fift seale, which praiers, there ar delayed, and here taks effect, as by the text, paraphrase, and historie thereof doth evidently appear.
d That the Sea is taken for sea coasts or peninsulls, reade Esay. 21.1. by the burthen of the desert Sea, meaning the burthen of the desert land of Arabia beside the sea: also Esay 23. ver. 4. by the sea, and strength of the sea, is meant the peninsull of Tyrus: and again in Esay 66. ver. 19. Italie (called there Tubal) is named among the sea cuntries. Finally, a^ent the signification of Cethim, read Ierome de interpretatione nominum.
c That shippes be taken for their marriners, it is certain also: wheras the sea is take^ for the sea coast (as by the former note) it is probable that the shippes betoken the inhabitants of that coast and gouernors therof, as in Ezechiel 27. ver. 25. by Ieromes translatio^, Naves maris principes tui, etc. The ships of the sea are thy princes.
f That starres be taken for ministers or professors of God his trueth, euen after their defection or apostasie, you may see both here by this Mahomet, and the Monk Sergius his colleague, as by the Turkes hereafter. Reve. 9. ver. 1. Of starres generally taken for true teachers, reade Dan. 12. ver. 3. and Reuel. 1. notes q. and xtherof. Reuel. 6.13. and notei. thereof, and other places.
g What these floods and fountaines be, consider by the hunger

and thirst spoken of before, Reuel. 7. ver. 16. and 17. And note h therof, and confer there with Ieremie. 2.18, speking of the drinking of the bitter floods of the Aegyptians and Assyrians, also Iohn 7.37.38. and Reuel. 21.6.
h That this bitter wormewood meaneth the doctrine of false Prophets, how sweet soeuer it seemes, read Ieremie 23.15. and howe bitter and vile the Mahomets doctrine is, they may consider by his Alkaron.
i In these Churches of the Orientall and Occidental empyres, where God sometimes was trulie honoured (as David Psal. 113.3 prophetically foretelleth) at this time abounds Idolatrie, heresies and many vaine traditions: of which, reade the Ecclesiasticall histories.
k There is so small difference in the greek, betwixt the orthographie of an Angell and of an Eagle, that some old coppies hath the one, and some hath the other, alwaies to them both, agreeth the interpretation of speedy warning or hastie message.
l The whole visible face of the Oriental and Occidental Churches, hauing now made defection: he notes by wo, wo, wo, as by an emphasis, how great and terrible shalbe the remanent three plagues that are to come vpon them therefore.



CHAP. IX.

THE ARGVMENT.
Hauing described the estate of the empyre, These foure first ages: and lately how both the Orientall and Occidental empyres, haue lost a greate part of that spirituall light that first they had: Now he proceedes in this chapter to the fift and sixt ages, wherein is described, how horriblie they are punished for their defection, and how neuertheles they abide obstinate and impenitent, till in the remanent chapters, the reformation of a great part, and ruine of the remanent ensue


Historicall application. 1 NOwe, in the fift age, beginning in the yeare of Christ
1051. proceeded yet one farther horrible plague; for eue^ the sore said Mahomet, who before had fallen from God his true Church, to earthly pride and ambition, receiued yet more power by his professours after him, to open vp again the infernall pit of his deuilish errours.
yeares of Christ1051* a Iu. The fift age* or Trumpet.
Paraphrast. exposition ANd the Angels of the fift age, blewe forth Gods threatninges
and plagues, and I perceaued, that former a Apostate, who before had fallen from God his true Church, to earthly pride and ambition, receiued yet more power by his professours after him, to open vp again the infernall pit of his deuilish errours.
The text 1 ANd the fift Angel blew the tru^pet, and I sawe that star which had fallen from heuen vnto erth and to him was giue^ the key of the bottomles pit.

Historicall application. 2 And hee by his professors and doctrine, opened the very way to the endles deepe of hell, and out of that his deuilish fornace, there arose such darknes of errours, that darkned greatly both the light of the Evangell and temporall estates.
Paraphrast. exposition 2 And hee by his professors and doctrine, opened the very way to the endles deepe of hell, and out of that his deuilish fornace, there arose such darknes of errours, that darkned greatly both the light of the Evangell and temporall estates.
The text 2 And he opened the bottomles pit, and there arose the smoke of the pit, as the smoke of a gret fornace, and the sun and the aire wer darkned by the smoke of the pit.
Historicall application. 3 So that nowe are sprung vp the Turkes, and become new Mahometists, and oppresse all Christian landes, rising at last so high in conquests, and so deep in heresie, that their sect is spred ouer in all places.
Paraphrast. exposition 3 So that now, newly again of this deuilish darknes and heresie, is sprung vp now b swarmes of that sect, wasters of all landes, hauing power in the end, with their c stings of heresie, to infect a greate parte of the earth.
The text 3 And there came out of the smoke Locustes vpon the earth, and vnto the^ was giuen power, as the scorpions of the earth haue power.
Historicall application. 4 Yet compell they as then, no ma^ to become Mahometists, but setts more their intent to reaue and spoile: those that were vnder the Romane and Papistical empire.
Paraphrast. exposition 4 Yet did God so bridle them, that as yet they were not able to ouercome the co^science of the very tenderest and moste weake Christians on earth, neither any that were as greene plants, or as fruitfull trees in Christs vineyard, but onely to troble and anoy these, that making defection
from Christ, professed subjectio^ to the antichristian empire.
The text 4 And it was comma^ded the^, that they should not hurte the grasse of the earth, neither any ^reene thing, nether any tree: but onely those me^ which haue not the seale of God in their for heades.
Historicall application. 5 And not being of power to destroy them and conquer Europe, they co^tinued so, spoiling and reuing, from the daies of Zadok their first Dominatour, in anno
Christi. 1051. vnto the time that Changius, Chan of Tartarie, subdued the^ in anno 1201, which was the space of an hundreth and fiftie yeares, beginning first to enter in Europe, as friends in supply of Basilius Emperoure against the Bulgarians, his rebels, afterward, they proceded wasting and spoyling ouer all parts:

Paraphrast. exposition 5 Yea, euen towards these also were they so bridled, that they shuld not d vtterly destroy them, but onelie oppresse them for the space of e 150. yeares, but this their small oppression beginning first softly, as the sting of a scorpion, procedeth at length to incurable wracke and exterminion.
The text 5 And vnto them was commanded, that they should not
kill them, but that they should bee vexed fiue moneths, and that their paine should be as the paine that commeth of a scorpion when he hath stung a man.
Historicall application. 6 So that now their poore, oppressed and depauperate captiues woulde wishe to die, yet doe they reserue them aliue for rowing in their gallies, and other seruitudes.
Paraphrast. exposition 6 And in these daies me^ whom they haue thus vexed and depauperat wold wish to dy but they shal be reserued a liue in torme^t.
The text 6 Therfore in those daies, shall men seeke death, and shall not finde it, and shal desire to dy, and death shall flee from them.
Historicall application. 7 And those oppressors were as barded horses, proceeding to battel with strength, boldnes, and agilitie, and so triumphed in oppression, that they raigned as crowned Kinges, enriched with their praies: In the firste face they seemed friendly as men should be.
Paraphrast. exposition 7 And those oppressors were as barded horses, proceeding to battel with strength, boldnes, and agilitie, and so triumphed in oppression, that they raigned as crowned Kinges, enriched with their praies: In the firste face they seemed friendly as men should be.
The text 7 And the form of the Locusts vvas lik vnto horses prepared vnto battel, and on their heads vvere as it vvere crownes, like vnto gold, and their faces vvere like the faces of me^.
Historicall application. 8 And smiled alluringly, as with womens attyre, yet they deuoured and wasted all landes, as with the teeth of Lyons.
Paraphrast. exposition 8 And smiled alluringly, as with womens attyre, yet they deuoured and wasted all landes, as with the teeth of Lyons.
The text 8 And they had hair as the haire of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of Lyons.
Historicall application. 9 They were armed on the most strongest maner, and their speedie haste made a noise as chariots of warre.
Paraphrast. exposition 9 They were armed on the most strongest maner, and their speedie haste made a noise as chariots of warre.
The text 9 And they had habergions, like to habergions of yron, and the sou^d of their winges vvas lik the sou^d of charets when many horses run vnto battell.
Historicall application. 10 But their tailes end, and finall intention was to oppresse and subdewe all men, and after that subjection, to impoyson the^ with their stings
of heresie, and they had power to torment and oppresse men the said 150 yeares.
Paraphrast. exposition 10 But their tailes end, and finall intention was to oppresse and subdewe all men, and after that subjection, to impoyson the^ with their stings of heresie, and they had power to torment and oppresse men the said 150 yeares.
The text 10 And they had tailes like vnto scorpions, and there wer stings in their tailes, and their power was to hurt men fiue moneths.

Historicall application. 11 And they had spirituallie raigning ouer the^ the said Mahomet, whose name signifieth a messe^ger or destroyer, and ouer the^ temporally raigned the great Turk, which likwise signifieth the same: for Turca is interpreted a waster or destroyer.
Paraphrast. exposition 11 And they had ouer the^ their king, euen a f messenger of the Devill, whose name (trying from la^guage to la^guage) shal be found to signifie a ff destroyer or waster.
The text 11 And they haue a King ouer them, which is the Angell of the bottomlesse pit, whose name in Hebrew, is Abaddon, and in Greek hee is named Apolly on.
Historicall application. 12 These at this time wrought great woe to the Roman Empire, but afterward, these same with others wrought yet more woe,
Paraphrast. exposition 12 The first of the great wofull plagues is past, and beholde, the two laste are to come shortlie.
The text 12 One wo is past, and behold, yet two woes come after this.
Historicall application. 13 For in the sixt age (begun in the year of Christ, 1296) it pleased God in his wrath to stir vp
yeares of Christ1296 A Iubilee. The sixt age, or trumpet.
Paraphrast. exposition 13 And the Angelles of the sixt age blew foorth God his threatninges, and a warning came at all quarters from the throne of Gods justice
The text 13 Then the sixt Angell blew the trumpet, and I hearde a voice from the foure hornes of the golden altar, which is before God.
Historicall application. 14 The foure nations Mahometists, that dwelled beyond and about Euphrates; to wit, the Saracens, Turks, Tartarians, and Arabians, who al being confederate together in one lawe of the Mahomet, and vnder one greate Emperor Ottoman, began euen the^ their first Empire.
Paraphrast. exposition 14 To these Angels of this sixt age, to loose the foure g great nations, which as Angels, and messengers of God his wrath, abode at the floud Euphrates.
The text 14 Saying to the sixt Angell, which had the trumpet, Loose the four Angels, which ar bound in the great riuer Euphrates.
Historicall application. 15 These with huge
Armies came against both the Empires of the Orient and Occicident, ouerthrowing, slaying and subduing all Asia, and much of Europe, even about the thirde parte of the world,
Paraphrast. exposition 15 And these four nations (which here dwelt in readines against this precise time and houre, to slay the third part of
me^) now raised their armie:
The text 15 And the four Angels wer loosed, which were prepared at an houre, at a day, at a moneth, and at a
year, to slay the thirde parte of men.

Historicall application. 16 For their nu^ber was infinite:
Paraphrast. exposition 16 And the number of their horsmen were h two hundred thousand thousands, and I heard that number to be certaine.
The text 16 And the number of horsmen of war were twe^ty thousand times ten thousand: for I heard the number of them.
Historicall application. 17 And themselues and their horses armed moste stronglie, like irefull proude oppressours, hasting to their praie; professing with their mouthes, these three speciall points of their lawe; to wit, their vnquencheable ire against al christian professours: the establishing of the Mahometicke heresie and doctrine vniuersallie: and finallie, their bitter auarice, to reaue and conquere all the world to themselues, as appertaining to the^ by right, for that they are the sonnes of Abraham.
Paraphrast. exposition 17 So I saw, in spirit, these horses, and their horsme^ armed, as me^, burning with fierie wrath, puft vp with glistering pride, and tending for fearfull destruction, riding fiercelie forward to devour their praie as Lyons, professing plainlie with their mouthes, their fierie wrath, their dark and smokie heresie, and their horrible and bitter avarice against all Christians:
The text 17 And thus I sawe the horses in a vision, and them that sat on them, hauing fiery habbergio^s, and of Iacinth, and of brimstone, and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lyons: and out of their mouthes went out fire, and smoke, and brimstone.
Historicall application. 18 And they being on these three respects puft vp, over-ran, slew and oppressed all Asia,
and much of Europe.
Paraphrast. exposition 18 And in their i ire heresie and avaritious oppressio^, which they professed, they invaded, slew and destroied the third part of all the Empire.
The text 18 Of these three was the thirde parte of men killed: that is, of the fire, and of the smoke, and of the brimston, which came out of their mouths.
Historicall application. 19 Co^quering mightilie before them with their armie, and leauing behind the^ their priests and false preachers to seduce.
Paraphrast. exposition 19 For these horsmen had power before them, to conquere and devoure vp all that come in their teeth and power, also behind them, because the Deuill, that old serpent, followed in their tailes, by the mouthes of their false teachers, to sting and seduce all whome they had ouercome.
The text 19 For their power is in their mouths, and in their tailes: for their tailes were like vnto serpe^ts and had heades wherewith they hurt.

Historicall application. 20 Neuerthelesse, the rest of the Roman Empire reformed not themselues, nor amended their workes, neither left they their vngodlie and deuilish worshipping of alleadged Saintes, neither their filthie idolatrie, and worshipping of senselesse images, made of euerie mettal and materiall:
Paraphrast. exposition 20 Neverthelesse, the rest of the people of the Empire, that were not ouercome by these plagues, repented not of their k vngodlie workes, nor abstained from l deuilish worshipping of m images of gold, of siluer, of brasse, of stone and of timber, which neither can see, nor heare, nor moue.
The text 20 And the remna^t of men which were not killed by these plagues, repented not of the workes of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idoles of golde, and of siluer, and of brasse, and of stone, and of wood, which neither can see, neither heare, nor goe:
Historicall application. 21 Neither left they off to murther al them that spak against their errours: but continued in their charmes and exorcismes and in their vild Sodomie, and horrible whoredome, and repented not to deceiue simple men, in stealing from the^ both their goods and their soules, for soul-masses, Diriges, Pardons, Indulgences, and such other trifles.
Paraphrast. exposition 21 Neither repented they of their n tyrannie and martyrdoms, nether of their o conjuring charmes or witchcraft, nether of their filthy and p vnspeakeable whordo^, neither yet of their q theeuish taking of goods from simple men.
The text 21 Also they repented not of their murther, and of their sorcerie, neither of their fornication, nor of their theft.



Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a Now doth the Spirite of God repeat here the fall of the Mahomet, not that he now fell (for as is said, he fell in the time of the third trumpet) but meaning that his olde fal, his Alkaron and professours that he left behind him, haue made the way patent to the Turks, now at this time, to fall also from the trueth, and followe him. Conferre here with our third proposition, and note following, by the which, both these starres appeare to be one, and to meane the Mahomet, and his locusts to be the Turks, and for confirmation that this star, is that same starre that before had fallen, the Greeke terme of falling, expressed in the text is (...)
in the praeterit time, which had falle^, and not (...) in the present time, which falleth. Meaning therby expreslie, that Saint Iohn saw, that in this fift age, the Mahomet (who before had fallen from God in the third age) now by his successours, and doctrin doth open vp the gates of hell more manifestlie, in stirring vp these Turks by his heresie.
b That these Locustes be the Turkes, it is plaine: for that as Locusts doe destroy and waste euery where, and are plagues appointed by God to that effect. (Exod. 10.) So are the Turkes both in name and effect, wasters and spoilers, as shall bee shewed in the note f following.
c That these, who with pleasant flatteries professe good, and yet in effect are rebels, and seducers from God, are compared to scorpions, read Ezech. 2.6. and how evill women for their faire resemblance and wickednes in effect, are called scorpions, read Ecclesiasticus 26.7. So these Turkes are described here with mens faces, and womens haire, and Scorpions tailes, because they first entered in Europe humainlie, and proceeded since with all despite and oppression. Also, for that the stinges of scorpions seem first nothing, and after become incurable, as the small companie of Turkes became almost a Monarchie.
d In histories is more mention made of the Turks oppressions, and spoiles done against Christians in that age, than of anie conquest or vtter destruction of Christians, as Iohn Baptista Egnatius, speaking de origine Turcarum; saith, Vagid spalatique quove cuique sors affuit latrocinantes magis quam bellig^rantes provincias vastarunt:

These going in vaging and vvandering vvheresoeuer their chance vvas, they vvasted countries, as theeues rather than as Warriours. And as to their dominion, how from the first year of their first Dominator Zadok, in the year of Christ, 1051. to the time that the Tartarians subdewed them, in An. 1201. are just 150. yeares, diuers histories doe declare.
e That these fiue propheticall moneths are an hundred and fiftie years, read the first proposition, with the seconde reason of our third proposition.
f. ff This flitting from Abaddon in Hebrew to Apollyon in Greek, signifieth, that his name is neither Abaddon nor Apollyon, but that we ought to descend from language to language, vntil we find the name of a Gouernor, that signifieth the same that Abaddon and Apollyon doe in Hebrew and Greeke. And so it is, that Abaddon and Apollyon doe signifie a Destroyer or Waster (Ierome de interpretatione nominum) And againe, on the other part Mahometes signifieth (ex eod.) Delens, a Destroyer, or Nuncius a Messenger, agreable with both the stiles that this text giues him, to wit, both a destroyer, and also, the Angell or messenger of the bottomlesse pit. Moreouer, the like is to be said of their temporall kings name Turca, which (ex Carionis chronico, fol. 8. lib. 1. and lib. 5. fol. 107.) signifieth idem quod vastator, a Waster or destroyer.
g That all messengers and executers of Gods affaires, either of favour or wrath be called Angels, it is common in all the Scriptures: for Angelus signifieth a Messenger: and for proofe that these foure of the sixt Trumpet be no spirituall Angels, the same in the sixt Viall (Apoc. 16.12) are called the kinges of the East, for so are these Mahometanes indeed.
h Albeit this number of two hundred thousand thousand is not so expressed to satisfie our curiositie, as if there were no oddes (as I wrote, Apoc. 7. and note f thereof) Yet certainlie it hath bene neere this number, for that he subjoyneth for the more certaintie againe, And I heard the number of them, and saw the horses in a vision, etc Agreeable hereto, it is reported that the great Turk contemptuouslie sent to the Emperour of Romanes, a Camel or a Dromedarie laden with wheat, with this vowe by message, that he shoulde bring against him, as manie fighting men, as there were graines of wheat therein. This armie hereafter (Apoc. 20.8.) is compared

to the sea sand in number.
i Of these three points of their profession, read their Alkaron, and confer therewith the histories, for of their yre against the name of Christians, euen from Mahomets first beginning, read Iohn Baptist. Egnatius vpon Heraclius Emperour, saying. Responderunt impii, (meaning Mahometists) non prius Romanis pacem se daturos, qua^ Christum abnegasset Imperator. These vvicked made answere, that they vvould giue no peace to the Romanes, till first their Emperour renounced Christ. The second, co^cerning their dilige^ce to spread their heresie is certaine. The third, concerning their auaritious claiming the title of the whole world, that is contained expresly in their law, that they being the sons of Abraham and of Sara (as they alledge) the land as promised to them by God, Gen. 13.16. and thereupon, Mahomet promiseth the kingdome of heauen to al them, that fights valiantly in that quarrell. Yet these alleadged Saracens, are the children of Abraham and Hagar, that is to say, Hagarens or Ismaelites, and not of Abraham and Sara. But as to the Turks we find no certaintie that any waies they are the sonnes of Abraham, yet claime they that promise, as if they were the true sonnes of Abraham and Sara. And so in these three points of their heresie and vsurping of kingdomes, do they inuey against Christians.
k These of the Romane Empire regarded not what euill and vitious works they did, seeing they wer perswaded, that for litle cost they would get indulgence, pardons, holy water, and light pennance, which would relieue and purge their sinnes.
l Of earthly hypocrites, who dissembled their euil life, as som histories report, the Pope made his Saincts: And though some of these be deuills, condemned for their hypocrisie, yet hath the Pope and his Cleargie ordained all these, whome they canonized to be worshipped. Moreouer, they are said heare to woorship the Deuill, in that they woorship not God, as hee hath commaunded them, but after their own imaginations.
m What crucifixes and other Idoles of golde, siluer, and other materials, were both priuately in their oratories, and publickly in Churches adored, the whole world knoweth. If they wil say, they worshipped them not, but vsed them as a remembrance: O Ananiasses and Zaphirasses, lyars against their owne soules, came they not barefooted, barelegged, bareheaded, grouflings and kneeling

with their hands holden vp to these Images, and with their faces and eies direct to them, making such prayers and supplications as in their very books are intituled, a prayer to the image of Christ, and a prayer to the crosse of Christ, and such others. Howe are they then able to deny, but that they prayed euen to these verie images, yea and for the greater deceite to simple soules, least it should be known, that Idolatrie any waies was sinne, their Cleargie took away the second commandement out of their treatises, and deuided the last commandement into two, to make out ten. And likewise, they held the whole Bible in Latine vntranslated, lest it should be known to the people, that God in it forbad the worshipping of Images. Repyning thereby against their knowledge and conscience, without any repentance as yet, as saith the text.
n Amidst the greate inuasions that these Mahometans made at this time against the Papists. The Pope neuerthelesse spared not, euen then to murther the poore sancts of God, such as Iohn Husse, Ierome of Praga, Ierome Savonarola, and many moe that opponed against his indulgences, and others his wicked traditions.
o What charmes euery common curate had for the fellone, the farsie, the worme, for bloodstemming, for lecherie, and for other horrible purposes, all their familiars, or that hath seene their workes and bookes, knowes. Also in Platina, and in other credible historiographers, ye shall finde the legend of 22. Popes or thereby, that wer most horrible Necromancers, like as there is one parte of their service that is called Exorcismus, conteining superstitious and magical enchantments and conjurations of oyl, of salt, of holy water, of belles, beads, Principiosis, Agnus Deis, and other such like. And further, euerie high altar is erected with joints, hair, clouts, cloths, threds and worseds of diuerse hewes, and diuers other reliques of dead men, laide and builded behinde the saide altars, as they do testifie whose eies hath seen the same. And lest they shuld doubt thereof who hath not seene it, the collects of the Masse do beare record of the same, graunting these reliques to be there, as in the Masse book secundu^ usum Sarum, in servitio beatae Mariae, orationibus: Propitiare quaesumus Domine and Praesta quesumus omnipotens: And again, in festo reliquiarum oratione praesta quesumus omnipotens etc. and lectione prima, Hodie dilectissimi etc. ye shall finde these clauses contained Quorum reliquiae in hac continentur Ecclesia, that is to say,

vvhose reliques are here contained in this Church.
p What whordome and vile Sodomie is vsed both in Rome, and likewise euery where, among the Popes, Cardinals and whol Clergie, not onely their innumerable bastards testifies, but also their lawes priuely permitting Priestes to haue concubines, but not wiues, (Distinct. 34.) though some late glozers (excusing the matter) define these concubines to be wiues, contrary vnto the text. Further hereof reade in Platina and others vnsuspected historiographers, the legend of licentious popes, whereof 13. were adulterers, 3. were common brothellers, 4. were incestuous harlots. 11. were impoysoned with vile Sodomie, 7. were whooremongers and erecters of brothel houses, wherof euerie whoore payeth weekly a Iulian pe^ny to the Pope, which diuers years wil extend to 40000 ducats by year. And all these, beside the shee Pope called Ioane, who was first called Gilberta an English woman borne in the town of Lyn, who being two yeares and an halfe Pope, at last dieth in deliuerie of a child openly vpon the high street of Rome, going in publike processio^ by the way to the church of saint Iohn de Laterane, and so made her whordom and filthines of her seat, patent, In memorie whereof, all Popes euer since going in procession, escheweth and goeth about that Laterane way, where their she predecessor dyed.
q It is more nor notorious what gret abbacies and bishopricks from simple princes, what landes and yearlie rentes from landed men, what money and goods from men of al estates, hath bin deceitfullie stolne for indulgences pardons, remissions of sinnes, trigintalls, soul-masses, diriges, de-profundis, and other superstitio^s, stealing thereby not onely mens goods, but euen their soules, as hereafter Reuel. 18.13. and note i. thereof, and 2. Pet. 2.3. These be like the Scribes and Pharisies vvho deuour vp poore vviddowes houses vnder pretence of long prayers, as is said in Matth. 23.14.



CHAP. X.

THE ARGVMENT.
Nowe orderly should followe the seuenth age, which the spirite of God beginneth not here to describe, after the style of the other six: but first settes out a vision consonant and relatiue, with the vision wherwith he began to describe the estate of the primitiue church,

and that because Christ Iesus, that came then in the flesh, and spred the true light of his Euangell to the primitive Church, is nowe (after long darknes and horrible defectio^) returned by his Spirit to restore and open vp againe the same light and trueth to vs, in this last age* And therefore he staieth here the imperial or secular historie of this seuenth age, till the Ecclesiasticall historie bee also farre proceeded. In this vision, first is described the spiritual returning of Iesus Christ to vs, with the open worde of his trueth. Secondly, that now the seuen thunders or Angels of Gods great haruest are comming, where Christ makes his solemne vow that in this seuenth age the world shall end. Last of all, (howe vnder the name of the Prophet) the whole Church at this time, should rightly conceiue in their hart the true vnderstanding and meaning of this reuelation, and should preach and publish with their mouthes the same, more plainly of new againe to the whole world.


The Text.
1 AND I sawe another mighty Angel come down from heauen, clothed with a cloud, and the rainbow vpon his head, and his face was as the Sunne, and his feet as pillers of fire.
2 And hee had in his hand a litle booke open, and he put his right foot vpon the sea, and his left on the earth,
3 And cried with a loud voice, as when a ly on roareth: and when he

had cried, seuen thunders vttred their voices.
4 And when the seuen thu^ders had vttred their voices, I was about to write: but I heard a voice from heauen, saying vnto mee, Seale vp these things which the seuen thunders haue spoken, and write them not.
5 And the Angel which I saw stand vpon the sea and vpon the earth, lift vp his hand to heauen,
6 And sware by him that liueth for euermore, which created heauen, and the thinges that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things that therin are, that time should be no more:
7 But in the daies of the voice of the seuenth Angel, after he shal blow the trumpet, eue^ the mysterie of God shal be finished, as he hath declared to his seruants the Prophets.
8 And the voice which I hearde from heauen, spake vnto me againe, and saide, Go, and take the litle booke, which is open in the hand of the Angel which standeth vpon the sea, and vpon the earth.
9 So I went vnto the Angel, and said to him, Giue me the litle booke. And he saide vnto mee,

Take it, and eate it vp, and it shall make thy bellie bitter, but it shall bee in thy mouth as sweete as honie.
10 Then I took the litle book out of the Angels hand, and ate it vp, and it was in my mouth as sweet as honie: but when I had eaten it, my bellie was bitter.
11 And hee said vnto me, Thou must prophecie among the people and nations, and tongues, and to manie kings.



The Paraphrasticall exposition.
ANd now I sawe another, euen the great Angel of the couena^t a Christ Iesus by his holy Spirit descending from heaue^, who^ as now the world thought cloudie and knew not: ouer his head stood the sign and memorie of his protection, and in the beautie of his face shined the bright light of eternall life, standing co^stant as a pillar in defence of the elect, and going as fierce as fire to confounde the wicked.
2 And he offered now at hand, the open trueth and revelation of these b Euangelical and propheticall mysteries, and subdued at last vnder his feet al empyres, both of sea and land.
3 And he cryed and publikelie preached repentance by the mouthes of his Preachers, as the fearful voice of Lyons: and as that doctrine was preached the seuen terrible thunders

c (preparers and reapers of Gods greate haruest) began to forewarn their message.
4 And when they had shewen forth and foretold the same, I thought to haue written it plainly, but (that being so greate a misterie) I was commanded from heauen to d seale and close vp the same in darke language (as cap. 14. I haue done) and not to write it plainly here.
5 And Christ Iesus that great Angel, Dominatour now ouer sea and land, solemnlie voweth, as one holding vp his hands to e the heavens,
6 And sweareth by him that liueth for euer and euer, who made the heauens, and all that is therein, and the earth, and all that is therein, and the sea, and all that is therein, that f time shall be no longer:
7 But in the daies of this seuenth age, euen g after the Angelles of this age, blowe forth the plague of Gods last wrath, the Antichrist shall be destroyed, and Christs kingdome onelie erected, and the great h mystery of Gods latter judgment, ending the prophecies of all Prophets, shal be perfourmed.
8 Then was I warned again, by that former voice of God, to goe now and receiue this cleare instruction of these mysteries, evangelicall and propheticall, at the hands of Christ Iesus, Dominatour ouer sea and land.
9 And I past, and craued earnestlie of him to reveale nowe to mee (in the name of the whole Church) this revelation and knowledge, and Christ granting this our petition, commanded vs al now in this age, to receiue this patent revelation and knowledge, and deeplie to swallow it vp, and settle it in our heartes, and it shall ingender within vs the

Spirite of his i zeale, and bitter indignation, detesting horriblie al impietie, but to preach it out with our mouths, and disburthen our consciences thereof, it shall bee most sweete and comfortable for our soules.
10 Then (the true light being now come) we receiue this perfect and clear instruction at the hands of Christ Iesus, and settle the same deeplie in our breasts, and the preaching and constant profession thereof with our mouths, becomes most pleasant and delectable to our soules: but when we doe deeplie ponder the terrible plagues of God, prophecied therein, to come for our impiety, it moveth our bodies to quake, and our soules to be full of bitter anguish.
11 And Christ Iesus by his Spirit reueiled vnto me, that it behoofed me, that is to say, the whole ministerie in me, to k preach forth this present revelation again in this last age, and plainelie open the prophecie thereof to all nations, people, tongues, kingdomes, and kinges thereof.


Notes, Reasons and amplifications.
a This Angell, who here appeareth to Iohn, is all one with him whome Daniel saw in the similitude of a man (Dan. 10.5. continewing to Daniels 12. chap. ver. 6.7) is euident by their commo^ signes and tokens, and for the same cause, hee who appeareth in the middes of the seven Candlestickes (Apoc. 1.13) is also all one with them: For by Dan. 10.16.18. he is stiled, One like the similitude of the Sonne of man or like appearance of a man. So Apoc. 1.13. he is stiled. One like vnto the Sonne of man. In Daniel hee is girded with a golden girdle: So is hee also in Apoc. 1. In both places his face did shine, as here also it shineth: In all these places his feet wer as pillers of fire, and of fiery and burnished brasse, and his voice terrible, as of a multitude of people, or of manie waters, or of a

roring lyon. Againe, both there in Daniel and Apoc. 1. his eies burn as a flame of fire, or as burning lampes: Both Daniel and Iohn fall downe at his feet through feare, and he againe doth comfort the^ both: Further, both in Dan. 12.6.7. and here in this chapter, he, standing vpon the waters, holds vp his handes, and sweareth the end of times. So that without all doubt, that similitude of a man that there appeared to Daniel, and Apoc. 1.13. appeared to Iohn, and this Angell here mentioned, must all three be one. But seeing he, who (Apoc. 1.13.) appeared to Iohn, is prooued there, note l thereof, to be Christ, spirituallie appearing: Therefore, both he, who there in Daniel appeared, and this Angell, who here appeares, is also Christ. And for co^firmation hereof, none hath this book in heauen or earth, or is worthie to open the same, except Christ our Lambe, Apoc. 5.2.3.6. Therfore, he who here hath the same open in his hand, must be Christ.
b Of this booke of Reuelation (wherof Christ here beareth the type in his hand) onlie the historicall part, to wit, the seven seales thereof, is opened by Christ and his Apostles to the primitiue Church, in that that part was fulfilled in their daies. But the text doth neuer shew, that the booke within is opened vp, and offered patent to vs, till now in this our seventh age, wherein Christ here (vers. 2.) not onely opens all the propheticall mysteries thereof, but also (ver. 9.) offereth the same to the Church, vnder the person of the Prophet: as thirdly, ordaineth them to preach the same ouer againe, openlie and patentlie to the whole worlde, wherethrow, without all question, this is the time of knowledge euen presentlie, of which saith Daniel chap. 12.4. Claude sermones, and signa librum vsque in tempus statutum. Close vp these speeches, and seal the book, vntill the time appointed.
c Howe soone in the beginning of this seuenth age, (about the year of Christ, 1541.) the light of the Evangell, and of these prophecies against the Antichriste, begins to be reviued, and preached out by Iesus Christ, in the mouthes of Luther, Caluin, and other his ministers, euen that verie year begin the seven thunders of the latter day, and reapers of Gods great haruest, to expresse their prophecies, euerie one of the first foure following other, by the space of fourtie and nine yeares, as at length is shewed in our 12. and 13. propositions.
d At the command and voice of God, the prophecie of these thunders, is so sealed and closed, that none could before the due time espie, either what they meaned, or where they were written: But the compleat time of Revelation and knowledge, spoken of by Daniel (chap. 12.4.9.13.) so seemeth by the dates contained both there in Daniel, and here in the Reuelation, to be come. And in this open booke, that Christ in this text proffereth to be so manifested, that we may certainly conclude nowe, that this, nor no other mysterie hereof is vnsearcheable: what therefore, these thunders be, is declared in our 11. proposition; to wit, that they be the seuen reapers of God his great harvest, mentioned Apoc. 14. No maruell then, though so greate a mysterie be commaunded to be closed, at the least during the daies of the Antichristian tyrannie, that these that raigne in iniquitie, might continue still therein, till vnawares, they be ruined (Math. 13.13.14.15.) like as contrariwise at length, and chieflie to the elect, the same is commaunded to be opened, and not sealed, Apoc. 22.10. And so, though euen vnto the wicked, I with manie mo, now write this patentlie, yet God hath prepared a vaile for their eies, that seeing they shal not see, till they goe into distruction.
e This is a comparison and similitude, taken from the gesture of men, when they make a solemne oath: and not meaning, that God sweareth: for, the smallest woorde of his mouth is as sure as an oath, yea, so sure, that not one jot thereof shall perish, (Mat. 5.18) The same oath you shall finde in Dan. 12.7. Also the like Gen. 22.16. The mention of this oath is but put here for the greater Emphasis, to supplie our weake credit and beleefe.
f Then let the Pope and all earthlie Princes, looke for no longer delay, but that in this seventh age, alreadie begun in the yeare of Christ 1541. the corner stone Iesus Christ, shal becom a mountaine, and shall destroy all temporal kingdomes, and raigne for euer Esay. 2.2.3. Dan. 2.44. Psal. 2.9. and before the 1786. yeare of Christ: yea, euen sooner, to wit, when we see the toke^s and plagues of this age spent and past, then shal immediately come, the day of Gods dreadfull judgment, as more in special is declared in our 10. 13. and 14. propositions, and in chap. 14. following. With this vow confer the like, mentioned in Dan. 12.7.
gThe vulgar text saith here, Quum coeperit tuba canere consummabitur

mysterium magnum, that is, When he beginneth to blow the trumpet, etc. But the originall Greek may rather import, After hee shal blow the trumpet: for the word (...) may more justlie be taken for After rather than for immediately or incontinently when, etc. as is to be seen in Mar. 4.32. where (...) is taken for a long time after, and not instantlie: for there it is not meaned, that the seed which is sowen, doeth instantlie rise vp, etc. and Ioh. 8.28. by the worde (...) hee meaned not, that insta^tlie after the crucifying of Christ they shuld know him truly, but rather after a certaine progresse of time from his passion. We therefore, here justlie disassent from the vulgare translation, which makes the beginning of the seuenth blast to be the end of the world; where contrarilie, Apoc. 11.19. and Apoc. 16.18.19.20.21. there is mention made of some worldly co^motions, betwixt the beginning of the seuenth blast or outpouring of the seuenth viall, and the latter day.
h What this mysterie is, and how it is the mysterie of the day of judgment and general resurrection, read 1. Cor. 15. whol chap. specially, vers. 51. Behold, I shewe vnto you a mysterie, etc.
i It is certain, that the knowledg of Gods mysteries, mortifieth in vs al worldly joy, and makes vs to conceiue horrible bitternes against worldly impietie, such is the vehement zeale that the Spirit of God worketh in our bowels, as ye shal find in Ezech. 3.14. This bitternes also may be taken for the danger that it is to Preachers; to conceal and hide vp Gods mysteries, and due admonitions within their bowels, and not to disburthen their conscience thereof, by preaching out the same, as may be seen of Ionah, chap. 1. and Paul testifieth the sam, 1. Cor. 9, 16. saying, Wo were vnto me if I preached not the Gospel. But contrariwise, vpon the other part, what sweetnes and comfort commeth by preaching forth the same, read Psa. 118.103. The like ye shal find in Ezech. 3.3.
k This prophecying ouer againe by the open booke, meaneth, that besides Iohns first prophecying and writing of this Revelation, in closed and darke language, it must be prophecied, preached, and opened ouer againe by the whole Church in the name of Iohn, in these our daies of the the seuenth age, according to the perfect sense, meaning, and interpretation thereof. The like is said of Daniel chap. 12.13. That he must rise and stand vp againe after manies yeares.




CHAP. XI.

THE ARGVMENT.
The Spirit of God hauing hitherto orderlie prophecied the imperiall or secular historie, vnto this seuenth age or trumpet, and in the former chapter hauing shewed, that in this seuenth age the worlde will end: Therefore now in this chapter, before that end come, hee beginnes againe, and enters to the Ecclesiastical history, of the progresse of Gods word and true professors thereof, proceeding briefly therein, vntill that historie be as far proceeded as the other: And then doth he introduce the trumpet of the latter day, after the very maner and style of the other six trumpets before expressed.


The Text.
The Text. 1 Then was giue^ me a reed like vnto a rod, and the Angel stood by saying, rise and mete the Temple of God, and the altar, and them that woorshippe therein.
Paraphrast. exposition. ANd there was power and knowledge giuen me straightly, as with a metwand, to measure the estate of things to come: so Christ the gret Angel of the couenant assisting me, co^manded me to arise from all earthlie affections, and to prophecie nowe the precise measure of times, that God hath carefully appointed ouer his true, inward and invisible Church, his holy religion, and all the true professors thereof.
Historicall application ANd there was power and knowledge giuen me straightly, as with a metwand, to measure the estate of things to come: so Christ the gret Angel of the couenant assisting me, co^manded me to arise from all earthlie affections, and to prophecie nowe the precise measure of times, that God hath carefully appointed ouer his true, inward and invisible Church, his holy religion, and all the true professors thereof.
The Text. 2 But the court which is with out the temple cast out, and mete it not, for it is giuen vnto the Gentiles, and the holy Citie shall they tread vnder foote two and fourtie moneths.
Paraphrast. exposition. 2 But as for the a outwarde and visible face of the pretended Church, it must be rejected from God, and no care, mesure, nor account had by him thereof, because it must be giuen ouer to Antichristian and Idolatrous people; who shall subdue his holy b Church and spiritual Ierusasalem, and treade it vnder foote c 1260. yeares.
Historicall application 2 But as for the a outwarde and visible face of the pretended Church, it must be rejected from God, and no care, mesure, nor account had by him thereof, because it must be giuen ouer to Antichristian and Idolatrous people; for after the yeare of God 300, the Emperor Constantine subdued all Christian Churches to Pope Syluester; fro^ which time, til these our daies, euen 1260. yeare, the Pope and his Cleargie, hath possessed the outward and visible Church
of Christians, treading downe and suppressing all that truely opponed against their abuses.
Anno Christ.Anno Christ 300 The Ecclesiasticall Historie and estate of Gods vvord and Scriptures during the Antichrist his raigne.
The Text. 3 But I will giue povver vnto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand, two hundreth,
and three score daies, clothed in sakcloth.
Paraphrast. exposition. 3 Yet in the mean time shall GOD giue that grace, that his two Witnesses, the d olde and newe Testamentes shall be authorised, and shall preach and prophesie these e thousande two hundred and three score yeares, thogh not in there due apparell, but disguised with the obscuritie f of mens traditions.
Historicall application 3 Seeming to authorise the olde and newe Testamentes, and to preache thereof these 1260. yeares, yet not rightly interpreting them, but obscuring them with mens traditio^s and coloured glosses.

The Text. 4 These are two oliue trees, and two candlesticks, standing before the God of the earth.
Paraphrast. exposition. 4 These Testamentes be as two g Oliues, to annoint vs Kinges and Priestes to our God, and as two g Lanternes, to illuminate vs with the true light of his holie Spirite: These abide and stande before God with his elect vpon earth.
Historicall application 4 These Testamentes be as two g Oliues, to annoint vs Kinges and Priestes to our God, and as two g Lanternes, to illuminate vs with the true light of his holie Spirite: These abide and stande before God with his elect vpon earth.
The Text. 5 And if any man will hurte them, fire proceedeth out of their mouthes, and deuoureth their enemies: for if any man would hurt the^, thus must he bee killed.
Paraphrast. exposition. 5 If any Heretick would peruert these, the h fire of godly zeale, proceeding from the mouthes of their professors, shal co^found these hereticks. And if any Atheist would vtterlie subvert these Testaments, they shal be destroyed and die eternally.
Historicall application 5 If any Heretick would peruert these, the h fire of godly zeale, proceeding from the mouthes of their professors, shal co^found these hereticks. And if any Atheist would vtterlie subvert these Testaments, they shal be destroyed and die eternally.
The Text. 6 These haue power to shutte heauen, that it rayne not in the daies of their prophecying, and haue power ouer waters, to turne them into blud, and to smite the earth with all manner of plagues, as often as they will.
Paraphrast. exposition. 6 These haue such authoritie, that the heauen shal be closed and no rain shal descend from thence, and tyrannie and bloodshed shal be among the people of the earth, and the worlde scourged with al kinde of plagues, during all the daies that these testaments and professors thereof do so prophecie and threaten vs for our iniquities: yea euen so oft, as they list to pronounce Gods wrath against vs for that cause.
Historicall application 6 These haue such authoritie, that the heauen shal be closed and no rain shal descend from thence, and tyrannie and bloodshed shal be among the people of the earth, and the worlde scourged with al kinde of plagues, during all the daies that these testaments and professors thereof do so prophecie and threaten vs for our iniquities: yea euen so oft, as they list to pronounce Gods wrath against vs for that cause.
The Text. 7 And when they haue finished their testimonie, the beaste

that commeth out of the bottomlesse pit, shal make warre against them, and kill them.
Paraphrast. exposition. 7 And when these two Testaments are compleitly written out, and their testimonie authorised, the i Antichristian
Monarch, rising fro^ the deuil, shal striue against them, and shall ouercome the^, and shall depriue the^ of their spirituall meaning and liuelie sense.
Historicall application 7 Now after the primitiue Church had receiued and admitted these testaments, and co^firmed the same in the counsell of Nice, anno
Christi. 322. euen from the^ce forth the Roman and Papisticall empire hath trobled those scriptures of God, with humane traditions and superstitions, and so hath preuailed, that the true sence and meaning there of, was as deade out of the world.

The Text. 8 And their corpes shall lie in the streets of the greate citie, which spirituallie is called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord also was crucified.
Paraphrast. exposition. 8 And their dead letter shal ly as dead carkeises patentlie, throughout all the kjurisdiction of that great Antichristian citie, which spirituallie is l as Sodom, in all stinking and vnnaturall lecherie, and as l Aegipt in tyrannie and oppression over the sants of god, for eue^ there, Christ our Lord, in manie respects is continuallie mcrucified, and put to death.
Historicall application 8 And this dead letter did lie obscured in Latine, throughout al the Empire of Rome, that great citie, that is more vile in al stinking Sodomie than Sodom it self, and a more tyrannicall Empire ouer Gods Church than Aegipt was: for in it Christ is daylie crucified in his me^bers, yea, eue^ in Rome was Christ himselfe crucified, in that he suffred death vnder that Empire, and vnder Pontius Pilat, one of the magistrates therof.
The Text. 9 And they of the people and kindreds, and tongues, and Gentiles, shall see their corps three daies and a half, and shal not suffer their carkeises to bee put in graues.
Paraphrast. exposition. 9 And they of all tribes, people, to^gs, and nations, shal see this dead letter, lying as deade carkeises, the said space of n 1260 yeares, and shall not suffer the same to be duly buried, setled, and ingraued within their breasts.
Historicall application 9 And al the Roman and Papistical empire, had of those Latine and il glosed Bibles patent in their Churches and houses, during the said 1260 years of their raigne: all the which time their Legendarie, and other fables were more ingraued in their harts, tha^ these Testame^ts of Gods truth.

The Text. 10 And they that dwell vpon the earth, shall rejoice ouer the^ and be glad, and shal sende giftes one to another, for these two Prophets vexed them that dwelt on the earth.
Paraphrast. exposition. 10 For all that dwel in earthly plesures, shall be merie to see Gods worde so smothered, and shal rejoice together, and send gifts and propines euerie one to another: For these two testame^ts wold haue preached against sinnes, and prophecied their destruction, and haue troubled the glad estate of these that dwelt in earthlie pleasures.
Historicall application 10 Yea, they rejoiced when the fearful threatnings of Gods worde were hid, and the Popes plausible Pardons opened vp, and offered to them, and made merie in their Christmas and Easter feastes, sending for gladnes their propines and gifts at new-yeares-day and hansell Mo^day: Wheras if they had known the fearfull sentence of the Scriptures, they had not so rejoiced in mens traditio^s and earthly plesures.
The Text. 11 But after three daies and an halfe, the spirit of life comming fro^ God, shal enter into them, and they shall stande vp vpon their feet, and great feare shall come vp^ them which saw them.
Paraphrast. exposition. 11 But after the said 1260 years, the liuely Spirite or interpretation from God shall quicken them vp, and they shal bee authorised and set vp in aestimation, and the feare of God shall com vpon the harts of al men that shall then rightlie see and consider them.
Historicall application 11 But now are these 1260 yeares expired in an. Christi 1560 or therabout, and the Scriptures of God are liuely and quicklie interpreted and restored to the true estimation and honour: and thousandes converted daylie from their former Papistry to the true feare of God,
The Text. 12 And they shall heare a great voice fro^ heauen saying vnto the^, Come vp hither. And they shal ascend
vp to heaven in a cloude, and their enemies shall see them.
Paraphrast. exposition. 12 For by the voice and preaching of Gods heauenly and true Church, they were chosen and called vpon, to ascend
vp to them, and bee promoted aboue al humain traditions, and they arose vp, and were promoted to their due honour and authoritie, among the^ of that heavenlie and true Church, while as yet they were but cloudy, dark, and vnknown to the world: then shal their enemies the Antichristians, now begin to see and perceiue their authoritie.
Historicall application 12 Hearing it openlie preched by the most true professors of God, that these his holy Testaments haue authoritie and authentikenes aboue al decrees, writs, and traditions of men, and therfore (how dark and despised soeuer they seemed before) ar onlie to be brought in as witnesses of Gods holie truth: and now this authoritie of these holy Testamentes is become so c^ and euident, that the verie Papists do see and perceiue the same, and must needes admit their Testimonie.
The Text. 13 And the same houre shal there be a great earthquake, and the tenth parte of the citie shall fall, and in the earthquake shal be slain in number seuen thousande: and the remnant shal be afraid, and giue glorie to the God of heauen.
Paraphrast. exposition. 13 And the gret Empire of the earth shall quake and bee commoned: and the o tenth parte of the Antichristian Synagogues, and buildinges shal bee ruined, and in that commotion pseue^ thousand of those men shal be depriued of their rents wheron they liued, and the rest of these shal repent, and feare the Lord, and shall giue glorie to the God of heauen.
Historicall application 13 At this time this Romane and Papisticall Empire, is greatlie shaken, for the tenth part thereof, euen all their Temples, Abbaies Frieries, Nunries, and other their cities and civill pollicies through all England, Scotland, and diuers parts of Germany are pulled downe and destroyed. And of their Bishops, Abbots, Priors Channons, Monks, Friers, and Priestes, a great number depriued of their rents, and liuings, and the rest repenting their idolatrous Papistrie, become true professours of God.
The Text. 14 The seco^d woe is past, and behold the third woe will come anone.
Paraphrast. exposition. 14 The second of
the greate wofull plagues, that that Empire shuld suffer is past, and this is the third and last, that approcheth at hand.
Historicall application 14 This Papisticall kingdo^e suffered great troble by Turkish dominatours, and far greater by the Mahometane Emperours: and these troubles are passed, but now thirdlie, and greatest of all, these Ministers of Gods trueth, arising in this age, since the yeare of God, 1541. shall bringe it to vtter wracke.
The Text. 15 And the seuenth Angell blewe the trumpet, and there were great voyces in heauen, saying, The kingdomes of this worlde are our Lordes, and his Christs, and hee shall raigne for euermore.
Paraphrast. exposition. 15 And the Angels of the seuenth and last age, blew out the plagues of God his wrath, and then wer there great voices of gladnesse, sole^nlie heard throgh out al the church of God, rejoycing, and saying, Now all the kingdo^s of the erth qar thrown down, and that holy kingdom of God, and his son Christe Iesus (who raigneth for euer and euer) onlie set vp.
Anno Christ.1541 Here beginneth the seuenth trumpet, in which the world endeth.
Historicall application 15 For, that yeare began the seventh age, wherein, the last dayes approching, al the Empires and kingdomes of the worlde must bee trodden downe, and Gods, and his Sonne Christes aeternall kingdome, only erected.
The Text. 16 Then the four and twenty Elders, which sate before God on their seates fell vpon their faces, and worshipped God.
Paraphrast. exposition. 16 And the 24. bookes of the olde Testament (dead, and vnmentioned since the daies of the primitiue church) now apears before God in their due and acostomed place and estate prostrating the^ selues, yeild by the mouths of their professors, praise and worship to God, saying.
Historicall application 16 And Gods holie Scriptures, which lay as deade the time of the Antichristian raigne, now beeing restored to their former authoritie and honour, doe stir vp the harts and mouths of all true professours, to humble themselues, and to yeelde their due praise and honour to God almightie, saying.

The Text. 17 Saying, we giue thee thankes, Lord GOD almightie, Which art, and Which wast, and Which art to come: for thou hast received thy gret might, and hast obtained thy kingdome.
Paraphrast. exposition. 17 O our Lord God almighty, who was, who is, and who now shall returne to judgment, wee yeeld thee most harty thanks, for that now thou hast taken vpon thee thy great and mighty power and strength, and doest now only raign ouer al.
Historicall application 17 O our Lord God almighty, who was, who is, and who now shall returne to judgment, wee yeeld thee most harty thanks, for that now thou hast taken vpon thee thy great and mighty power and strength, and doest now only raign ouer al.
The Text. 18 And the Gentiles were angrie, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest giue rewarde vnto thy servantes the Prophetes, and to the Saints, and to them that feare thy Name, to small and great, and shouldest destroie the^, which destroy the earth.
Paraphrast. exposition. 18 And the wicked nations are angrie thereat, but thy wrath is come vpon the^; and the time of the general judgme^t is com, that the dead must rise, and thy holie seruants, the Prophetes, and Saints, and all men both great and small, that haue feared thy name, must receiue the reward of aeternall life: but co^trarilie, those must be rooted out, and cast into aeternall damnation, who haue seduced the world, and polluted the earth with their abhominations.
Historicall application 18 And the wicked nations are angrie thereat, but thy wrath is come vpon the^; and the time of the general judgme^t is com, that the dead must rise, and thy holie seruants, the Prophetes, and Saints, and all men both great and small, that haue feared thy name, must receiue the reward of aeternall life: but co^trarilie, those must be rooted out, and cast into aeternall damnation, who haue seduced the world, and polluted the earth with their abhominations.
The Text. 19 Then the te^ple of God was opened in heauen, and there was seen in his Temple the Arke of his couenant: and there were lighteninges, and voyces, and thunderings, and earthquake, and much haile.
Paraphrast. exposition. 19 And vntill that day (nowe shortly approching) the true Temple and Church of God shal be made r patent, vouchable, visible, and open to all his heauenlie and true elect, and among these of that true Church and heauenlie elect, shall Christ, the true Ark of our couenant, and atonement with God the Father be seene, knowne, and vnderstood, preached out, and constantlie advouched. In that time shall there be great shewings forth of tempestuous troubles, great noise, rumours and threatnings of warres, and great trouble and commotions vpon the Empire of the earth. And the colde and tempestuous s hail of partialitie, self-loue, and lack of charitie, shal extinguish and quench out that ardent zeale, that we owe towards God, and the fervent loue and charitie, that we owe to our neighbour.
Historicall application 19 And vntill that day (nowe shortly approching) the true Temple and Church of God shal be made r patent, vouchable, visible, and open to all his heauenlie and true elect, and among these of that true Church and heauenlie elect, shall Christ, the true Ark of our couenant, and atonement with God the Father be seene, knowne, and vnderstood, preached out, and constantlie advouched. In that time shall there be great shewings forth of tempestuous troubles, great noise, rumours and threatnings of warres, and great trouble and commotions vpon the Empire of the earth. And the colde and tempestuous s hail of partialitie, self-loue, and lack of charitie, shal extinguish and quench out that ardent zeale, that we owe towards God, and the fervent loue and charitie, that we owe to our neighbour.


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a The temple of Ierusalem contained three partes, to wit, the vtter part, where al men resorted, the inner place, called the holy place, and the innermost part, called the holiest of al. These two

holy and holiest parts that are within, represents here the true latent and invisible Church, and the vttermost and most patent parte, represents the outward and visible pretended Church, this vtter court is without the temple, if yee call onely the holy and holiest places to be the temple: but if yee call the whole worke to be the temple, then is this vtter court within the temple as a parte of the whole: and therefore some reade, atrium quod est intra templum, and some reade, atrium quod est extra templum, etc. Alwaies in this visible and outwarde face of the Church, represented here by this outward court, Paul doth mean, that the Antichrist must sit. 2. Thes. 2.4. and therefore, it is commaunded here to be cast out, and no care, measure, nor account thereof to be taken of God.
b The holy citie is not one only citie, but is spirituall Ierusalem, euen the true Church and Spouse of Christ Iesus, generally throgh the whole world, as Reuel. 21. appeareth.
c That these 42. moneths, are 1260. yeares, is prooued by our 1. 15. and 16. Propositions, and that this account of 1260. years beginnes about the yeares of Christ 300. or 316. is prooued by our 36. proposition, and that this time, the Antichrist must sitte ouer the Church of God, read 2. Thes. 2. and that so doth the Pope professing himselfe the heade of the Church, read lib. 5. Sexti, Canone foelicis: in glossa, and lib. 3. Sexti Tit. 16. can periculoso, hereof read also the 2. synthesis of our 26. proposition.
d That the old and new Testaments be these two witnesses that here testifies of God, is prooued by our 21. proposition.
e That 1260. daies meanes here 1260. yeares, is prooued by our 1. 15. and 16. propositions: and that they begin anno Christi. 300. or 316. or thereby, is declared in our 36. proposition.
f Call to minde, how in the daies of Papistrie, none durst vnder the paine of their liues haue the Bible in vulgar language, but all the scriptures wer hidden vp from the vulgar people in Latin language, and wer hidden vp from simple schollers, by wrong glosses and false interpretations, as who would hide vppe and disguise a prince in sackcloth. Of these wicked glosses and false translations, wrested by the original Hebrue and Greeke, there is diuers to be seene in that age, such as euen now, and latest of all the Rhemish Testament.
g There is mention made of these in Zach. 4. where the Prophet

speking of Zerubbabel, and of Iehoshua the son of Iehozadak, their repairing vp of the materiall Temple, introduceth in that vision a figure of these two Candlestickes, and of these two Oliues or Testaments, that yeeld spirituall oyle, both to the Lampes of the seven primitiue Churches, as also now to vs, to kindle our Lampes againe anew, against our bridegroomes comming to judgement. Matth. 25.1.
h How the enemies of God and his word, are confounded with the fire of godlie zeale, is testified Psal. 20.9.10. and Psal. 78.5.6. Also, how manie blasphemous heretikes haue bene confounded by the mouthes of Gods ministers, and afterward died most horrible deaths, in histories may be seene.
i That this beast is the Romane and Papisticall Empire, by the whole indices and tokens thereof, is most clearlie declared Apoc. 12. and 13. and 17. and euidently prooued by our 24. proposition.
k This great citie and streets thereof (though chieflie it meaneth the Antichristian citie, which, God willing, both hereafter shall be, and is heretofore, proposition 23. prooved to be Rome) meaneth no one citie, but all the landes, cities, and places of the world, subject to the Antichristian Empire: Euen like as contrarilie, spiritual Ierusalem, meaned al those through the worlde, that were of the true Christian Empire, as is before saide in the note b hereof.
l This citie being called here, not simplie Sodome nor Aegypt, but spirituallie, like as hereafter (Apoc. 17.5) the same is called not simplie Babylon, but mysticallie Babylon: meaneth thereby, that that citie is not named literallie Sodom, Aegypt: or Babylon, but that because it is polluted with their vices; and like to them it is: therefore, spirituallie compared to them.
m Christ is saide to bee crucified in this Antichristian citie of Rome, for four causes: First, for that as the Iewes did put Christ to death, who is Gods true incarnate Worde, and depriued him of this earthlie life: So the Antichrist here, hath slaine Gods holie Word and Scriptures, by depriuing the^ of their true sense, which is their spirituall life, and the execution of this slaughter proceedeth from Rome. Secondlie, wheresoeuer Christ is truelie preached and afterward despised (as in Rome) he is said there to be crucified Gal. 3.1. Thirdlie, wheresoeuer Christs members ar crucified and

afflicted, there Christ esteemeth himselfe to be crucified and afflicted (Mat. 25.40.45) But in Rome manie martyres haue suffred death: Therefore, etc. Fourthlie, because (by the note k preceeding) the whol Antichristian and Roman Empire, is comprehended vnder the name of this chief metropolitan city therof, which is Rome; But vnder the Romane Empire. and by Pontius Pilate, one of the magistrates thereof, was Christ crucified: Therefore, in this citie, (which specially meaneth Rome) is Christ figuratiuelie said to bee crucified.
n That these three daies and an halfe, are 1260 years, is prooved by our 15. and 16. propositions: and that these yeares began betwixt the years of Christ 300. and 316. is declared in our 36. proposition.
o In consideration of the ten dominions that were vnder the Romane and Papisticall Empire, it may wel be esteemed, that the Abbeyes, Monasteries, and Papistical places of England, and Scotland, with the addition of manie in Germanie, and some in France, that were ruined and pulled down, about the time of the yeare of Christ 1560. were no lesse than the tenth part of al the Antichristian citie or Papisticall policie.
p At this time, the tenth part of the Papistical Empire being refourmed, and the idolatrous policies destroyed, it is specified here that seuen thousand wer slain, that is, they wer degraded of their dignities and honors, and spoyled of their rents, wheron they liued: for (as hereafter, Apoc. 13.15) to giue life to the image of the beast, is nothing els but to confirme, authorize, and inaugurate it, wherby it may enjoy office, honor, and rent: So here, to slaie, is as much as to degrade and depriue them of their offices, honours, and rentes, whereon they did liue. As to the precise number of seuen thousande, the like, and like number yee shall finde 3. Reg. 19.18. and Roman. 11.4. which wee must not thinke to bee so preciselie spoken, as if there were no oddes: for such reasons, as you shall reade Apoc. 7. note f thereof, and Apoc. 9. note hthereof.
q That in this age (which began in the yeare of Christ, a thousand, fiue hundred, fourtie and one, and endeth, at the farthest, in the yeare of Christ, a thousande, seuen hundred, foure score and sixe,) the Romane and Papistical Empire, and al tyrannicall kingdomes

shall bee suppressed, and Christs kingdome onlie erected: and the last judgment, ending all prophecies shall come, is manifested by the oath and vowe, made Apoc. 10.6. of which, reade the notes e and f thereof.
r How this true temple of God, was patent in the daies of the true primitiue Church, and then closed vp againe, to these dayes is said in the discourse of the 20. proposition, and shalbe confirmed hereafter, Reuel. 15.8. and note h thereof: Wherby they notablie erre, that think the Church of God euer to be patent, publik, and visible, seeing by the former verses 2.3.7. and 8. it must bee trod downe by the Antichrist. 1260. yeares, til at length here ver. 19. a little before the latter day, it be made publike, patent, and open to all men.
s This cold haile of partialitie, iniquitie, selfe-loue, and lack of charitie, is not onely here the last token, that preceeds the day of judgment, but also it is the very cause why the day of judgement shalbe hastened before the said 1786 year come, as Matth. 24.12.22. testifieth. Of this selfe-loue and partialitie of the latter day testifies Paul 2. Tim. 3.2. The remanent and perfect historie of the latter day is here omitted, and remitted to the 14. chapter, as shal be discussed there at length, and was already noted Reuel. 10. note d thereof, and in our progresse vppon the 11. proposition is mentioned. And so endeth the orderlie parte of this Reuelation, beginning at Christes baptisme, and continuing vntill the latter day.
Here follovveth the amplificatiue part of the Reuelation of the Euangelist S. Iohn, containing a repetition, amplification, and exposition of such notable thinges, as before are but summarlie intreated of in the former part.



CHAP. XII.

THE ARGVMENT.
The Spirite of God, for our full instruction, minding to repeat, amplifie and expound in this last part of the book, such matters as hath bene summarlie and obscurelie treated of in the former part, of the which this last Ecclesiastical historie being the chiefe: He therfore beginneth in this twelfth chapter again, to expound and repeate

the same after the maner of a battel betwixt Christs Church, holie Spirit, Word, and true professours on the one part: and the Deuill, the Antichristian and Roma^ Empire on the other part: In which is described the strife and malice that Satha^, by his Antichrist, executed against the visible, Apostolik and primitiue Church, which first conceiued, imbraced, and preched forth Gods word, and against that holie vvord, which they preached foorth. So that the true Church became latent and inuisible, and God kept and reserued his holie vvord in puritie, in the hearts of that inuisible and true latent Church, by meanes of his holie Spirite working in them, whereupon followed out a spirituall battell, the spirit of Sathan striuing in the minds of the elect by false doctrine, and other entisements against the Spirit of God. But Sathan seeing that hee preuailed not in that spiritual battel, against the soules of the elect number, hee raiseth, by his Antichrist, persecution corporally, against the bodies of euerie particular professour.


Historicall application.
Historicall application. 1 IN the daies of Saint Iohn, the true Primitiue Church of Christe flourished, the Euangel increased shining as the Sun, so that the professours thereof, despised the glory and dignities of this worlde, casting down al their rents at the feet of the Apostles; to be distributed in co^mo^ to the whol Church (Act. 4.35) having no other crowne of glorie, tha^ the crosse of christ, and doctrine of his Apostles. Gal. 6.14.
Paraphrast. exposition 1 AND there was shewed to mee the great and mervelous vision of Christ his heaue^lie a spouse and true Church, ouershadowed euerie where, with the bright light of his Evangel, shining as the Sun, and shee contemned and trode vnder her feet, all the glories of this world which are as mutable as the Moone, and shee was crowned
with the triumphant doctrin of the twelue Apostles.
The text. 1 AND there appeared a great wonder in heauen: A woman cloathed with the Sunne, and the Moone vvas vnder her feete, and vpon her he^de a crown of twelue starres.

Historicall application. 2 Altogether bent in their hearts, to coceiue and contemplat Gods true word, and in their mouthes and works to teach the same, and expresse the fruits therof;
Paraphrast. exposition 2 And within her bowels, she co^ceiued and meditated b Gods true word, and with her mouth preached and proclaimed out the same, and was preased by the Spirite of God, to yeeld foorth and teach the same, as a woman is pressed to yeelde foorth her birth.
The text. 2 And shee was with childe and cried, traueiling in birth, and was pained readie to be deliuered.
Historicall application. 3 But sodainly after the primitiue Church, the deuill stirred vp his instruments, euen the mighty empire of Rome that great citie, that is situate vpon the seuen notable hils Palatinus, Coelius, Ianiculus, Auentinus, Quirinalis, Vminalis, and Esquilinus, and hath these ten Christia^ kingdomes, Spaine, France, Lombardie, Engla^d, Scotland, Denmarke, Sweden, The kingdome of the Gothes in Italie, and of the Hunnes in Pannonia or Hungary, and the Exarchat of Rave^na; co^federat with it, and haue their Empire governed by seuen estates, all ruling successiuelie after other as kings, to wit, 1 Kings, 2 Consuls, 3 Dictators, 4 Triu^virs, 5 Tribuns, 6 Emperors, 7 Popes.
Paraphrast. exposition 3 Then on the contrarie part, I behelde amongst Gods heauenlie and holie elect and lo, the devil c that horrible and bloodie dragon (in the person of that Empire, whose seate and citie standeth vpon seuen hilles, and hath vnder it tenne confederate kinges, and hath had seuen princelie estats gouerning it)
The text. 3 And there appeared another wonder in heauen: for beholde, a greate red dragon, hauing seuen heds and ten hornes, and seue^ crownes vpon his heads:
Historicall application. 4 By meanes of the which Romane and Papistical
Empire, the deuill hath drawne after him, much of Europe and of Asia, euen the large third part of the world, causing their Pastours and Ministers to leaue their heaue^lie doctrin, and to teach Antichristian Apostasy, for loue of dignities, rents, and earthlie benefices: for the deuil was so ready, that how sone the true word of God was sowen by the primitiue Church, incontinently he raised vp the Papistical antichrist to devour and confounde the same with false glosses, and sinister interpretations.
Paraphrast. exposition 4 With the poyson of his taile, drew after him the third part of Christians, from their heauenlie contemplation, to earthlie affetions:
and this dragon and his members awaited vpon Gods Church and holie Spouse, that preached and expressed out the fruit of Gods word, that how soon she had preached out that word, hee might choke the same, and deuoure the fruite thereof.
The text. 4 And his tail drewe the third part of the stars of heauen, and cast them to the earth. And the drago^ stood before the women,
which was readie to be deliuered, to deuour her childe when shee had broght it forth.

Historicall application. 5 But contrary to their expectation, that pure doctrin of the Euangel, preched by the primitiue Church, was reserued by God amo^g the invisible Church, til at length, it shuld rule ouer al the kingdomes of the earth, and so God preserued his worde in puritie.
Paraphrast. exposition 5 And she deliuered and expressed forth her fruit, and increase of the true dincarnat Worde, Christ Iesus, who shal rule and governe all nations vnder the scepter of his servitude: And God accepted this fruit of his holy Word vnder his protection, and authorised it among his holie elect.
The text. 5 So shee brought foorth a man childe, which shoulde rule all nations with a rod of yron: and her sonne was taken vp to God, and to his throne.
Historicall application. 6 But his visible Church was bannished and made invisible among a few godly perso^s, who successiuely after other intertained the truth al the daies of the Antichrist, from the daies of Pope Syluester the first, to these our daies, euen 1260 years.
Paraphrast. exposition 6 Whereof the visible number, euen Gods true Church and Spouse was chaced away, and e remained invisible and solitarie among certaine priuate persons, predestinated and elected of God: where shee was nourished, and
fostered with their godlie praiers and secret meditations, during the space f of 1260 yeares.
The text. 6 And the woman fled into the wildernesse, where she hath a place prepared of God, that they shulde feede her there a thousand, two hundreth and thre score daies.

Historicall application. 7 For at the Pentecost after Christes ascension was the holie Spirit and thirde comforter sent, downe to dwell in our mindes, and therein to fight and withstande all the priuate temptations and motions of the deuil, vsed against the christian Church. For the deuill hauing first seduced the outward, visible, and Antichristian Church, now striueth against the Spirite of God, in the inward mindes of the invisible Church.
Paraphrast. exposition 7 Hereupon proceeded a greate and heauenlie strife, for God the g holie Spirit and third comforter, by his ministring Angels and godly inspirations, fought against the deuill, that old dragon; who with his wicked spirites and temptations fought, and withstood the spirit of God within vs
The text. 7 And there was a battell in heauen. Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the dragon fought and his Angels.
Historicall application. 8 But he by his temptations and intisements, is no waies able to ouerco^ the mightie force of Gods Spirit, working in our Spirits, far les to posses the souls of the faithful and heauenlie elect.
Paraphrast. exposition 8 But Sathan prevailed not, neither obtained any place amongst Gods heaue^lie and faithfull elect to ouercome them.
The text. 8 But they preuailed not, nether was their place found any more in heauen.
Historicall application. 9 So that now in Christ his passion hat craftie Seducer and accuser, and his me^bers, hauing no power against these electe
soules doeth most cruellie extend his tyranny against their fleshlie bodies onely.
Paraphrast. exposition 9 And so that wicked dragon and olde serpent, who justly is called an accuser and odious, who deceiues all the whole world, (now restrained from overco^ming the faithfull and heauenlie elect souls) is cast out, he, his members and instruments, hauing only permission to
tempt, trie, and persecute their earthlie bodies.
The text. 9 And the greate dragon, that olde Serpent, called the deuill and Sathan, was caste out, which deceiueth all the world: hee was euen caste into the earth, and his Angels were caste out vvith him:

Historicall application. 10 Therfore, with vs, and for our cause, al the Angels of heauen doe yeeld praise and thanks to God eternal, saying, Nowe is there saluation in heauen prepared for Gods elect, and the strength and kingdome of our God, and power of his Sonne Christ Iesus, is enlarged ouer all: for the accuser of the elect souls (who are euen as brethren vnto vs his Angelles) is caste downe and displaced: for continuallie, since the fal of the first Adam, he accused the^ therefore in Gods justice:
Paraphrast. exposition 10 For which delivery of our souls, ther wer voices of thanksgiuing and great joy among al the Angels of heauen, saying, Nowe is there saluation in heauen prepared for Gods elect, and the strength and kingdome of our God, and power of his Sonne Christ Iesus, is enlarged ouer all: for the accuser of the elect souls (who are euen as brethren vnto vs his Angelles) is caste downe and displaced: for continuallie, since the fal of the first Adam, he accused the^ therefore in Gods justice:
The text. 10 The^ I hard a loud voice saying, Nowe is saluation in heave^, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.
Historicall application. 11 But now they haue ouercome this their accuser, in the blood of the second Adam, Christ Iesus, and in the constant testimonie they did beare of him, not regarding their liues, but being contented to suffer martyrdome for his sake.
Paraphrast. exposition 11 But now they haue ouercome this their accuser, in the blood of the second Adam, Christ Iesus, and in the constant testimonie they did beare of him, not regarding their liues, but being contented to suffer martyrdome for his sake.
The text. 11 But they ouercame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimonie, and they loued not their liues vnto the death.
Historicall application. 12 Therefore, rejoyce all yee godlie and coelestiall creatures: but woe be vnto you, that doe fixe your foelicitie on earthlie glorie and affections, and do plunge your selues in the muddie seas and tumbling cares of this worlde, for the deuill is sent down amongst you, raging in great furie, knowing his time to be short, for that the world draweth neere to an end.
Paraphrast. exposition 12 Therefore, rejoyce all yee godlie and coelestiall creatures: but woe be vnto you, that doe fixe your foelicitie on earthlie glorie and affections, and do plunge your selues in the muddie seas and tumbling cares of this worlde, for the deuill is sent down amongst you, raging in great furie, knowing his time to be short, for that the world draweth neere to an end.
The text. 12 Therefore, rejoice ye heavens, and yee that dwel in the^. Wo to the inhabitants of the erth and of the sea, for the deuill is come down vnto you, which hath gret wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time.
Historicall application. 13 So then, Sathan seing himself secluded fro^ anie farther power against the elect, but only a litle power ouer the earthlie bodies of the true Church, stirreth vp the Bishops of Rome to vsurp temporal dignitie, and Antichristian supremacie, aboue all the visible Churches, whereby these seuen Churches of Asia, that S. Iohn wrot to, and other Apostolicall Churches, were still persecuted by that Roman Church, til their whol visible nu^ber wer faine to imbrace the Roma^ Apostasie, in sted of that true word, that somtime was preached among them.
Paraphrast. exposition 13 Nowe Sathan perceiuing himselfe so ouercome, that he had no more power but ouer the earthlings (as being Prince of this world) he in the person of the Antichriste
persecuted the true and visible primitiue Churche, and spouse of Christ, who had procreated and brought forth the noble fruit and increas of Gods Word.
The text. 13 And when the dragon sawe that he was cast vnto the earth,
hee persecuted the woma^ which had broughte foorth the man childe.

Historicall application. 14 So God from these daies forth, viz. from the yeare of Christ 316. hath withdrawne his visible Church fro^ open assemblies, to the harts of particular godly men, wher successiuelie it abode in puritie, invisiblie all the daies of the Antichristia^ raigne, euen to these our daies, the space of 1260 yeares.
Paraphrast. exposition 14 But God armed her with the swift h winges of his protection, whereby she became his inuisible Church, and fled from the open assemblie, to the private heartes of particular godlie men, as to her desart place, where she (as is said before) was nourished with godlie meditations, for the space of i a thousande, two hundreth and three score yeares, free from the poyson of that dragons heresie.
The text. 14 But to the woman were giuen two winges of a great eagle, that shee might flie into the wildernesse, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and halfe a time, from the presence of the serpent.
Historicall application. 15 Then this deuilish Antichrist, and Roman seat, fearing least the small sparke of Gods invisible Church shuld sometime reviue, and extinguish their synagogue, preached and set out such plausible heresie, as might trap and allure the invisible church such as merits, and workes of supererogatio^; deseruing (as they say) more than heauen, with Indulgences, and pardons for sins, although they shuld deserue worse than hell.
Paraphrast. exposition 15 Then spewed Sathan out of his mouth, a floode of k false doctrin and heresie, that hee might seduce God his true Church therewith.
The text. 15 And the serpent cast out of his mouth water after the woman like a flood, that hee might cause her to bee caried away of the flood

Historicall application. 16 Which, with manie more plausible heresies, their visible Church hath whollie imbraced: yet euer som of the true invisible Church haue remained in their puritie.
Paraphrast. exposition 16 And the earthly and visible Church of the Antichrist, did so drinke vppe and swallowe euerye droppe of that doctrin, that the true invisible Churche, did abide pure, and did not gette one droppe of that poyson, that Satha^ had spewed out.
The text. 16 But the earth holpe the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed vppe the flood, which the dragon had cast out of his mouth.
Historicall application. 17 Wherupon the devill, in that Romish Antichrist, is so inraged, that wheresoeuer particularly these dispersed children of Gods true invisible Church, their works and books are apprehended, they are al burned together, and persecuted with fire and sword.
Paraphrast. exposition 17 And the deuill raged in ire against that inuisible Church, and proceeded in persecuting the residue of her childre^, which from thence-forth do obserue the co^mandeme^ts of god and do beare truelie and constantly, the testimony of Iesus Christ.
The text. 17 The^ the dragon was wroth with the woman and went, and made warr with the remnant of her seed, which keepe the commandements of God, and haue the testimonie of Iesus Christ.
Historicall application. 18 And these thinges did S. Iohn foresee, and further, as followeth, sta^ding on the seashor of Pathmos.
Paraphrast. exposition 18 And I stood on the sea l shore of Pathmos, beholding the visio^, which followeth.
The text. 18 And I stood on the sea sand.


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a That this woman clad here with the Sunne, etc. is the true Church of God, is prooued by the 22. proposition.
b How the true Church euer traueled to procreate more children to God, in whome Christ is continually conceiued, formed, and spiritually borne: ye shal read the Galathians. 4.19. where Paul calleth the Galathians his little children, of whome he trauelled again

in birth, that Christ may be formed and shapen in the^: where by it is evident, that the Church of God is this Woman, and Christs true word is the fruite and birth, that shee formes and produceth into the hartes and bowels of the elect.
c That this Dragon is the Deuill, it appears plainly by the 9. verse hereof following: and that this shape and figure of his, of seuen heades and ten hornes, and that the 1260. yeares of his raign are the proprieties and notes of the Latine or Roman empire, is prooued by the 24. proposition. Hereby then is meant, that the deuil, in this strife against Gods Church, vsed or clothed himselfe with the persone of the Romane or Latine empire.
d This man-child that ruled al nations with a rod of yron, is called (Psal. 2.) Christ the sonne of God, and (Reuel. 19.13.) he is called the vvord of God, which ar both one, seeing that word tooke flesh, and was incarnate, Iohn 1.14. Gods Church then, and true spouse, is said to produce this birth of this man-childe, when they preach forth the true worde of God, and his sonne Christ Iesus, reade hereof Gal. 4.19. howe Christ must be formed and shapen in vs, etc.
e Seeing by the opinion of Methodius and Primasius, and diuers old writers, these notes of this woman agree not with the Virgin Marie in particular, but with the whole Church of Christ in generall: Therefore, and by these wordes of this text, and by our 16. proposition, it is certaine, that the Church of Christ must lurke and abide invisible. 1260. yeares, vnder the Antichrist, where through they are deceiued, that think the true Church to be euer visible, patent, and publike, or yet the publik and visible Church to be euer Gods true Church.
f That 1260. daies in prophecies, signifie 1260. years is prooued by our 1. and 16. propositions, and that these years beginne at Sylvester the first, about the year of Christ, 316. is proued in the 36. proposition.
g That both in Daniel 10.13.21, and Daniel 12.1. and also in this place, Michael is taken for one of the persones of the Trinitie, euen either for the Sonne, or for the holy Spirite, it is certaine, by the properties conteined in these textes, for there is Michael called one of the first Princes and our Prince, and so, is both Christ and the holy Spirit, the first Prince before all beginning, and

the last after all ending, euen a. and o. and is also prince ouer vs, yea, hee is a Prince for vs that are his elect, who (as saith Daniel there) stands for Daniels people, euen for the true and spirituall Israelites, and so standeth both Christ in heauen as our Mediator with God, and the holy Spirite on earth with vs, as our defender and gouerner: Againe, with the name of Michael, which is to say, vvho is like God, or otherwise, Deus percutiens, a beating or striking God, (ex Hieronymo de interpretatione nominum) doth both the persone of Christ and the holy Spirite agree, for both with the father are one God, and none is like to that God, whereof all the three persons beate and strike downe Sathans tyrannie, and fighte for vs. The question therefore is, which person of the Deitie doth Michael signifie, in these forenamed textes: though some think he meane Christe, for the properties aboue written, agreeing to Christ: yet in respect (as is said) the same also doeth agree with the holy Spirit, and in some points agreeth not to Christ. Therfore, (in my judgment) Michael meaneth the holy Spirit, and not the person of Christ: for seeing the man, or one like vnto the Son of man that appeared to Daniel. (10.) is prooued Apoc. 1. note s thereof, and Apoc. 10. note a thereof, to be vndoubtedlie Christ: How can it be, that Christ there (Dan. 10.13.21.) saith that Michael helped him, except that Michael be taken for the holie Spirit? For the Deitie distinguished in three persons (although essentiallie inseparable) euerie person is said in the Scriptures, to help one another, as the Father by the Sonne created the vvorld (Col. 1.16. and Iohn. 1.3.) The Sonne sent by the Father, redeemed the world. (Luk. 4.43.) The holie Spirit sent both from the Father and the Sonne co^forteth, defendeth, and regenerateth his elect of the worlde: And the Angels are not said to help, but to serue and minister to the Deitie. But contrarilie, to deuide one person of the Deitie in two names, and to make Christ named with the one name, to help christ named with the other name, seemeth altogether improper: Wher by, Michael that helped Christ, appeareth euidentlie, not to be Christ, but the holie Spirite: and this I speake of these forenamed Textes onelie, and not of Michael in the Epistle of Iude, where hee representeth an Archangell, who durst not himselfe, but referred it to God, to rebuke Sathan, neither of other parts of Scripture where Michael is the proper name of a man.
h These Eagles winges doe meane Gods mightie protection, because (Deu. 32, 11) As the Eagle flotereth ouer her yong, and stretcheth out her vvings, and carieth them on her shoulders: so the Lord hath also kept and preserued his owne. Furthermore, these two Eagles winges may be taken for the two Testamentes, the olde and the new, with the which Gods true inuisible Church clothes her selfe, and therewith flieth from the Antichristian synagogue and assemblie, to her priuate meditations.
i That this time, times, and halfe a time meaneth a thousand, two hundred and three score yeares, is prooued by our 16. proposition, beginning that date about the yeare of Christ 316. by the 36. proposition.
k That these Waters and floods mean doctrin, consider by the not g of the 8. chap. hereof.
l Some read this Text to bee spoken of the Dragon, in these wordes, And it stood vpon the sea shore, and so it may bee interpreted to meane, that Sathan stands readie betwixt sea and lande (according to the 12. verse hereof) to oppresse them both: that is, to seduce all those, that fixe and repose their foelicitie on earthlie pleasures and ease on the one part: and these on the other part who as the waltering waues of muddie seas, plaie the tyrants, reving to themselues the kingdomes of the world: But I rather assent to those other, who read, And I stood on the seashore, as if S. Iohn would signifie to vs, that he stood on the shore or sea coast of the Ile of Pathmos, while as he sawe the vision following of the beast arising out of the sea. The like is said in Dan. 10.4. that he stood on the banke of the riuer Tigris, where he saw his vision.



CHAP. XIII.

THE ARGVMENT.
Hauing in the former chapter deduced the continuall strife betwixt Christs Church and holie Spirit, on the one part, and the Deuill and his instruments on the other part: In this chapter he renewth a more speciall description of these chiefe instruments, whose person the deuil is to vse in all times hereafter, to persecute Gods Church withal: to wit of the whole Latine Empire in generall, and of the Antichrists kingdom in particular, set out respectiuelie

vnder the figure of two beasts the first ten horned, the last, two-horned, with all their notes and tokens, agreeing most exactlie with the Roman, and Papistical kingdomes as followeth.


Historicall application. 1 ANd among the ambitious tyra^ts and tumultuous people of the worlde, arose the gret Latin or Romane Empire, whose chiefe seat and Metropolitane citie Rome, is set vp on their seuen hils Palatinus, Coelius, Ianiculus (otherwise called Capitolinus) Auentinus, Quirinalis, Viminalis and Esquilinus, and hath bene gouerned by these seue^ princely governme^ts, Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Triumvirs, Tribunes, Emperors, and Pops, Afterward it was deuided into ten chief kingdoms, to wit, Spain, France, Lo^bardie, England, Scotla^d, Denmark, Sweden, the kingdom of the Goths in Italie, and of the Hunnes in Pannonia or Hungarie; and the Exarchat of Rauenna, and ouer thwart these seuen hils and notable partes of that Empire, were set vp idolatrous te^ples, Images, pillers, Piramydes, and monuments of great ostentation, and blasphemous superscriptions and titles, such as Diis Manibus, Minervae, Fortunae* Romae fortunatae, Romae victrici Romae aeternae, Plutoni, Veneri,
Priapo, and infinit others of old erected, beside also infinit Papistical Idols of new.
Paraphrast. exposition 1 AND I foresaw, that out of the waltering a waues and muddie seas of Tyrants, ther shuld arise a great and mightie b Empire, whose principall seate and chief Citie, is placed vpon seuen chilles, and should be gouerned by seuen princelie gouernementes; and d ten seuerall parts of the same Empire ar to bee devided, whereof there shall bee tenne crowned kings, and euery where vpon these seuen hilles, shall be monuments of ostentation, with proud and blasphemous superscriptions and titles, set vp by
these princelie and royall Gouernours.
The text. 1 AND I saw a beaste rise out of the sea, hauing seuen heades, and tenne hornes, and vpon his hornes vvere ten crownes, and vpon his heades the name of blasphemie.
Historicall application. 2 This Empire succeeding to the former three Empires and monarchies, was So that at length, by their deuillish works of Idolatrie, auguries, sorceries, oracles of false gods, and by blood-shed, it pleased our God, to suffer these Emperours to conquer and possesse the whol world.
Paraphrast. exposition 2 And this Empire that I foresawe, was like the Graecian Monarch, in that it swiftlie, as with the speede of a e Leopard, shortlie ouer ran the whol worlde, and like the Monarchie of the Medes and Persians, who mightilie marched forward, as on Beares feete, treading downe all other kingdomes, and like the Monarchie of the Babylonians, who (as with the mouthes of Lyons) devoured vp innocent blood without measure: And the deuill gaue him his power and his throne that is, he made him f Prince of the world with full authoritie.
Historicall application. 3 But afterwarde, the Hunnes, Gotthes and Vandalles, subverted that Gouernment of Emperours, and abolished them, wherthrough the Empire vaked and lay deade more than three hundred yeares. Yet, afterward rose new Emperours againe, intituled of Germanes and Romans, of the which Charle-maigne was the first, and in them was the Romane Empire in a maner reviued and restored againe. The greate foelicitie of this Empire astonished all men, who therefore called it Imperium
sacrum p^rpetuum and semper augustum, and not onelie became subject to it,
Paraphrast. exposition 3 And I foresawe one of his chiefest g governments, as it were vtterlie destroyed and abolished but that losse was mended again, and that government whollie restored, and all men marueiled at the power and prosperitie of that Empire, and gaue ouer themselues as slaues and servants
vnto it.
The text. 3 And I saw one of his heades, as it vvere wounded to death, but his deadly wou^d was healed, and al the world wo^dred and followed the beast.

Historicall application. 4 But also for loue of it, they worshipped the devill, in the idolles of Mars, Minerva, Ladie Fortune, and others, and did beare such reuerence to that Empire, that by protection of false gods, they thought the same without al compare, and for euer invincible.
Paraphrast. exposition 4 And they worshipped the h devil that gaue such preheminence to that Empire, and they honoured that empire, esteeming none like therunto or able to make warre against it.
The text. 4 And they worshiped the dragon which gaue power vnto the beast and th^y worshiped the beast, saying, Who is like vnto the beast who is able to warre with him?
Historicall application. 5 In this Empire ariseth the Pope, who proudlie alleadgeth himselfe to be God his Vicar, and that he can remitte sinnes, and exeeme from hell, and such other blasphemies against God: and he bega^ his mightie power and kingdom, by Pope Sylvester the first, about the year of Christ three hundreth and sixteene, and hath raigned a thousand, two hundreth and three score yeares.
Paraphrast. exposition 5 Then was ther adjoined to that Empire, a i false mouth, euen an Antichristia^ prophet, that spake foorth proudly things of gret ostentation, and blasphemies against God, and he received a mightie power of doing, for the space of k 1260. yeares.
The text. 5 And there was giue^ vnto him a mouth, that spak gret things, and blasphemies, and power was given vnto him to doe two and fourtie moneths.
Historicall application. 6 Not onelie blaspheming God and his name, but also boasting that hee hath heauen to sell for money, and can make Saintes in heauen of his owne canonizing, to whom we must praie, as our mediators.
Paraphrast. exposition 6 During the which time, the Empire opened this his Antichristia^ mouth, wherby he taught blasphemous doctrin against God, and against his holie name and heauenlie Tabernacle,
and against all the Saintes that dwell in heauen.
The text. 6 And he opened his mouth vnto blasphemie againste God, to blaspheme his Name, and his Tabernacle, and the^ that dwell in heauen.

Historicall application. 7 And whosoeuer woulde not imbrace these and other his errours, but meaned to serue God trulie, of these did he persecute, and put to death manie a thousand, extending his tyrannical power, ouer al christian kindreds and people.
Paraphrast. exposition 7 And God suffred him to make war aganst his elect serva^ts and to subdue the^ vnder his tyrannie, so that his power extended ouer euerie kinred, tongue, and natio^.
The text. 7 And it was giue^ vnto him to make warre with the saints and to ouercome them, and power was given him ouer euery kindred, tongue, and nation.
Historicall application. 8 Whereby worldlie men, addicted to earthlie pleasures, reuere^ced him as God (Distinct. 96. Can. Satis euidenter) kissing his feet, and adoring him, so that in him the name of Rome and whole Romane Empire, is esteemed famous, and holden in great estimation and reuerence of all
Paraphrast. exposition 8 Therefore, all worldlie men, dwelling in earthlie pleasures, shall giue such homage and reuerence as appertaineth to God, vnto that Empire, euen all these, whose names are not registred among the elect number of Christ Iesus our Sauiour, who was ^redestinat to l suffer death for vs, before the foundations of the world were laid:
The text. 8 Therefore all that dwell vpon the erth, shal worhippe him, whose names are not written in the booke of life of the Lamb whiche was slaine from the beginning of the world.
Historicall application. 9 But who hath vnderstanding, let him consider Gods just judgment.
Paraphrast. exposition 9 But who hath vnderstanding, let him consider Gods just judgment.
The text. 9 If any man haue an eare, let him heare,
Historicall application. 10 Whereby these tyrants shall goe at length into captiuitie, because they haue led others captiue: and shal be killed with the sword, because they haue killed others with the sword, and this yeeldeth occasion of comfort, patience, and perseverance in faith to Gods servants.
Paraphrast. exposition 10 Whereby these tyrants shall goe at length into captiuitie, because they haue led others captiue: and shal be killed with the sword, because they haue killed others with the sword, and this yeeldeth occasion of comfort, patience, and perseverance in faith to Gods servants.
The text. 10 If anie lead into captiuitie, he shall goe into captiuitie: if anie kill with a sword, he must be killed by a sword: here is the patience, and the faith of the Saints.
Historicall application. 11 And to returne againe to the particulare description of the Popes kingdome, it arose of the said greate Empire, and contained a two folde power, spirituall and temporall: signified by their two horned Miter, and by the two swordes, that Pope Boniface the eight caused to bee caried before him, saying, Ecce duo gladii hic, while as he was ^lad the one day in the Po^tificall of a Bishop, the next day in armour like an Emperor, vsurping so double power, but teaching such deuillish doctrine, as before is said.
Paraphrast. exposition 11 And I considered m by it selfe, and aparte, the descriptio^ of this Antichrist; euen howe his kingdome was in a manner, another kingdo^ comming vp out of the former great and stablished Empire of the earth, and that hee had double power, spiritual and temporall, euen n Priesthood and kingdom as Christ hath, yet in his doctrine teacheth hee divelish errours.
The text. 11 And I behelde another beast co^ming vp out of the erth, which had two horns like the Lamb, but hee spake like the dragon.

Historicall application. 12 And hee wrought what hee liste (the Emperours yet standing) with no lesse authoritie and power than the Emperour himselfe; yea, he established and inaugurated againe of newe, that decayed estate of Emperours, that nowe started vppe againe by Charlemaigne.
Paraphrast. exposition 12 And hee did al that hee liste, in presence of the greate Empire, with no lesse power than that first greate Empire was woont to do: and he compelled al men to doe homage, reverence, and be subject to that gret Empire, whose gouernment newlie o was start vp againe, and his former decaies and losses amended.
The text. 12 And he did al that the firste beaste could doe before him, and he caused the earth and them vvhich dwell therin, to worship the firste beaste, whose deadly wound was healed.
Historicall application. 13 And hee wrought manie wo^ders, partly fals as these of the legendary, partly by sorcery, throwing fire out of his sleues, as sent from heauen, partly by his ordinarie ceremonies of cursing, vsed with the setting vp on hie of light torches and burning candles, and then throwing them downe headlong to the ground, extinguishing them before al the people,
Paraphrast. exposition 13 And this Antichrist, wroght many devillish and p deceitfull wonders, so that he made q sires of diuers kindes to bee thrown downe from on high to the grou^d in presence of the whole people, as if the fire of God his wrath were at his commaund, to bee brought down from heauen.
The text. 13 And he did great wonders, so that he made fire to come down from heauen on the earth, in the sight of men.

Historicall application. 14 Terrifying simple men to obey him, who thoughte their soules were vndone for euer, by these lying terrours and deceites, which he vsed against both the people, and Princes of the Roman Empire: Also, it was the Pope that caused Charlemaigne and his successors new Emperours, to bee confirmed and established, after that that estate of Emperours had vaked more than three hu^dred yeares, by the warres of the Hunnes, Gothes and Vandalles: and ordained Princes Electours, who shoulde choose the King of Romans.
Paraphrast. exposition 14 And hee deceived, and terrified the^ that dwelled on the earth, by these lying signes and terrours, which God suffered him to vse, in presence of all those of the great Empire: and hee r caused all those that dwell on the earth, to renewe and make vp again, a new forme of Emperours or rather images of the former gret Empire, whose imperiall government had bin destroyed and abolished before by the sword, but now is repaired, and restored againe.
The text. 14 And deceiued them which dwel on the earth, by the signes, whiche were permitted to him to doe in the sight of the beast, saying to them that dwell on the erth, that they shoulde make the image of the beaste, which had the wounde of a sword, and did liue.
Historicall application. 15 Who yet was not Emperour, but as a dead figure, Image, or shew of the Empire, til he sole^nlie receiued the Popes injunctions, and did sweare to maintaine his profession, and then did the Pope crowne, inaugurat and confirme him Emperour of Germanes and Romans: And when the Emperour is so sworne, and co^federat with the Pope, then whoeuer do not reverence the^, and obey their como^ decrees wil be pursued of the^ both, and of all their co^federats, to deth, by fire and sword, as rebels apostats, and heretiks.
Paraphrast. exposition 15 And God suffered this Antichrist to s inspire those Emperours (or rather images and formes of the greate Empire) with the spirit of his errours, so that they should speak and professe his doctrin, and then should hee confirme, crown and inaugurate these counterfeit Emperours with such power, that now al men must honour and reuerence them, and yeelde them worship and obedience, vnder paine of their liues.
The text. 15 And it was permitted vnto him to giue a spirite vnto the image of the beaste, so that the image of the beast shuld speake, and should cause, that as manie as woulde not worshippe the image of the beast shoulde be killed.

Historicall application. 16 Moreouer, the Pope caused all his subjects of Christendom, to receiue, and beare in their hands and foreheads, markes and tokens, representing the name of the Latin Empire; such as the marks of (...)
and crosses of sundry sorts.
Paraphrast. exposition 16 And he caused all men of all degrees and qualities, to receiue, and beare visible t marks or liveries of the Empire, sometimes in their handes, somtimes on their foreheads.
The text. 16 And hee made al, both sma and gret, rich and poore, free and bond to recei e a marke in their right ^ands, or in their foreheads,
Historicall application. 17 Els were they not thought to be Christians but excommunicate, and by the Bul of Pope Martin the fift, these were not permitted to vse any traffique or trade of mercha^dize, that would not subject the^selues to the seate of Rome, by marking the^selues thereto, in bearing crosses on their foreheds on Ash-wednesday, and palme crosses in their handes on Palm-sunday, or by professing their name, that is to say, to beleeue, as the Latin church beleeues, or to reverence magicallie the crosses or naked figure of (...),
Paraphrast. exposition 17 And he discharged all men of doing their lawfull affaires, or vsing their trade of merchandize, except those, that doe beare and professe the marke or name of the Empire, or the figure of the number of his name.
The text. 17 And that no man might buy or sel, saue hee th t h^d the marke or the na^e of the beast, or the number of his name.

Historicall application. 18 Which who wil wiselie co^sider, shal find more like to (...) (which is the nu^ber of the name (...),) than to the name of christ; for this (...) is the name of that king, fro^ whom that Empire is called the Latin Empire, and the nu^ber of that name (...) is 666. expressed in Greek by these numerall letters (...)
Paraphrast. exposition 18 This is a matter, which requireth wisedome: let him therefore, that hath skill and knowledge reckon the literall number of the name of this Empire, for same number is also the number of one of the chief u headsmen, and firste Princes thereof, and the letters of that name make the number of sixe hundred, three score and sixe.
The text. 18 Here is wisedome. Let him that hath wit, count the number of the beaste: for it is the number of a man, and l^^^ number is sixe hundred, thre score and sixe


Notes, Reasons and Amplifications.
a Seeing (Apoc. 17.15.) waters generally are interpreted to mean al people and nations: the sea whereout this kingdome, and the foure kingdomes in Dan. 7. ariseth, must needs be the tumultuous people and tyrants of the world, amongst the which, and of whome, the monarchies start vp, conforme to Esay 57.20. the vvicked are like the raging sea that cannot rest, etc. and Ezech. 26.3. I wil bring vp many nations against thee as the sea, etc.
b That beasts be interpreted Kings, kingdomes, empires, and monarchies, read Daniel. 7.17. and Dan. 8.20.21. and that this beast is the Romane kingdome and empire in particular, is prooued by our 24. proposition.
c That these seuen heades, are interpreted seauen hilles of the great citie, and seuen sorts of Kings or gouernors thereof, reade Apoc. 17.9.18. and howe Rome is that seuen hilled citie, gouerned by seuen royall and princely gouernments, is prooued by the 23. proposition, and in our foresaid 24. proposition.
d How this empire of Rome became deuided into ten King^ or kingdomes, compared to hornes, read Apoc. 17.12. and the said 24. proposition.
c Daniel (cap. 7.) describing the foure monarchies, compares the first (which was of the Babylonians) to a Lyon. The seco^d (which was of the Medes and Persians) to a Bear. The thirde (which was of the Grecians) to a Leopard: but because to al these, fourthly succeeded the greate Latin empire: Therefore Sanct Iohn composeth

here the fourth beast, which represents the same of all the former three, signifying thereby, that this empire lacked no instrument of crueltie, that any of the former had.
f What throne and seat can this be els, that the Deuil giues to the Romans, but that which he promiseth to giue to Christ (Mat. 4.29) to wit, euen the Empire of the worlde, as being the Prince of this world (Ioh 12.31. and Eph. 6.12. and Col. 2.15.) and so indeede it pleased God to permit the Romans by their deuilish auguries, oracles, sorceries and bloodshed, to obtain the whol monarchie of the earth, to the wrack of other godles people, and at length of them selues.
g The heades (Apoc. 7.19.) being two waies interpreted; to wit, for seauen mountaines, and for seuen kings or royal gouernme^ts. The wounding of one of these seuen heades, must necessarily, rather meane the decay of one of the seuen princely gouernme^ts, tha^ any thing concerning any of the hils, specially, seeing experience of the event hath declared, that the most special of these seuen gouerme^ts, to wit, the Emperors, wer abolished by the warfare of the Hunnes, Gothes, and Vandalles, and vaked from the daies of Augustulus, in the year of Christ 475. vntil the co^ming of Charlemaign in the 806. year, in whose person and successors, that deadly woud of the empire was healed, and the estat of Emperors renued.
h Who can deny but these Romanes, adorers of these Idols, in whome the deuil actually spake by oracle, in that doing, worshipped the Deuil, seeing the most simple sorte of Idolatrie, is nothing els, but the worshipping of deuils, and are adjunct. Apoc. 9.20.
i This mouth of the Empire, euen the Pope, that Antichristian prophet, here receiues his beginning of the Latin empire, as a me^ber therof, but afterward (ver. 11.) he becomes a seueral king, and is particularly described: hereof read the 24. 25. and 26. Propositio^s.
k That 42. moneths be 1260 yeares, and begin about the 300. or 316. yeare of God, read our 1.16. and 36. propositions.
l This slaying of the Lambe from the beginning, meaneth the certaintie of Gods predestination, in that the decree of God, preordinate from the beginning, shal as surelie take effect, as if it had bene alreadie performed from the beginning. Arethas, reads this wise, Whose names were not written from the beginning of the vvorld in the booke of life of the Lamb, who was slain. Agreeable with the like, contained Apoc. 17.8. Alwaies, seeing both the saued number, as also

the form of redemption are from the beginning appointed and preordinate by God, therefore both these readings may stand.
m After he hath described the Pope as a member, euen the mouth of the great Roman Empire: now describeth he him more particularlie and apart, as hauing obtained a particular kingdom of his own: Hereof read note l with the 24. 25 and 26. propositions.
n Hornes, to signifie, powers, and kingdoms, read the note d Apoc. 5
o This deadlie wound, note g is declared to be the decay of the Imperial estat, which now being start vp again in Charlemaigne, the Pope proclames him Emperor, and willeth al men to reuere^ce him.
p Of these miracles and wonders, wrought partlie by sorcerie, partlie by jugling, and partlie but falslie alledged, ye shal find divers histories: Hereof read the tenth synthesis of our 26. proposition.
q Of these fiery signes, we read two sorts, the one is by inchantme^t, such as Pope Gregory the 7. did practise, who first was a Monk, and was called Hilde-brand, which is to say, a helth-brand, or rather a hel-brand, and being ashamed of that name, did change the same, but not the meaning therof, for (as Cardinal Benno writes in vita Hildebra^di) Cum vellet manicas suas discutiebat, etc, that is, Whe^ he list, he did shake down his sleeues and fire did flie out, in maner of sparks, and by these miracles, as by a sign of holines he deluded the eies of the simple people: And because the deuil might not persecute Christ openly by Pagans, therfore by this false Monk vnder a Monks habit, and shew of religio^, he fraudfully preassed to subuert Christs name. The other sort, is by ceremonies of terrour, as when the Pope or his Cleargie doe cast downe fierie Torches, and Candels from on high, at the time of their cursing, as though they would meane, that the fire of Gods wrath wer likewise ready at their command, to bee shaken out of heauen (as out of Hildebrands sleeue) against the^ whom they curse. And by these horrible signs and terrours, they haue so terrified Princes, that they made the^ to lose their kingdoms, and due obedience of their subjects, till they behoued to stoup vnder their feet, and craue pardon and absolution. What kingdomes thereby the Pope hath cowped, and what rents and dignities he hath conquered, is to be seene in histories.
r The Pope politikelie for his ease, causeth these newe counterfet Emperors to be made by princes Electors; that these Emperors of his own making, may not onlie augment his Ecclesiastial rents: but also, may be readie, as his slaues, to fight his battelles, and revenge

all his quarrels, as is to be seene in manie and diuerse histories, els shall the the Pope depriue them, and create other Emperours in their place: And so hath he puissance indeede to doe, for that hee hath hitherto so pinched the empire, that hee hath the substance thereof; and they litle more than the bare name, image, or shadow thereof: and therefore, are they called images of the beast, as being in a maner but counterfeit Emperours: Reade hereupon our 28. proposition.
s The king of Romanes and apparant Emperour, chosen by the Princes Electors, is neuer the more Emperour, vnlesse, being sworn to maintaine the Papisticall seat, he be afterward inaugurate and crowned by the Pope: for manifestatio^ of which supremacie, Pope Coelestine, crowning the Emperour Henrie with his hand, hee afterward with his foote threw down the crown from his head, saying, he had authoritie both to make Emperours, and to depose them at his pleasure.
t That these visible marks are the abused characters of chr^@, and crosses of all kindes, such as @ @ @ ^ ^ and such other, and how these be rather derived from the beasts name, lateino@, than from the name of Christ, read the 31. proposition.
u That the name of the beast is chx@, or Latin Empire, and how that name resulteth of the number 666 or (...), read the 29 proposition, and how the beasts visible markes are deriued there-from, read the 31 proposition.



CHAP. XIIII.

THE ARGVMENT.
Vnder the figure of 144000 Israelits, marked (Apoc 7) with the mark of Gods protection, before the troubles of the seuen ages, and nowe appearing in that same ful number after these troubles, reioycing with Christ on mount Sion: The Spirit of God expresseth to vs, the deliuerie of his Church fro^ al the tyranny of the Antichrist, and reviuing therof againe in ful nu^ber, which being the first resurrection, he proceedeth from thence orderlie to the second resurrection, and Gods great harvest, deviding the whole time to that great day, as also that dayes work, among seuen Angels, whom extraordinarilie

here the Prophet hath insert, and not in the tenth chapter, where they should haue bene, for the better conceiling the mystery thereof of these dayes, which before these our daies was not meet to be knowne, as may be gathered by Dan. 12.4.8.9.13 and Apoc. 10 4 and note (d) thereof, conferred with our 11. proposition, and with the second and fourth generall reasons in our 14. proposition.


The Text.
The Text. 1 THen I looked, and lo, a Lamb stod on mount Sion, and with him an hu^dred fourtie and foure thousande, hauing his Fathers Name, written in their forheades.
Paraphrastical exposition 1 THen I beheld, and considered the Lamb of God, Christ Iesus, to stande on the mount of his inheritance, euen among his elect Church, and with him, those a hundreth, fourtie and four thousands Israelits, who before (Apoc. 7.) were marked patentlie, with the marke and name of God, their protector.
Historicall application. 1 THen I beheld, and considered the Lamb of God, Christ Iesus, to stande on the mount of his inheritance, euen among his elect Church, and with him, those a hundreth, fourtie and four thousands Israelits, who before (Apoc. 7.) were marked patentlie, with the marke and name of God, their protector.
The Text. 2 And I hearde a voice fro^ heauen, as the sounde of manie waters, and as the sound of a gret thu^der: and I heard the voice of harpers, harping with their harpes.
Paraphrastical exposition 2 And I heard further, proceeding fro^ Gods Church, the voice and sound of many b people and nations, and the thundering and threatening voyce of Gods true Ministers, and I heard the ioyfull voice of their reioycing in God.
Historicall application. 2 And I heard further, proceeding fro^ Gods Church, the voice and sound of many b people and nations, and the thundering and threatening voyce of Gods true Ministers, and I heard the ioyfull voice of their reioycing in God.
The Text. 3 And they sung as it vver a new song before the throne, and before the foure beasts and the elders, and no man coulde learn that song, but the hundred, fourty and foure thousand, which were bought from the earth.
Paraphrastical exposition 3 And these Israelits sang, not the olde song that their Fathers did, of the Messias to come: but contrarily, in the presence of God, and before his professors of the olde and new Testamentes, they gladlie sang the songs and hymnes of their new redemption in his blood, alreadie shead: and no cmo of Israel could learn to rejoice and triu^ph in that new redemption, but onlie those hundred, fourtie foure thousands, which thereby were redeemed and selected from among the earthly Israelites.
Historicall application. 3 And these Israelits sang, not the olde song that their Fathers did, of the Messias to come: but contrarily, in the presence of God, and before his professors of the olde and new Testamentes, they gladlie sang the songs and hymnes of their new redemption in his blood, alreadie shead: and no cmo of Israel could learn to rejoice and triu^ph in that new redemption, but onlie those hundred, fourtie foure thousands, which thereby were redeemed and selected from among the earthly Israelites.
The Text. 4 These are they which ar not defiled with wome^: for they ar virgins, these follow the Lambe whithersoeuer he goeth

these ar boght from men, being the firste fruites vnto God, and to the Lambe.
Paraphrastical exposition 4 These are they, which are neither d whoremongers corporallie with women, not spiritually with Idols, for they are chast and cleane from both: These followe Christ, wheresoeuer he directs the^: these are redeemed and chosen out from worldlie men; being that portion of the e fruit of
the world, that is dedicated to God, and to his Son Christ Iesus.
Historicall application. 4 These are they, which are neither d whoremongers corporallie with women, not spiritually with Idols, for they are chast and cleane from both: These followe Christ, wheresoeuer he directs the^: these are redeemed and chosen out from worldlie men; being that portion of the e fruit of

the world, that is dedicated to God, and to his Son Christ Iesus.
The Text. 5 And in their mouthes was found no guile for they are without spotte before the throne of God.
Paraphrastical exposition 5 And in their mouths is found no guile nor deceit, for Christ hath purged their sinnes, so that they appeare without spot before the Majestie of God.
Historicall application. 5 And in their mouths is found no guile nor deceit, for Christ hath purged their sinnes, so that they appeare without spot before the Majestie of God.
The Text. 6 Then I saw another Angel flie in the mids of heauen, hauing an euerlasting Gospel, to preach vnto them, that dwell on the earth, and to euerie nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.
Paraphrastical exposition 6 These Israelits with manie Gentiles, being hitherto hidlings, preserued by God in these six ages, vnder the Pops tyranny. Now in the seuenth age, about the 1541. year of christ, god stirred vp ope^ly, his first ministers and seruants, Luther, Caluin, Melancthon, and others, to prech out, during al this Iubilie, the perfite verity of the Gospell publikly, which before was hid and obscured, vnder the Antichristian raign, so that nowe the true Church lurketh no more, but Gods treuth to all the worlde is made patent by these ministers.
An. Christi. The seuenth age begins. 1541 The first thundering Angels Iubelie.
Historicall application. 6 The^ after Christ his sprirituall presence, for the defence of these hither to: Now came another mightie Messenger, euen the f firste of the seuen thundering Angels of the latter day, and he, in the mouths of God his Ministers, did publishe the euerlasting Evangell of Christe Iesus, and preached foorth the same openlie, to all them which dwelt vppon the earth, of euerie Nation, Kindred, tongue, and people.
The Text. 7 Saying with a loude voice, feare God, and giue glorie to him: for the houre of his judgement is come: and worship him that made heauen, and earth, and the sea, and the fountaines of water.
Paraphrastical exposition 7 Teaching them all vniuersallie, by their publike and open preaching, to feare God onelie, and leauing all other supersticious worshipping, to giue glorie onlie vnto him, for the g houre draweth now neere, in the which, all shall be judged, and therefore, to leaue their Antichristian Idolatrie, and only to worship him, that made the heauen, earth, waters, and all that in them is.
Historicall application. 7 Teaching them all vniuersallie, by their publike and open preaching, to feare God onelie, and leauing all other supersticious worshipping, to giue glorie onlie vnto him, for the g houre draweth now neere, in the which, all shall be judged, and therefore, to leaue their Antichristian Idolatrie, and only to worship him, that made the heauen, earth, waters, and all that in them is.
The Text. 8 And there followed another

Angel, saying, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the gret citie: for shee made all nations to drinke of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.
Paraphrastical exposition 8 About the end of which Iubelie, and beginning

of this next Iubelie, begun in An. 1590. God hath shewed mervelous indices, that the Empire of Rome and Papistical kingdom, shal shortly fal: the Antichristia^ and Spanish flote is destroyed: the late King of France, Duke of Guize, and his brother, Papists, and co^mitters of the Parisian massacre, al murthered by other: a Protestant nowe made king of France: So that before the ende of this Iubelie (God willing) Rome and the whol Papistical kingdome thereof, shal be ruined.
An. Christi. Iubily 1590

The second thundering Angels Iubelie.
Historicall application. 8 Then came the second of the seuen

thundering Angels; declaring euen presentlie, the horrible fall and decay to become of that figuratiue h Babylon, and great Antichristian city, becaus she had entised all nations, hitherto, to committe idolatrous whoredome with her: and so made them to drinke of the cuppe of God his eternall wrath and indignation.
The Text. 9 And the third Angel followed them, saying, with a loude voyce, If anie man worship the beaste and his image, and receiue his marke in his foreheade, or on his hand,
Paraphrastical exposition 9 So that in the 3. Iubile beginning in An. 1639. the Ministers and messengers of God, shall (God willing) haue only the latter dregges of that Romish seate to admonishe, and threaten by open intimation, that if anie bee, in whose heartes the reuerence of that ruined Empire, and counterfeit Emperours, defenders thereof, is superstitiouslie inveterate; or if anie nowe be marked with Chrisme, or crosse on hand or head
An. Christi. 1639 The third thundering

Angels Iubelie.
Historicall application. 9 Afterwarde comes i the thirde order of thundering or threatning Messengers, openlie and loudly threatening, that if any be now, that doe worship or reuerence that Antichristian Empire, or counterfeiters thereof, or that receiues the olde superstitious marks thereof on their foreheade, or in their handes,
The Text. 10 The same shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, yea, of the pure wine, which is powred into the cuppe of his wrath, and

and he shal be torme^ted in fire and brimstone, before the holie Angels, and before the Lambe.
Paraphrastical exposition 10 The same shal drink of the horrible vengea^ce

of Gods wrath, yea, of his vengeance and wrath, pure and vnmixed with anie point of his mercie: and he shall bee tormented eternallie in the bitter sulphurious fire of hel, in the presence of Christ and all his holie Angels.
Historicall application. 10 The same shal drink of the horrible vengea^ce

of Gods wrath, yea, of his vengeance and wrath, pure and vnmixed with anie point of his mercie: and he shall bee tormented eternallie in the bitter sulphurious fire of hel, in the presence of Christ and all his holie Angels.
The Text. 11 And the smoke of their torment shal ascend euermore, and they shal haue no rest day nor night, whiche worshippe the beast and his image, and whosoeuer receiueth the print of his name.
Paraphrastical exposition 1. And the griefe of their torment shal encrease for euer and euer: and their torment shall neuer ende, that reuerence that Romane and Papisticall seat, or obey the Princes, maintainers thereof, be it Spaine or Germanie, or who euer els, that maintaining that seat, doeth counterfeit the Emperour, and whosoeuer receiues in honour the supersticious markes of (...) and crosses of al kinds, which ar deriued fro^ (...); which is the nu^ber of (...), the name of the Latine Empire.
Historicall application. 1. And the griefe of their torment shal encrease for euer and euer: and they shall haue no slakning day nor night, who reuerence that Antichristia^ Empire or counterfeit Emperours thereof, or whosoeuer receiveth the supersticious markes that are k deriued and composed of the name of that Empire.
The Text. 12 Here is the patience of the Saints: here are they that keepe the commandements of God, and the faith of Iesus.
Paraphrastical exposition 12 And this eternall punishment of the wicked, doeth minister occasion of patience to the Saintes of God, and to those that obserue his commandementes, and are the faithfull seruantes of Christ Iesus.
Historicall application. 12 And this eternall punishment of the wicked, doeth minister occasion of patience to the Saintes of God, and to those that obserue his commandementes, and are the faithfull seruantes of Christ Iesus.
The Text. 13 The^ I hard a voice from heuen, saying vnto me, Write, blessed ar the dead, which dy in the Lord, for that in continent hereafter (saith the Spirit) shal they rest from their labors, and their workes followe them.
Paraphrastical exposition 13 And nowe doeth the Prophete Iohn at the commandement of Gods Spirite, write and publish those now to be happie, that haue died in the Lord, for that l incontinent (saith Gods Spirite) after this Iubelie, shall they rest from their troubles, and the reward of their workes (deserued in Christe) shall now follow them.
Historicall application. 13 And nowe doeth the Prophete Iohn at the commandement of Gods Spirite, write and publish those now to be happie, that haue died in the Lord, for that l incontinent (saith Gods Spirite) after this Iubelie, shall they rest from their troubles, and the reward of their workes (deserued in Christe) shall now follow them.
The Text. 14 And I loked and behold, a white cloud, and vpon the cloude one sitting like

vnto the Sonne of man hauing on his heade a golden crowne, and in his hand a sharp sickle.
Paraphrastical exposition 14 And behold now, and loe (the fourth Iubelie being begun in Anno. 1688.) bright cloudes shall appeare, and m thereupon Christe, the Sonne of man comming vnto judgement, as the fourth of

the thundering Angels, hauing on his head the glorious crowne of eternall victorie, and in his hand the n sickle of sharpe diligence, to gather in his elect with.
Historicall application. 14 And behold now, and loe (the fourth Iubelie being begun in Anno. 1688.) bright cloudes shall appeare, and m thereupon Christe, the Sonne of man comming vnto judgement, as the fourth of

the thundering Angels, hauing on his head the glorious crowne of eternall victorie, and in his hand the n sickle of sharpe diligence, to gather in his elect with.
The Text. 15 And another Angel came out of the Temple, crying with a loude voice to him that sat on the cloud. Thrust in thy sickle and reap: for the time is com to reap: for the haruest of the earth is ripe.
Paraphrastical exposition 15 And for the fift of the thundering Angels came another, euen the o thirde person of the Trinitie, who proceding out from the p Majestie of the Father, proclaimed with a loude voice to Christ, that sate vpon the cloudes, saying, Enter to nowe with diligence, and gather in thine elect: for the houre of the greate haruest is nowe come, and the elect people of the world are readie and ripe, exspecting their reward.
Historicall application. 15 And for the fift of the thundering Angels came another, euen the o thirde person of the Trinitie, who proceding out from the p Majestie of the Father, proclaimed with a loude voice to Christ, that sate vpon the cloudes, saying, Enter to nowe with diligence, and gather in thine elect: for the houre of the greate haruest is nowe come, and the elect people of the world are readie and ripe, exspecting their reward.
The Text. 16 And hee that sat on the cloude, thruste in his sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped.
Paraphrastical exposition 16 And Christ, comming in the cloudes, entered to as a reaper, with the sharpe sickle of diligence, to gather in whollie his elect, from the earth, and they were then all gathered vp from the earth.
Historicall application. 16 And Christ, comming in the cloudes, entered to as a reaper, with the sharpe sickle of diligence, to gather in whollie his elect, from the earth, and they were then all gathered vp from the earth.
The Text. 17 Then another Angell came out of the temple, which is in heuen, having also a sharp sickle.
Paraphrastical exposition 17 And then came another (euen the sixt thundering Angell) executer of God his wrath, from the majestie of God, appointed also, diligentlie (as with a sickle) to gather in the wicked.
Historicall application. 17 And then came another (euen the sixt thundering Angell) executer of God his wrath, from the majestie of God, appointed also, diligentlie (as with a sickle) to gather in the wicked.
The Text. 18 And another Angel came out fro^ the altar, which had power ouer fire and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, and said, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vineyard of the earth: for her graps are ripe.
Paraphrastical exposition 18 And the seuenth and last thundering Angell came out from the justice seate of God, hauing power, concerning Gods fierie and fierce wrath, and he proclaimed with a loude voice to the former Angell, that was readie, as one with a sickle, to gather in the reprobate, saying: Enter to worke diligentlie, as a reaper with his sickle, and gather the heapes of the wicked of this world, for their q iniquitie is fullie ripe.
Historicall application. 18 And the seuenth and last thundering Angell came out from the justice seate of God, hauing power, concerning Gods fierie and fierce wrath, and he proclaimed with a loude voice to the former Angell, that was readie, as one with a sickle, to gather in the reprobate, saying: Enter to worke diligentlie, as a reaper with his sickle, and gather the heapes of the wicked of this world, for their q iniquitie is fullie ripe.
The Text. 19 And the angel thrust in his sharpe sickle on the earth, and cut down the vines of the vinyard of the earth, and cast them into the great

wine presse of the wrath of God
Paraphrastical exposition 19 And that sixt Angell entered vpon those people of the earth, as a reaper with his sickle, and cut downe the wicked, growing in all earthlie wickednesse, and caste them into hell, the greate tormente place of God his fierce wrath.
Historicall application. 19 And that sixt Angell entered vpon those people of the earth, as a reaper with his sickle, and cut downe the wicked, growing in all earthlie wickednesse, and caste them into hell, the greate tormente place of God his fierce wrath.
The Text. 20 And the wine presse was troden without the citie, and blood came out of the wine presse, vnto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousande and sixe hundred furlongs.
Paraphrastical exposition20 And there they were tormented, far from the companie of Gods true citizens, and as the bloud of an infinite slaughter, may be thought to flowe vp to the bridles of horse in a field r 1600 stades off: euen so shall their terrours, and eternall torment in hell, beginne to ouerflowe all measure, after the outrunning of a r thousande sixe hundred yeares.
Historicall application.20 And there they were tormented, far from the companie of Gods true citizens, and as the bloud of an infinite slaughter, may be thought to flowe vp to the bridles of horse in a field r 1600 stades off: euen so shall their terrours, and eternall torment in hell, beginne to ouerflowe all measure, after the outrunning of a r thousande sixe hundred yeares.


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a Of these 144000 Israelites, which the Spirite of God signified to S. Iohn, in the beginning of the troubles of the seuen ages, that he would preserue and marke to himself, there lacks not one, but they ar all exhibited now, after these troubles, merrie and reioysing with Christ their redeemer, as Christ saith, Ioh. 6.30. and 17 12. Haec est enim voluntas eius qui misit me Patris, vt omne quod dedit mihi non perdam ex eo, sed resuscitem illud in nouissimo die. This is the Fathers vvil vvhich hath sent me, that of al vvhich he hath giuen me, I shuld loose nothing, but should raise it vp again at the last day: And Quos dedisti mihi, custodiui, and nemo ex iis periit, etc. Those that thou gauest me, haue I kept, and none of them is lost, etc.
b As in the seuenth chapter he hath expressed and fore-warned the marking, preseruing and electing of these 144000. Israelites, and of the Gentiles of all nations, an innumerable people. So here for the Israelits, he repeats that self same number of 144000. and for the Gentiles he represents them vnder the sound of many waters, and great thunders, for (Reuel. 17.15.) waters are interprete, people, nations, and tongues: and thunders are those preachers, of whatsoeuer nations, that boldly threaten out Gods judgeme^ts against the wicked; for the which, Christ called Iohn and Iames the sonnes of thunders. Mark. 3.17. and the seuen Angels, that here threaten the destruction of this Babylon, and day of judgement, are therefore (Reuel. 10.3.4.) called the seuen thunders.
c This doubtlesse, is litterally spoken of Israell, of whome hee would mean, that, boast as they will, that they are the seede of Abraham, and chosen people of God, yet shall no more of them tha^

these 144000. be saued, that becomes Christians: whereas, of the Gentiles, the number that shall be saued (Reuel. 7.9.) shall be infinite, and their sound shall be here (saith he, ver. 2) as the sounde of manie waters: But concerning the precisenes of this number, read Apoc. 7. note f thereof.
d This is not so precisely meaned, but that both the whoremonger and idolater, whom God afterward hath indewed with repentance and amendement, hauing faith in Christ Iesus, shall be restored to puritie in his bloud: for, how oft so euer a sinner doeth repent him of his iniquities, the Lord will put his iniquitie out of his mind, Yea, though thy sinnes (saith God, Esay. 1.18) were as skarlet, yet shal I make thee vvhite as snow, and cleane as wool.
e As the first fruites in the Leuiticall Law were offered to God, and the rest disponed vpon by the people: So ar the Elect onlie dedicate and appointed for God, and therefore, they only are called his first fruites: and the great multitude reprobate, and reiecte.
f That this Angell (although he calleth him another Angell, that is to say, another than the Lambe) is no second, but is the first of these, which (Apoc. 10.3.4.) are called the seuen thunders, appeares hereafter by verse 9. and note i following, and by the 11. and 12. propositions: and therefore, this Angels time falleth betwixt the 1541. and the 1590. yeare of Christ.
g That at this time the houre of Gods latter judgment drawes neere, euen within an hundred and ten years from the end of this first Angels time, is to be seene by our 13. and 14. propositions.
h That vnder the name of figuratiue Babylon, is meaned Rome, read the 23. proposition. And as Rome it selfe is here comparable to Babylon, in that she succeeded to her Empire and impietie, so also here, and in the 18. chap. hereafter, doth the Prophet S. Iohn, in describing the fal of this Babylonical Rome, borrow the verie words of Esay and Ieremie, describing the fall of Babylon it selfe. Hereof read the note b of the 18. chapter. Further, how before the end of this Iubilie, ending in Anno 1639. Rome appearinglie is to bee destroyed, and the kingdom therof to fall, the merueilous beginning of this same Iubilie semeth to portend: for nere to the beginning hereof in the 88. 89. and 90. yeares of God, God hath by the tempest of his windes, miraculouslie destroyed the huge and monstrous Antichristian flote, that came from Spaine, against the professors

of God in this poore Iland: Again, God hath stirred vp one of the chiefe murderers of the Saints of God in Paris, euen the late king of France, to murther the Duke of Guize, and the Cardinall his brother, speciall deuisers of that cruel Massacre. Then farther, that mightie God hath stirred vp a desperat Papisticall Frier to cose liues with that bloodie king. So that by the sword, and mutual bloudshed of Papists among the^selues, the right of the crown of France is now fallen into the hands of the king of Nauar, a protestant Prince. And with these miraculous accidents hath this Iubelie begun, hoping in God before the end thereof, to heare that whole Papisticall citie and kingdome of Rome vtterlie ruined: For these premises were as vnlikely before those three yeares.
i Because this text calleth this Angell the third Angell: therefore, necessarily the Angel preceeding him in the 8. verse, must be the second: And againe, the Angel preceeding that seconde in the 6. verse, must be the first Angel, although the text adioines to that first Angell, the name of other, as being another than the Lambe, mentioned before, verse 1. For the Lambe is euer spirituallie present, and assistant with his Church: But that other was the firste messenger, that commeth in the last age: and this, contained in this 9. verse, is the third, and Christ himselfe by his bodilie comming to judgement, shall be the fourth. Read more hereof in our 13. proposition.
k Whereas in other partes of this booke, this mark is but simplie called the beastes marke, as doubtfull what it is like, or from whence it is deriued: here saith hee plainelie, it is the marke of the beasts name: as if therby he wold plainlie let vs vnderstand, that that marke is some wayes deriued from the name of the beaste (...), to wit, euen from the three numerall letters thereof (...)
assigned by the text, as more euidentlie doeth appeare by the next chapter, verse 2. and note c thereof, where that marke is expreslie called, the marke of the number of the beastes name: and therefore, these marks, are the markes of (...) and crosses of all kindes, as is prooved by our 31. proposition.
l Some reade here, Blessed are they that incontinent hereafter die in the Lord, for that (saith the Spirit) they shall rest from their labours: but seeing certainlie, they are alwayes blessed that die in the Lord, bee it heretofore, or hereafter, I therefore assent rather to them that

reade: Blessed are they that die in the Lorde, for that incontinent hereafter (saith the spirit) they shal rest from their labours. and this varietie commeth by the placing of the point before the adverb of time, or after the same in the Greeke.
m This cloude is meant literally, for in a cloude Christ past out of his disciples sight, and that same way (saith the Angels Act. 1.9.10.11.) shall he returne to judgement: hereof, read Math. 24.30. and Mat. 26.64. the like is spoken, Revel. 1.7. and note f thereof.
n This hooke or sickle mentioned here, and in Ioel. 3.13. and Mar. 4.29. can meane no other thing, nor that earnest and sharpe diligence, that Christ shall vse in gathering in his elect: by comparison, as shearers or reapers with their hookes gather in their corne, and not that Christ shal vse any material instrument in this work of the latter day: yea, no other than that, that God did vse at the first creation of all thinges, which was, Dixit and factum est, euen the vertue and puissance of his word.
o The precise day and houre of Gods greate judgement, being both vnknowne to Christ, so far as he is man, and also to the Angels of heauen, as Christ testifies in Mark. 13.32. Therefore, this Angell, that is the aduertiser of Christ, must needs be the holy spirit, the great Messenger of God, and God himself, by whom Christ is made foreseene, and priuie to al mysteries, as being coniunct and vnite persons in one Godhead.
p This temple that is said here to be in heauen, is by the Reuel. 21.22. and by the 20. prop. nothing else, than the majestie of God: from whome the holy spirit going out figuratiuelie, as it were, after the maner of men, beareth this message of the latter day to Christ, and so are expressed three seueral functions, correspondent to the three persons of the Godhead. The Father directs the message of his iudgement, the holy spirite beareth it vnto the sonne, the Son then executeth it. And this orderlie progresse is set down, but for supplie of our weake vnderstanding.
q This Vine is the wicked people of the world, which the Lord hath planted to bring forth good fruite, but they haue brought forth euill and corrupt works, of whome saith Esay 5.2. I vvaited that they should produce good vines, and they brought foorth sowre grapes. That is to say, in the seuenth verse therof: I waited that they shuld giue iudgment, and behold, they wrought iniquitie: and I looked

for iustice, and behold the complaint.
r Seeing by the spirit of God, there is nothing idlely or in vain expressed. These whol premises being spoke^ of the later day, it appeares this date of 1600. to be the date of that great day, else apparantly, this greate precise number of 1600. would not haue bin put here more than any other number, and this doth cheiflie appeare, because this number agreeth so neere with other propheticall dates of the latter day, falling about the yeare of Christ. 1699 as at more length is shewed in our 14. Proposition.



CHAP. XV.

THE ARGVMENT.
The spirit of God, intending to repeat the prophesie of the seauen ages now vnder the tearmes of Vialls, which before were expressed by seauen trumpets, to the effect, the one may be a commentarie to discipher the other, first settes downe this chapter as a preface thereunto, containing in it cheiflie two godly instructions. The one of Gods mercy, that these last plagues being imminent and redy, do not the more fall out, till God haue first established such in securitie amidst the raging seas and consuming fire of worldly persecution, as refusing the Antichristian errors, reioice triumphantly in god. The second instruction, is of Gods iustice, that while as his temple is most patent, and his treuth publikelie preched in the dayes of the primitiue Church, forth of the open predication of the Evangell, proceedes both Gods horrible plagues, vniuersally vpon the conte^ners thereof: As also, it pleaseth Gods maiestie to giue power and permission to the Antichrist, to obscure the true contemned light of the Euangell, till the end of these plagues.


The Text
1 ANd I saw another sign in heuen, gret and maruelous, seuen Angels hauing the seauen last plagues: for by them, is fulfilled the wrath of God.
2 And I saw, as it vver, a glassie sea, mingled with fire, and the^ that had gotten victory of the beast, and of his Image, and of his marke of the number of his name, stande at the glassie sea, hauing the harpes of God.
3. And they sung the song of Moses the seruant of God, and the songe of the Lambe, saying, Great and maruellous are thy workes, Lord God almightie: iust and true ar thy waies, King of Saints.
4 Who shall not feare thee, O Lord, and glorifie thy name? for thou onely art holy, and all nations shall come and woorship before thee: for thy iudgements ar made manifest.
5 And after that I looked, and beholde, the temple of the Tabernacle of testimony was open in heauen.
6 And the seauen Angells came out of the temple, which had the seuen plagues, clothed in pure and bright linen, and hauing their breastes girded with golden girdles.
7 And one of the foure beastes gaue vnto the seuen Angelles, seuen golden vialles, full of the wrath of God, which liueth for euermore.
8 And the Temple was full of smoke from the glorye of God, and from his power, and no man was able to enter into the temple, till the seauen plagues of the seuen Angels were fulfilled.



The Paraphrasticall exposition.
1 AND I behelde againe, farther of these great and heuenly maruells, and considered Gods messengers of the seauen latter plagues reddy, wherby in them the wrath of God might be fulfilled.
2. Then I perceaued and sawe, how first, God would make for his own, the flowing a waues, and rageing tyrannie of the worlde calme, and firm as glasse, though mixed with a litle fire of persecution, and those that had victoriously attained to the true b knowledge, which is the Antichristian empyre, who are the counterfet emperours thereof, which is his marke, that comes c of the number of his name, would hee make firmly and constantly to stande in all these raging stormes, as stable and sure, with perfite gladnes.
3 Singing and reioycing with Moses and the prophets of God, in the old Testame^t, and with christ and his disciples of the new testame^t
5 Thereafter I considered, and behold, the true Temple of God, even his holy Churche was visible and patent, and the gospell publikely preached, among his heauenly elect of the primitiue Church,
6 And vpon the pate^cie of that true church and d opening vp of the gospell and true christian religio^, ther flowed out vpon the disobedient contemners thereof, the seuen great plagues, powred out in the seuen last ages, by the Angels of God, who ar cled in e puritie and innocencie, and gloriously girded with justice, power and readines.
7 And Luke one of the f four eva^gelists (ending here his acts of the Apostles) giues place fro^ this forth, to these seuen Angells, to prosecute out their prophecie of these plagues, which they are to powre foorth of the precious

cuppes of the justice of God euerlasting.
8 And during that time, shal the true church of God, and holy christian religion be g obscured and darkened with Antichristian errours, which the majestie and power of God hath plesed to permit and suffer, for the contempt of his word, so that therby, there shal be no true visible church, nor sincere doctrin publikly opened, that any may haue accesse vnto, till these h seuen plagues bee powred out, by these Messengers and Angels of God, against the wicked of the world.


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a This glassie sea, is the world, wherin, although the wicked be drowned sometime, with the stormie waues and troubles; sometime againe, with the pleasures and voluptuousnes thereof: yet doth God a litle quiet the rage thereof, and make it so firme and stable to his owne, that though they sometime slide thereon, and be grieued with the fire of persecution, yet shall neither the raging stormes thereof, on the one part, nor the alluring pleasures thereof, vpon the other part, ouerwhelm or drowne them, hereof reade the Paraphrase of the Reuel. 4.6.
b The text here speketh of victory, and ouercomming the beast, his image, and mark of the number of his name. Though the ouercomming the beast, might import a battell or strife: yet it were vnproper to say, they stroue and ouercame the mark of the number of the beasts name. This victory then, appeares to mean a spirituall strife by knowledge, to discerne the treuth and true meaning of these, from the wrong meaning, and so to ouercome the difficultie of these mysteries, that knowing their true meaning, we may victoriously follow the truth.
c Many hauing mistaken this text, haue not followed the originall greek, but thinking to make the matter more sensible, haue turned it to the wrong sense: for some haue here interponed the conjunctio^, and, saying, of his mark, [and] of the nu^ber of his name: these, by interponing that coniunction and, woulde meane the

beasts mark to be a seueral thing, no waies pertinent to the number of the beasts name. Others, not finding there that coniunction, and, which is (...) in the greeke, doeth apparantly iudge these words. [Of his marke of the number of his name] to bee put appositiue, as to say, Iohn an Apostle, and so doth iudg this mark and this number to mean both one thing, and therefore leaues out the one; to wit, the mark, and this is done in the vulgar latine translation in these wordes. Et eos qui vicerunt bestiam et imaginem eius et numerum nominis eius etc. that is, and they who haue gotten victory of the beast, and of his image, and of the number of his name etc. but betwixt these extremities, whereof the one addeth, and the other paireth the text, we hold the text it selfe as the true middest, which word by word according to the greek originall, and as both T. Beza in the Latine, and we here in the englishe haue expounded the same, doeth import not the victory of the beasts mark, and of the number of his name, but of the beasts mark of the nu^ber of his name: inferring expreslie thereby, that the beasts marke comes of the number of his name: and therefore, haue we cited this text in our 31. proposition, as a sure ground and authoritie to try this mark by, reade further hereof in the said proposition.
d That this Temple means Gods holy Church and whol contents thereof, euen his very treuth and true religion amongst his holy and heauenly elect vpon earth, is shewed in our 20. proposition. And here is to be noted, that euer the more patently that this temple is opened, and the more openly that Gods truth is published, the greater euer are the plagues that floweth out from thence, if it be not duly imbraced, and reuerently accepted, as experience both here, after the daies of the primitiue Church, and also in al ages proueth, and shal, without al question, be also proued vpon vs in this present age, except more speedy repentance come not, yet appeareth.
e That fine linnen, is puritie, innocencie and iustification, read the Reuel. 19.8 and how this girding is a signe of readines, read Luke 12.35. and Luk. 17.8. and specially meaneth readines to justice, as in Esay. 11.5. Iustitia cingulum lumborum eius, Iustice shall be the girdle of his loynes, etc. and that with greate power, as Psa. 17.33 40. So that the girdle of these proprieties, for their excellencie, is said here to be of gold: that is to say, precious and glorious

as is said, Apoc. 1.13. note n thereof.
f Where it is saide here, that this beast or Euangelist, gaue the seuen Vials to these seuen Angels, it is not literallie so to be taken, but after a propheticall and figuratiue maner of speach: as if hee would say, that that Euangelist Luke remitted, and gaue ouer the writing of the rest of his Ecclesiasticall historie and entred to, these seuen Angels to prophecie out, where he left off: The like phrase is commonlie vsed, in saying, Thou hast deliuered him thy penne: that is, Thou hast giuen place to him to write the rest. Here then note, that if either the foure beasts were wrong interpreted, to be the foure Euangelistes, or yet the seuen trumpets, or seuen vials were not both one, or at the leaste, began not about the yeare of God, 71. and so our 2. 6. and 19. propositions were impugned, then woulde there some repugnance appeare here: but in that there is no repugnance here (for the Actes of the Apostles end at the remaining of Paule captiue two yeares in Rome, in free warde, where shortlie after he suffered death, in the end of Nero his raign, which approcheth within a yeare or two to the said 71. yeare of Christ) Therfore, the said propositions are hereby confirmed and vndoubtedlie approoued.
g Some doe translate this to bee the smoke and reeke of Gods majestie, and of his power, that hindreth vs to enter into his Temple; which is not probable, but rather, as Ierome and other learned translate it, a smoke, not of Gods majestie, nor of his power, but from Gods majestie, and from his power, as being the smoke of Antichristian errours, which neuertheles floweth from the permission and power of Gods majestie, for the punishment of the contemners of his trueth. The like is saide in the Lordes prayer, Lord, lead vs not into temptation. and Amos. 3.6. Is there anie euill in the citie, which the Lord hath not done: not that the Lord tempteth vs, or doth anie euill in the citie directlie, but onelie, that that temptation and euill doing doth flowe from the permission and sufferance of his majestie, and his almightie power, as permitting, in his just wrath, his slaues, the deuil, the world, and the flesh, to stirre vp all euill in vs: And so, this smoke that hindereth vs from entering into Gods Temple, is not his smoke, but the smoke of Antichristian errours, which neuertheles floweth from the permission of Gods majestie and power.
h This abiding of Gods Temple so long latent and obscure, is most certaine: For, during the most part of the first age, by diuers heretikes, forerunners of the great Antichrist: and during the second, third, fourth, fift, sixt, and beginning of the seuenth ages, by the Romane Antichrist himselfe; the true Temple of God, and light of the Gospell was obscured, til by the seuenth plague, in this seuenth and last age, his kingdome began to fall; so that henceforth to the worldes end, shall Gods true Church and holie religion be patent, open, and publikelie knowne. Hereof read the paraphrase of chap 11. 19. and note r thereof, with the discourse of our 20. proposition.



CHAP. 16.

THE ARGVMENT.
Hauing praemitted the former chapter, as a preface to the prophecie of the seuen ages, now to be repeated vnder the tearmes of vials. In this chapter he prosecutes out, in due order of time, the plagues of the whole seuen vials, correspondent and agreeable in purpose, sense, and almost in tearmes with the seuen trumpets, before expressed, whereby most surelie, the one may bee vsed as a commentarie to the other.


The Text. 1 ANd I hard a greate voice out of the temple, saying to the seue^ Angels, Goe your waies, and poure out the seuen vialles of the wrath of God, vpon the earth.
Paraphrastical exposition 1 ANd I hard the mightie decre of God, directed fro^ the Temple of his treuth, to his ministring Spirites of the seuen ages, commanding them to passe, and pour out the cups of his wrath of these seuen ages, vpon the a people of the earth.
Historical application. 1 AT the appointment of God, there are seuen ages to the worlds end, in euerye one of the which, ther ar seueral plagues poured foorth, for the iniquities of the world.
The Text. 2 And the first went, and poured out his viall vpon the earth, and ther
fell a noysome and a grieuous sore vpon the men, whiche had the marke of the beast, and vppon them which worshipped his image.
Paraphrastical exposition 2 And his messengers of the first age passed, and powred
out the cups of God his wrath vpon the great Empire of the earth, and there came a cruell and horrible plague vpon al people that professed obedience to it, and vpon them that reverenced that Empire and the degenerate Princes therof.
Anno Christi. 71 The
first Vial, or age.
Historical application. 2 In the first age, fro^ the yeare of God, 71. to the 316. yeare, the Empire of Rome and Roman Monarchie began to decay: For, the subjects of that Empire, and all
who obeyed the degenerate Princes thereof, were somtime plagued and oppressed by their tyranny, and by the tyrannie of the thirty tyrants, that then raigned vnder the^: Others, somtime were ouerrun by strangers, through the effeminate lenitie of these Emperours,

The Text. 3 And the second Angell poured out his viall vpon the sea, and it became as the blood of a ded man: and euerie liuing thing died in the sea.
Paraphrastical exposition 3 And the Messengers of the seco^d age powred foorth their cuppes of God his wrath vppon a certaine b sea coast, peninsull or lande, named by the sea: and that lande became full of bloudshed and murther: and all the people, that sometime liued wealthilie in that Peninsull, were for the most part slaine and destroyed.
Anno Christi. 316 The second Viall.
Historical application. 3 Wherethrough, and because in the seconde and next age, beginning about the yeare of God, 316. the Emperour Constantine tra^sported the imperiall seat to Constantinople, it came to passe, that the towne of Rome, and whole Peninsull of Cittim, which is (ex Hieronymo de interpretat nominum) interpreted the gathering or tossing of the seas, and nowe is called Italie, is left a praie to the Huns, Gothes Vandales, and other barbarous nations, who slewe and destroyed of the inhabitants of that country at their plesure.
The Text. 4 And the thirde Angell poured out his viall vpon the riuers and fountaines of waters,
and they became blood
Paraphrastical exposition 4 And the Messengers of the third age poured out their cups of Gods wrath c vpon the wholsom floudes and liuelie fountaines of pure doctrin, and the doctrine
became corrupt, tending all to d bloudshed and murther.
Anno Christi. 561 The
third Viall.
Historical application. 4 Then begins in the yeare of God, 561. the third age, in the which, the wicked Mahomet arose
and taught the damnable doctrin of his Alkaron, among the Christian Churches of the Orient, wherethrough these Easterly countries became altogether corrupt with his bloodie heresie.

The Text. 5 And I hard the Angell of the waters say Lord, thou art just, Which art and Whiche wast, and Holie, because thou hast judged these thinges.
Paraphrastical exposition 5 And I perceiued the Messengers and Ministers of the true doctrine, extolling Gods justice, saying, Thou Lord, who is, and euer was holie, art just, and hast judged righteously in this cause:
Historical application. 5 Herein doeth God his justice and most just judgement appeare: for that men had then contemned the true doctrine.
The Text. 6 For they shed the blud of the Saintes, and Prophets, and therefore hast thou giuen the^ blood to drinke: for they are worthy.
Paraphrastical exposition 6 For these people haue shead the blood of thy holie Saints and Ministers, and therefore haste thou suffered them spirituallie to drinke bloodie doctrin, exhorting bloudshed, for they wer no better worthy.
Historical application. 6 And shed the blood of Gods seruants; therfore did God sende among them this Mahometicke doctrine, which cruellie exhorteth men to mak war and bloodshed, and falsly promiseth the kingdom of heauen to al those, that valia^tly fight in their quarels.
The Text. 7 And I hard another out of the Sanctuarie say, Euen so, Lorde, God Almighty true and righteous are thy iudgments.
Paraphrastical exposition 7 And I considered from the Sanctuarie, euen from among them, that entered into the secret meditation of Gods mysteries, the same also confessed and approued, saying, O Lord God almighty true and righteous are thy judgments.
Historical application. 7 And this, all that contemplate the mysteries of Gods justice, vnderstand to be iustly deserued at the handes of the almightie, who is true and righteous in al his judgments.
The Text. 8 And the
fourth Angell poured out his viall on the Sun, and it was giue^ vnto him to tormente men with heat of fire.
Paraphrastical exposition 8 And Gods Messengers
of the fourth age, powred out the cup of Gods wrath, against the e spirituall Preachers: and God suffered them to stirre vp arrogant opinions, and to vex and grieue men with their sophismes, and furious fire of their hote contentions.
Anno Christi. 806
The fourth Viall.
Historical application. 8 Then beginneth in Anno 806. the fourth age, about the whiche time, the Spiritualtie and
Papisticall Clergie, induced manie contentious arguments, and sophisticall reasonings, as the captious distinctions of (...), excusing their idolatry, and newe erection of Imagerie, established latelie before, in the seuenth counsell of Nice, against certaine Godlie Emperors of Grece, who had demolished Imagerie: Also, the curious sophismes and contentious arguments of transubstantiation, to excuse their (...) and adoration of the bread.

The Text. 9 And men boyled in gret heat, and blasphemed the name of God, whiche hath power ouer these plagues, and they repented not to giue him glorie.
Paraphrastical exposition 9 And men were meruelouslie chafed and puft vppe with f contentious argumentes, defending blasphemies against the name of God, who onlie had power to reueale the trueth, and to remoue these plagues of bitter contention, neither repented they thereof, that they might glorifie God.
Historical application. 9 And with these, and such like fires of contentions, they kendled vp men in strife, smothering the trueth, and blaspheming the name of God, by calling it God, that was not god, and persevered in these errours, without repenting, or glorifying of the name of the true and almightie God.
The Text. 10 And the fift Angel powred out his viall vpon the throne of the beast, and his kingdom waxed darke, and th^y gnewe
their tongues for sorrow.
Paraphrastical exposition 10 And the Messengers of the fift age, powred out their cuppes of God his wrath, againste the Antichristian and imperiall throne, and other more g puissant Conquerours, obscured and stained their monarchie,
so that they orped and gnashed their tongues for sorrow.
Anno Christi. 1051 The
fift Viall.
Historical application. 10 Then the fift age being begun in An. 1051 That yeare Zadok was made first Dominatour of the Turks, whose dominion
arose daylie so gret, and so diminished the Roman Empire, that they of the Empire ar greatlie astonished and grieued.

The Text. 11 And blasphemed the God of heaue^ for their pains and for their sores, and repented not of their works.
Paraphrastical exposition 11 And yet insisted, blaspheming the God of heauen euen the more, because of these plagues and griefes, and repented not them selues of their wicked works.
Historical application. 11 And yet continue they still in their former impieties, idolatries and schismes, without repenting the same, or crauing pardon of God for their wicked works.
The Text. 12 And the sixt Angel poured out his viall vppon the greate riuer Euphrates, and the water ther of dried vppe, that the way of the kinges of the Easte should be prepared.
Paraphrastical exposition 12 And the messengers of the sixt age, powred out their cups of Gods wrath, toward the people that remayned about Euphrates that these kings and princes of the East, may mak ready way ouer Euphrates, and tak journey against the people of the West.
Anno Christi. 1296 The sixt age
or Viall.
Historical application. 12 Afterward, begins the sixt age, in An. 1296. About this time, euen in An. 1300. Ottoman being crowned the first Mahometan Emperour, it pleased God in his wrath, to stir vp fro^ that time forth the foure nations Mahotans, Turks, Tartarians, Saracens and Arabians, that dwel beyond and about Euphrates, with the saide Ottoman and his vnderkings of the east cuntries, to com ouer Euphrates, and raise warre against the^ of the whol Roman empire.
The Text. 13 And I saw three vnclean spirites, like frogs, come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beaste, and out of the mouth of the false prophets
Paraphrastical exposition 13 So I considered out of the deuilish h mouths of the great Empire, and of the false Prophet to proceede three special exhortatio^s and wicked entisements, as vile vermin or frogs, creeping fro^ their pool.
Historical application. 13 At this time, the devill stirs vp false teachers on both the sides, euen the Legats of the Pope and Roma^ seat on the one side; and the doctours of the Mahometick heresies, on the other side; to seduce
and stir vp their subjects of the whole worlde, three waies: to wit, in most furious wrath and crueltie, the one against the other. 2. To stand obstinately in their heretical doctrin. 3. To be illuded with vaine hope, to obtaine auaritiously, both the whol kingdoms of the world, and also the kingdom of heauen hereafter, if they fight valia^tly in these their holie wars, as they cal the^.

The Text. 14 For they are the Spirits of deuils, working miracles, to go vnto the Kinges of the earth, and of the whol world to gather the^ to the battell of that greate day of God almightie.
Paraphrastical exposition 14 These be i deuilish inspirations intising men by lying wonders, and entered into the heartes of all the Princes of the world, to entise and stir the^ vp to mak warr together, in this time of the horrible ve^gea^ce of almighty God.
Historical application. 14 And by these deuilish intisements, co^firmed som times with lying wonders, they stirred vp al the princes of the world by East, and about Euphrates, against those that ar by west, in co^tinual warfare al this sixt age
The Text. 15 (Beholde, I come as a theefe. Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his garments, least he walk naked, and men see his filthinesse.)
Paraphrastical exposition 15 Behold (saith the Lord) I come at vnawares to punish: blessed is he that abideth praying, and watching from sin, and keepeth his clothings of righteousnes, leaste hee beeing stripped thereof, al his horible iniquities appeare discouered, to his eternall shame and confusion.
Historical application. 15 So hath the Almighty broght this great and sudde^ vengeance vpo^ the Papistical Christians for their defectio^. Blessed ar they that abide constant, for God shall deliuer them from shame and confusion.
The Text. 16 And they gathered the^selues togither into a place, called in Hebrewe, Armageddon.
Paraphrastical exposition 16 And these people shal gather themselues together, to fight in the k mountain of gods Euangel, eve^ in the land of his chose^ fruit, and christian elect people.
Historical application. 16 And this wicked multitude of the whol world, euen the Roman and Papistical princes fro^ the west, and Mahometik Princes fro^ the east convened, and fought manie battels in Christendo^ both in Asia wher S. Iohn had pla^ted those seuen Christian Churches, and in such partes also of Europe, where other Apostles had preached.

The Text. 17 And the seuenth Angel powred out his viall into the aire and there came a loud voice out of the Temple of heauen fro^ the throne, saying, It is done.
Paraphrastical exposition 17 And the Angelles of the seuenth age, powred foorth their vials of Gods wrath against the volving ayre, euen the changeable estat of things: and there passed out a mightie decree and ordina^ce from Gods throne, and Temple of his treuth among his faithfull, saying, l all is done, euen al mortall thinges, in this age shall end.
Anno Christi. 1531 The seuenth Viall, and last age.
Historical application. 17 Last of all, begins the seuenth age, in Anno Christi, 1541. in the whiche age the worlde shall end.
The Text. 18 And ther were voyces, and thunderings, and lightnings, and there was a greate earth-quake, suche as was not since men were vpon the earth, euen so mightie an earth-quake.
Paraphrastical exposition 18 And vntil that end, ther shal be gret shewes and foretokens of tempestuous troubles, rumors of wars and Gods just judgme^ts thundred out, and such a commotio^ shal come in the gret Empire of the earth (which semeth more stable tha^ the erth) that ther came m neuer so great a commotion therof, since first men were vpon earth.
Historical application. 18 In the mean time there shall be great and tempestuous troubles of all sortes, and speciallie, the greate Romane Empire, and Papisticall kingdome shall (God willing) quite bee ouerthrowne, and the Monarchie therof so vtterlie destroyed, as neuer Monarchie was, since the beginning of the world.
The Text. 19 And the gret citie was deuided into three partes, and the cities of the nations fell: and great Babylon came in reme^bra^ce
before God, to giue vnto her the cup of the wine of the fiercenesse of his wrath.
Paraphrastical exposition 19 And the whol people that n dwelt in Christendom, became of three sorts,
of opinions, and al the Ethnick religions wer abolished, and then the greate o Antichristian citie, successour of Babel, cam in reme^bra^ce before the Almightie, to giue her nowe to drink in his justice, the cup of his wrath and bitter indignation.
Historical application. 19 At this time the whole people that remaine in Christendom, shal either professe Protestantrie, Papistrie, or a pretended Christian Neutralitie: for as touching the publike profession of anie Ethnicke religion, there shall bee none within Christendome: then shall that Papisticall seat and citie of Rome, in Gods wrath
and just judgement be destroyed.

The Text. 20 And euerie Ile fledd away, and the mountaines wer not found.
Paraphrastical exposition 20 And euery Ila^d revolted from her, and her mighty kingdomes of main la^d wer dissolued
Historical application. 20 Englande, Scotland, and other Ilands shall reuolt from her, and leaue her Papistry: her mightie and confederat kingdoms of Germanie, France, Spaine, and others: shal either bee ruined and dissolued themselues, or then shall dissolue their league with her.
The Text. 21 And ther fel a great hail like talents out of heauen vpon the men, and men blasphemed God, because of the plague of the haile: for the plague thereof was exceeding great.
Paraphrastical exposition 21 That time the p cold and te^pestuous hail of self-loue, and lacke of zeal and charitie, fell down, as fro^ on high, and in aboundance amo^g the people of the world; so that they dispised and blasphemed god throgh their coldnes of charity and zeal, for that plague of cold zeal doth euery where increase
Historical application. 21 In this time, zeale to God, and charitie to our neighbours shall grow cold, and selfe loue shall abound among al people, whereby the most part shall neglect and despise God, and follow their auarice, self-loue, and partiall affections, for vndoubtedlie, to the worldes end, these vices shal euer encrease.


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a The earth, in al the Reuelation, is not onlie taken for the people of the earth in generall, but for the Antichristian and vniuersal Empire of the earth, euen the Romane Monarchie in speciall, as appeareth here plainlie by these seuen plagues, which here are saide to be powred foorth vpon the earth, and fell indeed against the Romane Empire; and chieflie, where he saith, the first Viall was powred

foorth vpon the earth, he subjoyneth in continent, and there fell a noysome and grieuous plague on them that did beare the marke of that Antichristian beast or Empire: as meaning, by the falling of that plague on the earth, the falling therof on the empire of the earth, and consequentlie, the earth meaneth the Empire of the earth, or Romane Monarchie: and therefore earthquake doth euer meane commotions of the Empire, both actiuelie and passiuelie, as you shall find through all our Paraphrase, to agree with the historie.
b Why justlie we interprete the sea to mean Italie, read the note d Apoc. 8.
c That fountains and flouds mean doctrin, read the note g Apo. 8
d This doctrine is justlie called bloudie, seeing the Mahomet preached and proclaimed warre against all men, and promised the kingdome of heauen to them, that fight valiantlie in his causes.
e That the Sunne, for the most part, meaneth the spirituall estate, read Apoc. 6. note h thereof.
f This heat that the Cleargie, at this time, both chafed themselues and others with, agrees verie wel, by histories of that time, to be both the contentious arguments, and opinions, conteined in our historicall application, whereby they troubled and vexed Christians, as also the pride and ire of the Pope and his Cleargie, which at this time rose so hie, that they, by the hand of Charlemain, bereft the Exarchat from the Emperour of the Orient, and the kingdome of Lombardie from the Lombardes, and doe brooke both to this day, and then, and euer since, haue stirred vp the world in strife.
g This plague, that here makes against the Romane seate, in this fift Viall, prooueth the plague of the fift Trumpet, not to meane the Pope (as some beleeue) but rather the Turke, as in our 3. proposition is prooued more at length.
h These three vncleane Spirites, that here are saide to proceede foorth of the mouthes of the Deuill, of the Antichristian beast, and of the false Prophet, are called (Apoc. 9.17.18.) three plagues of fire, smoke, and brimstone, that proceeded out of the mouthes of the Mahometanes: wherethrowe of necessitie, they must meane such three common heads of doctrine, as both the Pope and the Mahomet do seduce their subjectes with. Such as, first, their ire and tyrannie: for, the Pope proclaimed hauocke of all Mahometicke blood. So doe the Mahometanes with Christians. Secondlie, heresie:

For the Pope presseth by al meanes possible, to spread his Papisticall heresie vniuersallie: so do the Mahometans their wicked heresie of their Alkaron. Thirdly, bitter and sulphurious auarice: For either of them aspired to be Monarch of the whole worlde. The Pope charging the Empire, and his vnder kinges to fight his holy warres, (as he tearmeth them) for the augmenting of S. Peters patrimonie. The Mahomet charging his Saracens to take vp the whol kingdomes of the world, as promised to the^ by God (Gen. 13.16) as being the sonnes of Abraham, euen Agarenes indeed, and Saracens (as they think) by adoption, and therfore, promising the kingdome of heauen to them that fight valiantlie in that quarrell: and so for conclusion, these deuilish plagues, and inspirations of ire, heresie, and auarice, do seeme to be the three plagues and deuilish intisements, that here both moueth Papisticall and Mahometicke kinges to this great bloudshed and warfare.
i As God is in the trueth, and the trueth in him, and he is the trueth (Ioh. 14.6) So (a contrariis) the deuill is in deceit, and deceit in him, and he is deceit, and that so inseperablie, that where the one is, there also is the other. Whereupon, these wicked and deceitfull intisements, and three inspirations of the deuil, are justlie called by the text, spirits of Deuils, because the deuill goeth with them, and they with him conjunctlie, in taking of the which his personall presence with them, hee confirmeth them oftentimes with lying wonders, and deceitfull miracles, as saith the Text. Of these false Papisticall miracles, and Mahometicall enthousiasmes, diuers ar to be read in their histories.
k That Armageddon signifieth the mountaine of the Euangel, or of the Elect fruit, read Hierome de interpretatione nominum. There is no reason here to read Geddon arma, as some doe, vnder prete^ce of the Hebrew maner of reading backward: for if the Hebrew manner wer here to be obserued, not only would the last word be first read, but euen likewise the last letters first, and euery letter backward in his owne order, making Noddegamra, and not geddon arma
l Of this consumation of all things, read the note q Apoc. 11.
m There came neuer so greate a change among the wicked Monarchies of the earth: for euer as one was destroyed, another as wicked arose, but now shal al wicked kingdomes be dissolued, and shal giue place vnto the eternall kingdome of Christ.
n This great citie, hauing neither the epithet of Holie, nor contrarilie, any Antichristian epithet ioyned to it, and yet apparantlie by the text, including no professed Gentilisme, must therefore, (as appeares) meane Christendome, which neither is altogether Gods holie citie and spirituall Hierusalem, neither yet altogether Antichristian, but partlie of both: but hauing no publike Gentilisme professed in it: for there is no religion publikelie professed in it, but Christian: yet by the craft of the deuill, the same is rent in peces, euen in three factions: one being Protestants, another Papists, the third, ignorant Neutrals, alike to both: who all cal themselues Christians: But of these three, the Papistical seat being the author both of their owne wilfull errours, as also of the ignorant peoples Neutralitie and doubtfulnes of faith, shal therefore (in the next verse) goe to ruine.
o That this Babylon, that here is mentioned, is Rome, is prooued by our 23. proposition: by destruction of the which Romane seate, here prophecied, occasion of perseverance is ministred to the Protestants, penitence to the Papists, and of perfect certaintie to the doubtfull and wauering Neutral: which because these do not the more hereof acknowledge, and tha^kfullie accept, but for the most part, become al colde as haill (as in the next verse is said) therfore doth the Lord shorten the latter dayes, for final end of al iniquity.
p Of this cold and tempestuous haill of self-loue, and lacke of zeale and charitie, read the note s Apoc. 11. Here note the professed Christians, being of three sortes, Protestants, Papists, and Neutrals: the Papists being the Authours, both of their owne wilfull errours, and of the Neutrals ignorant errours are therfore in the former verse, first punished: but because, neuertheles, these ignorant Neutrals do encrease and augment daylie in self-loue, and their zeal and charitie euer freeseth colder and colder to the worlds end, therefore, shall the Lord shorten the latter day, as appeareth by the testimonies cited in the said note s Apoc. 11.



CHAP. XVII.

THE ARGVMENT.
The moste speciall intention of the Spirite of God, in this holy worke, being couertly to discouer the Antichrist (couertlie I say, least before

the time, and to Antichristia^ persons it being known, had ministred occasion to their tyrannie, through care of their owne standing, to haue destroyed this whole Reuelation) now, vnder this co^uerture, and locking vp of his secretes, God hath bene so beneficiall to his owne, that he prouides the meanes, whereby this most needfull discouerie of the Antichrist, shall be in dew time made patent to them: among the which means, this chapter is the key and chief, for here, in expresse tearms, the Spirit of God hath interpreted the great Antichristian and Idolatrous whore, to be that citie, that is set as mistresse ouer the kingdomes of the earth: and the seuen heads of the beast, whereon she sitteth, to be her seuen mountaines, whereby (beside many other tokens herein contained) that imperiall and seuen hilled citie of Rome is most liuelie expressed, and onlie designed, and all true Christians thereby certified, that in it must the Antichrist set his seat and dwelling.


Historical application. 1 NOw, the last of the seuen ages being come, the Spirite of God letteth vs euidentlie see the destructio^ approching of the great Antichristian citie, and Idolatrous Empire of Rome, which hither to hath empired ouer all nations.
Paraphrasticall exposition 1 ANd there cam and communed with me, the a last of the Angels, which did bear the plagues of the seuen latter ages, saying, Approch, and I shall shew vnto thee, the destructio^ of the great Antichristian city b and Idolatrous whore, who impires ouer manie c nations.
The Text. 1 THen there came one of the seuen Angels, which had the seuen vials, and talked with mee, saying vnto me, Com, I will shew thee the damnation of the gret whore that sitteth vpon many waters.
Historical application. 2 And with whome all the princes of the earth haue bene entised to goe spiritually a whoring both of olde, after the Pagan Idols of Mars, Minerua, ladie Fortune, and others, as also of late, after the images
of our Ladie, the Crucifixe, Saint Paule, S. Helen, S. Margaret, S. Syluester Pope, and infinite moe Papisticall Idolles, and haue caused all people to dote with these fond supersticious errours.
Paraphrasticall exposition 2 And with whom the kings of the earth haue bene intised to commit Idolatrie, and all that dwell vnder
her earthlie Empire, are drunken with the d doctrin of her abhominable errours.
The Text. 2 With who^ haue committed fornication the Kinges of the earth, and the inhabita^ts of the earth ar
drunken with the wine of her fornication.

Historical application. 3 And those, whose spirit God indueth with true judgment, may perceiue, howe that citie of Rome hath broked a bloodie Empire, and hath vsurped proude, glorious, and blasphemous Antichristian titles, calling her selfe of olde, Roma aeterna, foelix, invicta, etc. and her Empire, sacrosanctum and perpetuum: and of new, S. Peters chaire, the Apostolike seat, and heade citie of the Church. She is builded vpon seuen hils, and hath bene gouerned successiuely, by seuen princely gouernments, and assisted by the ten christian kings, her confederats, al hereafter nominated.
Paraphrasticall exposition 3 Then rauished he my spirit in e solitary contemplations: and I perceiued, vnder the figure of a f woma^, a citie, set ouer a cruel and g blood-thirsty Monarchy, full of glorious and and blasphemous h stiles, which is scituate vpon seven i mountaines, and ruled by seuen princelie k gouernments, vnder the figure of seven heades, and afterward deuided into l te^ vnder kings, vnder the figure of ten hornes.
The Text. 3 So he caried me away in to the wildernes in the Spirite, and I saw a woman sitte vpon a skarlet collored beast, full of names of blasphemy, which had seuen heads and ten hornes.
Historical application. 4 And this imperiall citie inioyeth al the pomp and riches of the world: her pillers are of marble, her tapistries of silkes, her sielerings ouer gilt with gold, her Cardinals and rulers clothed in fine skarlet, red, and purple: their temples and idols decored with gold, pearls, and precious stones: for al the world paies tribute vnto her, but shee co^municated nothing to the^ again, but her poysonable doctrin, and vile allurements of idolatry.
Paraphrasticall exposition 4 And this whorish citie, was clad with all princelie m riches, of purple, skarlet, gold, precious stones, and pearle, exhibiting and propining (as out of her hand) to the whol world
the venomed drinks of her poysonable doctrine, and idolatrous heresie.
The Text. 4 And the woman was arayed in purple and skarlet, and gilded with gold and precious stones, and pearles, and had a cup of gold, in her hande, ful of abhominations,
nations, and filthines of her fornication.

Historical application. 5 And though her common name be Rome, yet is she often stiled gloriously, by her Clarkes, after her grand-mother Babylon, whose Empire shee brooketh, and so is as mother of all vice, and fountaine of all filthines.
Paraphrasticall exposition 5 And she bare the title and stile of n mystical Babylon, meaning literally her successor the mother of all spirituall whordome, and abhominable idolatrie of the world.
The Text. 5 And in her forehead vvas a name written, A mystery, great Babylon the mother of whordoms, and abhominatio^s of the earth.
Historical application. 6 And wee may daylie see, how that cruell citie, hath supped the blood of many thousands of Gods martyrs: so that it is wonderfull to behold, how she doeth play the Antichrist in all her tokens and behauiour.
Paraphrasticall exposition 6 And I sawe this citie, as drunke^ with the bloud of Gods seruants, and martyres of Iesus Christ, and I o wondered marueilously with great admiration, whe^ I considered her.
The Text. 6 And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Iesus: and whe^ I saw her, I wo^dered with a geat meruaile.
Historical application. 7 Which the Spirit of God, in these latter dayes, letteth vs euidently vnderstand, to agree in al points with the Antichristian citie, Empire, seuen mountaines, seuen princelie governments, and finallie with the ten vnder kings thereof.
Paraphrasticall exposition 7 Then saide the Angell vnto me, why wonderest thou? for I shal mak plain vnto thee, and to the whole Church in thee, the perfect interpretation, what is meaned by that woman, and by that imperiall beast or monarchie, which vpholdes her, who hath the seuen heads and ten hornes.
The Text. 7 Then the Angel said vnto me, Wherefore meruelest thou? I will shewe thee the mysterie of the woman, and of the beast that beareth her, which hath seuen heades, and ten hornes.
Historical application. 8 For stoode not that Empire or monarchie of Rome, being gouerned by Emperours, before S. Iohn wrote (...) it not vake by the decease of Domitian, when he wrot? Rose not the next Emperour Nerua Cocceius, not of the ancient blood, or honourable stock of the Romans, but of base linage? euen hee was the first stranger or barbarian Emperour (Galba not counted; as scarce beeing Emperour) and then died he not shortly? to wit, after hee had raigned onely an yeare, three moneths, and nyne daies: and finally, doth not the wicked world haue in greate reuerence and admiration these Emperours, whose estate (as is saide) stoode before Saint Iohn wrote: and though by decease of Domitian, it vaked when hee wrote, yet in effect stoode it still vnabolished, Nerua and others still succeeding.
Paraphrasticall exposition 8 That imperiall p beast that thou didst see, was that Monarchie,
which hitherto raigned, and now vaketh throgh the deceas of the Emperor thereof, and immediately shal the next Emperor thereof arise, of lowe degree and base linage to that monarchie and shortlie therafter he shal die, and the people of the earth, eue^ they whose names ar not from the beginning of the world registred into the booke of life, shall haue in greate q admiration, reuerence and estimation: this greate monarchie, that hitherto stood, now vakes in interraigne, and r yet doth stande vnabolished, for that more Emperors thereof doe instantly succeede.
The Text. 8 The beast that thou hast seen, was, and is not, and shal
ascend out of the bottomles pit, and shall goe into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder (whose names are not written in the booke of life, from the foundation of the worlde) when they beholde the beast that was, and is not, and yet is:
Historical application. 9 And beside these infallible tokens, doeth not the rest of the greater circumsta^ces also more plainly agre: For is not Rome scituate vpon the seuen hills of Palatinus, Coelius, Ianiculus (otherwise called Capitolmus) Aventinus Quirinalis Viminalis, and Esquilinus: and hath not that Cittie and empyre thereof, bene gouerned
by these seuen princely gouernementes, Kinges, Consulles, Dictators, Triumvirs, Tribunes, Emperours, and Popes.
Paraphrasticall exposition 9 And now followeth the minde, and meaning of the spirit of God, wherin consists the knoledge and interpretation hereof. These seuen heades which appeared to
thee, are certainelie to bee interpreted seuen mountaines, wherupo^ that whorish citie is set, and they do also meane the seuen princely s gouernments therof,
The Text. 9. Here is the minde, that hath wisedom. The seue^ heds ar seuen mountaines, whereon the woman
sitteth: they ar also seue^ king^

Historical application. 10 Whereof the gouernemet of these fiue, to wit, Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Triumvirs, and Tribunes were past before S. Iohns daies. The sixt, which is the state of Emperours gouerned in his daies, and the seuenth state, which is of Popes; came not while after his daies: and since they came, they haue gouerned 1260. yeares, a time but short in Gods sight, yea short in respect of the contrary eternall kingdome of Gods Elect.
Paraphrasticall exposition 10 Whereof fiue are past, and the sixt thereof now stands, and the seuenth gouernment is not yet come, and when it shall come, it must rule a t certain space
The Text. 10 Fiue are fallen and one is, and another is not yet com: and when hee commeth, hee must continue a short space*
Historical application. 11 And so that imperiall state, that reigned before S. Iohn wrote, to wit, the gouernement by Emperours (after it had vaked from the daies of Augustulus in anno. 475. more then three hundreth years) was renewed againe in Charlemaign in Anno. eight hundreth and six, and became the eight Romane gouernement, like as it had bene before the sixt, but now ar the Caesars and imperiall estate, worne to les than a
priuate kingdome
Paraphrasticall exposition 11 And so that state of monarchie, and imperial gouernement, which lately was, and now vaketh by interreign, that same imperiall gouernment (being hereafter long suppressed) shall bee againe the eight gouernement, like as before it hath bene one of the seuen, and at length shall it go into final destructio^
The Text. 11 And the beast that was, and is not, is euen the eight and is one of the seuen, and shall goe into destruction.
Historical application. 12 And there ar arisen of their decayed empyre, ten chief Christian Kinges: to wit, of Spaine, France, Lombardie, England, Scotland, Denmark, Swaden, of the Hunnes or Hungarians in Hungarie, of the Gotthes in Italie, and the Exarchat of Rauenna. Who were not in saint Iohns daies, nor begunne to reigne while the empyre began to decline.
Paraphrasticall exposition 12 And as for the tenne hornes which appeared to thee, these ar ten vnder kings, or confederate
kinges, who as yet haue not begun to raigne, but shall start vp as kings immediatly u after that that monarchie, or imperiall state beginnes to fall.
The Text. 12 And the tenne hornes that thou sawest, are tenne Kinges, which
yet haue not receued a kingdome, but shal receiue power as kings at one houre after the beast.

Historical application. 13 These whollie agreeth in one Papisticall faith, and Idolatrous profession: and therefore, with all their might, force and strength, maintained the Pope, whoe had the seuenth gouerment of Rome.
Paraphrasticall exposition 13 These shall agree vpon one faith and opinion, and shall giue ouer again their force, power, and assistance, to the next gouernors of that monarchie.
The Text. 13 These haue one mind, and shal giue their power, and authoritie vnto the beast.
Historical application. 14 And concurring with him, they persecuted and martyred all true Christia^ professors, who opponed against their papisticall abuses, but doubtlessly, Christ Iesus king of kings, shall now shortly ouercom them, either co^uerting or suppressing the^ (as he hath already begun) and shal erect aboue all his kingdome
of his holye people.
Paraphrasticall exposition 14 These will assist that Antichristian monarchie, fighting x against Christ Iesus, and his true seruants, but in the end, Christ shal ouercome them, for they are but earthlie kinges, and he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and his serua^ts are by him called and chosen, and found faithfull in all their doings.
The Text. 14 These shal fight with the Lambe, and the Lamb shall ouercome the^: for he is Lord of Lordes, and king of kings, and they that are on his side, are called, and chosen, and faithfull.

Historical application. 15 And so, although Rome hath borne hitherto the empyre and supremacie ouer all kinreds, people and nations.
Paraphrasticall exposition 15 And expounding yet farther vnto mee: these waters (saith he) that appered to the, ouer the which, is that whorish citie set, ar to be interpreted people, kinreds, nations and tonges, ouer the which she empyres.
The Text. 15 And hee said vnto me. The waters whiche thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are people and multitudes, and nations, and tongs.
Historical application. 16 Yet nowe shall these tenne Christian kinges, her confederats begin to hate her, and renounce her Papistical superstitio^s, depriue her of her dignities and honors, appropriate and annex her rich benefices and rentes, to their owne patrimonies: and at length, some of them shall spoile, that verie citie it selfe, of all her costly ornaments, and burne vppe with fire her edifices, and destroy the same for euer.
Paraphrasticall exposition 16 And these ten vnder kings (which by hornes appeared to thee) shal afterwarde begin y to hate that Idolatros citie and shal y make her bare and naked of her honours and dignities, and shall y eat vp her patrimonie and rentes, and at length y destroy her self with fire.
The Text. 16 And the tenne hornes whiche thou sawest vpo^ the beast, are they that shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her fleshe, and burne her with fire.
Historical application. 17 For although God made these princes, first to assist and authorize her with one consent: yet now is the time come, in the which God hath decreed them to reuolt from her and destroy her,
Paraphrasticall exposition 17 For God had put into their harts to work at al times his wil: eue^ that first they shuld giue ouer their whole power, might, and supremacie of the kingdoms to her, til at last the time were come, in the which God had predestinate the^ to revolt from her.
The Text. 17 For God hath put into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to do with one consente, for to giue their kingdom vnto the beast vntil the words of God be fulfilled.
Historical application. 18 Who hitherto hath bene the Metropolitane Citie, that hath empyred ouer all the whole kingdomes and countries of the world.
Paraphrasticall exposition 18 And be sure, that richly decked whore which appered to thee, means nothing els, but the metropolita^ and Idolatrous citie, which vsurpes the empyre ouer the whol kingdoms of the earth.
The Text. 18 And the woman which thou sawest, is the gret citie, which regneth ouer the kings of the earth.



Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a This one of these seuen Angels, both mentioned here, and in the Apoc. 21.9. agreeth rathest to be the last, euen the Angell of the last age, as being he in whose time, both in this place that Antichristian whore was destroyed, and in that place Gods holie Hierusalem and true Spouse and Church decored and d^cked: and therefore, of all the seuen, he seemeth meetest to describe these thinges to Iohn, which God had appointed him in effect to execute.
b f That an Idolatrous citie is called in the Scriptures a whore, it is common, For saith Esay 1.21. How is the holie Citie become a vvhore, etc. And how, more particularlie, this decked whore, and filthie woman, is interpreted to be that citie, that doeth impire ouer the Kinges of the earth, reade the last verse of this chapter, and so it must needes meane Rome, the onlie chief Metropolitane city of the Empire.
c Waters are plainlie interpreted by the Angell, to bee people and nations, ver. 15.
d Of potable liquors, wine and water, the cleare waters and welspringes, are euer taken in the Scriptures in the best parte, for the wholesome, pure, true, and most simple doctrine of the Evangell, which our soules continuallie thirste after: But contrarilie, wine, for that it is more alluring, delectable, and prouoketh drunkennesse, therefore, in all the Scriptures, it is commonlie taken in an euill parte, for idolatrous, licentious, and voluptuous doctrins, provoking Gods ire and fierce wrath. Read Apoc. 14.8.10. The like is in diuers other places.
e Except we be solitarilie, and as in a desert, distracted and withdrawne from worldlie societie and partiall affaires, it is hard to haue our Spirit and perfect judgement ripe and ready to discerne the trueth of spirituall matters.
f Hereof reade the note b.
g As al red coullours, betoken bloudshead in the Scriptures (as is said Apoc. 6.4. note c) and skarlet is a more glorious red than simple red. So betokeneth it, this Romane kingdom not onely simplie to be bloodthirstie, but euen to glorie in their bloodshead and murthers. And further, beside the spiritual meaning of these collours, the Princes of that Empire both first and last, euen both Emperours and Popes, were corporallie and really clothed in purple

and skarlet, in their Pontificals, as is to be read in the Decret. distinct. 96. where Constantine the Emperour giues his imperial garments of purple and skarlet, called therein, Chlamidem purpuream, and tunicam coccineam, to Pope Syluester the first, and his successours, to be worne by them, as they doe to this day,
h These names of blasphemie, that here are said, that the beaste is full of, are said (Apoc. 13.1) to bee vpon the seuen heads of the beast. The trueth is therefore, that these proud, glorious and presumptuous stiles and superscriptions, are not only set vp in sundry monuments vpon diuers places of these seuen hilles, which are her seuen heades, but also through al the whole bodie of the beast, euen in euery part of that Empire, are there infinite of these Temples, Idols, and other monuments erected, bearing such proude and blasphemous superscriptions and titles dedicatories, as Diis manibus, Fortunae, Plutoni, Veneri, Priapo, and euen at Mussilburgh, among our selues in Scotland, a foundation of a Romane monument lately found (now vtterlie demolished) bearing this inscription dedicatorie, Apollini Granno Quintus Lucius Sabinianus Proconsul Aug. Also there is to be seene in their coines the like vniuersally, euen titles of the pride and vain-glorie of Rome, as in the daies of Constantius and Maximianus, a coine printed with this inscription, Romae aeternae prat. In the dayes of Licinius Iunior, a coine with this inscription, Romae aeternae, with the figure of Rome, sitting as a glorious ladie. In the dayes of Priscus Attalus, a coine with this inscription. Invicta Roma aeterna conob. Of which writeth Adolphus Occo, libro Numismatum Romanoru^. Of this their blasphemous stile of eternity, read S. Ierome, lib. Epist. parte. 2. tract. 2. Epist. 18. question. 11. litera. Z. in these wordes, Vnde secundum Apocalypsim Ioannis, in fronte purpuratae meretricis, scriptum est nomen blasphemiae, id est Romae aeternae; that is to say, Whereby, acccording to the Reuelation of S. Iohn, in the forehead of the skarlet vvhore, there is written a name of blasphemie, which is Eternal Rome.
i These seue^ heads ar plainly interpreted by the Angel hereafter, v. 9. to be seuen mountains, and seue^ governme^ts, or princely estats.
k Read these heads, taken for kings, and kings for any princely gouernours in vers. 9. following, and note s thereof.
l Now haue we to trie, what these ten hornes doe meane: first by Daniell 7.24. and Reuel. 17.12. these be ten kinges. Secondlie,

their kingdomes must be part of the Romane beast, and fourth Monarchy, as both appears, Dan. 7.7.23.24. Reu. 12.3. and 13.1 and 17.3.7. as also, because that whol ten horned beast, meaning the whole Romane Empire, by our 24. prop. what els can the parts of that beast signifie, than parts of that Empire, and consequently the ten crowned horns of the beast, ten kings and kingdoms out of the Empire? Thirdly, by ver. 12. hereof, and note u following, appears that these ten kings arose whe^ the Roman governme^t by Emperors decayed, and when the Pope began to claime temporal dignities, which al occurred betwixt the 300. and 450. year of Christ, by our 36. prop. and approued histories. Fourthly, by the 13. and 14. verses, appears, that these shal be of one religion, and shal therfore authorize, and giue their power and assistance to the beast, that next gouerned that Roman seat, euen to the Pope (the Emperours then being decayed) Fiftly, thogh (as is said) these ten horns cam at once with that Papistical beast, and litle Antichristian horn, yet they rose first to their kingdoms before this Papistical horn rose to his Monarchy, and then he suppressed three of them, which testifieth, Dan. 7.24. saying, Another (euen that Antichrist) shal rise vp after them (to wit after these ten kings) and he shall subdue three kings, and so the Antichrist that commeth at one time with them, riseth not to an established Monarchy til after their rising, yea, til three of the^ wer falle^: for the tearm in the original Hebrue or Chaldee doth not meane there of his first co^ming or simple beginning to rise, but of his establishing or confirming of his rising: for the same tearm that here is put for this rising, is expresly put in Iob. 22.28. and 2. Chro. 7.18. and diuers other places, for establishing and confirming. So by these notes and toke^s, these ten appear to be the kings of Spain, France, Lo^bardy, England, Scotland, Denmark, Swade^, of the Hunnes or Hungarians in Pannonia, now called Hungarie, of the Gotths in Italy, and the Exarchat of Rauenna, al start vp with the Pope, betwixt the 300. and 450. yeare of God. As to the kingdoms of Arragon, Granad, Portugal, Castile, Legeon Tolet, Galice and Nauarre, they ar only inferior kingdoms, partly subject to the Empire, partly pendicles of Spain, and ar not kingdoms of old. The other kingdom of Nauarre is also of late, and now is and shall be (God willing) all one with France* Sicil, Beheme, and Naples, for the most part are of the Empire, and are neither old nor free kingdoms: Burgundie is of France, and was only a smal kingdom, or rather dukedome.

Norway is but of late a deuided kingdom from Denmarke, and is now conjoyned again with Denmarke, Ireland is conjoyned with England. Polland is but of late erected in a kingdo^. Cyprus is a kingdom both late, small, and seldome in Christians hands. As to the Vandals and Visegoths, that people, as appeares, came from Swaden, and the Northren countries, and began their kingdom in Spain. An. Christ. 382. by Modogislaus their king: and therfore justly, of these Vandals and Goths whatsoeuer, we comprehend their goers out vnder Spaine, Italy, and Hungarie, wher they came, and their remainers at home, we comprehend vnder Swaden, whose king now stileth him self, king of Swaden, Gothes and Vandals, as in the circumscription of their coines is to be seen. And so appara^tly, remain only the said ten kingdoms to be chiefly the beasts ten hornes, with which the Popes litle horn and smal kingdom comming at one time, was afterward co^firmed and established by Pipin, Charlemaign, and Lodouicus Pius, and the^ arose it greatest of all: and by his craft, and meanes of his confederates, suppressed the kingdoms of the Goths, Longobards and Exarchat, and brooketh their lands within Italy to this day: But the other seuen kings yet extant, with the people also of these three kingdomes, shall (God willing) one day repay that Antichristian seat, with fire, sword, and vtter destruction, as appeareth by the 16. verse hereof, and other places of this booke.
m Of the great pomp and riches of this town, read Hierom, parte. 2 tract. 5. Epistola. 59. litera, G. where he concludeth, Aurata sua tecta magis velint aspicere quam coelum, that is, they had rather behold their gilded silerings than the heauens: and what merueil is it that it be rich, seeing almost the whol world haue bene tributaries to it, about 2000. years, including the time of pardons, as being the most welthy tributes. And as in all things they are glorious, so also in their tributes they appointed that the same shuld be brought in earthe^ pots, and the pots broken in a certaine place of Rome, where, by the great quantity of broken pots, there is waxed a hil, called Monte testaceo. And this haue they done for their glorious name and ostentation, which (confirming this text) beareth recorde of the great riches that hath bene brought to them from al the world.
n How and why Rome is stiled Babylon mysticallie or figuratiuely, is shewed at length in our 23. proposition.
o Here saith Saint Iohn, hee wondered at the beast, and hereafter

(verse 8) he saith, that they, whose names were not written in the booke of life wondred at the beast, not making any repugnance, neither making himself to be of the wicked number: for ther is a distinction in wondering, according to the qualitie of the wonderer: the godlie seeing the pomp and glory of the world, wonder at the vanitie and impietie thereof, with great griefe of mind, detesting the same: and so S. Iohn here wondred at the whorish citie: But the wicked contrarilie, seeing herefter (ver. 8.) the great pomp, wealth, and worldlie felicitie of the Romane Emperours, they wondered thereat, not detesting the same, but rather are rauished in admiration, with reuerence, obedience and feare of them, as if they wer gods; and therfore it is said (Apoc. 13.3.4) that the whole world wondred at the beast, and worshipped the beast, and the dragon that gaue her power.
p It is so notable among the Prophets, that a beast, generallie meaneth a king, kingdom, Empire, or Monarchie (as may be prooued by Dan. 7. where he calleth his four beasts, the four kingdoms or Monarchies of the earth) That here S. Iohn superfluously interpreteth not, this beast to mean a Monarchie in generall, but entereth to the particular description thereof, so plainely, that hee lets vs euidently see it, to be not onlie in generall a Monarchie, but euen in particular, that selfe same ten horned beast, which Daniel called the fourth kingdome or monarchie: and so consequently, to be the Roman Empire, as is proued in our 24. prop. at more length.
q What maner of wondring this is, read before in the note o.
r Some read here, The beast that was and is not, onely: but I rather approue those, that read, the beast that was, and is not, and yet is, for althogh this seem a repugnance, yet it is none: for the Empire or imperial estate, at that time that S. Iohn wrot, might justlie be said, not to be, seing the Emperour Domitian was dead, and the next Emperor Nerua Cocceius not yet receiued: and yet in a maner, the Empire or imperial estate that time was, becaus the gouernme^t of Emperors stood as yet that time vnabolished. And so in diuers maners, and in diuers respects, the imperial estate at that time, both was and was not, without repugna^ce: wherof read the 5. reason of our 24. prop.
s A king, in the scripture, is a general name for any supream gouernour, be he king, Monarch, Emperor, or Pope, as in Daniel chap. 7. all the kings of one Monarchie, ar called but one king: wherby the four Monarchies are called foure kings: And again, Moses being

but a gouernour, is called a king. Deut. 33.5. and seing hereby, that not only a king, is taken for whatsoeuer supreame gouernor, but also, seeing how many soeuer supreame gouernors there be of one race or sort, they are al called but one king. Therfore, we justly esteeme these seuen kings, here mentioned, to be the seuen princelie, royal, and supreame gouernments of Rome, seing in all the rest of their circumstances, they agree so well with the text: Hereof is spoken in the fourth reason of our 24. proposition.
t It were vnproper, to measure the breuity and length of this time that the seuenth Papistical and Antichristian gouernme^t doth stand, according to our fantasie, as to cal it long, that men think long, for so indeed, should that Antichristian raigne be counted long; but more properly the Spirit of God (in whose sight a thousand years ar but as one day) here, in comparison of the aeternity of the Christian kingdom of Christ Iesus, accounteth the contrarie kingdom, euen the Antichristian kingdome, to be but short, for that trulie 1260. yeares are nothing in respect of aeternitie. Of a longer time called but short, read Apoc. 22.6.7.10.12.20.
u Here doe we followe Ieromes vulgare translation, Post bestiam, that is, After the beast, agreing sufficientlie with the Greek, (...); for verilie so came it to passe, that after the Empire of Rome decayed, and the imperiall gouerment was abolished by the Hunes, Gotthes Vandales, and such others: Then immediatelie, and at once, (betwixt the yeares of God, 300. and 450) start vp these ten kings. The other translation of T. Beza and others, who translate, vna hora cum bestia, At one houre with the beast, may also verie well stand with the word (...) which sometimes signifieth after, sometimes vvith. And so in that sense, although after the beast, euen after the fall of the Emperours (who in their time were that Roman beaste and Latine Empire) the ten kings came, and began to raign, yet also this comming of theirs, was at one houre (that is to say, immediatelie) with the beast: to wit, they came and arose immediatly with the Pope, who (since the fal of Emperors, hath euer bin that Roman beast, and possessed the Empire thereof: and therfore saith the text, in the next verse: These (to wit, ten kings) haue one counsell, and shall giue ouer their strength and power to the beast, meaning to the Pope, who since this decay of Emperors, haue broked for the most part, the stile, rent, honors and seat of this Latin Empire, and Roman beast.
x These be the warres (called the holie warres) which the Pope, his vnder kings and confederats, did raise against those kingdoms, princes, and particular professors, that following the trueth, wold any waies mean to repine against his Antichristian authoritie: But the Spirite of God here, discouereth their hypocritical tearmes of holy warres, affirming stedfastlie, them to fight against Christ, and that at length to their aeternall confusion.
y Here doth the Angell declare to vs, by whome, and after what maner the Antichristian and Idolatrous Citie of Rome shall bee destroyed. The doers thereof shall be (saith he) the same tenne Christian kinges, who before had maintained her. The maner of this destruction of Rome, seemeth to be three-folde. First (saith the text) they shall hate her, and leaue her desolate: taht is to say, (as appeareth by Paule. 2. Thess. 2.8. and Apoc. 14.6.) The trueth of Gods worde and holie Euangell shall be first publickely preached, and by the Majestie of the comming thereof, and two edged sword of that holie Word, manie of these tenne Christian Princes, their kindreds, and people shall be conuerted from their Antichristian and Papisticall superstitions, and shall hate the Romane seat, turn backe from it, and leaue it destitute of their assistance; and this is her first wracke. Secondlie (saith the text) They shall eate her flesh: that is, these ten Christian kinges, who before had enriched her, and made her fat with great benefices, rents and dayly casualities, now hating her, shall eate vp these rentes and rich benefices, and liue thereon themselues: and both these two wrackes are already come, thought not as yet altogether perfected. Resteth yet the last, whereof, thirdlie (saith the text) they shall burne her vvith fire: which appeareth not to be figuratiuelie taken, but literallie, by the next chapter, verses 8.9.16.17.18.21. by which it appeareth, that at length, Princes shall make warre against the verie citie of Rome, take it captiue, spoyle it, and finallie, so burne it with fire, that it shall be waste for euer, as at more length in that chapter we shall nowe deduce.



CHAP. XVIII.

THE ARGVMENT.
In this chapter coherentlie with the former, is pronounced the sore sentence and doome of destruction, against the seate and citie of

Rome, for her wicked demerites, with an exhortation to all true Christians, to leaue and renounce her: and expresse co^mandement to all men to put hand to the execution of Gods vengeance against her for her pride. And last of all, is set foorth the great horrour and anguish of her familiars, for the suddaine and terrible spoliation, demolishing, burning, and destruction of her for euer, vvith the triumph of Gods whole true seruants therefore, after so plaine a stile, that the Paraphrase and historie (or rather Prophecie) therof, may be consolidate in one Prophetical Paraphrase.


The Text.
1 AND after these things, I saw another Angell come down from heauen, hauing great power, so that the earth was lightened with his glory.
2 And he cried out mightilie, with a loude voyce, saying, It is fallen it is falle^, Babylon that great citie, and is becom the habitation of deuils and the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of euery vnclean and hatefull bird.
3 For al nations haue drunke of the wine of the wrath of her fornicatio^, and the kings of the earth haue committed fornication with her, and the merchantes of the earth ar waxed rich of the aboundance of her pleasures.
4 And I hard another voice from heauen, say,

Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sinnes, and that yee receiue not of her plagues.
5 For her sinnes are come vp vnto heauen, and God hath remembred her iniquities.
6 Reward her, euen as shee hath rewarded you, and giue her double according vnto her workes: and in the cup that shee hath filled to you, fill her the double.
7 In as much as shee glorified her selfe, and liued in pleasure, soe muche giue yee to her torment and sorrowe: for she saith in her hart, I sit, being a Queene, and am no widow, and shall see no mourning.
8 Therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and shee shal be burnt with fire: for strong is the Lorde God, which will condemn her.
9 And the Kinges of the earth shall bewaile her, and lament for her which haue committed fornication, and liued in pleasure with her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning.
10 And shall stande farre off for fear of her torment, saying, Alas,

alas, the great citie Babylon, the mightie citie for in one houre is thy iudgement come.
11 And the marcha^ts of the earth shall weep and waile ouer her, for no man byeth their ware any more.
12. The ware of golde and siluer, and of precious stone, and of pearls and of fine linnen, and of purple, and of silk, and of skarlet, and of al maner of Thyne wood, and of all vessells of yuorie, and of all vessells of most precious woode, and of brasse, and of yron, and of marble.
13 And of cynamon, and odours, and oyntments, and frankincense, and wine, and oyl, and fine floure, and wheat, and beasts, and sheepe, and horses, and charets and seruants, and souls of men.
14. (And the apples that thy soule lusted after, are departed from thee, and al things that were fat and excellent, ar departed from thee, and thou shalt finde them no more.)
15 And the marcha^ts of these thinges which were waxed riche, shall stand a far of from her, for fear of her torme^t, weeping and wailing.
16. And saying, Alas, alas, the gret citie, that was clothed in fine linnen, and purple, and skarlet, and gilded with gold, and precious stone, and pearles.
17 For in one houre so great riches are com to desolation. And euery shipmaster, and all the people that occupy ships, and shipmen, and whosoeuer trauell on the sea, shal stand a far off.
18 And cry when they see the smok of her burning, saying, What city was like vnto this gret citie.
19 And they shall cast dust on their heades, and crie weeping and wailing, and say, Alas, alas, the great citie, wherein were made rich al that had ships on the sea, by her costlines: for in one houre she is made desolate.
20 O heauen reioice of her, and ye holy Apo stles and Prophets: for God hath giuen your judgment on her.
21 Then a mightie An gel took vp a stone, like a great milstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, with such violence shall the great citie Babylon be cast, and shall bee found no more.
22 And the voice of Harpers, and musitians, and of pipers, and tru^peters shal be heard no more in thee, and noe craftes man, of whatsoeuer craft he be, shal be found any more in thee and the sound of a milstone shal be heard no more in thee.
23 And the light of a candle shall shine noe more in thee: and the voice of the bridegrom and of the bride, shall bee hearde no more in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth: and with thine inchantments were deceiued all nations.
24 And in her was fou^d the bloode of the Prophets, and of the saints and of al that wer slain vpon the earth.



The Prophetical Paraphrase.
1 AFterwarde came the a seconde of the seven thundering Angels from heauen, with great power and Majestie, lightening all the earth with the beames of his glorie:
2 And he pronounced with a loude voice the doome and sentence following, saying, now shal fal, yea, euen now shal fal that mightie imperial seat of b Rome, successour of great Babylon, and shee shall become a desert dwelling of c deuilles and Fayries, and a solitarie wildernesse, for the repaire of wilde and rauenous foules.
3 Because shee hath poysoned all nations, with the venemous drinkes of her idolatrous doctrine: and all the kinges and gouernours of the earth, haue followed her a whoring after idolles: and the Merchantes of the earth d both spirituall and temporall, haue bene inriched through her voluptuous and delicate traffique.
4 Then hearde I againe, a spirituall and heauenlie voice, charging all God his true, holie and electe Christians, to departe from

that Romane seat, and leaue all her superstitions, least they being participant of her offences were also destroyed with her.
5 For her sinnes haue craued vengeance from the heauens, and the Lorde hath called to minde her iniquities.
6 Commanding therfore al men to e render vnto her such wrack, as she hath deserued at their hand: yea, and to double the reue^ge vpon her, that her works haue deserued, and as she hath hitherto entised them to drink in the cup of Gods wrath, so they ar now to execute Gods wrath twofold against her.
7 And so much as shee hath vaunted and gloried in her selfe, and hath liued wealthilie in all sensualities and pleasures, so much the more to ad vnto her torment and dolour. For in the presumption of her hart, she hath said, I sit f Queene and Maistres ouer the whole world, and I shall be destitute of no voluptuous pleasure, neither euer shall I see any sorrowe.
8 Therefore, at once shall God powre out on her the plagues of death and mourning, for the g slaughter of her inhabitants, and she shal be inclosed and effamished: finally, taken captiue, and burnt with fire: for almightie is the Lord, that hath giuen that sore sentence against her.
9 The Kings, Cardinals, and rulers of the earth, who haue followed her in whoring spirituallie after Idols, and haue led a careles life in all her worldly pleasures, shal now mourn and bewaile her, and shal become dolorous and sorrowfull for her sake, when they shall vnderstand that shee is consumed and burnt vp with fire, and destroied for euer.
10 They dare not approche to assist her,

for feare to be wracked with her, but absenting them selues, shal mourn in their heartes, saying; Alas, alas, our cheife citie Rome, that great and mightie successour and daughter of Babel, for vnawares is come thy destructio^.
11 The Merchants of the earth, craftsmen and traffiquers with her wares, shall lament and mourne for her destruction, for their delicate wares shal not henceforth be so saleable.
12 Euen their rich and costly Idoles, chalices, Paxes, and crucifixes, threefold crownes, myters, Bishops staues, and rings of golde, and siluer set with pearles, and all manner of precious stones, surplices of fine linnen, copes, masse-clothes, and other vestiments of purple, of silke, and of skarlet, sielerings, tabernacles and other ornamentes in Churches, and Church places of al manner of h well carued, and long lasting wood, Host boxes, and relique buses of Iuorie or fine woode, offering stocks and diuers vessels for Chrisme, oyl, salt; and holy water of fine timber, Snuffers, and incensours of brasse, copper, or yron, founts and holy water stones of Allablaster, Marble, or Iasper.
13 Yea, their confections of cannell and sugered spices, for their Christmas and Easter feasts, their delicate perfumes, odours, and costly oyntments: for their Pontificalls, their incense, roset and frankinscence, to burne in Churches, wine for their drink, and for daily masses, oyle for their extreame vnction, fine floure for their Hosts and masse bread, wheat and plentie of all maner of cornes, with store of kyne and sheep, for their daily sustentation; Horses, mules, and mulets, with costly decored chariots for their journeying; Moores, Pages, Lackies and seruants to serue them, and

finallie the pretended i merchandise of the soules of men from hell and purgatorie, by soule masses, diriges, pardons, indulgences, remissions of sinnes, and such soule wares for lucre.
14 And the delicate and wealthie pleasures that thy soul lusted after, are departed from thee, and all thy profitable rentes, and glorious dignities are taken from thee, and shall neuer hereafter be restored to thee.
15 These Marchants and sellers of these wares, which hitherto were made wealthie therby, dare not assist her, but absenting the^selues lest they be wracked with her, shal bewaile and lament her,
16 Saying, Alas, alas, that mightie citie which was decored with fine linnen, and with abullements, pales, hangers, and tapestries of silk, purple and skarlet, and had her k sielerings ouer-gilt with gold, and was richely dect and replenished with al maner of precious stones and pearle:
17 For at an instant is shee depriued and spoiled of all these riches, and all her Marriners, pylates, and gouernours of her greate l shippes and huge Galliasses, and euery shipmaister, that transporteth her wares, standing a far off for feare to be wracked,
18 Vnderstanding her to be burnt vppe with fire, and vtterlie destroyed, shal lament, saying, what citie on earth was so mightie as this great citie?
19 And they shall be grieued and disfigured with sorrowe and anguishe, and shall crie out, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that mightie and great citie, by whome, al we her ship-masters and marriners were inriched, and made wealthie through the costlines

of her delicate wares, for in an instant is shee brought to desolation.
20 But contrarilie, O elect Churche of God, Apostles and holy Prophets rejoice and triumph, yea, for the Almightie hath judged and reuenged your cause against her.
21 Then a mightie Angell, shewed me the comparison of a great milstone cast into the sea, declaring, that with such suddentie and violence should thou, O Rome, the mightie citie, successor and daughter of great Babylon, be brought to vtter confusion, so that thou shalt neuer m arise nor recouer thereafter.
22 And the triumphant melodie of thy Organes, and belles, hymnes and canticles, bummes, timbrels, and rigols, shall neuer be hereafter heard, sounding in thy quiers, nor in thy houses or habitations, shall any maner of crafts-men be found dwelling: yea, not so much as the sound of any mil or quernes shal be heard grinding corne towards thee.
23 For ther shal not dwel in thee, so much as one to light a torch or ca^dle to shine in thee, and far lesse shall it be heard, anie to marie, or to be maried in thee, or to procreat, or replenishe with people thy ruined walles, for thy merchants (cheif sellers of indulgences, and soule wares) become Cardinals and Bishops, and great men vpon earth, and with thy alluring superstitions, all people and nations were blinded and deceiued.
24 And that miserable citie was founde and convict of God, to be the author of the bludshed and martyrdome of all the Christians, and true professors that were slain throughout the whole earth.



Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a We interpret the Angel, that here pronounceth this decay of this spirituall Babylon, to be the seconde of the seauen thundering Angels, because that same Angell proclaimed that same decay to fall in his time. Apoc. 14.8. and so consequently, wee look (God willing) for the performance hereof, in this present Iubile begun already in anno 1590. and ending in anno 1639. or thereby.
b This Babylon is not literally Babylon it self, for that Babylon was destroied by the Medes and Persians, according to the prophecies of Esay 13.17. and Ieremie 51.11. and Psal. 137. and that, long be fore saint Iohn wrote this, and neuer rose in authoritie againe, but this Babylon is figuratiue or mystical Babylon, so called (Apoc. 17.5) for that this Babylon succedeth to the monarchie of the former, as the eroy to her grandmother, and is certainly the citie of Rome as is prooued by our 23. proposition, and by the whol tokens of the 17. chapter hereof, read also hereupon, Apoc. 14. note h.
c The spirit of God, describing the horrible decay of royal Babylon. Esay. 13.21. for the greater agrauating of Gods justice, and to moue vs to conceiue the greater horrour, not onely saith simplie it shal be a desert, or such a desert or wildernes, as no tame beast or bird dare resort into, for rauenous beasts and fowles of reif, that abide there: but euen that it shall bee a place so vtterly elraich (as we tearme it) that also no man dare make residence there, for fear of deuills, fayries and spirits of illusions: and, as the Rabbins interpret that text, Ibi saltabu^t Fauni, Satyri, seu daemones pilosi, etc. The like is said here of this mystical Babylon or Babylonicall Rome, that it shal become a dwelling of deuils, and a holde or residence of vncleane spirits, not that the deuils are as yet annexed to any certaine residence, or that they like rather to go dwel in deserts, than to abide among men to seduce them, but that the spirit of God wold haue vs his faithfull to detest that citie as abhominable, wherein deuils shall dwell and possesse the same as their due patrimonie.
d These marchants appeare hereafter plainly by their wares, to meane but seculare marchants, sellers of all delicate wares to the Romans, as also their ecclesiasticall merchants, priests, pardonars, and Legats, that sel their indulgences, pardones, and soule wares vnto the whole world: consider this by the 12. and 13. verses hereof.
e Now Princes, potentats, and mightie men on earth, go to, and execute Gods wrath against this godles citie, for here you haue a speciall warrant and earnest commande to reuenge that cause, that is, not onely your owne cause, but also it is the cause of the Almightie, by the which ye are certified here, that that work shall go wel with you, and shal prosper in your hands. Where note, that this doubling of reuenge is spoken by a Propheticall Emphasis, as meaning thereby, that we ought without pitie, ruth, and mercie to proceede with all possible extremitie against that deuillish seat, to the vtter extirpation thereof, and not meaning that any punishement in this world that possiblie may be executed by men, can be so much as equivalent with the single, and farre les can be double to her wicked demerits: where through, in the ende of the next chapter, shee and hers ar cast into hell fire eternallie, as a full revenge.
f Here doth the spirit of God describe and paint Rome no other wise, then shee in her old monuments and coynings doth paint and set out her self: to wit, after the forme of a lusty Ladye, clad in no mourning weede, nor widdowes apparel, but gloriouslie and richlie deckt, and decored with all delectable and costly ornaments, and therewithal, sitting inthroned in her throne, as Lady and mistres ouer the whole world, with her glorious titles, and blasphemous inscriptions Roma aeterna, foelix, invicta, and such others, wher of reade the note h Apoc. 17.
g Here haue we inserted certaine clauses gathered out of other parts of this book, opening the maner of the destruction of Rome, that the prophecie may be the more plaine. And first, where wee interpret her mourning to be for the slaughter of her inhabitants (beside also for the ruine of her kingdome) we do not coniecture it without a warrant, that ther shal be gret slaughter vpon her inhabitants, for which they shall mourn, because the former plague (expressed in this text) that should fall on them, is death. Againe, by the Apoc. 13.10. it is doubtlesse meant, that they shall be killed by the sword, because they haue killed others with the sword. Secondly, becaus the text specifies, that they shal be effamished and burnt with fire, it betokeneth a siege and inclosing of them, and that shee shall be taken captiue, and therefore haue wee also inserted these clauses agreeing with the said warrant. Apoc. 13.10.

wherein it is likewise meant, that they shal be led captiue, because they haue led others captiue.
h This (...), is the wood Thyia which Theophrastus reporteth to be a long lasting, and vncorruptible timber: hereof mentioneth Plinius lib. 13. cap. 16. And with this timber, Temples in old times were decored and replenished.
i After the spirite of God had reckoned out certaine bodilie wares which the Romane seat accustomed most to buy, nowe concludes he with these soule wares, which they and their marchants vsed chiefly to sel, wherby, they were so inriched, that thereby they were made able to buy al the former costly wares. These soulwares are pardons, indulgence, remissions of sinnes, trentalls, soule masses, and diriges, with such godles jestes, whereby, they promise for mony, to deliuer vs from hell and purgatory, and to canonize vs saints in heauen, and make vs intercessors for our brethren on earth, and conseque^tly, Christs intercession to be needles. O blasphemie intollerable that maketh riche men (whome Christ saith shall hardly come in the kingdome of heauen) to become saintes for money, and so tacitly to depriue our sauiour of his office of intercession and onely mediation: doeth not Peter speake trulie of these his false pretended successors. (2. Epist. cap. 2.) saying, they shall bring in damnable errors, denying the Lord that redeemed them, and through fained wordes shal they make marchandise of men, to wit, (as here is saide) by selling both their poore peoples soules, and their owne soules to the deuill for worldly lucre. Herewith confer the note d preceeding.
k Of these golden and gilded silerings and great riches of Rome, read the note m in Apoc. 17. with diuers olde writers, describers of the Pompe of Rome.
l These mightie marriners with their gret Galliasses, Venetia^s, Spanishes, and other of that Antichristian flote, who hitherto, and latest of all in this 1588. yeare of God, haue bene so readie at euery nod of their Apostatik step-mother, Rome, to haue ouerwhelmed vs poore and true christian professors. Seeing now and perceauing by daily experience, that God fights for vs, and daily aduanceth our causes more and more to their destruction, shall now shortly faint and fal back, from assisting that cause any more, only standing a far and bewailing that irreparable destruction that

God is sending vpon that godles citie, and in their hearts lamenting the decay of their owne prosperitie, without making any farther debate or encounter in defence of that Romish seat.
m Let none beleeue, that this destruction, desolation, and burning of Rome, is any of these destructions which are already performed by the Hunnes, Gotthes, Vandales, or others in time past, for these destructions were soone repared, but this destruction, (saith the spirit of God before, verse 14. and here verses 21.22.23.) shall be such, that neuer shalbe repared againe, that citie neuer founde nor founded againe, her dignities and rents neuer restored to her, and finally, no inhabitant to dwel there, or so muche as to light a candle in that execrable and accursed citie againe.



CHAP. 19.

THE ARGVMENT.
Following out the exhortation and commandement of Gods spirit in the former chapter, verse 20. here in this chapter, the whol church of God, vnderstanding that Antichristian enemie of theirs, the Romane seat to be shortly brought to ruine, and themselues nowe to be stedfastlie coupled with their Lorde and spouse, Christ Iesus, doth therefore reioyce and magnifie God. Thereafter followeth a briefe description of the word of God, and how the same doth nowe obtaine victory ouer all the enemies, that are conuened against it, and how all false Prophets, and chief members of that Antichristian empyre, are condemned to the vnquencheable fire of hell for euer, as the latter and iust rewarde of their demerits, beside that bodilie vengeance that commeth vpon the carkases of all their assisters.


The Text.
1 AND after these things, I hearde a great voice of a greate multitude in heauen, saying, Hallelu-iah, saluation, and glory, and honour, and power be to the Lord our God.
2 For true and righteous ar his iudgments: for he hath condemned the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath aue^ged the blood of his seruants shed by her hand.
3 And againe they saide, Hallelu-iah: and her smoke rose vpp for euermore.
4 And the foure and twentie elders, and the foure beasts fel downe, and worshipped God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen, Hallelu-iah.
5 Then a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all yee his seruants, and ye that fear him both smal and great.
6. And I heard like a voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of strong thu^drings, saying, Hallelu-iah: for our Lord God al mightie hath reigned.
7. Let vs be glad, and reioice, and giue glory to him: for the mariage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made her selfe ready.
8 And to her was granted, that shee shuld bee arrayed with pure fine linnen and shining: for the fine linne^ is the righteousnes of saints.
9 Then hee said vnto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called vnto the Lambs supper. And he said vnto mee, These wordes of God are true.
10 And I fell before his feete, to worshippe him, but hee saide vnto me, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow seruant, and one of thy bretheren, which haue the testimonie of Iesus. Worship God. For the testimonie of Iesus, is the Spirite of prophecie.
11 And I saw heauen open, and beholde, a white horse, and he that sate one him was called Faithful and true, and hee judgeth and fighteth righteouslie.
12 And his eies vver as a flamme of fire, and on his head vver many crownes, and hee had a name written, that no

man doeth knowe but himselfe.
13 And he was clothed with a garmente dipt in blood, and his name is called, THE WORD OF GOD.
14 And the warriers which were in heauen, followed him vppon white horses, clothed with fine linnen, white and pure,
15 And out of his mouth went a sharpe sword, that with it hee should smite the heathen: for hee shall rule them with a rod of iron for hee it is that treadeth the winepresse of the fiercenesse and wrath of Almightie God.
16 And he hath vppon his garment, and vpon his thigh a name written, THE KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.
17 And I sawe an Angell stand in the sun, who cried with a loude voice saying to all the foules that did flie by the middest of heauen, Come and gather your

selues together vnto the supper of the great God
18 That ye may eat the flesh of kinges, and the flesh of high Captaines, and the flesh of mightie men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the fleshe of all free men and bondmen, and of small and great.
19 And I sawe the beast and the kings of the earth and their warriours gathered together, to make battell againste him that sate on the horse, and against his souldiers.
20 But the beast was taken, and with him that false Prophet, that wroght miracles before him, whereby he deceiued the^ that receiued the beastes mark, and them that worshipped his image. These both were aliue caste into a lake of fire, burning with brimstone.
21 And the remna^t wer slaine with the sworde of him that sits vpo^ the horse

which commeth out of his mouth, and all the foules were filled full with their flesh:



Paraphrasticall exposition.
HEreafter I considered, and beholde, the voice of the whole multitude and congregation of Gods true Church, saying, a let vs praise the Lord, saluation, and glory, honour and power, belongeth to the Lorde our God for euer.
2 For true and righteous are all his proceedings, and he hath justly condemned that Idolatrous citie and spirituall whore, which poysoned and infected all people on earth, with her Idolatrous doctrine, and God hath righteouslie avenged the bloodshed and cruell martyrdome of his Saintes and seruantes, committed by her tyrannie.
3 And againe, and againe, incessantlie continued they, saying, Let vs praise the Lord, and the griefe of her torment shall resound to the heauens, and neuer shall haue an end.
4 And all the true professours of the olde and newe Testaments, prostrated themselues and woorshipped God, who raigned in his throne among them, saying, euen so, O Lord, let vs praise thee for euer.
5 Then did the voice of Gods Spirit, proceeding from the throne of his trueth, exhort all his elect servantes, both small and great, that feare him, to render him praise for euer.
6 And with that was hearde the greate dinne and mightie voyces of all the huge multitude of God his b people, as the resounding noyse of manie waters, and of his true Teachers and Prophetes, thundering out Gods praises, saying, Let vs praise God, for our Lorde God Almightie hath preuailed, and shall raigne hencefoorth for euer more.
7 Let vs be glad and rejoyce, and giue to him the praise, that hath now vouchsafed to vnite his Sonne, that immaculate Lambe, Christe Iesus, in spirituall c spousage with vs, his holie Church, and nowe is our Church purged from Antichristianisme, and readie

decked for him, as his true Spouse.
8 And hee hath propined and presented her with giftes and shining garmentes of puritie and innocencie, betokening that perfect puritie and righteousnesse, that God hath granted to euerie one of her particular saints and professours.
9 Then saide the Angell vnto mee, publish thou, and shew foorth vnto all men, how blessed they are, that are called of God to be participant of that holie d Supper and marriage banquet, whereby wee are vnited and espoused to Christ Iesus, and he said moreouer, all that I haue said vnto thee is of e God, and shall surely come to passe.
10 And I fell downe at his feete to haue f worshipped him: but hee rebuked me, saying, Beware thou doe it not, for I am but a seruaunt of God, as thou art, and as one of thy bretheren, bearing the testimonie of Christ Iesus: woorship nothing except God onelie, for wee that doe testifie of Christe Iesus, are not God, but Spirites of his prophecie.
11 At this time the Churche of GOD shall bee patent and visible, and therein shall bee perfect and syncere Professours, and that profession that they doe beare on them shall bee of g Christ Iesus, who is called the faithfull and true incarnate worde of God, who doeth judge with justice, and fighteth righteouslie.
12 And with the fierce and fierie eies of foresight doeth terrifie his enemies, and his heade is crowned with manie victories ouer them, and hee hath a name, whiche none knoweth but himselfe, euen none doeth knowe Christ Iesus, the verie true incarnate

Worde of God, but they who are his mysticall bodie, euen they who are in him, and he in them.
13 His apparell was besprinkled with the blood that hee did shead for our redemption, h as also with the bloud of his enemies, whome hee hath troden downe: and he is named that Word of God, that was before all beginning, and nowe hath receiued flesh.
14 And all the whole Armie and elect Congregation of his true Church, followed his will and preceptes, truelie journeying and traueyling through this worlde in their mortified and regenerate fleshe, clothed with the garmentes of his puritie and righteousnesse.
15 And out of his mouth proceeded true doctrine, piercing and subdewing on euerie side, the heartes of all Nations, and vnder the Scepter of his seruitude doeth hee gouerne and subdew them: for hee also it is, who doeth i presse and treade downe these wicked and reprobate people, that drinke vp iniquitie, and provoke the vengeance of almightie God.
16 And hee beareth in his badge, the stile and title of KING OF KINGES, AND LORD OF LORDS.
17 Then I sawe a mightie k Angell who did awaite vppon the Ecclesiasticall estate, and affayres of the Gospell, proclayming openlie and patentlie, to all Warriours, Souldiours, and other rauenous people, that dwelled among them of the true Church of God, forewarning them, that they shoulde convene and gather themselues together, against that time, which almightie God had

appointed for that great spoyle, slaughter, and bloudshed, which they must eat vp and deuoure.
18 And that then they should shead the bloud, and eate vp the rents, and spoyle the riches of Papisticall kinges, and Cardinals, and of their riding knightes and Captains, subuerting them, horse and man: and finallie should deuoure vp and destroy all, both free and bond man, both great and small, that were of that sect.
19 And I foresaw that the great Romane Monarch, and his confederate kinges and their great Armies had euer conuened together, to fight and rebell against that true words of God, that his professours did beare, and against all the true Ministers thereof.
20 And therefore also were taken these Monarches, and their l Pseudopropheticall Popes, who had counterfeited miracles, and made lying woonders before them of the Empire, to deceiue all those who did professe obedience vnto that Empire, bearing the badges and markes thereof, and them that reuerenced the counterfeit Emperors therof: and these two, euen straight after this m mortall life, were caste downe to hell, there to bee tormented for euer, with the burning fire and sulphurious flammes thereof.
21 And the reste of their Armie and partakers were altogether ouercome, vanquished and suppressed by that true and syncere doctrine, whiche did proceede from out of the mouth of Christe Iesus, that incarnate and holie Worde, whiche all true professours doe moste constantlie

beare testimonie of and professe, and all greedie and rauenous people, reuers spoylers, and auaritious men, were satisfied aboundantlie with the rich spoyles, Church rentes, and benefices of these Antichristian people,


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a That Hallelu-iah is interpreted, Praise the Lord, read Ierome de interpretatione nominum. This worde, as also Amen and Selah, and diuers other Hebrue woordes, as being Vocabula artis, euen notable Theologicall tearmes, that in fewe sillables doe containe greate matter, are therefore in all translations left vninterpreted, for that S. Iohn himself writing in Greek, doth neuertheles retain them in Hebrew, yet in the Paraphrase wee thinke meete to leaue nothing vnexponed.
b Waters to meane people, and Thunders to meane Preachers, read in the note b Apoc. 14.
c Of this Spouse and spousage, read the note a Apoc. 12. and our 22. proposition.
d The parable of this marriage banquet of Christ Iesus, is at length expressed in Matth. 22. Hereof the Supper of the Lorde is the perfite type and symbole.
e Here is the certainty of these prophecies threefoldlie confirmed: first, in that they are revealed by an Angell. Secondlie, in that hee testifieth that they are of God. And thirdlie, for that in expresse tearmes he affirmeth them to be true and certaine.
f O miserable Papists, why goe ye barefooted, and barelegged on pilgrimage, and doe fall kneeling and groueling before your Idolles, adoring either them, or yet at the best, those Saints whom they represent, seeing a more glorified Saint than anie of your Saints (whom for the most parte, your selues make and canonize) euen an holie Angell, who neuer was a sinfull man, neuer fell nor made defection at anie time from God, as men Saints a thousande thousand times haue done, but euer abode perfect and holie, here doeth abhorre and detest all kneeling and worshipping before him, greatlie rebuking Saint Iohn, for meaning and preasing thervnto,

and in expresse tearmes, forbidding the same, and yeelding the godlie reason, that none should bee worshipped but God onlie. Away, away with your captious distinctions of (...)
and (...), and all such visards as excuse idolatrie, for here the pure, naked and simple worde of God, spoken by the mouth, and vttered by the example of this holie Angell of God, and of Gods holie Prophet Saint Iohn, doeth detect all your hypocriticall sophismes. The Lord open your eyes, for in this text among manie moe, doeth the light clearelie shine. The same example for the more aggreging hereof, is repeated ouer againe in the Reuel. 22.8.9.
g That this that rideth on the white horse, is the true and incarnate worde of God euen Christ Iesus, appeareth plainelie by the 13. and 16. verses following, and by the whole harmonicall tokens of this text, and of Apoc. 6.2. conferred also with the note d of Apoc. 12.
h Seeing Christ the incarnate word of God, treadeth the winepresse of Gods wrath, in the 15. verse, therefore doeth this blood wherewith his garments are besprinkled, beare the type of the blood of his enemies, which he hath shead in the winepresse of Gods justice, as appeareth by Esay 63.3. beside also the figure of that blood, which he shed out of his body for our redemption.
i To treade the winepresse of Gods wrath, doeth here not onely meane, to execute God his latter judgement of aeternall damnation against the wicked, as it doeth particularlie meane in the end of the 14. chapter: but it doth meane generallie the execution of all Gods judgements against offenders. And in that generall sense, how Christ our righteous judge and reuenger doeth tread this presse, read Esay. 63. and Lament. 1.15.
k This Angell certainelie beareth the type of all Gods Ministers in this age, who standing in the Sun, that is, standing and awayting on the Gospell and Ecclesiasticall affaires, openlie and patentlie proclaimed the destruction of Babylon, wherby those Rauens and rauenous foules, that flie by the middest of heauen, that is the rauenous and greedy people that dwell among them of the true Churche, shall be couragiouslie enanimated to put hande to worke, and spoyle that wicked Citie, and eate vp all their riches. So that their greedie auarice in this case, shall aduance the

worke of the Lorde in a part, although the applying therof to the vse of the true Church, were more the dutie of these temporall auarious persons.
l Here is to be seen, what it is to worldlie Princes to maintaine and assist false teachers, for here is not onelie the Pope, that false illuder of those of the Empire, throwne downe headlong to hell, but also those Monarches and Emperours that assisted him, and such other false teachers in this world, in the world to come shall participate with them in aeternall torment. And that this false prophete here mentioned, is one with the two horned Antichristian beast, and consequentlie is the Pope, is prooued in our 25. and 26. propositions.
m This lake burning with fire and brimstone, where these imperiall beastes, and Pseudoprophetical Popes ar placed, are torments induring for euermore (as saith Saint Iohn, Apoc. 20.10.) and are the second death, euen the death of the soule (Apoc. 20.14. and Apoc. 21.8.) and therefore is it neither a temporall punishment, neither the fire of Purgatorie, but the aeternal flaming fire of Gehenna, ont of the which there is no redemptio^. And here note against Purgatorie, that the Pope himselfe and his imperial princes, deuisers and maintainers thereof, haue, by this text, no leisure giuen them to resort thither, but straightway, while they are skarse dead, to hel must they goe the neerest way, and therefore saith the text here, And these two were aliue cast into that lake, etc. as if he woulde say, skarse is their soule and life gone foorth of their bodies, but it is as soone in hell, without anie intermission or mediate place. So that they and their sect hereafter in experience shall finde no other Purgatorie to them, but the aeternall flamming fire of hell, nor to the elect, but the bloud of Christ, although now they debate Purgatorie by fire and sword.



CHAP. 20.

THE ARGVMENT.
There being onelie two speciall kingdomes enemies to God, the one Papisticke, a coulloured enemie, the other Mahometicke, a professed enemie, and having in the thirde, fourth, fift, and sixt

trumpets or vials, exponed and prophecied orderly, the estate and and increase of the Mahometike kingdome. And in manie of these chapters latelie past, hauing described the Romane and Papisticall kingdome, now in this chapter S. Iohn sheweth, that after a thousand yeares of peace, granted to the Romane and Papisticall Empire, in the ende the Deuill is loosed to stirre vp moste cruell warres betwixt these two mightie kingdomes, Papisticall and Mahometicke, in the reuenge of the blood of holie martyrs shead in the meane time: and how afterward, men beginne to reuiue and arise from the blind errours and deadlie sleepe of Antichristianisme. And last, how by Gods trueth, these godlesse kingdomes, shall be extinguished, and Christ shal come to iudge all men according to their demerits.


Historical application. 1 NOwe it pleased the the mercie and provide^ce of God, by his holy Spirite, and heauenlie Angels, to restrain the tyrannical power and vniversall rage of Sathan.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 1 ANd I sawe an Angel desce^ding from heauen, who had power of God, to open and close the mysteries of hell, and to restrain by his hand, the power of the Deuil, in the chaines of Gods feare.
The Text. 1 ANd I saw an Angel come downe from heauen, hauing the key of the bottemlesse pit, and a great chain in his hand.
Historical application. 2 So that after the continual and successiue tyran ny of heathen Roman Emperours, and last of Diocletian, who in one moneth slew 17000. martyrs, arose at length the first publike Christian Emperour, Constantine the great, about the yeare of Christ, 300. from which time to the dayes of Pope Boniface rhe 8. and of Ottoman the great, and firste
Emperour of Mahometans, An. 1300. euen the space of a thousand yeares, the Deuil and his raging tyrantes of this world, were restrayned from that high degree of vniuersall tyrannie, that they both before and after vsed.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 2 And hee foreshewed mee, howe God had appointed to take that oldea dragon and venemous serpent, euen the deuill, that odious Sathan, and shuld restrain him in bondage
b a thousande yeares.
The Text. 2 And hee tooke the dragon, that olde serpent, which is he deuill and Satan, and hee
bounde him a thousande yeares.

Historical application. 3 For God so dantoned them, and abased the power of Sathan, that he might wel stir vp particular and provinciall warres, but vniuersall warres among the people and whole nations of the world, that is to say, betweene Monarch and Monarch there was none raised during all these 1000. yeares, and after these thousand yeares, ending in An. 1300. it pleased God to permit Sathan, by his instruments, so raise vp most terrible and vniuersall warres for a season.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 3 And shoulde depose him from his c highest tyra^nicall power, to his lowest estate; and in such wise shuld he be restrained and inclosed, and the closure so co^firmed of God, that he should d no further stir vp deceitfully the Heathen nations to vniuersal e warfare, til these thousand yeares were expired, and the^ shuld the deuil be losed to stirre vp great wars among the^ for a season.
The Text. 3 And cast him into the bottomles pit, and he shutte him vp, and sealed the doore vpon him, that he should deceiue the people no more, till the thousand years wer fulfilled, for after that hee must be loosed for a litle season.
Historical application. 4 Now in the beginning of these 1000. yeares, a newe kinde of supreame gouernment, and judiciall authoristart vp, to wit, the Papisticall gouernment, by Pope Sylvester the first, in An. 315. to whom, and whose successors, Constantine gaue both kingdome and judicial power ouerall Christian Churches, this at length came to that tyrannie, that they martyred
al those that trulie professed Christ, and preached the word of God, and all that reuerenced not that Romane seate, nor these counterfeit Emperours, or images of the Empire, whom they inaugurated, neither were marked with Chrisme, or crosses on their foreheades or handes, for euen then was there a latent and invisible Church, that liued priuily as true Christians, triumphing and raigning ouer these Papisticall abuses, during all these thousand yeares.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 4 At this time he let me see, that there should be f new seats, and supreame authorities erected, and these that were erected in authoritie, shuld haue judiciall power giuen them, so I perceiued many, who^ they had judged, martyred, and co^demned
to death, for bearing the testimony of Iesus Christ, and for professing the true word of God, and which did not reverence the Antichristian Empire, nor the cou^terfet Emperors therof, neither had professed his superstitious markes, or born the same on their forheads, or in their hands, and these liued and raigned as true Christians, g during all these 1000. years.
The Text. 4 And I saw seates: and they sat vpon them, and judgment was giuen vnto them, and I savv the souls of them that wer beheaded for the witnes of Iesus, and for the word of God, and which did not worshippe the beaste, neither his image, neither had taken his mark vpon their foreheds or on their hands, and they liued and raigned with christ a thousande yeares.

Historical application. 5 But the rest, I mean the whol outward visible church lay whollie as dead, and corrupted with Papisticall errours, and began not to bee raised vp nor quickened by the word of life, till after the yeare of God, a thousande three hundred when that al these thousande yeares were outrun, and then began mo and moe to rise dayly from their former Antichristian errours: this rising from Antichristian errours, is the i first resurrection, that goes before the resurrectio^ of the dead.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 5 But the rest of the people, that lay h dead in Antichristian errours, arose not therfro^, to imbrace the worde of life till these thousande yeares were runne out: this rising from Antichristian errours, is the i first resurrection, that goes before the resurrectio^ of the dead.
The Text. 5 But the rest of the ded men shall not liue againe, vntill the thousand yeares be finished: this is the first resurrection.
Historical application. 6 Happie is he and blessed that riseth trulie from these errors, and so is participant of that first resurrection, for vpon them the second death, which is the death of the soule, shall haue no power, but they shall become Priests and Sacrificers of their pure and holie prayers vnto God and his Sonne Christ Iesus and shal raigne with him spiritually, the k thousand yeares of the great Sabboth, which is to say, for euer and euer.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 6 Happie is he and blessed that riseth trulie from these errors, and so is participant of that first resurrection, for vpon them the second death, which is the death of the soule, shall haue no power, but they shall become Priests and Sacrificers of their pure and holie prayers vnto God and his Sonne Christ Iesus and shal raigne with him spiritually, the k thousand yeares of the great Sabboth, which is to say, for euer and euer.
The Text. 6 Blessed and holy is he, that hath part in the first resurrection: for on such the seco^d death hath no power: but they shall bee the Priestes of God and of christ, and shal raigne with him a thousand yeare.

Historical application. 7 But these former 1000. yeares being expired in An. 1300. euen that very yeare Pope Boniface the 8. beginning the first Iubelie, was clothed the one day in his Popelike pontificall, and the next day in an Emperours Robe royall, and bearing before him two swords, saying, Ecce duo gladii hic, therby hee vindicated to himselfe both the spirituall and temporall impire ouer all the quarters of the earth: on the contrary parte, was Ottoman the great, who aspiring to be Monarch, was crowned that same year Emperour ouer al the four nations Mahometa^s.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 7 And whe^ the l former 1000. years shal be m outrun, the deuil shall bee loosed of his foresaide bondage,
The Text. 7 And when the thousande yeares are expired, Sathan shall be loosed out of his prison.
Historical application. 8 And so from this forth the deuill stirred vp betwixt these two pretended Monarches and their successors, moste terrible warres, by suche vniuersall multitudes and inumerable Armies, as hath not bene heard of before.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 8 And shal passe out to deceiue the people that dwell in al the arthes, or foure quarters of the countries of n Gog and of Magog, euen stirring vp the one against the other to battel, and shall gather them in number, as the o sea sand.
The Text. 8 And shall go out to deceiue the peo- which are in the four quarters of the erth euen Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battel, whose num ber is as the sand of the sea
Historical application. 9 And their chiefe skirmishes and battelles, were fought besides the landes of Christians, in Europe and in Asia minor, and thereabout,
wher God had first pla^ted his holie Citizens, euen these seuen Churches that Saint Iohn writeth vnto: But (God willing) at le^gth shall these Papisticall and Mahometane kingdomes, both enemies to God, be destroyed by the power and force of Gods word.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 9 And they shal gather together in the plain of the earth, toward and about those cuntries, p cities and dwellings, where Christians, and Christs holie citizens had made their residence: but at length by the fiery tongues of the Apostolike doctrin and fla^ming
fire of Gods word from heauen, shall both Gog and Magog be ouercome.
The Text. 9 And they went vp into the plaine of the earth, which compassed the tentes of the Saintes about, and the beloued cittie: but fire came downe from God out of heauen, and deuoured the^.
Historical application. 10 And Sathan, that gret deceiuer of the world shall be cast into hell fire eternallie, wher also all the godles Romane and Mahometicke Emperours, and other wicked Princes, together with al false Prophets Papisticals, Mahometickes, and others, shall terriblie bee tormented day and night for euermore,
Paraphrasticall exposition. 10 And the deuill that shal deceue the^ and stir the^ vp to warfare shal be cast into the eternal flame of Gehenna, where also the gret Emperors of the earth, and the false Antichristian Prophets shalbe torme^ted day and night for euer more.
The Text. 10 And the deuil that deceiued them, was cast into a lake of fire and brimston, wher the beast and the false Prophet shall bee tormented euen day and night for euermore.
Historical application. 11 When Christe in his maiesty shal come to judgment, for then certainlie shal heauen and earth bee renewed.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 11 For I saw that at this time shuld the true and sincer justice seat of God appear and Christe our just judge sitting thero^, at whose presence this heauen and earth shall then vtterly q melt away, and all thinges be renewed
The Text. 11 And I sawe a greate white throne, and one that sat on it, from whose face fled away both the earth and heauen, and their place was no more found.
Historical application. 12 And we are sure that then the second and last resurrection should be, wherein generally all men small and great, that euer died, shall rise againe, and appeare befor that justice seate of God, and the r register books of all mens consciences be opened vp, and laid abroad, and the great r register of God his predestination, and booke of life shall bee opened and made patent, and the dead shall be judged according to theit s workes, written and registred in their consciences.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 12 And we are sure that then the second and last resurrection should be, wherein generally all men small and great, that euer died, shall rise againe, and appeare befor that justice seate of God, and the r register books of all mens consciences be opened vp, and laid abroad, and the great r register of God his predestination, and booke of life shall bee opened and made patent, and the dead shall be judged according to theit s workes, written and registred in their consciences.
The Text. 12 And I saw the deade, both greate and smal, stand before God, and the books wer opened, and an other book was opened, which is the booke of life, and the deid wer judged of those thinges whiche were written in the bookes, according to their works.
Historical application. 13 And the waltering world, by his raging seas
and stormie tempests inveighing against our fleshe, shall render againe all that haue died by it, and the deuill by his deadly and desperate greifes, and infernall temptations of the minde, shall render againe all that hath dyed by him, and euery man shal be iudged accorto his workes.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 13 And the waltering world, by his raging seas
and stormie tempests inveighing against our fleshe, shall render againe all that haue died by it, and the deuill by his deadly and desperate greifes, and infernall temptations of the minde, shall render againe all that hath dyed by him, and euery man shal be iudged accorto his workes.
The Text. 13 And the
sea gaue vp her dead, which were in her, and death and hel deliuered vp the dead, which were in them: and they were iudged, euery man according vnto their workes.

Historical application. 14 And the t infernal spirits and damned Deuils, who are as death and hell it selfe, shal be cast in the burning flame and vnquenchable fire thereoff: this is the second and euerlasting death.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 14 And the t infernal spirits and damned Deuils, who are as death and hell it selfe, shal be cast in the burning flame and vnquenchable fire thereoff: this is the second and euerlasting death.
The Text. 14 And death and hel wer cast into the lake of fire: this is the second death.
Historical application. 15 And whosoeuer is not contained in the register of Gods mercifull predestination, and booke of life, shall also be cast in with them in that eternall and vnquencheable fire.
Paraphrasticall exposition. 15 And whosoeuer is not contained in the register of Gods mercifull predestination, and booke of life, shall also be cast in with them in that eternall and vnquencheable fire.
The Text. 15 And whosoeuer was not found writte^ in the booke of life, was cast into the lake of fire.


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a The former parte of the history of this Dragon Sathan, is to be found in the twelfth chapter hereof: to the which, this chapter is to be subjoined.
b To wit, a thousand yeares of the 1260. years, that the church abode latent and invisible, as at more length is opened in our 34. Proposition.
c This deepe wherein Sathan is nowe closed, is not as yet the deepe pit, and endles paine of Gehenna, for as yet, he is but retained in the chaines of darknes, till the latter day, when he shall be damned aeternally to the deepe of hell (2. Pet. 2.) But this hell or deepe, called in Greeke (...), and in Latine abyssus is sometime taken for the depth of the earth, or of waters locallie: as Psal. 105. ^^ Sometime for lowe estate and base degree, as both here, and ^^oc. 17.8. where the imperial beast riseth out of this hel or deep, ^^d goeth thereafter to decay, but out of hell there is none that riseth, specially, no Emperour or mankinde: wherefore in this text (abyssus meaning but a lowe degree and base estate) the Deuill is but thirled and restrained from his vttermost tyrannie, and not at this time bound in Gehenna: for as all the scriptures testifie, he

hath euer had and shall haue to the worlds end that freedome and libertie to go te^pting mankind, seeking as a rageing Lyon whome he may deuoure: read further hereupon in our 35. proposition.
d It is said in the Apoc. 12. (wher the former part of this historie is set out) that the Church of God shal be persecuted and chased into the desert by this Dragon, and made invisible 1260. yeares: and therefore now alluding to that, hee saith here, that Sathan is bound, that he shall not sedu e anie farther: to wit, anie farther than is said already in that 12. chapter: and so in this chapter hee is not restrained simplie from persecution, and from all manner of seduction, such, as particular warres, and martyrdomes, and sowing of heresies, but from stirring vp of vniuersall warres, as is prooued in the said 35. proposition.
e Sence Christs daies to this day, the Churche of God wanted neuer either schismes or persecution: therefore, this bondage of Sathan for a 1000. yeares, is only (as is said) from stirring vp of vniuersall warres, as is prooued in the said 35. proposition.
f Because the iudgement seat, and judiciall throne of Christ followeth shortly, verse 11. and that with him his elect shal sit (Apoc. 2.26.27. and note x thereof, and Apoc. 3. verse 21. and note f thereof.) Therefore this throne and authoritie that here is erected, appears not to be of the elect soules, but rather vpon the co^trary part to be the throne of the Antichristian beast, who here doth martyr these Saints of God, that raigned against antichristianisme these thousand years professing Christ in this world, and shal therfore eternally reign with Christ in his throne herafter ver. 11.
g Although during these 1000. years and more, the true Church lurked in the wildernesse (as Apoc. 12.6.14. is saide) yet was not that Church so invisible, but the Dragon in the Antichrists perso^ in all ages, espied some of the children of the true latent Church, and martyred them: as both here, and Apoc. 12.17. is mentioned. So this confirmes our former assertion, where wee say, the Deuill here is not simply bound, but in a maner, as we prooue in our sa^^ 35. proposition. Moreouer hereof is gathered, that seeing (by this text) they that worshipped not the Antichristian beast, his image, or marke was persecuted a 1000. yeares, therefore necessarilie the Antichrist raigned a 1000. years at the least: and consequently, these who supposeth him to raign but three years and an half, ar deceiued,

as is prooued in our 16. Proposition.
h The former martyrs and professors being the inward and invisible Church (Apoc. 11.1.) These whole remanent here spoken off, are the vtter court and visible pretended Church called in that chapter Gentiles, that is Idolatrous Ethnickes, and Iohn there ve. 2. is forbidden to account or regard them: for here saith he, they ly all deade and drunken in Antichristian errors, for the space of a 1000. yeares: and so indeed from the daies of Pope Syluester the first, to the daies of Pope Boniface the eight: that 1000. yeares the seat of Rome hauing no match nor encounter, suffred neuer any to be seen vouchable or visible of the true Church: but there about, and from thence foorth such hote warres fell betwixt the empyre of Rome and the Mahumeticke empyre, that vnawares, diuers true professors openly and vowably did arise and start vp, such as Iohn de rupe scissa ann. 1240. Gulielmus de Sancto amore anno 1260. Arnoldus de villa noua and Petrus Cassiodorus Italian anno 1302. Dantes Aligherius and Gulielmus Occham anno 1321. Franciscus Petrarcha 1374. Ioannes Wicklevus anno, 1390. Ioannes Husse and Hieronymus de Praga Bohemians and martyrs anno 1415. And then did arise by their doctrin a visible reformed Church in Bohemia, and thereafter be Luther in Germanie, and so euer moe and moe visible Churches and publike teachers ar risen from Papisticall and Antichristian errors, euen to this day: and all these were sometime dead in these former Antichristian errors, but (praised be God) are now reuiued by the spirit of God in this first resurrection.
i That there be two resurrections, and two deaths, and what they be is plaine in the scriptures. The first resurrection, is the rising from errors, of which saith Salomon. Prou. 24.16. Seuen times in a day falleth the iust man, and yet riseth againe: and this first resurrection is cheifly meant, from antichristian errors, as here, and in Daniel 12.2. wherein saith he, many shall rise, etc. whereas the second resurrection is the general resurrection of the dead where^^ ^ot onely many, but euen all, shall arise againe: as to the two deathes they are also plaine. The first, is the death of our fleshlie bodies here, which the scriptures call oft a sleep: the second death, is the endles dying of body and soule in hell fire eternallie, reade hereof, Apoc. 2. ver. 11. and note k thereof.
k After our exemption (here spoken of) from the second death,

and after our aeternall kingdome and priesthood with Christ, this reigne of 1000. yeares in this place, cannot be temporall or definite: for by the grounds of Christian religion, that reigne is aeternall, how then here a thousande yeares is taken for aeternitie, yee may consider by the comparison of the six daies of labour, and the Sabboths rest with the six thousand yeares, that we must labor in this world, and thereafter haue eternall rest, whereof we haue spoken in our 14. proposition, and yee shall finde, that although euery day of weeklie worke daies meaneth (according to 2. Pet. 3.8.) 1000. yeares definitely: yet the Sabboths 1000. yeares represents aeternitie. And such like doubtles though the other 1000. yeares of this chapter ar definitly to be taken for a 1000. common years: yet these 1000. yeares of our reigning with Christ, after wee are freed from the second death, must infinitely be taken for aeternity and for the eternall Sabboth. Where note, that by this text literally and definitely taken, resulted the great errour of Cerinthus, and his secte of Chiliasts or Millenaries, who thought our raign with Christ to be on earth, and temporal for a 1000. yeares, and wee then againe to die, and ly dead another 1000. yeares, and so about by vicissitudes, as did of old the Platonicks, and of new in a maner the Origenists. Further, some also by the mistaking of this text, suspected the authoritie of this whole Reuelation: but to the true Christian conceiuer hereof, both is the authoritie of this booke confirmed, and the heresie of the Millenaries refelled.
l Though in the former verses by the last note 1000. yeares, is there prooued to meane aeternitie: yet these thousand yeares here spoken of, are the same 1000. yeares literally and definitely spoken of in the verses, 2.3.4. and 5. for al these 1000. yeares are spoken of thinges temporall, while we are yet in this worlde, and agreeth historically with these same 1000. yeares that begins about the yeare of Christ 300. and ends in the yeare of Christ 1300. as is prooued in our 34. proposition, but yeares, times, and numbers specified of the world to come (as verse 6.) must meane aeternitie, seeing after the latter day, there shall be no day, yea no year, time nor numerall distinction thereof, but aeternitie without measure, Apoc. 10.6. And therfore be sure this present text here, is the progresse and large deduction of that loosing of Sathan, which was but summarly touched, and forewarned in the end of the third verse,

and so this loosing is all one with that loosing.
m This text doth confirme our former assertion, whereby wee affirme Sathans bondage these thousand yeares, to be only from raising of vniuersall tyrannie and warres: for proofe now whereof when here he is loosed, he raised now vniuersal warres, by enanimating of Gods publike enemie Magog, with his Princes of the Orient, against Gods latent enemy, and Antichrist Gog, with his whol Princes of the Occident: and so came it to passe that very last yeare of these thousand, euen the year of God, 1300. that Pope Boniface the 8. chalenged to himselfe in his triumphant Iubelie, the double Monarchie, both spirituall and temporall, ouer the whole worlde. And contrarilie, that same yeare, Ottoman the great, was crowned the first Emperour of the Mahometans: and so from thence forth betwixt these, and their successours, there followed out continuall and vniuersall warres of the whole Orient, against the whol Occident, by armies of innumerable people.
n That Gog is the Roman and Papistick Empire, and Magog the Mahometicke Empire, read and consider the 32. Proposition.
o The Mahometick horsmen onlie of this armie, being (Apoc. 9.16) reckoned to two hu^dred thousand thousand horsmen, no maruell though here both the Armies, Mahometicke and Papistick, yea, both horsemen and footmen thereof, be more comparable to the sea sand, than to any definite number: further concerning this matter, read Apoc. 9.16. and note h thereof.
p Consider the progresse of Ottomans warres, and his successors Emperors of Mahometanes, and ye shall find the greatest part of all their battels, both intestine, and also against the Popes forces, to haue bene fought among Christians, and Gods holy Citizens. For Ottoman fought, and did win Bithynia, and much of the coaste side at Pontus Euxinus in the country of Asia minor, where these seuen Churches lay, that Saint Iohn writeth to. Then Ottomans sonne Or^^^^s fought amongst the Graecians, and in diuers Christian partes (...) Europe, and conquered Prusia. Then Amurathes their thirde Emperor, made great conquest in Europe about Constantinople, and fought many battels thereabout: and so foorth, with their successours, who neuer rested, making all their battels among the Christians in Asia minor, Bulgaria, Walachia, Seruia, Bosna, Croatia, Illyria, Hungaria, Epirus, Peloponnesus, and at length, in Spaine and Italie,

with marueilous successe, in so much that Mahomet, their ninth Emperour subuerted the two Christian Empires of Constantinople and Trapezo^da, and wan twelue Christian kingdomes, with two hundred Christian Cities, beside diuers Ilandes, as yee shall finde lib. 3. Romanorum Principum Ioan. Baptistae Egnatii, and in other histories.
q Of this dissolution of the heauen, the earth, and all the elements, read 2. Pet. 3.10. and next chapter hereof: So that by the Scriptures, apparantly heauen and earth shall be one habitacle of Gods Saints and holie seruantes.
r The booke of life and predestinate saluation, is effectuallie registred with God in his mercie, whereof, although by faith the Spirite of God giueth our Spirit a feeling, yet the same is not effectuallie registred in our conscience, I meane our conscience beareth no testimonie that we haue anie merite of life in vs. But the other bookes of Gods just judgement, are indeed effectuallie registred in our conscience, which beareth the fearful record of all our iniquities, whereby the consciences of the wicked doe testifie their owne damnation. Wis. 17.10.11. while as contrarilie, the register book of Gods mercy exemeth the godly from their deserued damnation, and promoteth them free lie to life euerlasting.
s By workes here are we judged and justified, and not by faith onlie, as also Iames 2.24. testifieth, meaning hereby that of liuelie faith, and of the good workes that followeth therevpon man is justified, and not of that dead faith, that is by it selfe alone, with out any good workes: otherwise were the wordes of Paule (Rom. 3.28) expresse contrarie to this text, and to Iames, for saith Paule, We are iustified by faith, without the works of the Law, that is to say, not without good workes whatsoeuer, but meaning, that we are justified by liuelie faith, with such small good workes, as our weake nature will suffer that faith to produce, although it be without the precise workes that the Law requireth: and for confirmation of this interpretation, and vnion of these textes, yee (...) find both Iames and Paule agree in diuers places; that faith without workes is a dead faith, and serueth nothing to justification. And againe, they agree both, that all workes (howe good so euer they seeme) that proceed not from faith, are euill. And so it is all one to say with Saint Paule, We are justified by fruitfull faith, or

faith that produceth good workes, although not the workes that the Law requireth, or to say with Iames, and here with Saint Iohn, we are justified by faithfull workes, seeing a working faith and faithfull workes are inseparable, and none can haue the one without the other. So for conclusion, these workes, by the which here wee are judged, are to bee esteemed good or euill, not in themselues, or in so farre as they satisfie the Lawe (for so were all workes euill and imperfect) but in so farre foorth, as they haue or want faith adioyned with them, they are accounted good or evill onlie.
t To cast death or hel, or such vnliuelie thinges into this aeternall fire, cannot bee meaned here: But for as much as death and hell by Sathans procurement is brought vpon mankinde, and so Sathan is authour thereof: Therefore metonymice death and hell are taken for the Deuill and all damned Spirites. The like is mentioned in diuers places of the Scriptur, as in Esay. 28.15.18. where by their league and band made with death and hell, is doubtleslie meant, the giuing of themselues ouer vnto the Deuill and all inquitie, and in Esay. 38.18, where, in saying, that hell and death shall not praise God; is meaned, that the Deuil and damned Spirites shall not praise God: and so in Osee. 13.14. O death, I vvill be thy death, and O hell, I vvill be thy destruction, What els is this than the victorie of Christ ouer death and hell, by treading downe the head of Sathan, and casting him into the eternal torment of death and hell, who hath bene the intiser and onelie authour of death and hell. So then here (verse 13.) the Deuill and his instruments vnder the tearmes of death and hell, doeth exhibite to iudgment all those whome hee hath destroyed by his temptations, as the world is saide before (vnder the termes of sea) to haue exhibited all that haue died by it, including betwixt them all that euer died, for all men either die by corporall griefe of bodie, or spirituall griefe of minde. So then here (verse 14.) this death and hell, that (...) aeternallie cast into the lake of fire, can bee no other than the deuill and damned Spirites, who intised man to death and hell, and therefore are casten into that aeternall and vnquencheable fire of Gehenna, agreeing with verse 10. preceeding.






CHAP. XXI.

THE ARGVMENT.
The diuine Prophet Saint Iohn, hitherto fro^ the first to the last comming of Christ, prophecying the mutabilities of this world, wherein the Christian Church hath neuer had earthly rest: now in this Chapter and beginning of the next, concludes and ends all these their definite and temporall miseries, by assuring them of infinite and aeternall ioy and rest, in that new world and heauenly habitation, which here he describes, not as it is, for that no eie hath seene, nor eare hath heard, nor heart can consider the ioyes thereof. (1. Cor. 2.9.) but after a certaine metaphoricall comparison most proper for our senses and capacitie, is that heauenly habitation described. So that vnder the literall glorie thereof, obiected here to our capacitie and worldly senses, is not onlie meaned an infinite and endlesse glorie, exceeding all humane capacitie and iudgment, but also by the symmetries thereof, diuers mysteries of the Godhead, and grounds of religion are typically expressed.


The Text.
1 ANd I sawe a newe heauen, and a newe earth, for the first heauen, and the first earth were passed away, and ther was no more sea.
2 And I Iohn saw the holie citie newe Ierusalem come downe from God out of heau^^ prepared as a b trimmed for her husband.
3 And I heard a great voice out of heaue^, saying, Behold, the Tabernacle

of God, is with men, and he will dwell with them: and they shall be his people, and God himselfe shall bee their God with them.
4 And God shal wipe away all teares from their eies: and ther shal be no more death, neither sorrowe, neither crying, neither shall ther be any more pain, for the first thinges are passed.
5 And he that sat vp on the throne, said, Behold, I make all thinges new: and he saide vnto me, Write, for these thinges are faithfull and true.
6 And hee said vnto me, It is done. I am Alpha an Omega, the beginning and the end, I will giue to him that is a thirst, of the well of the water of life freely.
7 He that ouercommeth shall inherite all things, and I will be his God, and he shall bee my Sonne.
8 But the fearfull and vnbeleeuing, and the abhominable, and murtherers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and al lyars shal

haue their parte in the lake whiche burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the seconde death.
9 And there came vn to me one of the seuen Angels, which had the seuen vials; full of the seuen last plagues, and talked with me saying, Come: I wil shewe thee the bride, the Lambes wife.
10 And hee caried me away in the spirit, to a great and hie mountaine, and hee shewed me the great citie, holy Ierusalem, descending out of heauen, from God.
11 Hauing the glory of God, and her shining was like vnto a stone, moste precious, as a Iasper stone, cleare as Chrystall.
12 And had a great wall and hie, and had twelue gates, and at the gates twelue Angels, and the names written, which are the twelue tribes of the children of Israell.
13 On the East parte there vvere three gates, and on the North side three gates, on the South side three gates,

and on the West side three gates.
14 And the wall of the city had twelue foundations, and in them the names of the Lambes twelue Apostles.
15 And he that talked with me, had a golden reed to measure the citie withall, and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.
16 And the citie lay foure square, and the length is as large as the bredth of it, and he measured the citie with the reede, twelue thousand furlongs, and the length, and the bredth, and the height of it are equall.
17 And he measured the wal therof, an hundreth

fourtie and foure cubites, by the measure of man, that is, of the Angel.
18 And the building of the wall of it, was of Iasper, and the citie was pure gold, like vnto cleare glasse.
19 And the foundatiouns of the wall of the citie were garnished with all manner of precious stons: the first foundation vvas Iasper, the seconde of Saphir: the third of a Chalcedonie: the fourth of a Smaragde.
20 The fift of a Sardonyx:

the sixte of a Sardius: the seue^th of a Chrysolit: the eight of a Beryl: the ninth of a Topaze, the te^th of a Chrysoprasus, the eleuenth of a lacinct, the twelfth an Amethyst.
21 And the twelue gates vvere twelue pearles, and euerie gate is of one pearle, and the streete of the city is pure golde, as shining glasse.
22 And I saw no Temple therin: for the Lord God Almightie and the Lamb are the Temple of it.
23 And the (...) hath no ^^ede of the Sun, neither of the Moone to shine in it, for the glorye of God did light it, and the Lamb

is the light of it.
24 And the people which are saued, shall walke in the light of it, and the kinges of the earth shall bring their glorie and honor vnto it
25 And the gates of it shal not bee shut by day: for there shall bee no night there.
26 And the glory and honor of the Gentiles shal be brought vnto it
27 And ther shal enter into it, none vncleane thing, neither whatsoeuer worketh abhomination or lies: but they which ar written in the Lambes book of life.


Paraphrasticall exposition.
1 THen I foresawe that the heauens and the earth should be a renewed to their vttermost perfection: for this imperfect estate of the heauens and the earth that nowe is, shall dissolue and melt away, and there shall be no sea, or b raging inundations of worldly troubles.
2 And I Iohn foresaw and beheld that c spirituall Ierusalem (euen our eternall felicitie, and glorie in Gods Majestie) vouchsafed and d sent downe of God from the highest heauens, prepared to decore and attire true Christians with, for their e spouse Christ Iesus.
3 And I heard the mightie voice of God his aeternall decree from heauen saying, Beholde, from hencefoorth the Tabernacle

and dwelling of God shal be with men, and by f Christ shal he dwel in them, and they in him, and they shal be his people, and God himself dwelling with them, shall bee their God for euer.
4 And hee shall put an g ende now to all their miseries, and they shal be no more subject to death, nor to sorrowe, nor to mourning, nor to anie maner of paine, for al such carnall passions of this our former worlde shall be abolished.
5 And h God, who sitteth in full authoritie among them, hath promised saying, Beholde (saith he) I shall now renewe and make perfect all these imperfections, and he i commanded me to write, and assure all men, that these wordes were faithfull and true.
6 And he said vnto me, now ar al k things done and perfected: I am the first and the last euen the first before all beginning, and the last after all ending: to him that hath thirsted and zealled after trueth and justice, wil I now freelie of my mercie, giue to drinke and receiue of my liuely fountaine, euerlasting life.
7 He that hath ouercom his earthlie temtations, shall in this heauenlie world possesse and inherit all joyfull things; and I will be his God and Father, and he shal be l adopted one of my sonnes.
8 But contrarilie, the fearfull doubter, and the vnbeleeuer, and the execrable and abhominable liuers, cruel murtherers, filthy whormongers, execrable Sorcerers, abhominable Idolaters, and all teachers and authorisers of lies, shall haue their part and portion in that endles deepe of hell, which burneth eternall lie with vnquencheable fire, and bitter torment,

which is the euerlasting m death of the soule.
9 And there came vnto me the n last of the seuen Angels, which had power to execute the seuen last plagues, and he talked with me saying, Come, and I will let thee see the spirituall estate of the glorified Churche, who is the true Spouse and Bride of the immaculate Lambe Christ Iesus.
10 And he rauished me away in the Spirit, to a great and high contemplation, wherein he let me to vnderstand that aeternall felicitie in GOD, and o holie habitation, whiche from the highest heauens, God had appointed to bestow and send downe vnto his elect and holie Church.
11 And that happie habitacle was decored with the glorie of God, and the shining beautie thereof exceeded all precious stones, euer flourishing in all felicitie, and waxing greene as Iasper, but pure and cleare from all spots of vncleannesse, as shining Chrystall.
12 And it was stronglie environed about, with the true and inuincible p Apostolicall doctrine, and forenent eache of the twelue tribes, euen forenent euerie elect people and nation, there was set an open and patent gate and readie accesse, whereat Gods Angels, q Apostles, and Ministers, called and conducted seuerallie by name, euerie r tribe, kindred, and nation of Christ his spiritual Israelites to enter.
13 Toward the holie elect people of the Orient, was the s knowledge of the Trinitie set patent, as a threefold entrie to this felicitie. To the elect people of the North was the same knoweledge of Gods Trinitie a threefold entrie to felicitie. The elect people of the South also entred in by the same Trinitie. And

finallie, the elect people of the West, and all the airthes of the world had no other entrie to felicitie, but by the knowledge and profession of this Trinitie.
14 And that strong bulwarke and t wall of Gods trueth and true doctrine, wherwith that holie habitation was defended and environed, was euen that selfe same doctrine, whereof the strong foundations were laide before in this worlde, twelue fold by Christ Iesus his twelue Apostles, euery one by name in their seueral calling.
15 And the Angell who reuealed these thinges to me, represented by the u symbole of a golden metwand, that he was to mete and expone by measurs, the figuratiue symmetrie of that holie habitation, of the entries thereof, and of the walles enuironing the same.
16 And this our heauenlie habitation and eternall felicitie in God, was x squared and fourefoldlie described by the foure Evangelistes: and the indwellers are to injoy a like felicitie in the Father, as in the Sonne, and the Angel by the symbole of metting represented vnto mee the infinite roome and sufficient dwelling places that were therein, y euen that there were twelue thousand times twelue thousand stades, counted or multiplied 12000. times, answering to the infinite number of Gentils, and to the twelue thousand of euerie tribe of Israell, mentioned Apoc. 7. al these shal participate z so much felicitie in the Father, as they do in the Son, and alike in Son, as they doe in the holy Spirit.
17 And the Angel by the figure of metting represented to me, that that stro^g bulwark and wal of the Apostolik doctrin, raised vp twelue courses high, by these twelue Apostles, is now

as it wer raised vp aa twelue times so high, euen 144 courses vp, speaking these thinges after the maner and comparison of men, which are meaned in a spiritual and Angelicall meaning.
18 And the building of this fortresse, and wall of the Apostolike doctrine, was firme, pure and bright, euer flourishing, and waxing greene as the Iasper, and the happie habitation of Saintes within the same, was more glorious than golde, and more glistering and pure than the cleare glasse.
19 And the foundations of that strong walle of this holie habitacle, was decored with the Prophetes, Martyres, Professours, Preachers, interpreters, and other precious people of the Primitiue Churche, which as bb precious stones, God hath gathred out of al countries, by his twelue Apostles, to found this eternal Sanctuarie with: for of these twelue Apostles some one from the Indies gathered in all those greene Iaspers, who abode euer greene and vnwithered from the true faith, to found with these the first foundation of this heauenlie habitacle: Another Apostle to make the second course of this foundation, brought in those coelestiall Sapphyres, who, indued with heauenlie hewes and qualities, respected no earthlie shewes: The third Apostle for the third course of this foundation, gathered in from among the Aegyptians, the victorious and fiery Chalcedonies, euen the zealous Professours, and victorious Teachers of trueth: Some fourth Apostle, to builde the fourth foundation, euen from the Scythians and Bactrians, brought in the greene and glauncing Smaragdes, euen the flourishing, vnwithered, and syncere Christians of those Countries.
20 For the fift course of this foundation, some Apostles gathered in from among the Arabians, their meeke lowlie and chaste people, comparable to the simple and chaste nature of the Sardonyx: The sixte Apostle gathered in these mollified people, in whose

soft harts are ingrauen the seales of saluation, euen the continual memorie of Christs passion, represented by the blodie and fleshly colour of the Sardius. The seue^th Apostle, for the seuenth ground and foundatio^, the wise and constant Chrysolites: The eight Apostle for his course and foundatio^, gathered in al diligent Christians and peace makers, comparable to the precious Beryll. The ninth Apostle to founde his course with, gathered in the patient people, and restrayners of their affections, represented by the nature of the Topaze. The tenth Apostle, brought in to the tenth course of this foundation, the golden greene Chrysoprasus, euen those Christians, that renouncing avarice, glorie in that golden treasure of heauen, that neuer withereth nor decayeth. The eleuenth Apostle to found his eleuenth course with, gathered in the golden purple and princelie Hyacinths, euen those magnifice^t and princelie Professors, who being richly decored with spiritual benefites, ouercame all temptations: Finallie, for the twelfth course, and to compleat the foundation of this holie work, the twelfth Apostle brought in, euen from Armenia, the pure and temperate Amethystes, to wit, those Christians, who detesting gluttonie and drunkennesse, are indued with sobrietie and temperance.
21 And these twelue Apostles, teachers of the way of life, stoode as precious pearls, decoring these entries, euen euerie Apostle was in euerie entrie of that heauenlie habitacle, as a precious pearle, and the cc patent passages or stretes of that glorious habitacle, are more glorious than the pure golde, and more bright than the shining of glasse.
22 And ther was no distinct Temple in that heauenlie habitacle, for vniuersally, and ouer it all, the dd Majestie of the Almightie God, and of Christ Iesus is their Temple.
23 So that therefore, this holie habitation needeth no light of ee spirituall Teachers, nor seculare

lawes, for the glorie of God shineth in it, and Christ Iesus is their lanterne of light.
24 And the elect people and nations shall enjoy the full fruition of that light, and all that were kinges of the earth, shall aboue all worldlie pompe ff glorifie that glorie.
25 In all this eternall day time, shall neuer the elect be barred out from this felicity, and there shall be no obscuritie of gg night, or darknes of errours there.
26 And the onlie glorie and felicitie of al the elect nations shall be established in it.
27 Into this glorious habitation shal no wicked or filthy creature haue entresse, neither any abhominable sinners, or deceitfull lyers, but onelie they which are predestinate to saluation and registred in the booke of life of our Sauiour Christ Iesus.


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a This renewing of the heauen and earth, is without all doubt literally meant: for seeing this is the time of eternall rest, all heauenly motions and earthly vicissitudes must haue an ende: yea, seeing the motions of the Spheares, Planets, and starres were made for distinction of times. Genes. 1.14. as also forth from this day shalbe no time Apo. 10.6. Therfore shal their estate without all question be renewed: yea, and the estate of euery creature, for saith Paule Romans. 8.21.22. The Creature also shall be deliuered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious libertie of the sons of God: for vvee knowe that every Creature groneth vvith vs also, and traueleth in paine togither vnto that present. Of this renovation reade. 2. Pet. 3.10. and Esay. 65.17. and Esay 66.22. and Apoc. 20.11. and note q thereof.
b Because this destruction of the world shal be with fire, (as testifieth 2. Pet. 3.10.) It may be that the Sea shal be vtterly dried vp, and so the Sea here to be literally taken: but alwaies in the figuratiue sense, we are sure that all tumultuous troubles, shall cease at

that day foreuer, and that the sea doth signifie tumults and tumultuous people, is said in our note a Apoc. 13.
c This Ierusalem called new Ierusalem, and the spouse of the Lamb, must therefore be the renewed Church, euen both the glorified Church, and the felicitie thereof: for that to both the glorified Church who are the inhabitants, and to that felicitie in which they dwell, doth the whole subsequent proprieties of this Ierusalem agreee: euen as the name of a citie is not onely taken for the towne, but also metonymice, for the inhabitants thereof.
d For that God is the supreame height, all that proceedeth fro^ him is said to descend, and so this descending of spirituall Ierusalem, is not meant locally, but figuratiuelie, that both the godlie their selues, and their eternall felicitie hath their originall, and flowing from the maiestie of God, and so descendeth from him.
e Seeing by the Apoc. 12.1. and note a thereof, and by our 22. proposition, the Church militant is Christes spouse, far rather is shee now his spouse, when she is become triumphant: yea, before was shee in a part diuorceable for her offences, but nowe for her co^firmed puritie and established chastitie, all whollie indiuorceable.
f For this end hath Christ taken on him our nature, and is become Emmanuel (Esay. 7.14.) that is to say, God with vs, that wee might now be with God, and so by this text God shal be with man, and man shall be with God in this holie habitation and aeternall felicitie.
g This end of all miseries yeeldeth comfortable occasion to all Gods seruants, to endure patientlie temporall and definite troubles, knowing hereby, that now shall follow the rewarde of infinit and eternall felicitie.
h Here saith the text, he who sate in the throne spake, to wit, that same Deitie and diuine essence. But for asmuch as both the person of the Father, and also of the Sonne, are meaned to sit in this throne, in the next chap. ver. 1.3. therfore it is to be reasoned whe^^^r this be the person of the Father or of the Son, that here speaketh to S. Iohn. Concerning this wee say, that although it was the person of Christ, who sitting in this throne, lately, in the end of the former chapter, judgeth the world, as both our beleef, and Apoc. 14.14. do testifie, yet here is there a translation made of persons, and it is the Father that now speaketh. For not onelie nowe hath

that judgment seat (attributed in the Scriptures to Christ) taken full effect, but also Christ hitherto hauing perfected his functions of incarnation, teaching, redemption, mediation, and of damning and throwing down the wicked, doeth nowe deliuer vp the kingdome vnto God the Father, that he may be all in all, as testifieth Paule, 1. Cor. 15.24.25.28. And againe on the other parte, nowe are here introduced the offices and functions of God the Father, and Creator, in new creating and renewing the world. So that here the functions of the Sonne ending, and the functions of the Father of new againe beginning, this must needs be the Father, that here sheweth, that he is to renew the world, seeing that is his function and office. And to confounde the persons, or yet their offices, is contrarie to the godlie Symbole of Athanasius, saying, neque confundentes Personas, neque Substantiam separantes, as who wold say, the holie Spirite had redeemed vs, or that Christ either first created, or now at last reneweth the world simplie, and altogether in his own person: Indeed Christ is meaned with the Father, and the Father by Christ (but not Christ simplie) to create the world. Heb. 1.2.9. conferred with Psal. 102.26. and Col. 1.16. and the first article of our beleefe: and so this must not bee the persone of Christ, but of the Father, that speaketh this: and for more proof that this is the Father, he calleth vs afterward, vers. 7. his sonnes, whereas Christ calleth vs not so, yea, not servantes, but friendes, Ioh. 15.15. for both Christ and we are called Sonnes to God the Father, hee naturall, and we adopted.
i It is said by Paul (2. Cor. 11.14.) that Sathan may take the similitude of an Angell of light, but that he may professe himselfe God, by taking his similitude, we read not, neither possiblie dare he, least so the most godlie Prophetes (meaning nothing but godlines) should be abused, and worship Sathan. Then followeth, that this being verily God, that here appeareth, and testifieth the words of this book to be true and faithfull, there can therefore bee no doubt of the authoritie thereof. But if any will say, that though Sathan dare not faine the similitude of God, yet durst Cerinthus or other heretikes, Chiliasts, faine Gods visions. In contrarie of that conceiued suspition, the heauenlie stile, the precise performance, the harmonie with other Scriptures, the infallible notes, names, numbers, and dates of times confirm the veritie of this Book, and

diuine certaintie thereof. The same veritie hereof, that here is approoued by God, was before intimate by the Angell Apoc. 19.9. note e and is hereafter repeated. Apoc. 22.6.
k This is the same thing that is meant, by the latter sounde of the seuenth trumpet. Apoc. 11.15. and outpowring of the seuenth Vial. Apoc. 16.17. and these are the performances of the Angells oath and vow made in Daniell. 12.7. and Reuel. 10.6. of which, our 14. proposition reckoneth the dates.
l That this is God the Father that saith this, is said at length, note h preceding.
m The first death, being the bodily death; the second deth, must be the eternall death of soule and body, as is said, Apoc. 20. note i and Apoc. 2. note k.
n This one of these seuen Angels, both here, and Reuel. 17.1. mentioned, appears to be the last of these seuen Angels, for such reasons as are contained there, Reuel. 17. note a thereof.
o What this Hierusalem and descending thereof meaneth, reade the former notes hereof c and d.
p The Apostolicall doctrine, being indeed a strong wal against all errors is therefore iustlie here meant by this wall, which hereafter verse 27. debarreth out all vncleane and abhominable creatures and lyers: Further, that bold and constant Preachers and their doctrine, is called a brasen wall: reade Ieremie 1.18. And for the more euident token, that this wall can meane no other thing, nor the Apostolike doctrine, the same hath twelue foundations, which are entituled by the names of the twelue Apostles: ver. 14. and 19. following: and so it being a solide wall to debarre out the wicked, hath not the lesse threefold portes in it, by the knowledge of the Trinitie, to receiue in the elect at all quarters as followeth. verse 12. and note f hereof, pointing out so by number, names and circumstances, that it doth meane the Apostolike doctrine.
q Seeing ministers and Pastors euen before their glorification, (...) called angels, as is shewed. Reuel. 1. note x thereof: how much more then may the twelue Apostles now after their glorification be meant by these Angels, the number of twelue, and other circumstances following, so well agreeing.
r Vnder the number of twelue tribes of Israell, (because they sometime were the onelie peculiar people of God,) are nowe figuratiuelie

included the whole elect tribes of all the people and nations of the world, who now also are become Gods people. So that as testifieth Paul, Gal. 3.7. al the faithful ar the sons of Abraham, and consequently, all the faithful are accounted the twelue tribes, in these figuratiue and propheticall speeches.
s This description of this spiritual Hierusalem and heauenly habitation, by three portes in each of the foure airthes, making in the whole twelue, hath in it a perfect harmonie and representatio^ of our absolute and eternall felicitie, whereof the entries and ports is the knowledge of the Trinitie, written and testified by the foure Evangelistes, and patently preached, made open, and dispersed through all the world, by the twelue Apostles.
t What this wall is, reade before in the note p preceeding.
u Nothing is more common amongst the Prophets, and in propheticall visions, nor to represent their figuratiue matters by an outward and externall action, as is to be seene in Ieremies jockes. chap. 27. and 28. and Ezechiels gesture* cap. 4. and cap. 5. and in the Angels meeting, Ezech. 40.3. and diuers other places. And this is done for our weake capacitie, which imprinteth no verbal document so deeplie in minde, as we doe an actuall gesture: So here the Angell by this externall gesture of metting, willeth vs deeply to imprint in minde, all the subsequent symmetrie of this holie habitacle, as containing in it an holie harmonie, with the chiefe groundes of Christian trueth.
x Proceeding here further to the description of that eternal felicitie, in which we are to dwel for euer: for our capacitie, the Spirite of God setteth downe the same in such forme and shape, as most liuelie pointeth out the doctrine of the Godhead, and teachers thereof in this world, by whome this heauenly felicity hath bene squared and founded in vs in this life, that afterwarde wee might be citizens in the joyful habitacle of euerlasting life. Now therefore saith he here, this citie is set in square or four cornered: meaning, no doubt, hereby, that this our heauenly habitacle a^^ eternall felicitie, wherein now we are to dwell, and the whole doctrine pertinent thereunto, was squared and fourfoldly described by the foure Euangels of Matthew, Marke, Luke, and Iohn: for where before, note p the twelue Apostles by their short and present doctrine, are made the first layers of the twelue foundations of this

work, doth it not verie harmonically agree, that the foure Evang. by their long lasting and written testimonies, haue builded out the squares and four corners of that worke, to the finall perfection thereof. If this were not the cause, why this raised square, and Cubique figure, were rathest here of al other figures chosen: then had either the Spirit of God chosen the round figure, as of all solide bodies the most perfect figure: or then had he chosen the Pyramid Triangulare, which is the most simple, firme, and constant figure: but these, partlie not agreeing with the conuenient forme of a citie, and partlie, not bearing the symbole of the vnite and aequall Trinitie, and of the foure Euangelistes, and other symmetries needfull are therefore here refused, and the raysed square or Cubique figure chosen.
y The whole elect Israelites being reckoned to 144000. to wit, 12000. of euerie Tribe, and the elect Gentiles to be innumerable, (Apoc. 7.4.9. note f thereof. and Apoc. 14.1. notes a and b thereof.) here setteth he downe a citie almost of infinite roome, to containe them into, according to Christes saying, Ioh. 14.2. In domo Patris mei mansiones sunt multae. In my Fathers house are manie dwelling places, for the length of this Citie being 12000. stadges, the bredth 12000. stadges, and the height 12000, stadges, as here the texte meaneth, the whole citie must containe 12000. times 12000. stadges, multiplied by 12000. which is, 1728000000000. Cubique stadges: whereas one cubique stadge, (that is, a stadge in length, a stadge in breadth, and a stadge in height) were sufficient to holde one whole region of people. Hereby then is meaned, that this heauenly habitacle and eternall foelicity is infinit, and aboundantlie capable of all the elect number. Of the precisenes of numbers in such like accomptes, wee haue said ynough Apoc. 7. note f and Apo. 14. notes a and b thereof and other places. And as for this number in particular, it hath his originall from 12. for the 12. Apostles, and then fro^ 1000. answering to the subdisciples of every Apostle: and then again, these ar multiplied cubiquelie to represent the great increase of Gods servants to the worlds end, and consequently, of the agreable mansions, prouided in heauen for them.
z Seeing the whole bodie of this citie, representeth most properlie that whole felicitie, that we are eternallie to enjoy in the whole vnite Godhead, the three seueral dimensions of longitude,

and altitude of that citie must represent these seueral measures and portions of ioy, which wee haue in the Father, in the Sonne, and in the holie Spirite, and consequentlie, the being of the longitude, of the latitude, and of the altitude of that holie habitation al equal by this text, doeth represent that portion of joy, that we haue in the Father, that portion of joy that we haue in the Sonne, and that felicity that we enjoy in the holie Spirit, to be aequall and alike. So that although euerie one of vs inioy not alike felicitie with other, yet, as God in his three persons is aequall, and alike in himselfe, so of al his three persons giueth he alike presence and fruition: The Father shal not be absented from vs more than the Sonne, nor the Sonne no more than the holie Ghost: we shall see all three in one, we shal worship all three in one, and finallie, of all the three persons of that vnite Godhead, shal we haue ful joy, comfort and fruition, and that alike of the one as of the other, euen as the persons are alike in Godhead, and one in substance.
tuxyz Of all these textes and former notes thereof is gathered the marucilous harmonie and accord in all pointes, betwixt God and this his holie Hierusalem. For God, who created man according to his own image, here also describeth his glorified Churches symmetrie, to his owne similitude. God is one, so here by one onlie spirituall Hierusalem, he representeth his Church. There be three equall persons of the Deitie, Father, Sonne, and holie Ghost, so be there here of this Hierusalem three equall dimensions of longitude, latitude, and altitude: None of the three persons of the Deitie is separable from other, so none of these three dimensions of a citie, or of any solid bodie, can be separable one fro^ another, for then should it become a superfice, and no solide bodie. The three persons of the Deitie and their functions, cannot be confounded: so are not these three dimensions confounded, for the length is not the breadth, nor the breadth is not the height: Like as in Athanasius Creede, the person of the Fat^^ is not the person of the Son. Neither is the person of the So^^ the person of the holy Ghost, and yet the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, are one onely God: as here the length, bredth, and height, maketh one onely Citie. Further, the doctrine of the deitie is witnessed and fourfoldly set downe by the four Euangelists: So here is this Hierusalem set downe in quadrat, or foursquare. Twelue Apostles

dispersed in al airths, hath founded this doctrine, and thereby enter we to the knowledge of God: So on twelue foundations standeth this Ierusalem, and twelue entries there be thereunto in seuerall airthes. Finally, the Deitie is vniuersall, infinite, and infinitely extended ouer all his workes. So in this Ierusalem, is there infinit foelicitie, and aboundant roome for stowing of all her inhabitants.
aa The Apostolike doctrine, amongst these of the Church militant, being by worldly impediments holden low, is now amongst these of the triumphant Church, raised to the full and perfecte height, signified here by the full increase of 12. multiplied by 12. quadratly, making 144. courses of height.
bb Of all that hereafter followeth, and is spoken of these precious stones, wherewith are founded the 12. foundations of this strong wal of the Apostolical doctrine, this one thing is the summe and summar meaning, that as a diligent master of worke, will send his quarriors, masons, and builders in all partes, to search, dresse, forme and hew stones proper and meet for their building, and glorious for the decorement thereof. So hath our God in this world, sent his holy Apostles through Inde, through Arabie, through Aegypte, through Armenie; and throughout al the cuntries of the world, to gather in, teach, and instruct these holy and precious people, some Prophets, some Martyrs, some teachers, some interpreters, some hauing one gifte and vertue, and some another, of whome God had decreed to build vp this holy and eternal habitacle, and first to lay by them the twelue foundations, of the Apostolical and Militant Church in this world, which thereafter in the worlde to come, euen in this triumphant Church and holy Ierusalem, should shine aeternally and vtter all their glistering vertues: as saith Dan. 12.3. Qui autem doctifuerint, fulgebunt sicut splendor firmamenti, and qui ad iustitiam erudiu^t multos, quafi stellae in perpetuas aeternitates. And they that be vvise shal shine as the brightnes of the firmament, and they that (...) ^e many to righteousnes, shal shine as the starres, for euer and euer. In the separate hewes, natures and qualities of these stones, in the Paraphrase, I haue followed the receiued opinion of writers, leanning alwaies more to this their summar effect and meaning.
cc By these streets and passages, is signified libertie (amongst other felicities) so that we haue no maner of thirlage, as tyed or addicted

to any one place: yea, go where we will, wee go alwaies in God, and our waies and streets are beautifull and glorious, and importeth to vs full felicitie.
dd Of this temple, and how here and some other places, it meaneth the majestie of God, we haue shewed in the discourse of our 20. Proposition.
ee How the Sunne is taken for the spiritualitie, and the Moone for the temporalitie, read the note h Apoc. 6.
ff This is no worldly glory that they shal bring thither, for that heauenly habitacle that hath no neede of the glorious light of the Sunne, and Moone, verse 23. hath farre lesse neede of worldlie glory. It is therefore hereby meant, that these, who were godly Princes in this world, shall lift vp all their felicitie, glory, and estimation from the pleasures of the worlde, and fixe the same whollie vpon that felicitie and glory, which there they shall haue in God.
gg This night that shall not be founde, agreeth there both literallie, and figuratiuelie: for literally there shall be no night after the latter day, seeing distinctions of time by night and day, and by Sommer and winter shal cease, as is lately saide in the note a hereof, and Apoc. 10.6. Againe, figuratiuelie, there shall be no obscuritie of errours there, for that no vncleane thing, no lyar, nor abhominable persone abides there, as hereafter verse 27. is testified, of no night to bee here, reade also Reuel. 22. verse 5.



CHAP. XXII.

THE ARGVMENT.
The spirite of God in the former Chapter, hauing described the glory of the glorified Church, vnder the comparison and forme of a Citie, now prosecutes out in this Chapter, to declare, how that Citie and heauenly Citizens thereof are furnished of such spirituall liuely drink, meate and medicaments, as shal conserue aeternal^^ felicitie and health, vsing here these earthly tearmes for our capacitie, in expressing of heauenly matters. Thereafter followeth a conclusion of the proprieties of that glory, and of this whole prophecie,

with a confirmation yet againe of the veritie hereof, ending finally with a threatning against al the wicked, and a terrible protestation against al the eakers and pairers of this booke, and then contrarily commending the faithfull Churches to God.


The Text.
1 And he shewed me a pure riuer of water of life, clear as chrystall, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lambe.
2 In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the riuer, was the tree of life, which bare twelue maner of fruits, and gaue fruite euery moneth, and the leaues of the tree serued to heal the nations with.
3 And there shall be no more curse, but the throne of God, and of the Lambe shall be in at, and his seruants shal serue him.
4 And they shall see his face, and his name shall bee in their fore-heads.
5 And there shall be no ni^ht there, and they neede no candle, neither light of the sunne, for the Lord God giueeth them light, and they shall raigne for euermore.
6 And he saide vnto me, These wordes are faithfull and true: and the Lorde God of the holy Prophets, sent his Angel to shew vnto his seruaunts, the thinges which must shortly bee fulfilled.
7 Behold, I com shortly, Blessed is he that kepeth the wordes of the Prophecie of this book
8 And I am Iohn, which sawe and heard these things: and when, I had heard and seene, I fell down to woorship before the feete of the Angell, which shewed me these thinges.
9 But hee saide vnto me, see thou do it not: for I am thy fellow seruant, and of thy brethren the Prophet of them which k^ the words of this book, worship God.
10 And he said to me, Seale not the wordes,

of the Prophecie of this book: for the time is at hand.
11 He that is vniust, let him be vniust still: and hee which is filthie, let him be filthie still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous stil: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.
12 And beholde, I come shortly, and my rewarde is with me, to giue euery man according as his work shalbe
13 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the firste and the last.
14 Blessed are they, that do his commandeme^ts, that their right may bee in the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the Citie.
15 For without shall be dogs, and enchanters, and whoremongers, and murtherers, and Idolaters, and whosoeuer loueth or maketh lyes.
16 I Iesus haue sent mine Angell, to testifie vnto you these thinges (...) ^e Churches: I am (...) roote and the generation of David, and the brighte morning starre.
17 And the spirite and the bride say, Come, And let him that heareth, say Come: and let him that is a thirste, come: and let whosoeuer will, take of the water of life freelie.
18 For I protest vnto euery man, that heareth the wordes of the prophecie of this booke, if any man shall adde vnto these things, God shall adde vnto him the plagues that are written in this booke.
19 And if any man shall diminishe of the wordes of the booke of this prophecie, god shal take away his part out of the booke of life, and out of the holy citie, and fro^ those things which ar written in this book.
20 Hee which testifieth these things, faith, Surely, I come quickly. Amen, euen so, come Lord Iesus.
21 The grace of our Lorde Iesus Christ, be with you all, Amen.



Paraphrasticall exposition.
1 AND the Angell let me to vnderstand how a God the holy Spirite (flowing as a riuer to satisfie all that thirsted after his spirituall giftes) proceedeth from the persons of God the Father, and of God the Son, who sat there in supreme authoritie.
2 And amidst the waies and passages of al that glorified congregation, and with these flowing waters and graces of the holy Ghost, was also b Christ Iesus conjunct, who is the author of our life and saluation: who continuallie and euer recently yeelded, and exhibited the fruit and fruition of all his heauenly vertues, in number and measure sufficient to satisfie euery man, of the c twelue tribes of spirituall Israelites: to wit, such as had obserued and imbraced the doctrin of the c twelue Apostles: and the smallest benefits, and lightest vertues that flowes from Christ serued some way to the comfort, joy, and continuall health of euery elect people and nation.
3 And there shall be no accursed thing in that holy habitacle, for the throne and eternall seate of God the d Father, and of Christ Iesus his Sonne shal be there, and all these his seruants shall now most perfectly serue him.
4 And they shall haue the full fruition and enjoying of his face and presence, and with constant e courage and bolde faces shall they professe his name.
5 And there shall bee no darknesse there, neither of f night, nor of errours, and no neede shall they haue of temporall nor ecclesiasticall teachings, for GOD himselfe in Trinitie and Vnitie shall lighten them, and with him shall they raigne, for euermore.
6 And the Angell againe assured me, that these wordes were faithfull and true: for the Almightie God, Lord ouer all the holy Prophets, had sent him, who is his holy Angel, to shewe and publishe vnto his seruaunts vppon earth these thinges, which must beginne shortly, and be performed amongest them.
7 Beholde, it shall not bee g long (saith Christ) till my comming, in respecte of my eternall abiding, happy shall hee bee, who obserueth and doeth according vnto the wordes written in this booke of Prophecie.
8 And I the writer hereof, am Iohn the Apostle and Evangelist, who spirituallie sawe and heard all these thinges, and when I had hearde and seene the same, h I fell downe prostrate at the feete of the Angel, who shewed me these thinges to haue woorshipped him.
9 But hee rebuked me, saying, Beware thou do it not, for I am but a seruant of Gods as thou art, and as one of thy brethren which are Prophets, and am one of them whiche obserue the wordes of God, contained in this booke, woorshippe none but God onelie.
10 And hee commanded me not to i conceale, or vtterlie to seale vp the wordes of the prophecie co^tained in this book, for that the

time of the performance thereof, comes daily on and approcheth.
11 Now he that doth wrong k proceed (if he list) to do wrong, and he who is a filthie sinner proceede (if he listeth) in his filthie sinnes and contrarilie, let the righteous man continue in his righteousnes, and the holy man in his holines.
12 For behold (saith God) I come shortly, and that not emptie, but bearing with me euery mans reward, to recompence the^ therewith, according to their faithfull l workes.
23 I am the first and the last; the beginning and the ending, euen the first before all beginning, and the last after all ending.
14 Blessed are they that m keepe the commandeme^ts of this their God, that they may obtaine a ioyfull parte and protion in Christ Iesus, the true Author of life: and that they by the true knowledge of the Trinitie, according to the Apostolike doctrine, may enter to eternall felicitie.
15 But forth of the same shal be debarred all Apostatik n revolters to their filthines, as dogges to their vomet, and all enchanters, whoremongers, murtherers, and Idolaters, and finally, all that teacheth lyes, or loued and delighted therein.
16 I (saith the Lorde Iesus) assure all men that I haue sent my holy Angell to testifie these thinges vnto you all my holy Churches and congregations. I am (in my Deitie) that o roote and foundation whereof David and all the faithful hath sprung, and (in my humanitie) I am of that o posteritie and ofspring that hath sprung of David, and am that morning p star and Son of justice, whose bright Evangell lightened the whole world.
17 And all godly q spirits, and Christs holy Church and chaste spouse, wished him to come, and yee that heares pray for his comming, and let euery man that zealeth and thirsteth after spirituall graces, approch, and come vnto him: For what faithfull man soeuer listeth to come, shall freelie and in his mercy receiue of him, and drinke vp as water the aboundant graces of the holy Ghost to life eternall.
18 Nowe therefore, I protest vnto euerie man that heares the wordes of this booke of prophecie, that if any man shall pretend to adde any thing farther vnto this booke, God shall adde his torment, and bring vpon that man al the plagues that are contained in this booke.
19 And likewise, if any man shall meane to pare or diminish of the wordes of this holy propheticall booke, God shall vtterly take away all his portion and parte, out of the register book of eternal life, and out of this holy habitacle of eternall felicitie, and from enjoying of these joyes and r benefites herein promised for the faithfull.
20 The Lorde Iesus, who testifieth these thinges, hath promised, that hee shall come most speedely. Euen so must it be, O Lord Iesus, come therefore speedilie.
21 The s grace of this our lord Iesus Christ, be with all you his faithful for euer. So be it.


Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a This pure and christalline riuer of liuely waters, is taken in the scriptures for the spirit of God and graces thereof, which our soules euer thirste and drinke, as is plainly expounded in Iohn 7.38.39. saying, Flumina de ventre eius fluent aquae viua: hoc autem

dicebat de spiritu quem accepturi erant credentes in eum, etc. Out of his bellie shal flower riuers of water of life: This spake he of the spirite, which they that beleeued in him should receiue. And for confirmation, that this reiuer is the holy spirit, he saith here, that it proceedes of the throne of God the Father, and of God the Son, vsing the proper tearm of proceeding, for that the holy Spirit is said to proceed from the person of the Father and of the Son, as saith the godly Athanasius in his Symbole: Spiritus sanctus a Patre and Filio, non factus, nec creatus, nec genitus, sed procedens: The holy Ghost, not made, nor created, nor begotten of the Father and of the sonne, but proceeding from them.
b This tree of life that groweth in the middest of this glorified congregatio^, and among these flowing waters of Gods spirit, and yeeldeth continuall fruite, where vpon the godly feedeth to life aeternall, must needes be Christ Iesus the author of our life and saluation, of whome the tree of life in earthly Paradise, did bear the type: and who hath his residence among his elect, and is conjoyned with the holy spirit in Deitie, and yeeldeth to these his elect, continuall benefites, and spirituall graces and vertues, whereon, they spiritually do feede and aeternally liue.
c Because the Citie by the number of ports, foundatio^s, roomes and symmetries thereof, hath bene before accommodate to the number of twelue, correspondent to the twelue tribes of spiritual Israelites, and twelue Apostles: Therfore agreeable to that same number of twelue, he here also describes their spirituall food, making thereby the citie, and the inhabitants, and their spiritual food, and furniture, all correspondent and conformablie agreeing togither in one, with the twelue Apostles, of whome they haue receiued their comparison, and of whome in truth, both is that heauenly habitacle and proprieties thereof: to wit, our resurrection, justification, immortalitie, and aeternall foelicitie described: as also, the number of all faithfull, are by them and their successors collected and gathered in: As thirdly, these spirituall vertues flowing here ^^m Christ, are distributed to euery faithfull, according as they are more or lesse of the number of the twelue tribes of spirituall Israelits, or hath imbraced more or lesse the doctrin of the twelue Apostles: and therefore, not onely first the symmetrie of the citie, and secondly, the roome and inhabitants thereof, but also thirdly, the furniture, euen these fruites, benefites and graces that here

flowes from Christ vnto them, are all reckoned after the number of twelue: and so their monethly increases, meaneth noe other thing, but first this allusion to the number of the twelue Apostles, And secondly, that these fruites and benefites are euer continual, fresh, and recent: for (as we haue saide note a of the former chapter, and in other partes) there is no distinction of times by yeares, moneths or daies, neither in heauen, neither after the latter day any waies.
d Here he (as also verse 1.) speaketh onely of two persons of the Godhead: to wit, the Father and the Sonne sitting in this throne, although inseperablie the whol Deitie in Trinitie and Vnitie here sitteth: but these two persons, the Father and the Son are onelie here mentioned, because the judiciall matters of this throne, and the present functions belonging thereto, at this time concerned cheiflie the offices of God the Father, and of God the Sonne. Of God the Son, in that here he sitteth, now lately judging the whole world generally, which cheifly appertaineth to him, as saith our Beleefe, inde venturus est iudicare vivos and mortuos, from thence hee shall come to iudge the quick and the dead. Of God the Father, in that hee here sitteth reforming and renewing the worlde, as he testifieth in the text saying, ecce, noua facio omnia, behold, I make all thinges newe, which belongs to his office, as being Creator of all, as testifieth our beleefe, calling him, Creatorem coeli and terrae, maker of heauen and earth, This approueth the note h of the former chapter.
e This name of God was promised before (Apoc. 3.12.) to bee written vpon the elect, where the first mention is made of this new Hierusalem: and now at this time since they are come to that Hierusalem that promise here taketh effect. This (contrary all wayfaring and worldly professions) meaneth so constant and vnchangeable a profession of the name of God, that it shall neuer be deleted nor forgotten out of their hearts, mindes, and continuall thoughts, but euer shall abide so rooted in them, that with cor^^ courage and bold faces, shal they professe that name for euer, (...) therefore is that name of God said here to be in their foreheads.
f Read of this night before, Apoc. 21.25. and note ff thereof.
g For three causes, are times which appeare long to men, called short in the scriptures. First, to moue the elect to patience. Secondly, in respect of the contrair purposes and matter, as here the

definite time of Christs, bodily absence in this world, in respect of the infinite time of his eternall presence in that euerlasting world, is called but short. Thirdly, in respect of God who speaketh this, in whose sight a 1000. years are but as one day (2. Pet. 3.8.) this definite time is but short: conferre herewith Apoc. 17.10. and note t thereof.
h Maruelous is the forcible temptations of Idolatrie, and wrong worshipping. Sundrie times hath saint Iohn seene the persons of the Deitie in these visions: and although we reade, that hee hath then fallen and bene prostrated with that glorious majestie of Gods presence (Apoc. 1.17.) yet finde we not, that hee prostrated himselfe voluntarilie to worship God, but contrarilie, this is the second time, that voluntarilie he prostrates and bowes down himself to commit wrong worshipping: and that euen although hee was before forbidden of the Angels selfe, according to the prouerb, Nitimur in vetitum semper cupimusque negata. Forbidden thinges of men are choosed, and most we sue that is refused. The diuine Prophet, Apostle and Euangelist Iohn, makes notable here to vs by his own twofold example, the greate infirmitie in mankinde on the one parte, and the terrible force of Idolatrous temptations on the other part. To the effect wee wretched sinners neither truste ouer much in our own strength, neither yet be ouer slacke and slothfull against such temptations: Seeing this holy and beloued seruant of God so farre ouercome, read more hereof, Reuel. 19.10. and note s thereof.
i In that here the Prophet is forbidden to seale and close vppe these mysteries, it is not simplie meant, that he should write all so plaine, that no part thereof were in any wise sealed or kept secret: for contrarilie of the seuen thunders (Reuel. 10.4.) it is commanded to seale them, and not to write them plainly. The meaning therefore of this text, is not simplie, but in comparison of other ^^ophets: to wit, that saint Iohn who was neerer to the time of (...) performance, should not seal vp these thinges so obscurely as other Prophets did, who were further from that time of performance: and therefore saith this text here, ne signaueris, etc. tempus enim prope est, Seale not these vvords, etc. for the time is at hand. And contrarilie is saide in Dan. 8.26. Tu ergo visionem signa, quia post multos dies erit. Seale you vp the vision, for it shalbe after many daies. and Daniel

12.4.9. Claude sermones and signa librum, vsque ad tempus statutum, Shut vp the vvordes and seale the booke till the end of the time. And so is Iohn here indeede a great deal more plaine, ample, and orderly nor is Daniel: Daniel hauing sealed his booke for a long time, and Iohn hauing onely concealed this booke from Antichristians, during the Antichrists raigne, which time he calles but short. Apoc. 17.10. saying, Oportet cum breue tempus manere, Hee must continue a short space, agreeable with these wordes here spoken, of the revealing of this book, which are, tempus enim prope est, for the time is at hand, and so in the end of the Antichrists reign (which ends in our daies) shoulde these mysteries be throughly revealed. This texte maketh expreslie against them, that esteemes this booke to be so closed, that it shall neuer be vnderstood till Christ come, and consequently, it should be superfluous.
k This is spoken Ironicallie in mockage of the wicked, and there after speaks he exhortingly to the godly to confirm them. This Ironical speech is vsed oft in the scriptur, for the more eshaming of vs from sinne, as (besides many other examples) the like is to bee found in Eccles. 11.9. where the spirit of God by Salomon mockes the licentious youth, in bidding them tauntinglie followe their lustes and harts desire, but know saith he certainly, that of al these thinges God shal craue accompt in iudgement. The like is saide euen here in the next verse, For behold (saith he) I shal come shortly, and my rewarde vvith me, to giue to every man according to his vvorkes. So this threatning conclusion inferres, that the former bidding of the wicked continue wicked, is altogether Ironicall, and contrarilie, that the bidding of the godly continue godly, is altogether allowablie and exhortingly spoken to them.
l How these workes are not simply meant of onely works, but of workes that proceede of Faith, or liuely Faith that produceth good workes, and so Faith to be the ground of Iustification, reade Apoc. 20. note s thereof.
m The vulgare translation, containeth here these wordes, Be qui lauant stolas suas in sanguine Agni, Blessed are they that washe their garments in the blood of the Lambe. The most allowable translation bearing Beati qui seruant eius mandata, Blessed are they that keepe his commandements, as the literall difference hereof is small in the originall greeke, so is the meaning of both alike in substance, for

these that do keepe the commandements of Christ Iesus, ar these selfe same, that figuratiuely are said, Apoc. 7.14. to wash their garments in the blood of Christ, and therefore set we the plainest in the paraphrase, as an interpretation to both.
n To dogges for filthines in lust, insatiable gluttonie, vomiting and returning to their vomit, are compared al such filthie persons as how oft soeuer the spirit of God striueth to purge the^ of their sinnes, yet will they euer revolt and returne to them againe, till at length the spirit of God-renounce them, and leaue them in their owne filth. Of these saith Salomon, Prouerb. 26.11. Sicut canis qui reuertitur ad vomitum, sic imprudens qui iterat stultitiam suam, As a dogge vvho turneth againe to his vomit, so is the foolish man vvho turneth to his foolishnes, and in 2. Peter. 2.22. It is saide of these reuolters and backturners to their sinnes. Canis reversus ad vomitum suum, and sus lota in volutabro luti. The dogge is returned to his vomit, and the sow that was washed to the vvallowing in the myre. This generall doggish propertie of backturning, and continual reuolting to sinne, without amendement, is here set formost, and is to be vnderstood, common to the enchanters, whoremongers, murtherers, Idolaters, and lyers after specified, where through, here they are debarred from God: otherwise, if they repented their sins, and returned not euer thereunto, as dogs to their vomit, they might be receiued among the faithfull number, as Apoc. 14. note d is declared.
o In simple tearmes Christ here, and Apo. 5.5. setteth out his two natures very liuely, I am (saith he) the root and the generation of David. This apparant contrarietie making Christ the roote whereof Dauid is sprung, and againe Christ to be a branche, who is sprung of Dauid, is doubtleslie to be vnderstood diuersly. The first of Christs deitie, in respect whereof, he was before Dauid, as he testifieth saying, (Iohn 8.58.) antequam Abraham fieret, ego sum, Before Abraham vvas I am: yea, seeing God by Christ created the whole worlde, (Colos. 1.16. and Iohn 1.3.) therefore, Christ in his Deitie, is the (...) roote and originall, whereof all thinges, cheiflie godly men, as Abraham and David hath their beginning and being. The second of Christes humanitie, in respecte whereof, Christ contrarilie is sprung of Abraham and of David, Matthew, 1.1. and so is Christe perfitely both Dauids roote, and also his branche.
p For many causes is Christ called the morning star: for as the morning star endeth the nights darknes, and beginneth the day light. So doth Christ at his comming put end to all errours. And doth begin and yeeld to vs that aeternall light and day, which neuer decaieth: of which is said before, verse 5. et nox vltra non erit illic, and non egebunt lumine lucernae, neque lumine Solis, quoniam Dominus Deus illuminabit illos. and there shall be no night there, and they neede no candle, neither the light of the sunne, for the Lord God giueth them light. For that same cause, is hee likewise called, Sol Iustitiae, the sunne of iustice, that riseth to the world, Malach. 4.2. Also Christ is called this morning star, to shew thereby, that the starre that should rise of Iacob (Nomb, 24.17.) was performed in his person. Moreouer, because Christs natiuitie and comming was represented by an extraordinary star, seene in the East Orientall. And it is frequent in the scriptures, to call the thing signified, after the name and the style of the signe it selfe: as where Christ is called the Lambe, etc. Therefore is Christ, called here the beautifull, orientall, rising, or morning starre.
q This spirit that craueth Christs latter comming, is nether the damned spirits, for that they therby are to receiue no gaines, but p^^ne and eternall torment. Neither yet is it simplie and in it self the spirit of God, for that holy spirit in himself, hath no yearning, not other passions, but hath the present estate of all things agreeable to his wil and ordinance, lacking nothing longer nor he craueth it or yearneth after the same. This therefore is the spirite of the holy elect and chosen number, or the spirite of God in them, that craueth here Christes comming and yearneth for the same. For seeing all the good creatures of God long for that day, that they may haue libertie, freedome, and rest in God, as saith Paul Rom. 8.21.22. Therefore, farre rathest of all do these godly spirites that God hath created and breathed in man, yearne and desire Christs comming, thar from henceforth they may be conjoined with God their original, and haue the ful fruition of his presen^^ as saith also S. Paul, (Phil. 1.23.) of himselfe and his godly spirite, desiderium habens dissolui, and esse cum Christo, by this desire that Pauls spirit had to be with Christ before the latter day, and without the body, importeth he a farre greater desire that our spirites haue in yearning for the latter daye, that body and soule altogether may

be with Christ our Lorde and Sauiour.
r Although the greeke worde may here seeme to meane alike. These men that are vvritten, or, These thinges that are vvritten: and also that this booke may either meane indifferently here the booke of life, or this present book of Apocalyps: yet be reason of the like wordes contained in the former verses, speaking directly of the plagues written in this booke of Apocalyps, It must needs be, that contrarily these spoken of here, are the benefites and good things written also in this same booke of Apocalyps.
s Here endeth Saint Iohn, this holy Prophecie of Apocalyps: imploring the grace of Gods spirit through Iesus Christ, to abide with al the faithfull. Here end we also that interpretation therof, which God by that selfe same grace hath made the faithfull of these our latter daies to vndersta^d, in discouerse of Gods enemies and revealing of his trueth, that his Church being purged from Antichristianisme, may from henceforth abide pure, and holy, and readie decked as a comely bride, waiting the sudden comming of her Lorde and bridegrome Christ Iesus: To this God in Trinitie and Vnitie, who here giues these graces to vs, do we therefore render aeternal praise, honour, and glory, for euer and euer. Amen.





Rom. cap. 15. vers. 4.5.6.

4 Whatsoeuer thinges are vvritten aforetime, are vvritten for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might haue hope.
5 Nowe the God of patience and consolation, giue you that yee be like minded one towardes another, according to Christ Iesus.
6 That yee with one mind, and vvith one mouth may praise God, euen the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ.


To God onely wise, be praise through Iesus Christ for euer. Amen.
Rom. 16.27.





To the misliking Reader whosoe^er.
SVch is the miserie of these latter daies, through selfe loue, and coldnes of charity (as Christ foretelleth) that every man envying other, aspires by reproching his neighbours godly workes and good exercises, to get him selfe a name, so that no mans workes, howe godly soeuer, lacketh some one or other detestable calumniator and envious reprocher: Neither look I more, than others more learned to escape the same. To thee therefore whosoeuer, misliker hereof, and opponer against this work, I haue thought good to direct this gentle admonition, crauing thee earnestlie, in the fear of God, Reade ouer, ponder well, print all in minde, confer places, leaue off partialitie. So trust in God you shall finde in the same nothing either greatlie, worthie of blasphemous reproche, or able justly to be-refelled: For first, as touching the opponing against these presents, by blasphemous reproches: because that raylings, reproches, and invectiues, exceedes the boundes of brotherly loue and Christian charitie, I trust you, nor no Christian professor will borrowe these manifest dartes of the Deuill, and armour of Sathan to fight against any man, euen not against a reprocher, and far lesse against me, who reprocheth no man that euer wrote hereof: but judging them al to haue done faithfullie as they could, doth therefore but simplie, without injury to them, set out this my present worke, confirming the same by conference of scripture expreslie, (as the Lorde knoweth) to glorifie God thereby, and to profit thee, O Reader, in repelling of errours, and discouering the trueth, without partial loue to Protestant, or hatred to Papist, as to this houre, neuer hauing receiued worldely injurie of Papist, nor fleshlie commoditie forbeing Protestant: yea, I spare not in this work to blame, the negligence of such professed Protestants, as in these daies are waxed cold, carelesse, and without charitie: as againe, I spare not to purge and excuse the Pope and Papistes of some texts in this booke, which others applies against them: namely, in that (contrarie the opinion of many learned) I purge the Pope from being the Apostat of the fift trumpet: And wheresoeuer I accuse the Pope in this work, by admonishing of his errors, and threatning the decay of his sect, seate and kingdome: I do nothing more thereinto, nor the very euidence of the text, harmony of other scriptures, and the truth of God enforceth me vnto. This doing then being offensiue to no good man: I am (...) no professed Christian, will by blasphemous reprochings, raylings, publ^^ slaunders, priuat backbitings, or such other dartes of the Deuill oppone against this book. But if secondly, leauing these Ethnick invectiues and detractions, thou thinkest by pretended arguments, to refute this worke and forme of interpretation therein contained: be sure, that canst thou not justly, nor by no good reasons perform, seeing the grounds and substance hereof

ar prooued, both by sure testimonies and very probable arguments: by sure testimonies (say) both of scriptures interpreting scripture: whereof, our whole Paraphrasticall exposition, and diuers notes are composed and made vp: And also by the testimony of vnsuspect writers, euen of Papistes, where they wrote of themselues, and of Ethnicks, where they wrote of themselues, and of these vnsuspect histories (verely credible against themselues) is the historicall application of this worke composed, and diuers amplifications amongst the notes made vp. Then resteth our propositions and the resones that are among the notes, and these I say we prooue by very probable arguments: yea, euen by arguments as necessarie, as true religion (which falles not vnder the capacitie of man, nor necessitie of mans reason) will suffer and permit: For these arguments are founded vpon the most evident reasones, clearest tokens, and plainest scriptures, and thereafter euery argument followes one another, fro^ the plainer text, to the obscurer text, til the whole be discouered. So then of our Propositions, Paraphrasticall exposition, Historicall application, Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications: and consequently, of this our whole worke, nothing is mine, or of my only assertion, to God be the glory, true testimonie and reason yeeldeth all: Think not therefore to refute the veritie, for strong and mightie is the protectour thereof. And whereas I haue saide, that our Paraphrasticall exposition, is not onely grounded vpon the present text, but composed of the conference of many texts and scripturs interpreting others: that haue I purposely and by al means possible pressed to do, expreslie, becaus many interpreting the present text onely by it selfe, and according to that sense that to them seemed most proper in that place, they haue greatly erred, for to others another sense doth seeme more proper, and so infinite and repugnant interpretations do arise: for as in the disciphering of cyphered letters, hee who judged such a marke or Character to signifie such a letter, for that it so agrees and spells in some one place, he may be deceiued, and therefore he must take that Character for such a letter as it spells and agrees with, not onely in that one place, but in all places where it is founde throughout that whole Epistle. Euen so in Prophecies, who by an onely texte judged such a propheticall tearme or phrase to haue such a sense, for that it so appears there to agree, he may be deceiued: and therefore he must take that propheticall tearme in such a sense, as not onely doth agree with that one present text, but with diuers other texts where the same tearme is to be found, and so shall all interpreters agree, and no man varie from other: for scriptures interpreting scriptures, furnisheth one onely veritie, and though sometimes diuerse interpretations, yet not disagreeing nor repugnant, but in a manner all one: and after this maner of interpretation do I proceede, so farre as God hath giuen (...) judgement, memory, and sight of scriptures, referring the rest to whomsoeuer God doth blesse with moe talents and greater benefites. If then thou O Christian Reader hereof, first laying aside blasphemie, invectiues, and reproches against me: secondly, casting of all captious sophismes against the trueth, doth now think this forme of Paraphrasticall interpretation, by scriptures interpreting scriptures, after the maner of disciphering

of letters, and this form of historical application be approued, and vnsuspect writers, and this forme f gathering our gro^ndes by most probable judices and arguments, to be the perfitest way to d^scouer the mysteries of this holy Reuelation (as in trueth tis) and yet doth think that I haue not so accuratly followed that order my selfe, as I haue here prescribed t to others: Then and in that case, I am not onely conte^ted, but earnestly I craue and exhort the^, and all other su^p^cters hereof, whome God hath endued with greter benefits, to put hand to work, and follow this most perfect order, more accuratelie then I may attaine to: for verely, I do ack^owledge myne own imperfection, euen my tender memory and hard vtterance: but sure I am, and experience shall declare, that whosoeuer by this most perfect way and manner of exposition shall proceed, he shall fal vpon the same interpretation in substance, that I haue here set downe, and though now thou disagreest, yet then shalt thou accord herewith in one veritie without any substantial difference in effect or matter. I graunt indeede, and am sure, that in the style of wordes and vtterance of language we shall greatlie differ: for therein I do judge my selfe inferiour to all men* So that scarcely in these high matters could I with long deliberation, finde wordes to expresse my minde: but this imperfection, seeing God perchance sendeth it, to make the ^reater perfection in humilitie, and to beate downe vaine glorie, and that Moses and many great men haue lack^d the eloquence of tou^g: I trust charitable Christians shall not disdaine me therefore, but rather amende the same in their owne editions. Finally, by this my brotherly admonition, I hope you wil not giue place vnto thy first conceiued wrath: so, that howsoeuer you at this first approching disdained these presents: yet now at thy more resolued revewing hereof, I hope, and also protesteth, that in the feare of God you casting of all blasphemous reproches against me, and all captious sophismes against the trueth, must either yeeld to the assured veritie of this worke, or then thy selfe set out the better exposition hereof, vpon these or more surer grounds: And I beseech the Almightie, the God of trueth and vnitie, to blesse that thy godly enterprise, and to vnite it with his trueth: So shall we also please one an other, and ab^de vnited in him, who in Trinitie is Vnited, and abides blessed for euer and euer. So fare you wel in the Lord, and growe in him, from rankour and reproche to Christian charitie, for euer. Amen.

Your louing Friend in the Lord. I. N.




HEREAFTER FOLLOWETH CERTAINE NOTABLE PROPHECIES agreable to our purpose, extract out of the books of Sibylla, whose authorities neither being so authentik, that hitherto vve could cite any of them in matters of scriptures, neither so prophane that altogether we could omit them: We haue therefore thought very meet, seuerally and apart to insert the same here, after the end of this worke of holy scripture, because of the famous antiquitie, approued veritie, and harmonicall consentment thereof with the scriptures of God, and specially with the 18. Chapter of this holy Revelation.

OVT OF THE SECOND BOOK OF the Oracles of Sibylla, beginning at this part according to Castalio his Latine translation. -- hominum tum denique saeclum. Existet decimum, quando qui sydera fecit, etc. Faithfullie englished this way.

THere shal of men the tenth age then arise,
When God who did the heauens high deuise,
At whose presence, the earth doth quake and mooue,
OfApoc 17.9. and 23. Prop. Imagerie extinguish shall the loue:
And shall of Rome raised on herApoc. 18.17. hilles seuen,
The people shake. Then beis the strength downe dreuen
Of her riches, whillApoc. 17.16, and 18.8.9. Vulcane in his ire
Oft shall on her send furious flames of fire.

a Herby she noteth the inseparable Idolatrie of Rome in so much as Rome and hir Idolatrie, shal stand together ^^d fall together.
a Of these seuen hilles of Rome, read Apoc. 17.9. and our 23. Proposition.
c Here, agreeable with the Revelation, doth she forewarne the finall destruction of Rome, to be by fire, vsing here poeticallie the name of Vulcan^ expreslie, for mocking



of them and their Idol Gods, for she in all her books acknowledgeth onely the true God.


OVT OF THE FIFT BOOK AT THIS PART. De coelo veniet sydus magnum in mare magnum, etc.

From heauen there fell a great (a) star in the (b) sie,Apo. 8.8.
And burnt it vp although both great and hie:
So beis burnt vp,Apo. 18. etc, propo. 23 and shall no longer stand,
Thou (c) Babylon of Italie the land:
Who murthereth Saints and many faithfull Iow,Apo. 17.6 and 18.24. Apoc. 11.3.
Temples tread downe that did the trueth avow,
Yet thou O mischant suffer shall great paine,
As thou deseruest desert shall thou remaine:Apoc. 17.16. and ^18. etc.
Remaine shall thou desert for euer more,
Thy natiue soile henceforth thou shalt abhore:
For thou in (d) poyson hath delighted thee,
Mother of whoredome and adulterie:Apoc. 17.5.
And bougerie gainst nature nurishing,Apoc. 18.7.
A towne of ease in filth most flurishing:
Wicked, vniust, vnworthy to be named,
Ah towne of Latins vtterly defamed:
As (e) Widowe wood,Isay. 47.7.8.9. and Viper venomous,
Vpon thy banks thou shalt sit dolorous:
And (f) Tiber flood for thee his spouse shall mourne,
Thy mind is mad,Apoc. 17.6. and 18.24. Isa 47.7.8.6 etc. Apoc. 18.7 thy hart for blood doth burne:
Thou doest misknowe Gods mind and might, for why
Onely I am (saiest thou) and who but I?
Eternall God,Isa. 47 etc. Apoc. 18. etc. now wrack shall the and thyne,
In al the earth shall not rest but ruyne
A monument or yet a mark of thee,
Which thou hadst when God gaue prosperitie:
Thou mischant nowe fit soliter alone,
Hurld syne to hell with many grieuous grone:Apoc. 19.20.

Where thou shalt bide burning both bone and lyre,
Into that lake of furious flaming fyre.

a This great star, Apoc. 8.8. is called a mountain of fire, and is there proued to mean, the multitude of fierce and firy people that began alredy the first destruction of Rome.
b The sea is both proued, Apoc. 8.8. note d thereof, to meane Italie, as also here subsequently doth followe.
c How this Babylon is Rome, we haue proued Prop. 23. and consequentlie, must be of the land of Italie, as here both maruelouslie and plainly this Prophetesse affirmeth.
d How much the people of Rome, and all Italie, are inclined to poisoning and priuie murthers, all men knowes, in so much as vulgarlie we cal poison, an Italian posset.
e Because as testifieth both Esay 47.7. and Revel. 18.7. that she is a Queene and Lady, fornicating with many vowers, and thinketh her selfe no widowe, therefore at once say they there, as Sibylla doth here, she shal be made a widow and desolate of all her vowers.
f This is the floud that goeth through the towne of Rome, bearing the name of Tiber to this day.


OVT OF THE SAME FIFT BOOK AT THIS PART Italia infoelix deserta infleta manebis, etc.

O Cursed and vnhappie Italie,
Vnmeind or mournd for, barren shalt thou be:
To ground as greene, as wildernes vnwrought,Apoc. 18.2
To woods wild and bushes beis thou brought.

And thereafter sairh shee
Stay and restraineye (a) mother murtherers,Your hands and hearts, O filthie furtherers(^) To bougrie, like beasts abusing boyes,Who women (e) chaste with villanie annoyes:Apoc, 17.5And maketh whores by your perswasion,Ouercomd by subtill so^istation:In thee the Sonne doth with his mother mell,The daughter wife doth with her Father dwell,And Kings their (d) mouthes polluted hath in thee,In thee is found with beasts bougerie:Sit dolorous down deplore thy paine with pitie,Apoc. 18. etc.Thou lecherous seat supprest, and sinfull citie:
a Because that Nero, who was Emperour of Rome, murthered his mother, therfore here Sibylla stileth the whol Romanes after him, Mother murtherers.
b Who could more viuely describe by present history, the filthie vices of Rome, than here Sibylla doeth by her maruelous prophecie, for proofe whereof, reade their owne histories.
c To wit, chast Lucretia, whome Sextus T. Aruns sonne to Tarq. Sup. the king of Rome, deforced filthily against her wil.
d In mouing of Kings and Emperours to make oaths of maintenance, seruice and obedience to her, euen against God and his trueth.


OVT OF THE VII. BOOK AT THIS PART. Roma ferox animi, post fracta Macedonis arma, etc.

ROme fierce in mind, whe^ (a) Grecians are down driuen,
Shall stellifie thy self vp to the heauen.
But when thou thinkst thee in thy highest hight,
God shall tread downe thy sturdie strength and might:Apoc. 18.7.8
Then shall I say when thou art dongen downe,
Sometime on hie resounded thy renowne:
The (b) second time, O Rome againe to thee,
Hereafter yet I will speak secondle.

a Alexander King of Macedonia, Monarche of (...) world being dead, and the monarchie of the Grecian ^ing ended, then vpstart the Romans, and become monarch of the whole earth, and thereafter by the Pope they vsurped also the power of heauen.
b For the greater emphasis she doubles the worde (secondly)

meaning thereby, of a first and of a seconde destruction of Rome, according to the which, she here pronounceth a first, and hereafter a second prophecie.


OVT OF THE VIII. BOOK AT THIS VERSE. Par tibi de coelo sublimis vertice Roma, etc.

O Rome vpraised now with thy toppis hie,
The like ruine from heauen shall fall on thee:
Plaine beis thou made, down shall thy toppes turne,Apoc. 18.21
And flaming fire all whollie shall thee burne:Apoc. 17.16. and 18 8.9.
Far shalt thou slit into an vncouth land,
Thy riches shall be reft out of thine hand:
In thy wall steds shall Wolues and toddes convene,Apoc. 18.17. Apoc. 18.2. Ier. 50 39.
Wast shall thou be, as thou had neuer bene:
Where then shall be thy Oracles deuyne,
What golden gods shall keepe or saue thee syne:Isay 47.11.13.
What God I say of copper or of stone,
Where then shall be the consultation
Of thy Senate? What helps thy noble race,
Of Saturne, Ioue or Rhea in this cace:
Whose sensles soules and Idoles thou before,
Religiouslie did worship and adore:
Of whose greene graues, vnhappie Crete avants,
Their figures dead vp doest thou set like Sants:

Then followeth immediatly of the Pope.

When rung in thee hath (a) fifteen Emperours,
Of all the world that hath bene conquerours:
Then comes a King (b) a manifold crowne to beare,
^^^ose name shall be to (c) PONTI very neare.
(...) wicked (d) foote the world shall visitate,
Great gifts and goods then shall he impetrate:
Huge heapes of golde he shall haue into treasure,
With siluer hid, and money without measure:
(e) Discouered thinges he shall loose and remit,
of (f) Magick art, well shall he knowe and wit
The mysteries and secreet sorcerie,
The mightie God he makes (g) a babe to be:
Dan. 7.25. Apoc. ^ 11.2 2. Thes. 2.9.10.And downe he shall tread all true worshippin,
And at cheif heades of errours first begin
His mysteries to al he shall expone,
Then comes the time of mourning and of mone:
For in a (h) roape his ending shall he make,
The potent people, and the towne shall wrack:
Thus shall they say, we knew and hoped ay,
Sometime on vs should come this bitter day:
The Fathers ould, and babes shal mourne for thee,
Beholding then thy dolorous destinee:
On Tiber banke lamenting sore thy case,
Sadde shall they sit, with many loud alase.

a Hauing before in the beginning of the fift booke, amongst other Emperours described the fiftenth Emperour Adrianus, with many of the same tokens wherewith here the Antichrist is described, Sibylla here sheweth, that this wicked Antichrist shall come after fifteen Emperors, expresly therby to put difference betwixt him and Adrianus, and not meaning thereby, that immediately after the fifteenth Emperour, came the wicked Antichrist.
b Adrianus Emperour was before described with a siluer crown, and to be a good man, but where here shee describes this wicked man to weare a many fold crowne called in Greeke (...), she thereby expresseth and points out the Pope most liuely, who euer since Constantine the Emperours daies, beareth a threefold crown, as the gift contained in the Decret. dist. 96. proports.
c Where she describes Adrianus Emperour, shee saith not that his name is neere vnto Pontus, which is to say, neere to the Sea, but plainly saith shee, hee shall haue the name of the Sea: for where Adrianus was borne, the sea

there is called the Adriatick or Adriane Sea, but here saith shee, this wicked man shall haue a name neere to Ponti, meaning thereby plainly of the Pope, who is styled Romanus Pontifex, or Summus Pontifex.
d With his wicked foot doth he visit the world, both in treading downe Kinges and Princes vnder his feete, as he did to Frederick Barbarossa and Henrie the Emperours: as also in setting vp his foot to be visite, seene and kissed, as a relique and publick spectacle to the whole world.
e Euen sinnes discouered by auricular confession shal he presume to loose and remit.
f Hereof read Platina the Popes own secretarie, together with other true histories, who make mention of 22. Necromantick Popes, and of eight Atheists, beside others of horrible natures.
g By representing God by stones, and carued stockes of bony Baby Iesus, and such like Idoles to the poore people to play them with, and many other vanities, where by he mocketh God, and would make God to seme as an ignorant barne.
h This is vnperformed as yet, and seemes to meane of the last Pope, who shal make such a tragical end, his people, seate and towne being vtterly wracked.
And shortly after followeth
Lament shall you and mourne, laying aside,Thy (a) purpleweede, imperiall robes of pride:And into sackcloth sitting sorrowfull,Repeat shalt thou thy plaintes pitifull:O royall Rome, thou bragging Prince but Peere,Of Latine land the onely daughter deere:(...) ride but pompe ruyned shall remaine:Apoc, 18.19Thou (b) once trode downe shalt neuer rise againe:Apoc. 18.14.^1For gone shall be the glore of that armie,That beareth the (c) Eagles in their enseignie:To whence then shall thy forces foreward fair,What land with armes shall help thee any mair:Yea, none now bound is to thy seruitude,O mishant, etc.
a How both Popes and Emperours of Rome, haue their robe royall of purple and skarlet, reade the Decret. dist. 96. as is said in the note g Apoc. 17.
b Shee speaketh not here of the wrackes that Rome sustained in times past, by the Gotthes and Vandales, for all these wrackes were repared: but here shee speakes of that great wrack; that is yet to come, which neuer shalbe repaired, as is testified Apoc. 18.14.21.22.23.
c The Romane Emperours bears the double displaied Eagle in their badge.
And hereafter followeth.

Then endes the world, then comes the latter light,
Then God shall come to iudge his folk aright:
But first shall fall on Rome but resistance,
Apoc, 14.8.14.Of Gods wrath the wofull vengeance
A wofull life a bloudie time shalbe,
Apoc. 17.6. and 18 24.Oh, people rude, Oh land of crueltie:
Thou litle lookst, nor doth regard aright,
How poore and bare thou first came in the light:
That to the like againe you should returne,
And last before a dreidfull iudge should murne

IN summar conclusion, if thou O Rome alledges thy self reformed, and to beleeue true Christianisme, then beleeue Saint Iohn the Disciple, whome Christ loued, publickly here in this Reuelatio^ proclaiming thy wrack, but if thou remaine Ethnick in thy priuate thoughts, beleeuing the old Oracles of the Sibylls reuerently keeped sometime in thy Capitoll: then doth here this Sibyll proclaime also thy wrack. Repent therefore alwaies, in this thy latter breath, as thou louest thine aeternall saluation, Amen.

FINIS.


