Hannibal and Scipio the argument of the first act Hannibal reprove his soldier for their lasciviousness at Capua be himself take with the love of a lady of Salapia news be bring he of Scipio that he have recover Spain and a command from the senate that he return to Carthage which with much unwillingness he assent to the scene Capua scene the first maharbal and Himulco Mah. here be the right use of victory to tame our fury with soft case and wantonness after so many travel have our Hannibal possess himself of Rome without a Capua the conquest have be poor Himul. these spoil of beauty and free one too that uncompelled will run to embrace a soldier rock he in her arm sing he asleep and with her icy finger comb the knot curl of his black hair so long neglect make herself the ravisher oh it be Elysium Mahar. nay to have such change of pleasure court we as if their invention be busy to make our delight the object of their care here we be feast with chalcedonian tune rhodian guilt head and more than samian gluttony we drink no wine but of campania or grape crown Aulon boy more fair than he that bear jove cup rapt on the dusky wing of his sky-born eagle serve the banquet up in golden dish or corinthian plate luxury chief he to crown the entertainment here sit a lady Hebe never blush a colour like she check and in her eye a thousand Cupid move in wanton frisk to catch the gazer there be another deck in the sea riches which the negro dive for her pearl reflection dimace the dark taper as if all light be borrow from those sun their orient roundness mock we with a three betray through a transparent lawn the beauty of a complexion white and red do never mix a more perfect and a shape exact as nature first Pandora the possession after desire have make a preparation in every sense to entertain these joy can earth afford a heaven and this not be the best hope ever feign Mahar. then to be clothe in silk of tyrian die to sleep on down and wake clasp a goddess in one arm lovely as Cytharea revel sometime and dance to the mermaid music till the night be make one artificial day invert the course of time and his action oh delight beyond weak comprehension we begin to taste they without sense do not diversity whet appetite anew he yet so much change shall make invention barren but it be fruitful pregnant and teem as fast as it be deliver delicious Capua Mah. pleasure only storehouse be I a Hannibal and conquest quiet i as fair as daylight spread his crystal wing one Capua shall ransom all scene the second to they a common soldier with a fair lady court he he what be here she court he with as earnest zeal as Cynthia will her Endymion or the gray-eyed morn her early Shafalus Mah. now by my sword he be that a soldier oath in Capua by the bright tress of my mistress hair fine as Arachne web or gossimer who curl when garnish with their dress show like that spin vapour when it be pearl with dew or by the sunshine of her crystal eye wherein the god of love his wet wing dry after his bathe in sad lover tear these be the only oath a soldier swear what shall we do with sword Mah. Indeed it be true their bloody use have be so long neglect and for my part I be so cloy with woman i must be fill to powder and prepare to be their physic the green-sickness else will not be cure by i he i shall be draw to wear for pin and that which oft have reign the blood of roman on my hilt and hand weary almost with slaughter shall be touch with tremble finger white as Othris snow whilst the soft handler start if by mischance the point but prick her skin and must consult with some learned unguentary to prevent the invisible scar why here we can quarrel among ourselves for wench there be a lady as mean a beauty heretofore have be the ground of a sad war or in a camp serve up a mutiny we can envy it that he a common soldier valour cipher one only press to make the number up enjoy she whole and perhaps have change Mah. nay stand upon nice term for his reward and must be hire to pleasure such as some will even through any danger to embrace prithee observe lady why shall I be deny be I not fair enough my beauty fresh as the new spring when wanton Phoebus mount his burnish chariot early to salute she and kiss dew from her cheek Soul there be as fair and free a pension lady must be think of I can else be sportive Lad. be tha all i will full thy burgonet with iberian gold stamp into medal sell my wanton treasury ring jewel carcanet ere thou shall want but what thy wish can covet soldier this old buff will be translate Lad. into persian mantle rich embroider no rough pelt of thrumb to fight with weather shall be clothe in silk such as may vie for touch with their softness when it be calm and no violent gust do wave it into wrinkle Soul I must eat too Lad. nothing but choice caudy and drink wine that shall have pearl dissolve in it come let we hasten to our delight I have prepare a bed of artificial rose mix with down wherein our dalliance we will emulate the cyprian queen and she love warrior when in her ivory arm she do embrace his iron side Soul soft lady there be yet strict condition I be not come to that I must not be confine to time or place nor to your single number I must change as I see cause Lad. shall be thy own disposer he minister and like a handmaid wait when thou will grace another nor repine but with a patient long Soul on these term I feel a provocation Come Mah. do ease ever before produce such act of shame Himulco no matter it be a better life than war afford her son a hard cold bed of earth sleep break with a thousand apprehension of danger diet course and seldom seasonable hunger and thirst and death each hour present let we translate our Carthage unto Capua we shall not need to toil in blood and sweat for more enlargement scene the three to they Hannibal music hush our general Mah. how do he like this softness it agree not with his rough nature Hanm. music every place surfeit with this lasciviousness a song as from some window march on my merry mate to Venus war you need not fear your pate you shall receive no wound nor scar you may come naked to the fight we will have no other vessel but night only you must not see the blush of your enemy chorus the love battle set and we begin to counter-meet with active strive who shall win I saint and yet methinks you yield both lose and yet both win the field recover strength and then we will to these pleasant war again a light brave maintain and well come off on both side curse on this case you be well meet noble captain how do your courage brook this silken slavery be it not a easy bondage to be tie in bracelet of a wanton lady hair and chain your dare spirit to the awe of every glance her eye shoot tell i true how do the pleasure of this Capua relish upon your sense be they not even what desire can shape Mah. they be my lord most absolute Han. and you be please with they he they can be refuse be offer we so pay after labour as the fruit and harvest of our pain what stupid earth can be so void of apprehension as not to think they blessing Han. that can Hannibal who through the swarthy vizard age and care have tan his face with blush at the change of soldier into woman why in stead of Plume-crowned crest wear you not tire and deck your neck with gem in stead of arm they with corslet lay by all command save only to set your distaff-servant task and study lascivious dress not war discipline better employ invention how to court a mistress in the fashionable garb than to contrive a useful stratagem where force prevail not Mah. who have we to sight with lead we again to action we will express a courage double by this little rest and from the hope of such another conquest we will act wonder to make victory dote on our valour Han. you like carthaginian speak from the sonles of man muster your soldier we will again to Rome and with the terror of our approach make earthquake in the heart of her gown senator burn the proud trophy adorn she Capitol or make they scarecrow bury she high-ascending tower in heap of their own ruin and till tyber die with blood of his own child not a arm shall cease from slaughter have we cut our way through mountain and thaw rock of ice for passage to reach the head of Rome and shall we not triumph in her rich spoil yes we will triumph or by the genius of my native Carthage and the religious oath I make my father when yet my youth have see the progress but of nine sun through the twelve celestial mansion i will level all the rugged Apennines and mount the humble valley till their head be wrap in cloud whence thunder shall not force i till I survey the plain of Italy like earth manure chalk with the bone of roman after their flesh be bury in the gorge of kite and vulture he speak like Hannibal scene the four to they two lady Han. what lady be that Mah. she be of Salapia Han. she be lovely what unusual passion soften i on a sudden I methinks can play with air and wanton with the breath of such a mistress court she amorous and not mistake a phrase nor fright her tenderness with any repetition of war horror cease your rebellion thought I must be man and keep my freedom he do observe his eye how it be fix Han. what do creation mean a woman for but pleasure shall not I pursue it then since it be the end of all we either do or wish it be action soul that make it live I must enjoy it this way desire be a law set down by nature counsel and not to be dispute Mah. so my lord example shall direct we we may well if Hannibal turn courtier 1 lady one at once sweet gentleman though I shall covet change at once i will not admit plurality Han. to you fair storehouse of your sex excellence I will direct the language of my heart 2. lady it be sure a noble dialect my lord that must express it Han. lady it can speak nothing but passion you have wound it and from the self same eye that shoot the dart I must have balm to cure it 2. lady you be my lord a conqueror and may command the will of all beneath you Han. but I be your captive and in that pleasant bondage will abide though I may force my ransom 2. Lad. violence will it become those virtue same proclaim we to have possess you and I dare be confident nothing can tempt you to turn ravisher though I shall boast virginity Han. suspect of such a ill wrong be your own innocence my love be zealous and the passive flame feed with a pure desire I will enjoy you to mix our soul not mere to delight the wanton sense 2. Lad. how can you a man who custom have habituate in the extreme of cruelty change nature and perhaps your first innate and not a second only bear out of use methinks it be not possible your thought shall be possess of other object then what war horror paint with bloody colour love and a lady be for such as case have soften into woman Hannibal have nothing in he but what be masculine so harden too that those weak sire can never alter his temper Han. yes your eye have do it although my skin be horny and my flesh almost insensible through daily weight of heavy arm the substance of my heart be flexible and take impression of love from your perfection it not derogate from the best difference in man composition to love for that best speak he man and argue he have a spirit capable of thing worthy his being Come then perfect i with your addition make my captivity a conquest and i will fix 2. Lad. that be enough to brand you with a last infamy you have design for action shall you stop the prosecution of a war begin with such success and only for a woman to will make you be the scorn of man the subject of jester libel I can court your valour as you be Hannibal but as a lover the thought of that cool all affection have I at Cannae be or Thrasimenus gird in a amazonian male my head wrap in a iron tiara and my hand arm with a sword I will have keep the side of Hannibal to dote upon those wonder his conquer arm then act Han. as from water cast on bitumen so from these sharp check my flame increase you express a soul make other valour but derivative from you as if the spring of all flow thence and we but drink our small proportion from your abundance our embrace will people the waste world with warrior scene the five to they Mah. whence speak your haste and what Nun. I come from Spain and bring important news but sad he shall we by change ride through the zodiac of your pleasure and feast ourselves in every house 1. Lad. you still mistake the sign Mah. it be not in sure 1. Lad. nor yet in Taurus though I have a husband you two be a pair of captain he she flout we sure Nun. what shall this courtship mean maharbal and Himulco that be character for valiant captain turn sinock-souldier and Hannibal 1. Lad. the air of Capua have not so change we but we can preserve our modesty Mah. oh miracle that Capua have honest woman in it Nun. will Hannibal attend my message Han. have thou bring she pearl ravish from neck of rich roman dame i will pave the path we tread to Hymen joy with spoil of all the city I have conquer Nunt. not of new Carthage Sagunt Locris Tarracon all these be re-overcome by Scipio in Spain he only triumph 2. Lad. do not Hannibal mind the sad news revenge if nothing else shall wing he to new conquest Hann. I perceive error in my behaviour court a woman when I shall threaten vengeance but she be fair hang beauty that and ease be the only engine to ruin virtue lady pray withdraw the affair of man be handle 2. Lad. may they prove your honour more in valour than in love Han. I be prepare and if there be a accident that do exceed in horror praise or wonder discourse it lively that it may impress something within to beget a act shall parallel it Nunt. that must be new Carthage her siege and take when the roman general approach the wall a cold fear shake her genius the earth groan with weight of such a multitude his navy likewise at that instant make a cloud upon the sea so round about the city be begirt our resolution mix with despair soon arm we and the assault be sudden we do do before consider yet what we do thus with the wall height prove successful we have respite to advice the sea we think sufficient to defend that pait it wash and direct all our force to the isthmus where we sally forth the enemy retire but out of policy to draw we far on and now the sun survey we from his height when sudden a violent northwind join with the ebb sweep all the channel dry of which the roman be inform by certain fisherman seize the opportunity and free pass to the unman wall enter without resistance what more they be full conqueror do need no relation custom shew it Hannibal the example make some other city yield some policy win some force some treachery deliver up all be possess by Scipio Han. then Rome shall ransom they revenge be able out of a flinty cowardice to strike the fire of valour with that new supply I do expect from Carthage we will to Rome and emulate this victory nor let it be your affliction that blind chance have rob your former labour of their due reward Rome will repair all scene the six to he Bomilcar see bomilcar be come cousin what answer send we the Carthage senate to my demand thy look speak discontent as if the business of thy errand choke the unwilling passage utter it my breast be proof against all misfortune Bom. I must then deliver a relation of ingratitude beyond example those who you have make master of wealth and honour and release their palsy age from many a coward fear not mind the rich benefit you have do they deny your need relief if you want aid they say your conquest be but a lie rumour nor will they credit doubtful testimony of any present they not stick to call the ground of this your war in Italy your own ambition not their safety malice of faction have frame pretence to cloud the glory of your action which to confirm the more see their command that you shall instant withdraw your force and to return to Carthage Han. not till now when in my talon I have almost seize Rome eagle and prepare my sharpen beak to prey upon her hair Bom. it be likewise fear that Massanissa have forsake Carthage so that unless some policy can win Syphax unto we we must never more expect numidian aid his counsellor seem to desire it for they wish your presence and that you will put the instruction here contain into a sudden act Han. must I then leave Rome unsubvert So a man that strive to make himself eternal by erect of some stupendous monument be force to his last quiet ere the work be perfect leave it but a lame and half design of his ambition he have not Hannibal his force here let we forward with that strength which yet be leave we nor regard the tie their dote policy will chain we with valour consist in heart more than in number let we on to Rome Han. no passion shall submit unto my best part conquest of myself shall speak i more in this then if my power have level she seven hill I leave she only to grow more worthy of my victory I will obey though each unwilling step wound i beyond the cure of common patience command of power must not be withstand great action make man great good action good the argument of the second act Hannibal and Scipio meet accidental at the court of Syphax who favour the roman and be a young man be wrought upon by Hannibal to dote upon Sophonisba who after much unwillingness express and reflection on some former love she bear Massanissa who have be the carthaginian friend but now become the roman be give to Syphax for his wife the scene the court of Syphax in Cyrtha scene the first Syphax Piston Crates attendant Pist. it will prove I fear lame policy to haut betwixt these faction awe by two such spirit as never be still from envy or revenge Syph. brave Hannibal brave Scipio great Carthage but great Rome who eagle eye have gaze against the sun of many a glorious triumph when the bright beam reflect from their riches have blind daylight as if heaven great eye borrow his only from they Crat. Carthage be oar ancient friend and friendship long continue shall not be easy lose Syph. a useful tenet where the condition be private but in king it do not hold war chance be variable and he that now be victor may be conquer before his peace be settle from example we must consult our safety more than from a moral precept have not Scipio get Spain from Hannibal and join unto he massilia king be not their army flush with the rich spoil of Sagunt and who know but they will transport then force and begird Carthage itself it be better that we yield free to amity than be compel than Scipio must be welcome Pist. but if fortune prosper my counterplot he will be greet with a affront shall cloud his entertainment and dim the paint glory of that pomp your compliment intend our youthful king must not direct our counsel nor affair of state be order by the affection of one so weak in policy indulgent to his own passion Carthage be set down by our experience for numidia love and shall possess it Syph. we may then consider the carthaginian general be a man wear with employment into more decay of strength and year than can give any hope of a continuance Rome green champion be full of grow sap to make he spread whilst the other like a age oak that long have fight with tempest and withstand the rage of burn air now yield to every gust a bough or arm till one more violent shatter the dry limb or quite root it up it be better to provide for last state then mere to prevent a present fate then Scipio must be welcome Crat. but if Syphax will hear our reason Syph. Crates you have be our worthy counsellor and by your wisdom steer government in a right course whilst yet our youth do want it but we be now grow Riper in judgement and we can distinguish to they messenger the different ground of any politic act nor do we find it safe in rule of state if Scipio be not welcome what be your haste Mes. the roman general be arrive and enter Syph. and no feign thunder to inform we of it from the loud voice of flock multitude shall throng to bid he welcome Mes. he be scarce know to any but myself his train be private without due state only some needful servant to wait upon his person Syph. be they his army I will exhaust my treasury to feast they and every common soldier shall drink health in his corinthian goblet which shall be his largesse likewise let our minister fill the shrill throat of war loud instrument And dodonean brass be beat deaf whilst it proclaim his welcome let the sea echo the sound to sagant and return their shoot again flourish scene the second to they Scipio Lelius welcome great Scipio never do Syphax joyful arm embrace a guest of so rich value in who mind world of heroic virtue be congest to make he up a worthy Scip. i will not answer your kindness Syphax with a compliment my tongue be not oil with flattery I have steal a little time from action to inform numidia king how Rome by my advice have choose he a favourer of her cause that suffer by false Carthage the success of my recover Spain have give new hope unto her faint spirit that be near their last expire by the massacre the carthaginian make six consul have already fall my father and my uncle Sempronius Terentius and Flaminius and last Marcellus who receive his death even in the sight of Rome yet there be a Scipio survive to conquer he or die in the enterprise Syph. and that brave Scipio shall not want what aid my person or my kingdom can afford he Scip. Rome shall make great esteem of Syphax friendship and when she shall be wrap in silken wing of victory and peace his statue crown shall grace the triumph Pist. I shall rather joy to see he chain a captive though myself and family be sell to be his ransom in Carthage quarrel scene the three to they Hannibal Himulco maharbal Han. this cold entertainment do make i jealous Crat. see how soon their eye have find each other Scip. sure it be Hannibal his name and nature be stamp upon his brow I in those wrinkle read it valour mix with cruelty to which ambition only as the first wheel in engine move the rest that eye he lose pass the fen of Arnus and such a look his counterfeit be draw with if there be treachery Syph. what will Hannibal Scip. be it Hannibal we be betray by Syphax Han. what art Scip. Rome general and thy enemy Han. ha Scipio then the character report give we of he be false he scorn ignoble way of honour to overcome by treachery Scip. I think the same of Hannibal Han. and find it it be only thy conspiracy with Syphax who make his court a privilege for that fame will proclaim with blush Syph. why this uproar Han. Syphax thou be treacherous Scip. to Rome and Scipio Han. to Hannibal and Carthage Pist. now observe how he will calm the tempest Syph. what to answer from sudden doubt you both possess i with I can easy resolve a jealousy be sometime strengthen by the excuse shall kill it yet if your confidence will give credit to a king religious oath by all that make the sacred difference in i I be free from thought of ill to either your arrival be unexpected and if either danger be smother in intent you bring it with you which i will prevent if all numidia strength can do it think not i perfidious for then i will doubt you since self evil be most common the parent of suspicion but for your own mistrust you be safe here than in your own camp guard with a maze of your best soldier Han. it be a satisfaction I bless the occasion make we meet my long be violent to see thou Scipio Scip. my more to see thou Hannibal but rather arm in the field prepare for a encounter then here to parley Han. doubt not such a greeting when next we meet Syph. I needs must interpose and moderate this contention pray my lord let i be powerful to dispose your temper for other mild impression that my court for entertain two such enemy at once be make discourse for after-age a banquet wait you music usher it music thus peace bid soldier welcome Scip. Syphax no think of Rome cause and let your feast be season with say to that if thou prove treacherous expect a vengeance justice never yet give severe execution to a great I must be go the affair of war attend i when I have settle Rome peace we will comply in the effect action till then must live by blood and labour Hannibal farewell next greeting will be rough Han. not to be calm with word Grow strong be still a conqueror till I shall conquer thou Scip. thou be but flatter by a ambition vain than thy dream ten carthage and Hannibal will not weigh equal with the achievement Han. one Hannibal and Carthage poise but in a equal scale with twenty Rome and twenty Scipio shall weigh like lead against feather Scip. proud insister upon his own slight merit Remember Syphax thy vow have make thou Rome Syph. which i will preserve as sacred inviolate as if eternal seal have ratify it usher the roman general forth flourish he have word such power upon our general to deject he thus Han. my brain be labour he i will help to deliver it Han. as giddy fancy when they do present delightful shadow seem to please the sense when it be quiet and not capable of any object till the dreamer joy sudden wake he and the false impression vanish to their first nothing so have I flatter my hope he I prophesy success despite of Scipio Syphax counsellor who secret correspondency with we teach the great mean by which their master love must be regain a long experience confirm our friend then prosecute it thorough scene the four to they Piston Crates and a little after Syphax they be return Pist. my lord till now the accident cause by the roman presence do prevent we from give satisfaction to your doubt which be but just ground our young king be full of his youthful passion and so In the prosecution of they counsel rather do set a keen edge upon his appetite we therefore give he way but if we can reduce his action to a rule of judgement we will open oppose he or conspire as against a tyrant that make will his law see he be return be confident Syph. how whisper I do suspect Han. if Syphax dare be private Syph. dare Hannibal have thou intent more black than ever night give execution to even in Carthage senate house as well as in my own court I dare stand the encounter of single Hannibal withdraw Han. they must not the wrong thou have do Carthage must be witness that when fame speak they loud partial man make not their incredulity a excuse for what no satisfaction can restore thy honour lose in infamy Syph. thou tempt i with these dark preface yet thy upbraid do seem so frivolous my patience rather laugh at their vainness clear my understanding without more circumstance for yet my innocence Know not to accuse myself unless forgive thy saucy taunt a privilege Han. what error but to defend itself will strive though vain to mock truth out of truth well Syphax know the expectation of a state delude can but trouble it a king be more than a mean person bound with dimension of the bare man his action be his people and what he do or suffer they must stand Consider then when Carthage shall call up revenge and with all force pursue the injury to satisfaction when her soldier who custom have make pitiless shall plough the womb of teem mother with their falchion to prevent the issue that may vindicate a father slay make your numidian virgin the ruin of their pleasure and not leave a altar to your god nor private lar that may defend a household from their violence when these who very repetition carry horror enough to fright man into peace shall happen Syph. when they shall it rather seem a positive threat Tell Carthage be her power of a extent that limit can not bind with any circumscription i will not fear it to die for Rome be above victory furnish ten thousand choice numidian horseman to wait on Scipio why be our command no more respect i will have execution forerun my edict that concern the good of Rome and Scipio stand you like dull statue fix to their first foundation when your diligence shall borrow speed from wind as if you rid on the contract air to hasten it Han. full well their age wise with experience know to disobey a king unjust command law and religion warrant Syphax youth be fit to court beauty than to sit at a state helm and steer the various course it be subject to by his green violent passion with which his bed ere this have be enrich have Carthage find he kind fair Sophonisba Crat. that name have startle he Han. she from who eye the amorous sun resign first his own may be ambitious to derive new fire yet she to be reserve for his embrace who slight that honour all the neighbour king have be competitor for and will lay down their crown to purchase sell their very being to be translate into a possession of Sophonisba Pist. it begin to work Syph. whence do the intent of this great honour to i derive itself Han. from a desire of friendship and league with Syphax which his passionate love to Rome and Scipio that admit no reason deny I must publish the dishonour do to a lady at who least command a nation shall be arm lead by such captain as in their emulation will declare what mortal owe to her divine perfection that warrant her revenge as just a quarrel as ever stir up valour in a conscience scruple have coward here my commission take end and I must go Syph. stay Hannibal strange passion war against my resolution and love begin to circle i in flame ere my eye take the fire what be Rome or Scipio to Sophonisba in who rich beauty mor comprehend than the macedonian can from his many conquest and subversion of monarchy boast himself owner of what be a king promise but a politic and that be allow evasion to gain time for counsel with his will i will be for Carthage to enjoy Sophonisba i be inflame from the report and if my sense find truth answer fame great Hannibal shall lead numidia power against Rome or any place he have design for conquest Han. but if Syphax shall again suffer Scipio menacy to fright his weakness out of this resolve I Syph. my weakness tempt i not with a suspect let i have Sophonisba or i will make a rape upon your Carthage not on she for what delight be in violence inquire the cause of that loud shout shout within messenger Messen. I come to inform you a stately ship from her rich lade womb have on our shore deliver such a train of glorious virgin that attend on one who lead the rest Han. no more it be Sophonisba Syph. receive she with religious ceremony perfume the air with incense rich than the phoenix funeral pile let harmony music breath out her soul at every artist touch Cover the pavement which her step must hallow with persian tapestry how I be ravish with the expectation and like some light matter catch in a whirlwind all my faculty be hurry forward scene the five To they Sophonisba lady all in white and veil who to the music of the song place themselves in a figure for a dance veil it be sure some mockery the song beauty no more the subject be of want on art to flatter thou or in dull figure call thou spring lily or rose or other thing all which beneath thou be and grow into contempt when thou do show the unmatched glory of thy brow chorus behold a sphere of virgin move none amongst they less than queen of love and yet their queen so far excel beauty and she be only parallel a dance too i will expect the event in the dance they discover themselves in order Sophonisba last a fair one but it be not Sophonisba fair yet unhappy Syphax from who eye such wonder have be to long conceal which be the goddess which Sophonisba Sopho. can thy sense distinguish see Syphax thus I deign to show thou that king have be proud to worship Syph. ere I embrace let i admire in each eye sit a Cupid who as he skip about to shoot his dart be himself fetter in the golden curl that deck her brow Elysium but a fable and that eternity the poet dream of serve but to figure this Sopho. although my difference may challenge more i be not ambitious of shallow praise my spirit must fly high to catch at fame not flattery Syph. come you not to love i then Sopho. I do but not to think all your expression though they be extend beyond my wish can merit it Syph. I be a king and you methinks shall court the fortune with a glad readiness to share my honour and to be make my equal Sopho. be you more I be above addition in myself and shall be lessen if I do confine a thought to any person and the act include nothing but bare satisfaction of a desire I will not let a smile fall loose from i but shall be attend by action worth their history which read shall with the apprehension of my greatness amaze posterity Syph. can Sophonisba be covetous of more than the earth honour when she shall sit encompass in a ring of noble matron that shall deify her beauty with their praise when she shall be crown with sparkle wreath to blind the gazer as if a constellation have be rob to make she shine when in a king arm sleep all pleasure shall be minister that nature and art in their contention strive to own and take their glory from Sopho. I hire pretty bait to catch a easy wanton who dull earth a little varnish over do know itself no far than the superficial tincture discover in her glass I have a soul great than Syphax kingdom and to bound it will take from what I be it will be your honour above all that your ambition can direct you to hope for next eternity if I vouchsafe to add unto your petty royalty my great self and the addition be great than you can purchase by your conquest it be but her due when Sophonisba crave world for her kingdom their king for her slave shall Syphax make a resignation of all he own be for i it be but as if he pare a molehill from the earth to place a Atlas in its stead Han. Come Sophonisba you must consent there be fame in it that will give you a everlasting be in the memory of benefit your country will derive from it child shall first be teach to speak your name and from their age grandsire learn your story who often repetition shall take from the tediousness of age and make they seem as if they dance for joy when palsy shake they Syph. be I enslame and shall I not enjoy mock i not lady into a despair you show i heaven and shut the gate against i make not a king that deign to be your servant a slave unto your cruelty Han. to give Syphax a satisfaction your competitor false Massanissa he that share your kingdom and will engross it all have long solicit for Sophonisba love Sopho. oh Massanissa Han. he have now forsake Carthage she out of her piety to do her country a good prefer you and that her revenge may be pursue with great violence allow her elf your right though she be a treasure may be dispose of to a more advantage of Carthage strength Syph. will Sophonisba love then if I fight carthag quarrel Sopho. yes your fortune Whilst it be at height but the least declination wave it to a ebb I from that fall must mount to high honour if a gale meet it to raise i Syph. massanissa person it seem can limit your desire Sopho. he be a man make up of fire no gross earth clog his spirit when it will mount to honour top and load same with his act have he not fall from Carthage Sophonisba have but be the price of his desert and yet I love he dear Massanissa Syph. she have overcome i I will be great every day action shall raise i a step high and i will take you with i lady no you shall lead i the tribute I will pay for every kiss shall be a victory over your enemy proud Rome shall find Syphax can be a soldier when Sophonisba bid he put on steel Han. the not to be resist power of beauty Carthage I will salute thou now with joy nor shall the thought of thy ingratitude make i less willing to pursue thy good through a deep sea of vanquish roman blood Syph. we will feast than fight who lead by such bright eaves will not match on to any enterprise exennt the argument of the three act Syphax war against the roman at length be take prisoner by Massanissa who find Sophonisba in the city of Cirtha marry she with a vow not to deliver she up to the roman for which marriage be reprove by Scipio he give her poison which she take to prevent the roman triumph over she the scene Utica scene the first Scipio soldier a little after Lelius Scip. Syphax so soon revolt I what weak man will mock away his safety child thus play with fire to please their foolish sense be often burn and make their sport the instrument of their own danger Massanissa yet be constant and by this time have subdue he success must follow those attempt that rise from a just cause and crown the enterprise Lelius what news Lelius I labour with the event joy hinder a delivery Massanissa gird in a conquest great never make a triumph glorious be return back to present Scipio with numidia spoil and Syphax captive Scip. it be a joyful errant just Nemesis thy griffin have be swift and bear thou well to see the execution of a revenge upon perfidious Syphax have thou fail in it we just may disclaim thy deity and without fear of punishment profane thy altar on who marble now we will pay a sacrifice of rich flame mix with the blood of king discourse the progress to this event Leli. when your successful policy have destroy both the camp of Asdrubal and Syphax with devour fire who flame seem to the distant gazer on it a prodigy that threaten dissolution and beget their great fear then when the artillery of heaven speak loud through the burn air to tell the world jove angry when you retire to Utica to prevent a invasion intend by the carthaginian navy which dark the sea much like a cloud of vulture that be convent after some great fight to glut their ravenous gorge with the gore thousand of soulless man lie reek in the mad numidian king in who despair have kindle a new valour gather head and with a fresh supply of unman man for have they be such as experience have teach the useful order of a war the end have again be doubtful give we battle their first assault make we retire yet still we keep the sudden form have put we in for best advantage till their heedless courage hurry they on where our foot legion observe their disorder for they fight in throng so thick that many time one strike wound his fellow give they new resistance at which they stop mate with apprehension of their own danger who the incense king mix his threat with promise of honour labour be to bring one till his horse be kill we take he prisoner with two thousand more the rest not flame be flee Scip. brave victory worthy the achiever to who memory eternal statue shall be raise and trophy rich as Rome Capitol be glorious with but where be Massanissa Leli. he pretend to visit Cirtha Syphax chief city which be deliver up Scip. I have new fear flourish that woman will again bewitch he know the cause scene the second to they Massanissa soldier bring in Syphax bind Leli. it be Massanissa Scip. the only wealth i will be possess of I embrace in thou a boundless treasure Massa. let not Scipio flatter i into pride for what be rather fortune than i Scip. the action of thy virtue fortune be a under power that be herself command by desert it be a mere vainness of our credulity to give she more than her due attribute which be but servant to a heroic spirit Massa this example may instance proof for her divinity all be but endeavour until perfect by the success and that be fortune only desert share little in she Scip. let not thy modesty maintain such error to refuse just praise be a extreme worse than man overween opinion of himself great Massanissa shall have all honour due unto his conquest and wear triumphant garland that false king chain to his chariot from the gazer eye invite scorn not pity Syph. it be not manly to insult over misery to which thyself be as subject and perhaps may feel chance make prosperity when it be at high but pastime to delight her giddy humour and will deject the most seem possessor when she command a restitution of her lend favour that she may confer they upon another this consideration may invite mercy Scip. when superior justice make we her instrument shall we be partial I the execution it be to mock the power and call down vengeance yet I grieve for Syphax that he deserve the punishment who weakness suffer a piece of paint earth to tempt he from his religion and neglect the god who he invoke for witness to that vow a woman make he violate Syph. it be my hope she may deceive thou too and with her charm bewitch the boast conqueror that be her slave from his faith to Rome Massa. his madness will betray i to a reproach Syph. it take from my own suffering to see my enemy in the same danger when he by his adulterous embrace receive the like infection into he soul that make i sick of virtue and of all but my disease Scip. do you enjoy the lady Massa. yes she be my wife Scip. your act be somewhat rash before her husband death do the religion you pay numidia god warrant it law full Massa. Syphax be dead in his captivity his life be i which I but lend he only for Rome great triumph Scip. we will consult a little and then dispose you Syphax Syph. as your will advise you it be the curse of greatness to be its own destruction so we see that mountain cedar have the least defence against storm when shrub confront their violence scene the three Scipio Massanissa remain Scip. when first you free do commit yourself unto my charge and promise with a vow my like only shall dispose your action either you love they or your flattery pretend admiration of some virtue you think possess i one I must confess I glory to be master of that be continence I have converse with beauty rich as nature do ever make art proud to counterfeit may have command some that conquest give i yet have I still keep out desire but you have yield to that passion do betray a weakness in you will obscure the glory of all your other goodness think how dangerous it be to a young man on who expectation opinion eye be fix to mix his action with wanton pleasure when his thought transfer the wicked object of his humorous sense unto his soul that poison all her faculty and make they useless noble Massanissa your good deed sing by fame be music to i your error I have rather you yourself will silent consider and reform before with any show of least unkindness you force i to reprove they Massa. let not Scipio deny those error a excuse if nature have a like clothe man disposition and all do wear one habit of the mind you need not urge the example of your own to instruct another continence for all from a necessity and innate temperance will be as you be though I do not boast command over pleasure I pursue they not with a intemperate appetite but make reason my guide that tell we i to provide for a succession do become the judgement of a wise king posterity may well be call the eternity of life he never die that have issue for which I have marry her my own conquest give i Scip. your own conquest pray do not arrogate too much you must not dispose Rome prisoner whilst you fight her quarrel the war be not you though you the victory she must attend her sentence from our senate which hardly will be partial to her beauty though it be adulterate with more art then ever lasciviousness be mistress of and rack it invention for let Sophonisba be then deliver up Massa. perhaps yourself after your boast continence will have she to be your own Scip. be that your jealousy weak passionate man that through thy blind reason foresee not thy own danger by the example of other misery and yet be ripe to maintain gross error of thy will and seem discretion master have not Syphax bewitch by magic of her wanton eye into a dotage break his faith with Rome he may have flourish in his height of glory and still command over his division which Rome will add to massanissa kingdom yield up Sophonisba Massa. you will seem to give i mine upon condition I shall restore the gold reserve only the earth to trample on in Sophonisba I have a treasure my own life shall ransom if she be force away and to consent she shall be yield up to any roman be worse than sacrilege though I shall scare the hallow statue of nunsidia god down from their altar and convert their temple into the loathsome use of necessity king oath be equal with decree of fate those I have make I can violate Scip. then I disclaim thou there be not so much danger in a know foe as a suspect friend to prevent a it be best to quench a brand before it fire the rest Massa. he be angry and I must not let it grow to ripeness of his hate I be resolve to be the example of a constancy fame shall proclaim for wonder scene the four to he Sophonisba she be already come ere my wish can summon she her sight begin to shake the weak foundation of my resolve like stone shoot from a engine she ruin with the battery of her eye what my intent have build Soph. why be my lord thus cloudy I expect entertainment of other difference such as cheerful love present desire with from the interchange of smile and amorous glance Massa Sophonisba I be new enter into meditation of death and other wretchedness depend upon mortality Soph. be that the argument of your dejectedness it shew too much of woman weakness man shall have a spirit above the fear any consideration can work within he death be but a entrance to our eternity and if our life merit a blessedness hereafter we shall run with joy to meet it Massa. but if one possess of happiness beyond the hope of any great that deny another can be in expectation more than what his soul enjoy already apprehend a separation from it by the malice of death or other accident it will force he weep silent within though shame restrain his outward tear Sopho. this circumstance will seem to prepare something that shall have relation unto yourself or i perhaps the consul have urge that I shall be deliver up to Rome dispose massanissa vow make with religious ceremony can if he respect the god consent to it and rather than their tyranny shall make i wretched anew to my first earth return i the worst remain of Sophonisba Massa. dare she die then to quit her fear Sopho. and meet the instrument with great cheerfulness than fond parent can show at the return of their decree child from long captivity this tender frame lodge a masculine and heroic spirit and if thy passionate love deny thyself to be the actor in this benefit give i thy sword my own right hand shall guide the point unto my heart i will without tremble open a passage for the crimson drop and smile to see they diaper the pavement as if it be some conceit workmanship make by the looker fancy Massa. ere my eye shall suffer such a object to offend their hitherto please sense I will dissolve they in their own humour no Sophonisba this breath shall first waste into empty air and leave my naked bone in the hallow pile ere I prove false to thou give i some wine i will drink a bridal health to Sophonisba and mix it with Nepenthe here be the juice will cause forgetfulness and mock the extremity of any adverse fortune messenger with wine Sopho. sure it be poison will Massanissa leave i then unguarded to Scipio violence I have here no father nor uncle to defend i not so much as a poor tear by weep to stir up a roman pity I shall only dart a anger from my burn eye to show the carthaginian spirit I be bear with which not with stand will not quit this part from a captivity this Scipio rage will hurry in his triumph to be gaze at and scorn by the course rabble do not then by such a keep of it break thy vow for it be no less to i I must still want the benefice of such a constancy for though himself live not to yield i up I be expose to it and without least power to make resistance let i then partake that mean of best security Massa. not to have a monument of last adamant raise to my memory no Sophonisba this be no potion to preserve a beauty in it be first green or ripe it to a summer or prevent the autumn or return the winter into a new spring this will pale the die which thy cheek blush when it will clothe modesty in a rich scarlet make that ivory breast now love soft bed whereon he play be the wanton and ambush himself to catch the flame he shoot at other from thy eye as cold as scythian sand bleak with continual freeze into a seem crystal Scipio dare not insult over thou thy face will check his malice into a silent admiration of it or if he sin so much as to deject thou with the least fear of ill the god themselves will leave their immortality to be each other rival in thy love and strive which shall revenge thou best this must not weaken what be so powerful Sopho. if my lord be then resolve to leave i widow be yet scarce warm in his embrace let i mix a tear with his last drink that he may carry something of Sophonisba with he Massa that have in it sufficient virtue to convert all the thessalian pontic phasian aconite into preservative and turn this draught into a antidote which yet be powerful above all that art and nature in conspiracy of mischief ever invent we that be great and yet subject to the incertainty of fortune have this custom to prevent it we affect glory and conclude no slate that end be not in itself be fortunate So offer to drink Soph. let my lord first give i leave to breathe a errant over it that when he be enter Elysium throng of carthaginian hero may bid he welcome and inform themselves from he of Sophonisba Massa. do it then quick i will bear it and command the king of night resign his ravish queen to be thy handmaid hell I shall now be arm to meet thy horror with great power than thou Soph. if there be fate why be it conceal the revelation of it will make we strive to mock eternal providence the ingenious artist that do form this cup foresee not such a use of it have he know it shall have minister death to a king his tremble hand can never have finish it with such exactness what so ever decree be write in the adamantine table of destiny we must subscribe to time though he keep on his swift and silent pace death be sure at first or last to win the race pray keep out Scipio I have almost end So drink be Massa. ha what have Sophonisba madness do oh Aesculapius if thy deity be not a feign one then administer and show it powerful in restore back my Sophonisba to her former safety Numidia shall pay worship to none other but thou and Phoebus altar shall be raise make of iberian gold and flame with incense until Arabia rich earth grow barren of gum and spice Sopho. why do Massanissa invoke vain aid the god be merciful in their deny it and it be but justice that I shall die my adulterous easiness deserve it that without the least resistance leave my yet live husband to embrace his enemy but it have warrant from the end my country good and the first love I bear thou Massanissa now let Scipio boast of his conquest Sophonisba be her own subverter it begin to work with a full strength my blood will serve to heat a salamander and convert his ice into a flame Aetna but paint fire to that which burn my marrow yet my look be cheerful and erect victory be never meet more joyful than I embrace that death prevent my misery my weak earth totter underneath a weight that sink it downward my still live spirit ride upon cloud to reach jove high sky who fear not death but in the worst part die die Mass. she be dead sink you supporter of this fabric into your deep foundation make they grave for your own ruin since there be not leave a weight worthy your bear she be not dead only she have translate her divinity to its own bless abode and call on i to pay a mortal duty shall have sacrifice and rich too king out of devotion shall offer themselves in flame and from their ash rise glorious star whence learned curiosity derive a new art shall teach astrologer the virtue of a influence shall include secret to make credulity astonish at their presage I will be their precedent and make this earth already consecrate with Sophonisba precious foot a altar open thy cranny to receive my blood and from its mixture spring a grove of balsam lead by who ravish odour the new issue of every phoenix shall neglect Panehaia to bring her mother spicy death bed hither that be likewise her own cradle but this action shall have more state and ceremony no a king be the priest a king be the sacrifice his own sword whilst it be yet warm with his victory shall serve forth axe and so shall I but die then i will live to pay she more than the expiration of a short breath and die to all delight but what I can derive from her fair memory which shall be treasure here and by its virtue revive to kill i every life it give cause another death scene the five to he Scipio Lelius soldier Scip. the lady dead Massa. to Scipio malice Scip. can not Massanissa acquit himself of one but by commit a great folly but I must not chide most worthy Massanissa Massa. keep your flattery I have no Sophonisba touch she not none but myself shall bear she to the pile the sacrilegious hand beside attempt it I will cut off your triumph shall not twice kill Sophonisba with the body Scip. with best care attend he unto our tent lest that his passion grow into a desperate frenzy I must cure it by counsel mix with gift in that weak woman half Carthage strength be go Leli. our spy inform that the other half which I conceive be Hannibal intend upon the event of one great battle to hazard all his camp be already pitch near Zama whence a messenger be send that show the carthaginian much desire to have some conference with you Scip. we will dispose our army thitherward methinks I see victory crown already clap her wing over our head what a strange circulation be in time accident from victory peace be derive from peace security thence lust ambition two main ground of jar we fight for peace and peace again breed war the argument of the four act Hannibal be whole overcome by Scipio at the battle of Zama return to Carthage where be ill entertain by the senate he behave himself rough in the senate house and their intention of deliver he up to Scipio be discover by the aid of his faction he escape and fly the carthaginian submit themselves be reprove by Scipio who likewise impose upon they the strict condition and by a example of his own reclaim Massanissa from his passion the scene Carthage scene the first Hanno Gisgon Bostar a full senate be sit to they Hanno pray take no notice that we know the event of the late battle I already have employ my faction about a peace and Scipio be not far off it shall not be the act of Hannibal to boast of when we have betray he to the roman the condition beside be easy Gisg. mind the public Bostar do you think it not concern you Bost. I be my riches make i a senator my wisdom never deserve the purple be you politic let i preserve my state Gisg. your wealth it be grant raise you to this high place necessity may corrupt justice in a magistrate which to prevent at least our jealousy our carthaginian custom in election of senator sometime prefer the rich before the best man take your seat Bost. to fill it fear will not let i sleep Hanno attend the message it seem from Hannibal Bost. a worthy man he send we home three bushel full of ring of which I share the most Nunt. before I speak methinks the air about i as the sound of my sad word do pass through it shall thicken into a cloud then melt at every period into a weep rain till none be leave to give we breathe for sigh Oure Hannibal be vanquish by the roman Bost. we shall then have no more wealth bring home nor safe keep what we possess already curse on chance that mock we thus i will never make her statue of gold hereafter and by consequent never worship she I have but cold devotion towards a wooden goddess Hanno it be not fit evil remediless shall be lament from a misfortune something may arise to prevent great if it be apply with a exact consideration of all occurrent that may make it useful relate it then Nun. before the battle join the world two captain for beside they none merit be the name in equal competition meet to have conference where for a space they stand astonish at each other presence and like two comet tilt in the air against one another shoot prodigious flame from either eye and with a counterchange of fierce and angry look seem to begin a eager fight till Hannibal break silence and move a peace which Scipio or suspect it to be but wont policy or confident both of his own strength and success refuse then like two cloud swell big with a might tempest and hurry forward by contrary wind justle each other till their rib be break the sulphurous issue fly through the black air a inundation follow that will fright nature Archaeus from his quiet centre to seek a Aetna or out where he may dry himself so meet the army and with a shout that outnoise thunder charge each other brave at their first encounter mix their blood in stream that every way flow like a tide as yet the peaceful goddess incline to neither part till Massanissa bring up his right wing of numidian horseman and break the array enforce our first battle back to our second when we be compel to fight against our own lest their retire may put we out of order till betwixt we dead body make a bulwark so that neither we nor the roman but by trample on our fellow carcase can strike a blow of any use the roman legion now overpress we with their number and both wing of horseman wheel about to assault our rear we then be compass yet like angry lion who the toil hamper labour for our freedom but few escape five hundred only live of forty thousand which to Adrumentum be flee with Hannibal whence he intend to visit Carthage sudden Hanno his welcome if he foreknow it will give he small encouragement the incertainty of war do Hannibal solicit peace i will seem to oppose it then though it intend a good the inborn malice betwixt our family will not permit i allow his act or counsel by his greatness i be eclipse and though this overthrow may make he less in popular opinion his faction yet be strong Gisg. what mean you Bostar Bost. i be dead that horrible relation kill i I never shall see addition to my heap now Hannibal be conquer Hanno you have store enough wealth to maintain another army that may bring home increase Pray let we use your state we will spare your wisdom Bost. how be that Hanno my state and spare my wisdom i be a senator and wear my gown as formal as you can nod and spit at the end of every sentence and number with my own arithmetic more sum of coin then thy whole family part with my wealth i will rather die and purchase hell with it if Pluto will but sell his kingdom yet sure it can be so rich as I be the judge there be just bribe can buy a partial sentence scene the second to they Hannibal some soldier Han. ha methinks they shall salute i though I bring not victory when I present they with wealth their flattery be great than become they be I less in merit now then when success attend my action glue unto their seat and Hannibal enter grave father Hanno on sir we be patient to hear you speak Han. but patient he that stand accuse may challenge that or just tax you of more than tyranny Hanno be you so confident you dare affront your judge Han. ha my judge what envy though it be still from the black gall of lean Erinys adder can so blemish my life or same that from the least suspect I may incur a sentence be it for this I have through blood and sweat make Carthage great as Rome herself and have not politic dotage infect with your private avarice that will not spare i what myself bestow upon your case prevent it by call i and my army home I have ere this make Rome your tributary and be I return now to be judge because I have after so many victory lose one battle the monstrous birth of your ingratitude be able to fright manhood from posterity and check all undertake Hanno whence do you receive commission to move peace with Scipio Han. from my own judgement that foresee the danger my power can not prevent Hanno it seem you be declaim to coward Han. there be no privilege pull he down under your gown for that learn to know man then be his judge Bost. pray heaven he hurt not i most valiant Hannibal Han. I hate your flattery it be mix with scorn and I will rather trample upon your purple Nunt. good my lord forbear your violence Consider but their person and dignity Han. shall Jove himself provoke i with a disgrace like this i will challenge he to meet upon a cloud ram full of thunder and dart it at he till with flame I have consume the brass supporter of his heaven tumble he down with all his petty god unto their first mortality Nunt. the custom of Carthage government command respect unto their difference Han. let the respect be likewise teach they that belong to i and if my labour have maintain their ease in which they have both study and establish civil formality my rugged life do never practise it may well excuse a great error who be my accuser Hanno yourself Han. myself myself will be my judge then and make the abuse seat honour for a justice which your corrupt soul will never suffer your power to execute look carthaginian and if your reason eye can see the error your blind envy lead it to with blush guide they to reformation I that take a oath at nine year old before the altar when it be smoke with the horrid sacrifice of immolate man to be Rome enemy and perfect what my father have begin I that transfer the wealth of Spain to Carthage and through the freeze Alps melt my way into the fertile plain of Italy that wade with my army through the fen of gloomy Arnus in who fog I lose one of my body comfortable light I that overthrow six consul and at canna in one sight kill a hundred roman senator and thence present Carthage with a prey that may outvie a indian treasury cram with the choice wealth I that abroad whilst here you bathe in pleasure make my body propose against a tempest and endure the rage of more prodigious storm then ever fright mortal into religion Hanno yet at Capua the fair salapian Omphale can teach our carthaginian Hercules to spin and mind his distaff else she will not smile upon he for his work Han. thy malice Hanno like to the break some a rock beat back upon the angry main fowl thou own bosom I be above it and in spite of thou or all the battery of thy calumny will stand like a colossus to be gaze at by all beneath i when the scorn of man shall lash thy envy with the whip of satyr who vain do attempt to ruin that be build for fame Hanno nay you may keep your seat it well become you Han. it become you better when your grave nod and formal hem strike terror through the affright malefactor heart who for some slight offence expect his judgement no less than banishment or confiscation of all his substance which be share among you the public use neglect but in vain I tax your vice when your soul be sully with a ingratitude to i that make all other white as innocence compare with that black monster Carthage I disclaim thou and rather than employ my power again to raise thy head above other in thy ruin i will hide my own and but for reverence I bear the ash of my ancestor I will myself plough furrow in thy womb and sow my faction only for the increase of my own greatness Hanno pray observe it father he do affect the monarchy he will alter our government Han. you be deceive you be weak enough already there be no need of a sedition to subvert your state can you resist the roman and make peace upon your own condition scene the three to they Himulco hasty what be the meaning he you be betray my lord your safety need a sudden resolution Scipio enter the gate of Carthage Han. oh inhuman treachery but for prevent justice that will fall heavy upon you by some other instrument it be piety to wash corruption from this abuse place with your blood who stain will yet infect the pavement and remain like blush in the marble to betray the guilt you die for when the roman practise their tyranny upon you wish in vain you have a Hannibal he your danger will not allow your passion vent pray fly my lord Han. into some desert to converse with beast they have grateful soul Carthage methinks a earthquake shall palsy thy old joint and shrink thy head into thy shoulder or thy genius wrap thou in a perpetual cloud to hide the shame of this base act revenge i will court thou through the ruin of my own Carthage shall see not i from she her greatness grow from i all those that love i follow senator remain Hanno will we have ensnare he better but his faction want a head it be strengthless let a crier publish the sentence of his banishment that Scipio may take it for our act we must comply with all occasion that may make our peace a useful good no voluntary bondage we must receive the roman with a show of less fear than the straits of our necessity may excuse manhood for scene the four to they Scipio Massanissa Lelius some soldier Scip. now carthaginian although I be a conqueror success swell i no high to prefer myself above what judgement warrant I have strive with all oppose reason to forget your often breach of faith which you be tax with by all man for a vice that the air you breathe infect you with as if the place nature enforce it from necessity but custom must be conclude be the most efficient to cause that barbarous neglect of piety which shall be man sole object I be strengthen sufficient against fear since I can easy compel you to subjection but prefer a mild command before imperious rigour declare yourselves and you shall find that we practise no cruelty Hanno most worthy roman we may excuse the general and confer the guilt upon some private few who lead by a ambition make this war without consent from we some we have just punish and he by who as by the first great mover the rest be hurry forward we have banish to take from Rome all cause of after-jealousy his faction do prevent it else we have yield he up to Scipio peace be now the thing we crave and the condition no strict than the carthaginian will have propose have they be conqueror and Scipio sue to they Scip. can there be faith in those that will betray their own and such a one as make the end of all his action your greatness first and when that fail your safety a man that more than figure mars and merit a deify by your gratitude blush at it fame and with thy hundred tongue till all be hoarse proclaim it the condition propose shall stand if but to punish this this monstrous act nature methinks shall throw you from her warm bosom with a angry motion of all the earth sinew and not suffer you to suck her milk but dry her fruitful womb into a barrenness before such monster shall be again produce as you perform the strict clause and what afflict you most call it not satisfaction for our injury but punishment for your ingratitude to Hannibal Hanno that will take from my suffering when those we hate in misery bear a part envy grow fat by eat her own heart Scip. Lelius attend the carthaginian senator survey the city and see execution of all the league include do Scipio triumph and Massanissa hang the head one article be that they shall restore to Massanissa all that they have deprive he of Massa. they can restore my Sophonisba Scip. still that passion I think her memory have be wash away with the large stream of blood so late flow from his victorious sword Come Massanissa you shall enjoy a roman lady one that shall outvie the glory of a sun throne in his clear sky and make his light appear but as a shadow to her beauty one that shall comprehend within herself all that be ever feign of other woman and make their fable probable Massa. Rome have not another Sophonisba Scip. that the wealth of Rome best province may but ransom home his lose command over passion scene the five to they Lelius Lucius a young lady who be this lady Leli. a spanish captive Scip. do ever innocence look sweet as if she be joy to make this little frame her mansion why do thou weep they shall not hurt you pretty one Lad. they say they will carry i to Rome Scip. suppose they do roman be full of gentleness and mild will entertain you where you shall be teach civility of manner education clothe your mind in ornament of virtue fit your expectation and your beauty rip with mature age roman knight shall court it perhaps myself will take you to my bed Lad. Indeed you shall not you be a rough soldier your look will fright i Scip. can you then deny to cherish such a hope you shall enjoy delight above your wish your house shall be a court of pleasure spring shall always dwell within your garden as it Tempe be translate thither virgin shall attend you fair as the morning when she usher in the day with blush your bath shall be the dew gather from rose and your garment soft as the curl air by mild etesian wind make temperate when the sun ride on his lion to hunt heaven dog up you shall sleep on down drive from swan white neck be visit by matron usher to solemnity and at the public show outshine the glory of daylight with the lustre of those gem you shall be deck in and a conqueror when his head be wrap in triumphant laurel couch it upon your lap Massa. he be take man weak judgement that call it vice in other which himself be equal incline to Lad. I never hear of such fine thing before Scip. the barren soil that breed you be in fault I must confess nature have in your yet imperfect beauty show wonder to the world you be of her most curious labour and if fortune shall in so fair a book blur any lest exact draw line her deity be cruel your own a barbarous country where civility have scarce a name you can there expect a value of yourself above the worship their eye will give you when they rude gaze upon your form and by the sense distinguish the outward workmanship we teach our soul a glorious conversation with those virtue that deck the inside of a beauteous frame and vary pleasure honour earth delight to the imitation of that infinite and never die part Lad. you Lucius do never court i thus you will only tell i that I shall be a queen when your old father go to the low kingdom Scip. what be Lucius Luci. a prince among the celtiberian this lady noble bear to i betroth if Scipio will be merciful i will ransom Scip. you love she then Luci. above myself without she my being be not perfect Scip. bless occasion now Massanissa if example may rectify error in thou make my act a imitable precedent young prince receive she from my hand withal the sum intend for her ransom as a dowry love Rome and Scipio Luci. nobleness above the reach of praise how shall I show my gratitude Lad. when he have make i queen he bid you welcome to Lucius court Luci. and Lucius when grow man will bring you soldier Massa. seem he not to love she and yet without least pause he give her back be possess I be overcome I see passion be the noble soul worst enemy i be all for action music Scip. Massanissa be become himself again wherefore this music Lels. to gratulate your victory and the peace that give they rest the soldier have prepare a slight solemnity the carthaginian mix with the roman though their heavy heart to part with so much treasure scarce admit it Scip. it be seasonable there be cause to joy since massanissa new wed to my bosom and this young lady nuptial the soldier lead in by their captain distinguish several by their arm and ensign to the music of the follow put themselves into a figure like a battalion the song on brave on the foe be meet the soldier rank the battle set make the earth tremble and the sky redouble echo from your cry blood put a scarlet mantle on the late green plain they will sty anon chorus then follow but your order keep take prisoner set their ransom deep retreat for fame and the delight that peace bring only soldier fight the dance express a fight thank to all so you proportion pleasure we give way to it be Lelius yet inform of Hannibal Leli. that he be flee unto Antiochus or else to Prusias of Bythinia his end be doubtful Scip. if his discontent shall anew whet his envy to attempt their aid it will much disturb the asian province we will follow to prevent it Lelius you shall carry our success unto the senate and with it Syphax and the Carthage pledge Come my soul half we will hunt this Africa lion into a strong toil fame shall wait on we till we have load she and that she see our triumph finish in his tragedy the argument of the last act Hannibal be flee to Prusias king of Bythinia receive his promise for his safety the roman legate be arrive and Hannibal perceive Scipio and Flaminius the son of Flaminius who he have former slay to be among they and understand the house to be encompass by arm man suspect himself to be betray take poison which he always carry about he in his ring of which he die and Scipio to prevent the like ingratitude from his roman and out of a natural addiction he always have to learning it be say of he that Cyri and retire himself to his country Villa take upon he as it be a voluntary banishment the scene Bythinia scene the first Prusias Hannibal Himulco attendant Prus. you be welcome though your fortune be ebb the memory of what you have be shall command respect from good man to you virtue be not lessen by want of a success that be but a gloss fortune set on she misery do make her inside glorious sometime when desertless and bastard action as the heir of chance shine in their superficies but be search be find like bladder swell with a enforcement of wind into they which the least necessity or adverse fortune prick they dilate the include air and shrink into their first narrow dimension when true virtue bear her owner head above affliction wave and steer he into harbour Han. you be noble and like a king with judgement value i my mind be never subject I have know so much of both that neither of the pastime fortune delight herself with can incline i to height above a moderate nor decline i below myself prosperity adversity both make one even scale and weight be add to either show the difference he be not man will be deject or exalt every one shall temper the condition of his state such as the present make it with the fear or hope of after change and when he labour in the extremity of one or flow in the swell height of the other still his mind shall be the same chance vary every way but virtue course be constant Prus. you express a noble resolution and your soul show rich and glorious even through the cloud of your misfortune there be a readiness and a propense desire in i to aid you but circumstance must make it probable whether the cause justness may command the attendance of success for a attempt that be warrant by justice can want a prosperous end Han. if to descend my country or to compel encroach enemy to satisfaction such as will deprive we of the earth that nature in her legacy make our proportion be a justice I do never injury for these be only the motive to my action fame I know can not be silent but she must inform even the remote dweller how proud Rome who infant greatness by ambition nurse be now in grow and will spread itself if a prevention stay it not beyond all limit of the yet know world insult over her neighbour province from Carthage she have enforce Sicilia the world granary and other hand and her general swell with his fortune have attempt far to overflow all Africa you may likewise expect he will encroach upon your Asia Antiochus be already vanquish and flee to Ephesus if nothing else your safety shall invite you to take arm though but defensive state that never know a change but in their growth which a long peace have bring unto perfection be like steel which be neglect will consume itself with its own rust So do security eat through he heart of state whilst they be sleep and lull in her false quiet Prusias therefore shall dwell no long in so great a danger if he will not be a soldier let he arm his people Hannibal will be their captain and lead they unto action that shall take Fam with the wonder till I have make Rome who like the earth issue heap up hill on hill to raise her proud head nothing my right hand jove-like be arm with thunder which shall fly wing with prodigious flame of just revenge to punish her impiety Prus. I can glad cherish your resolution be ground on justice but to engage myself or people in a uncertain war before provoke by enemy be rashness that excuse can no way gloss to make it show a act worthy a man much less a king Han. you value those scruple more than a full weight of honour heaven give the difference to you but to be the figure of that power that will exact a just account of a king great action than what inferior owe to their creation the essential part of your eternity depend upon that point and can you more express yourself heaven minister then when you do the thing agree with it Prus. Rome comply with we for peace the violation of a religious oath superior justice can but punish else we may be bold to call the worship of the god no more than the issue of credulity produce to fright we with a name that have no power but what our fear allow it Rome be yet our friend and till she fall from honour we must hold her dear Han. in that consist your danger she be mask in policy and like a statesman without religion steer her course by show and mere appearance to whatever end amoition point she be not then too rash make not the greatness which be yet your own derivative from she it will leave your name a stain in time record and blot the table that shall preserve it Prus. noble Hannibal be safe with we and confident I expect the roman legate and if mediation or any practice which I can with honour assay to reconcile you may be useful Han. to reconcile we time shall first run back to his beginning and the world return to its first chaos ere I will admit of such a word let those that fawn upon the smile of peace and softness to delight their wanton appetite practise their low effeminate soul in fear and passion each thought of i shall be a numerous army to lead against Rome in my imagination I will fight with she still though I want soldier Prus. noble resolve scene the second to they Scipio Massanissa Flaminius other roman legate Han. ha Scipio and Flaminius among the roman legate there be some treachery inform thyself Himulco his pursue my course import no good and my sad soul labour with a prophetic apprehension of something he intend be ready thou thou my last refuge Prus. sudden cloud methinks creep over your eye though you be enemy peace warrant gentle greeting she be embleme in dove that have no gall you be here my guest and shall partake a courtly entertainment worthy such person Scip. Hannibal I know have put of the rough habit which his mind be late wrap in and since chance have make he the subject of my conquest in the peace Rome have allow his country the condition be strict keep all past contention must lose their memory and after strite be stifle in their first birth by prevention I must acknowledge my ambition bear my thought high than my country good or her enlargement only have my fortune captive the person of great Hannibal my triumph shall outvie all the rich pomp that ever make Rome shine Han. that person yet be free and capable of new design to make himself full owner of a glory above Scipio conquest it be not thy success decline i the least step towards subjection of my still high build hope which be strong prop with my resolution shall in time raise monument of fame unto my action let not one chance exalt thou Hannibal though Carthage own he not command a world great than she or Rome Scip. but the dimension be bound with that strict necessity they can be extend flatter not those hope with expectation of a change to any better than the now condition of thy subvert greatness which be ruin beyond all reparation thy attempt to build it new want material be vain far than the Sicilian dog bark against the moon Han. be not deceive with too much confidence the more they be press the more palm flourish that that will make Scipio look downward lift i up Scip. how thou be mock with self-opinion know I have a soul so full instruct it have power to temper the difference of my fortune with that mean that even the high glory to myself be but adversity and a abject state no less than be my present greatness man from outward accident shall not derive the knowledge of himself for so he be make the creature of beginning over which his virtue may command fortune and chance when he by speculation have inform his divine part he be perfect and till then but a rough matter only capable of better form it oft beget my wonder that thou a rude barbarian ignorant of all art but of war which custom only have be join to thy first nature teach thou shall know so much of man Han. I study man better from practice than thou can from book thy learning be but opinion my know truth subject to no gross error such as can be reconcile but by production of new and great do thy learned master of art with who even arm thou have converse before a battle join if fame speak truth by their instruction show thou sure way to victory than fortune join to valour and a full strength of man Scip. that which consist in action only and the event depend upon no certain rule demonstrative be fate not reason Prus. fie this strife sound harsh come Massanissa you have share your part of virtue and of fortune Han. least of virtue that leave a just cause to support a wrong one such be his fall from Carthage Massa. you be judge in your own cause but who will else subscribe to such a partial sentence Prus. pray no more my court look like a parliament of soldier where war methinks shall be discourse on how a battle shall be order or what form have most advantage what man have you know or history do mention that exceed in the degree of merit Han. Alexander the first best captain Scip. who the second Han. Pyrrhus Prus. and who the three Han. doubtless myself Scip. what then be I that conquer Hannibal Han. if I have conquer Scipio I have then be first Scip. do ever pride so swell the infect part of a rich soul be not his mind corrupt with that disease of virtue I shall covet to join i with it in a eternal fellowship and only here in outward enmity divide our body scene the last to they Himulco Han. how be satisfy be I yet safe he my observation have be I fear too curious for your danger if any be intend want all mean of opposition but my fear perhaps interpret worse than a consideration will from the circumstance which yet have show of probability Han. why what have see he arm troop guard all the passage by which the house be enter Han. I be then betray can king be treacherous have they mortal part subject to that corruption stain with leprosy the glorious brow of honour can creation be in her different work so negligent as not to perfect they she be idle when she make king shall be like god less than man Prusias and Scipio thus I mock your plot be treacherous now you shall have nothing but Hannibal earth to work on take the poison Scip. what be the meaning of this Massa it be poison sure that he take Scip. restrain he Han. it be too late Prus. Call our physician Han. all help be vain as your conspiracy it be no juggle sop to wrap the sense in slumber like death Colches never yield a juice more baneful I go still prepare thus to overcome your malice which discover my death bear i above it Scip. why shall Hannibal from the weak warrant of a bare suspicion be guilty of such barbarousness by all the hope I have of good man love or memory among their true value of desert I ever restrain my uncertaine thought their liberty from be busy about betray Hannibal by any practice honour may not father and glad call his own Han. persuade thy flatterer to credit it those that will deify the virtue in thy book not of thy mind practice have teach i how to read man soul do not I know then thy hypocrisy plaster the wound credit of thy act but if thou heal it there will be a scar to show posterity that what thou do be full of base corruption Scip. thou do much lessen thyself in thy first fear and now by the ill-grounded jealousy of my virtue will make thy own tax from this I have be true moral the institution have be my guide in every action which I do either as a man or prince Cyrus himself to who they be direct pursue they not so strict as I have breath not thy soul forth then till thou be satisfy of my true innocence for if thou die in thy suspicion be assure it will disturb thy peace hereafter and thy ash as the pile hallow they will fright thy ghost with shape of the dishonour thou unjust will lay on Scipio Han. Tell thy philosopher the earth have not a centre that the day be not illumine by the sun that fire be cold than the ever-frozen rock that bear the north-end of the earth axletree when they allow these paradox I will credit Scipio work on thou brave minister of my last victory over myself quench thy unnatural flame with my scortcht bowel now thou have meet a heat which join to thy make all the frame like the bright forge whence Jove have his artillery my heart my heart quench it Eridanus but it will dry thy water up i be wrap in great fire than the rash boy thou choke will this be Oeta that like the furious theban I may build my own pile and the flame as it ascend transform itself into a constellation or fix in the upper region of the air like a perpetual comet to fright Rome with his prodigious light methinks a earthquake totter the age fabric that so long have bear i on it and the divide pole embrace to kiss each other a inversion of nature order shall attend the fate of die Hannibal so Okes eradicate by a prodigious whirlwind tear the earth through which their large root spread themselves no less than the whole world to be my grave Scip. he be dead with he my glory Scipio act i will have die have not another object worthy they or his attempt he fame break thy trumpet now deaf thy wide ear and silence all thy tongue since he be dead who with his action wont to imp new feather to thy break wing and make thou fly a pitch above the reach of common eye Prus. lest that my honour suffer in the suspicion of betray he I will provide a last monument and fix his statue on it Scip. you Massanissa i will see establish in your kingdom Carthage thy base ingratitude to he who merit but just challenge all that thou can own shall teach i a prevention solitude be the soul best companion at linturnum my country Villa I will terminate my after life free from man flattery and fear of their lean envy he that suffer prosperity to swell he above a mean like those impression in the air that rise from dunghill vapour scatter by the wind leave nothing but a empty fame behind the epilogue by Scipio our strife be end yet in one I spy peace smile and war frown in another eye be victorious I must not submit to a dislike Rather to he that write our story grateful I will allow one leaf of laurel tear from my own brow and with their fair opinion of it these may make it a full garland if they please