



@The Terrors of the Night.
OR
A Discourse of Apparitions.
A Litle to beguile time idlely
discontented, and satisfie
so me of my solitary friends
heere in the Countrey, I
haue hastily vndertooke to
write of the wearie fancies
of the Night, wherein if I
weary none with my weak
fancies, I will herafter leane
harder on my penne and
fetch the petegree of my praise, from the vtmost of
paines.
As touching the terrors of the night, they are as many
as our sinnes. The Night is the Diuells Blacke booke,
wherein hee recordeth all our transgressions. Euen, as
when a condemned man is put into a darke dungeon,
secluded from all comfort of light or companie, he doth
nothing but despairfully call to minde his gracelesse former

life, and the brutish outrages and misdemeanours
that haue throwne him into that desolate horrour: so
when Night in her rustie dungeon hath imprisoned our
ey-sight, and that we are shut seperatly in our chambers
from resort, the diuell keepeth his audit in our sin-guilty
consciences, no sense but surrenders to our memorie a
true bill of parcels of his detestable impieties. The table
of our hart is turned to an index of iniquities, and all
our thoughts are nothing but texts to condemne vs.
The rest we take in our beds is such another kinde of
rest, as the wearie traueller taketh in the coole soft grasse
in summer; who thinking there to lye at ease, and refresh
his tyred limmes, layeth his fainting head vnawares
on a loathsome neast of snakes.
Well haue the Poets tearmd night the nurse of cares,
the mother of despaire, the daughter of hell.
Some Diuines haue had this conceipt, that God
would haue made all day and no night, if it had not been
to put vs in minde, there is a Hell as well as a Heauen.
Such is the peace of the subiects as is the peace of the
Prince vnder whom they are gouerned. As God is intitled
the Father of light, so is the diuell surnamed the
Prince of darknesse, which is the night. The only peace
of minde that the diuell hath is dispaire, wherefore wee
that liue in his nightly kingdome of darknes, must needs
taste some disquiet.
The Rauen and the Doue that were sent out of Noes
Arke, to discouer the worlde after the generall Deluge,
may well be an allegorie of the day and the night. The

day is our good Angell the Doue, that returneth to our
eyes with an Oliue branch of peace in his mouth (presenting
quiet and securitie to our distracted soules and
consciences); the night is that ill angel the Rauen, which
neuer commeth back to bring anie good tidings of tranquilitie:
a continuall messenger hee is of dole and misfortune.
The greatest curse almost that in the scripture
is threatened, is, that the rauens shal picke out their eies
in the valley of death. This cursed rauen the night, pecks
out mens eyes in the valley of death. It hindreth them
from looking to heauen for succor, where their Redeemer
dwelleth: wherefore no doubt it is a time most fatall
and vnhallowed. This being proued, that the diuell
is a speciall predominant Planet of the night, and that
our creator for our punishment hath allotted it him as
his peculiar segniorie and kingdome, from his inueterate
enuie, I will amplifie the vgly terrours of the night.
The names importing his mallice, which the scripture is
plentiful of, I wil here omit; least some men shuld think
I went about to coniure. Sufficeth vs to haue this heedfull
knowledge of him, that hee is an auncient male content,
and seeketh to make anie one desperat like himselfe.
Like a cunning fowler to this end he spreadeth his nets
of temptation in the darke, that men might not see to auoyd
them. As the Poet saith.
Quae nimis apparent retia vitat auis.
Too open nets euen simple birds doo shun.
Therfore in another place (which it cannot be but the
diuell hath read) he counsaileth thus.
Noctem peccatis and fraudibus obiice nubom.By night time sinne, and cloake thy fraud with clouds.
When hath the diuell commonly first appeared vnto anie
man but in the night?
In the time of infidelitie, when spirits were so familiar
with men that they cald them Du Penates, their houshold
Gods or their Lares, they neuer sacrificed vnto them till
Sunne-setting. Their Robbin-good-fellowes, Elfes,
Fairies, Hobgoblins of our latter age, which idolatrous
former daies and the fantasticall world of Greece ycleaped
Fawnes, Satyres, Dryades and Hamadryades, did most of
their merry prankes in the Night. Then ground they
malt, and had hempen shirts for their labours, daunst in
rounds in greene meadowes, pincht maids in their sleep
that swept not their houses cleane, and led poore Trauellers
out of their way notoriously.
It is not to be gain-said, but the diuell can transforme
himselfe into an angell of light, appeare in the day aswell
as in the night, but not in this subtil world of Christianity
so vsuall as before. If he doo, it is when mens mindes are
extraordinarily throwne downe with discontent, or inly
terrified with some horrible concealed murder, or other
hainous crime close smothered in secret. In the day
he may smoothly in some mild shape insinuat, but in the
night he takes vpon him like a tyrant. There is no theese
that is halfe so hardie in the day as in the night, no more is
the diuell. A generall principle it is, hee that doth ill hateth
the light.
This Macheuillian tricke hath hee in him worth the
noting, that those whom he dare not vnited or together

encounter, disioined and diuided, hee will one by one
assaile in their sleepe. And euen as Ruptures and
crampes doo then most torment a man when the
bodie with any other disease is distemperd, so the Diuell
when with any other sickenes or malladie the faculties
of our reason are enfeebled and distemperd, will be most
busie to disturbe vs and torment vs.
In the quiet silence of the night he will be fare to surprize
vs, when he vnfallibly knowes we shall be vnarmed
to resist, and that there will be full auditorie granted
him to vndermine or perswade what he lists. All that euer
he can scare vs with, are but Seleucus ayrie Castles,
terrible bug-beare brags, and nought els, which with the
least thought of faith are quite vanished and put to flight.
Neither in his owne nature dare he come nere vs, but in
the name of sin, and as Gods executioner. Those that
catch birdes imitate their voyces, so will hee imitate the
voyces of Gods vengeance, to bring vs like birds into the
net of eternall damnation.
Children, fooles, sicke-men, or mad-men hee is most
familiar with (for he still delights to worke vpon the aduantage)
and to them he boldly reuealeth, the whole astonishing
treasurie of his wonders.
It will bee demaunded why in the likenes of ones father
or mother, or kinsfolks, he oftentimes presents himselfe
vnto vs?
No other reason can bee giuen of it but this, that in
those shapes which hee supposeth most familliar vnto vs,
and that wee are inclined to with a naturall kind of loue,
we will sooner harken to him than otherwise.
Should he not disguise himselfe in such sub til formes of
affection, we would flie from him as a serpent, and eschew
him with that hatred he ought to be eschewd. If
anie aske why he is more conuersant and busie in churchyards
and places where men are buried, than in anie other
places? It is to make vs beleeue, that the bodies and
soules of the departed rest entirely in his possession, and
the peculiar power of death is resigned to his disposition.
A rich man delights in nothing so much as to be vncessantly
raking in his treasurie, to bee turning ouer hys
his rustie gold euerie houre: the boanes of the dead the
diuell counts his chiefe treasurie, and therfore is he continually
raking amongst them; and the rather he doth it,
that the lining which heare it should bee more vnwilling
to die, insomuch as after death their boanes should take
no rest.
It was said of Catiline, Vultum gestauit in manibus, with
the turning of a hand he could turne and alter his countenance.
Farre more nimble and sodaine is the Diuell in
shifting his habit, his sorme he can change, and cogge as
quicke as thought.
What do we talke of one diuel? there is not a roome
in anie mans house, but is pestred and close packed with
a campe royall of diuels. Chrisostome saith, the aire and
earth are three parts inhabited with spirits. Hereunto the
Philosopher alluded, when hee said, Nature made no
voydnes in the whole vniuersall: for no place (bee it no
bigger than a pockhole in a mans face) but is close thronged
with them. Infinite millions of them will hang swarming
about a worm-eaten nose.
Don Lucifer himselfe their grand Capitano, asketh no better
throne than a bleare eye to set vp his state in. Vpon a
haire they will sit like a nit, and ouer-dredgea bald pate
like a white scurffe. The wrinkles in old witches visages,
they eate out to entrench themselues in.
If in one man a whole legionof diuells haue bin billetted?
how manie hundred thousand legions retaine to
a Tearme at London. If I said but to a Tauerne, it were
an infinite thing. In westminster Hall a man can scarce
breath for them: for in euery corner they houer as thick
as moates in the sunne.
The Druides that dwelt in the Ile of Man, which are
famous for great coniurers, are reported to haue beene
lousie with familiars. Had they but put their finger and
their thumbe into their neck, they coud haue pluckt out
a whole neast of them.
There be them that thinke euerie sparke in a flame is
a spirit, and that the wormes which at sea eate through a
ship, are so also: which may verie well bee; for haue not
you seene one sparke of fire burne a whole towne, and a
man with a sparke of lightning made blinde, or kild outright.
It is impossible the gunnes should goe off as they
doo, if there were not a spirit either in the fier, or in the
powder.
Now for wormes: what makes a dog run mad, but a
worme in his tung? and what should that worme bee,
but a spirit? Is there anie reason, such small vermine as
they are, should deuoure such a vast thing as a shippe, or
haue the teeth to gnaw through yron and wood? No, no
they are spirits, or els it were incredible.
Tullius Hostillius who tooke vppon him to coniure vp
Ioue by Numa Pompillius bookes, had no sense to quake and
tremble at the wagging and shaking of euery lease, but
that he thought all leaues are full of wormes, and those
wormes are wicked spirits.
If the bubbels in streames were wel searcht, I am perswaded
they would be found to be little better. Hence
it comes that mares (as Columella reporteth) looking their
formes in the water, run mad. A flea is but a little beast,
yet if she were not possest with a spirit, she could neuer
leape and skip so as she doth. Froisard saith, the Earle of
Fois had a familiar that presented it selfe vnto him in the
likenes of two rushes fighting one with another. Not
so much as Tewksburie mustard but hath a spirit in it or els
it would neuer bite so. Haue wee not read of a number
of men that haue ordinarily carried a familiar or a spirite
in a ring in stead of a sparke of a diamond? why I tell ye
we cannot break a crum of bread so little, as one of them
will be if they lift.
From this generall discourse of spirits, let vs digresse and
talke another while of their seperate natures and properties.
The spirits of the fire which are the purest and perfectest,
are merry, pleasant, and well inclined to wit, but neuertheles
gyddie, and vnconstant.
Those whome they possesse, they cause to excell in
what euer they vndertake. Or Poets or boone companions
they are out of question.
Socrates Genius was one of this stampe, and the Doue
where with the Turkes hold Mahomet their Prophet to

bee inspired. What their names are, and vnder whome
they are gouerned, the Discouerie of witchcraft hath
amplified at large, wherefore I am exempted from that
labour. But of the diuinest quintessence of mettals and of
wines are many of these spirits extracted. It is almost impossible
for any to bee encumbred with ill spirits, who is
continually conuersant in the excellent restoratiue distillations
of wit and of Alcumie. Those that rauenously
englut themselues with grosse meates, and respect not
the quality but the quantity of what they eate, haue no
affinitie with these spirits of the fire.
A man that will entertaine them must not pollute his
bodie with any grosse carnall copulation or inordinate
beastly desires, but loue pure beauty, pure vertue, and
not haue his affections linseywolsey, intermingled with
lust, and things worthy of liking.
As for example if hee loue good Poets hee must not
countenance Ballet-makers, if he haue learned Phisitions
he must not fauor horse-leaches and mountebanks: for a
bad spirit and a good can neuer endure to dwell together.
Those spirits of the fire, howeuer I tearme them comparatiuely
good in respect of a number of bad, yet are
they not simply well inclinde, for they bee by nature ambitious,
haughty and proud, nor do they loue vertue for
it selfe any whit, but because they would ouerquell and
outstrip others, with the vaineglorious ostentation of it.
A humor of monarchizing and nothing els it is, which
makes them affect rare quallified studies. Many Atheists
are with these spirits inhabited.
To come to the spirits of the water, the earth, and the
ayre; they are dull flegmaticke drones, things that haue
much mallice without anie great might. Drunkards,
mizers, and women they vsually retain too. water (you
all know) breedeth a medley kinde of licor called beere;
with these watrie spirits they were possessed, that first inuented
the art of bruing. A quagmire consisting of mud
and sand, sendeth forth the like pudly mixture.
All rheumes, poses, Sciaticaes, dropsies, and gouts, are
diseases of their flegmaticke engendring. Sea-faring men
of what sort soeuer, are chiefe entertainers of those spirits.
Greedy vintners likewise giue hospitalitie to a number
of them; who hauing read no more scripture, than
that myracle of Christs turning water into wine in Chanaan,
thinke to doo a farre stranger miracle than euer he
did, by turning wine into water.
Alehouses and cookes shadie pauisions, by watrie spirits
are principally vpholden.
The spirits of the earth are they which crie, all bread
and no drinke, that loue gold and a buttond cap aboue
heauen. The woorth in nought they respect, but the
weight, good wits they naturally hate; insomuch as the
element of fire their progenitor, is a wast-good and a consumer.
If with their earth-plowing snowtes they can
turne vp a pearle out of a dunghill, it is all they desire.
Witches haue manie of these spirits, and kill kyne wyth
them. The giants and chiefetaines of those spirites, are
powrfull sometimes to bring men to their ends, but not
a iot of good can they doo for their liues.
Souldiers with these terrestriall spirits participate part

of their essence, for nothing but yron and golde (which
are earths excrements) they delight in. Besides, in another
kinde they may be said to participate with them, insomuch
as they confirme them in their furie, and congeale
their mindes with a bloodie resolution. Spirites of the
earth they were that entred into the heard of swyne in
the Gospel. There is no citie merchant, or country purchaser,
but is haunted with a whole hoste of these spirits
of the earth. The Indies is their Metrapolitane realme
of abode.
As for the spirits of the aire, which haue no other visible
bodies or form, but such as by the vnconstant glimmering
of our eies is begotten; they are in truth all show
and no substance, deluders of our imagination, and nought
els. Carpet knights, politique statesmen, women and childre^
they most conuers with. Carpet knights they inspire
with a humor of setting big lookes on it, being the basest
cowards vnder heauen, couering an apes hart with a lions
case, and making false alarums when they mean nothing
but a may-game. Politique statesmen they priuily
incite, to bleare the worlds eyes with clowdes of common
wealth pretences, to broach any enmitie or ambitious
humor of their owne, vnder a title of their cuntries
preseruation. To make it faire or fowle when they list to
procure popularity, or induce a preamble to some mightie peece of prowling, to stir vp tempests round about,
and replenish heauen with prodigies and wonders, the
more to ratifie their auaritious religion. Women they
vnder-hand instruct to pownce and boulster out theyr
brawn-falne deformities, to new perboile with painting

their rake-leane withered visages, to set vp flaxeshops on
their forheads, when all their owne haire is dead and rotten,
to sticke their gums round with Comfets, when they
haue not a tooth left in their heads to help them to chide
withall.
Children they seduce with garish obiects and toyish
babies, abusing them many yeares with slight vanities. So
that you see all their whole influence is but thin ouercast
vapours, flying clouds dispersed with the least winde of
wit or vnderstanding.
None of these spirits of the ayre or the fire haue so
much predominance in the night as the spirits of the
earth and the water; for they feeding on foggie-braind
melancholly, engender thereof many vncouth terrible
monsters. Thus much obserue by the way, that the grossest
part of our blood is the melancholy humor, which in
the spleene congealed whose office is to disperse it, with
his thicke steaming sennie vapours casteth a mist ouer the
spirit, and cleane bemasketh the phantasie.
And euen as slime and durt in a standing puddle, engender
toads and frogs, and many other vnsightly creatures,
so this slimie melancholy humor still still thickning
as it stands still, engendreth many mishapen obiects in
our imaginations. Sundry times wee behold whole Armies
of men skirmishing in the Ayre, Dragons, wilde
beasts, bloody streamers, blasing Commets, firie strakes
with other apparitions innumerable, whence haue all
these their conglomerate matter but from fuming meteors
that arise from the earth, so from the fuming melancholly
of our spleene mounteth that hot matter into the

higher Region of the braine, whereof manie fearfull visions
are framed. Our reason euen like drunken fumes
it displaceth and intoxicates, and yeelds vp our intellectiue
apprehension to be mocked and troden vnder foote, by
euerie false obiect or counterset noyse that comes neere
it. Heerein specially consisteth our senses defect and abuse,
that those organicall parts which to the minde are
ordained embassadours, doo not their message as they
ought, but by some misdiet or misgouernment being distempered,
faile in their report, and deliuer vp nothing
but lyes and fables.
Such is our braine oppressed with melancholy, as is a
clocke tyde downe with too heauie weights or plummets;
which as it cannot chuse but monstrously goe a
square, or not goe at all: so must our braines of necessitie
be either monstrously distracted, or vtterly destroyed
thereby.
Lightly this extreamitie of Melancholye neuer
commeth, but before some notable sicknesse; it faring
with our braynes as with Bees, who, as they exceedingly
toyle and turmoile before a storme or change of
weather, so doo they beate and toyle, and are infinitelie
confused before sicknes.
Of the effects of melancholy I need not dilate, or discourse
how many encumbred with it, haue thought the^selues
birdes and beasts, with feathers, and hornes, and
hydes; others, that they haue been turned into glasse;
others, that if they should make water they should
drowne all the world; others, that they can neuer bleed
inough. 
 Phisitions in their circuit euerie day meet with far more
ridiculous experience. Onely it shall suffise a little by the
way to handle one speciall effect of it, which is dreames.
A dreame is nothing els but a bubling scum or froath
of the fancie, which the day hath left vndigested; or an after
feast made of the fragments of idle imaginations.
How manie sorts there be of them no man can rightly
set downe, since it scarce hath been heard, there were
euer two men that dreamed alike. Diuers haue written
diuersly of their causes, but the best reason among them
all that I could euer picke out, was this, that as an arrow
which is shot out of a bow is sent forth manie times with
such force, that it flyeth farre beyond the marke wherat
it was aymed: so our thoughts intentiuely fixt all the day
time vpon a marke wee are to hit, are now and then ouer-drawne
with such force, that they flye beyonde the 
marke of the day into the confines of the night. There
is no man put to any torment, but quaketh and trembleth
a great while after the executioner hath withdrawne his
his hand from him. In the daye time wee torment our thoughts
and imaginations with sundry cares and deuices; 
all the night time they quake and tremble after the 
terror of their late suffering, and still continue thinking
of the perplexities they haue endured. To nothing more
aptly can I compare the working of our braines after
we haue vnyoakt and gone to bed, than to the glimmering
and dazeling of a mans eyes when hee comes newly out
of the bright Sunne, into the darke shadow.
Euen as ones eyes glimmer and dazle when they are
withdrawne out of the light into darknesse: so are our

thoughts troubled and vexed when they are retyred from
labor to ease, and from skirmishing to surgerie.
You must giue a wounded man leaue to grone while 
he is in dressing: Dreaming is no other than groaning,
while sleepe our surgeon hath vs in cure.
He that dreams merily is like a boy new breetcht, who
leapes and daunceth for ioy his pain is past: but long that
ioy stayes not with him, for presently after his master the
day seeing him so iocond and pleasant, comes and dooes
as much for him againe, whereby his hell is renued.
No such figure of the first Chaos whereout the world
was extraught, as our dreames in the night. In them all
states, all sexes, all places are confounded and meete together.
Our cogitations runne on heapes like men to part a
fray, where euerie one strikes his next fellow. From one
place to another without consultation they leap, like rebells
bent on a head. Souldiers iust vp and downe they
imitate at the sacke of a Citie, which spare neither age
nor beautie: the yong, the old, trees, steeples and mountaines,
they confound in one gallimafrie.
Of those things which are most knowne to vs, some
of vs that haue moyst braynes make to our selues images
of memorie: on those images of memorie whereon we
buyld in the daye, comes some superfluous humour of
ours, lyke a Iacke-anapes in the night, and erects a puppet
stage, or some such ridiculous idle childish inuention.
A Dreame is nothing els but the Eccho of our conceipts
in the day.

But other-while it fals out, that one Eccho borrowes of
another: so our dreames (the Ecchoes of the day) borrow
of anie noyse we heare in the night.
As for example; if in the dead of the night there be anic
rumbling, knocking, or disturbaunce neere vs, wee
straight dreame of warres, or of thunder. If a dogge
howle, we suppose we are transported into hell, where
we heare the complaint of damned ghosts. If our heads
lye double or vneasie, we imagine we vphold all heauen
with our shoulders like Atlas. If wee bee troubled
with too manie clothes, then we suppose the night mare
rides vs.
I knew one that was crampt, and hee dreamt that hee
was torne in peeces with wylde horses; and another,
that hauing a blacke sant brought to his bed side at midnight,
dreamt he was bidden to dinner at Iron-mongers
Hall.
Anie meate that in the day time we eat against our stomackes,
begetteth a dismall dreame. Discontent also in
dreames hath no little predominance: for euen as from
water that is troubled, the mud dispersingly ascendeth
from the bottome to the top; so when our blood is chafed,
disquieted and troubled, all the light imperfect humours
of our bodie, ascend like mud vp aloft into the
head.
The clearest spring a little tutcht, is creased wyth a
thousand circles: as those momentarie circles for all the
world such are our dreames. when all is said, melancholy
is the mother of dreames, and of all terrours of the
night whatsoeuer.
Let it but affirme it hath seene a spirit (though it be but
the moone-shine on the wall) the best reason wee haue
cannot infringe it.
Of this melancholy there be two sorts; one that digested
by our liuer swimmeth like oyle aboue water, and that
is rightly tearmed womens melancholy, which lasteth
but for an houre, and is (as it were) but a coppie of their
countenance: the other sinketh downe to the bottome
like the lees of the wine, and that corrupteth all the
blood, and is the causer of lunacie. well moderated recreations
are the medicine to both: surfet or excessiue
studie the causers of either.
There were gates in Rome, out of which nothing was
carried but dust and dung, and men to execution: so manie
of the gates of our senses serue for nothing but to
conueigh out excrementall vapors, and afrighting deadly
dreames, that are worse than executioners vnto vs.
Ah woe be to the solitarie man that hath his sinnes continually
about him, that hath no withdrawing place from
the diuell and his temptations.
Much I wonder how treason and murder dispense
with the darknes of the night, how they can shriue themselues
to it, and not raue and die. Me thinkes they shuld
imagine that hell imbraceth them round, when she ouer
spreads them with her blacke pitchie mantle.
Dreames to none are so fearfull, as to those whose accusing
priuate guilt expects mischiefe euerie hower for
their merit. Wonderfull superstitious are such persons
in obseruing euerie accident that befalls them: and that
their superstition is as good as an hundred furies to torment
Bond-men in Turkey or in Spaine are not so ordinarilye
fold, as witches sell familiars there. Farre cheaper maye
you buy a winde amongst them, than you can buy wind
or faire words in the Court. Three knots in a thred, or
an odde grandams blessing in the corner of a napkin, will
carrie you all the world ouer.
Wee when we frowne knit our browes, but let a wizard
there knit a noose or a riding snarle on his beard, and
it is haile, storme and tempest a month after.
More might be spoken of the prodigies this countrey
sendes foorth, if it were not too much erring from my
scope. Whole Ilands they haue of yee, on which they
build and ttaffique as on the maine land.
Admirable (aboue the rest) are the incomprehensible
wonders of the bottomlesse Lake Vether, ouer which
no fowle flies but is frozen to death, nor anie man pasleth
but he is senselesly benummed like a statue of marble.
All the inhabitaunts round about it, are deafned wyth
the hideous roring of his waters when the winter breaketh
vp, and the yee in his dissoluing giues a terrible cracke
like to thunder, when as out of the midst of it (as out of
Mont-Gibell) a sulphureous stinking smoak issues, that
welnigh poysons the whole Countrey.
A poyson light on it, how come I to digresse to such a
dull, Lenten Northren Clyme, where there is nothing
but stock-fish, whetstones and cods-heads? Yet now I remember
me, I haue not lost my way so much as I thoght
for my theame is The terrors of the Night, and Island is
one of the chiefe kingdomes of the night; they hauing
scarce so much day there, as will serue a childe to ask his

father blessing. Marry with one commoditie they are
blest, they haue Ale that they carry in their pockets lyke
glue, and euer when they would drinke, they set it on
the fire and melt it.
It is reported, that the Pope long since gaue them a
dispensation to receiue the Sacrament in ale, insomuch
as for their vncessant frosts there, no wine but was turned
to red emayle, as soone as euer it came amongst them.
Farewell frost: as much to say, as farewell Island, for I
haue no more to say to thee.
I care not much if I dream yet a little more: and to say
the troth, all this whole Tractate is but a dreame, for my
wits are not halfe awaked in it: and yet no golden dreame,
but a leaden dreame is it; for in a leaden standish I stand
fishing all day, but haue none of Saint Peters lucke to
bring a fish to the hooke that carries anie siluer in the
mouth. And yet there be of them that carrie siluer in the
mouth too, but none in the hand: that is to say, are verie
bountifull and honourable in their words, but except it
be to sweare indeed, no other good deedes comes from
them.
Filthie Italionat complement-mungers they are, who
would faine be counted the Courts Gloriosos, and the refined
iudges of wit; when if their war drops and the withred
bladders of their braines were well searcht, they
haue nothing but a fewe moath-eaten cod-peece sutes
(made against the comming of Mounsier) in the one, and
a few scraps of out-landish prouerbes in the other: and
these alone doo buckler them from the name of beggers
and idiots. Other-while perhaps they may keep a coyle

with the spirit of Tasso, and then they folde their armes
like Braggarts, writhe their neckes alla Neapolitano, and
turne vp their eye-balls like men intraunced.
Come, come, I am entraunced from my Text I wote
weil, and talke idlely in my sleepe longer than I should,
those that will harken any more after Dreames, I referre
them to Artimidorus, Synesurs, and Cardan, with many others
which onely I haue heard by their names, but I
thanke God had neuer the plodding patience to reade,
for if they bee no better than some of them I haue perused,
euery weatherwise old wise might write better.
what sense is there that the yoalke of an egge should
signifie gold, or dreaming of Beares, or fire, or water, debate
and anger, that euery thing must bee interpreted
backward as Witches say their Pater-noster, good being
the character of bad, and bad of good.
As well we may calculate from euery accident in the
day, and not goe about any busines in the morning till
we haue seene on which hand the Crow sits.
O Lord I haue heard many a wise Gentlewoman say,
I am so merry and haue laught so hartily, that I am sure
ere long to bee crost with some sad tydinges or other; all
one as if men comming from a Play should conclude,
Well we haue seene a Commedie to day, and therefore
there cannot choose but be a Tragedie to morrow.
I doo not deny but after extremity of myrth, followe
many sad accidents, but yet those sad accidents (in my opinion)
wee meerely plucke on with the feare of comming
mischiefe, and those meanes wee in pollicie most
vse to preuent it, soonest enwrappe vs in it, and that was

Sathans tricke in the old world of gentillisme to bring to
passe all his blind Prophecies.
Could any man set downe certaine rules of expounding
of Dreames, and that their rules were generall, holding
in all as well as in some, I would beginne a litle to list
to them, but commonly that which is portentiue in a
King is but a friuolous fancie in a beggar, and let him
dreame of Angels, Eagles, Lyons, Griffons, Dragons neuer
so, all the augurie vnder heauen will not allot him
so much as a good almes.
Some will obiect vnto mee for the certainety of
Dreames, the Dreames of Cyrus, Cambyses, Pompey, Caesar,
Darius, and Alexander. For those I answer, that they were
rather visions than Dreames, extraordinarily sent from
heauen to foreshew the translation of Monarchies.
The Greeke and Romane histories are full of them,
and such a stirre they keepe with their Augurers and
Soothsayers, how they foretold long before by Dreames
and beasts and birds intrayles, the losse of such a battaile,
the death of such a Captaine or Emperour, when false
knaues, they were all as Prophet Calchas, pernitious
Traytors to their Country and them that put them in
trust, and were many times hyred by the aduerse part to
disharten and discourage their Masters by such Conycatching
Riddles as might in truth be turned any way.
An easie matter was it for them to prognosticate treasons
and conspiracies, in which they were vnderhand inlincked
themselues, and how euer the world went it was
a good pollicie for them to saue their heades by the shift,
for if the treasons chaunst afterwards to come to light, it

would not be suspected they were practisers in them, insomuch
as they reueald them, or if they should by theyr
confederates be appealed as practisers, yet might they
plead and pretend it was done but of spite and mallice to
supplant them for so bewraying and laying open their intents.
This tricke they had with them besides, that neuer
till the verie instant that anie treason was to be put in execution,
and it was so neere at hand that the Prince had
no time to preuent it, would they speake one word of it,
or offer to disclose it: yea, and euen then such vnfit seasons
for their colourable discouerie would they picke
foorth, as they would be sure he should haue no leasure
to attend it.
But you will aske why at all as then they should step
foorth to detect it? Marry to cleare themselues to hys
successors, that there might bee no reuenge prosecuted
on their liues.
So did Spurina the great Astrologer, euen as Caesar in
the midst of all his busines was going hastely to the Senate
house, he popt a bill in his hand of Brutus and Cassius
conspiracie, and all the names of those that were colleagued
with them.
well he might haue thought that in such hast by the
high way side, he wold not stay to peruse any schedules,
and well he knew and was assertained, that assoone as euer
he came into the Capitoll, the bloudie deed was to
be accomplished.
Shall I impart vnto you a rare secrecy how these great
famous Coniurers and cunning men ascend by degrees

to foretell secrets as they doo. First and formost they are
men which haue had some little sprinkling of Grammer
learning in their youth; or at least I will allowe them to
haue been Surgeons or Apothecaries prentises, these I
say hauing runne through their thrift at the elbowes, and
riotouslie amongst harlots and make-shifts spent the annuitie
of halfpennie ale that was left them, fall a beating
their braynes how to botch vp an easie gainfull trade, and
set a new nap on an old occupation.
Hereupon presently they rake some dunghil for a few
durtie boxes and plaisters, and of tosted cheese and candles
endes, temper vp a fewe oyntments and sirrups:
which hauing done, farre North, or into some such rude
simple countrey they get them, and set vp.
Scarce one month haue they staid there, but what with
their vaunting and prating, and speaking fustian in steede
of Greeke, all the Shyres round about do ring with their
fame: and then they begin to get them a Library of three
or foure old rustie manuscript books, which they themselues
nor anie els can read; and furnish their shops with
a thousand quid pro quos, that would choake anie horse:
besides, some wast trinkets in their chambers hung vp,
which maye make the world halfe in iealouzie they can
coniure.
They will euermore talke doubtfully, as if there were
more in them than they meant to make publique, or was
appliable to euerie common mans capacitie: when God
bee their rightfull Iudges, they vtter all that they know
and a great deale more.
To knit vp their knaueries in short, which in sooth is

the hang-mans office, and nones els) hauing pickt vp theyr
crummes thus pretely well in the Countrey, they drawe
after a time a little neerer and neerer to London; and at
length into London they filtch themselues priuely: but
how? Not in the hart of the Cittie will they presume at
first dash to hang out their rat-banners, but in the skirtes
and out-shifts steale out a signe ouer a Coblers stall, lyke
Aqua vitae-sellers and stocking menders.
Manie pore people they win to beleeue in them, who
haue not a barreld Herring or a peece of poore Iohn
that lookes ill on it, but they will bring the water that he
was steept in vnto them in an vrinall, and craue their iudgment
whether he be rotte^, or merchant and chapmanable
or no. The brute of their cunning thus traueling fro^ alehouse
to Ale-house, at length is transported in the great
hiltes of one or other countrey Seruing-mans sword to
some good Tauerne or Ordinarie: where it is no sooner
arriued, but it is greedily snatcht vp by some dappert
Mounsier Diego, who liues by telling of newes, and false
dice, and it may be hath a pretie insight into the cardes also,
together with a little skill in his Iacobs staffe, and hys
Compasse: being able at all times to discouer a new passage
to Virginia.
This needie Gallaunt (with the qualities aforesaid)
straight trudgeth to some Noble-mans to dinner, and there
enlargeth the rumor of this newe Phisition, comments
vpon euerie glasse and violl that he hath, rayleth on our
Galenists and calls them dull gardners and hay-makers
in a mans belly, compares them to dogs, who when they
are sick eate grasse, and saies they are no better than pack

or malthorses, who if a man shuld knock out their brains
will not goe out of the beaten high way; wheras his horsleach
will leap ouer the hedge and ditch of a thousand Dioscorides
and Hippocrates and giue a man twentie poysons
in one, but he would restore him to perfit health. With
this strange tale the Noble-man inflamed, desires to bee
acquainted with him: what does me he, but goes immediately
and breaks with this mountebanke, telling him if
he will diuide his gains with him, he will bring him in custome
with such and such States, and he shall bee countenanst
in the Court as he wold desire. The hungrie druggier,
ambitious after preferment, agrees to any thing, and
to Court he goes; where being come to enterview, hee
speaks nothing but broken English like a French Doctor
prete^ding to haue forgotte^ his naturall tung by trauell,
when he hath neuer been farther than either the Lowe
Countries or Ireland, inforced thether to flye either for
getting a maid with child, or marrying two wiues. Suffifeth
he fet a good face on it, and will sweare he can extract
a better Balsamum out of a chip than the Balm of Iudaea:
yea, all receipts and authors you can name he syllogizeth
of, and makes a pish at in comparison of them he hath seen
and read: whose names if you aske, hee claps you in the
mouth with halfe a dozen spruce titles, neuer til he inue^ted
them heard of by any Christian. But this is most certaine,
if he be of any sect, he is a mettle-bruing Paracelsian,
hauing not past one or two Probatums for al diseases.
But oafe he be called to practise, hee excuseth it by great
cures he hath in hand; and will not encounter an infirmity
but in the declining, that his credit may be more aute^tical

or els when by some secret intelligence hee is through lie
instructed of the whole processe of his vnrecouerable
extremitie, he comes grauely marching like a Iudge, and
giues peremptorie sentence of death; whereby he is accounted
a Prophet of deepe prescience.
But how he comes to be the diuells secretarie, all this
long tale vnrips not.
In secret be it spoken, he is not so great with the diuell
as you take it. It may be they are neere a kinne, but yet
you haue manie kindred that will doo nothing for one
another; no more will the diuell for him, except it be to
damne him.
This is the Tittle est amen of it: that when he wexeth
stale, and all his pispots are crackt and wil no longer hold
water, he sets vp a coniuring schoole, and vndertakes to
play the baud to Ladie Fortune.
Not a thiefe or a cut-purse, but a man that hee keepes
doth associate with, and is of their fraternitie; only that his
master when any thing is stoln may tell who it is that hath
it. In petie trifles hauing gotten some credit, great Peeres
entertaine him for one of their priuie counsaile, and if
they haue anie daungerous enterprise in hand they consult
with him about successe.
All malcontents entending anie inuasiue violence against
their Prince and Countrey runne headlong to his
oracle. Contrarie factions enbosome vnto him their inwardest
complots, whilest he like a crastie Iacke a both
sides, as if he had a spirit still at his elbow, reciprooallie
embowelleth to the one what the other goes about; receiuing
no intelligence from anie familiar, but their own

mouths. I assure you most of our chiefe noted Augurers
and Soothsayers in England at this day, by no other Arte
but this gaine their reputation.
They may verie well picke mens purses, like the vnskilfuller
cousning kind of Alchumists, with their artificiall
and ceremoniall Magicke, but no effect shall they
atchieue thereby, though they would hang themselues:
the reason is, the diuell of late is growen a puritane, and
cannot away with anie ceremonies; he sees all Prinees
haue left off their States, and hee leaues off his state too,
and will not be inuocated with such solemnity as he was
wont.
Priuate and disguised he passeth too and fro, and is in a
thousand places in an houre.
Faire words cannot anie longer beguile him, for not a
cue of curtsie will he doo anie man, except it be vpon a
flat bill of sale; and so hee chaffers with wysards and witches
euerie howre.
Now the world is almost at an end, he hath left forme
and is all for matter; and like an Embroyderer or a Tailer
he maketh hast of worke against a good time, which is
the day of iudgement: therefore you goodmen exorcisers
his olde acquaintance must pardon him, though (as
heretofore) he stay not to dwell vpon complements.
In diebus illis when Corineus and Gogmagog were little
boyes, I will not gainsaye but hee was wont to iest and
sport wyth countrey people, and play the good fellowe
amongst kitchin-wenches, sitting in an euening by the
fire side making of possets, and come a woing to them in
the likenes of a cooper, or a curmogionly purchaser: and

sometimes he would dresse himselfe like a Barbar, and wash
and shaue all those that laye in such a chamber: otherwhile
like a stale cutter of Queene hyue, hee would iustle
men in their owne houses, pluck them out of bed by
the heeles, and daunce in chaynes from one chamber to
another: now there is no goodnes in him but miserablenes
and couetousnes.
Sooner he will pare his nayles cleanly, than cause a
man to dreame of a pot of golde, or a money bag that is
hid in the eaues of a thatcht house.
(Heere is to bee noted, that it is a blessed thing but to
dreame of gold, though a man neuer haue it.)
Such a dreame is not altogether ridiculous or impertinent,
for it keepes flesh and bloud from despaire: all other
are but as dust we raise by our steps; which awhyle
mounteth aloft, and annoyeth our ey-sight, but presently
disperseth and vanisheth.
Senior Sathan when he was a yong stripling, and had
not yet gotten perfect audacitie to set vpon vs in the day
time, was a sly Polititian in dreames; but those dayes are
gone with him, and now that he is thoroughly steeled in
his scutcherie, hee playes aboue-boord boldly, and sweeps
more stakes than euer he did before.
I haue rid a false gallop these three or foure pages:
now I care not if I breathe mee, and walke soberly and
demurely halfe a dozen turnes, like a graue Citizen going
about to take the ayre.
To make a shaft or a bolt of this drumbling subiect of
dreames, from whence I haue bin tost off and on I know
not how; this is my definitiue verdit: that one may aswel

by the smoke that comes out of a kitchin gesse what meat
is there a broach, as by paraphrasing on smokie dreames
praeominate of future euents. Thus far notwithstanding
Ile goe with them; Phisitions by dreames may better discerne
the distemperature of their pale clients, than either
by vrine or ordure.
He that is inclining to a burning feuer shall dreame of
frayes, lightning and thunder, of skirmishing with the diuell,
and a hundred such like. He that is spiced wyth the
gowte or the dropsie, frequently dreameth of fetters and
manacles, and being put on the bilbowes, that his legges
are turned to marble or adamant, and his feet like the giants
that scal'd heauen kept vnder with Mount Ossa and
Peleon, and earst while that they are fast locked in quagmyres.
I haue heard aged mumping beldams as they sat
warming their knees ouer a coale scratch ouer the argument
verie curiously, and they would bid yong folks beware
on what day they par'd their nayles, tell what luck
euerie one should haue by the day of the weeke he was
borne on; show how many yeares a man should liue by
the number of wrinkles on his forhead, and stand descanting
not a litle of the difference in fortune when they are
turnd vpward, and when they are bent downward; him
that had a wart on his chin, they would confidently assertaine
he should haue no need of anie of his kin: marry
they would likewise distinguish betweene the standing
of the wart on the right side and on the left. when I
was a little childe, I was a great auditor of theirs, and had
all their witchcrafts at my fingers endes, as perfit as good
morrow and good euen.
Of the signification of dreames, whole catalogues
could I recyte of theirs, which heere there is no roome
for: but for a glannce to this purpose, this I remember
they would verie soberly affirme, that if one at supper
eate birds, he should dreame of flying; if fish, of swimming;
if venison of hunting, and so for the rest: as thogh
those birds, fish, and venison beeing dead and disgested,
did flie, swim and hold their chase in their braynes; or
the solution of our dreames should be nought els but to
expresse what meates we eate ouer-night.
From the vnequall and repugnant mixture of contrarious
meates I iumpe with them, manie of our mystie
cogitations proceede: and euen as fire maketh yron like
it selfe, so the firie inflammations of our liuer, or stomack
transforme our imaginations to their analagie and likenesse.
No humor in generall in our bodies ouer-flowing or
abounding, but the tips of our thoughts are dipt in hys
tincture. And as when a man is readie to drowne, hee
takes hold of anie thing that is next him: so our flutring
thoughts, when wee are drowned in deadly sleepe, take
hold, and coessence themselues with anie ouerboyling
humour which fourseth hiest in our stomackes.
What heede then is there to be had of dreames, that
are no more but the confused giddie action of our
braines, made drunke with the innundation of humours?
Iust such like impostures as is this Art of exposition of
dreames, are the artes of Phisiognomie and Palmestrie:
wherein who beareth most palme and praise, is the palpablest

foole and Crepundio. Liues there anie such slowe
yce-braind beefe-witted gull, who by the riueld barke or
outward rynde of a tree will take vpon him to forespeak
how long it shall stand, what mischances of wormes, caterpillers,
boughs breaking, frost bitings, cattells rubbing
against, it shall haue? As absurd is it, by the external branched
seames or furrowed wrinckles in a mans face or
hand, in particular or generall to coniecture and foredoome
of his fate.
According to euerie ones labor or exercise, the palme
of his hand is wrythen and pleyted, and euerie daye alters
as he alters his employments or pastimes: wherfore
well may we collect, that he which hath a hand so brawned
and enter-lined, vseth such and such toyles or recreations;
but for the minde or disposition, we can no more
looke into through it, than wee can into a looking Glasse
through the woodden case thereof.
So also our faces, which sundrie times with surfets,
greefe, studie, or intemperaunce, are most deformedlye
welked and crumpled; there is no more to bee gathered
by their sharpe embossed Ioyners anticke worke, or ragged
ouer-hangings or pit-falls; but that they haue beene
layd vp in slouens presse, and with miscarriage and misgouernment
are so fretted and galled.
My owne experience is but small, yet thus much I can
say by his warrantize, that those fatall brands of phisiognomie
which condemne men for fooles and for idiots,
and on the other side for trecherous circumuenters and
false brothers, haue in a hundred men I know been verefied
in the contrarie.
So Socrates (the wisest man of Greece) was censured by
a wrinckle-wyzard for the lumpishest blockehead that euer
went on two legs: whome though the Philosopher
in pitie vouchsafed with a nyce distinction of Art and nature
to rayse and recouer, when he was vtterly confounded
with a hisse and a laughter, yet sure his insolent simplicity
might lawfully haue su'd out his patent of exemption;
for hee was a forlorne creature, both in discretion
and wit-craft.
Will you haue the summe of all: some subtill humorist,
to feede fantasticke heads with innouations and nouelties,
first inuented this trifling childish glose vppon
dreames and phisiognomie; wherein he stroue onely to
boast himselfe of a pregnant probable conceipt beyonde
philosophie or truth.
Let but anie man who is most conuersant in the superstition
of dreames, reckon me one that hath hapned iust;
and Ile set downe a hundred out of Histories, that haue
perished to foolerie.
To come to late dayes; Lewes the xj. dreamt that
he swam in blood on the toppe of the Alpes: which one
Father Robert (a holy Hermit of his time) interpreted to
be present death in his next warres against Italy: though
hee liu'd and prosperd in all his enterprises a long whyle
after,
So Charles the fifth sayling to the siege of Tunis, dreamt
that the Citie met him on the sea like an Argosie, and ouerwhelmed
his whole Nauie: when by Cornelius Agrippa
the great Coniurer (who went along with him) it
was expounded to be the ouerthrow of that famous expedition.

And thereupon Agrippa offred the Emperor
(if it pleased him) to blowe vp the Citie by Art Magicke
in the ayre before his eyes, without anie farther ieopardie
of warre, or besieging. The Emperour vtterly refused
it and said, Since it was Gods warres against an Infidel,
he would neuer borrow aid of the diuell.
Some haue memorized, that Agrippa seeing his counsaile
in that case reiected, and that the Emperour (notwithstanding
his vnfortunate presage) was prosperous
and succesfull, within few dayes after dyed franticke and
desperate.
Alphonso King of Naples in like case, before the rumor
of the French Kings comming into Italy, had a vision in
the night presented vnto him of Aeneas ghoast hauing
Turnus in chase, and Iuno Pronuba comming betwixt them,
and parting them; whereby hee gest that by marriage
their iarring Kingdomes should be vnited: but far otherwise
it fell out, for the Freuch King came indeed, and he
was driuen thereby into such a melancholy extasie, that
he thought the verie fowles of the ayre would snatch his
Crowne from him; and no bough or arbour that ouershadowd
him, but enclosed him, and tooke him prisner;
and that not so much but the stones of the street sought
to iustle him out of his Throne.
These examples I alledge, to proue there is no certaintie
in dreames; and that they are but according to
our deuisings and meditations in the day time.
I confesse the Saintes and Martirs of the Primitiue
Church had vnfallible dreames fore-running their ends,
as Policarpus and other: but those especially proceeded

from heauen, and not from anie vaporous dreggie parts
of our blood or our braines.
For this cause the Turkes banish Learning from amongst
them, because it is euerie daye setting men together
by the eares, mouing straunge contentions and alterations,
and making his professors faint hearted and effeminate.
Much more requisite were it that out of our ciuill
Christian Common-wcalths we seuerely banish and
exterminate those fabulous commentaries on toyish fantasies,
which feare-benum and effeminate the harts of the
stoutest, cause a man without any ground to be iealous of
his owne frends and his kinsfolkes, and withdraw hym
from the search and insight into more excellent things,
to stand all his whole life sifting and winnowing dry rubbish
chaffe, whose best bottome quintessence prooues in
the end but sandie grauell and cockle.
Molestations and cares inough, the ordinarie course
of our life tythes of his owne accord vnto vs, though we
seeke not a knot in a bulrush, or stuffe not our night pillowes
with thistles to encrease our disturbance.
In our sleepe wee are agasted and terrified, with the
disordered skirmishing and conflicting of our sensitiue
faculties: yet with this terror and agastment cannot wee
rest our selues satisfide, but we must pursue and hunt af^ter
a further feare in the recordation and too busie examining
our paines ouer-passed.
Dreames in my minde if they haue anie premonstrances
in them, the preparatiue feare of that they so premonstrate
and denounce, is far worse than the mischiefe
it selfe by them denounced and premonstrated.
So there is no long sicknesse but is worse than death,
for death is but a blowe and awaye, whereas sicknesse is
like a Chancerie sute, which hangs two or thee yeare ere
it can come to a iudgement.
O a consumption is worse than a Capias ad Ligatum, to
nothing can I co^pare it better, tha^ to a repriue after aman
is condemnd, or to a boy with his hoase about his heeles,
ready to be whipt, to whom his master stands preaching
a long time all law and no Gospel, ere he proceed to execution.
Or rather it is as a man should be rosted to death,
and melt away by little and little, whiles Phisitions lyke
Cookes stand stuffing him out with hearbes, and basting
him with this oyle and that sirrup.
I am of the opinion, that to be famisht to death is farre
better, for his paine in seauen or eight dayes is at an end,
whereas he that is in a consumption, continues languishing
manie yeares ere death haue mercie on him.
The next plague and the neerest that I know in affinitie
to a consumption, is long depending hope friuolously
defeated, than which there is no greater miserie on
earth: and so per consequens no men in earth more miserable
than courtiers. It is a cowardly feare that is not resolute
inough to despaire. It is like a cowardly feare that is not resolute
inough to despaire. It is like a pore hungerstarvd wretch
at sea, who still in expectation of a good voyage, endures
more miseries than Iob. He that writes this can tell, for
he hath neuer had good voyage in his life but one, and that
was to a fortunate blessed Iland, nere those pinacle rocks
called the Needles. O it is a purified Continent, and a fertil
plot fit to seat another Paradice, where or in no place the
image of the ancient hospitalitie is to be found.
While I liue I will praise it and extoll it, for the true
magnificence and continued honourable bountie that I
saw there.
Farre vnworthie am I to spend the least breath of commendation
in the extolling so delightfull and pleasaunt a
Tempe, or once to consecrate my inke with the excellent
mention of the thrice noble and illustrious Chiefetaine,
vnder whom it is flourishingly gouerned.
That rare ornament of our Countrey, learned Master
Camden, whose desertfull name is vniuersally admyred
throughout Christendome, in the last repollished Edition
of his Brittania, hath most elaborate and exactly described
the souereigne plenteous scituation of that Ile;
as also the inestimable happines it inherites, it beeing patronizd
and carefully protected by so heroicall and couragious
a Commaunder.
Men that haue neuer tasted that full spring of his liberalitie,
wherwith (in my most forsaken extremities) right
graciously hee hath deigned to reuiue and refresh mee,
may rashly (at first sight) implead me of flatterie, and not
esteeme these my feruent tearmes as the necessary repaiment
of due debt, but words idly begotten with good
lookes, and in an ouer-ioyed humour of vaine hope slipt
from me by chance: but therein they shall shewe themselues
too vnciuill iniurious, both to my deuoted obseruant
dutie, and the condigne deare purchased merite of
his glorie.
Too base a ground is this, whereon to embroyder the
rich storie of his eternall renowme; some longer lyued
Tractate I reserue for the full blaze of his vertues, which

here onely in the sparkes I decypher. Manie embers of
encumbraunces haue I at this time, which forbid the
bright flame of my zeale to mount aloft as it would. Perforce
I must breake from it, since other turbulent cares
sit as now at the stearne of my inuention. Thus I conclude
with this chance-medley Parenthesis, that whatsoeuer
minutes intermission I haue of calmed content, or
least respite to call my wits together, principall and immediate
proceedeth from him.
Through him my tender wainscot Studie doore is deliuered
from much assault and battrie: through him I
looke into, and am lookt on in the world: from whence
otherwise I were a wretched banished exile. Through
him all my good (as by a conduit head) is conueighed vnto
me; and to him all my endeuours (like riuers) shall
pay tribute as to the Ocean.
Did Ouid entitle Carus a Noble-man of Rome, the onely
constant frend hee had, in his vngratefull extrusion amongst
the Getes: and writ to him thus,
Qui quod es idvere Care vocaris.
And in another Elegie,
O mihi post nullos Care memorande sodales?
Much more may I acknowledge all redundant prostrate
vassailage to the royall descended Familie of the Careys:
but for whom, my spirit long ere this had expyred, and
my pen seru'd as a puniard to gall my owne hart.
Why doo I vse so much circumstance, and in a streame
on which none but gnats and flies doo swimme, sound
Fames trumpet like Triton, to call a number of foolish
skiffes and light cock-boates toparley?
Feare (if I be not deceiud) was the last pertinent matter
I had vnder my displing; from which I feare I haue
strayed beyond my limits: and yet feare hath no limits,
for to hell and beyond hell, it sinkes downe and penetrates.
But this was my position, that the feare of anie expected
cuill, is worse than the euill it selfe; which by dyuers
comparisons I confirmed.
Now to visions and apparitions againe, as fast as I can
trudge.
The glasses of our sight (in the night) are like the prospectiue
glasses one Hostius made in Rome, which represented
the images of things farre greater than they were:
each moate in the darke they make a monster, and euerie
sleight glimmering a giant.
Asolitarie man in his bed, is like a poore bed-red lazer
lying by the high way side; vnto whose displaied wounds
and sores a number of stinging flyes doo swarme for pastance
and beuerage: his naked wounds are his inward
hart-griping woes, the waspes and flyes his idle wandering
thoughts; who to that secret smarting paine he hath
alreadie, do adde a further sting of impatience, and new
lanch his sleeping griefes and vexations.
Questionlesse this is an vnrefutable consequence, that
the man who is mocked of his fortune; he that hath consumed
his braines to compasse prosperitie, and meetes
with no counteruaylement in hir likenesse, but hedge
wine and leane mutton, and peraduenture some halfe
eid good looks that can hardly be discerned from winking;
this poore piteous perplexed miscreant either finallie

lie despaire; or like a lanke frost-bitten plant looseth hys
vigor or spirit by little and little: anie terror, the least illusion
in the earth, is a Cacodaemon vnto him. His soule hath
left his bodie; for why, it is flying after these ayrie incorporeate
Courtly promises, and glittring painted allurements;
which when they vanish to nothing, it lykewise
vanisheth with them.
Excessiue ioy no lesse hath his desectiue and ioylesse operations,
the spleene into water it melteth* so that except
it be some momentarie bubbles of mirth, nothing
it yeelds but a cloying surfet of repentance.
Diuers instances haue we of men, whom too much sodaine
coment and ouer-rauished delight hath brought
vntimely to their graues.
Foure or fiue I haue read of, whom the very extremitie
of laughter hath bereft of their liues: whereby I gather,
that euen such another pernitious sweete, superfluous
mirth is to the sence, as a surfet of honnie to a mans
stomacke, than the which there is nothing more dangerous.
Bee it as dangerous as it will, it cannot but be an easie
kinde of death. It is like one that is stung with an Aspis,
who in the midst of his paine falls delighted asleepe, and
in that suauitie of slumber surrenders the ghost: whereas
hee whom greefe vndertakes to bring to his end, hath
his hart gnawenin sunder by little and little with vultures,
like Prometheus.
But this is nothing (you will obiect) to our iourneys
ende of apparitions. Yes, altogether: for of the ouerswelling
superabundance of ioy and greefe, wee frame

to our selues most of our melancholy dreames and visions.
There is an olde philosophicall common Prouerbe,
Vnusquisque fingit fortunam sibi, Euerie one shapes hys
owne fortune as he lists. More aptly may it be said, Euerie
one shapes his owne feares and fancies as he list.
In all points our brains are like the firmament, and exhale
in euerie respect the like grose mistempred vapors
and meteors; of the more foeculent combustible ayrie
matter whereof, afrighting formes and monstrous images
innumerable are created: but of the slymie vnweeldier
drossie part, dull melancholy or drousines.
And as the firmament is still moouing and working, so
vncessant is the wheeling and rolling on of our braines;
which euerie hower are tempring some newe peece of
prodigie or other, and turmoyling, mixing and changing
the course of our thoughts.
I write not this, for that I thinke there are no true
apparitios or prodigies; but to shew how easily we may
be flouted if we take not great heed, with our own anticke
suppositions. I will tell you a strange tale tending
to this nature: whether of true melancholy or true apparition,
I will not take vpon me to determine.
It was my chance in Februarie last to be in the Countrey
some threescore myle off from London; where a
Gentleman of good worship and credit falling sicke, the
verie second day of his lying downe, hee pretended to
haue miraculous waking visions: which before I enter
to describe, thus much I will informe ye by the way, that
at the reporting of them he was in perfect memorie; nor

had sicknes yet so tirannizd ouer him to make his tongue
grow idle. A wise graue sensible man he was euer reputed,
and so approou'd himselfe in all his actions in his life
time. This which I deliuer (with manie preparatiue protestations)
to a great Man of this Land hee confidently avouched:
beleeue it or condemn it, as you shal see cause,
for I leaue it to be censured in differently.
The first day of his distemprature, he visibly saw (as he
affirmed) al his chamber hung with silken nets and siluer
hookes, the diuell (as it should seeme) comming thether
a fishing; whereupon euery Pater noster while he lookt
whether in the nets he should be entangled, or with the
hookes ensnared; with the nets he feard to be strangled
or smothred, and with the hooks to haue his throat scracht
out, and his flesh rent and mangled: at length, he knew
not how they sodainly vanished, and the whole chamber
was clered. Next a copanie of lusty sailers (euerie one a
sharker or a swaggerer at the least) hauing made a braue
voyage, came carousing and quaffing in large siluer kans
to his helth. Fellowes they were that had good big pop
mouths to crie Port a helme Saint George, and knew as
well as the best what belongs to haling of bolings yare,
and falling on the star-boord buttocke.
But to the issue of my tale: their drunken proffers he
vtterly put by, and sayd hee highly scorned and detested
both them and their hellish disguisings: which notwithstanding,
they tost their cups to the skies, and reeled and
staggered vp and downe the roome like a ship shaking in
the winde.
After all they danst Lustie gallant, and a drunken Danish

Laualto or two, and so departed. For the third course,
rust tin a number of statcly diuels, bringing in boystrous
chests of massie tresure betwixt the. As braue they were
as Turkish Ianissaries, hauing their apparel alll powdred
with gold and pearle, and their armes as it were bemayled
with rich chaynes and bracelets; but faces far blacker
than anie ball of Tobacco, great glaring eyes that had
whole shelues of Kentish oysters in them, and terrible
wyde mouthes, whereof not one of them, but would
well haue made a case for Molenax great Gloabe of the
world.
These louely youths and full of fauour, hauing stalkt
vp and downe the iust measures of a sinkapace, opened
one of the principall chests they brought, and out of it
pluckt a Princely royall Tent, whose empearled shining
canopie they quickly aduaunced on hie, and with all artificiall
magnificence adorned like a state: which performed,
pompous Lucifer entred, imitating in goodly stature
the huge picture of Laocoon at Rome: who sent vnto
him agallant Embassadour, signifying thus much, that
if hee would serue him, hee should haue all the rich treasure
that he saw there, or anie farther wealth hee would
desire.
The Gentleman returned this milde aunswere, that
he knew not what he was, whether an Angell or a wicked
seend: and if an Angell, he was but his fellow seruant,
and no otherwise to be serued or regarded; if a fiend or
a diuell, hee had nothing to doo with him, for God had
exalted and redeemed him aboue his desperate out-cast
condition, and a strong faith he had to defie and with-stand

all his iugling temptations. Hauing vttered these words,
all the whole traine of them inuisibly auoyded, and hee
neuer set eye on them after.
Then did ther for the third pageant present themselues
vnto him, an inueigling troupe of naked Virgins, thrice
more amiable and beautifull than the bright Vessals, that
brought in Augustus Testament to the Senate, after hys
decease: but no Vestall-like Ornament had they about
them; for from top to toe bare despoyled they were, except
some one or two of them that ware maskes before
their faces, and had transparent azur'd lawne veyles before
the chiefe iewell houses of their honors.
Such goodly lustfull Bonarobaes they were (by his report)
as if anie sharpe eyd Painter had been there to peruse
them, he might haue learned to exceed diuine Mihel
Angclo in the true boske of a naked, or curious Tuns in
quicke life, whom the great masters of that Art do terme
the sprightly old man.
Their haire they ware loose vnrowled about their
shoulders, whose dangling amber trammells reaching
downe beneath their knees, seemed to drop baulme on
their delicious bodies; and euer as they moou'd too and
fro, with their light windye wauings, wantonly to correct
their exquisite mistresses.
Their daintie feete in their tender birdlike trippings,
enameld (as it were) the dustie ground; and their odoriferous
breath more perfumed the aire, than Ordinance
would, that is charged with Amomum, Muske, Cyuet,
and Amber-greece.
But to leaue amplifications, and proceed: those sweet

bewitching naked maides, hauing maiestically paced about
the chamber, to the end their naturall vnshelled shining
mother pearle proportions might be more imprintingly
apprehended, close to his bed-side modestly blushing
they approched, and made impudent profer vnto him
of theyr lasciuious embraces. He obstinatly bent to withstand
these their sinfull allurements no lesse than the former,
bad them goe seek entertainment of hotter bloods,
for he had not to satisfie them. A cold comfort was this
to poore wenches no better cloathed, yet they hearing
what to trust too, verie sorrowfully retyred, and shrunk
away.
Lo in the fourth Act there sallied out a graue assembly
of sober attyred Matrones, much like the Virgines of
Marie Magdalens order in Rome, which vowe neuer to
see man; or the chast daughters of Saint Philip.
With no incontinent curtesie did they greete him, but
tolde him, if so hee thought good they would praye for
him.
Therupon, fro^ the beginning to the ending he vnfolded
vnto them, how he had been mightely hanted with
wicked illusions of late: but neuertheles, if he could be
perswaded that they were Angels or Saintes, their inuocations
could not hurt him; yea, he would adde his desire
to their requestes, to make their prayers more penetrably
enforcing.
Without further parley, vppon their knees they fell
most deuoutly, and for halfe an hower neuer ceased extensiuely
to intercessionate GOD for his speedie recouerie.
Rising vp agayne on the right hand of his bed, there
appeared a cleare light, and with that he might perceiue
a naked slender foote offring to steale betwixt the sheets
in to him.
At which instant, entred a messenger from a Knight of
great honour thereabouts, who sent him a most precious
extract quintessence to drinke: which no sooner he
tasted, but he thought hee saw all the fore-named Enterluders
at once, hand ouer head leap, plunge, and drowne
themselues in puddles and ditches hard by, and hee felt
perfect ease.
But long it lasted not with him, for within foure howers
after, hauing not fully settled his estate in order, hee
grewe to trifling dotage and rauing dyde within two
daies following.
God is my witnesse, in all this relation, I borrowe no
essential part from stretcht out inuention, nor haue I one
iot abusde my informations; onely for the recreation of
my Readers, whom loath to tyre with a course homespunne
tale, that should dull them woorse than Holland
cheese, heere and there I welt and garde it with allusiue
exornations and comparisons: and yet me thinks it comes
off too goutie and lumbring.
Bee it as it will, it is lyke to haue no more allowaunce
of English for mee. If the world will giue it
anie allowaunce of truth, so it is: For then I hope
my excuse is alreadye lawfullye customed and authorized;
since Truth is euer drawne and painted naked,

and I haue lent her but a leathren patcht cloake at most
to keepe her from the cold: that is, that she come not off
too lamely and coldly.
Vpon the accidentall occasion of this dreame or apparition,
(call or miscall it what you will, for it is yours as
freely as anie wast paper that euer you had in your liues)
was this Pamphlet (no bigger than an old Praeface) speedily
botcht vp and compyled.
Are there anie doubts which remaine in your mynde
vndigested, as touching this incredible Narration I haue
vnfolded? well, doubt you not, but I am milde and tractable,
and will resolue you in what I may.
First, the house where this Gentleman dwelt, stood in
a low marish ground, almost as rotten a Clymate as the
Lowe Countreyes; where their mystie ayre is as thicke
as mould butter, and the deaw lyes like froathie barme
on the ground.
It was noted ouer and besides to haue been an vnluckie
house to all his predecessors, scituate in a quarter not
altogether exempted from witches.
The abrupt falling into his sicknesse was suspitious, proceeding
from no apparant surfet or misdiet. The outragious
tyrannie of it in so short a time, bred thrice more
admiration and wonder, and his sodaine death incontinent
ensuing vppon that his disclosed dreame or vision,
might seeme some probable reason to confirme it; since
none haue such palpable dreames or visions, but die presently
after.
The like to this was Master Allingtons vision in the beginning
of her Maiesties raigne; than the which there is

nothing more ordinarilie bruted. Through Greeke and
Romane common-places to this purport I could runne,
if I were disposed to vaunt my selfe like a ridiculous Pedant,
of deepe reading in Fulgosius, Licosthenes, and Valerius.
Goe no farther than the Court, and they will tell you
of a mightie worthie man of this Land; who riding in
his Coatch from London to his house, was all the waye
haunted with a couple of Hogges, who followed him
close, and doo what his men could they might not driue
them from him: wherefore at night hee caused them to
be shut vp in a barne, and commanded milke to be giuen
them; the barne dore was lockt, and the key safely kept,
yet were they gone by morning, and no man knew how.
A number of men there be yet liuing, who haue been
haunted by their wiues after their death, about forswearing
themselues, and vndooing their children, of whom
they promised to be carefull fathers: whereof I can gather
no reason but this, that Women are borne to torment
a man both aliue and dead.
I haue heard of others likewise, that beside these night
terrors, haue been (for whole months together whether
soeuer they went or rid) pursued by wesels and rats, and
oftentimes with squirrels and hares; that in the traueling
of three hundred myle, haue still wayted on their horse
heeles.
But those are onely the exploytes and stratagems of
witches, which may well astonish a little at first sight, but
if a man haue the least heart or spirite to with-stand one
fierce blast of their brauadoes, he shall see them shrinke

faster than Northren cloath, and outstrip time in dastardly
flight.
Fie, fie, was euer poore fellow so farre benighted in an
old wiues tale of diuells and vrchins. Out vpon it, I am
wearie of it, for it hath caused such a thicke fulsome Serena
to descend on my braine, that now my penne makes
blots as broad as a furd stomacher, and my muse inspyres
me to put out my candle and goe to bed: and yet I wyll
not neyther, till after all these nights reuells, I haue solemnly
bid you good night: as much to saye, as tell you
how you shall haue a good night, and sleep quietly without
affrightment and annoyance.
First and formost drinke moderately, and dice and
drabbe not away your money prodigally, and then forsweare
your selues to borrow more.
You that be pore mens children, know your own fathers;
and though you can shift and cheate your selues into
good cloathes here about Towne; yet bow your knees
to their leathern bagges and russet coates, that they may
blesse you from the ambition of Tiburne.
You that beare the name of souldiers, and liue baselie
swaggering in euerie ale-house, hauing no other exhibition
but from harlots and strumpets; seeke some newe
trade, and leaue whoring and quarrelling, least besides
the nightly guilt of your owne banqurout consciences,
Bridewell or Newgate prooue the ende of your caueleering.
You, whosoeuer or wheresoeuer you be, that liue by
spoyling and ouer-reaching yong Gentlemen, and make
but a sport to deride their simplicities to their vndooing,

to you the Night at one time or other will proue terrible,
except you foorthwith thinke on restitution: or if
you haue not your Night in this world, you will haue it
in hell.
You that are married and haue wiues of your owne,
and yet hold too nere frendship with your neighbours;
set vp your rests, that the Night will be an il neighbour to
your rest, and that you shall haue as little peace of minde
as the rest. Therefore was Troy burnt by night, because
Paris by night prostituted Helena, and wrought such treson
to Prince Menclaus.
You that are Macheuilian vaine fooles, and thinke it
no wit or pollicie but to vowe and protest what you neuer
meane, that trauell for nothing els but to learne the
vices of other countries, and disfigure the ill English faces
that God hath giuen you with Tuscan glickes and apish
trickes; the night is for you with a black saunt or a
matachine, except you presently turne and conuert to
the simplicitie you were borne too.
You that can cast a man into an Italian ague when you
list, and imitate with your diet drinkes anie disease or infirmitie,
the night likewise hath an infernall to act before
yee.
Traitors that by night meete and consult how to walke
in the day vndiscouered, and thinke those words of Christ
vainly spoken, There is nothing done in secret but shalbe reuealed
and laid open: to you no lesse the night shalbe as a night
owle to vexe and torment you.
And finallie, O you Iudges and Magistrates, if there
bee anye amongest you, that doo wrest all the Lawe

into their owne hands, by drawing and receyuing euery
mans money into their hands, and making newe golden
lawes of their owne, which no Prince nor Parliament
euer dreamed of; that looke as iust as Iehouah by daye,
enthronizing graue zeale and religion on the eleuated
whites of their eyes, when by night corrupt gifts and rewards
rush in at their gates in whole Armies, like Northren
Carriers comming to their Inne; that in steede of
their bookes turne ouer their bribes, for the deciding
of causes, adiudging him the best right, that brings the richest
present vnto them. If anie such there be I say, as in
our Common-wealth I know none, but haue read of in
other States, let them looke to haue a number of vnwelcome
Clients of their owne accusing thoughts and imaginations,
that will betray them in the night to euery idle
feare and illusion.
Therefore are the terrors of the night more than of the
day, because the sinnes of the night surmount the sinnes
of the day.
By night time came the Deluge ouer the face of the
whole earth; by night time Iudas betrayed Christ; Tarquin
rauisht Lucretia.
When anie Poet would describe a horrible Tragicall
accident; to adde the more probabilitie and credence vnto
it, he disinally beginneth to tell, how it was darke night
when it was done, and cheerfull daylight had quite abandoned
the firmament.
Hence it is, that sinne generally throughout the scripture
is called the workes of darknesse; for neuer is the
diuell so busie as then, and then he thinkes he may aswel

vndiscouered walke abroad, as homicides and outlawes.
Had we no more Religion than we might deriue from
heathen fables; me thinkes those dolefull Querristers of
the night, the Scritch-owle, the Nightingale, and croking
Frogs, might ouer-awe vs from anie insolent transgression
at that time. The first for her lauish blabbing of forbidden
secrets, being for euer ordayned to be a blabbe of
ill newes and misfortune, still is crying out in our eares,
that we are mortall, and must die: the second puts vs in
minde of the end and punishment of lust and rauishment;
and the third and last, that we are but slyme and mud, such
as those watrie creatures are bred of: and therfore why
should we delight to adde more to our slyme and corruption,
by extraordinarie surfets and drunkennes.
But these are nothing neither in comparison: for hee
whom in the day heauen cannot exhale, the night wil neuer
helpe: she onely pleading for her old grandmother
hell, as well as the day for heauen.
Thus I shut vp my Treatise abruptly, that hee who in
the daye doth not good woorkes inough to answere the
obiections of the night, will hardly aunswere at the daye
of iudgement.
FINIS.

