


OF THE ETERNALL FELICITY OF THE SAINTS, Vnder the Name, or Title of the Kingdome of God. THE FIRST BOOKE.

Of the Amplitude, or largenesse of the Kingdome of God. CHAP. I.
OF what worth and dignity the doctrine of the Kingdome of Heauen is, may partly be knowne, in that our Heauenly Maister did begin his Sermons to his Auditory fro^ those words of Matth. 4. De pennance, for the Kingdome of Heauen is at hand. And further, in that he made the
 Kingdome of Heauen, the Subiect of most of his Parables, saying (Matth. 13.18.20.21.22.25.) The Kingdome of Heauen is resembled etc. And after his Resurrection, in the time of those fourty dayes before his Ascension, appearing to his Disciples, he discoursed of the Kingdome of Heauen, as S. Luke doth witnesse in the Acts of the Apostles. Therefore we see, the beginning progresse, and consummation or end of the speaches of Christ, were euer of the Kingdom of Heaue^. Now we in this place will not vndertake to dispute of all points, touching the Kingdome of Heauen; but only so farre forth, as concernes the place and state of the Blessed Saints. And first, we will explicate, why the place and state of the Saints is named in the holy Scriptures, The Kingdome of Heauen.
Well then, the Habitation of the Saints for seuerall respects is entitled, The Kingdome of Heauen. First, because Heauen is a most ample Region, and far more ample and large, then the narrow limits euen of Mans thought can comprehend. The whole Earth, which is but a Pricke or Point, in comparison of the highest Heauen, doth
 containe so many, and so great Kingdomes, as that with difficulty they can be numbred. Of what immensenesse and huge Vastnesse then shall that Kingdome be, which is but one, and yet dispersed and spread throughout the whole latitude and breadth of the Heauen of Heauens? For the King^ome of Heauen doth not only containe through its owne capacity) the Celestiall Region, but also all this Vniuersity, ^nd generall State of things, For that supercelestiall Region as I may tearme it, which is properly the Kingdome of Heauen is as it were the first Prouince of the Kingdome of God, in which the chiefe Princes (all which are the Sons of God) doe reside and dwell. The s^cond Prouince may be called Eternall; in which the Stars are seated. Which Starres, though they be inanimate, neuerthelesse they are so obedient and seruiceable to the will and beck of their Creatour as that they may be well said to haue life and sense, according to that of Ecclesiasticus: Come, and let vs adore the King, to whom all things do^ liue.
The third Prouince is that of the Aire, wherein the Winds and Clouds,
 doe mooue to and fro: where also stormes, Raine, Snow, Hayle, and Thunder are ingendred; and in which the Birds of seuerall kindes doe liue and flie. The fourth Prouince is that ^f the water, comprehending the Sea, Fountaines, Riuers and Lakes, in which the fishes are procreated, And which walke the paths of the Sea, Psal. 8. The ^f Prouince is th^s of the Earth, which being (as it were) emulous of that of Heauen, is enriched with most noble Inhabitants, though not blessed, to wit, with men, indued with Reason, but yet mortall, and obnoxious to death; Who neuerthelesse haue dominion of the beasts of the Earth, the birds of the Aire, and the fishes of the Sea.
The last Prouince is that, which may be called, subterranea, as being vnder the Earth; being (as it were) as other desert of Arabia, and producing no good fruits, but only thornes and bryars. In which the wicked Spirits do liue; who through their Pride deserued this punishment, and who aspiring to be the first, came thereby to be the last; And thus they endeauouring to aduance their Seates aboue the stars
 of heauen, were for such their attempt detruded from thence, and cast out to ^he lowest Hell. And this place doth daily expect the arriuall of such Men, who (as being companions to the di^ells) wallow in all flagitious sinnes, ^nd enormities; and who depart from the stage of this life without true repentance. All these seuerall Prouinces God doth hold within his Empire and Gouerment, according whereunto the Psalmist saith: All things doe serue thee. Psal. 118. All which most spatious Kingdomes God will communicate to such, as loue and serue him, as hereafter we will shew.
Now, O Christian Soule, spread and dilate thy hart; suffer not thy selfe to be confined within the niggard and narrow bou^ds of things only that are present; why dost thou so incessantly sweat and toyle to obtaine some small part of this world, since if thou wilt, thou maist purchase it all? Certainly, if mortall men would with a serious and earnest thirst aspire to this Kingdome, or would with mature reflexion of the soule, meditate thereon, they would euen blush to wage warre for any small, or narrow portion of
 the earth. God (O Man) offereth to thee the society and partage of his immense and eternall Kingdome; And thou for the defence or gaining of one little Towne; dost enter into warre and open hostility, by meanes whereof many rapines, bloudsheds, and other innumerable sinnes are committed: all which must iustly prouoke the King of Kings to wrath and indignation. Where then is there any wisdome in this thy proceeding? Where any iudgement, or true consideration? I speake not this, as if I were perswaded, it were vnlawfull for Christians to mooue warre in defence of their owne Townes and Citties; For I well know, that iust warres are maintained and allowed, not only by the holy Fathers (and particularly by S. Austin Ep. ad Marcel.) but also by S. Thomas (2.8. q. 40.) the chiefe of all Schoolemen. Yea the Precursour of our Lord (then whome not any was borne gteater of Women) Luc 3. admonisheth souldiars, not that they should forsake a lawfull warre; but that, as being content with their stipends and payes, should forbeare to wrong any man. And I my selfe in my Books of Controuersies
 of Religion. (...) defended lawful warres: Therefore we^ doe not ^bsolutely forbid and di^a^low of warre, but we only exhort to that, which is more perfect, and (for the most part) more profitab^e, with the same inten^ion, with which Saint Paul speakech to the Corinthians cap. 6. It is a fault in you, that you haue iudgments among ^ou: VVhy do you not rather take wrong? VVhy doe you not rather suffer fraud? And S. Iames in his Epistle (cap. 4.) From whence are warres and contentions ^mong you? Are the not of your Concu^iscences, which warre in your mem^ers? You couet, and haue not; you kill ^nd enuy, and cannot obtaine; you con^end, and warre, and you haue not, be^ause you aske not. Certainly, who is ^ruly sollicitous of the Kingdome of Heauen would be little afflicted with ^he losse of any one Towne or Citty; ^ut rather would be desirous to vse ^^e mediation of others, for the com^ounding all depending Controuer^ies, without the calamities and dan^ers of warre. But let vs passe on forward.



Of the Concourse and Frequency of the Inhabitants in the Kingdome of God. CHAP. II.
THat supreme habitation is for ^ second respect called the Kingdom of God; to wit, because it containet^ a greater multitude and diuersity of Inhabitants, within the capacity and largenesse of its owne Orbe, then any House or Citty, yea more then large and vast Kingdomes are accustomed to comprehend. For there is (as the Apostle speaketh in his Epistle to the Hebrewes cap. 22.) the entercourse of many thousand Angells. There is also a confluence of the Spirits and Soules of all iust and perfect men; vnder which number are comprized all those, who shall close vp their dayes of this life in the feare of our Lord, euen from the day of Abel the Iust, vntill the consummation of the world. Neither shall only the Spirits of lust men stay there after the ending of the world; but
 also their glorious bodyes, being reunited to their soules: All which and e^ery one of them shall shine (euen as the Sunne) in the Kingdome of their ^ather, as our Lord assureth vs, Ma^hew 13.
Now, so much as appertaineth to the diuersity of the Angels, we during our ^eregrination here vpon earth, are ^carsely suffered to know any thing, ^ut only their Names. For wee know out of the vision of Esay c. 6. that some of them are called Seraphims; ^thers Cherubims out of the Prophet ^zechiele, 28. others, Thrones, others Cominations; others, Principalities; ^thers, Powers, from the Apostle to ^he Colossians, c. 1. Others, Vertues, ^rom the same Apostle to the Ephesi^ns, c. 1. Some, Archangels, from ^he same Apostle 1. Thess. 4. and from ^he Epistle of S. Iude. To conclude, others Angels, of whom most frequent mention is much celebrated in all the ^acred Books of Scripture. From these ^ifferent nine names and appellations, ^he holy Doctors, with an vnanimous ^onsent, doe proue, that there are nine different Orders of Angels, vnder ^uery particular Order whereof many
 thousands of Angells are ranged, according to the words of Daniel, c. 7. Thousand of thousands ministred vnto him, and ten thousand hundred thousand assisted him: with whom Iob conspireth, saying: Is there any number of his souldiers? And although the Angells be doubtlesly most blessed, and shine with the splendour and brightnesse of all vertues and diuine gifts; notwithstanding those are tearmed Seraphims, who are more remarkable and preeminent for their ardour and zeale of Charity: Those Cherubims, who exceed in knowledge: Those Thrones, who enioy an ineffable and silent tranquillity of Contemplation: Those Dominations, to whome as to the Ministers and Deputies of the supreme Emperour, the charge of this inferiour world is committed: Those Vertues, who at the command of God, are exercised in the accomplishing of Signes and miracles: Those Powers, who haue the commandement and domination of the very powers of the vncleane Spirits: Those Principalities, who haue a soueraignty ouer the Kings and Princes of this world: Those Archangells, which are Adiutors and Assistors
 of the Prelates of the Church: Lastly, those Angells, whose incumbency and charge is of euery particular man, whiles he liueth hereupon the Earth.
Neither are these seuerall Points signified only by the seuerall Names of the Angels: but for more proofe therof, these very Names are certaine Ensignes, or Images of Gods Omnipotency, or mirrours, wherein we may glasse his Puissance. For example; The Seraphims, as by a certaine marke, Image, or glasse, doe represent the infinit Charity of God, who moued only by the force of loue, did create the Angels themselues, men, and all other things; and being created, doth conserue them. The Cherubims by the like Standard, Image, or glasse, doe proclaime and shew the infinite wisdom of God, who hath ordained all things in number, weight, and measure. The Thrones doe in like manner demonstrate (as it were in a perfect Image) that secure Rest. which God sitting in his Throne doth enioy; Who not being moued, moueth and worketh all things; and resting in a continuall tranquillity, doth dispose and gouerne all things. Dominations doe euen preach,
 that it is God, who truly and properly hath the full domination and gouerment ouer all Creatures; since it is in his power alone, eyther to conserue all things, or else to annihilate and reduce them to nothing. The Vertues also doe signify, that it is God alone, who worketh mirabilia magna, great and stupendious wonders* and who hath reserued only to himselfe the power to renew or multiply at his pleasure such prodigious matters. The Powers by their name, doe figure out, how God is absolutely and truly Potent; to whom nothing is impossible, since in him alone all true Power doth reside. The Principalities doe import by their Enseigne, that God is the Prince of all Kings of the Earth, the King of Kings, and the Lord of all those who row at the oare of gouerment. The Archangells signify, that God is the true and supreme Prelate or President of all Churches. Briefely, the Angells doe manifest, that God is the true Father of Orphanes; And that although he hath bequeathed Angells, as Guardians to euery particular man; yet that himselfe is present to euery man, keepeth euery man, and protecteth
 euery Man For that same Prophet who hath savd: He that giuen his Angels charge of thee, that they keep thee in all thy wayes, doth also introduce God thus speaking in the same place: VVith him I am in tribulation, I will deliuer him, I will glorify him. Psal. 90. And our Lord, who sa^d. Matt 18. Their Angels in Heauen alwayes do see the face of my Father, who is in Heauen, sayd also Matt. 10. Are not two sparrows sould for a farthing, and not one of them shall fall vpon the ground, without your father? But the very hayres of your head are all numbred; feare not therefore, better are you, then many sparrowes. And thus much of those few things, we know touching the Angels. If it please the ^eader, he may peruse S. Bernard, fro^ whome I haue borrowed these few Points l. 5. de consider. To these nyne Orders of Angels, doth answere so great a multitude of Holy Men, as that no man (as we haue proued out of the Apocalyps) is able to number them: which multitude are also reduced to nyne Orders. For some are Patriarchs, some Prophets, some Apostles, Others Pastours and Doctours, Others Priests
 and Leuites, Others Monks, and Hermites; To conclude, Others are holy Women, Virgins, Widowes, or those who haue continued till death in coniugall State of Mariage.
And now, o Christian Soule, I heere demaund of thee, how an ineffable Felicity shall it be, to interleague for all eternity with such holy Angels, and Saints? S. Ierome in his Epistle to Paulinus, writeth; that many are accustomed to trauayle into other forrayne Prouinces, to discourse with People of other Nations; as also to passe the very Seas, to the end, they might see and conuerse with such as were reputed most famous for learning and erudition. It is also recorded, 3. Reg 10. how the Queene of Saba came from the furthest parts of the Earth, to Salomon; for the so great opinion, she had conceaued of his Wisdome. To one Antony (by profession of lyfe, a poore despicable Hermite) men of all parts, euen flocked, by reason of the report of his ^anctity: yea Emperours themselues were ambitious of his friendship* and amity. What solace then wil^ it be, no^ only to see so great a confluence of Angels and most holy
 Men; but also dayly to conuerse and consociate with them, in most strict loue and participation of their felicity? If but one Angell should exhibite himselfe in his full splendour to our sight now in our exile, who would not most willingly hasten to see him? What then will it be to behould all the Angels togeather at one sight? And if any of the Prophets, Apostles, or Doctours of the Church should now descend from Heauen; with what a thirstines of attention, would we, euen drinke vp his words and speaches? But in the Kingdome of heauen it shalbe lawfull for vs, to see and heare not only one, but all the Prophets, all the Apostles, all the Doctours, and to haue dayly intercourse and familiarity with them. How much doth one Sunne exhilerate and reioyce the whole Earth? What then will so many innumerable Sunnes doe, being liuing Sunnes, vnderstanding Sunnes, and such as do make a continuall Iubiley in the Kingdome of God? I will euen vnbreast my selfe, and speake what I thinke; to wit, the consideration of this inward amity and familiarity with the Angels and holy Men (of which
 not any is foolish, not any wicked, but all most good, and most wise) is so pleasing and preuayling with me; as that it alone would seeme a most great happinesse; and for the obtaining only thereof, I would most willingly abandone and shake hands for euer with all the comforts and delights of this world.


Of the true Monarchicall forme of the Kingdome of God. CHAP. III.
THe third reason, why that Celestiall habitation is called a Kingdome, is, because in that Place is found the perfect forme of Gouerment. This is the difference betweene a Kingdome and a Co^monwealth; whether the Co^monwealth consist of certaine and eminent men, or of the Communalty and more vulgar sort. To wit, that in a Kingdome all supreme Soueraignty is inuested in onely one; whereas in a Commonwealth it is shared and deuided among many. In these temporall Kingdoms of men, the supreme power
 doth not reside truly and properly in one man; For it may be, that a King without either the counsell or consent of others, may giue commandement, that such or such a thing shalbe done; but yet his directions cannot be put in execution, except his Subiects doe affoard their concurrency and aide. And often it so falleth out, that the King cannot command (at least dare not) the effecting of a thing, if so he stand in feare, to the multitude of his Subiects. For how many Kings and Emperours haue beene dethroned, whose authority the Sub^ects haue shaken off, and often with death to the said Kings and Emperours? Histories are fraught with Examples of this subiect. Therefore that chiefe gouerment in mortall Kings is languide and weake; since those Kings cannot performe any thing, or atcheiue any exploite, without the approbation, and allowance of the People. But the Soueraignty of God, who alone is stiled (and truly is) The great King, hath no dependancy of any thing, but only of his owne VVill. The which his VVill (since it is Omnipotent) cannot brooke any resistance; neither standeth it in
 need of souldiers, warlike prouision, or any other endeauour out of it selfe.
And although God doth vse Angels, or Men, as also euen dead, and senselesse things, as his inferiour Ministers; yet this he doth not out of any necessity, but because it so best pleaseth his diuine Will. For he, who without the ministeriall assistance of any, created only by the vertue of his VVord, Heauen, and Earth, and euery thing therin contained, and doth conserue them only by his VVill, may also no doubt gouerne all things so created, only by his owne imperiall dominion. Neither only is God said, most truly to rule, because supreme, or (as I may tearme it) superlatiue power remaineth in him alone; but also in that the chiefe mistery of gouerning is peculiar only to him. For God needeth not any Senatours, or others to consult withall. VVho hath knowne (saith S. Paul Rom. 11.) the mind of our Lord, or who hath beene his counsellour? And before the Apostle, Isay c. 40. thus contesteth the same, saying: VVho hath holpen the spirit of our Lord? Or who hath beene his counsellour, and shewed to him? VVith whom hath he taken counsell, and
 who hath instructed him, and taught him the path of Iustice, and taught him knowledge, and shewed him the way of Prudence? Therefore it followeth ineuitably from the Premisses, that a Monarchy (which is the best kind of gouerment) is not only found to bee in God; but it is found to be in him alone, true and perfect. For hee is not only formidable ouer all the Kings of the earth, as we reade, Psal. 75. but also is a most Maiesticall King ouer all the Gods, as is said againe in Psalm 94. For there are certaine false Gods, who are rather to bee called diuells, according to that of the Prophet: The Gods of the Gentils are diuells: Psal. 95. There are also other Gods by participation, as the Kings of the Earth, and the Angells of Heauen are, for we reade: Psal. 81. I haue said, you are Gods. But all these Gods stand subiect and obedient to that one ouerruling God, who reigneth in Heauen.
The refore it necessarily followeth from what is aboue said, that, that King is truly a King, and most puissant, whom Nabuchodonosor, that fastigious King of Babylon, (after his pride was iustly punished) in these words fully
 acknowledgeth: Dan. 4. Therefore after the end of the daies, I Nabucodonosor lifted vp mine eyes to Heauen, and blessed the Highest, and praysed him for euer, because his power is an euerlasting Power, and his Kingdome in generation to generation. And all the Inhabitants of the earth are reputed with him for nothing: for he doeth according to his will, as well in the Powers of Heauen, as in: he Inhabitants of the earth And there is none, that can resist hi^ hand, and say to him: VVhy didst tho^ it? etc. Now therefore I Nabuchodonosor prayse, and magnify, and glorif^ the King of Heauen, because all hi^ VVorks are true, and his wayes Iudgements, and them that walke in pride, he can humble
Thus K^ng Nabuchodonosor confessed of himself: who may be an exa^ple to all others, that they doe humble and prostrate themselues, vnder the powerfull hand of God, as S Peter admonisheth; And that they stand more prepared to serue the King of Kings, thereby to deserue his beneuolence and fauour, then through pride and cl^tio^ of heart, to resist his Wi^l, by which their course, they are in the end forced
 to suffer condigne punishments vnder his most rigorous hand, accord^ng to their iust deserts.


That all the Blessed in Heauen are Kings. CHAP. IV.
THE fourth and most principall reason why the place and state of the Blessed may be called the Kingdome of Heauen, is, because all the Blessed in Heauen are Kings, and in that, all the conditions of Regall Authority doe most aptly agree to them. For although all the Saints in Heauen doe serue and obey God, as is said in the Apocalyps c. 22. yet with all, they gouerne and rule. For whereas, it is sayd: in the same place his seruants shall serue him; it is also there sayd: And they shall reigne for euer and euer. Neyther only doe all the B^essed serue togeather, and rule togeather; but withall they may be tearmed both Seruants and Sonnes; for thus God speaketh in the Apocalyps cap. 21 They
 who shall ouercome, shall possesse these things etc And I will be his God, and he shalbe my Sonne. Thus therfore, as the same Saints may be said to be Serua^ts Sonnes; so, also may they be sayd to be Seruants and Kings They are Seruanes in that they are created of God, and do owe all obedience and vassalage vnto him, of whome they receaue them Being, lyfe, and other thinges for nothing created is excepted out o^ this homage, euen by the testimony of Dauid, saying: All things do seru^ thee, Psal. 118. They may be also called the Sonnes of God, because the^ receaue their regeneration from God by water, and the Holy Ghost. Finally they are Kings, since Regal^ Powe^ and Dignity is communicated vnt^ them by the King of Kings, who euer in th^s respect is styled in the Apocalyps cap. 19. The King of Kings, an^ Lord of Lords.
Perhaps it may be heere vrged, that it is not repugna^t, that one and the same man should be a temporall King, and withall a Seruant of God; as it i^ said accordingly in the 2. Psalme: An^ now your Kings vndersta^d, take instructio^ you that iudge the earth. But to be
 King of the Kingdome of Heauen, and withall to be a seruant of the King of Heauen, seeme to be incompatible togeather. How then can a man apprehend this difficu^ty, or belieue it? ^ answere, notwithstanding it is so, ^nd facile to fayth both to conceaue, and to belieue it. Therefore the Iust ^n the Kingdome of Heauen, shall a^so be Kings of the Kingdom of Heauen, because they shall participate of that Regall Dignity and power, as also of the spiritual riches and a^l other goods which are in the Kingdome of Heauen. The Verity of which point the Holy Ghost contesteth in three places of Scripture: One is, in the Ghospe^l of S. Matthew cap. 5. Blessed are the poore in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdome of Heauen. Another in the same Ghospell, cap. 15. Come yee blessed of my Father; possesse the Kingdome prepared for you, from the beginning of the VVorld. The third is in the Apocalyps cap. 3. He that shall ouercome, I will giue vnto him, to sit with me, in my throne, as I haue also ouercome, and haue sitten with my Father in his throne. What can be more clearely spoken, then this? We haue heare the Kingdome
 of God prom^sed to vs; we haue the possession of the same Kingdome, assigned to vs in the day of Iudgment; We haue granted to vs seates in the Regall Throne of the Sonne of God, and of his Father the Eternall King. And what other thing is all this, then the participation of the same Kingdome of Heauen, which God possesseth from all Eternity?
We may heer adioyne the testimony of S. Paul 2. Tim. 2. saying: If we shall sustaine, we shall reigne togeather. And of S. Iohn in the beginning of the Apocalyps: and of S. Iames in his Epistle c. 2 thus writing: God hath chosen the poore of this world, rich in fayth, and heyres of the Kingdom, which God hath promised to them that loue him. Neyther are we to feare, that because the Kingdome of Heauen is communicated to many, and almost innumerable Angels and men, it is therefore diminished or lessened; Since the Kingdom of Heaue^ ^s not lyke to earthly Kingdomes which cannot brooke any corriualls, or participation; but if they be deuided, by diuision they are euer made lesse; and in the end are brought to nothing: I say, the Kingdome
 of Heauen beareth no proportion (...) lyknes to these but being whole, it is entirely possessed of all; as a so being whole* it is entirely possessed of e^ery particular. Euen as ^he Sunne ^s wholy seene of all men, and wholy ^^ene of euery particu^ar Man; And i^ selfe doth no lesse ^eate and illumin^^e ech particular Man, then a l Men. Which ^oint shalbe more clearely ^ll^^trated in our explication of the G^ods of the K ngdome of Heauen. But now before we are heere to assigne the cond^tions and qualities, required to be ^n Kings; that no Man may re^t doubtfull, but that the Blessed Saints in Heauen are iustly called Kings, and Kings euen of Heauen.
There are two qualities, with which kings ought necessarily to be inuested: T^ wit, VVisdome and Iustice. But with Wisdome the Scripture doth ioyne P^^dence, Councell, and all other things ^^^onging to Intelligence; with Iustice ^^ngeth Mercy, Clemency, and the (...) of the Vertues which do beauti^ ^nd perfect the VVill. Wisdome ^efore is required, that a King may ^^w, how to gouerne his Subiects; ^^^^ice, how to gouerne them well. And
 according heerto, Salomon being admonished from God in the beginning of his Reigne, that he should demand, what he most desired, he demaunded Wisdome, which is the Queene of all good qualities, necessarily required in Kings; And this his pet^tion was so pleasing vnto God, as appeareth out of the third booke of Kings, that it was granted vnto him, as he desired. I could haue wished, he had demaunded also Iustice; for then perhaps he had not precipitated and cast himselfe into so many crimes, and sinnes, as afterward he did. But with more iudgement did Dauid pray for the good and prosperity of his Sonne Salomon, in those words of the 71. Psalme, O God giue thy iudgment to the King, and thy Iustice to the Sonne of the King. In which words he may be thought to haue forseene, that Salomon would aske for Wisdome; and that therefore himselfe prayed that Iustice and Iudgment might be giuen also to his Sonne; the which without Wisdome ^annot be; wheras Wisdome (at ^east s^ming and imperfect) may be with out Iustice. In lyke sort, the Booke of Wisdome, which was principally written for the erudition
 and instruction of Kings, thus speaketh vnto them: Diligite Iustitia^, qui iudicatis terram etc. Sap 1. and it beginneth at the vertue of Iustice, because that alone and of its owne nature is not only necessary to Kings, but it is also a dispositio^ to Wisdom^; for a litle after followeth; Because wisdome will not enter into a malitious soule. To conclude, pretermitting other testimonies, Ieremy prophesying of Christ the eternall King thus sayth: cap. 23. Behould the dayes do come (sayth our Lord) and I will rayse vp Dauid, a iust branch, and he shall reigne a King, and shalbe wife, and shall do iudgment and Iustice in the earth. From all this then it ineuitably followeth; that Wisdome and Iustice are the endowments* chiefly required Kings.
That all the Blessed in Heauen (though many of the^ perhaps* whiles they liued heere vpon earth; were but ignorant persons) do excell in Wisdom and Iustice, so as they may deseruedly be Kings of any K ngdome, is so euident, that it can admit no contrad^ction: since there is not any one of the Blessed in Heauen, who doth not see the Essence of God, which is the first
 Cause of all things, and consequently, he draweth so much Wisdome out of that fountaine of increated Wisdome, as that neyther Salomon, not any other Mortall man euer had in lyke degree, our Lord Iesus Christ only excepted, who euen in the tyme of his mortality did see God, and in whome were all the Treasures of Wisdom and knowledge of God. Now, to the measure of Wisdome in all the Saints, is giuen a proportionable measure of Iustice; so as for the tyme after, neyther haue they a desire to sinne, neither can they sinne. For thus S. Austine speaketh hereof (de grat. and cor. cap. 12.) Prima libertas voluntatis etc. The first liberty of the will, was to haue power not to sinne: but the last liberty of the will shalbe farre greater, it being not to haue power to sinne. And who cannot sinne, cannot therefore become vniust. And since Charity is perfect, therefore Iustice is also perfect. And accordingly S. Austin affirmeth that he, who ca^not loue God but w^th a supreme and perfect loue, cannot also but possesse supreme and perfect Iustice. They also who behould God their supreme, pure, and infinite Good, cannot diuert
 their eyes from him, neither can they but prosecute him euer with most ardent and burning Affection. From whence it is euicted, that all the Saints in Heauen are perfectly wyse, and perfectly Iust; and are therefore most apt euer to reigne as Kings.
Now raise thy selfe vp, O Christian Soule, and ascend in spirit, as much as thou canst, and meditate, how great a felicity it is to reigne with God, and penetrate with the Wings of conte^plation the very Heauens, and behould that sublime Throne, of which our Sauiour speaketh: Apoc. 3. He that shall ouercome, I will giue vnto him to sit with me, in my throne. O how ineffable a glory will it be for a Soule in the presence of an infinite multitude of Angells, to be placed in the Throne or seate it selfe of Christ, and God? And to be proclaimed by the iust iudgment of God, as conquerour ouer the World, ouer the gouernours or Lords of the world, and ouer all the inuisible Powers? And with how much ioy sh^ll that Soule exult, when she shall perceaue her to be freed of all danger and labour, and to triumph most happily ouer all her enemies? And what
 is left more that she can defir whe^ she shall be made partaker of all the goods of her Lord and Creatour; yea euen to the par^icipation of his own Throne and Kingdome? O, with what alacrity doe those Men fight heere vpon Earth, and how easily doe they tolerate and vndergoe all aduersities for Christ, who with a vigorous faith, and erected hope, behould with the eye of the vnderstanding, such magnificent and supreme honours in Heauen!


Of the goods of the Kingdome of God. CHAP. V.
THe fift reason of calling the happinesse of the Saints, the Kingdome of Heauen, may be taken from the similitude and resemblance of the Saints liuing in Heauen, to the goods, which terrene Kings do enioy: though those of Heauen doe so much ouer-ballance these of the earth, and are greater then they, by how much Heauen is more worthy and noble then
 the Earth. Therefore the Kingdome prepared for the blessed, is not simply, a Kingdome, but is called for more fulnesse of speach, the Kingdome of Heauen; that thereby we may be instructed, that the like proportion here is of goods, to goods which is of the Earth to Heauen; that is, of a thing in it selfe narrow, base, sordid, temporary, to that, which is most ample, most high, most noble, and (which is the chiefest) eternall and euerlasting.
The goods of a terrene Kingdome are accounted these, to wit, Power, Honour, Riches, Pleasures. A temporall King may commaund ouer his subi^cts, and if they be found disobedient or stiffe-necked, he may punish them with bonds, imprisonment, banishment, penalty of money, whipping, or euen with death. And hence it is, that Kings become feareful to their Subiects, and are reputed (as it were) certaine Gods. Againe, Kings wilbe honored with a certaine height of veneration and worship, almost transcending mans Nature; for they expect the bowing of the knee; neither will they ofte^ vouchsafe to heare their Subiects speake but with a submisse and
 humble cou^tenance, and deportement of body: and if they passe through the streets, they looke that all men should go backe and giue them the way. Againe, kings couet to haue a most copious and rich Treasury, replenished with gould ane siluer: neither do they number their reuenews by hundreds or thousands, but by ten hu^dred thousands; and this not without iust reason, since they are not to mantayne ten or twe^ty seruants, or followers, but great and powerfull armyes of soldiers against their enemies. Lastly, they are not content to recreate themselues, with accustomed sports, but they hould it as necessary to the splendour of their greatnes and maiesty to wast many pou^ds of gould and siluer, in banqueting, hu^ting, and in publike shewes and sights. And these things aboue rehearsed are the sole goods almost belonging to te^porall Princes: which goods haue this one thing incident to them all; that is, that they are but momentary and fading beginning at the birth of the Princes, and ending with their death, except perhaps it may fall so out, that the lyfe of the Kings be of longer continuance then their Reigne.

Furthermore these goods are not pure, but are accompanyed with their ^tings. Thus power is oftentymes ballanced with infirmity and weakenes: Honour with ignominy: Riches with Pou^rty; and Ioy with griefe and lamentation. True it is, that Regall Dominion is such, as that the People do depend vpon the least intimation or signification of the King his mynd; yet this his power is mixed with infirmity since the Prince resteth vpon the strength and courage of his people. For what can the command of a Prince eyther in beseiging or defending a Citty effect, if his subiects eyther be not able, or not willing to encounter the Enemy? Neyther doth the authority of the Prince rest only vpon the strength of his Subiects, but also in the walles of the Citty, of the Trenches; of weapons, of miliitary stratagems, and of Money, which is vsually called, the Sinew of Warre. Therefore the people rest at the commaund of the Prince; and are subiect to one man; But the Prince relyeth vpon the Wills of many Men, as also vpon diuers other things, in all which he is forced in some sort to be seruiceable.

To conclude, it is in the Power of the King to chastize his subiects with bonds, imprisonment, banishment, yea with death: notwithstanding the King himselfe (I speake what actually may be done, not what by right ought to be done) lyeth open to bonds, imprisonment, banishment, wounds, and death. The truth of this point is proued from the pittifull examples of Iulius Caesar, Caius, Nero, Galba, Vitellius, Domitian, Commodus, Heliogabalus, and from diuers others. Neyther do these wicked Princes, but such as haue beene of great modesty and moderation in their comportement, witnes the same; as Alexander Mamme^a, Gordianus the yonger, Pertinax, Tacitus, Numerianus Probus, Gratianus, Valentinianus the second. I could insist also in such Princes, which haue beene most remarkable for piety and Sanctimony of lyfe; as S. Edward, King of England, S. Wenceslaus, duke of Bohemia, S. Sigismundus King of Burgandy, S. Canutus King of Denmark, and some others.
In this next place let vs discourse of Honour. Kings indeede in their owne presence, and in the presence
 of others, are much reuerenced; but in their absence they are often slaundered, and their Honours turne a^under with contumelious Inuectiues. In like sort in their owne presence, ^hey are much flattered by such their Sycophants, who secretly beare to them a great contempt, and inward hatred. And if account should be taken both of such, as extoll them in prayse, and of others their detractours, these later would be found far more in number. Therfore doubtlesly the glory of Kings is for the most part lesse, then their ignominy; since those who in the presence of a King, do honour him, are but few; whereas the absent are many, of which some doe taxe the King with sordide auarice, some with cruelty, others with luxury, and others with other vices.
To descend to riches. Perhaps some may thinke, that Kings haue no mixture of Pouerty adioyned to their riches. Nothing lesse. For no men are found to be more wanting, and poore then Kings. They haue indeed great reuenewes and treasure, but withall they often are indebted more they their Treasure can discharge. And that
 man is not so poore who hath litle, as he who desireth much, because he wanteth much. And is it not a great argument of Pouerty, for Kings to extort farthings or halfpe^nies from their Subiects, being poore, since they exact small customes or payments of all those, who sell things necessary for mans sustenance and prouision? I speake not this, as reprehending such exactions, fot I well know that Kings may iustly require these Tributs, according to those words of the Apostle, in his Epistle to the Romans cap. 13. Be subiect not only for wrath, but for conscience; therefore giue you Tributs also, for they are the Ministers of God etc. Render therefore to all men their due; to whome tribute, tribute; to whome custome, custome. Onely my intention heere, is to paint out the miserable state of mortall Kings; who of necessity are to abound with great affluence of riches, and yet are forced to gather no small part thereof from poore and needy men.
But now in this place what shal we say of the pleasures and delicacies, which Kings enioy? Kinges indeed haue their gardens, their bowers, their
 Orchards, most sumptuous tables of meate, their hunting sportes, their theaters, and other such pleasures for their recreation; but these are often attended on with the goute, the griefe or paine of the stom^ke, or Head, and (which is more violent) with most grieuous solicitude and cares of the mynd, which not seldome do depriue them of their nightly rest: such are suspicious, feares, augours etc. Thus if their Bedchamber dore doe but open, or make the least noyse in the night, they instantly suspect treachery and treason. If newes be brought them, that there is seene a multude of armed men togeather, they feare a combination of their Subiects against them. Thus* is there made a compound of their ioyes and griefs, of their repose and disquietnesse; which hath beene the Motiue, why diuers Kings, abandoning all domination and Rule, haue finally chose^ to liue vnder the hatches of a priuate lyfe.
But let vs heare S. Chrysostome, who discourseth of the Emperours of his tyme in these words, hom. 66. ad pop. Antioch. Ne diadema respicias, sed curarum tempestacem; neque purpuram
 intuere etc. Do not so much cast thy eye vpon the diademe or Crowne of Kings, as vpon the storme of their Cares; neyther behould the Purple garme^t and Robe, but the Soule and mynd, more blacke then the Purple. The Crowne doth no more incompasse the Head, then Care doth the mynd, Neyther thinke thou of the great company and traine of Officers and Attendants, but of the multitude of troubles. For thou shalt ^ot find a priuate house so replenished with cares, as Kings Pallaces are. For in the day tyme death is feared, in the night the very soule seemes to leape out of the body, through apprehension of terrours. And these thinges happen in tyme of Peace. But if the trumpet be once sounded, and that VVarres rush on, what lyfe is more miserable, then the lyfe of Kings? How many dangers doe their familiars and subiects threaten to them? For the very pauement and stones of Kings Courts doe euen flow with the bloud of their owne friends and kinred. This will be fully acknowledged, if I doe insist in some examples both of former times, and of our dayes.
This King (for example) hauing a
 wife suspected of Adultery, did tye her naked, leauing her to bee deuoured of beasts in the mountaines, though she became mother of many Princes. Now what kind of life may wee thinke this man did liue? For hee would neuer haue burst out into so great a reuenge, had he enioyed the true vse of Iudgment. This other Prince did throtle to death his owne Sonne. This third being suprised by his enemy, became his owne Homicide. Another muthered his owne Nephew, being Competitour to the Crowne. The fifth is reported to haue depriued his owne Brother of life. Another ended his life by taking Physicke being impoysoned; and the eye of his Sonne was pulled out, for the preuenting of future dangers, when as yet he had committed no wrong. The next Emperour (as a Man, breathing only misery and infelicity) was burned with his horses, wagons, and other his furniture. VVords light short to expresse the calamities which the next Prince to the former, was forced to suffer. And as for this Emperour that now reigneth, is it not most euident, that after hee was crowned with the Diademe, he spent no short
 time in labours, in dangers, in disconsolation, and secret endeauours? At non talis Caelorum Regia; but such is not the Court or Kingdome of Heauen.
Thus farre S. Chrysostome. Who how truly he concluded, what wee shall now relate, will fully proue. For it is certaine, that the Kings of the Kingdome of Heauen (and such are all the blessed, who doe liue with God) haue Power without weaknes, honour without ignominy, riches without Pouerry, and pleasure without griefe. For of them it is said in the 90. Psalme: There shall no euill come to thee, and scourge shall not approach to thy Tabernacle. And in the Apocalyps cap. 21. And God shall wipe away all teares from cheir eyes, and there shall bee no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more paine. Therefore the power of those celestiall Kings is most great, their imbecillity and weaknes none.
Wee reade in the 4. of Kings, that one Angell without any military forces, without any artillery, or svvords or launces did kill at one blow a hundred eighty thousand of Assyrians; neither did the Angell feare to receaue
 any wound from them. S. Gregory relateth in his third booke of Dialogues, cap. 36. how a holy man being assaulted by a bloody and mercilesse fellow, with his arme stretched out, and a naked sword in his hand, instantly cried out: O Saint Iohn, hould him, And presently thereupon his hand did grow stiffe, so as hee could not mooue it. Therefore Saint Iohn, did heare the prayer of his Client from Heauen; and with such celerity did punish that wicked Man, as that it preuented the blow, being already begun to be giuen. Such is the power of Celestiall Kings, as that neither almost an infinite distance of place, nor the solitarines of one poore iust man, nor the multitude of armed men, could hinder S. Iohn, from deliuering his Suppliant from imminent death. Infinite other examples l^ke to this might be produced.
Now concerning the Honour of those Kings of Heauen, it is so glorious, and great, as that not only the godly and vertuous, but euen the wicked, yea the very Diuells doe reuerence and giue veneration to them. Many doe contemne, and be trample vpon vertuous
 and holy men here liuing vpon the earth; whome, after that they be translated to Heauen and their sanctimony celebrated by the publicke suffrage and decree of the Church, the former men doe worship and honour. And the Diuells themselues doe reuerence and feare the relicks and Images of such holy Saints in Heauen, whome whiles they liued in flesh, they vexed with their temptations; yea often times with stripes and blowes, through the permission of God.
What shall I say of the Riches of these Heauenly Kings? Their chiefest riches is to want nothing, since God to them is, All in al, 1. Cor. 15. for he is not rich, who possesseth many things, but he who desireth nothing, since he wa^teth nothing. For it is the mynd, which maketh a man to be rich not his stored chests or coffers. We may add heerto, that Heauen and eatth, and what is therein contayned, belong to the riches of the Saints: for what do not they possesse, who are, the heyres of God, the coheyres of Christ? Rom. 8. And whome, the Father will constitute, the heyres of all things. Heb. 1.
There now remayneth to speake of
 Pleasure. Certainly the pleasure, which the celestiall Kings enioy, is most pure and cleare, not contaminated with any drosse of griefe or dolour. For we haue aboue learned out of the Apocalyps c. 21. that God shall wype away euery teare from their eyes, and that they shall not suffer any more lamentation. But touching Pleasure, we shal enlarge our selues more in discourse hereafter when we treate of Paradise. Now it is euident from what we haue aboue deliuered, that the goods of the Kingdome of Heauen shalbe common to all the Saints and Blessed; and that they are of that worth, as that they cannot brooke any comparison, with the goods of this world; especially since all terrene goods are temporary: but celestiall goods, euerlasting.





How much earthly Kingdomes are prized by Men; and how much the Kingdome of Heauen ought to be esteemed. CHAP. VI.
NOw let vs a little obserue, with what vehemency and heate of endeauour are earthly Kingdomes desired and sought after by men, though they be vncertaine, small in their own nature, and euen fraught with infinite feare and sollicitudes; that from thence we may gather, with what a thirsty desire and ardour the Kingdome of Heauen ought to be sought after. The greedines of Domination and Rule doth incomparably exceed all other humane desires: Since a Kingdome is not one only particular good, but it is a massing or heaping togeather of all the goods, which may be desired of men. For there is Power, Honour, Riches, pleasure, as is aboue sayd. There also is found a liberty of liuing after ones owne will; which is incident and gratefull not only to men, but also to
 beasts. There is also a supereminency, and (as it were) a certaine Diuinity in respect whereof Kings haue no Equals in the Kingdome, but are aboue all, command all, and are worshipped of all. And hence it riseth, that when Kings wil promise any thing of greatnes, they are often accustomed out of a glorious boasting of their owne sublimity and height, to promise the halfe of their Kingdome.
Thus we read of Assuerus, in Hester cap. 5. VVhat dost thou desire to be giuen thee etc. Though thou aske the halfe of my Kingdome, thou shalt obtaine. And in lyke fort of Herod to the daughter of Herodias Mar. 6. VVhatsoeuer thou askest, I will giue thee, though the halfe of my Kingdome. And from this grou^d it riseth, that for the obtayning of a Kingdome, men hould it lawfull to peruert all lawes and right: neyther do they thinke any thing so sacred and holy, which they may not violate to satisfy their thirst of raigning.
Ninus was the first Man, who prouoked his friends and neighbours by vniust warres; that by that meanes (whether right or wrong) he might enlarge his Empire, as S* Austin relateth
 out of Iustin. lib. 4. de Ciuit. c. 6. Maximinus the Thracian hauing receaued many and great benefits from Alexander the Emperour; notwithstanding caused him to be slayne by his owne Souldiers, that therby he might succeed in the Empyre The lyke facinorous and vnheard of act did Philip of Arabia commit vpon Gordianus his Lord and Emperour. Neither this vnquenchable lust of raigning hath caused men to wash their hands in the bloud only of their Neighbours and Benefactours, but also of their Brethren, Nephews, yea their owne Father. Romulus killed Remus his brother, and Caracalla, Geta his brother, and both through desire of raigning. Athalia depriued of lyfe all the nephews of Ochozias King, that herselfe might after gouerne the sterne, as we read in the 4. Booke of Kings cap. 11.
Thus we see, that this greedines of Soueraingty inciteth not only men, but euen women, to commit most flagitious crymes, Sinochus (the Persian) procured the murdering of Cosdroas his Father, and Medarses his brother, that himselfe alone might sway the Gouernment. Yea which is more, the
 Mother of Nero hauing receaued answere from the Astrologers, that the Sonne should reigne, but the mother should perish, is reported to haue said, Interimat, dum imperet, Let Nero be the cause of my death, so that himself may raigne: So much did this ambitious Woman affect, that her Sonne should gouerne, as that in respect therof she nothing pryzed her owne lyfe.
Neyther doth this insatiable honger of raygning and gouerning make Iniustice only to seeme iust, and ouercome the loue vvhich men vse to beare to Brethren, Nephews, and Parents; but withall it maintayneth, that euen any religious oath is to be violated for that end; which act of Religion was euer houlden most sacred in all Countryes, and was thought most fit to be kept euen by the most fierce and cruell Souldiers though with dangers of life. And according to this (if we may belieue Cicero) Iulius Caesar had euer in his mouth those verses of Euripides: Si iusiurandum violandum est, regnandi causa violandum est; in caeteris pietatem colas. If an Oath be to be broken, it is to be broken for gouernment sake: in other respects thou oughtst to keep
 it religiously. Cic. l. 3. de Off. I pretermit infinit examples, demonstrating that in all ages nothing hath been so much esteemed, as a Kingdome, though the Kings do not raigne long, and though the Kingdomes also do in a short tyme come to vtter ruine and dissolution; whereas the Kingdome of the Saints in Heauen shalbe established for all Eternity. Heare the Prophet Daniel of this point, say, cap. 2. In these dayes of those Kingdomes, the God of Heauen will raise vp a Kingdome, that shall not be dissipated for euer; and his Kingdome shall not be deliuered vp to another People; and it shal breake in peeces and consume all other Kingdomes, and it selfe shall stand for euer. This Prophesy is to be accomplished in the consummation, and end of the world: at what tyme, not only greater monarchies; but also lesser Kingdomes, and Magistracies, and power of temporall Princes shall vanish away, and resolue to smoake; and the Kingdome of Christ and his Saints shall remaine euerlasting, according to that of the Angell: Et regni eius non erit finis: and of his Kingdome there shallbe no end, Luc. 1.

Now if a Kingdome, which is to continue but for a moment; which of its one Nature is weake and vncertaine; which belongeth but to few; and which standeth obnoxious and subiect to many anxieties and troubles, be so ^rdently loued and sought after, be to be preferred before all other things; yea to be acquired and obtained by slaughter, and great effusion of bloud: what is then the cause, why so few do loue the Kingdome of Heauen, but most negligently, and carelesly doe sleight it? And neuerthelesse it is euident (if we belieue the Sacred Scriptures) that this Kingdome of Heauen lyeth open to all men; that the getting thereof may be had without suffering of blowes, or sheeding of bloud, and that it inco^parably surpasseth all earthly Kingdomes?
If I should say to one; Contemne a whole Kingdome, that thou maist obtaine a litle field, or vineyard, thou wouldest deseruedly eyther laugh, or wonder at me. But when I say, or rather God sayth: Contemne a small earthly Kingdome, and seeke after ^ most precious, great, and eternall Kingdome; the which thou mayst purchase
 (if thou wilt) through the grace of God, which will neuer be wanting; why dost thou not raise vp thy spirits both for the desiring and gayning of it? Doubtlesly I cannot conceaue, what may be answered heerto, but that the glory of an earthly Kingdome as being present to the eye, may be (as it were) touched with the hand; whereas the Kingdome of Heauen cannot be seene, cannot be touched, nor scarse apprehended by Fayth. This indeed is true; notwithstanding if a man will seriously and intensly consider, what force and efficacy the Verity, Antiquity, Sincerity and grauity of the sacred Scripture enioyeth, and how perspicuously, and cleerly the sayd Diuine VVrit speaketh of this poynt; and how great a cloude of witnesses during already so many ages, not only with miracles, but euen with bloud, haue confirmed the authority of the sayd diuine writings; doubtlesly he cannot but burst out with the Prophet, and say: Thy testimonyes (O Lord) are made ouer much credible. Psal. 98.
Wherefore we may conclude, that it is not the obscurity and darknes of Fayth, which withdrawes vs from seeking
 after the Kingdome of Heauen; but it is because our mynds are wholy absorpt in exteriour things, and burdened with the weight of custome; and therefore we do not take sufficient tyme and leasure to meditate and ponder of such things as conduce to our Soules good, neyther do we (according to the counsell of our Lord, Mat. 6.) enter into the closet of our hart, and the dore being shut, we do not euen besiege God with our feruerous prayers, that in so great and wayghty ^ busines he would assist vs. Certainty ^f once laying a syde all care of inferiour and lesser matters, we would seriously and with due preparation take into our thought, what the Kingdome of Heauen is, and how easily, and certainly it might be obtayned; and what infinite disparity there is betweene things euerlasting and temporall, betweene matters of greatest weight, and trifles; and briefly betweene the Kingdome of Heauen and earthly Kingdoms; without doubt so great a contempt of temporall Thrones, Crownes, and Scepters, would be ingendred in vs; and on the contrary, so ardent a desire of celestiall affayres
 would so inflame vs, as that we should without difficulty, yea with much ease and facility, bestow all our labour and diligence in pursuite of the Kingdome of Heauen; to the which, as to one true and last end we are made by our Creatour.


The first path-way, or Tract, leading to the Kingdome of God. CHAP. VII.
HEre we are now to know, what is necessarily to be done, that we may arriue to the most desired, and most happy Kingdome of Heauen. But to know this, is no great difficulty, since the King of Heauen himselfe to teach vs the same, did descend to the Earth; And being become our Master and Captaine, setteth before vs foure chiefe, and most safe wayes thereunto. Of these the first is contayned in those words of Mat. 6. Seeke first the Kingdome of God, and the Iustice of him, and all these things shallbe giuen to you.
Morall doctrine beginneth from the end; our End is the Kingdome of God; which Kingdome shalbe ours, if so we
 will walke in that path, wherein our Captaine walked. Also the Iustice of the Kingdome of God is (as it were) ^he scope, or marke, whereat we ^re to ^euell, if so we desire to enioy ^he reward of the Kingdom of Heauen, For as Cassianus rightly teacheth, col. ^. cap. 2. The End is one thing; the scope an other thing. The Scope is a signe or marke, vnto which arrowes ^re directed in shooting; But the End, is the reward which those do take, who haue shot more neere the scope, or marke. In lyke manner, the Scope, of our Actions propounded by God, is ^ustice; the Reward of those, who ob^aine this marke is the Kingdome of Heauen. But the Iustice of the Kingdome of God, is not the Iustice of the Scribes and Pharisies, which was placed in the externall obseruation of ^he Preceps: Neyther it is the Iu^^ice of the Philosophers, which did ^ot transcend the light of natura^l ^eason, corrupted by Sinne. But it ^s the Euangelicall Iustice, which tea^heth to loue God with all our hart, withall our soule, withall our strength and to loue our neighbour (though our Enemy) as our selfe. Of this Scope and
 End S. Paul Rom. 6. speaketh, saying: You haue your fayth vnto Iustification; but the End, life euerlasting.
This is that, whereunto the Apostle admonisheth vs, that the first of all things, we do seeke the Kingdome of Heauen, and the Iustice therof; that is, that our earnest and chiefest thoughts be not caryed away to any temporall goods, but be directed to the gayning of the Kingdome of Heauen, and to a most diligent and inuiolable keeping of that first and greatest Precept; The which Precept being neglected, and broken by most men, therefore it is sayd, Matt. 22. Many are called, but few are chosen. For most men do so liue and comport themselues in their ma^ners; as that their furthest thought, is to seeke, how they may come to this Kingdome of Heauen; neither is there anything, which they more couldly looke after, then the Kingdome of Heauen and the Iustice therof. As if our Lord had said: First seeke after the Kingdom of this world, and its iniustice and deceyt, and the Kingdome of God shalbe giuen vnto you. But that celestiall Kingdome is not of that basenes and meane esteeme, as that it should be thrust vpo^
 those, who do preferre all other things before the obtaining thereof. Therefore he that will learne a certaine and easy way for gayning the Iustice of the Kingdome of God, which leadeth directly to the Kingdome it selfe, let that man heare our forsayd Mayster and Lord, Christ Iesus, thus affirming: Matt. 5. Blessed be they, that hungar and thirst after Iustice, for they shall haue their fill.
But what, o Lord, is the facility of fynding Iustice so great with thee, as that it is sufficient onely to be hungry or thirsty of it? Certainly all poore me^ would be blessed, if only by thirsting after money, they should be so replenished therewith, as that they should not need to be satiated with any other thing. But the matter heere is farre otherwise, for it is one thing to be hungry and thirst after money, and other thing after Iustice. For they who suffer hunger and thirst after Iustice, that is, who so greedily and anxiously seeke after Iustice, as men doe who thirst after water, and are hungry after meate; those men certainly doe euer busy their mind with the thought of it, and breathlesly labour after it,
 and (which is the chiefest) do humbly beseech it of God with inutterable sighs, and lamentations. God doth willingly heare men praying in this manner, and is ready to replenish them with the guifts of Iustice, so as they being satiated therwith, may euen breath nothing, but words and works of Iustice. But money or riches is not a good of this nature, as that who desireth or prayeth for it to God, is presently heard; Since many abuse the vse of money our riches, but of Iustice there can be no abuse. To conclude, Iustice is like to Wisdome, of which S. Iames sayth, cap. 1. If any of you lack VVisdome, let him aske of God, who giueth to all men abundantly, and vpbraydeth none.
O ineffable clemency of God, who is more ready and wi^ling to giue vs those things, which conduce to our Soules good, then we are eyther to demaund or desire them! Whosoeuer therefore wanteth the wisdome of Saints, or the guift of Iustice, which are the chiefe dispositions for the gayning the Kingdome of Heauen, let him most humbly beseech God by most earnest prayers, and deep sighs and co^plaints,
 and he shall infallibly obtaine his desire. For God giueth to men thus praying, and he do not repell or exclude any man; neither doth he giue sparingly and nigardly, but largely, abondantly and without any vpbraiding or delay, for God is not agrieued with mans importunity herein.
Now what may we heer say? With what colour of excuse can a man plai^ter ouer eyther his ignorance or weakenes, at the day of iudgement? On^y thirst after Iustice, and demaund it of God, and thou shalt fully drinke thereof to thy owne satiety; but do not thirst after the blandishments, or allurements of the flesh, neyther after the empty smoake of Honours, nor ^ny other earthly benefits; so shalt thou draw out thy dayes in this world in all iustice, sobriety, and Piety; and in the next thou shalt arriue to the euerlasting Kingdome of Heauen.



The second Path to the Kingdome of God. CHAP. VIII.
ANother Tract, or Path of the Kingdome of God, the which our Captaine sheweth vs, is that of Matt. 5. Blessed are the poore in spirit. By which words we are not commanded to empty our chests and bags altogeather of money, but only to keep our harts voyde of all greedy affection and desire of earthly things. Our Lord doth offer to vs great wealth and abunda^ce of riches; but he will not giue them to vs, except we do bring an open hart, free, and estranged from all worldly couetousnes. The roote of all euils, is couetousnes. 1. Tim. 6. Which in the Greeke is called Philargyria, that is, loue of Siluer. The roote of all good, is Charity, which two things, cannot stand togeather. Therefore except a man become truly and wholy poore in spirit, so as whether he haue great or small store of riches, his mynd be not fixed vpon them; but
 that he be ready to distribute to them ^hat want, and reserue to himselfe, ^n^y what is necessary to his state; this ^an I say, cannot fulfill the Iustice of ^he Kingdome of Heauen; and conse^uently cannot obtaine that King^ome.
This is the true Tract to the King^ome of Heauen; and in this path Christ ^imself did first tread, who for vs was ^ade poore, that he might enrich ^s through his Pouerty. And although ^e had some money, yet he deliuered ^t to Iudas to keepe, whome he knew ^o be a thiefe; that thereby we might ^nderstand, his mynd was not posses^ed with the desire of money. This Tract the Apostles also did follow, ^ho might easily haue procured abun^ance of riches, since they were fa^ous for working of wondrous si^nes and Miracles, did speake the ton^ues of all Countries, and became ad^irable throughout the whole world ^or their Wisdom. But they, who once ^yd: Behould, we haue left all things, ^nd followed thee, did tast the sweet^es of liberty, as being free from the ^ares and loue of riches; and conten^ng themselues with meate, drinke,
 cloaths, did esteeme piety, and the Iustice of the Kingdome of God, to be the greatest riches.
This path not only Monks and Hermites, but also Kings, and supreme Bishops haue walked in, who are arriued to the Kingdome of Heauen. Certainly S. Lewis King of France was rich; but withall he was poore in spirit; for he did vse but ordinary cloathing, did much fast, was liberall and open-handed to the poore, and onely to himselfe most sparing; nor do we read, that he wasted any money in Playes, or Banquets. S. Gregory also, (being Pope) did possesse in diuers places great store of Ecclesiasticall Patrimony and riches; yet because he was poore in spirit, he was most profuse, and bountifull in giuing Almes, and most sparing, yea euen almost couetous in bestowing any thing vpon himselfe, or his kinred: Thus he might well be thought to haue exceeded the bonds of liberality towards others, and of sparingnes toward^ himselfe, and his friends. But this is the way, which leadeth to life euerlasting.
We will adioyne to the former Examples,
 two rare Women. S. Paula ^e Roman, (whose lyfe was written (...) S. Ierome) was no lesse rich in possessions and reuenues, then poore in s^irit; for being a Woman of most ^^ble extraction, she bestowed all her ^ealth and riches in erecting of Mona^^ries, and relieuing the poore, and ^^is with such feruour of charity, as ^^at she desired in soule, to be brought (...) that low degree of want as that the Charity and mercy of others should discharge her funeralls. Now how sparing in charges she was to herselfe, appeareth, in that, she forbore to feed vpon flesh, or egs, or to drinke wyne; for linnen next to her body s^e wore a haire-cloath, she did lie vpo^ the ground, and did purge and cancell euen her smallest offences, with continuall prayers, and teares.
To proceed to the next. Heduigis Queene of Polonia, was rich in temporall faculties, but more rich in po^erty of Spirit. She did content herselfe with one poore gowne, and wore i^ alone euen in the greatest frosts. She f^sted euery day, Su^dayes and great festiuall dayes only excepted. She afflicted her tender body with sharpe disciplines,
 with great watching, and all ma^ner of austerities. Now from this he course of lyfe, we may easely coniecture, vpon what things she did spen^ all her Regall wealth, and how smal an affection (or rather none) she bare to riches. Therefore we are not to wounder, that a woman so poore i^ spirit, and so desirous to shake of al^ temporall cares, did at the last through such spirituall endeauours, arriue to Heauen.


The third Path way to the Kingdome of God. CHAP. IX.
THE third way appointed by ou^ Spirituall Captaine is this, Ma^^ S. Blessed are they, who suffer persecuti^^ for Iustice, for theirs is the Kingdom^ of Heauen. The wisdome of Iesas Chri^^ our Doctour is most admirable, yet altogether secret and vnknowne to th^ wisemen of this world. For who woul^ belieue (were it not that God auerret^ it) that it is good and expedient for vs t^ be poore in riches, and rich in pressur^
 and Afflictions? And notwithstanding ^his is most true, nothing more con^uceth to the acquiring of true riches (...) which are the merits of the King^om of Heauen) then to haue a mind, ^oyd of all affection to temporall be^efits, and withall to haue an ardent desire to suffer for Christ. Heare then our Lord himselfe saying, Luc. 6. VVoe ^e to you, that are rich, because you ^aue your consolation: VVoe to you that are filled, because you sh^lbe hungry: VVoe be to you that laugh, because you ^hall mourne and weep. As also on the contrary syde: Blessed are you, poore; for yours is the Kingdome of God* Blessed are you that now weep; Blessed shall you be, when men shall hate and reuile you, and shall separate you, and vpbraid you: and abandon your name as euill, for the Sonne of Mans sake. Be glad in that day, and reioyce, for behould your reward is great in Heauen.
Heare also S. Iames, how he magnifyeth Tribulation cap. 1. Esteeme it ^ll ioy, when you shall fall into diuers temptations; knowing that the probation of your faith worketh patience, and patience hath a perfect VVorke. Where we are to obserue, that the Apostle he^ sayth not, Tolerate, sustaine, be you patient, when you fall in tribulation, be gaudete, reioyce, yea esteeme it to be ^ ioy. That is, take tribulation not as tribulation but as matter of all ioy, comfort, and exultation. And as touching riches, obserue the iudgement of the same Apostle S. Iames cap. 5. Go too yo^ Rich Men, weep, howling in your miseries, which shall come to you. And i^ another place, the same Apostle saith of rich men: Be miserable and mourne, and weep; let your laughter be turne^ into mourning, and ioy into sorrow. Iac^ 4. But from whence commeth it, tha^ persecution doth make a man blessed, the which rather should seeme to make him miserable? Many thinges might be alledged in proofe of this verity, but I will content my selfe with one reason. To wit, that persecution is like to a forge of burning fire. For fire doth prepare and dresse meates, doth purge siluer, and proue gould: Euen so persecution, if it be patiently suffered, rectifieth, and disposeth Sinners, refineth the imperfect, and is a touchstone to the Iust: And thus is persecution become seruiceable to all sortes
 of men. A sinner is lyke to raw flesh, vvhich except it be rightly dressed, is cast forth to the beasts to be eaten, for ^ sinners is full of vnvvholesome and bad humours; to vvit, concupiscence of the flesh, vvhich is Luxury; concupiscence of the eyes, which is Auarice; and pride of life vvhich is Ambition. But novv if persecution be at hand, threatning a sinner, then is he so prepared in that fire, as that he may be fit to be honourably brought to the table of our Lord. For persecution, or grieuous tribulation violently rushing vpon a sinner, he instantly forgetteth all lust, lucre, and ambition, and so becommeth transformed, and another man, from vvhat before he vvas.
A iust man (but weake and imperfect) though hee doth not fall into any grieuous sinne; yet he is a fauourer of his flesh, followeth his pleasures, loueth gaine and wealth, doth not detest the vanities of the world; This man is like vnto siluer mixed with much drosse; but if once the forge of Persecution take hould of him, and that with patience hee entertaine it, then presently the refuse matter in him doth beginne to bee separated
 from the siluer. For then ^e beginneth to gather his forces togeather, to meditate of things which are aboue, to abhorre and loath carnall desires, and to liue iustly, temperatly, and piously in this world, and to expect with great hope and alacrity the approach and comming of the glory of that great and puissant God. To conclude, a man perfect in Charity is gold, yet he is to be tried in the fire of Tribulation, that both himselfe and others may be assured, that he is gold, and not copper. For after it is seene, that he is able to endure the fire of Peresecution with all patience and euennesse of mind; not only others take notice, what he in himselfe is, but also himselfe with a more erected conscience, hope, and security doth expect the wages and reward of the Kingdome of Heauen; according to that of the Apostle: Rom 5. Tribulation worketh Patience; and Patience, Probation; and Probation, Hope; and Hope confoundeth not. And God himselfe doth daily more and more raise and exalt his seruant tryed in tribulation, vntill he maketh him partaker of his Kingdome and Felicity.
Behould here, how many goods Patience
 in persecution doth ingender. And indeed it deserueth admiration to obserue, how few men there are, who haue the fruition of these goods of Persecution, although they doe lie open to all men, to be partakers of them; since persecution and affliction may bee found in euery place. For in euery place it doth ^ffront vs, whether in our owne house, in the way, in intercourse with others, yea euen in the Church; because in euery place the wicked doe assault the good and vertuous; and that Sentence of the Apostle is most true, 2. Tim. 3. All, that will liue godly in Christ Iesus, shall suffer persecution. Notwithstanding we being ouer delicate and nice souldiers doe either flye from this trying-fire of Persecution wholy, or else, we retort, and beate backe the receaued iniury or wrong vpon our Aduersary. And thus wee doe not suffer persecution and wrong, but we commit it. And there are not wanting, A mans owne enemyes (being) they of his owne House, who doe prayse and commend him, that disburdeneth himselfe of the wrong offered, and doe transferre it vpon the Aduersary: And yet these men will
 be accounted Christians, who thus doe violate and contemne the Precepts of Christ.


The fourth Way to the Kingdome of God. CHAP. X.
BVt because few men there are, who vnderstand aright these great difficulties aboue discoursed of, and more few, who will make triall of them by their owne practice; therefore our Captaine Christ Iesus, hath shewed vs a fourth way (and that a most strait and narrow) leading vs to the Kingdome of God, saying: Matth. 11. The Kingdome of Heauen suffereth violence, and the violent beare it away. As if he would say; I well know, that it seemes a strange Paradoxe to men, that such as are blessed should be poore, and miserable men should bee rich; and that on the contrary, we ought to reioyce in Persecution, and weepe in Prosperity. Neither am I ignorant, that there are fevv, vvho vvould loose and exchange goods present, for the gayning
 of goods future; and vvould imbrace and vvish for present euills, therby to auoid euills to come. But I, vvho am Truth it selfe, neither can I, nor ought to conceale the truth: and therefore I haue here added, That the Kingdome of God cannot be taken but by such, as offer great violence, so as only men of violence doe carry it avvay. Hence it is, that in another place I haue said, Luc. 18. How hardly shall they, that haue money enter into the Kingdome of God? For it is easier for a Camell to passe through the eye of a nedle, then a rich man to enter into the Kingdome of God. And againe: How narrow is the gate, and how straite is the way, that leadeth to life: And few there are, that find it?
I haue also compared the Kingdome of Heauen, to a Treasure hid in a Field, as also to a precious Margarite vvhich cannot be bought, vvithout the sale of all other things; intimating thereby, that a man must depriue himselfe of all things, vvhich he holds deare vpon earth, if so he hope to possesse the celestiall Treasure, and precious Margarite in Heauen, I haue furthermore perspicuously, and vvithout any
 ambiguity of vvords, protested, Luc. 1. VVho doth not renounce all things, which he possesseth, cannot be my disciple. And although this renunciation is to bee vnderstood of the preparation of the mind; Neuerthelesse seeing this preparation of the mind, to renounce all temporalities, vvhen either the health of the Soule, or the glory of God doth require it, is not easily performed; and the accomplishment thereof is found but in few: therefore I haue adioyned the similitudes of him, vvho vvill build a Tovver, not hauing sufficient prouision and meanes to performe the same; as also of that King, vvho thinketh of vvaging vvarre against another King, and yet hath not equall forces, vvherby hee might hope for victory. Novv if the building of a Tovver vvithout good store of money; and the encountring in vvarre and hostility against a potent King, be things most difficult, and almost impossible: Hovv much more difficult then is it to performe both these tvvo points together? But hee ought to performe them, vvho vvil besiege or lay battery to the Kingdome of God.
For first, a Tovver is to be built,
 vvhich may reach to Heauen; That is, merits and the price of good vvorks, are to be procured, vvhich may deserue eternall life. And with all he is to fight vvith very many and most potent enemies, to vvit with the vncleane and vvicked Spirits; vvho shall labour by their subtile endeauours to hinder the building of the foresaid Tovver. The Tipe or figure herof happened to the Israelits, vvho endeuouring to reedify and build vp the Citty of Ierusalem, then ruined and beaten to the ground by the Chaldeans, were hindred by their neighboring Countreyes, vvarring against them; so as they vvere forced to vse incredible sollicitude and care in building vvith one hand, and fighting vvith the other. From all vvhich the Conclusion is, that the Kingdome of Heauen cannot without great paynes and sweat be purchased by such men, who become a prey to earthly and momentary pleasures and benefits; not knowing how to bridle and tame the Concupiscence of the flesh, or to fight with an inuisible enemy. Neuerthelesse, whosoeuer, being assisted by the the grace of God, shall seriously giue his mind to Christian Perfection, and
 shall most attentiuely consider the words of Christ, following the examples of him and all other Saints; to this man by little and little the way and Tract shall be enlarged, the gates shall be opened, the vigour and courage of the mind shall increase, the enemies shall be enfeebled; and thus through the charity of God in Christ Iesus, increasing in him, the burden shall beginne to be light, and the yoke sweet. And those words of Esay c. 40. shall be verified: They that hope in our Lord, shall renew their strength; they shall take wings as Eagles; they shall runne, and not labour, walke and not faint. And this man shall say with the Royall Prophet: I did runne the way of thy commandements, when thou didst dilate my heart. Psal. 118.
Certainly, it was not grieuous to S. Antony to spend whole nights without sleepe; yea the night did seeme most short to him, in respect of the sweetnesse of diuine Contemplation; as well appeared, when he complained of the Sunne it selfe in these words: Quid me impedis, Sol, etc. VVhy dost thou h^nder me, O Sunne, which risest so soone, to the end, thou maist withdraw
 me from the splendour and brightnesse of the true light? Cass. Col. 9. cap. 31. Neither seemed it any difficult matter to this Saint, and such like holy men, to co^tinue their fasts by whole weeks, when they euen fed vpon, and were refreshed with the reading and meditating of the sacred Word of God, as with a celestiall and supernaturall bread. Neither was it painfull to S. Austin to weane himselfe from the sweetnesse of worldly pleasures (to the which euen from his youth he had beene enthralled) after he once had tasted the sweetnesse of diuine loue, and of internall Contemplation. Therefore let no man be disanimated or let his heart and courage fall, but cast himselfe with an immoueable Hope into the Armes of Gods most holy assistance, who, as he made vs for himselfe, so will he draw vs to himselfe; And who will vouchsafe to place all those in his Kingdome, whome hee vouchsafed to redeeme with the precious bloud of his only begotten Sonne,
Now in regard of all this (O Christian Soule) thou oughtest not through the asperity of the way to rest disheartned, but to trust in our Lord; who
 would neuer haue inuited vs to seeke after his Kingdome before all other things whatsoeuer, had he not beene prepared to strenghthen vs in this our iourney, with his most powerfull and puissable help.
Therefore enter into this Path, or tract-way towards the Kingdome of Heauen, with all cherefull animosity of mind. Here is no place left for a wauering mind or iudgement. For if the labour be great, which here presents it selfe to thee, yet the reward propounded for this thy labour, is incomparably farre greater; and if the forces of thy enemies hindering thee in this thy voyage, be powerfull, yet the hand of God vvhich leads and conducts thee, is more povverfull; And if many of all Ages and Sexes could by this vvay arriue to the Kingdome of God vvhy vvilt thou be so faint-harted and deiected in spirit, as to despaire by the same vvay, to arriue to the same Kingdome?
Their bodies vvere not made of stone or iron, but of flesh, and they vvere mortall and fraile; And therfore vvhat they atcheiued, vvas not through their ovvne strength, but through the
 strength of our Lord. Why therefore mayst not thou (though vveake and infirme) accomplish the like attempt? Cast thy selfe vpon God (faith S. Austin l. 8. confess. c. 11.) and be not afraid; He will not withdraw himselfe from thee, that thou shouldest fall: Cast thy selfe vpon him confidently, He will receaue thee, He will help thee. God is faithfu^l, hee cannot deny himselfe. Two things are required at thy hands; The one, that most firmely and vnalterably thou wouldst resolue, to preferre the glory of God, and saluation of thy ovvne Soule, before all other things vvhatsoeuer. The other, That thou vvouldst repose all thy hope and confidence, not in thy ovvne strength, neither in thy ovvne vvisdome, but in the Omnipotency and infinite Charity of God. Which tvvo Points if thou do performe, Crooked things shall become straight, and rough wayes plaine. Esa. 40. And thou shalt serue our Lord vvith ineffable comfort. ioy, and exultation; And thou shalt sing, in the wayes of our Lord, because the glory of our Lord is great. Psal. 137.




OF THE ETERNALL FELICITY OF THE SAINTS, Vnder the Title of the Citty of God. THE SECOND BOOKE.

Of the Beauty of the Citty of God. CHAP. I.
GLORIOSA dicta sunt de te, Ciuitas Dei. Glorious things are said of thee, O Citty of God. Psal. 86. In regard herof, I much couet to behold thy Beauty by way of meditatio^, though it be (as it were) by a glasse,
 in a dark manner. And among other things this first occurreth to be considered, why the Felicity of the Saints, which in the holy Scriptures is called the Kingdome of Heauen, is also called the Citty of God. One chiefe reason thereof seemeth to be, because as it is called a Kingdom in respect of its amplitude and largnes: so it also deserueth to be called a Citty with reference to its splenstour and beauty. When one heareth any speach of a most large and vast Kingdome, he may easily thinke, that in the same there are many solitary and vnpleasing places, left onely for beasts to inhabit, many hills vncultiuated, many Vales ouergrowne with wood, many Rocks inaccessible, wayes vneauen and vnhaunted, and finally most deepe precipices, and the lyke.
But because all this infelicity of place ought to be most distant and remote from the felicity of Saints; Therfore the holy Ghost doth instruct vs in the Scriptures, that the Kingdome of Heauen is like to a most fayre and adorned Citty; and though this Kingdom be of a most immense and almost infinite Circuite; yet that it doth euen
 shine, and appeare fayre, as any Citty that is most populous and most rich, is accustomed to doe. For in the chiefest and greatest Citties there are to be seene most sumptuous and adorned Temples or Churches, most stately and haughty Pallaces, most pleasant Orchards, most large places for resort of the Citizens, most replenished houses with people; besids goodly fountaines Columnes, Pyramisses, Theaters, Towers, and shops fraught with all things necessary for the vse of Man. What had beene the splendour of Italy, if (wanting the barraine Apennines) it all should shyne, not as Rome as this day, but as it was vnder Augustus Caesar, who turned its Mud-wals into edifices of Marble? And how beautifull had Syria beene long since, if all of it had beene lyke to Ierusalem, before Ierusalem had come to desolation by the Romans? For Iosephus describeth the magnificence of it with all wounder, so as the Prophet might not without iust cause say thereof, Gloriosa dicta sunt de te, Ciuitas Dei, and yet euen then, it was not brought to that height of eminency, to the which after Dauid and Salomon, Herod
 the great had aduanced it. Of what luster had Chaldaea, and all Assyria and Mesopotamia, or rather all the East beene, if the Citty of Babylon could haue contained all the parts thereof within the compasse of its owne Walles? For both Pliny and Strabo describe that Citty in such manner, as that the largenes and beauty thereof may seeme to be incredible. And therfore the Citty of Babylon was worthily ranged among the seauen Miracles of the World.
But now to parallell things togeather: What kind of Citty then, shall that heauenly Citty, that supernall Ierusalem be, which possesseth, or containeth the whole Kingdome of Heauen? I meane that Citty, which maketh, that great Kingdome of Heauen so to cast forth its splendour and light, as if it all were but one most faire and glorious Citty, in the which there is no vacancy of place, no deformity, nothing vile or base. Doubtlesly the supernall Citty is of such nature, as that no man can seriously and with due attention meditate thereof, but that he must instantly burne with desire of so great a matter: And no man can trul^
 burne therewith, but that abandoning all things, he must thirst after it, and neuer cease, till he hath found it.
Obserue, what Tobias the yonger, reioycing in spirit, speaketh of this Citty c. 13. Thou shalt shine with a glorious light, and all the coasts of the earth shall adore thee etc. The gates of Ierusalem shall be built of Saphire and Emerauld, and all the compasse of the walls, of precious stones: VVith white and cleane stone shall all the streetes thereof be paued, and in the streets Alleluia shalbe sung. And S. Iohn accordeth to Toby herein, saying, Apoc. 21. And the building of the wall thereof was of Iaspar-stone, etc. And the Citty was pure gold, as it were transparent glasse etc. And the foundation of the Citty was adorned with all precious stones; and the seuerall gates thereof were of seuerall margarites, and the streetes of the Citty, pure gould. Now heere we are not to imagine, that the heauenly Ierusalem shalbe seene, as adorned with gould and precious stones, such as are heere vpon the earth; ^ut these things are so deliuered in holy Writ, that thereby we may vnderstand, that the Heauenly Citty is so
 farre more noble then any earthly Citty, by how much gould is better then mud or dyrt, Margarites then common stones, starres then lights, the Sunne then a torch or lampe, Heauen then the earth; and finally God the immortall Workeman, then any mortall Architect. But because we are heerafter more fully to discourse of the beauty of all the parts of the Citty of God, I will heere forbeare further speach thereof.


Of the Concord and Peace of the Citty of God. CHAP. II.
ANother reason, why the Kingdome of God may be called the Citty of God, seemeth to be, in that a Kingdome is accustomed to comprehend within it almost an infinite multitude of persons being among themselues distinct in language, Manners, and Lawes; of which number (though all of one Kingdome) many did neuer see one another, much lesse euer contracted any mutuall friendship or familiarity.
 Now a Citty contayneth onely those which speake one and the same tongue, who are of lyke manners, and are gouerned by the same customes or lawes. Thus the same thing is called both a Kingdome, and a Citty, because the inhabitants of the Heauenly Kingdome, are so many, as that they can hardly be numbred; and as S. Iohn sayth Apoc 7. they are gathered togeather of seuerall Nations, of seuerall Tribes and People, and of seuerall tongues; as also of Angels, Archangels, Principalities, Powers, Vertues, Dominations, Thrones, Cherubims, and Seraphims, who exceed men in number; of which euery one of them do differ from another, not in Country, people, language, but in diuersity of nature, I meane in a specificall difference: And yet neuertheles they are all true Cittizens, all of vnanimous consent, and are gouerned only by the law of Charity. And hence it is, that they are all one Hart, and one Spirit. And since charity cannot brooke Hatred, Enuy, Contentions, discord, and the lyke; therefore all such dissentio^s, and iarres are most remoted fro^ that holy Citty of Ierusalem; and only Charity
 there raigneth being atte^ded on with ^ustice, peace, and ioy, in the Holy Ghost.
In the beginning of the Creation of things there was a great wa^re in Heauen, betweene S. Michael the Archangell, and the Dragon; But S. Michael and the other Angells, who ranged themselues with him, and remayned in the Truth, and performed their loyalty and obedience to their Lord, obtained victory ouer the Dragon and his Associats, who breathing nothing but pride, reuolted from their common Lord, and Soueraigne: And the great Dragon was cast forth, the old Serpent, wh^ch is called the Diuell, and Satan, which seduceth the whole world; and he was cast into the earth. Apoc. 12. From which time the Holy Citty (the heauenly Ierusalem) did border it selfe within the limitts of Peace; Neither hath any warlike Trumpet beene hard therein, neyther shall hereafter be heard, and this for a^l Eternity.
Now to reflect vpon what is aboue said: What can be reputed more pleasing or happy, then this Citty? Such men, who by their owne experience haue tryed the euills of warres, robberies, slaughters, Rapines, deuastation
 of places by Lies, sacriledges and the like, may easily and truly preach of the great pleasure and sweetnes of peace. But passing ouer publike warres and Hostility; who hath not made triall in his owne Citty, yea in his owne house, how distastfull and vnpleasing it is, daily to conuerse with men of an irefull, and froward disposition, who doe interprete euery thing in the worst ^art? Depart from the wicked, and euill shall fall from thee, saith Ecclesiasticus c. 7. But whither can we fly where we shall not be encountred with wicked men? And if euery place doe swarme with such men, then doubtlesly must many euills, discontents, and vnquietnes attend vpon vs, during this our tyme of exile. Giue eare to what the foresaid Ecclesiasticus pronounceth of an euill wife: It shall be more pleasant to abide with a Lion and Dragon, then to dwell with a wicked woman. c. 25. And if she, who is the fellow and companion of mans l^fe, be through wickednesse, turned into a Lyon, or Dragon, to how great angours and infelicities are many men exposed? All, that will liue godly in Christ Iesus (faith the Apostle) ^* Tim. 3. shall suffer persecution.

Therefore how vnhappy is the Citty of this world, in vvhich a man of necessity must be affronted vvith Aduersaries, and vvage vvarre? For if thou vvilt liue piously and godly, thou shalt suffer persecution at the hands of men; And if thou vvilt giue the bridle to all impiety, thereby to decline and auoid persecution of men, thou shalt then fall into the wrath and indignation of that most high and powerfull King, who shall persecute and punish thee, both liuing and dead; whose anger no man can resist. Most vnfortunate therfore and calamitous is that Countrey in which no man can escape warre, no man can fly from persecution, no man can find true peace. What then remaineth, but that euen from the bottome of our heart, we doe prosecute with a I loue and prayse the Heauenly Citty, wherein no persecution can be found, no warres, broyles, or discord can take place.



Of the liberty, or freedome of the Citty of God. CHAP. III.
THe third Reason, why the Kingdome of God, may be called a Citty, is, in that a Kingdome hath a Monarchicall forme o gouerment, which seemeth to be opposed to liberty; whereas all the Cittizens of Heauen, are free, and our Mother, which is the supreme Ierusalem, is also free, as S. Paul witnesseth to the Galathians c. 4. Which blessed Apostle did well know, what he did speake, since he being once taken vp in spirit into the third Heauen, was thereby acquainted with the manners, and lawes of that Citty. Therefore seeing a Kingdome doth seeme to include seruitude, and a Citty liberty; that Kingdome may well be called a Citty, in wh^ch all, who serue the King, are free. Now among the holy inhabitants of Heauen, there is not one only liberty, but a liberty of seuerall kinds. For first, all the Cittizens of Heauen are free from the bondage
 of sinne, seeing the first liberty, which was in the terrestriall Paradise, was to haue power not to sinne; wheras the second liberty in the celestiall Paradise is far greater; to wit, not to be able to sinne, as S. Austin teacheth. lib. de correp. and gra c. 11.
Another kind of liberty consisteth in being free from death, being like to the former liberty. For Adam vvas so free in the terrestriall Paradise, as that it vvas in his povver not to dye: And the Sonnes of Adam are so free in the celestiall Paradise, as that they cannot dye. Neyther must it seeme strange, that vve p^ace liberty in that, vvhich consisteth in not being able to doe; seeing not to be able to sinne, and not to be able to dye, imply an eminency of freedome from the captiuity of sinne, and thraldome of mortality. For vvho hath not povver to sinne, is not only free from sinne; but also is so farre from the bondage thereof, as that he remaines secure, that sinne shall neuer haue any soueraignty ouer him. In like sort, he vvho cannot dye, remaines not only free from death, but is so farre distant from death, as that he is ascertained, that
 death shall neuer make any assault tovvards him: Which liberty only God through his owne Nature enioyeth, according to those words of the Apostle 1. Tim. 6. VVho alone hath immortality. For although the Angells and rationall soules be said to be naturally immortall, because they haue no Principle, or cause of Corruption in their ^ature; Neuerthelesse, God who first created them, can at his pleasure, reduce them to Nothing. But the Angells, and the blessed Saints are most secure, that they shall for neuer after sinne, nor dye; and are in this respect most free from the seruitude of sinne or death; which priuiledge is a most honorable participation of the diuine liberty of God.
The third kind of liberty, is to be free from Necessity; and this liberty, is also of seuerall sorts. For now mortal men are forced (through a certaine constraint of necessity) to eate, to drinke, to sleepe, to labour, sometymes to stand, another time to walke, or to lye downe, and repose themselues. But the Saints in Heauen stand subiect and thra l to no such necessity, but are freed from all corporall necessitudes;
 And this is the liberty of the glory of the Sonnes of God, of which the Apostle speaketh in his Epistle to the Romans. Now of what dignity this liberty is, first poore men, secondly spirituall men, lastly rich men, and such as are louers of this world, do fully testify. Men oppressed with penury and want in the highest degree, what indefatigable paynes d^ they vndergoe, thereby to prouide for themselues and theirs, meate, drinke, cloaths, and other necessaries? And how much would they acknowledge themselues to be obliged to such men, who would disburden and free them from all such seruitude of Want and Necessity? And hence it is, that many of them practise theft, and other prohibited courses, for the maintayning of their liues; for they say with that wicked Steward in the Ghospell Luc. 16. To dig I am not able, to beg I am ashamed, I know what I will do: To witt, I will deceaue my Lord; I meane, I wil free my selfe by theft and rapine from this burden of want and necessity. But the close or end of this is to fall into a necessity far more grieuous; that is, into the seruitude
 of sinne and the diuell, mans greatest enemy.
To come to holy men who greedly thirst after Heauen; these men accou^t it a great burden, to haue the care of prouiding al things n^cessary for the body, standing in need of so many things, and spending much tyme therin, which they would bestow willingly vpon more noble employments. Eusebius l. 2. hist. cap. 16 recordeth out of Philo, that the first Christians of Alexandria in Egypt, liuing vnder the gouernm nt of S. Marke the Euangelist, were so wholy deuoted to their accustomed heauenly meditations, as that they neuer refreshed their. Bodies with meate, till after the Sunne was set, that so they might spend the whole day, and a great part of the night in such celestiall studies; so allotting but a small part of the night for their Bodies ease and cherishment. Yea he relateth, that diuers, for the space of three whole dayes, others for six dayes togeather, abstayned fro^ meate. In like sort Ioannes Cassianus in his Collations, and Theodoret in his history, do affirme, that the same long ^bstinence from meate was much practized
 by many holy ^rmites. Therefore from hence we may gather, that the seruitude of corporall necessities was a great clogge to these men; they complaining and crying out with the Apostle: Rom. 7. Vnhappy man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the body of this death?
Now to descend to the Cittizens of this World, and particularly to rich men (who breath nothing but temporall gaine and pleasures:) To these this seruitude of necessity is not vngratefull; neuertheles if they weighed the matter in an euen ballance, they would censure it to be most grieuous. Meate, drinke, and sleep are pleasing to them, but if these benefits of nature be taken in a superfluous degree, they fill the body w^th a troublesome ouercharge of bad humours and diseases; which after to expell they are forced to drinke diuers better potions; and to suffer no sleight paines. Agayne such men are violently constrayned eyther to professe open emnity to God, and thereupon to vndergoe his most dread^ull wrath and indignation; or els most couragiously to wage Warre against concupiscence of
 the flesh for the obtayning of temperance and sobriety; which kind of feight is accustomed to be most laborious, and most dangerous. Therefore I conclude, that both the poore, the rich, the godly, and the wicked, are disburdened and freed of a most fastidious wearisom necessity and vassilage, when they are freed from the seruitude of this miserable and manifold Necessity.
The fourth kind of liberty consisteth, in being free and vnobliged to the Law, and the Precepts; since the Law was instituted not for the iust, but for the iniust, as the Apostle teacheth. Now there are none more iust, then the Blessed; for they are confirmed and corroborated in Iustice, neither can they possibly become iniust. True it is, that the threatning and pressing Law is not ordained for iust men, liuing in this World; since of their owne accord, they are obedient to the Law; neuerthelesse it cannot be denied, but the Law doth oblige and direct euen them to do that, which the law commandeth, and to flye that, which the Law prohibiteth.
But the iust, who doe enioy the liberty
 of the glory of the Sonnes of God, doe stand in need of no Law, for they conte^plate all Iustice in the VVord; and as being strenghtned and fortified in perfect Charity, they cannot deflect or decline from the will of God. This liberty indeed is of great moment, which dischargeth one of all sollicitude and anxiety; and it is wholy opposite to that captiuity and thraldome of those vnfortunate Soules, who hauing their hands and feete bound, shalbe cast into exteriour darknes, and into a furnace of fire; So as they shall not be able either to tolerate, or to auoid those torments. And yet there is not any man, but of necessity he must vndergoe one of these two contrary lotts or fortunes. Notwithstanding men are so blinded with the empty smoake of present Honour, and the dust of terrene Benefits, as that they make no cogitation, no introuersion of iudgment vpon these matters, vntill a sudden ouerthrow and calamity doe rush vpon them; and thus doth irreuocable punishment open their eyes, vvhich sinne had before shut, and closed vp.



Of the Situation, and forme, or structure of the Citty of God. CHAP. IV.
BVT let vs returne to the Heauenly Citty; and let vs attentiuely co^consider the situation, forme, foundation, gates, walles, and streets therof. And to beginne with the situation: This Citty is placed in Holy mountaines; for thus we read: Psal. 86. The foundations thereof are in holy mountaines: With whome agreeth S. Iohn Apoc. 21. And he tooke me vp in spirit to a Mountaine great and high, and shewed me the holy Citty. Now Citties are seated vpo^ Hils or mou^taines, both for healthfulnes of the ayre, as also for strength. But what mountaines are higher then Heauen? And which is that mountaine that is exalted aboue all mountaines, if not the Heauen of Heauens, of which Dauid thus singeth: Ps^l. 113. Caelum Caeli Domino. This is that mountaine, to the which the sayd Prophet coueted to aspire, when he said againe, Psal. 23. VVho shall afcend
 into the mount of our Lord, or who shall stand in his holy place? And from whence he implored and expected aide, saying: Psal. 120. I haue lifted vp mine ^yes vnto the mountaines, from whence helpe shall come to me Therefore from all this we may gather, that the Seate of the Citty of God, is most sublime and high, and transcendeth al^ things, which may in any sort disturbe the peace and tranquillity of the said Citty: for it is erected to a greater height then any dust, myre, thornes, the bitings of venemous beasts of the earth can reach vnto. It is more high, then any vapours, darknes of the ayre, hayle, thunder, or lightning can terrify, or annoy. Briefly it is more high, then those vncleane, and rauenous Birds, which the Apostle Eph. 6. calleth, Spiritualia nequitiae in caelestibus, can ascend vnto. He meaneth spirituall wickednes in heauenly places.
The forme of the Citty of God is foure square; for thus speaketh S. Iohn, Apoc. 2^. And the City is situated quadrangle wise; and the length thereof is as great, as the breadth. This signifieth no other thing, but an admirable and most perfect Iustice, which reigneth
 in that Citty, in which there is no Iniustice, no obliquity, or distortion of mens Actions; which point S. Austin toucheth in explicating that of the Psalm. 64. mirabile in aequitate, that is, wonderfull in Iustice. And doubtlesly it vvill deserue admiration, to behold so many almost innumerable Cittizens of that Citty, all of them enioying a most exact freedome of Will, and yet not any one (for all eternity) to be noted for any exorbitancy or miscariadge either in vvorke, vvord, or thought. Therefore vve may truly say, that that Citty is placed in a square, so as the length and breadth thereof are equall.
Furthermore, this foure-squared forme, may also figure out, that the latitude of the Heauenly felicity is equall to the longitude; I meane, because as the store or abundance of celestiall Goods shalbe infinite, so also shall their continuance be infinit, and interminable. For according to the Dialect of holy Scripture, Latitude is accustomed to be applyed to the multitude of things, and Longitude to their con^inuance. According heereto vve read, that the manifold vvisdome of
 Salomon is called in the booke of the Kings, the Latitude of the Heart, like vnto the sand, which is in the sea shore; and in the Psalmes, duration or continuance of time, is tearmed the length of dayes. Therefore it followeth, that in the Citty of our Lord, the Latitude shalbe equall with the Longitude, because there shalbe an immensity of good things, ioyned with an eternity of their fruition. S. Iohn addeth, a little after the place aboue alledged, that the height of this glorious Citty shalbe of the same dime^sion with its breadth, so as the Citty may be foure square euery way; the meaning whereof is, that the goods of the Celestiall Ierusalem shall not be only many and euerlasting, but also most noble, and most sublime or high. Neither doth it import any thing, that Vitruuius and Vigetius doe not allow in Citties a foure-square forme; seeing they speake of Citties, which stand in feare of the enemy; Whereas the Holy Scripture celebrateth in words, that Citty whose borders and limitts are Peace; and to which, in regard of its height, no euill can make approach, as the holy Prophet hath auerred. Psal. 90.



Of the foundations and gates of the Citty of God. CHAP. V.
THE foundation of the Citty of God is of that sort or manner, a^ that it alone may deseruedly be said to haue a foundation or worke; for thus doth the Holy Apostle speake: Heb. 11. He expected that Citty, that had foundations; whose artificer and maker is God. For the Apostle doth in these words giue a reason, why Abraham did not build a Citty in the Land of Promise, nor so much as any house, or place of habitation, but did there liue as a stranger. The cause being, in that he was instructed, that, that Land of Promise was but a figure of a greater Land of Promise: and therefore he was vnwi^ling to erect a house or Citty, which was after to become a ruine and desolation; as expecting a Citty built vpon a firme and stable foundation, whose Architect or builder is God. Therefore from hence it resulteth, that the Heauenly Citty is only that Citty,
 which truly and properly hath a foundation, and which, as being bu^lt by God, shall last for euer.
The Citty which Cain, Nembroth, Ninus, Nabuchodonosor, Romulus, and others haue built, in that they were after subiect to ruine, and shall all of them at the end of the world come to vtter desolation, doe euen proclaime, that they had no foundation; And from hence we may gather, how much more wise and prudent were the auncient Prophets, then we are; for they, although they l^ued as long againe, as we doe now liue, and were to expect for certaine thousands of yeares, before they could enter into the Heauenly Citty; neuerthelesse they vouchsafed not to build either Citties or houses, but liued only in Tabernacles, as strangers and Pilgrims; comforting themselues with a certaine and liuely Faith and Hope, that since all things vpon earth doe finally come to decay, they at last should enioy the eternall Citty of Heauen. Whereas we, who doe liue but few yeares, and may (if our selues will) presently after our death, enter into that most b^essed Cit y, do so sweat and labour in building,
 and adorning Ci^ties, and stately Houses, as if we were neuer to dye, or neuer expected to arriue to Heaue^; In which our proceeding, we doublesly imitate not the bel^euing Patriarchs, but the misbelieuing Heathens: And yet we are Christians, and doe well know, that neither Christ nor any of the Apostles had here vpon Earth any Citty, Pallace, or so much as an house; much lesse, that they did build any of these.
I would not heere be vnderstood to reprehend Princes of this world (although Christians) for erecting of Citties, and priuate men for building conuenient houses for themselues and their Posterity; for we well know, that Dauid (a pious King) did much inlarge the Citty of Ierusalem, and did in the same Citty build himselfe a most Regall Pallace, as we read in the second Booke of Kings. We likewise know, that S. Lewis (King of France) repayred at his owne peculiar charges, certaine much ruined Citties of the Christia^s in Palestine. Neither are we ignorant, that Princes should liue in more magnificent Buildings, then priuate men; and in lyke sort men of worth and
 dignity, then men of the common and vulgar sort. All this ^e know; but but we on^y require and allow a mediocrity in these things; the extreme we codemne, especially when we see that Priuate men couet to haue Pallaces fi^ting for Kings; and Kings not content with Pallaces, do buyld for themselues huge masles and heights of Edifices, equalling euen townes in greatnes: To conclude, we condemne an ouer-affectionate desire to these temporal chings, as if we were to repose and place our chi^fe felicity in them; and we prayse and allow the contempt of the world, and the humi^ity of Christ.
Now touching the Ports or Gates of the Citty of Heauen; they are sayd by S. Iohn in the place aboue alledged to consist of Margarites and Pearles. In lyke sort, the structure of the walls is of Iaspar stone, and the streets of the Citty, as also the whole Citty of pure gould. All which desc^iption doth signify, that that holy Citty is mo^t precious, and withall most bright and shining. For it is well knowne, that the Margarite or Pearle is precious, and lightsome. Now, the Iaspar is eyther
 greene or whyte; and therefore for the better distinction of these two colours, S. Iohn addeth, Et lumen eius simile lapidi precioso, and the light thereof, lyke to a precious stone, as it were to the Iaspar stone, euen as Cristal. Where he adioyneth the words, euen as Cristall, to signify that he spake not of the greene, but of the whyte and transparent Iaspar: So also, where he sayth; that the streetes are of pure gould, he annexeth these wordes lyke to pure glasse; that is trasparent* and of a whyte colour, lyke vnto Cristall.
From this it followeth, that the whole Citty, whether you respect the gates, the wall, or the streets, is most precious, which hath not within it any ordure, or any thing that is base, abiect sordid, or of small continuance. And withall the Citty is sayd to be whyte, and plainly lyeth open to the eye; for therin is nothing couered. All the Citizens then see all things; neither is there any suspicion, or any imposture, or deceyte. And perhaps this is the reason, why S. Iohn subnecteth in the same place this short passage: An^ the Gates thereof shall not be shut; because there shalbe no darknes, no theeues,
 no Enemies, for feare of whome the Gates should be shut. Neither is this repugnant to the wordes of the Psalmist, who celebrateth the prayse of his Heauenly Ierusalem in these words: Psal. 147. O Ierusalem praise our Lord, because he hath strengthened the locks of thy Gates. Since both the Prophe^ and the Euangalist do insinuate one and the same thing; to wit, that there are not any enemies or theeues, who can threaten danger to this heauenly Ierusalem. For the Prophet, by the Gates being euer shut, sign fyeth that Gods holy Protection will not suffer the enemy at any time to inuade or enter into that Citty, so much beloued by him. The Euangelist by the gates being open, sheweth, that that Citty is so secure and free from all hostile incursions, as that it needeth n t to shut its Gates; much lesse to keep any Watch, or Centinall.
But let as proceed, and shew, what the Gates, the VValls, and the Streetes of his Citty do import? The Gates (by their standsng euer open) declare, that now after the Passion of our Sauiour, entrance into this Citty of God and Angels, is giuen to men, since Christ
 himselfe, after he had suffered death, did open the Kingdome of Heauen to the faithfull. Neither is there one only Port or gate, but twelue, by which the faythful may enter into this Citty: for thus S. Iohn speaketh: On the East side three gates, on the North three, and on the South three, and on the VVest three. Since not only the Iewes (as themselues dreamed) doe enter into that Citty, but men euen from ^ll the most remote and discosted parts of the whole World. Yea, so few Iewes do enter there into, as with reference to men of other Nations, they may be said to be almost none at all: for thus did our Lord (speaking to the Centurion) prophesy of them. Matth. 8. I haue not found so great faith in Israel; And, I say vnto you, that many shall come from the East, and the VVest, and shall sit downe with Abraham, and Isaac, and Iacob, in the kingdome of Heauen; but the children of the Kingdome shalbe cast out into exteriour darknes. In like sort, in the Parable of the Vine, our Lord thus saith, Matt 21. The Kingdome of God shalbe taken away from you, and shalbe giuen to a Nation yielding fruit thereof. And the same point
 is inculcated most clearly in S Luke. VVhen you shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Iacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you to be thrust out. And there shall come from the East, and the VVest, and the North, and the South and shal sit down in the Kingdom of God.
Now there are said to be three Gates from euery part of the World, (and so in number twelue) because entrance sha be giuen not only to those comming from the East, the South, the West, and the North; but also from the beginning or first entrance of the East, from the middle of the East, and from the end of the East; the lyke may be sayd of the three other Parts of the World. Except this other construction following of the foresaid number of the Gates, may be perhaps more pertinent to the purpose, to wit, that three gates are assigned to seuerall parts of the Heauenly Citty, with reference to the mistery of the Blessed Trinity, and the three most necessary Vertues; since they all, from all the foure parts of the World, doe enter into this Heauenly Citty, who being baptiz^d in the name of the three diuine Persons, haue perseuered to their
 last end in Fayth, Hope, and Charity.


Of the Wall, and streetes of the Citty of God. CHAP. VI.
TO proceed. The VVall of the Citty signifieth nothing els, then Gods holy Protectio^ and custody, which one thing alone is sufficient, to preserue this Citty, without any watch, forces, or fortresses. I will be to it (saith God by the mouth of Zachary) A wall of fyer round about; and I wilbe in glory in the middest thereof. Zach. 2. A most wonderfull Promise He saith, I will be a wall of fyer round about, that I may hinder the entrance of Enemies; and I will be a glory in the middest thereof that I may enlighten the Cittizens: as if he would say; Fyer burneth, and shyneth; therefore I will consume the enemy with fyer, and and will illuminate and comfort the Cittizens. So I shalbe a wall of fyer round about, and a light of glory in the middest: which very point S. Iohn a
 little after doth explicate, when he saith: Apoc. 21. And the Citty needeth not Sunne nor Moone to shine in it; for the glory of God hath illuminated it, and the Lambe is the Lampe thereof. The clarity and brightnesse of God, as a Sunne, doth enlighten the minds, and Christ being the Lambe of God, as a Lampe, doth illuminate the bodyes of the blessed. Now Christ is here called a Lampe, not as if this Lampe were necessary in the night time, but is so called in comparison of the Diuinity. For if the faces of the Saints shall shine as the Sunne in the Kingdome of God (as our Lord himselfe testifieth Matth. 13.) then how much more shall the face of Christ, not as a Lamp, but as a chiefe Sunne, enlighten the Citty of God? And hence it is, that S. Iohn doth there subioyne, that there shalbe no Night in that Citty.
Here yet remaineth the street of this Citty to be discoursed of. This street co^prehendeth the whole space, wh^ch is within the compasse of the walls. And this street is the common habitation of all the Celestiall Cittizens; The which is all of pure gold; that is, of a fiery and bright Charity, which
 shall containe all those Cittizens; and through force of which one of the Inhabitants shall euen liue in another, through the vertue of pure Loue. Neither only shall one liue in another, but all of them shall liue in God, and God in the^ all; for who remayneth in Charity, remaineth in God, and God in him. 1. Ioan. 4. The which point, that it might be affected Christ our Lord asked of his Father in that praier which, ready to goe to his Passion, he made in the hearing of all of his Apostles, saying: Ioan. 17. Not for them alone doe I pray, but for the^ also, who by their word shall belieue in me, that they all may be one, as thou (Father) in me, and I in thee, that they also in vs may be one.
O most blessed Citty, which being seated vpon a most high mountaine, dost enioy a most pure ayre! Which art founded vpon a Rocke, as being supported with eternall stability and firmenes! Whose gates doe shine like Margarites, and euer stand open for Holy Soules to enter into! Whose wall is God, encompassing thee about with his vigilancy and protection, and as a precious Ia^per-stone doth adorne thee! Whose street is Charity, more
 bright and glorious, then all gould, more white then any Crystall! Which maketh all the inhabitants to be of one heart, of one mind! replenishing them with an inutterable ioy, and placing them in an interminable and euerlasting tranquillity and peace! Concupiscit, and deficit anima mea; my soule coueteth, and euen fainteth, vnto thy streets. Psal. 9^. What is more gratefull, and more wished for, by our labouring, and lamenting in the midst of a wicked Nation, among false brethren, and in that world, which is wholy placed in malignity and wickednes, then euen in all hast to flye to that place, in which only Charity reigneth? VVhen shall I come, and appeare before the face of God? Psal. 41. What greater consolation and comfort can be to a s^ule louing our Lord, then to see his beloued, and to be seene of his beloued, and through an inward and most sweet connexion reciprocally to dvvell the one in the other? It is insufferable bouldnes (O Holy Citty) that dust and ashes should dare to aspire to thy Pallaces; and it is greater bouldnes, that a vile and deiected soule should dare to approach to
 the fruition of his Creatour. But he vvill excuse and pleade for this boldnes, vvho gaue it, vvhen he prayed to his Father, that vve all might be one; and that as the Father is in the Sonne, and the Sonne in the Father; so vve may be but one, in one another.


Of the Temple of the Citty of God. CHAP. VII.
VVE are heer further to inlarge our discourse of the Citty of God, in shewing the Temple therein to prayse God, and the meate and drinke, which there is to be eaten and drunke^; for as for cloathing the Inhabitants need not to be sollicitous. For if Adam and Eue needed not any cloathing in the terrestriall Paradise, much lesse shall the Saints in the celestiall Pararadise need any such; who shall be all cloathed with splendour and light, as with a vestment. Now concerning meate and drinke, Adam and Eue could not want them; neyther doe the Angells themselues want them, according to those words of the Angell Raphael:
 I vse an inuisible meate and drinke, which cannot be seene of men. Tob. 12.
And first touching the Temple, S. Iohn thus speaketh in the Apocalyps 21. And temple I saw none therein, for our Lord God omnipotent is the Temple thereof, and the Lambe. That S. Iohn did not see any Temple in the Citty, may not seeme strange; since Temples are erected in the Militant Church for foure ends; to wit, that the Word of God may be preached in them to the faythfull; that the Sacraments and Sacrifices may be celebrated in them; that Publike Prayer may be in them offered vp to God; And finally that due praises with singing and ioy may be performed to him. Now the preaching of the Word of God shall cease in Heauen; seeing there the increated VVord himsefe shall manifestly speake to all; And according to the preaching of Ieremy the Prophet. cap. 31. Man shall no more teach his neighbour, or his brother, saying, Know our Lord: for all shal know me from the least to the greatest.
Sacraments in lyke manner and Sacrifices shall not be necessary in that Citty; since neither Sins shalbe there
 expiated, neither shall signes be there required, where things signifyed shall manifestly appeare. Prayers and Laudes to God are heer vpon earth, performed in Churches and Temples, dedicated vnto God, because himselfe hath promised, that in such sacred places his eyes shalbe open, and eares atte^t; for thus he speaketh to Salomon: Paral. 7. Myne eyes shalbe open, and mine eares erected to his prayer, that shall pray in this place. But now seeing in the Celestiall Citty, God wilbe openly seene and heard of all men, therefore not any Temple seemeth to be necessary in that place. Hence then we may easily gather, why S. Iohn said, And I saw no Temple in the Citty.
But h^er it may be demau^ded, why S. Iohn subioineth these words: The God omnipotent, is the Temple thereof, and the Lambe? For if no Temple be required in that Citty, why then is God himselfe said to be the Temple thereof? and not only the Temple, but also the Lambe? Or what explication can it haue; to say, that God and the La^be shalbe called Temples in Heauen? Or to what vse shall this Temple be in Heauen? In answere heerto, we are
 to recurre to the custome of the holy Scriptures, where one text or sentence doth comment, and explaine another, and the more darke and obscure passage receaues its illustratio^ from that which is more perspicuous and cleare. Well then, we thus reade in the 90. Psalme: He that dwelleth in the help of the highest, shall ab^d^ in the Protectio^ of the God of Heaue^ (...) sense and meaning of which Words is this: Who by a firme Confidence and Hope is ioyned with God, he (as it were) maketh to himselfe a house in God, in the which he may securely liue, as being exempt and free from all euill. The same may be said of Prayses and Prayers to God. For he that, through an inward reuerence, is conioyned with God, doth in lyke sort build to himselfe a place of Habitation in God, the which he inhabitating in that sort as he ought to doe, may therein pray, and offer vp his prayses vnto God,
So heer we say, that our Lord (the Omniporent God of Heauen) is the Temple of the holy Citty; because all those holy Cittizens most intensly and with a strong bent of feruour, meditating on the omnipotency of God




 (and so by this meanes ioyned to him, by an inward reuerence) do dwell in him, and exhibit to him due prayses; and when they pray for vs, they are heard with a most willing and ready care. In lyke manner, when they seriously contemplate the merits of Christ, who, as an innocent Lambe, deliuered himself vp in oblation and Sacrifice to God (...) odour of sweetnes; they being firmely vnited by loue, and dwelling in him, as in a Temple, doe powre out their Prayers, and impetrations for vs, and doe doubtlesly find the eyes of God open, and his eares attentiue, that they may obtaine in our behalfe any thing, for which they pray.
But if those blessed Cittizens be accustomed to dwell in God and in Christ, as in a Temple, thereby to offer vp their prayses and prayers for vs; what are we (poore men) to doe, who neither see God nor Christ? O would to God, that we might be so happy, out of the immense fauour of God, as to approach neere, to magnify and pray to God, as that now through true Humility and perfect reuerence, proceeding out of the consideration of his supreme
 Maiesty, we being with God, might dwell in him, as in a most sacred Temple.
For then would we not performe our prayses and prayers with a yawning and heedles attentio^, our thoughts being then fixed vpon other things; but with all serious and recollected deuotion we would exhibite gratefull Prayses to God, and profitable Prayers for our selues and our Brethren. And then would be accomplished and fulfilled that sentence: The Sacrifice of praise shall glorify me; and there is the way, by which I will shew him the saluation of God. Psal. 49. For diuine prayses offered vp as an Holocaust vpon the Altar of the Heart, and heated with the fire of Charity, doe ascend vp, in an odour of wonderfull sweetnes, and doe obtaine, that a way may be opened to vs, by the illustration of the hart, to behold that true health or saluation, which God hath prepared for all that loue him. All which benefitts those poore soules loose, who performe their Prayers with a wandring of the mind, and a voluntary drinesse of the Heart. And thus doe these men partake of the labour and
 paines with others, who pray, and sing Laudes to God; but of the diuine consolation, and tast before hand of the Heauenly Beatitude, they partake not at all.


Of the meate and drinke of the Citty of God. CHAP. VIII.
TOuching the Meate and drinke of the celestial Inhabitants, we thus read in the Apocalyps cap. 22. And he shewed me a riuer of liuing water, cleare as christall, proceeding from the seate of God, and of the Lambe. In the middest of the streete thereof, and of both sides of the riuer, the tree of lyfe, yielding twelue fruits, rendring his fruit euery moneth, and the leaues of the tree for the curing of the Gentils. I partly feare that some who read this passage, may wonder at the parcimony of the supernall Citizens, and may be persuaded that better prouisio^ of meate may be had in this our peregrination: for heere in Heauen we heare nothing concerning meate, but of the fruite
 of one tree; and concerning drinke, but of the water of a riuer But let such Men (who thus talke) call to mynd, that in the terrestriall Paradise (where no doubt there were better meats, the^ are in this our exile and banishment) Adam had nothing els granted him, but fruites and herbs for his meate, and water for his drinke; and neuertheles those fruites, herbs, and water exceeded the most delicious meates and wynes of this life, and yet were many degrees inferiour to the tree of life and liuing water of the Heauenly Paradise.
In this vale of misery, all Men are sicke, and haue their sense of Tast corrupted, through a certaine bitter sharpnes; therefore to take avvay all kind of loathing, they haue found out diuers sorts of meates; But yet this delicate variety of meates so diminisheth the loathing, as that it engendreth many diseases. In the earthly Paradise all men were sound and healthfull; and the salubrity and sweetnes of those fruites, and of that water was of that vertue, as that it could with incredible delectatio^, perfectly nourish them (without any nauseous saciety) and
 conserue them in their health: We may add heerto, that they had their meate and drinke euen abundantly, and this without any labour or paine of the body taken therfore. But howsoeuer these matters were in the earthly Paradise; doubtlesly the liuely VVater and the tree of lyfe in the Citty of God are not meate and drinke commo^ to Beasts with men (as the Waters and fruites heere in the vale of our peregrination are) but they are of such worth, and in nature so diuine, as that the Prophet not without cause thus speaketh: Psal. 33. They shallbe inebriated with the plenty of thy house; and with the torrent of thy pleasure thou shalt make them drinke; for these meats and drinke are not corporall, but spirituall and diuine things. The VVater of life is VVisdome, which we thus read: Eccles. 15. She shall giue him VVater of wholsome VVisdome to drinke; And the tree of lyfe is that bread, of which in the same place we lykewise read: She shall feed him with the bread of lyfe, and vnderstanding. For as S. Austin teacheth; in corporall nourishments one thinge is meate, and another thinge drinke; but in spirituall nourishments
 one and the same thing is both meate and drinke; to wit, VVisdome, Vnderstanding, or intelligence; since wisedome is meate, as it nourisheth; it is also drinke, as it quencheth thirst.
Notwithstanding what is heere sayd, I grant also, that as by the water of lyfe; VVisdome may be signifyed so by the tree of life Chaeity; for thus we fynd in S. Iohn, He who loueth not, remayneth in death, 1. Ioan 3. And againe; VVe know, that we are tra^slated from death to life, because we loue the brethren And ceriainly as well to vnderstand, as to loue, are vitall Actions. Therfore it followeth, that the drinke in the Citty of God, is to drinke of that liuely riuer, which streameth from the fountaine of lyfe, which is God; to wit, to enioy the participation of that wisdome, by the which God is wise; the w^ich wisdom is most high, and not to be expressed in words. And the meate of those Saints, is to eare of the tree of lyfe; that is, to enioy the participation of that ineffable Loue, with the which Goodnes it selfe (being clearely seene) may be loued, and with the which God (who is infinitly good, and the fountaine of all goodnes)
 doth loue himselfe. What these things are, may after a sort, come within the compasse of our coniecture but of our Vnderstanding they ca^not, nor euer shall, vntill we arriue to that Citty it selfe.
Now where S. Iohn sayth, that the tree was vpon eyther syde of the riuer; and that seuerall moneths it yielded forth fruite; all this is to be vnderstood figuratiuely, that so by the similitude, or resemblance of corporal things, we may better apprehend spirituall things. For the Blessed Euangelist his scope was, to paint forth in words a tree of supreme goodnes and fertility, the which to performe, he describeth a tree, which groweth at the banke of a Riuer, and which throgh its owne goodnes, and through a co^tinuall irrigation, bringeth forth fruit (not euery yeere only, as other trees vsually do, but) euery moneth. Neyther doth the Euangelist meane, that there is only one tree in the Heauenly Citty, but many trees of the same kind, which grow vpon both sides of the riuer, running though the middst of the Citty; so as betweene one tree and another, the distance was not great,
 but of that conuenient space, as that the whole Citty may enioy both the benefit of the W^ter, and the fruite of the tree. The goodnes of the tree is intimated and signifyed, in being called The tree of lyfe. The fertility thereof is shewed, in that it bringeth forth fruit euery moueth. Thus it falleth out, that the Inhabitants of that Citty haue euer new and rype fruit* new (I meane) of the present moneth, and rype of the moneth next past; so as the fruit is neuer rotten, neuer dry, neuer vnpleasing to the tast. All which descriptions and circumstances do signify, and figure out the meate and drinke of the Blessed; to wit, VVisdom, by the which they perfectly vndersta^d God, and Charity by the which they perfectly loue God; And this meate and drinke of the Saints being of chiefest worth, are neuer wanting.
Now where the Euangelist speaketh of the leaues of that tree conducing to the health of Nations, he may be thought to signify thereby, that during our banishment in this world, the fruites themselues of the tree of life are neuer sent to vs, but only certaine leaues of that tree; the which although
 they do not conferre eternall lyfe, neuertheles they are very medicinable to cure our diseases, to wit, the Concupiscence of the flesh, Concupiscence of the eyes, Pryde of life, and other such maladies, of which all of vs eyther in a high, meane, or low degree, are sicke. These Leaues are the diuine word of God, brought to vs, by the Prophets and Apostles from Heauen, that is, by diuine Reuelation. O how sweet an odour do these leaues breath forth to such, as haue the spirit of our Lord! Reade the Prophets, reade the Psalmist, reade the Gospe^ls, read the Apostles, Peter, Paul Iohn, Iames, and Iude, all these leaues do euen breath forth Humility, the Charity of God, Virginity into the Readers hart; of all which the Philosophers are wholy silent: but this we are not to wounder at, seeing these leaues are the leaues of Paradise; those of the Philosophers, the leaues of the Earth. Therefore (O Christian Soule) gather these Leaues most diligently, and make to thy self of them a daily medicine; and from the worth of these leaues, make a coniecture what the fruit is; and loathing the draffe of
 swine, aspire with a breathles and incessant desire, to this fruite of Eternall lyfe which is aboue: of this meditate and let the remembrance thereof be euer deeply fixed in thy mynd.


Of the Mysticall foundation of the Citty of God. CHAP. IX.
VVE haue already taken into our consideration the structure of the supernall Ierusalem, we will now intreate of another structure thereof. For a Citty doth not onely containe the fou^dations, the wals, the streets, but also the multitude of the Citizens, who in regard of the diuersity of their functions and offices, are also said in a figuratiue sense, to be the Foundations, Ports, or Walls, and the lyke. And perhaps the gathering, and liuing togeather vnder the same Lawes, is more properly called a Citty, then a continuation of a multitude of houses vnder the same walls; for thus doth Tully (in somni^ Scipionis) speake heereof: Concilia coetusque hominum etc. The familiarityes, and companies
 of men, linked togeather within one Law, are called Citties. Of this celestiall Citty, which consisteth of Citizens, not only S. Iohn, but also S. Peter, and S. Paul do speake. In the Apocalyps cap. 21. we read: that in the twelue gates, were seene twelue Angels, and the inscription of their Names were the twelue Tribes of the children of Israel; and in the foundations were written twelue names of the twelue Apostles of the Lambe.
In S. Peter we thus reade: Vnto whome approching, a liuing stone, of men indeed reprobated, but of God elect and made honourable, 1. Pet. 2. And you as liuing stones, be you made etc. To come to S. Paul: he thus writeth Ephes. 1. Now therefore you are not strangers, and forreners, but are Citizens of the Saints, and the domestiks of God, built vpon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Iesus Christ himselfe being the highest Corner-stone. Therfore from all this we gather, that the Citty of God hath for foundation or ground worke* the Apostles and Prophets; for the doctrine of the Apostles and the Prophets doth support the whole fabrick thereof. For fayth
 is the beginning of sa^uation. Now fayth is ^e^^aled by the Apostl^s and Prophets, eyther by writing, or preaching the mysteries of the Trinity, the In^arna^ion, the Resurrection of the dead, the glory of the Saints, Eternall punishments, and other poin^s transcending humane reason; all which we haue learned from the Prophets and Apostles, to whome God hath vouchsafed to reueale these Mysteries. For although Fayth hath no place in the blessed Soules, because that which they did belieue, they ^ow see (bu^ what is seene is not belieued, but knowne;) notwithstanding the Prophets and Apostles are sayd to be the foundation of the supernall Citty, because Faith is the beginning of salua^ion, and therefore the beginning of Beatitude.
But because S. Peter teacheth 1. Pet. 2. That we (as liuing stones) are ^uilt vpon Christ: And S. Paul 1. Cor. ^. sayth: Other foundation no man can ^y besides that which is layd, which ^ Christ Iesus: Therefore there is one ^oundation, and there are also twelue ^oundations, as S. Austin (in explic. Ps. ^6.) teacheth, because in the twelue
 Apostles Christ was: for he, or his Spirit did speake and teach by the^. Heare the Apostle himselfe, 2. Cor. 13. Doe you seeke an experiment of him, that speaketh in me, Christ? Heare Christ himselfe saying; VVho so heareth you, heareth me. And in another place: It is not you that speake, but it is the spirit of your Father, that speaketh in you. And it is not to be doubted, but that one and the same spirit is of the Holy Ghost, of the Father, and of the Sonne. From whence we may further learne, that by the twelue foundations, not only the twelue Apostles are vnderstood, but also all those, who first preached the same fayth with them; since otherwise S. Paul himselfe, Barnabas, and the seauenty disciples (all who were not of the number of the foresayd twelue disciples) should not hau^ belonged to these foundations; ye^ neyther the Prophets the^selues shoul^ appertaine thereto; And thus (whic^ God forbid) we should make the Apostle lyar, who said, that we ar^ built vpon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.
But here occurreth no small doub^ to wit. How Christ can truly be calle^
 the foundotion of this Edifice or building, since he is the chiefe Cornerstone thereof, as the Apostle speaketh, and is exalted aboue the head of the Angle, or Corner, as the Prophet affirmeth. For how can the same stone be in the highest and lowest place? be in the foundation, and in topp of the building? But he that shal call to mind, that these words are vsed in a Metaphoricall sense, will easily conceaue, how by reason of diuers functions or offices, contrary words may be applied to one and the same person. For not only Christ, who is both God and Ma^, but euery Prelate in his owne Church, is both the foundatio^, and height; because as he is the foundation, he ought to sustaine the burden or weight of the Edifice; to tolerate the infirmities of all; and in this respect to be vnder all; And yet the same Prelate, as being the Summity, or height of the building, ought to be aboue all, to co^maund all: and to be obeyed by All Therfore with much more reason, may Christ, as the fou^dation of the Church, be of Power to beare all vp, through his authority and vertue: And withall, as he is placed in the head of the angle, may co^ioyne
 two Wall^ togeather, and constitute one People of the Gentils and the Iewes; and so preside ouer All, and commaund ouer All.


Of the mysticall Port, or Gate of the Citty of God. CHAP. X.
IT now followeth, that we consider the ports or gates of this Celestiall Ierusalem. The common exposition of Interpreters, is, that by the Ports are vnderstood the Apostles; which expositours doe herein follow the iudgement of S. Austin, in exposit. Psal. 86. But the Euangelist, Apoc. 21. speaking of the Gates, maketh me^tion of twelve Angells, and twelue Tribes of the Childre^ of Israel, whose names (he said) were written in the twelue gates of the Citty of God; but of the twelue Apostles he there speaketh not at all, Yet from hence it followeth not, that the sentence of S. Austin, (and of others following him) is false; since S. Iohn speaketh mystically, and not as the Words doe sound, and there
 speaketh as a Prophet, not as an Historian; and all that description of his is euen most redundant of mysticall significations.
The Land of Promise was (by the ioint consent of all) a figure of this Heauenly Citty. Abraham was the first to whom Promise of that Land was made, for thus doth God speake to Abraham: Gen. 13. All the Land which thou seest, will I giue to thee, and to thy seed for euer. And the Apostle conspir^ngly saith the like: Gal. 3. To Abraha^, and his seed the Promises were made; And a little after: God gaue is to Abraham by Promise, Isaac was the sole heyre to Abraham, Ismael (who was the Sonne of a handmaid) being excluded, the Scripture thus speaking thereof: The Sonne of the Handmaid shall not be heyre, with the Sonne of a Freewoman The Sonne of Isaac, was only Iacob, Esau being excluded, who sould his birth-^ight; Of whome the Prophet Malachy thus speaketh: I loued Iacob, and hated Esau. Which sentence the Apostle speaketh to the Romans cap. 9. The Heyres of Iacob, were all his Sonnes, which were twelue, not any of them being disinherited;
 And thus the Land of Promise was deuided among the twelue Tribes of Israel, as appeareth out of the Book of Iosue.
Now this therefore is the cause, why S. Iohn in the Apocalyps said, that the names of the twelue Tribes of Israel were written vpon the twelue Gates, to wit, because the Port or Gate of entring into the Land of Promise, was that Heredita^y right, which belonged to all, and only the Sonnes of Israel. But as I noted a little aboue, the Apostle S. Iohn speaketh mystically; and by the twelue Tribes of Israel, are vnderstood true Israelits, not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit, and Faith; and consequently the twelue Apostles, and their spirituall Children are vnderstood thereby. For as S. Paul expresly teacheth: Rom. 9. Not all that are of Israel, be Israelites: Nor they, which be the seed of Abraham, all be children. Which Apostle ^ little after compareth Israel to a Tree, of which many boughes are broke^ through incredulity; and others inserted and implanted through faith. In this sense the Gentills, being conuerted to the faith, did begin to become
 the children of ^srael; and many of the Iewes did cease to be true Israelits.
Saint Austin d^monstrateth and expli^ateth all th^se points very ^argely, thus writing: Ep ad As^l. Are not these great wounders, and a deep mystery, that many not borne of Israel, should be Israel, and man^ should not be the Children, who are the seed of Abraham? But how commeth it to pass^, that they are not? and how commeth is to passe, that the other ^re? I will shew, Those are not the Sonne^ of the Promi^e* who do not belong to the grace of Christ, but are the Sonnes according to the fles^* so enioying an empty name or title; and th^^^fore they ^re not Israel, as we are. Neither are we Israel, as they are; for we are Israel ac^ording to spirituall regeneration; the^ are Israel, in respect of carnall generation. And a little after the said S Austin thus further enlargeth himselfe, saying; Euen among the Nephewes of Abraham, the Sonnes of Isaac, those two brethren (I meane) Esau, and Iacob who after was called Israel, this great and deepe mystery taketh place; of which point the Apostle speaketh, when by Isaac he maketh mention of the children of the Promise,
 belonging to the grace of Christ. Certainly this Apostolicall and Catholik^ doctrine euidently sheweth, that according to the origine of the flesh, the Iewes did belong to Sara, the Ismaelits to Agar; But according to the mystery of the Spirit, the Christians did appertaine to Sara, and the Iewes to Agar. In like sort, according to the origine of the flesh, to Esau (who is also called Edom) the ofspring of the Idumeans belongeth; and to Iacob (who was also called Israel) the Progeny of the Iewes appertaineth. Lastly according to the mystery of the Spirit, the Iewes belong to Esau, and to Israel the Christians.
Thus far S. Austin; Who fully instructeth vs, that Christians are true Israelits, not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit, and consequently are the true Heyres of the Land of Promise, which is in Heauen, And thus it appeareth, that the Gates of heauenly Ierusalem haue the Names of the twelue Tribes of Israel written vpon them: because the Port or Gate by the which entrance is made into that Heauenly Land of Promise, is the right, or title of the inheritance of the Sonnes of God; who alone are true
 and sincere Christians, being the Sons of the Holy Apostles, which are vnderstood by the name of Israelits, that is, by the Sonnes of Iacob the Patriarke. Now where S. Iohn addeth, that in those gates were twelue Angells; this signifieth, that the Angells are the keepers or warders of the gates; their office being to take care, that not any doe enter therein, who haue not right of Inheritance: And perhaps for this reason, S. Michael (the Archangell) is pictured with a paire of ballance or weights in his hand, in that by the Ministery of the Angells, subiect vnto him, he doth examine and weigh the meritts of those, who doe seeke to aspire to this Heauenly Citty. Thus much touching the Gates.


Of the Mysticall stones of the Citty of God. CHAP. XII.
THE rest of the Edifice consisteth of stones, which are all the faithfull, that are built vpon the foundation, as the Apostles S. Peter, and S.


 Paul haue perspicuously expounded. Now since this part of the building extendeth it selfe to all men, I hould it a thing conu^nient, to consider the conditions and qualities, which are r^quisite for all those, who couet to be ^u^^t vpon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, vnder the supr^me Corner stone, Iesus Christ; so as they may not only be in the Citty of God, but themselues may be that high, and most happy Citty of God
Three things concurre to the end: man may be built vpon so noble and worthy a foundation. First, that he be a stone; Secondly, that he be a liuing ston^; lastly, that this stone be curiously polished, and squared. First then we ought to be stones, not Wood, not Hay, not straw, that so we may make a solid and firme Wall; that is, we ought to be graue and stab^e Men, perseuering in Fayth, in Charity, in Humility, in obedience of the Commandements, and not suffer our selfs to be carryed away and blowne to and fro with euery wind of doctrine, as Heretiks are accu^tomed to be; neyther violently to be possessed with
 seuerall desires and Passions as some light and vnsteddy Catholiks are wont to be. For not any of these Men are admitted by the builders of the eternal Citty, but only serue to make poore and weake cottages, which are after presently ouerthrowne and ruines. We ought also to be liuing stones, as S. Peter admonisheth, that is, to be full of Charity, of the Spirit of lyfe, as the Corner stone Christ is; who though he once dyed in flesh, yet he euer liued in Spirit, and accord^ng to the flesh did reuiue, after he had tasted death, and is neuer after more to dye. Dead stones do buyld and make dead howses, I meane corporall howses; whereas the spirituall howse or rather the Citty of the great King (wh ch is both spirituall and Heauenly) requireth spirituall stones, and in this respect liuely stones.
To conclude, it is necessary, that we be stones artificially wrought and squared; not stones vnpolished, and without forme, because such building is best sorting to the most noble Citty of all Citties. So we read, in Iudith 1. that Arphaxad (the King) did build the Citty Echatanis, of squared and
 cut stones. And if King Salomon built the Temple of our Lord heere vpon earth, of polished, carued, and curious stones; what stones then ought to be vsed for the building of that Eternall Citty, which infinitly is exalted aboue all other Citties? But this squaring and working is to be performed in this life and not in Heauen; The figure, or Type wherof, was the building of the Temple of Salomon; for thus we read in the third of the Kings cap. 6. VVhen the House was building, neyther hammer, nor hatchet, nor any toole of Iron was heard in the House. Because the stones were hewed, cut, and so perfectly and euenly squared far from the house of the Lord, as that when they were brought to the Temple, they were put in their place, without any noyse, or sound of the Hammer. Therfore we gather from hence, that no sound or blow of the striking Hammer shalbe heard in the Celestiall Ierusalees; for ther shalbe no persecution, no tribulation, no pen^tentiall labour, no complayning, no dolour, no heauines; And therefore the stones designed to the glory of this Heaue^ly house, ought in this vale of misery and teares to be
 polished with strokes and pressures; for thus the Church singeth.

Tunsionibus, pressuris
Expoliti lapides,
Suis cooptantur locis
Per manus artificis,
Disponuntur permansuri
Sacris edificijs.

That is, The stones being polished with knockings and pressures, are made apt for their places by the hands of the VVorkeman; And so they are disposed for euer to remaine in the sacred buildings.
Thus heer in this world the burden of pennance is necessarily to be vndergone, since we all offend in many things, as S. Iames affirmeth cap. 3. Heer our carnall concupiscences are to be tamed; Here our proper Wills are to be ouercome; Heer our Body is to brought into seruitude; Heere the buckler of fayth through an indefatigable labour is to be interposed against the fyery darts of vncleane Spirits: Since otherwise if we cannot endure the stroke of the Hammer, how can we then expect to be admitted by the Heauenly Architect, vnto the structure of the Celestiall House? O! that Men would vnderstood and conceaue, of
 how great a good they depriue themselues, whiles they do auoyd and decline the Hammer of persecution, and cannot (at least will not) suffer any incommodity or losse, any asperity, any thing bitter and aduerse vnto them; they would then, doubtlesly change their courses; they would ruine banquettings and good fellowship into fasting; delicate and costly apparell into hayre-shirts; and idle discourses and vnnecessary words into watching, and prayer. And if they suffered any iniustice or wrong at the ha^ds of false Brethren, or open and professed enemies, they would not (in requitall) meditate vpon reuenge; but they would giue thanks to God, and pray euen from their heart for their Calumniatours and Persecutours, because The sufferings of these tymes are not co^digne to the glory to come, that shalbe reuealed to vs. Rom. 8. And in that; Our Tribulation, which is now momentary and light, worketh aboue measure exceedingly an eternall weight of glory in vs. 2. Cor. 4.
And certainly if we cast our eye backe vpon those liuing stones, who are gone before vs towards the structure
 of this Heauenly edifice, we shal behould ech one of them to haue b^n hewed with knockings or strokes, and polished with seuerall pressures. Christ himselfe (the most precious Cornerstone, who did not stand in need of any hammering or working vpon) did so suffer for vs, as that by such a sufferance he did leaue to vs an Example, who, when he was reuiled, did not reuyle, and when he suffered* he threatned not 1. Pet. 2. In like sort, all the Apostles could say with S. Paul: vntill this houre we do both hunger and thirst, and are naked; and are beaten with buffets, and are wanderers, and labour working with our Hands; we are cursed, and do blesse; we are persecuted, and sustaine it: we are blasphemed, and we do beseech; we are made the out-cast of this VVorld, the drosse of all. 1. Cor. 4. What may we relate of the Martyrs; did not they all, being cut and wrought by many tribulations, calamities, and most bitter deaths, ascend to the edifice of the Heauenly Ierusalem? I passe ouer the Holy Confessours, Anchorets, Virgins, Widdowes, and all others, gratefull to God; who had not beene admitted to this Celestiall building,
 if they had not crucifyed their flesh with their vices, and had not proclaimed open warre and hostility euen against themselues.
Neither this refining and polishing of the liuely stones was necessary only after the comming of Christ; but it was practised euen from the beginning of the world. The first liuing stone was Abel, who was cruelly slaine by his owne brother Cain. The holy Patriarke Ioseph was sould by his Brethren, Tobias receaued these words from the Angell: Because thou wast acceptable to God, it was necessary, that temptation should proue thee. Tob. 12. The Angell said not; because thou wert a sinner, and hatefu^l to God, it was needfull that thou shouldst be punished with blindnes and pouerty; But the Angell said: Because thou art gratefull to God, as being a iust and holy man, therefore as a liuing stone, designed to the celestiall edifice, it was necessary, that thou shouldst suffer the hammer of Persecution. Which of the Prophets escaped Persecution and Iniuries comming from the wicked? What torments did not the blessed children of the Machabees endure? But let vs
 heare the Apostle (touching this point) preaching of the Saints of the Old Testament: They had triall of mockery and stripes, and also of bands and prisons: They were stoned, they were hewed, they were tempted; they died in the slaughter of the sword: They went abroad in Sheep-skins, in Goate-skins, needy, in distres, afflicted, of whome the world was not worthy; wandering in deserts, in mountaines, and dennes, and in the Caues of the earth. Heb. 11.
And now, o Christian Soule, what canst thou reply hereto? If the hammer of the builder did not spare those Men, of whome the world through their eminent sanctity, was not worthy, that thereby they might be squared, laboured, and made fit for the celestiall Edifice: what then shall become of thee, and such as are lyke to thee; to whome sinne is pleasing and gratefull, but all pennance and satisfaction for sinne, most grieuous and vngratefull? One of these two fortunes perforce thou must vndergo, to wit, eyther thou must be hammered in this life, or in Purgatory; or els thou shalt not haue any place in that sublime building, but in lieu thereof
 the hammer of Hell, for all eternity shalbe striking vpon thee Why then (O poore Soule) wilt thou not rather suffer to be wrought fayre and polished in this life, through a short and sleight tribulation, then in the next lyfe to be reprobated, and cast into that place, where thou must suffer an euerlasting and intollerable pressure, and bruising of the hammer?
Neither oughtest thou to sleight or litle regard the Purgatory-refyning and hammering in the lyfe to come, since that punishment (though not eternall) is most grieuous and oftentimes of longer continuance then any Paine of this life. Heare S. Austin in Psal 37. discoursing of this point. Dicitur, suluus eris, sic tamen quasi per ignem etc. It is said. Thou shalt be saued, as it were by fyar: And because it is sayd, thou shalt be saued, therefore this fyar is contemned; and yet is more insupportable, then any thing which man can suffer in this lyfe. Thus this holy Father, who further addeth, that the paines of Purgatory do exceed all punishments inflicted vpon Theeues and other malefactours, as also all the torments of the Martyrs; Therefore
 such men are euen fooles, and depriued of all true Iudgement, who contemne the fyre of Purgatory, and do abhorre all tribulations of this present lyfe.
But obserue how other fathers conspire with S Austin herein. S Bernard thus writeth: Know you this that such sinnes which are in this lyfe neglected, shall be punished a hundred tymes more in the purging places, euen till the very last farthing be payed. serm. de obitu Humberti Monachi. To conclude, S. Anselm in these words agreeth with the former father: Sciendum est, quia grauior est ille ignis etc. VVe are to know that this fyre is more insufferable, then any thing, which man can endure in this lyfe. For all the torments heere vpon Earth, are more sufferable and easy: And yet men for the auoyding of those paynes here, will performe any labour whatsoeuer imposed vpon them. How much better then is it and more profitable to do those things, which God comma^ds vs, that thereby we may not suffer those other paines, farre more horrible and grieuous? Ansel. in explicat cap. 3. ad Cor. 1.



Of flying from the Citty of the World. CHAP. XII.
NOw hauing explicated the structure and building of the Citty of God; it remaineth that we briefly shew, what is chiefly requisite, that men may be ascribed, and admitted Citizens into this most happy Citty. This may be declared euen in one word; to wit, that we doe renounce and disclaime from the Citty of this World, and that in the meane time we liue here, as strangers or pilgrims, for it is impossible for vs, to be both Citizens of this world, and Citizens in the Heauenly Citty. And a man no sooner giueth (by disclayming from it) his last farewell to this World, but that he is instantly admitted into the bosome of the Citty of God. But let vs stir more fully the earth, or mould, about the roote of this point.
Well then, there are two Citties set downe and declared to vs in the Holy Scripturs; The Earthly Citty,
 which began in Cain, who first vpon earth builded a Citty, as we reade in the booke of Genesis cap. 4. And the Celestiall Citty, taking its beginning in Abel; of which Citty not Abel, but God was the Builder and Workman, as aboue we haue shewed out of the Apostle, Heb. 11. Babylon the Great (which signifieth the Confusion) was a figure of that Citty of the world: And Ierusalem (which is called, Vifio Pacis) was the type of this Heauenly Citty, which is the Citty of the supreme King. The Cittizens of the earthly Citty are those, who not only in body, but in soule doe inhabite the earth; who euen adore the earth; who gape after earthly pleasures and profitts; who tumultuously fight and striue for them; finally who are wholly drowned in the pursuite thereof.
The Prince of this Citty is the Diuell, who being cast out of the Celestiall Citty, first possessed the Tyranny of the earthly Citty: for though our Lord, approaching were vnto his Passion said, Ioan. 12. Now is the iudgment of the world; Now the Prince of this world shall be cast forth; and accordingly our Lord did truly driue him
 forth with the staffe of his Crosse; and through the said Crosse did triumph ouer him, according to those words of the Apostle Coloss. 2. Spoyling the Principalities and Potentates, haue led them confidently in open shew, triumphing ouer them in himselfe; notwithstanding this is not so to be vnderstood, as if the Diuel were wholly cast out of this world, or had lost all Principality thereof; but that he is ca^t out from all those, and among all such hath lost his dominion and Empyre, as haue ranged themselues vnder Christ; and who flying out of the terrene City, are designed to the Heauenly
That the Diuell exerciseth his rule and gouerment yet in this Citty of the world, the Apostle teacheth, when he saith: Our wrestling is not against flesh and bloud, but against Princes and Potentates, against the rulers of the world of this darknesse: Ephes. 4. Therefore as yet Sathan with his ministers hath h s rule and gouerment in this world, and is Prince thereof, I meane, of worldly men, and Cittizens of the earthly Citty; of which world S. Iohn saith cap. 5. The whole world is set in wickednesse. As if he would had said:
 The world adhereth to its head, who is called maligne, or wicked transcendently; or, the world is vnder the gouerment and power of the wicked Diuell.
But to proceed further. The Cittizens of this Heauenly Citty, are those, who being already blessed, doe reigne in the Kingdome of Heauen; as also all those, who remaining yet in mortall body, doe inhabitate the Earth; yet this not in Heart, but only in Body; since in heart and soule their Conuersation is in Heauen, and they couet to be dissolued, and with Christ, who is the King of the Celestiall Citty. But now because the celestiall Cittizens are promiscuously mixed with the earthly Citizens, therefore the holy Scriptures say (for greater distinction) That the Cittizens of Heauen are in the VVorld, but not of the VVorld; And that they are in the World, not as Cittizens thereof, but as strangers and Pilgrims, for S. Peter speaketh: I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrimes, to refraine from carnall desires: 1. Pet. 2. But of the Citizens of the earth the Scripture changeth its style, and thus speaketh of them: They are strangers of the Testament,
 hauing no Hope of the Promise, and without God in this world, Ephes. 2. Now these things being thus, Let no man deceaue himselfe, nor dreame, that he can be a Cittizen of the world, and withall a Cittizen of Heauen. The Cittizens of the World, are of the World; The Cittizens of Heauen, are not of the World. To be of the world, and not to be of the world, are contradictory, and incompatible togeather; and therefore cannot brooke any conuinction; In regard whereof let those men then, (to whom the world and earthly matters are gratefull) not perswade themselues, that they can haue any place in the Heauenly Citty, except they first goe out, and (as it were) wholy forsake the world, voyding their iudgements and wills of all earthly Pleasures, and Benefitts.
But because these Points are high mysteries, and are vnderstood by few, at least not thought and meditated on as they ought to be; therefore to the end, that no man at the last day may pretend ignorance, there is not any thing, which the Apostles and Euangelists doe more often inculcate and
 repeate, then this one point; Heare our Lord: Ioan. 8. You are of this world, I am not of this world. Againe, he thus speaketh to the Apostles: If you had beene of the world, the world would loue its owne; but because, you are not of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Heare S. Paul 2. Cor. 3. The wisdome of this world, is foolishnesse with God. And againe: You ought to haue gone out of this world. And yet more; That we may not be damned with this world. Heare S. Iames: cap. 4. Know you not, that the friendship of this world, is the enemy of God? VVhosoeuer therefore will be a friend of this world, is made an enemy of God. Heare S. Peter: Fly the corruption of the concupiscence which is in the world. 2. Pet. 1. Heare S. Iohn: Doe not you loue the world, or those things in the world: 1. Ioan 2. And againe: If any man loue the world, the charity of the Father is not in him; And yet more cap. 5. The whole world is set in wickednes. To conclude heare our Lord himselfe, speaking in prayer to his Father: Ioan 17. For them doe I pray, not for the world doe I pray, but for them, whom thou hast giuen me. And the world doth hate them, because
 they are not of the world, as also I am not of the world.
Now from hence we may gather most euidently, that the world is so (as it were) excommunicated and cursed by God, as that Christ thinketh it not conuenient to pray for it. Yet may it be here obiected, that if Christ doth not pray for the world, how is it said: Ioan. 3. God so loued the world, as that he gaue his only begotten Sonne? what, doth the Father loue the world, and the Sonne hate the World? Or how doth the Sonne exclude the world from his prayer, which the Father doth not exclude from his loue? S. Austin expounding this later place, saith, that the world for whom Christ denyed to pray, signifieth only the wicked; according to which acceptance, the Apostle saith, so that w^ may not be damned with this world: 1. Cor. 11. But we may here furthe^ say, Christ did not pray for the world because such things, as he then praye^ for his Apostles, did not in any so^ agree to the world. For he prayed fo^ the gift of Perseuerance; Keepe the^ (saith our Sauiour, Ioan. 17.) in m^ Name; And withall he (...), that
 they might obtaine eternity of glory, saying: I will (Father) that where I am, they may be also with me, that they may see my glory. But these things are not agreeable to the world for neither is the world (except it be afore cleansed of its filth a^d ordure) apt for the Kingdome of H^auen euen as it is not fitting, for a man that is bemy^ed with dirt in riding, to enter into the bedchamber of a K ng. God doth truly loue the world, and for it gaue his only Sonne, thereby to clense and purge the world, tha^ it may be fit for his Kingdome; And so Christ prayed for his Crucifiers, not, that they should perseuere in that state, in which they then were; bu^ t^at his Father might pardon them, and in p rdoning of them, might cause them to leaue, and goe out of the world. An^ therefore though Christ did say, I do not pray for the world; yet he adioyne a little after these words: That (...) world may belieue, that thou h^st (...) me. Thus the closure of all (...) Christ prayed for his owne Discip^^ not for the world; because exce^^ man doe first goe out of the world, b^fore he goe out of his Body, he can neuer
 arriue to the Kingdome of Heauen.
Whosoeuer therefore doth thirst after that supreme and high Citty, let him hasten to goe out of the world, for feare least his last day may suddenly and vnexpectedly surprize him, and take him out of this life, when he shall be depriued of all hope of his conuersion. But if he be once happily gotten out of the world, then let him forsake the same with all its concupiscences, that he may daily meditate only of the Citty of our Lord, and that he may euen protest with the Holy Prophet: If I shall forget thee, O Ierusalem, let my right Hand be forgotten; let my tongue cleaue to my mouth, if I do not reme^ber thee, if I shall not set Ierusalem in the beginning of my ioy. Psal. 136. For this is the true Character, or Note of the Cittizens of the Eternall Citty; to wit, to be more desirous to want both tongue and hands, then to speake, or attempt any thing against the loue of God their Father, and their Celestiall Countrey; that so the beginning of their ioy, may be the Citty it selfe, which replenisheth its Cittizens with such beatitude, as that no worldly felicity
 can delight them; and thus the only remembrance and expectation of future ioyes, is sufficient in this their banishment to comfort them.
I hold it conuenient, to close vp this Booke with the words of S. Austin, that such, who will not perhapps belieue me, may not doubt to giue credit vnto so great and worthy a man. This Father in these following words doth expresse, which is the true note of the inhabitants of the Citty of the world, and of the Citty of God; Thus he then writeth: Omnes qui terrena sapiunt etc* All those, who are wholly immersed in earthly affayres; All, who doe preferre a temporary felicity before God; All, who seeke after their owne things, not after those of Iesus Christ, doe belong vnto th^t one Citty, which mystically is called Babylon, and which hath the Diuell for their King. But all such others, who bend their labours to things, which are supernall and aboue; who are euen absorpt in the meditation of Celestiall matters; who liue in this world with all sollicitude and care, that they doe not offend God, or sinne; who sinning, are not ash^med to confesse their offences; finally who are humble, meeke,
 holy, iust, pious, good: All such (I say) belong to that one Citty, which hath Christ for its King. Thus fa^re Saint Austin, in explicat. Psal 61.




OF THE ETERNALL FELICITY OF THE SAINTS, Vnder the Title of the House of God. THE THIRD BOOKE.

That all the Blessed are the Domesticks, and Sonnes of God. CHAP. I.
I Reioyced in these thinges, which were said to we: VVe shal go into the House of our Lord sayth the Royall Prophet, Psal. 121. Certainly it is a great and ineffable cause of reioycing for a good and faithful seruant after he hath
 painefully laboured in the Vineyard, or hath multiplyed his Talents, through negotiation and trafficke, or (as first) hath gained the Prize in the race; or hath deserued the Crowne in warre and spirituall fight; or hath diligently fed the sheep committed to his charge, couragiously and valiantly defending them from wolues; for then such a man, after the accomplishment of all these his labours, doth with all alacrity and cheerfulnes enter into the House of his Lord. But let is first consider, why that is called a House, which a litle before was called a Citty. Truly we cannot thinke, that the cause of this appellation is, that this House is strait, or narrow, and therefore doth deserue the name of a Citty; since indeed it is of that largenes, as that in greatnes, it giueth not place to any Citty, or Kingdome. Giue eare to what the Prophet Baruch. cap. 3. (by way of acclamaaion) speakes hereof: O Israel, how great is the House of God, and how great is the place of his Possession! It is great, and hath no end. Why then may not so great a House iustly be called a Citty.
The first reason heerof then is, because
 the blessed, though they be spred throughout the Kingdome of Heauen, are the domesticks and familiars of our Lord. For perhaps a man might imagine, that if mention were made only of a Kingdome, or of a Citty, that many might be in the Kingdome of Heauen, and in the Citty of God, who did neuer see God, nor were euer admitted to speake or haue any entercourse with God but onely by the mediation of other greater Saints. But because the matter standeth farre otherwise; and that all the Sa^nts do euer see God do co^uerse with him, and do speake to him face to face; whether they be the supreme Seraphims and Cherubims, Patriarches, Apostles, Prophets, inferiour Angels, and the lowest Saints. For euen of our Angels Gardians, who belong to the least degree of Angells, our Lord thus saith: Matth. 18. Their Angels in Heauen alwayes do see the face of my Father, which is Heauen. And the Apostle writing to the Ephesians cap. 4. auerreth, that all the Saints are not only the Citizens of God, but euen the domestick friends of God. Therefore from hence I inferre that the habitation of the Saints is not only called
 a Citty, but also a House. There are doubtlesly diuers Ma^sions in Heauen; to wit greater, and lesser; there are also seuerall Crownes, some more illustrious, others not so illustrious, according to the disparity and inequality of merits; neuertheles all those Cittizens are blessed and happy, and are cleane in hart, and replenished with Charity. We may then from hence co^clude, that there is no Saint, who is not in that ce^estiall house, and who seeth not God, and conuerseth not with him, as a domesticall and familiar friend; howsoeuer contrary heerto in other Kingdomes and Citties, there are many, who neuer see the King, and most few they are, to whome he vouchsafes any speach, or familiarity,
Another reason, why the Citty of God is called a House, may seeme to be, in that in a Citty many do see the King, and do speake to him; yet all those are not the Domesticks, Sonnes and heyres of the King; but only those, who dwelling in the Kings Pallace, are acknowledged by the King, for such. But now in the Kingdome of Heauen and in the Citty of God, all the Saints,
 whether o^ higher or low degree, are truly the Domestickes of God, and Brethren of Christ; and by reason heerof they are linked togeather in the strait coniunction of fraternity or brotherhood; so as the Superiours among them do not contemne their inferiours, neither with them is any co^tention or malignity. For when our Lord did teach the Pater noster, that chiefe Prayer, which is daily to be recited; he in these words excluded not any man; and when at the day of Iudgement he shall say: Come you Blessed of my Father, possesse you the Kingdome, prepared for you from the foundation the VVorld. Matth. 25. he shall not except any out of this most confortable inuitation. And when the Apostle said to the Romans, cap. 8. whosoeuer are gouerned with the spirit of God, those are the Sonnes of God; and if Sonnes, Heyres also; Heyres truly of God; and Coheires of Christ: He in these words shutteth out no man, whether great or litle, so that he enioyeth the Spirit of God, and will suffer himselfe to be sterned and guided therewith. Which one Point is doubtlesly common to all the regenerate in
 Christ, perseuering in Fayth, Hope, Charity. In like sort S. Peter, 1. Pet. 1. promiseth to all the regenerate, an incorruptible inheritance, incontaminate, and not decaying, being reserued in Heauen. To conclude S. Iohn without any exception thus preacheth to all the iust: See (I pray) what manner of Charity the Father hath giuen vs, that we should be named, and be the Sonnes of God. 1. Ioan 3.
From all this then we gather that the Place of habitation of the Saints is a House, and not only a Citty or Kingdome; in which house all are Domestickes, Sonnes and heyres of the great King, and all of them are beloued of God, as Sonnes, and of Christ as brethren; and that they may by good right say with the Prophet: Psal. 132. O how good and pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to dwell in one? For what greater consolation and comfort can be imagined to a man, then to conuerse with innumerable Angels, with men of all degrees, eyther superiour, equall, and inferiour to him, and he to be beloued of them all with most sincere affectio^, as a brother, to be vsed as a brother, and imbraced and entertained as a brother?



Of the greatnes, and Beauty of the House of God. CHAP. II.
ANother reason, for which the Habitations of the Saints is called a House, may be taken from that, Houses (especially the houses of Kings) haue many ornaments in their Hals, in their Bedcha^bers, in other withdrawing roomes, which the rest of the Citty doth want. For who can recou^t the Arras, Tapestry, precious vestme^ts, plate of Gold and Siluer, with the which the Palaces of Kings do glitter and shine? Neither are these interiour ornaments only of great worth and pryce; but also the externall and outward building it selfe is accustomed to be most admirable for the goodly marble, stately Pillars, guilded Porches, hanging gardens, and such other delicacies, which is ouer long to relate,
Salomon King of Ierusalem, after he had built a Temple to our Lord, with such cost and charges, as was fitting,
 did make a Pallace for himselfe with such profuse cost, as that he spent thirteene yeares in the building of it; although he had many Maisters and Ouerseers of the whole Fabricke, and had (at hand, with small labour) great store of precious and curious marble, and other stones, and abundance of Cedar-trees. And not with lesse charge and magnificence did he erect a Pallace for his vvife, being the daughter of the King of Egypt, so sumptuous, as it seemed incredible. Therefore when the Sacred Scripture calleth that Habitation, the House of God, which in other passages therof, it calleth the Citty of God, and the Kingdome of Heauen, it seemeth to insinuate, that all that Citty, and Kingdome is as resplendent and glorious, as any Regall house or Pallace. For as we haue learned aboue, out of the Prophet Baruch; the House of God, is of that largenesse and extension, as that it is able to comprepend and containe the whole Kingdome of Heauen.
It seemed (a little aboue) a thing worthy of admiration, if any whole Kingdome should appeare to be of
 that splendour and fayrenesse, with which its chiefe Citty is adorned: Who then will not rest astonished, ^^en he shall thinke, that the whole Kingdome of Heauen is styled the House of God, in that, it is all stately, all fayre, all precious, as beseemeth the House of God to be? Therefore with good reason did the Prophet Dauid burst forth into those words: Psal, 83. My soule euen coueteth, and fainteth vnto the Courts of our Lord. For who doth not thirstingly desire to see and possesse a most noble Kingly house, which in its spacious greatnesse may equall any Kingdome? As on the contrary, to see and enioy a most ample and large Kingdome, which for ornaments, splendour, and magnificence may contend and compare with any Princely house or Pallace? Neither would our soule only desire the fruition of such a House and such a Kingdom, if attentiuely it did thinke thereof, and confidently belieue the same; but it would be wholy absorpt, and euen faint, and transgresse its owne limits through the incredible beauty, and worth of so great a matter.
But (alas) we, who lie vpon the
 ground, and are become thrall to temporalities and earthly things, and doe admire so much what we here see, doe little busy our thoughts with inuisible matters; we bearing our selues herein, like to little children, who neuer going out of their Fathers house, doe so loue that poore Cottage, as that they neuer once thinke of the Pallaces of Kings. In like sort, we imitate herein the Countrey-pesants, who neuer saw any Citty, but are busied in tilling their ground, and in repayring their poore wodden, and clayie house; neuer thinking on Pallaces, Towers, Theaters, Honours, dignities, increasing of siluer, chargeable banquets, and the like. And perhapps these Rusticks and Children are more happy, then many rich Cittizens, and great Princes; because those things which are in this world much prized and highly esteemed, are commonly attended on with more anxiety, care, and danger, then with solid profit and dignity. But the goods, which are in that Heauenly house of our Father, are inestimable; neither are they acco^panied with any sollicitude, discontent, or perill; but are exempted from all
 griefe and molestation; and this, not for any short time, but for all Eternity.
Therefore S. Paul, who was neither a Ch ld, nor a Rusticke, and who well knew the goods and commodities of this wor^d; for he was a man most learned, and conuersed with most wise men; He also had beene in the House of God, and had perused and viewed the Heuenly Citty, as being rapt into the third Heauen, doth thus speake of himselfe: 2. Cor. 4. VVe not considering the things which are seene, but which are not seene; for the things that are seene, are temporall; but the things that be not seene, are eternall.
And againe: Phil. 3. Our conuersation is in Heauen And according hereto he exhorteth vs all: Colloss. 3. To seeke the things, which are aboue; where Christ is sitting on the right hand of God. And to mind the things which are aboue, not the thinges which are vpon the Earth.



Of the Dyning Chamber of the House of God. CHAP. III.
ANother reason, why that, which is cal ed a Citty, and a Kingdome, is also called the House of God, may be taken from those words of our Lord, Ioan. 14. In my Fathers House there be many mansions: Thus we see, that in Houses, there be Chambers or Partours to dine and sup in; Chambers also for men to take their repose and sleepe; Halles, and other spacious roomes for the exercise of seuerall Actions, which out of the House are not accustomed to be done. But to begin with the Great Chamber (as I may say) or place of Refection: Certainly there is a place in the House of our Lord, in which all the Saints are not only fed w^th Princely viands, but (which is wonderfull, and scarcely credible, were it not that the Holy Ghost teacheth vs so much) where the King himselfe shalbe girded and prepared to minister and serue the Table.
 For thus doth our Lord himself speake: Luc. 12. Blessed are those seruants, whome when our Lord commeth, he shal find watching: Verily I say vnto you, that he will gird himselfe, and make them sit downe* and will come forth, and minister vnto them. What kind of ba^quetting House is this? Who euer heard of the lyke? The Lord standeth, the seruant sitteth downe; the Lord is girded, that without any hinderance or let, he may wayte; The Seruant is vngirded, that so more freely and co^modiously he may sit at Table: The Lord goeth vp and downe, to bring in and serue the meates; The Seruant quietly feedeth vpon those Princely viands. O, if we would seriously take these things into our consideration, how loathing and cloying would all earthly pleasures seeme vnto vs?
Our Lord did sometime gird himselfe with a towel, that he might wash his Disciples feete. Peter was affrighted at this sight, and could not endure that his feete should be washed by his Lord. But Peter was iustly affrighted, because he saw therein maiesty humbled, to the end to giue an Example of Humility to his seruants. But in that
 Celestial Mansion, thi^ ministery of our Lord, is not of humi^iation, but of dignation or vouchsafing; for the seruants of God in Heauen shall not need any example of humility and submissiuenes, since not one of them shall be once touched with any pryde of mind, but they all shall be confirmed and strengthened in all kind of vertue. Therefore that girding of our Lord doth signify, that he shall so freely, so readily, and without any delay be present to euery one of his Seruants and Brethren; euen heaping vpon them all goodnesse, as if there were no other imployment remayning for him, but only this.
O Christian Soule, what thing is this? would to God, thou wouldst once truly conceaue and vnderstand, what honours and true pleasures our Lord will abundantly bestow vpon his seruants for eu^r. For certainly if the thought and cogitation heereof did deeply descend into thy Hart, thou as eue^ boyling in feruour of spirit, wouldest gird thy loynes togeather, and wouldest prostrate thy self most cheerfully in all obsequy and seruice before our Lord. And if any one of thy brethren
 (oppressed with want) did meete thee, thou wouldest not onely not disdaine him with a scornefull and side-cast eye, but euen dilating thy Bowells of Charity, thou wouldst with all willingnes refresh and feed him; sollacing thy selfe with those wordes of the Ghospell, Matth. 25, Amen, I say vnto you, as long as you did it to one of these my least Brethren, you did it to me, Now where it is sayd, that our Lord shall make all his seruants to sit downe, this sheweth, that they being admitted into the House of his Father, may most safely, and without any da^ger, or sollicitude repose and rest the^selues, and enioy all those goods, with the which the House of our Lord is replenished: for there shall not be any after, who eyther by force, or by deceite shall depriue them of the fruition of the same.
To conclude, where further it is said, that our Lord himselfe passing vp and downe, shall minister and serue; the meaning hereof is, that the chiefest dainties and meates of the Saints are in our Lord himselfe; for He, is the Bread of life: He is the fountaine of VVisdome; He is that hidden manna,
 which no man knoweth, but he who receaueth and tasteth of it. Therefore our Lord passeth through all, he ministreth to all, vnspeakable Viands and Banquets, the which doe satiate without fastidiousnesse, and fill without saciety.


Of the Bed-chambers of the House of God. CHAP. IIII.
LEt vs passe from the Chamber of Repast, to the Chambers of Rest and repose. Dauid saith: The Saints shall reioyce in glory, they shalbe ioyfull in their Bedds. This Bed is nothing els, then a full and continuall Repose of the Saints; and of that sleepe which the same Prophet Psal. 126. thus praiseth, VVhen he shall giue sleepe to his Beloued, behold the inheritance of our Lord. Of which point he thus speaketh: Psal. 4. In peace, in the selfe same, will I sleepe and rest. To conclude, This is that Rest, of which it was thus said to S. Iohn. Apoc. 14. VVrite: Blessed are the dead, which dye in our Lord; for
 hence forth, saith the spirit, they shall rest from their labours, for their works follow them.
This is a great felicity, and peculiar only to the Blessed For in this life there is no man wholy disburdened of all labour; and euen those men, who seeme most to be at rest and quietnes (to wit, noble and rich men) are commonly pressed with greater anxieties. And therefore not without cause did our Lord co^pare Riches vnto Thornes in the Parable of the Sower: Matth. 13. And Iob saith cap. 7. The life of man is a warfare vpon the Earth. And one of his fellowes conspiringly thus auerreth, Iob. 5. A man is borne to labour, and a bird to flye. But Ecclesiasticus more copiously doth inlarge himselfe vpon this point, thus preaching: cap. 4. Great trauell is created to all men, and a heauy yoke vpon the children of Adam, from the day of their comming forth of their Mothers wombe, vntill the day of their burying into the mother of all. Their Cogitations and feares of the Heart, imagination of things to come, and the day of their ending, from him that sitteth vpon the glorious Seate, vnto him that is humbled
 in earth and ashes; from him, that weareth Hyacinth, and the Diademe, euen to him that is couered with rude sackcloth. Thus Ecclesiasticus. In which words he teacheth vs, that no mortall man is at any time made entirely partaker of Rest.
But to the end, that all men may vnderstand, of what worth and moment the sleep, that is, the sweet Repose of the Saints, is to be respected, therefore I will (as it were) lay open the seuerall points of the former sentence. First then he saith: Great trauell is created to all men, and an heauy yoke vpon the children of Adam. Here occupation and busines is opposed to rest; But because many are busied in things comfortable and pleasant, as in hunting, playing, singing, and the like; therefore Ecclesiasticus addeth, an heauy yoke; thereby to shew, that he speaketh of a laboursome, vnpleasant, and toylesome occupation, with which no man is delighted, and which All endeauour to decline and auoid. And this most troublesome occupation, or negotiation he affirmeth to be created for men; that is, adioyned and assigned to man, euen from his Creation,
 as an indiuiduall and inseparable Companion, Which point he further explicateth (that men may better vnderstand his meaning) by adioyning these words, From the day of their comming forth of their mothers wombe, vntill the day of their burying into the mother of all. Therefore a more mild and gentill course is taken with Oxen, which beare the yoke in the day-time, and rest in the night, then with men, who both day and night are forced to beare the yoke of labour, and sollicitude. And after this, Ecclesiasticus briefly toucheth vpon particular troublesome molestitions, which like vnto a most heauy yoke, doe presse and bow down euen the necks of mortall men, saying: Their cogitations, and feares of the hart, imagination of things to come, and the day of their ending.
Thus we see, that the first part or Scene of their laborious and painefull trauell, is a cogitation of thinges to come. For a worldly man is euer anxious and carefull of the day to come, saying to himselfe: VVhat shall heerter fall out? Shall we lose the smal good which we now enioy? And from this riseth a continuall feare of the Hart,
 which neuer suffereth a Man to remaine and quiet. Now this intense cogitation is two-fold. For one part is that, which the mynd frames and figures out to it self. The other is necessary, and such as no man can auoyd. Of the first, he saith, Imagination of things to come; of the other, the day of their Ending. A man doth imagine, that is, he doth frame to himselfe diuers expectations of future things and perils, which do no lesse torment him, then if it were certaine they should come to passe, and take effect. But the greatest torment to man, is the cogitation and feare of death, which Ecclesiasticus aboue calleth, the day of mans ending; the which day all men haue in so great an a horrour, as that the Apostle, Heb. 2. calleth it a continuall seruitude: since the ineuitable expectation of death doth make better, and (as it were) put wormewood, into all the sweetnesse and delicacies of this life.
To conclude, Ecclesiasticus addeth, that this laborious occupation and trauell is so common to all the Sonnes of Adam, as that euery one of them from the first to the last (euen from him,
 who sits enthroned in the Chayre of Soueraignty, and weareth the Diademe, and Hyacinth, to the poore and despicable man, who liueth vpon the ground, and weareth sackcloth) is made thrall thereto. Thus in all these things men after the sinne of Adam, are made more vnhappy then beasts. For beasts liue without feare; are not sollicitous and forecasting for the morrow; neither doe they remember the labour once passed; neither are they affrighted with expectation of things to come. And therefore the foresaid wise Ecclesiasticus doth heere teach, that this burdensome yoke is layd vpo^ the Sonnes as Adan; partly to exclude beasts, as exempted from this yoke; and partly to shew the cause of this misery; which is, the first sinne of the first Man.
But this is the height of all misery, to those who labour, and couer not to ascend to the Celestiall House or mansion; to wit, that in this life they suffer a grieuous yoake, but a farre mo^^ grieuous shall they find in Hell. For here in this life no man is free from labour; yet is his labour eased, being ioyned with some consolation; but after
 this life in Hell, all labour and dolour is without any comfort or repose: Only in the blessed House of God, Rest is without any labour, and consolation without any dolour. Therefore the Prophet Psal. 149. iustly pronounceth; The Saints shall reioyce in glory, they shalbe ioyfull in their beddes. Because they shall not rest, as men sleeping, who do not feele or perceaue their rest; but they shal rest with great exultation and ioy: well knowing and acknowledging with an eternall gratitude the good of their most happy rest and quietnes; it being most free from all labour, griefe, feare, or molestation. Certainly if no other good were in the House of our Lord, but only this euerlasting Rest, were it not (thinke you) worthy to ouer-balla^ce and weigh downe all the labours, paines, and dolours of this life? And if in Hell there were no other torment, then an euerlasting and vnquiet watching, did it not deserue to be redeemed with all daily and nighly Prayers, and other pennance whatsoeuer?
O how pleasant and gratefull will it appeare to the Saints, at their departure out of the world, to behould an
 end of their labours, and other their paines; and on the other syde, how bitter will it be to the wicked, at their lyke leauing this world, to see, that neuer after they are in hope for any relaxation or ease of their labours, and dolours? Death is said to be the greatest, and last of all terrible things; yet because death seemeth to haue some respiration or rest from paines, therefore those miserable wretches, who shall descend into Hell, shall seeke for death, and shall not find it, and they shall desire to dye, and death shall fly from them. Apoc. 9. Therefore the want of al Rest shalbe iudged a greater euill and infelicity, then the last and greatst of all terrible things. And yet neuerthelesse such is the blindnes of Men in this world, as that they repute in nothing, to lose euerlasting rest and quietnes, and to descend to that place, where torments shall admit no ease, rest or intermission whatsoeuer.



Of the Princely Court of the House of God. CHAP. V.
IN a House there are seueral roomes, designed for seuerall businesses and negotiations; but in that supernall and blessed House there shalbe but one Office or businesse, common to all the Saints, to wit, the praysing and lauding of the King of Heauen. Here in this life diuers doe busy themselues to gather and heape vp money and riches; others to aspire to honour and dignity; others to adorne themselues with learning, that so they may be able to teach; others againe apply themselues to mechanicall Arts, thereby to prouide things necessary, for the sustentation of their life. But in that region and habitation of Immortality, there shalbe no penury or want, no ignorance, no necssity, no amb^tion; since all, being contented with their present state, shall desire nothing more; but shall be wholy occupied and busied in the fruition, loue, and prayses of
 their chiefe and supreme good.
But it may be, some men will say, that the office of praysing God in Psalmes and Hymnes, and especially in reciting the Canonicall Houres, is accompanyed with labour, and of the Spirits; and heerupon perhaps some will auerre, yea accomplaine, that a heauy burden is imposed vpon them, in that they are commanded to spend daily so many houres, in singing in the Church, and in praysing of God. To this I answere, that to performe laudes and prayses to God by Prayer, is in this lyfe a Merit; and in the Eternall lyfe a Reward; and from hence it co^meth, that the exhibiting of laudes and prayers, is heer laborious and painful to many, which in Heauen shalbe most pleasant and ioyfull. For now we read and sing many passages, which we do not vnderstand: besides during our tyme of prayer, we are not a little troubled in driuing away idle and vaine cogita^ions, as so many most importune fl^^s To conclude, the Body, which now stands subiect to corrupt on, cannot long be intent to the fu^ctions of the Soule without wearisomnes: but in that blessed Country, the
 Body shalbe immortall, it shallbe impass^ble, the flyes of d stractions and vnnecssary thoughts shallbe absent; A^d (which is the chiefest) the performance of diuine seruice and prayers shalbe nothing els, then the exercise of Felicity: and therefore if eternall Felicity shall not be troublesome, then shall not the eternall praysing of God become troublesome. That our prayses and laudes exhibited in Heauen to his d^uine Maiesty sh^llbe the exercise of our Beatitude, the Prophet teacheth Psal 82. saying: Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, O Lord; for euer and euer they shall prayse thee.
For as it appertaineth to Beatitude, euer to loue, and haue the eye fixed vpon the chiefest good; so also it belongeth to the exercise of Beatitude euer to admire and prayse the pulchritude and beauty of the said chiefe good. And as no ma^ shalbe tired wi^h louing God, so also be shall not be tired in praysing of God. We may adde heerto that we shall not on^y be not weary of louing and seeing God; but neither shall we be weary in contemplating and praysing the workes of God; all which workes shall euer be present in
 our sight, and shal be manifesting their owne admirable splendour and beauty. And we cannot prayse the workes of God, as very fayre; but withall we must prayse and offer vp incense of laudes to the ^uthour of those workes, which shall euer proclaime, Ipse fecit nos, and non ipsi nos; He made vs, and not we our selues. To conclude, as we shall neuer be able to forget the benefitts, with the which God doth daily, euen ouerwhelme vs, and hath tyed vs to him by certaine indisoluble knots (as it were) of loue; so also we cannot, but euer be prest and ready to spend our voices and breath in the praises and lauds of so great a benefactour. Therefore let vs conclude with S. Austin l. 22. de Ciuit cap. ^0. and let vs burst forth with him in like feruour of speach, saying: VVhat other thing shalbe there performed, where neither it shall be intermitted through any sloth, nor vndertaken through aan want? God himselfe who is the end of our desires, shalbe seene without end, shalbe loued without irksomnes, and shalbe praysed without wearisomnes* This functio^, this affection, this exercise shall doubtlesly be common to all, as euen
 eternall lyfe is common. For there we shalbe at leasure, and we shall see, and and we shall loue we shall loue; and we shall prayse. Thus behould, what shall be in the end, without end. For what other end shalbe assigned to vs, but to come to that Kingdome, ^f which there is no End* Thus S. Austin.


Of the first Part of the Port, or Gate of the House of God, which is Fayh. CHAP. VI.
THese former Points being already explicated, one thing yet remaineth to be consi^e^ed; that is, to shew the Gate, by which we may be able to enter into this mo^t happy House. But our Lord himselfe doth not only shew in the Ghospell, what this Port, or Gate is, but with all hath foretould, that it is very strayt and narrow; admonishing vs thereby, that we labour and striue to enter the rat. For he being thus demanded: Luc. 13. Lor^ be they few, th^t are saued? He replied saying: striue to enter by the narrow
 gate; because I say vnto you, many shall seeke to enter, and shall not be able. But, when the goodman of the House shall enter in, and shut the dore, and you shall beginne to stand without, and knocke at the dore, saying, Lord open to v^; and he answering shall say to you: I know yoe not etc. depart from me, all you VVorkers of iniquity; there shallbe weeping and gnashing of teeth. Thus our Lord. By which wordes he euidently inough teacheth that the Gate of the House of God, which is in Heauen, is very narrow, although the House it selfe be most ample and large; and that through the straitnes therof many shall nor enter, who otherwise willingly wou^d; and t^^refore they are not to enter, because they couet indeed to enter, but they are loath to suffer any thronge, or pressure
But let vs explicate, from whence it proceedeth, that the Gate of so ample and great a house, is strait. Well then, a Gate consisteth of foure parts; That is, of the Threeshould, the Transome ouer the dore, and two side-stones; thus a Gate consisteth of foure stones; One below, another aboue, and two on the sides. These foure stones in this
 our Gate, are foure vertues altogeather necessary, for a mans entrance into the House of God; to wit, Faith; Hope, Charity, Humility, Faith, and Hope, are the laterall, or side-stones; Charity the Transome-stone aboue, Humility, the threeshold, which is worne and troden vpon with feete. But all these stones, I meane all these vertues haue in themselues but a small longitude, and latitude or breadth; so as they are narrow in themselues, and doe make a most strait entrance.
Let vs begin with Faith. The Christian and t^ue Faith doth suffer such straits, as that except mans iudgment doe offer to it selfe violence, and endure it selfe to be brought into captiuity, and (as it were) enthralled; no man is of power to enter by it, into the Celestiall house. And this is the meaning of those words which the Apostle writeth to the Corinthians 2. Cor. ^0. Bringing into Captiuity all vnderstanding, vnto the obedience of Christ. For the Fayth of Christ proposeth many things to be belieued, the which do so farre transcend a^ reason, as that it is most hard to giue assent vnto them; and yet the sayd Fayth doth
 command these points so constantly and vndoubtfully to be belieued, as that a man ought to be ready rather a thousand tymes to spend his l^fe, then to deny but any one A^ticle thereof. Certainly great are these straits, and therefore the lesse wonder it is, if but few me^ do ouercome such diffi ulties. And this is the rea^on, why so many do apostate from the truth, to the Mahometans and Heretikes; for all these haue taken away the straits of Fayth, and in lieu thereof haue made the Gate more large and spacious; by the which notwithstanding a man goeth not to lyfe, but to perdition, according to that sentence of our Lord, Matth. 7. Broade is the Gate, and large is the way that leadeth to perdition; and many there be, that enter by it. Certainly euery Man is carryed with a naturall propension and desire to know, as the Philosopher writeth in his metaphysicks, and therfore he is slow in giuing any credit to such speculations, except eyther they can be demonstrated, or at least fortified with stro^g probabilities.
The Apostle S. Paul had experience hereof in himselfe, who though he preached, as being instructed therein
 both by infused, and laboured doctrine, as also by the miraculous guyft of the tongues; yet when he was to teach the Resurrection of the dead, there were not wanting some, who did deride and scorne him therefore; and others, who in plaine words thus reprehended him, what is it, that this VVord sower would say? In lyke sort, when he preached Christ crucifyed, he was reputed a foole with the Gen^ils, and the Iewes did suffer a scandall therein, as himselfe witnesseth. 1. Cor. 1. And from this source it streamed, that the old Heretickes by dilating and enlarging this narrow gate, did set abroach diuers errours. For some of them tooke away the mystery of the Trinity, as the Sabellians and Arians; others the mystery of the Incarnation, as the Nestorius and Eutichians; others againe the Resurrection of the dead, as the Origenists etc. But all these ports or Gates (and almost 200. more) because they were builded by humane and weake Architects, and did want a solid and firme foundation, did decay, and became so ruinous (as I may say) in a short tyme, as that scarcely their Names are now extant; neither
 should we at this day take notice of their names, had they not beene recorded in the Bookes of Catholike Writers, who first impugned them, as Irenaeus, Philastrius, Epiphanius, Austin, Theodoret, and the lyke.
Now the Mahometans who so long and so wide, haue so spread ab^oad their Sect, that they haue destroyed and expunged almost all the most difficult po^nts of Christian Faith; as the Trinity of the Diuine Persons, the Incarnation of the diuine VVord, the death and Resurrection of the Sonne of God, the Sacraments of Pennance and of the Eucharist. All which mysteries being taken away, all straitnesse touching Faith, is taken away. And thus the Gate being enlarged, admitteth entrance for an innumerable multitude. But those men, who say, they preach the Gospell of Christ in these our dayes, haue entred in by another way; and those straites they haue wholy taken away, which doe not so much conduce to the Vnderstanding, as to the VVill, and Practice. Christian Faith teacheth, that all sinnes are to be auoided, and that an account must be rendred of euery idle word. And that


 if a man doe fal into mortall sinne, he must confesse the same to a Priest, and wash it away by a vehement Contrition and satisfaction; That good works (though laborious and difficult) are to be performed, being prescribed and enioyned by the spirituall Pastours of mans soule; That the Kingdome of Heauen may be obtained and purchased by good works, as the Crowne of Iustice, and reward of labour; That single and vnmaried life is to be led by Ecclesiasticall Persons, and such others of the Clergy; That the Vowes of Monks and Nuns are religiously to be obserued.
These Catholike and Christian Articles, and such others, as seemed to straiten the Gate of the Celestiall house, our Aduersaries in Faith haue so ouerthrowne, as that they haue opened a most large and wide Gate to Heauen; teaching in all these points the contrary to vs Catholicks. But to proce^d. Neither haue haue all Catholiks ouercome all the straites of Faith. For although they belieue a^l those points, which Faith teacheth; yet whiles they liue otherwise, then their Faith instructeth and bindeth them, they range
 themselues in the number of those, of whom the Apostle speaketh, Tim. 1. saying: They confesse they know God, but in their works they deny him. And so by this manner themselues doe fly from the straites of Faith, and enter into the broad Gate, which lead^th to the most deadly ouerthrow of their Soules. Therefore so farre forth as concerneth Faith, the answere to the question propounded to our Lord, VVhether they be but few, that are saued? is, That they are but few; and therefore men ought to labour and striue to enter in, by the narrow Gate.


Of Hope, which is another part of the gate of the House of GOD. CHAP. VII.
NOw touching Hope, it also is straitned, and narrow on all sides, whether we consider the greatnesse of the reward, or our basenesse, and littlenesse. For if one should command an vnlearned clowne, vnexperienced in humane affayres to hope, for
 that in a short time he should arriue to the wisdome of Salomon, or at least of Plato and Aristotle; and withall should haue the Empyre of Alexander the Great, or of Augustus, deliuered vp to him; when would this poore silly fellow be persuaded, that from his dunghil state he should aspire to such height of Wisedome and Soueraignty? Yet this is far more easy, then that a mortall man should hope for the Wisedome and Power of Angells, who are in Heauen, and are pure Intelligences, For that poore Countrey Pesant, and Alexander, and Aristotle were of the same nature, and all were mortall men, And the wisdome of Aristotle did not transcend humane wisdome; and the Empyre of Alexander did not comprehend within it the third part of the world. But the Hope of the faithfull commands them, to hope for the equality of the Angells, our Lord himselfe thus saying: Luc. ^0. They, who shall be counted worthy of that world, and the resurrection from the Dead, neither marry, nor take wiues; neither can they dye any more for they are equall to Angells, and are the Sonnes of God.
In like sort, if a man, who only creepeth
 vpon the earth, should be commanded to hope, that w^thin few dayes, he should be ab e to fly in the ayre, or to continue a long time vnder the water; when could he be brought to hope for these things? And yet Birds (though great) as Cranes, Storks, Eagles, doe most swiftly fly through the aire* and most huge and loaded sh^pps doe subsist in the waters, passing to and fro with great speedines, as the Saylers shall gouerne them. But the Hope of Christians, without the least doubt or wauering commandeth, that a Christian man shall Hope, euen with his body to ascend aboue the Heauens; and that he shall descend from Heauen to earth, without any danger of ruine or fall; and that in his po^^ing from the Ea^t to the West, he shall striue euen with the Sunne, and shall doubtlesly ouercome it in swiftnesse. To conclude, if any poore man, who is depriued of his Parents, should be commanded to Hope, that a great King (altogeather vnknowne to him) should adopt him for his Sonne; no doubt be would much struggle with his owne iudgement, before he could be induced to hope for the true euent
 thereof; And yet Christian fayth teacheth, that euery Man, who is baptized in Christ, and keepeth the Commandements of Christ, shall haue the spirit of Adoption from God; shalbe coadopted into his Sonne; shalbe truly heyre of all those goods, which God himselfe possesseth; shalbe the Coheyre of Christ; who is the natura l and p^oper Sonne of God, and whom the Father hath constituted Heyre of a^l things whatsoeuer.
This vigorous Fayth, if according to its owne worth, it were imbraced by Christians, would make them so fearlesse and resolute, as that they would yield to no peri ls, and dangers; but would confidently say with the Prophet; Psal. 117. God is my Helper, I will not feare, what Man can do against me. And: Yf whole armyes should sta^d against me, my hart shal not feare. And with the Apostle: Phil 4. I can do all things in him that strenghn th me. And againe, Rom 8. Ys God he for vs, who is against vs? But there are very few, who do hope for such high and hard matters, as they ought; since there are many who do expect to receaue only temporall and small matters
 from God; but for the gayning of them doe confide and trust in, their owne subtilties, in thefts, and lyes, rather then in the help of the Highest. Our Lord him elfe in Mathew 6. and Luke 12. admonished the faythfull by most forcing and mouing similitudes, tha they should not be ouer sollicitous in seeking of meate and cloathing, but that they should euen anker their hope and confidence vpon Gods good Prouidence; becau e (sayth he) our Heauenly Father doth nourish the litle B^rds, which do neither sow nor gather, and cloatheth the lyllyes of the fie d, which neither labour, nor spinne. Therefore much more will he prouide for his owne Sonnes, for whom he hath reserued the kingdome of Heauen; And yet notwithstanding all this, there is so sma^l, or els no confidence in God found in many Christians, as that in their necessities, they rather flie for their sanctuary to the fraudes and impostures of men, or to diabolicall Arts, then to God. Therefore we may bouldly conclude, that if such men do not hope for these things from God, which God affordeth euen to the Birds of
 the field, and which himselfe promiseth to giue to those who place their trust and Hope in him; that then all these men haue not that Hope, which is peculiar to the sonnes of God, and which all such ought to haue, who hope from God, to be partakers of the kingdome of Heauen. And hence it commeth, that seeing no man without an inexpugnable and liuely Hope (which is a part of the gate of this supernall House) can obtayne his saluation, that therefore they are not many who are saued.
But there are yet remayning some greater straytes in the Vertue of Hope. For, Christian Hope commandeth to sl^ight, or rather contemne things present which are seene; to Hope for things future which are not seene. For example, it commandeth to distribute a mans substance to the Poore, to the end that it being mu^tiplied, may be restored to the giuer in Heauen, where no man hath beene, who could see, or thincke, what are those goods, which shalbe restored to vs in Heauen, if so we sow and di^perse our goods here vpon earth. We see, that a Countrey Plowman is easely persuaded,
 that in sowing of wheate, it multiplieth vpon the earth; And of this the vse and obseruation of many yeares hath warranted the truth; to wit, that what is sowed with labour, is reaped with comfort; But that riches distributed among the poore, should be gathered and reaped with great multip^ication therof in Heauen, no experience hath yet taught vs. Therefore it seemeth a difficult and harsh course to relinquish things present, which are seene, and to hope for things future, which are not seene. To conclude, it is a great Argument, that a firme and vnshaken Confidence in God, is a most narrow and strai^e Gate; in that we find in euery plac^, almost such a multitude of miserable, lamenting, exclayming, blaspheming, and despayring Men. For God doth either take away the Miseries from those who do trust in him, or at least giueth patience, conioyned with so great consolation, as that they may well say with the Apostle. 2. Cor. 7. I am filled full with consolation; I do exceedingly abound in ioy, in all my tribulation. Therefore that confused Multitude of disconsolate, and bewayling
 Men in their Miseries, is an euident argument and demonstration, that (as S. Basill writeth in Psal 45.) there are many, who haue in their mouth; Deus refugium nostrum and Virtus; but most few, who in their secret hart and mind, do truly hope, and trust in God.


Of Charity, which is the third part of the Gate. CHAP. VIII.
LEt vs come to Charity, which is the Transome, or highest stone of the Heauenly Gate. Charity is the Queene of Vertues, which on the one syde, seemeth to be of a greater breadth and Latitude, in that it extendeth it selfe to God, to Angels, to Men; yea such as be vnknowne to vs, or our Enemyes. On the other syde, it is made more narrow, in regard of the incredible difficulty, which doth accompany it, in our passing through by it; since not only in word and tongue, but in worke, and truth, the Precepts therof are to be fulfilled. For what
 doth this Queene impose by Command vpon her Seruants? First, she commandeth, that we loue God with all our Hart, with all our soule, with all our strength. Matth. 20. Luc. ^0. Certainly, Man is brought into great straits, when he prepares himselfe to the accomplishment hereof. For what other thing is it to loue God withall our strength, then to loue him with a true and supreme Loue? That, (with our Harte and soule) signifyeth, that the Loue towards God, shou^d be sincere, not counterfayted; not in word and Tongue, but as S Iames sayth, in worke and Verity. That other (with all our strength, with all our forces, as another Euangelist hath) sheweth, that our Loue of God ought to be most intense and great. Therefore the force of this Precept is, that we loue God with a true and chiefe loue; and that by no ballancing therof, we either prefer or equall any thing before, or with him; but that all things be cast backe, and set in a lower degree, in respect of our Loue to him; So as a Christian man o^ght to be prepared with he Patriarch Abraham (if so it conduceth to the glory of God) not to
 spare the life of his ow^e, and only b^gotten, and most louing Child.
Neyther is this onely exacted, but man is obliged to hate (as our Lord commaundeth Luc. 14.) Father, Mother, VVife, Children, Brothers, Sisters, yea also his owne Soule, and to renou^ce and disclayme from all things which he possesseth; that is, he ought to be ready (with that promptitude of mind) to be depriued of all his kinred, his owne life, all his wealth and dignity, with the which promptitude he should be depriued of them, if so he truly and from his hart did ^ate all these things. Doubtlesly, these are great straits; and who is prepared and ready to penetrate and passe through them? And how more easely can we fynd Men (and those not few) who are pressed, and (as it vvere) ready charged to abandon and renounce euen God himselfe, and all his Promises, rather then riches and temporall Honours, much lesse their owne life, and the life of their Children? Witnes hereof is S. Cyprian in Tract. de lapsis, who writeth, that euen in the primitiue Church (at what tyme the heate of Charity was more boyling in Mens
 breasts then in these dayes it is) for a small number of Martyrs, very many were forsakers of the Christian sayth, who preferred their temporall states (much more their liues) before their Charity, and Loue of God. The same Point is in like sort testified by Eusebius, in hist. Eccl. l. 8, c. 2.
Now what shall we speake of Charity towards a Mans neighbour? What doth Charity prescribe to performe to our Neighbour? It teacheth, that we must loue him, as well as we loue our selues. And what proceeding in matters we do expect from him, the same, we should practise towards him. Who is he, if he much labour vvith pouerty, but that he vvisheth part of the superfluities of rich men might be giuen to him? And yet it is no sufficient excuse for the rich-man to say, that he taketh money vp at rent; or that he hath lately bought a Farme at a great price; Or that he hath beene at charges of buylding a stately House, and of buying costly hangings for the roomes; For perhaps all these are needles expences; and Charity doth not suffer, that a man should abound and flow in all opulency of state, and
 his poore Neighbour should want things necessary to the sustentation of his life. Of which point the Reader may peruse S. Basil, orat. ad diuites, and S Bernard sup. illa verba, Ecce nos reliquimus. For he shall there see, and vvithall rest terrifyed a^ the danger of those, vvho neuer thinke, that they are to giue an account, how they do spend their ovvne goods, but thinke that they may (vvithout all impunitie) vse them accord^ng as they are svvayed by their o^vne Passions, and not according to the rules of Charity tovvards their Neighbours. But let such be afraid; for if vve must ansvvere for euery idle Word (Math 12.) vvhy then not much more, for the bad expenses of our riches?
But let vs heare the Apostle S. Iohn, and let vs learne of him, how far the due of Charity extendeth its limits who thus writeth, 1. Ioan 3. In this we haue knowne the Charity of God, because he hath yielded his life for vs, and we ought to yield our liues for our Brethren Christ (being God) ^ayed downe lis lyfe for his seruants; what great matter then is it, if we lay downe ours for our Brethren? Where
 we are to obserue, that the Apostle sayth not, we may, but we ought to lay downe our liues for our Brethre^; neither saith he, I do Iudge, thinke, or I do counsell; but he saith, and prononceth ab^olutely, we ought to lay downe our liues for our Brethren. And if we ought to spend our liues for our neigbour, then much more our goods: And therefore S. Gregory thus truly concludeth, Hom. 14. in Euang. Seeing that the lyfe, by which we liue, is incomparably far better, then the earthly substance and riches which we externally possesse; he therefore, who will not giue his riches, when will he giue his lyfe? And the lyke inference we may deduce touching other thinges. For He, that ought to lay downe his lyfe for his brethren, ought much more to pardon, and remit an iniury or offence to his Brethren. Agayne, He, that ought to lay downe his lyfe for his brethren, ought with all diligence to be wary and eautelous, that he do not hurt his Brethren eyther in word or deed. Now seeing the Precept of Charity towards God and our Neighbour, is enuironed with such straitnes, as few men do ouercome it,


 therefore our Lord being demanded, If they be few who are saued, might with iust reason answere, that they were but few; and consequently that we ought with all our forces striue, to ouercome the straitnes of that celestial Gate with those few.


Of Humility, which is the fourth Part of the Gate. CHAP. IX.
VVE vvill heer descend to Humility; which also hath no small straites. What doth our Maister command, who most truly thus speaks of himselfe, Matth. 11. Learne of me, because I am meeke and humble of hart? Go in the lowest place. Luc. 14. And vvhat he spake in wordes, he practised in vvorkes. For he comming into the vvorld, did first lye in a manger; and then dying, did hang vpon the Crosse. So as we see, neyther in his byrth, nor in his death, could he find a more humble, and louer place. And vvhiles he liued,
 he vvas more poore not only then men, but euen then vnreasonable creatures, For the Foxes haue their holes, and the birds of the Ayre their Nests Luc. 9. but he had no place to repose his Head. But vvhat meaneth those vvords, Sit downe in the lowest Place? They signify, th^t vvhosoeuer thou art, or of what greatnes soeuer, yet repute thy selfe to be vvorthy only of the lovvest Place. Of vvhich point the Apostle giueth a resaon, saying: Gal* 6. For if any man esteeme himselfe to be something, whereas he is nothing, he seduceth himselfe. Heere the Apostle sayth not: Who thinketh himselfe to be great, or greater then others either in Wisdome, Power, or Vertue; neither sayth he; Yf any man esteeme himselfe not to be great, neither greater then others, but only like to others; But the Apostle plainly said: Yf a man esteeme himselfe to be something. To conclude, He did not say: vvhereas he is but poore, or vnlearned, or contemptible; but he said, whereas he is nothing. Therefore the Apostle could not descend more by his Pen, to designe the lowest place, then he did, and to giue a true Commentary of the
 Words of our Lord*
But against this it may seeme to be vrged, that some Men ought to be in high degree, and sublimity of state; as Prelates, Princes, Kings, Emperours, Popes. This indeed is true, yet euery one of these ought to sit in the lowest place, and expect till our Lord sayth: Arise and sit higher: Of which matter we haue a Notable Example in S. Austin of himselfe, whose words I thinke good here to set downe. Thus then he writeth in serm. de com. vita Clericorum* Ab ijs, qui diligunt saeculum, segregaui me etc. I haue separated my selfe from those, who loue the World; and with those, who haue a presidency and charge ouer the common People, I haue not equalled me. Neither in distributing the banquet of our Lord haue I chosen any high place, but that which is inferiour and abiect. And it pleased our Lord to say to me: Ascend aboue: I did much feare to vndergoe an Episcopall state, after my name did once begin to spread it selfe: I did decline that dignity as much as I could, to the end, that my poore soule might be saued in a low and humble place, and not indangered in a high place. But as I said, the seruant
 ought not to withstand or contradict his Lord and Maister. Thus this Holy Father. And I would to God, all men vvould be emulous of S. Austin herein; for then we should haue many good Prelates, many good Princes, many good Magistrates. But because there are many, who thrust themselues vp into high places, and do not vouchsafe to expect the calling of our Lord thereto, therefore God is sometimes offended thereat, and for the example of others, he forceth many of them to sit in the lowest place; to the end, that all may vnderstand and confesse, that honours, riches (as other temporall and spirituall goods) do depend vpon the distribution of Gods hand. And hence it is, that we often see, men most rich, in a short tyme, to be brought to the extremity of all want and penury; and great Princes to be dethroned, and cast out of their seates of Maiesty.
But it is not sufficient only to expect the calling of God, but a man ought to beare himselfe in his Prelature or Principality without any pride or elation of mind; but according to the counsell of the Wiseman Eccl. 3. by
 how much a man is greater, by so much to humble himselfe the more to all; and this not in Body, but in Hart also, as S. Gregory teacheth. Past. l. 2 c. 6. and more perspicuously S. Austin, Ep. 109. saying: Let Gouerment before men be in Honour with you; but before God let it become euer prostrate to your feete: Since euery one ought to belieue, that all others are better then himselfe; and therefore greater then himselfe; For that man is truly and simply greater, who is greater with God. Now with God he is greater, who is better; and he is better, who more excelleth in Vertue, notwithstanding their Gouerment, riches, titles, crownes, or diademes; Since they are Vertues (not Prelacy, Riches, Honours, and the like) which make a man good. And if Vertues do make man good; then the greater Vertues he hath, make him better; and the most Vertues make him best; and consequently they who are inuested with Vertues in a more high degree, do the more excell others. Now that Humility is one of these Great and prime Vertues, appeareth, from that our Lord giueth exaltation and aduancement to Humility, in that (so often
 by him repeated) sentence: Matth. 23. Euery one that humbleth himselfe shalbe exalted. Which sentence the Blessed Virgin followed in her Canticle Luc. 14. He hath deposed the mighty from their Seate, and hath exalted the Humble. In like sort, S. Peter saying, 1 Pet. 5. Be you humbled vnder the m^ghty hand of God, that he may exalt you in the day of Visitation. And S. Iames cap. 4. Be you humbled in the sight of God, that he may exalt you. And to conclude. S Paul, Philip. 2. thus speaketh of Christ himselfe: He hath humbled himselfe, for which thing God hath exalted him.
Now because Vertues (and especially Charity and Humility) do make men truly Good before God, and so proportionably better, and best of all; And because no man knoweth certainly, how he stands in the sight of God, and how he now is, or others are, or hereafter may be; therefore it is dangerous to prefer himselfe before others, and most profitable to humble himselfe after others; Therefore our Lord absolutly pronounceth; Sit downe in the lowest place. But who is he, th^ obserueth our Lords Precept her^
 For about vvhat matter is there greater contention and distast among men, then about Precedency of place? And what paynes do men take, who labour to reduce to peace and friendsh^p such, as contend about Points of Honou^? ^ovv may haue we heard alledging that sentence of Scripture, Isa. 4: or rather vsurping it: I will not giue my Glory to another? But let such remember, that the Prophet speaketh these words in the Person of Almighty God, to whom alone Glory iustly agreeth. For God alone ought not to be humble; since Humility is a Vertue, which bridleth the desires of a man, and will not suffer him to ascend aboue himselfe; But God, who is most high, hath nothing aboue him. Therefore it is an insufferable pryde, that a poore Worme of the Earth dare contest and say; I will not giue my glory to another. And yet we may obserue, that these poore Wormes, vvhom winde and pryde do so puff vp, as that they say with God, I will not giue my Honour to another, do neuerthelesse so debase and cast themselues ^^wne, as that confessedly they be^^^^e thrall, and slaues to Honour; I
 meane, to a wyndy estimation, consisting in the breath of oth^r men. And thus they do so faythful^y serue this their Lord, or rather Idoll, as that they rather chuse, in ^ingle fight, or Duellisme, to be cruelly slayne, and so (by desce^ding to Hell) to loose both eternal and temporall life, then that their Honour should suffer any dispargement forsooth, or disgrace from them-O Vanity of Vanities! and how wonderfully doth this smoake of Honour blind the eyes of the soule? And yet, notvvithstanding this, we are Christians, and vve know, that Christ himselfe did heare from the mouths of his Enemyes, these ensuing reproaches: Behould a man, that is a glutton, and a Wine-drinker. Matth. 11. And againe: Thou art a Samaritane, and hast a Deuill. Ioan. 8. And more: He casteth forth Deuills in Belzebub the Prince of Deuills: And yet in answere to all this, no man did heare from the mouth of our Lord this Word; Thou liest, or the like. But what was the reason hereof? to wit, because he was meeke and humble of H^rt, and, when he was reuiled, did not reuyle, and when he suffered, he threatned not; As S. Peter


 sayth, 1 Pet. 2.
Now from these Points aboue discussed, it appeareth, that the Gate of Eternall life is encompassed with great straites, and penetrable but vnto few; and this no lesse in regard of Humility, then of the Theologicall Vertues, Fayth, Hope, and Charity; And therefore if it be demanded, whether They be few, that are saued; it may most truly be replyed, That they are but few: because there are but few, who (as they ought to doe) do labour with all their force and endeauour, to enter by the strait way of that Heauenly Gate.


A second Discourse of Fayth, which is the first Part of the Gate of the House of God. CHAP. X.
TO the end, that we may not be thought, through ouer much terrour and feare, to auert men fro^ their entrance into this Gate, since our only drift and scope throughout this booke is, to inflame the minds of the faythfull to desire and seeke after our most
 sweet, and most blessed Country; I will therefore briefly shew, that that Gate, which by reason of the eminency and perfection of the former vertues, is most narrow and strait may also (through the Omnipotency, truth, and mercy of God) be sayd to be most wyde and large, and easy for entrance; if so a man do truly desyre to enter thereinto. And that we may beginne with Fayth. True it is, that fayth teacheth Articles and Points most hard, far transcending all sense and reason, and farre aduanced aboue the naturall capacity euen of the Angells: yet when we are admonished by fayth it selfe, that we are to belieue those points or sp^^^lations, through the authority of God (who cannot lye) of Angels, or of men; then the straytnes of this Port of Gate begins to be delated and enlarged.
If Fayth should command and say: Belieue, that there are three Persons* and one God; belieue, that the Sonne of God is made the Sonne of a Virgin; belieue, that Christ did rise after three dayes from the dead by his own vertue and power, after being immortall. And belieue all these things
 most firmely and vndoubtedly, because S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Iohn, Isay, Ieremy, and Ezechiel haue deliuered these points for true, I should without doubt wauer and rest doubtfull therein, neither could I be easily induced to giue credi^ thereto, only for the authority of Men, lyke vnto my selfe; Because it is written, Psal. 115 Euery man is a lyar; and therefore so many Oaths and Sureties are exacted, that we may credit men. But whereas Fayth sayth: All these former articles of beliefe God hath first reuealed; and that neyther Peter, nor Paul, nor Iohn, nor the rest of the Apostles and Prophets taught these Points of their owne Authority; but they were instructed therin of God himself, and they did preach the word of God, not their w^e word; the^ presently is the Hart dilated, and prepared to belieue, without the least doubt or wauering in fayth.
Now that it was God, who taught and spake by the Apostles and Prophets, is made manifest from his working of so many manifest, and stupendious miracles; so as it were not only simplicity, but great temerity to rest diffident and distrustfull of the
 Truth. For thus doth the Apostle speake to the Hebrews cap. 2. VVhich when it was begun to be declared by our Lord, of them that heard was confirmed on vs, God withall testifying by signes and wonders, and diuers miracles, and distributions of the Holy Ghost, according to his VVill. But what things God speaketh, who dare deny to be true, seeing God cannot possibly lye; for if he could iye, then were he not God? Yet is it vrged: what things are propou^ded to vs to belieue are aboue reason. This is true; but they are not aboue the Power and Wisdome of God. And therefore S. Iohn sayth, 1. Ioan. 3. God is greater then our Hart: because he is able to do, and which we are not able to vnderstand: And his Essence and Existence is more perfect and worthy, then mans Soule can possibly comprehend, or take the true height thereof. If an vnlearned and ignorant man be ready to belieue the Philosophers and Astrologers, discoursing of the greatnes of the Sunne and the starrs (vvhich seeme incredible;) Why then may not man with the like promptitude and facility giue credit to God himselfe touching those points
 of fayth, which it shall please him to reueale, and the rather, seing the Wisdome and power of God, do by infinit degrees differ from that sparke of Reason, with which men are endued? Those men therfore, who haue a true apprehension of these reasons, do not suffer any straitnes or difficulty in belieuing those dogmaticall Points, which the Church propounds to vs to belieue.


A second discourse of Hope, which is the second Part of the Gate of the House of God. CHAP. XI.
VVHat we haue said of the Vertue of Fayth, the same we may bouldly pronounce of the Vertue of Hope; for if we should say, that what we expect in the life to come, we do expect to proceede from the bounty and liberality of men, we might be deseruedly reiected, as vayne Impostours; since men may lye; and it is not in their power to afford and distribute so great
 and transcendent Rewards: But we teach not, that they are to be hoped for from man, but from God; Who neither can lye, since he is Truth; nor deceaue, since he is Goodnes; nor can promise any thing impossible, since he is Omnipotent. Therefore a Rusticke fellow might deseruedly thinke himselfe to be mocked and derided, if any man should promise to him the Wisdome of Salomon, or the Greatnes of Augustus; because that man, who thus should promise, should be reputed as a Lyar. But why ought not a Christian, to whom God hath promised eternall life, the kingdome of Heauen, the Paradise of all Pleasure, assuredly hope for the same? Is there perhaps wanting an Earnest, or Pledge of Gods most bountifull Good Will to vs? Not so. For did not God by way of figure and adumbration of things Present, lead his People without any step, or print of vvet, through the Red Sea? did he not rayne Manna from Heauen? did he not draw Water from out a Rock? To conclude, did he not bring his Seruants, by the Conduct of Iosue, into the Land of Promise? And must so remarkable a figure be reputed, as empty,
 and of no force?
Furthermore, If God so loued the World, that he gaue his only begotten sonne, Ioan. 3. Hath be not then giuen with him all things to vs? Rom. 8. What great thing do we hope for, to be giuen vs from God, the which is not inferiour to that guift, which already he hath giuen to vs; we neither hoping for it, nor demanding it? Yf God gaue to sinners, and his Enemyes the Death of his owne Sonne; will he not giue to the lust, and his friends, the life of his Sonne? Neither satisfying himselfe herewith, he gaue and adioyned the Holy Ghost, as a pledge of our Inheritance, who cryeth in our Harts; Abba Pater. And the spirit giueth testimony to our spirit, that we are the Sonnes of God; and if Sonnes, Heyres also of God, and Coheyres with Christ. Rom. 8. Wherefore if the greatnes of the things promised may seeme to ouercome our Hope; yet can they not ouercome the greatnes of him, that promiseth. Which greatnes, since it is infinite, may so easely strengthen our Hope, as that without any fearefull doubtfulnes, it may arriue, and attaine to the things promised. Which Promise
 (as the Apostle proueth Heb. 6.) God hath euen confirmed with a most solemne Oath: That so by force of two inexpugnable and immoueable forts (to wit, the Promise of him who cannot lye, and his annexed Oath) we may haue Hope, as a s^^me and safe Anker leading vs to those Penetralia, into which Christ entred for vs, who is made a Priest for euer, according to the Order of Melchisedech.


A second discourse of Charity, which is the third part of the Gate of the House of God. CHAP. XII.
NOw, what shall we speake of Charity? This Vertue, as in regard of the difficulty of fulfilling its precepts, is of a most narrow and strayt extent; so in respect of the excellency of the Diuine Goodnes (whervnto Charity hath reference) it may be said to be of a most great breadth. For why ought it to seeme hard, to loue God with all our Hart, with all our
 soule, with all our strength, when as he is most sayre, most good, and most worthy of infinite Loue? It is not a hard matter here vpo^ Earth, to loue things that are fayre and good; but it is hard not to loue them at all, or not to loue them too much. Therefore God* seemeth (after a certaine manner) to offer vs wrong, in commanding, vnder so seuere punishments to loue him, as if of our owne accord and willingly we ought not to loue him. But some may reply, saying: Those things, which are good, and fayre here vpon the Earth, are so ardently loued, and affected, because they are clearely seene, as being subiect to the sense; But God no man euer saw. Ioan. 1. It is true indeed, we see not God; neuerthelesse we haue seene, and do dayly see his workes, which are very fayre: of which works the VViseman thus sayth, Sap. 13. Yf with whose beauty being delighted (meaning with the beauty of the Sunne and the Moone) they thought them Gods let them know, how much the Lord of them, is more beautifull then they; for the Authour of Beauty made all those things. We in like sort do make triall and tast of the sweetnes of God,
 in his daily Benefits conferred vpon vs. To conclude, we haue the testimony of him, who sayth, and cannot lye; to wit, of the Holy Ghost, who preacheth by the Apostles and Prophets in the Holy Scriptures, that God is so good, and so fayre, as that He alone deserueth to be styled Good, and Fayre.
But here some will insist, and say, It is very hard, and euen incompatible with our Nature, to be forced (for Gods sake) to lose our substance and riches, our nearest friends, yea sometimes our owne liues. I confesse, that this is hard to men not louing God; but to such, as do loue him; and couet to enioy him, say it is light and easy; especially seing in recompence of our contempt of these tempora^l goods, there are prepared for vs, goods incomparably far more in number, and better. O! obserue the disparity. Thou losest corruptible and fading riches; thou shalt gaine an euerlasting Kingdome. Thou losest Father, and Brothers and friends; thou shalt gaine God to be thy Father, and Christ thy Brother, and all the Angells and Saints thy friends and Companions. Thou
 losest a temporall life, euen ouercharged with misery; thou shalt gaine an eternall life, fraught with all felicity. Heare then this Canticle or song of diuine Loue: Yf a man shall giue all the substance of his house for loue, as nothing shall he despise it. Cant. 8. And a litle afore: Many VVaters (meaning of tribulatio^s) ca^not que^ch Charity, neither shall flouds ouerwhelme it. Heare a so one of those, who loued God, Rom. 8. Who then shall separate vs from the Charity of Christ? tribulation? or distresse? or famine? or nakednes? or danger? or persecution? or the sword? But in all these we ouercome, because of him that hath loued vs.
But some do yet further vrge: So to loue my neighbour, as to communicate and impart my goods to him, yea though he were my deadly Enemy, and had much iniured me, so as I ought not only to pardon him, but to heape benefits vpon him; this appeareth to be very harsh and repugnant to Humane Nature. This perhaps may be truly said, being spoken of ma^s Nature, as it is corrupted by sinne; but not of Nature repayred through the Grace of Christ. Doth not God himselfe
 communicate his goods and benefits, euen to his Enemies? And doth he not duly pardon his enemies, rendring to them by way of a strange exchange Good for Bad, whiles he maketh the sunne to shyne vpon the good and the euill, and rayneth vpon the Iust and Vniust? Matth. 5. Now if God do so beare himselfe towards his Enemies; it then followeth, that it is not contrary either to the Nature of God, or of man (who is created to the Image of God) to loue our Enemies, or to do them benefits; but it is only contrary to the nature of Beasts, and of those men, who, when they were in Honour, did not vnderstand: they were compared to Beasts without vndersta^ding, and became like to them. Ps. 48.


A second Discourse of Humility, which is the fourth Part of the Gate of the House of God. CHAP. XIII.
IN this last place I come to Humility, which is like to its Sisters, the
 which Vertue, as it begetteth great straits to the proud and arrogant, so with ease it beginneth to be dilated and made larger, to such who wilbe taught in the Schoole of Christ. For first, we ought to humble our selfes vnder the potent hand of God, as the Chiefe of the Apostles hath admonished vs, 1. Pet 5. and as his Coapostle S. Iames confirmeth, cap. 4. Now what difficulty can be imagined, to be in the humiliation of a mortall man, to the immortall and Omnipotent God? Furthermore, we ought also to make choise of the lowest place among men, as presuming them to be better then our selues are, as the Apostle counselleth vs, saying, Philip 2. Ech one counting others better then himselfe. Therefore who know themselues, and are priuy to their owne imperfections, but knovv not what secret Vertue may lye hid in the breast of others, do suffer no difficulty to repute others superiour to themselues, and do willingly honour them, and giue to them the higher and more worthy place. For as Pryde groweth from the ignorance of a man no knowing himselfe, so Humility from the true knowing
 of himselfe.
A proude Hart quickly penetrateth into the Vices* which it selfe hath not, but which others haue, because all these are out of him: yet his proper Vices, though often far greater and knowne to all other men, this man seeth not, because they are within him: Euen as the Eye, which seeth not what is within it selfe, but only what is without it. The Pharisy Luc, 18. may be an example hereof to vs, who gaue thanks to God, that he was not, as other men were, to wit, Robbers, Iniust; Adulterers; for he did see, that the Vices of Rapine, Iniustice, Adultery were not in him; but he did not see the more grieuous Vices vvhich did lye lurking within him, I meane, Pryde, blindnes of mind, and impenitency; and therefore he preferred himselfe before the Publican, praying in the same Temple. But the Publican, who was of a more cleare sight, did see the Vices in himselfe, but not the Vertues; and therefore he tooke the lovvest place, standing a far off, beating his breast, and imploring the mercy of God: And so the euent was, that by the iudgment of God, this poore
 humbled man departed iustified, that other, reprobated. Wherefore if a man (voyding his iudgment of all selfeloue) vvill labour diligently to knovv his ovvne imbecillity and imperfections, he vvill not suffer any straits, in entring into the Gate of the hovvse of God.
To all these precedent discourses, it is needfull to adioyne this one Consideration. That vvheras the Port or Gate of the House of God seemeth most narrovv, and almost impenetrable to those vvho come to is heauily burdened and loaden, or vvho are of a grosse and corpulent body, or cloathed vvith many garments, or labour to enter therin, lifting themselues vp in their full height and stature; So is the same Gate become large, and easy for entrance to those, vvho come vnto it, without burden, naked, leane, and crooked, or bending themselues: and therefore the fault is in vs, why vve may not easily enter by that Gate, through the vvhich many Saints vvithout any difficulty, and trouble haue already passed.
Therefore let a Christian man lay dovvne the burden of his Riches: Let
 him knovv, that riches are giuen by God to him, to be a Dispenser, and not an absolute Lord therof, that so he do distribute them to the needy and poore, and not reserue them to himselfe alone. And then it shall to fall out, that his mind being free from the loue of riches, and he lightned of the great burden thereof, shall fynd the Gate wyde inough for his entrance; In like sort, let him free, and deliuer himselfe of that ouermuch fatnes (as I may terme it) of carnall delights; or rather let him cast out the hurtfull and dangerous Humour of seuerall Concupiscences; which engender a spirituall Dropsy, and puffe vp the Body. To conclude, let him disuest himselfe of all proper estimation and selfe loue; let him put on the Humility of Christ, let him incline and bend his necke to the obedience of the Commandements; and then let him complayne (if he can) if with all conuenient facility and ease, he cannot passe through the Gate of Saluation.



That it is absolutely necessary to enter through the Gate, though it be strait, if so a man will be saued. CHAP. XIV.
BVt whether this Gate, be large, or strait, we ought w^th all our endeauour labour to enter thereinto. For there is no other place left vs after this life (which flieth away like a shadow) where we can well repose our selues, but within this Port, and Gate. Therefore our Lord exhorteth vs saying, Luc. 13. Striue to enter in by the narrow Gate. Because as himselfe in the same place subioyneth, all those who remaine without, shalbe cast downe into those places, where there is an euerlasting weeping, and continuall gnashing of teeth. Which words do import extremity of dolours, with despayre of remedy: from whence then riseth certaine fury or madnes, which impatiently suffereth those torments, which it cannot but suffer, and must be forced for all eternity to
 suffer How much more secure therefore is it, to striue to enter by the narrow Gate, where (after some small paynes and labour endured) euerlasting rest and felicity is found?
If so the matter did st^nd, as that men might to auoyd the straitnes of the Gate, and withall the paines of Hell; perhaps the weaknes and imbecillity of them might in part seeme excusab^e, who haue not the courage to lay battery to the narrownes of that Gate; but since of necessity men most here for a short tyme labour to enlarge this Gate, or otherwise irreuocably fall into eternall paynes and torments, what kind of iudgment is that, or how can it be styled Reason, which dictateth, that lesser and shorter labours are to be auoyded, that more intollerable paynes therby must after be suffered? But admit for the tyme, that no torments were ro seyze vpon men after this life, but only they should be depriued of the House of God, wherein there be euerlasting, and endles ioyes; yet these very ioyes alone ought to be a sufficient inducement to encourage vs, with all alacrity to enter into the House of God; not only through the
 straitnes of the Gate, but euen through thornes and bryars, yea through sword and fyer.
And although during our peregrination here, we cannot feelingly conceaue, what it is to be depriued of euerlasting Beatitude; yet after the separation of the soule from the Body, then shall the Eyes of the mind be instantly opened, that they may most clearly see, how great a detriment, yea how infinit a losse and ouerthrow it is, not to arriue to that last End, to the which we are created. And this desire is signified by those Words, which being related in the Gospell, are repeated by those who shall remayne excluded out of the Gate: Math. 22. Lord, Lord, open vnto vs. Which desire truly of the Last end, shall euer torment and afflict those miserable Wretches, and their remorse of Conscience shall neuer cease; And so that sentence shalbe fulfilled, Marc. 9 Their worme shall not dye, and their fyer shall not be quenched.
O, if we could novv seriously consider and thinke with what a greedy desire, such men shall say: Lord, Lord, open vnto vs, as if they would say and
 complayne: Without entrance into this House of God, we cannot liue; and yet to dye, is not granted to vs: therefore we liue, not to the end we may liue, but to the end we may be euer miserable. Open to vs therefore, O Lord; for we are prepared to vndergoe any torments so that we may enter in. But it shalbe answered them: Matth. 25. I know you not; The yeare of Iubily is now expired: When you might haue entred, you would not; now therefore it is but reasonable, that when you would enter, you cannot. Thus these men being irremediably excluded, shall neuerthelesse cease to cry out (pricked thereto through a naturall desire) Lord, Lord, open vnto vs. But because in this life they were deafe to the exhortatio^s of our Lord, crying out and saying: Luc. 13. Striue to enter by the narrow Gate; Therfore after, they shall cry to the deafe eares of our Lord: Lord, Lord open to vs. To conclude, if we haue any spatke of true iudgment, let vs prouide and take care for the state of our owne soules; whyles we haue tyme; Let vs do that now when it is lawfull, and in our power; the which doubtlesly, then
 from our hart we shall couet to doe, or to haue done, and yet it shall not be then lawfull, nor in our power to do it.




OF THE ETERNALL FELICITY OF THE SAINTS, Vnder the Title of Paradise. THE FOVRTH BOOKE.

That in Heauen there are true Ioyes. CHAP. I.
PAradise is a name of Pleasure and Delight: For it signifieth* most pleasant Garden or Orchard, most apt for recreation and pleasure. In the Booke of Genesis (cap. 1. and 3.) where speach is made of the Terrestriall Paradise, it is called oftener then once, The Paradise of Pleasure. But in Ezechiel cap. 28. touching the Celestiall
 Paradise it is said to the chiefe Angell, who after fell, and became a Deuill: Thou wast in the delicacies of the Paradise of God. Now because we find nothing in the Holy Scriptures touching Paradise, but that in it there were many trees, and a fountaine of liuing water; Therefore I thought good through occasion of the Title, or Name of Paradise, to explicate the pleasures and felicity, which the Blessed do enioy in Heauen. It will be (I trust) a profitable contemplation to stir vp and incite mens minds, to seeke and meditate vpon those things, which be aboue; and consequently so to gouerne and order our liues, that when we are to leaue this our earthly habitation, we may remoue, not to lamentation and darknes, but (by the assistance of God) to light and euerlasting consolation. Most men (some few excepted) are accustom^^ to be drawne more with pleasure, then with any other good or benefit; and accordingly the Church in one prayer sayth: Let our Harts be fixed there, where true ioyes are.
First therefore, we vvill consider vvhat the Holy Scriptures do teach vs
 touching the celestiall Paradise; from whence we shall be able to proue, that there are true ioyes therein. That done, vve vvill attempt to explicate vvhat those Ioyes may be. In the last place vve vvill demonstrate by many reasons, or rather comparisons, that those Ioyes be far greater, then vve can either apprehend, thinke, or but once coniecture. First then, the name it selfe of Paradise doth euen sound Pleasure, and Delight, as vve haue shevved before our of the Booke of Genesis. And that there is a Paradise in Heauen, Ezechiel testified as aboue is said. The same doth our Lord in the Ghospell vvitnesse, when he said to the good Theefe hanging with him vpon the Crosse, Luc. 23. To day thou shalt be with me in Paradise: For by the vvord Paradise our Sauiour did vnderstand the Kingdome of Heauen, and essentiall Beatitude. For when the Theefe had said: O Lord, remember me, when thou shalt come into thy Kingdome; our Lord promising to him the participation of his Kingdome, did answere: To day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. The same is also witnessed by S. Paul, when he said, 2. Cor. 12.
 I know a man in Christ, rapt euen to the third Heauen; he was rapt into Paradise. S. Iohn doth witnesse the same in his Apocalyps cap. 2. where he bringeth in our Lord thus speaking: To him, that ouercommeth, I will giue to eate of the tree of life, which is in the Paradise of my God. Now from these passages of Scripture it is euident, that the Region of the Blessed is a place of delight and Pleasure.
Furthermore when our Lord said to the good and faythfull seruant, Math. 25. Enter into the ioy of thy Lord; doth he not most openly declare, the House of God, or the City of God, to the which all the good and faythfull Seruants are admitted after their passing out of this world, to be a place of Ioy? And where in many places be compareth the Kingdome of Heauen to a Supper, as in Luc. 14. A certaine m^n made a great supper. And againe cap. 22. where he sayth: And I dispose to you, as my Father disposed to me, a kingdome, that you may eate and drinke vpon my Table, in my kingdome. To conclude in the Apocalyps ^t is said: cap. 19. Blessed are they; who are called to the supper of the Mariage of the
 Lambe. Certainly the Scripture by the Metaphor of a supper, signifieth delectation and pleasure; except we will maintayne, that in the sense of Tasting there is no pleasure. And we may annex hereto, that in the Gospell, and in the Apocalips, the Kingdome of Heauen is compared to a Regall or Princely Supper; as is euident out of that King, VVho made a mariage for his sonne; and out of the Parable of the Wise and foolish Virgins; of which, the Wise Virgins did enter with the Bridegroome to the Mariage, but the Foolish Virgins were shut out. We also fynd in the Apocalyps many things to be spoken of the Mariage of the Lambe in the Kingdome of Heauen, being celebrated with all magnificent preparation. Furthermore, the felicity of the Saints is compared to Princely Mariages, at what tyme all kind of pleasures almost are enioyed; of which point we are further to discourse in the next ensuing Booke.
To conclude. S. Iohn in the Apocalyps did see a Company of Virgins, who did follow the Lambe wheresoeuer he went, and did sing a new song which no others could sing:
 Which place S. Austin expoundeth of certaine holy ioyes and pleasures, which the Virgins (either men, or Women) do enioy. His words are these: You shall bring to the Mariage of the Lambe a new song, which you shall sing vpon your Citherns: that is, you shall sing prayses in your Harts; not such as the whole Earth singeth, but such, as not any can sing but your selues. Aug. de sancta Virgin. c. 27. And then after: Whither may we thinke this Lambe will goe? Where none shalbe able, or dare to follow him but your selues? Whither may we thinke him to goe, into what gardens or other pleasant places? Thither I belieue, where the grasse is ioyes, not the vayne ioyes of this VVorld being but lying Madnes; neither the ioyes, which are graunted in the kingdome of God to others not being Virgins; but they are ioyes, distinguished from all other kind of ioyes. And then againe a little after: The rest of the multitude of the faithfull shall see you, which cannot follow this Lambe; They shall see, but the shall not enjoy; and reioycing with you that which they haue not in themselues, they shall haue in you; for they shall not be able to sing that new
 song peculiar to you, but they shalbe able to heare it, and to be delighted in your great delight. But you, who shall both sing and heare this new song, because in that you shall sing it, you shall heare it, you shall with more felicity exult or reioyce, and with more pleasure reigne. ibid. c. 29. Thus from all aboue expressed it is manifest, that in the Heauenly Kingdome, and City, or House, there be many true Ioyes, and most true, and most great Pleasures.


Of the Ioy of the Vnderstanding. CHAP. II.
SEing aboue we haue proued out of the Holy Scripture, that there are true Ioyes in the Kingdome of Heauen, we wi^l now explicate what those Ioyes be. And first we will vndertake to shew, what the Ioyes of the Vnderstanding, VVill, and Memory be, all which do belong to the spirit or soule; next, what the ioyes of the seuerall senses be, which do appertaine vnto the Body. VVe do not inten^ herby to maintayne, that the Vnderstanding,
 the Memory, and the s^nses of the Body are the proper seats of Ioy; for we are not ignorant that Ioy (as also desire) do properly belo^g to the will in the superiour part, and to the Appetite in the inferiour. But we heare speake, as men do vulgarly speak, who forbeare not to say, that the Eye is delighted with the beauty of Colours* and the Eare with sweetnes of sounds. Therefore we vnderstand by the Ioy of the mynd, or of the Memory, or of the Externall senses, a delectation or pleasure, which a man taketh from those things, which either he doth vnderstand, or remember, or which he doth draw from the externall senses.
The first Ioy then of the Blessed, shalbe to see with the eyes of the mind, God, euen face to face, as S. Paul speaketh, and as S. Iohn sayth; to see him, as he is. Now how great a Ioy this wilbe, we may in part coniecture, in that the Prophet Isay, and the Apostle do witnes, that it exceedeth all the Ioyes, which any ma^ hath either seene, heard, desired, or euer imagined: The eye hath not seene, nor the eare hath heard, neither hath it entred into the har^ of man, what things God hath
 prepared for them that loue him. (Isa. 64. 1. Cor. 2) For the Scripture here speaketh of the chiefe, and Essentiall Beatitude or Happines, which is placed in the vision and sight of God himselfe, according to that saving of our Lord: Matth. 5 Bless^d are the cleane of Hart, for they shall see God. And; This is life euerlasting, that they know thee, the only true God, and whome thou hast sent Iesus Christ. And truly there semeth in the former VVords a great amplification; to wit, That no man hath either seene, or heard, or desired, or thought, what kind of ioy consisteth in the Vision of God; Notw^thstanding it is no amplification, but a simple Truth; because the Eyes, the eares, and the harts of men are accustomed to perceaue only ioyes that haue end; but the Vision of God is a Vision of an inaccessible light, and of a Good which hath no end, and which comprehendeth in it selfe All Good, according to the words of our Lord to Moyses: I wil shew thee all good, when Moyses a litle afore thus desired of Ged, Shew me thy fa^e. Exod. 33.
But to proceed, and that we may proue the truth of this point by force
 of Reason. We are to learne out of S. Thomas (p. 2. q. 31. a. 5.) that delectation, which is taken from knowledg, requireth three things; to wit, an Intelligent or sentient Power; an Obiect, sorting to that Power; and an Vnion of the Obiect with that Power. Now by how much the power is more apt to know, and the Obiect more noble, and the Vnion more intrinsecall and inward; by so much the delectation fro^ thence proceeding, is greater. That the Vnderstanding, or the mynd is more pure, more high, more noble, and more liuely (as I may say) and therein more apt for knowledge, then the externall sense, is so euident, as it needeth no proofe. Now that God is a more high, and more noble Obiect, not only aboue all the Obiects of the Senses, but euen aboue all the Obiects of the soule or mind (since he is an Infinite Good, all good, or rather Goodnes it self) no man can doubt. That the Vnion of the Intelligence, by an open and cleare Vision, is an Vnion so inward, as that the Essence of God doth penetrate the vvhole mind of the seer, and the mind is euen tra^sformed into God himselfe, as into a great sea, is likewise certaine.

Who therefore is able to comprehend or coniecture, how great that Ioy is, or what kind of kisse is that of the supreme good, or what imbracement is it of a Spouse of an infinite Beauty? Certainly in the coniunction of a fayre Colour with the sense of seeing, or of a sweete sound with the sense of Hearing (and the like is to be said of other sensible Obiects, with their senses) we receaue great pleasure, and often so great, as that diuers men by this meanes do almost become madd; Neuerthelesse the Powers of the senses are materiall, and common to vs with Beasts: And the Obiects of them, are things Corporall, and sometymes do no lesse hurt, then delight and please. To conclude, the Vnion is but superficiall and external^; And in some senses, there is no Vni^n at all of the Obiect it selfe, but only of its image or likenes with the Power. VVe may add hereto, that spirituall Vnion, and the Vnion of God with the Intelligence or mind by Vision, is more firme, more durable, and altogether entyre; wheras corporall delectations, which are taken by the senses, because they are subiect to change, they cannot continue
 long; neither are they wholy taken togeather, but are instilled by degrees, and as it were, by drops: VVherfore the infallible Conclusion of all this is, that the delectation and pleasure of the mind, is incomparably greater, then the Pleasure of the sense.
Now (O Man) gather thy selfe togeather, and weigh in a true ballance, and with a steedy hand, the Pleasure, which the VVorld prostituteth and offereth to thee, with that Pleasure, which God doth promise, when he promiseth the sight and Vision of himselfe to those that loue him; And then in this thy ballancing make choyce of that pleasure thou most doest couet. Certainly if thou louest Pleasure, the which thou canst not deny thou louest, then wilt thou make choyse, of that Pleasure, vvhich is greatest, rather then of that which is least, and of that which is for all eternity, then of that which is momentary and fading.
But neither the only Vision of God is promised to holy men in Heauen, but also the Vision and sight of all things, which God hath made. Heere vpon the Earth we behould by the sense of our sight, the Sunne, the
 Moone, the stars, the sea, riuers, liuing Creatures, Trees, and Mettalls; but our mind seeth nothing hereof; that is, it perfectly seeth no substance, no essentiall differences, or proprieties: neither truly doth it see its owne soule, but only after the manner of blind men, it gropeth after the effects, and so by discourse of Reason it gaineth some knowledge. What then shalbe that Ioy, when the face of things being vnueyled, our Vnderstanding shall clearely see the Nature of all things, their differences, proprieties, and forces? And with how great an exultation, and comfort will it be euen astonished, when it shall behould a whole Army of innumerable Angel^s (all differing one from another, in specie) and shall perspicuously obserue the differences of all and euery one of them?
O Good God, what a Theater and Co^templation will it be, how delightfull, how much to be loued, when we shalbe admitted to behould, and view all the Holy men, and women, vvhich haue beene from the Creation of the VVorld, to the End thereof, gathered togeather, with all the Angels, as also their merits, Palms, and Trophies of
 Victory? Neither shall we see and consider the Wickednes and torments of the reprobate, without some pleasure, in whom the Sanctity of good men, and Iustice of God shall wonderfully shyne: For then the Iust shall wash their hands in the bloud of sinners, as the Prophet so long since foretould. For what other thing is it to wash the hands in the bloud of sinners, but that the works of the Iust shall more clearely appeare, as being compared with the Works of Wicked men? Certainly at that tyme the Virginity and Chastity of some men shalbe more resplendent and remarkable, when it is compared with the Adulteries of others, their Equalls. In like sort the Fastings and Almsdeeds of some, when they are ballanced with the Epicurisme, drunkennes, and cruelty of others: I meane, when it shalbe truly said; This young man was comely and pleasing of Body, yet neuerthelesse he euer professed Virginity or Chastity: That other yong man was also fayre; and of a good presence; yet not contenting himselfe with his wyfe, he often defyled himself with Adultery and sacriledge.

Againe, that man was rich and noble, and fasted, and prayed much, and most bountifull in Alms deeds; This man being as rich; and noble by byrth, was so wholy giuen ouer to dainty fayre, drinking, and Iouiallisme, as that consuming all his substance and riches in voluptuousnes* he did leaue nothing for the reliefe of the poore. And thus from hence it shall arise, that the Ioyes of the Iust shall receaue an increase, from their Knowledge of the wicked deportment and cariage of the Iniust; and consequently, their Ioy shalbe augmented from the contemplation of Gods Iustice, which shall wonderfully shyne in the rewards of the Blessed, and punishments of the Wicked. For now in humaine proceedings, a great deformity or irregularity appeareth; in that offence and sinne is often accompained vvith Revvard, and Vertue vvith Punishment; so as the Iustice of God may somevvhat seeme to be obscured or darkened in the Eye of men; But then all Punishment shalbe conioyned with Sinne, and all Reward vvith Vertue: And so the co^formity or beauty of Iustice shall stir vp an incredible ioy in the minds of the Blessed.



Of the Ioy of the Will. CHAP. III.
BEsides that Pleasure, vvhich the Will taketh from the good of the Vnderstanding, there are three things, vvhich shall properly beget and cause Ioy in the VVill it selfe. One of these is, a most ardent Loue of God, and of our Neighbour: For Loue is a principall sauce, or seasoning of all things that are to be beloued. He that loueth, iudgeth all those things which he loueth, to be most fayre and good; and therefore he much reioyceth at the presence and sight of them: As contrary-wise at their absence he greatly lamenteth. We see that Parents, who out of a naturall affection loue their Children dearely, do belieue, that they are most fayre, most witty, and most wyse; although often they be deformed, and but shallow-witted; and if choyce were giuen them, they vvould not change them for any others, though in an impartiall Eye far better and fayrer. In like sort, we see, that men either through VVitchcraft,
 or some vnexpected accident, are taken and surprized with the Loue of deformed persons; houlding it a most pleasant thing to conuerse with them; and most infortunate to be separated from their company and familiariry. Which proceeding only Loue causeth, being (as aboue we said) a sauce to all things, which are the subiect of Loue.
Now seeing these thinges stand thus, what, and how ineffable shall the pleasure of the Saints be, euer to conuerse with God, and all the Blessed whom they shall most ardently loue; who are truly most fayre and most good, euen in a cleare and vnpartiall iudgment, and from whom they shall know, that they are neuer to be separated? As on the contrary, it shalbe one of the greatest punishments of Hell, to be forced euer to be in the Company of those damned spirits, whom they extremely hate, and by whose diuers stratagems and deuises they know, themselues to haue beene circumuented and abused.
An other Consideration, which shal much increase the ioy of the Blessed in the will, shalbe an vnspeakable
 rest, and satiety without cloying, vvhich shall make them on all sydes satisfyed and content. Heere vpon Earth no man liues contented with his state; There is no man, but he coueteth many things which he cannot obtaine. And hence it riseth, that there are so many hungry and thirsty men in the pursuit of temporall Benefits in the VVorld. Neither is this to be much wondred at; since our mind is capable of an infinite and euerlasting Good; wheras the things created are small in themselues, of a fading nature, and cannot long continue. Therefore what exultation and ioy shall it be to that man, who shall see himselfe seated in that place, where he shall liue in all contentment and sweete repose of mind; vvhere nothing shalbe wanting, nothing shall affright him, nothing shalbe desired, nothing more shalbe sought after? O Peace surmounting all apprehension of sense, the which the VVorld cannot affoard, and vvhich is found only in the heauenly Ierusalem, the City of the peacefull and most great King. To thee, this our Peregrination doth greedily bend it self; VVe are here loaden vvith temptations
 and sollicitudes, and we greatly appease and quiet our selues only in the thought and expectation of thee.
The third thing, which shall bring great Ioy to a Blessed VVill, is Iustice; and this perfect, and more perfect, then was the Originall Iustice in Adam. The Iustice of him did subiect the inferiour part of the soule to the superiour, as long as the superiour was subiect to God: But this Iustice subiecteth the inferiour part to the superiour, and the superiour to God, by a most firme and indissoluble band and connexion: That was (as it were) a wollen or linnen Garment, this a silken, or goulden Vestment which maketh the VVill most fayre and amiable to God, to the Angells, and all Blessed soules. This is that perfect Iustice, which admitteth no spot, nor any veniall blemish. So as of a soule cloathed with this Iustice, it may be said: Thou art all fayre, O my Loue, and there is no spot in thee. Cant. 4. This comprehendeth all Vertues, as they are vnmixted with the drosse of any imperfection. Now how great ioy and pleasure this Iustice may bring to a soule in Heauen, the VViseman doth witnesse, saying:
 A secure mind is as it were, a continuall feast. Prou. 15.
Heere only that mind is secure, which is neuer gnawed with the worme of Conscience; in that through a perfect Iustice it is so established in good, as that euen for any short moment it cannot slyde. Of which point the Apostle is also witnesse, saying: Rom. 14. The kingdome of God is not meate and drinke, but Iustice, and peace, and ioy in the Holy Ghost. In which words, the holy Apostle clearely teacheth, that the Kingdome of Heauen contayneth in it selfe great Pleasure, consisting not in delighting the thtoat, and repletion of the Belly (as carnall and sensuall men perhaps could wish) but in Iustice, which engenders in the soule a firme Peace, and true Ioy. For who is perfectly iust, hath nothing in his hart, which may vpbraid or reprehend him: neither any thing in his Actions, at which other men can take exceptions. And from hence springeth a most constant and sweete Peace betweene God himselfe, and all others: From hence also riseth an ineffable ioy in the Holy Ghost; with which ioy no earthly or temporall pleasures can be compared.



Of the Ioy of the Memory. CHAP. IV.
NOw the faculty of Memory through remembrance of things past, shall minister no small matter of Ioy. For first the calling to mind the benefits of God, either touching spirituall or corporall matters, naturall or supernaturall, temporall or eternall, throughout our whole life, shall bring an incredible Ioy, when the iust soule shall call to mind by how many wayes it was preuented in the benedictions of all sweetnes. Againe, the remembrance of the perills and dangers, out of which God by strange meanes hath euen snatched vs, throughout all our life, how great a comfort will it affoard? Among other dangers I put in the first place, That a man being very neere vnto committing of a mortall sinne, and so thereby neere vnto Hell, God moued only through his benignity and loue, did hinder the committing therof. Certainly this mercy of God being so great, and often extended
 to the Elect, when it shall be called to mind in that most safe and most peacefull Region, shall affoard most great Ioy. VVhich remembrance, if it were wanting to the Saints in Heauen, how then could it be said of them in the Psalme 88. I will sing the mercyes of our Lord for euer? Then which Canticle (sayth S. Austin) being song in the glory of the grace and fauour of Christ, nothing shalbe more pleasant to that Heauenly Citty. l 22. de ciuit. c. 30.
What may I speake of the deuolution and current of Tymes and ages, euen from the beginning to the End? What pleasure will the remembrance of so many Vicissitudes of things, and of so great Variety bring, which the Prouidence of God hath gouerned so wisely, and brought to their due ends? And perhaps this is that mayne current of that Riuer, which so wonderfully exhilerateth the Citty of God. Psal. 45. For what other thing is the Order of ages passing away with such speede, and neuer intermitting their course, then the great swiftnes of the Riuer, running without any cessation, till it be wholy absorpt in the mayne Ocean? And now truly, whiles the Riuer
 is in running, and the Times slipping away, many do dispute of the Prouidence of God; yea some euen of Gods seruants are much troubled with this impetuosity of the streame; for seing that it is often hurtfull to good men, but commodious and beneficiall to the Wicked, whi^es it carieth away the good earth, taken from the fields of the Vertuous, vnto the fields of the Wicked, thus they often suffer great Temptations, and seeme to complayne of Gods Prouidence.
Heare of this point the Royall Prophet, thus moaning: Psal 72. My feete were almost moued, my steps almost slipped, because I had zeale vpon the wicked, seing the peace of sinners. And a little after: Loe the sinners themselues; and they that abound in the World, haue obtayned riches; And I said, then I haue iustified my hart without cause, and haue washed my hands among Innocents, and haue bene scourged all the day. Heare also Ieremy the Prophet thus expostulating cap. 12. Thou (O Lord) art iust if I dispute with thee; but yet I will speake iust things to thee: Why doth the way of the impious prosper? And why is it well with all, that
 transgresse and do wickedly? Thou hast planted them, and they haue taken roote; They prosper and bring forth fruite: thou art nigh to their mouth, and far from their reynes, To conclude, Heare the Prophet Habacuc, c. 1. Why lookest thou vpon them that do vniust things, and houldest thy peace, when the impious deuoureth him that is more iust then himselfe? Thou wilt make men, as the fishes of the Sea, and as the creeping Beast, not hauing a Prince. Thus these former Prophets.
But after the reuolution of tymes, and after the forsaid Riuer hath disgorged it selfe into the sea, when the Saints in Heauen shall cleerely see and read the reasons of all those vicissitudes, or alterations, as written in the Booke of the diuine Prouidence; then VVords will light short to expresse the ioye, which the City of God shall receaue thereby. There they shall read, why God suffered the first Angell, and the first man to sinne; and why the Mercy of God did restore the man, but would not restore the Angell. There they shall see, why God did make choyce of the sonnes of Abraham for his peculiar people; whome notwithstanding
 he did foresee, to be after of a most stubborne necke, and what good through their obstinacy he was after to prepare for the Gentills. And that I may pretermit the Vniuersall Prouidence of God, there they shall see why he did permit many iust Men (or rather almost a^l) to suffer pressures and ^fflictions in this World, and to become balls to their Enemies, that therby he might after crowne them most gloriously. And from this remembra^ce the Saints shall with great ioy euen blesse all those Crosses, which they suffered in the VVord, when they shall see them changed into euerlasting Crownes, and shall say with the Prophet, Psal. 93. According to the multude of my sorrowes in my hart, thy Consolations haue made my soule ioyfull.


Of the Ioy of the Eyes. CHAP. V.
LEt vs now take into our consideration the ioyes of a glorified Body. And first the Ioy of the sense of seeing presenteth it selfe; which sense
 among the senses of the Body is most noble, and in its office and vse dilateth it selfe most largly. This sense in the Celestiall Country shall first reioyce at the splendour of its owne proper Body, changed by Christ, and configured, or made like to the Body of his Glory, as the Apostle speaketh. Phil. 3. Neither shall its brightnes be lesse then the splendour of the sunne. For the same Apostle Act. 26. affirmeth, that Christ (according to whose brightne^ we are to be co^formed) was seene of him, to exceed the brightnes of the sunne. And our Lord himselfe thus speaketh in the Ghospell. Then the iust shall shyne as the sunne, in the kingdome of their Father. Matth. 13. How pleasing and gratefull a spectacle will it be, when the Eyes of the Blessed shall behould their hands, their feete, and all their me^bers so to send forth beames of light, as that they shall not neede any more the light of the sunne, or of the moone (much lesse the light of a Candle) to dispense all darknes? And they shall see not only their owne body, to shyne like to the sunne, but also the bodies of all Saints, and especially of Christ himselfe, and of his Blessed Mother.

How much doth one Sunne at its rising, reioyce the whole Earth? What then will it be, to behould innumerable sunnes togeather, not resplendent only in light, but also most fayre for their variety and proportion of members? Neither in that place shall the Eyes shut themselues, for feare least they be oppressed, and hurt with ouer much brightnes; for those Eyes shall be Blessed, and in this respect impassible and immortall. For he, who shall so comfort the Eyes of the mind, with the light of Glory, as that they behoulding God face to face, shall not be oppressed by his Glory; he shall also comfort the Eyes of the body with the guift, or priuiledge of Impassibility; so as without any danger they shalbe able to looke vpon, not one only sunne but, innumerable sunnes.
This further shalbe adioyned to increase the glory of the Eyes, as S. Austin teacheth; l. 22. de Ciu. c. 20. to wit, that the most Blessed Martyrs shall beare most fayre and beautifull prints, or signes of Vertue, euen in those particular partes of the Body, wherein they suffered their torments. What solace to the eye then shall it be,
 to behould S. Stephen, shyning with as many precious stones, as he suffered dints of stones in his Body? In like sort what pleasure wil it be to see S. Io. Baptist, S. Iames the elder S. Paul, and almost infinite others (whose heads were cut of for professing Christ) to shyne vvith a most rich chayne, more precious then any gould? What to see S. Bartholomew (whose skinne was fleaed off) so illustrious in body, as that it may seeme to exceed all Purple, though neuer so precious? What shall it be (to omit all others) to behould S. Peter, S. Andrew, and many others (who suffered death vpon the Crosse) to represent, or beare most shining stars (as it were) in their hands and feete, with incred^ble Beauty? Concerning Christ, the king of Martyrs, who for his glory, and our comfort will haue the signes, or marks of the nayles and the Lance preserued, no tongue is able to expresse, with what radiant splendour and light those most holy impressions shall shyne, seing all the glory of Saints compared to the Glory of Christ, is lesse then the Beauty of the starrs, with reference to the Beauty of the sunne.

But now what shall I speake of the Pleasures, which the Eyes of the Blessed shall take in behoulding that most spacious and large City, which Tobias, and S. Iohn (as aboue we haue proued) as not hauing Words worthy inough to set out and proclaime its beauty, said, That it was all made of gould, and garnished with rich Iewels. Margarites, and other precious stones? Tob. 13. Apoc. 21. What lastly may I say of the New Heauen, and the New Earth, the which the Holy Scriptures do promise to vs after the day of Iudgment, and of the renouation of all things into a better state? For these things, as they are vnknowne to vs, so they shall delight the Eyes of the Blessed with a new and admirable ioy, when their Beauty shall begin to be seene.


Of the Ioy of the Eares. CHAP. VI.
THat the sense of Hearing, and the Instruments of speach shalbe in the Kingdome of Heauen, no man may
 doubt: For the Bodies of the Blessed shalbe true and liuing Bodies, and in euery part perfect. And such was the Body of Christ after his Resurrection, as all the Apostles, many disciples, and others haue testified. For they did heare him speake, and he did answere to their demaunds: And S. Paul himself did heare Christ speaking to him from Heauen; and he answered to Christ hearing him. That there shalbe Canticles, and songs, and chiefly of that Word Alleluia, the aforesaid Toby and S. Iohn do witnes. From hence then we may gather, that in that Heauenly City, there shall not be wanting many most sweet Sonnets, with the which God may be praysed, and the Blessed eares of Holy men may be wonderfully delighted. And if these things ought to be performed in proportion and measure, the^ doubtlesly those songs ought to be the more sweet, and harmonious, by how much the singers shalbe more skilfull, and he that is praysed, more noble and sublime, and the place where the Musicke is made, more high, and the Company or presence of the Auditours more intelligent, and in greater number.

What consolation therefore will it be, in that most high peace, and in the concord of soules, and in that ardour and heate of Charity towards their supreme Benefactour, to heare the most cleare voyces of those, which shall sing Alleluia? If S. Francis (as S. Bonauenture hath left written) was so rapt and moued at the sound of a Citherne, played vpon but a very short tyme by an Angell, as that he thought himselfe to haue beene in a new World; what delights then shall our Eares enioy, when millions of musitians with most concordant and sweet voyces shall with full accord and consent prayse God; and other Millions with like melody and feruour, shall many tymes repeate the said Prayses? And perhaps in that Heauenly Citty, not only the prayses of God shalbe celebrated with Musicall voyces; but also the Triumphs of Martyrs, the Honour of Confessours, the Glory of Virgins, and the victories of all the Saints against the Deuill, shalbe extolled with Celestiall Musicke. For we thus read Eccl. 31. Who is proued therein and perfect, shall haue eternall Glory: He that could transgresse, and hath not transgressed;
 and do Euill, and hath not done it; therfore are his good things established in our Lord, and all the Church of Saints shal declare his Almes. Although this may be vnderstood of the prayses of mortall men, in the milita^t Church here vpon Earth; yet withall it may be meant of the immortall Citizens, and of the triumphant Church in Heauen; Since there the Saints shall haue truly eternall glory, and that is truly and properly the Church of Saints.
And whereas our Lord in the Gospell sayth, that the faythfull and prudent seruants shalbe praysed of God in the Heauenly Kingdome Matth. 28. Well farre thee, good and faythfull seruant, because thou hast beene faythfull ouer a few things, I will place thee ouer many things: Enter into the ioy of thy Lord; Why may we not thinke, that those words of our Lord shalbe celebrated with the singing of the whole Celestiall Court, and shall againe and againe be most sweetly repeated? Certainly the Catholike Church doubted not thus to speake of S. Martin: Martinus hic pauper and modicus, diues Caelum ingreditur, hymnis caelestibus honoratur. Martin being but poore and
 temperate, did enter into Heauen rich; and is honored with Celestiall Hymnes. To conclude, S. Austin affirmeth the same point in expresse Words, l. 22. de Ciu. c. 30. saying: There shalbe true glory, where no man shalbe praysed through the errour, or adulation of the Prayser. True Honour, which shall not be conferred vpon any, not worthy; Neither shall any vnworthy seeke after that Honour, where none but he that is worthy, shall be permitted to be. O therefore thrice Happy Soules, who in that place, where all flattery is banished and exiled, and no lye is found to be, shall heare their owne Prayses and Trophees to be celebrated without danger of Pryde, but not without increase of ioy, and comfort.


Of the Ioy of the sense of smelling. CHAP. VII.
TOuching the other senses, litle is to be said; not in that they want their great Pleasures; but because what Pleasures those shalbe, the Holy Scripture hath not declared. Neuerthelesse
 this is euident to vs, that many Bodies of Holy Saints haue after their deaths braathed out a most sweet Odour. This S. Ierome testifieth of the Body of S. Hilarion. For he affirmeth, that ten Months after the Body was interred, it was found entyre, as if it were then liuing, and did cast from it such a fragrant smel, as if it had beene imbalmed with sweet oyntments. The like doth S. Gregory witnes of the body of S. Seruulus, the Palseyman; His words are these: l. 4. Dial. c. 14. The soule departing, such a fragrancy of smell did rise, as that all there present were replenished with incredible sweetnes. And a litle after: Till the Body was buried, the sweetnes of that smell did not depart from their Noses. Neither are there wanting many other such like Examples both of former and later tymes: from all which we may gather, that if the Bodies of the dead Saints (after the Soule is glorifyed) do send forth such sweet smells, then much more the liuing and glorifyed Bodies of the saints shall breath forth a most delicious and sweet Odour.
I will adioyne hereto that, which the said S. Gregory relateth of the liuing
 and most glorious Body of our Sauiour. Thus he writeth: lib. 4. c. 16. and hom. 38. sup. Euang. Tarsilla the Virgin then looking vp, sow Iesus comming; and suddenly there was (as it were) sprinkled such a fragrancy of a wounderful Odour, as that the sweetnes therof did assure all, that the Authour of sweetnes was thither come. But if the glorifyed Body of our Redeemer did breath an odour of such sweetnes, then it is altogether credible, that all the Bodies of the Saints shall send forth in Heauen a wonderfull sweetnes: For it is fitting, that the members should be conformable to the Head, not only in splendour, but also in suauity of Odour. Those men therefore, who are delighted with Odours, let them thinke, with what sweetnes they are to be replenished, when they shall draw into their glorified sent, the diuerse, and most sweet, odours of so many thousands of Celestiall flowers, on euery syde breathing forth in that diuine garden.



Of the Ioy of the senses of Tasting, and Touching. CHAP. VIII.
COncerning the Sense of Tast, Deuines do write that the Blessed shall not vse any mortall meates: Notwithanding they shall haue some delight in that sense, that it may not seeme to be superfluous. But concerning the Sense of touching; or Feeling, all do agree, that the Vse thereof shall not be wanting in Heauen. Since the Bodies of the Blessed (as being true bodies with life) may doubtlesly be touche; Our Lord thus speaking: Touch and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see me to haue Luc. 24. Yet all impure touching shalbe most remote from their bodies, for they shall haue no desire of Generation: And therefore our Lord speaketh thus: Math. 22. In the Resurrection neither shall they marry, nor be marryed, But are as the Angels of God in Heauen. But we will not heere stay about these things, which are daily disputed
 in the Schooles. This one thing we affirme, that the Sense of Touching shall receaue no small pleasure from the perpetu^ll and most excellent habitude, or disposition of a Glorious Body, through its qualities; of which the Apostle thus speaketh: 1. Cor. 15. The body is sowen in Corruption, it riseth in Incorruption; It is sowen in Dishonour, it shall ryse in Glory; It is sowen in Infirmity, it shall rise in Power; It is sowen a naturall Body, it shall rise a spirituall Body.
Of these foure qualities, or priuiledges of a glorified Body, that of glory or splendour belongeth to the sense of Seeing, as aboue we haue said; the other three seeme properly to belong to the sense of Touching. For euen as, when the Body is oppressed with strokes, diseases, or wounds endangering the life, the Sense of Touching is that, which suffereth and grieueth; so in like manner, when the Body enioyeth perfect health, is sound, and of a strong constitution, the Sense of Touching doth reioyce. Therefore this sense shall haue great ioy in Heauen, vvhen after the Resurrection it shalbe
 clad with Immortality, Impassibility, and Health in the highest degree, and this for all Eternity. What charges would not men willingly be at (especially Princes, and others of great estates) to be freed all their life time, from the dolours of the Goute, or of the Heade, the stomack, or the reynes? What ioy shall it then be in Heauen, from whence not only death, but all diseases and griefs shalbe altogeather exiled? Furthermore, those Qualities, through the which a corruptible body doth rise incorruptible, and a body that is infirme, riseth impassible, do belong to the ioy of the Sense of Touching.
In like sort, the qualities of Agility, or Subtility, by which a Naturall Body shall rise spirituall, seeme to belong to the same Sense of touching: since that Body sha^l be called spirituall, and shalbe a glorious Body, not in that it hath not truly flesh and bones; but because it shalbe so subiect to the spirit, as that at the very beck and pleasure of the spirit or soule, it shalbe able without any difficulty, toyle, or wearines, to be moued most swiftly, to ascend and descend, to goe and returne,
 to penetrate and pierce all places; and this in such sort, as if it were not a Body, but a spirit. Therefore euen as the Sense of Touching grieueth and beareth it selfe not well, when a heauy and weighty body is forced to ascend high, or with great swiftnes and speed to be remoued from place to place; so also on the contrary, it much reioyceth and exulteth, when a Body without any toyle, or wearines, either ascendeth aboue, or passeth most speedily from place to place.
Behould therefore from what seruitude of Corruption the Blessed shalbe freed, when as they sha^l no more stand in neede of Horses, Coaches, Gards of men, Weapons, nor any other thing; but those Blessed Bodies euen by their ovvne forces shall passe, and goe, into what places themselues Will; and they shall be euery where most safe and exempt from all danger, yea in the middest and thickest troupes of armed men. I would to God, that such men, who cannot tast or resent spirituall delights, in that they haue an inuenomed and corrupted palate or Tast; at least would entertayne with due consideration these
 most great and perpetuall Corporall Goods and Pleasures; and that they would labour, with all endeauour, and bent of Will, for the purchasing therof; For thus it might come to passe, that by litle and litle they would aspire to higher Matters; and so by these degrees they might at length, through the assistance of God, arriue to euerlasting Ioyes.


Of the Comparison of the Ioyes of the Earth, with the Ioyes of Heauen. CHAP. IX.
VVE haue vnfoulded and explicated (according to our small ability) what Ioyes are prepared in Heauen for those that loue God. Now we will endeauour to demonstrate by certaine externall Argume^ts, how great, and transcendent those Ioyes are. Our first argument shalbe taken from the comparison of the Ioyes, which God often in this World, giueth euen to his professed Enemies, and to the Reprobate. And certainly
 there is such a confluence of Ioyes consisting in Riches, Honours, Power, and diuers pleasures, which God imparteth to sinners, to his Enemies, either blaspheming against his dignity, or not belieuing in him, as that of most men they are judged to be Blessed and most happy, according to the vvords of the Prophet: Psal. 143. They haue said, it is a happy People, which hath these things. Which of the Louers of this world doth not enuy and grudge at Salomons Prosperity, who reigned fourty yeares, abounded with all affluence of riches and delights, and had seauen hundred wyues, and three hundred Concubines? Who neuerthelesse (according to the iudgment of S. Austin) was a Reprobate: for thus this Father writeth, in Psal. 126. Euen Salomon himselfe was a louer of VVomen, and was reprobated of God. And in his booke de Ciuitate Dei c. 20. he sayth the same of Salomon, which Salust did of Cataline: This man had a good beginning, but an euill ending. S Gregory followeth S. Austins iudgment herein, thus writing: l. 2. moral. cap. 2. Hence it is, that Salomon (though receauing VVisdome) did not perseuere in
 Gods fauour etc. Neither are the Kings, or Emperours of the Turks, the Persians, those of China, and Tartary, vnlike to Salomon herein; all who enioy most vast and large Kingdoms, and are so deuoted, or rather become slaues, to all sorts of pleasure of the flesh, as that they giue all liberty to the Hart, to the Eyes, to the eares, to their tast, vnto Lust, wallowing in all such voluptuousnes, and sensualities, as may content any of these Parts.
But to passe ouer these Ioyes, of which but few are partakers: How great are the consolations and Ioyes, which God giueth to all men in Common, of whom the Greatest part either know not God, or at lest do not adore him with that Honour and feare, with which they oxght? Doth he not giue all the Earth, with all its riches, delights, liuing Creatures, flowers, Mettals to men in generall? Doth he not giue the seas, the fountaynes, Riuers, Lakes with so seuerall sorts of fish to all men promiscuously? Hath he not created Heauen (which is, as a Couer of this great House, and beautified with so many starrs) for the generall vse of Man? Hath not this our most
 gratious and most bountifull Lord commanded the sunne to rise, and the Clouds to rayne vpon both the Iust and Iniust? Now, if he be so profuse (as I may say) in distributing so great benefits and comforts to reprobate sinners, (being his vngratefull bondslaues, and worthy all punishment) in this life; Is it then not most iust and reasonable, that he should reserue incomparably far greater Ioyes for his friends, and his sonnes? Heare what S Austin meditateth hereof, saying: in Psal. 10. Seing God giueth to sinners (dayly blaspheming him) the Heauens, the Earth, the Fountaines, Fruits, Health, Children, Ri^hes, abundance of all temporall Benefits; VVhat then dost thou thinke, he layeth vp, and prouides for his seruants, who giu^th all these former ioyes and Comforts to sin^ers?
It is written of S. Fulgentius in his life, that he once behoulding the glory and magnificence of the Senate of Rome, did burst forth into exclamation, saying: How specious and illustrious may the Celestiall Ierusalem be, if Earthly Rome, do thus shyne? And if in this world so great dignity and Honour be ascribed to the Louers of Vanity, what
 Honour and Glory shalbe due to the Saints, contemplating the Truth? Certainly S. Austin (who made a prudent and true estimation of things) affirmed all earthly pleasures whatsoeuer, to be so far short and inferiour to Celestiall, as he doubted not to say, that it were more to be wished for a man to enioy Heauenly pleasure, but for the space of one day, then to enioy all temporall pleasures for many thousands of Ages. His words are these l. 3. de lib. arbit. c. vit. So great is the pleasure of eternall Light, as that if it were permitted for one, to remayne and stay therein, no more, then the space of one day; yet euen for so short a space of the fruition therof, innumerable yeares of this life, (though fraught with all delights and affluence of temporall goods) are deseruedly to be contemned. For it is not said through any false or mistaking iudgment, Psal 83. Better is one day in thy Courtes, aboue thousands. Thus S. Austin.
Novv what shall we from all this conclude? If these things be true (as they are most true) haue we not reason as length to begin to be wise, and open our eyes? Hitherto we haue
 beene accustomed to say, that earthly pleasures are to be contemned, because they are but short and momentary; and that Celestiall are to be loued, because they are euerlasting: But we haue heard S. Austin (a most wise Doctour) inueighing against this our manner of speach, and earnestly contesting, that if earthly matters were euerlasting, and Celestiall but momentary, that neuerthelesse in a cleere iudgment, Heauenly goods and benefits were to be preferred before Earthly. Are we not therefore deafe, are we not blind, are we not fooles and stupid, if for earthly benefits and pleasures, which are not only base and ignoble, but also fading and momentary, we do contemne or sleight Celestiall, which are most precious, and shall continue for all Eternity? O most mercifull Lord, dissolue this our deafnes, enlighten our blindnes, dispell our stupidity, and cure our madnes. To what end hast thou signed vpon vs the light of thy Countenance, Psal. 4. if we cannot discerne, and see these so great and so necessary matters? And why hast thou giuen vs iudgment of Reason, if we do not penetrate points so euident?



A Comparison of the Terrestriall Paradise, with the Celestiall. CHAP. X.
VVE haue aboue compared the Ioyes of this World with the Ioyes of the kingdome of Heauen. In this next place we will briefly parallel togeather the Ioyes of the Terrestriall Paradise. How great the Ioyes of the Earthly Paradise were, may be knowne from that it was (as it were) a Garden of Delights, allotted to men who were created to the image and similitude of God, whereas the rest of the Earth was giuen to Brute Beasts. And hereupon when Adam by sinning did lose his Honour, in which God had constituted him, and was made like to Beasts without Vnderstanding, Psal. 48. he was then cast out of that Place, and banished into this. S. Alcuinus surnamed Auitas writing vpon Genesis, doth liuely describe this Terrestriall Paradise* and sheweth it to haue byn a Region most pleasant and most temperate, where the Heate of the sommer
 did not scorch or burne, nor the cold of the Winter annoy or hurt; but a perpetuall spring of flowers did exhilerate, and refresh; and the Autumne to abound with all kind of fruits. His words are these: Hic ver assiduum etc. In this place the mildnes of the Aire causeth a continuall spring; the te^pestuous Southwind is absent; the Cloudes do flye away from vnder the cleere firmament, giuing place to a continuall serenity. Neither doth the nature of the Soyle require any showers; since the buds, and the young plant are content with the falling dew. Thus seing neither Winter to hurt, nor Sommer to burne, the Autumne furnisheth the yeare with all fruits, and the spring-tyme with flowers. Thus he,
S. Basill in like manner (lib. de paradiso) thus describeth this Terrestriall Paradise, saying: Illic plantauit Deus etc. God placed Paradise there, where no violence of wynds, nor vnpleasantnes of times, nor Hayle, nor lightning, nor thunder, nor frost, nor moysture, nor scorching eate, nor drines is to be found: But there is a peacefull and temperate agreement of all times amo^g themselues etc. And S. Austin agreeth
 with the former doctours in describing this Terrestriall Paradise lib. 14. de Ciuit. cap. 10. Quid timere vel dolere poterant illi etc. VVhat should those men feare or grieue at, who were euen incompassed about with such an affluency of so great goods, where neyther death, nor any euill disposition of the Body was to be feared; neither was there any thing absent, which a vertuous will could desire; nor any thing there present which could displease or offend the flesh, or mynd of a man, liuing happily etc. And then a litle after: How happy therfore were our first Parents, who were not troubled with any perturbations of the mynd, nor hurt with any discommodities of the Body? So happy should all mankind haue beene, if they had co^mitted no euill which after they did cast vpon their children, nor any of their posterity had perpetrated iniquity, which should deserue damnation, Thus S. Austin.
But howsoeuer these particularities of the pleasantnes and frutfulnes of this Terrestriall Paradise went; we infallibly gather from the holy Scripture, that it was a farre more happy place, then this our Habitation is;
 since it is said to Adam by way of punishment of his sinne, Gen. 3. Because thou hast heard the voyce of thy VVyfe, and hast eaten of the tree, whereof I co^manded thee not to eate, cursed he the Earth in thy worke; with much toyle and labour shalt thou eate thereof all the dayes of thy lyfe; thornes and thisles shall it bring forth to thee. And to the Woman it was sayd: I will multiply thy sorrowes, and thy childbearings in trauel; thou shalt be vnder thy Husba^ds Power, and he shall haue dominion ouer thee. Thus we see, that in Paradise there was not any barrenes of Earth, nor was it to be inhabited with any labour or paines; neyther did it bring forth any thornes or thisle. In lyke sort the Women there should neuer haue conceaued in vaine, but their co^ceauings should euer haue beene accompanyed with most happy byrths. And although they had beene subiect to their Husbands; yet this not after any Lord lyke authority ouer them, but after a ciuill and moderate ma^ner: Therefore men should there haue led a happy lyfe, voyd of all feare, griefe, or labour.
Now if the Terrestriall Paradise
 wanted all Euill, and abounded with many and great goods and commodities, what then may we conceaue of the Celestiall Paradise* which ought to be so much the more high, and so much the more good, by how much the persons for which it is ordayned, are better? But the Height of the Heauen of the Blessed, is without any comparison, more sublime and high, then the Paradise of Adam; and the Blessed men in Heauen, who can neither sinne* nor dye, are by infinit degrees better, then the inhabitants of the Terrestriall Paradise, who could both sinne and dye: Therfore we may ineuitably inferre, that the Heauenly Paradise doth not only want all Euill, but that it is replenished with Pleasures, Goodnes, and Felicity; and this incomparably greater in worth, and more in number, then the Earthly Paradise did abound. Now these things being most certaine, let vs burst out into thanks and gratefulnes to God, who for the Terrestriall Paradise, taken from vs through the malice and enuy of the deuill, hath by the Redemption of his Sonne prepared for vs the Celestiall Paradise, farre more blessed,
 and happy. And to the end, that we may not be vnthankfull to so great a Redemer, and also that we may not seeme to be enemies to our selues; let vs striue vvith all our endeauour and forces, to fynd a way to the Celestial Paradise, and to enlarge the way therto by an entyre Fayth, sincere Hope, perfect Charity, and good VVorkes.


A Comparison of the goods of this World, and the goods of the Terrestriall Paradise ioyned together, with the goods of the Celestiall Paradise only. CHAP. XI.
BVT let vs proceed further in this our ballancing of things; and let vs co^pare all the goods of this world, as also all the goods of the Earthly Paradise (ioyned togeather) with the goods only of the Celestiall Paradise; and so see, whether of these do preponderate, and weigh downe the other. This we shall more easily effect if we conceaue, that Riches, Empyres, Pleasures, and all the glory of Salomon,
 and of all other lyke most happy men, could be obtained without labour, and retained and kept without feare; as also if we further suppose such most fortunate men neuer to sin, nor neuet to dye; yet so, as that they might sinne, and might dye: Now all this by supposall being granted, I most confidently affirme, that the goods of the Celestiall Paradise only, do infinitly surpasse all the goods of this world, and of the Terrestriall Paradise together, From whence it will appeare, that those goods being ioyned togeather ca^ neither satisfy the mynd; nor satiate the desire of the mynd; since the Hart of Man is capable of an infinit and boundlesse good. Therefore that shall euer stand for a true and maine Position, which S. Austin hath left recorded lib. 1. Confess. cap. 1. Thou hast O Lord made vs for thy self, and to the lykenes of thy selfe; yet our Hart is vnquiet, till it rest in thy sclfe, And so true also is that, which the Prophet speaketh, Psal. 16. I shall be filled, whe^ thy glory shall appeare. Now so long as the Hart shalbe vnquiet, it shalbe miserable; and if it be miserable, so long it cannot be blessed or happy.

But the Celestiall Paradise enioyeth this priuiledg, that, it is of power to satiate the soule, and to exile and expell all vnquietnesse and solicitude. For what can that man want, who shalbe lyke to God, Because he shall see God, as he is, 1. Ioan. 3.? What can he wa^t, whome God shall constitute or appoint ouer all goods. Matth. 24.? What can he want, who shall reigne with God, shalbe coheyre with Christ, whome the Father hath appointed heyre of all. Heb. 1.? I say, what can this man want, except he will dreame, that God himselfe is miserable? Furthermore, those goods of the world, and of the Terrestrial Paradise (how great, or of what Nature soeuer they might be) in that they stood obnoxious to be lost, were not perfect goods; neither could they satiate the mynd, or giue to it a full repose, or rest; and for this respect they did not, nor could make a Man Blessed or happy: but the goods of the Celestiall Paradise are on euery syde perfect and stable; neyther are they in any sort subiect to losse, or dimunition: for the Saints placed in those most happy Seates, can neither dye, neyther can they sinne; and of their euerlasting
 felicity they are most secure. Therefore let mortall men open their eyes, let them often call to mynd, of what moment it is, not to loose the Celestiall Paradise. For heare the businesse toucheth the maine matter of all others, and is not about trifles, or fading vanities, And therefore the Wisdome of God, euen through a diuine Iudgement, hath pronounced: VVhat doth it profit a man, if he gaine the whole VVorld, and sustaine the domage of his soule? Matt. 16. Marc. 8. Luc. 9.


A Comparison of the price of the Celestiall Paradise, and the Paradise it selfe. CHAP. XII.
THe last Comparison shalbe of the Pryce, with the which Christ did buy Paradise, and with the which it ought to be bought of vs, with relation to the greatnes and dignity of Paradise it selfe. Christ with effusion of his owne most precious bloud did buy Paradise for vs, which the Enuy of the Deuill had afore violently taken
 from vs, not that himselfe might enioy it, but only that we might be depriued of it. For to this end the Deuill seduced Eue, and by her he caused Adam to sinne, that so they might be Consorts and fellowes in punishment. Christ therefore is that prudent Merchant, (Matth. 13.) who gaue all his goods, that he might buy this precious Margarite; by the which he clearely inough did teach, that the Kingdome of Heauen is signified: for it is he, of whom the Apostle speaketh, when he sayth, 1. Cor. 6. You are brought with a great Pryce. And the Apostle S. Peter: Not with corruptible things, gould, or siluer are you redeemed, but with the precious bloud (as it were) of an immaculate and vnspotted Lambe, Christ, 1. Pet. 1. And againe; They deny him, that bought them, the Lord. 2. Pet. 2. For Christ (at one and the same tyme) did buy Paradise for vs, and did buy vs. For we before were made Captiues, and had lost Paradise by sinne: But Christ redeeming vs from sinne, and from the Captiuity of the Deuill, did withall adopt vs the Sonnes, and heyres of God; and in so doing, did restore Paradise vnto vs. From hence
 therefore the greatnes and vvorth of the Celestiall Paradise may be conceaued; to wit, that in the Wisdome of God, it is thought to be vvorthy of an infinite Pryce.
If heere among men a prudent and rich merchant should be content to giue all his vvealth for the buying of a precious Pearle; certainly no man vvould once doubt, but that the Ievvell vvere of so inestimable Worth and valew, as that it could hardly fynd a sufficient pryce. Of what account and estimation then (if vve haue any sparke of true iudgment) ought the Possession of the Kingdome of Heauen seeme to vs to be, the vvhich the VVisdome of God, the VVord Incarnate, vvith all his labours, toyles, and dolours, for the space of thirty three yeares, and lastly vvith his owne bloud and most precious death, did purchase, and buy? VVe are vvholy stupid, yea mad, if vve vvill sell our interest and title of that thing, for a base and most vile price of temporall Good, vvhich Christ our Lord rated at an infinite Pryce and valevv.
But vvhat? Not only Christ vvas content to buy Paradise with the effusion
 of his owne bloud; but all Saints being herein taught by him, did most willingly expose whatsoeuer they had, with all their force and strength, for the gayning of the said Paradise. Yea the Blessed Apostle thus bursteth out in words: Rom. 8. The Passions of this tyme are not worthy of the glory to come, that shalbe reuealed to vs. And if any of the Martyrs were demanded, whether they did willingly buy Paradise vvith such Torments; as also if the Holy Confessours were questioned, whether they did in like sort promptly and readily buy Paradise with their so many Watchings, Fasts, Prayers, Almes deedes, and Persecutions; no doubt they would all cry out in one voyce with the Apostle: The Passions and sufferings of this tyme, are not worthy of the glory to come, which shalbe reuealed to vs. For although the Bloud of Christ was not only a worthy price of Paradise for vs, but also (as I may speake) more then a worthy Pryce, as being supereminent, and exceeding the dignity of the thing which was bought; neuerthelesse Christs good pleasure was, that we also should buy Paradise, thereby the more to honour
 and exalt vs. The Glory of man is great, in that he obtayneth Paradise, not only from the merits of Christ; but also from his owne merits, streaming from the Vertue and force of Christ his merits. And if a man will not (when it is in his povver) do good, and suffer euill, for the buying of Paradise, he is worthily expelled from the buying of Christ, as an euill and slouthfull seruant, as Christ himselfe admonisheth in the Parable of the Talents, Matth. 25. and the Apostle vehemently counselleth, Rom. 8. when he sayth: Yf sonnes, Heyres also; Heyres truly of God, and Coheyres of Christ; yet if we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with him.
And to preuent, that whereas some men may perhaps complayne, they haue not a sufficient Pryce for the buying of Paradise; let such take notice, that nothing more is asked of vs here, but what our selues haue. For thus S. Austin speaketh: The kingdome of God is worth so much, as thou hast. Which point the same Father proueth from examples of diuine Scripture, thus he writing tract. in Psal. 49. Quid tam vile etc. What is so vile, what is so terrene
 and earthly, as to breake and giue a peece of bread to the Hungry? So much the kingdome of Heauen is worth. For it is written. Possesse the kingdome prepared for you, for I was hungry, and you gaue me bread. The VVidow did buy it with two mytes. Peter bought Paradise by leauing his nets: and Zacheus by giuing the halfe of his Patrimony. Thus far S. Austin discourseth. To whom Venerable Bede is heerein agreable, when he sayth, that he, who hath nothing besides himselfe, yet in giuing himselfe, he buieth Heauen. His words are these Serm. 19. de Sanctis: Regnum caeleste etc. The kingdome of heauen, requireth no other price then thy selfe. Tantum valet, quantum es tu; te da, and habebis illud. Certainly Lazarus the beggar, had nothing, which he could giue, but only his patience in suffering his griefes and paynes; and yet he was carryed by the Angells into the bosome of Abraham. And the good thiefe had nothing in this World that was his, but only a free and ready voyce, with vvhich he cryed out: Remember me, when thou shalt come into thy kingdome; and yet he presently did heare, To day thou shalt be with me in Paradise.

O most truly great liberality of God! O ineffable felicity of man, who can so easily make bargaine (as it were) with his Lord, for the price of a thing, most precious aboue all other things! Dost thou (O man) couet of God, and thirst after the enioying of Paradise, the height of all delights and pleasures? Giue thy selfe in pryce, and thou shalt obtaine it. But what is the meaning of these Words, Giue thy selfe? To wit Loue God from the depth of thy hart; Humble thy selfe vnder his potent and mighty hand; Prayse him at all tymes; Submit thy selfe with all promptitude of mind to his will, whether it shalbe his pleasure, that thou shalt be rich or poore; glorious or ignoble; finally in Health, or in sicknes: for his Will in euery thing is good, and all his Iudgments are iust. Say to God: I am thyne, dispose of me according to thy best pleasure and Will. I do not resist, I do not reclayme, I do not with-draw my selfe out of thy iurisdiction: My Hart is prepared and ready (O my God) my hart is prepared; Let not my VVill, but thy VVill be done.
This Holocaust of Obedience did Christ daily offer vp to his Father, as
 himselfe doth testify, vvhen he said: The things that please him, I do alwayes, Ioan. 8. And the like did the Apostle, the true imitatour of Christ, saying, 2. Cor. 5. We striue, whether we be ahsent, or present, to please him. This perfect renunciation, and disclayming from all things which a man possesseth, or desires to possesse; this abnegation of a mans selfe, that he may serue only God, is the true Pryce of Paradise. Neither followeth it, that who giueth himselfe away after this manner, that he may buy Paradise, doth loose himselfe: but most truly and most happily he doth find himselfe, according to those words of our Lord Matth. ^0. He that loseth his life for me, shall find it; He that hateth his life in this VVorld, doth keep it to life euerlasting. But because this Wisdome is hidden from the wyse and prudent men of this wor d; who truly are fooles in the sight of God; and because the number of fooles is infinite; therefore many are called, but few are chosen. Matth. 22.




OF THE ETERNALL FELICITY OF THE SAINTS, Vnder Parabolicall Names. THE FIFTH BOOKE.

Of a Treasure hidden in the field. CHAP. I.
HITHERTO I haue written so far forth, as God hath vouchsafed to dictate to me in my Meditations, of the felicity of the Saints vnder the name of those places which they do inhabit; I meane, vnder the places of the kingdome of Heauen; of the Citty of God; of ^he House of our Lord; and of the Para^ (...) ^elights and Pleasures. I will in
 this next place add something concerning the same Felicity, vnder the name of such Things, to the which our Lord in Parables hath compared the Felicity of Saints. And heere in the beginning, it is to be aduertized, that those Words of our Lord, The kingdome of Heauen is like etc. (the which our Lord doth commonly vse) are not euer referred to the Words immediatly following; As where our Lord sayth: The kingdome of Heauen is like vnto a Merchant man; he meaneth not, that the Kingdome of Heauen is like vnto a Merchant man, but he referreth those words to the whole Narration, in which by way of similitude, the way to the Kingdome of Heauen is demonstrated. And further, we are to obserue, that the Kingdome of Heauen, is sometimes in the Parables described more obscurely, at other tymes more clearely, and sometimes not touched at all. I wil explicate the seuerall members of this diuision.
Whereas our Lord in S. Matthew, setteth downe the Parable of the sower, he describeth the fruite, which the Preaching of the Ghospell bringeth forth, according to the diuers dispositions
 of the earth: and this he calleth the Mistery of the Kingdome of God: but touching the Beatitude of the Saints he speaketh nothing. But where our Lord in the same place, doth add the Parable of the Cockle, he briefly toucheth the felicity of Saints, when he sayth, that the good Seede, or wheat is to be gathered vp into the barne of our Lord, and the Cockle to be tyed togeather and burned. But when in the same Chapter he relateth the Parables of him that sought for good Pearles, and of him that did find the Treasure hidden in the field, then more perspicuously he compareth the Kingdome of God to a Pearle, and to a Treasure: And of this third kind, among the Parables of our Lord, I find only six. One of a Treasure hidden in a field; another of a precious Margarite or Pearle; The third of the daily Penny; the fourth of the Lord, or Mayster distributing the Talents; The fift, of a Great supper; the sixt of a Mariage. To the which we will adioyne two similitudes out of the Apostle; the one of those who runne in a race; the other, who fight, or stryue for the Maistery: So as there shalbe eight
 Considerations touching the Blessed life of the Saints, deduced from Parabolicall Names, or Titles.
The first Parable then is taken from S. Mathew: cap 13. The kingdome of heauen is like to a Treasure, hidden in a field. VVhere our Lord teacheth, how it may be gotten, when he sayth: Which when a man hauing found, did hide it, and for ioy thereof goeth, and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field. Treasure signifieth a great aboundance of gould, siluer, and precious stones; as Paulus the Ciuill Lawyer teacheth (de acquir. rerum dom. L. Nunquam) and this Treasure ought to be so ancient, as that there remayned no memory therof before; and therfore it hath no proper Lord, but belongeth by right to him, that findeth it. This Treasure in S. Mathew, is the Diuinity it selfe, which is hid in the field of the Humanity of Christ, as S. Hilarius and S. Ierome (in Com. cap. 13. Matth.) do rightly expound. For in Christ (as the Apostle sayth) all the Treasures of the knowledge and VVisdome of God are hidden. Now the Diuinity is the most true Treasure of all goods, and is indeed so ancient (since
 it is eternall, and did precede all Ages) as that there can be no former memory of it extant. Neither had this Infinite Treasure any proper Lord to own it, for it selfe is the Lord of all things. Neuerthelesse this Treasure of the Diuinity is said to belong to the right of them that find it; because God giueth himselfe freely to those, who by selling all their substance and Goods, earnestly labour to acquire and purchase him.
It is further said to be had, as it were, and digged in a field, to wit, in the Humanity of Christ; for although the Diuinity be euery where, yet it is in no place so properly and peculiarly, as in the Humanity of Christ, to the which it is so vnited* as that one and the same Person is both God and Man. And therefore the Apostle sayth, 2. Cor 5. God was in Christ, reconciling the VVorld to himselfe. And though the Diuinity be in no place more, then in the Humanity of Christ; notwithstanding it seemeth to be so hid therein, as that it is needfull to vse a light or candle, to demonstrate and shew God to be in Christ. And this light was S. Iohn Baptist, who, as S. Iohn writeth
 cap. 5. was the lampe burning and shining; Of whom Dauid in the Person of God the Father, did thus prophesy, Ps. 131. I haue prepared a Lampe vnto my Christ. For S. Iohn Baptist did manifest Christ, and did shew, that he was God, and the only begotten sonne of God, when he said Ioan. 1. God no man hath euer seene; the only begotten sonne, which is in the bosome of the Father, he hath declared. And againe: He that commeth from Heauen, is aboue all. And a litle after: The Father loueth the Sonne, and he hath giuen all things in his hand: he that belieueth in the sonne, hath life euerlasting; but he that is incredulous to the sonne, shall not see life, but the wrath of God remaineth vpon him. Ioan. 3.
But although this burning and shining Lampe did manifest Christ openly to be the Sonne of God; neuerthelesse the blinded Iewes could not (at least would not) acknowledge the Diuinity to be hidden in Chrisi. For if they had knowne so much, then, as the Apostle sayth, 1. Cor. 2. they would neuer haue crucified the Lord of Glory. VVho therefore being enlightened from God, doth find this Treasure,
 doth hide it, and for ioy thereof goeth, and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth the field. To hide the Treasure being found, is nothing e^s, but to conceale and couer the receaued Grace of God, vnder the veyle of Humility, and not to vaunt* of diuine Consolations and Reuelations, for feare that vayne and aery glory do corrupt true Glory. Therefore Esay cap. 24. was accustomed to say: My secret is to my selfe: And the Apostle 2. Cor. 12. If I must needs glory (it is not expedient indeed) I will come to the Visions and Reuelations of our Lord. I know a man in Christ, aboue foureteene yeares agoe etc. For that most remarkable Reuelation, which the Apostle being rapt into Paradise, receaued, he concealed for the space of foureteene yeares, and would haue concealed it, but that the necessity of disclosing the same, forced him thereto. And he plainly pronounceth, that it is not expedient to publish and make knowne such guifts or priuiledges; and therefore he did discouer it vnder an vncertaine name, well shewing thereby, how anxiously he suffered the manifestation thereof. The like fell out vnto S. Francis, when
 the sacred Prints or wounds were from aboue impressed vpon his body, as S. Bonauenture in his life relateth; For at other tymes he was accustomed to conceale his diuine reuelations, and to say with Esay: My secret is to my selfe etc. But when he saw the matter could be concealed no longer, he related with great feare the whole order of his Vision to his Brethren demanding him therof.
But to proceed. To buy with ioy that field, wherein the Treasure did lye hidden, signifieth only, that he, who will enioy God and Cbrist in the Kingdome of Heauen, ought to suffer in affection, renouncing and casting away of all temporall thinges, and to bequeath both himselfe, and what he any way hath, vnto the seruice and obedience of God: and this not with any painefull reluctation of Will, or necessity, but with all alacrity and ioy, seeing that God loueth a chereful giuer. 2. Cor. 9. But he who truly knoweth, how immense a Treasure it is, to enioy Christ in the Eternall Country, to behould his Diuinity with the Eye^ of his Soule, and his Humanity with the Eyes of his Body, and to participate of
 all the goods of God and Christ, and to be sure and certaine of so great a Possession for all Eternity, will thinke it no great matter to spurne at, and contemne all temporalities whatsoeuer, yea his owne lyfe, for the loue of God, and euerlasting felicity. Witnes to vs of this Point may be S. Ignatius Martyr, thus writing to the Romans: Fyar, the Crosse, cruelty of beasts, cutting asunder my Body, breaking of my bones, a rending of all my members, the extinguishment of all my Body, yea all the whips, and scourges of the diuell, let shem full vpon me, so that I may deerue to obtaine, and purchase Christ. Now he, who out of the fulnes of his Charity towards Christ, thus speaketh, doubtlesly would litle feare want, pouerty, ignominy, exile, prisons, so that he might not lose that inco^parable Treasure. Whoseuer therfore earnestly coueteth to gaine the Treasure of Eternall life, let him most seriously thinke and co^sider with himself, whether he be prepared with an immoueable resolutio^, to contemne and betra^ple vnder his feet all other goods: since otherwise, neither a liue, nor dead, shall he euer obtaine that Treasure, without
 the which he shall eternally be most miserable and poore.
But I heere will demaund, what is the reason, why so many men in such heate of desire, do seeke after the Treasures of Gould and siluer: and not content to vse herein humane dilige^ce, they flye, by most execrable Arts, to the help of the Deuill, with imminent danger both of their reputation and life? And yet thy Treasure (O Lord my God) so few do seeke, which alone is able to enrich a man, and which they may easely purchase without labour, charge, or perill? Truly I do see no other Cause hereof, but either want of fayth in thy People, or their ouermuch negotiation in temporall affaires, which leaueth them no tyme to thinke, and meditate of thy diuine Promisses made vnto men. Therefore (O Blessed Lord,) increase our Fayth and beliefe concerning thy Promisses, and extinguish our thirst in the pursuite of temporall riches. For so it may come to passe, that with greater and more feruerous bent of desire, we shall seeke after thy Treasure; and finding it, with sale of all we haue, may resolue to purchase it.



Of the precious Margarite, or Pearle. CHAP. II.
AN other Parable like to the former, and which also next follovveth in S. Mathew cap. 13. is of the Precious Pearle, or Margarite. For in that there was a Treasure; in this a Pearle, which may be esteemed, as a Treasure. In that it was needfull by selling of all a man possesseth, to buy the field in which the Treasure was hid; In this in like manner it is necessa^y to buy the Pearle, with the charges and expences of all we haue. Therefore it is conuenient only to explicate, in what points these two Parables do diff^r. They differ in two things; to wit, that in the first a Treasure is mentioned, in this a Pearle. Againe, that the Treasure was found by chance; whereas the Pearle, was d^ligently sought after by the Merchant. And truly in this place the Celestiall Beatitude, or Christ himselfe is vnderstood by the Pearle, as S. Ambrose, serm. 6. S. Gregory
 Nazianzen. orat. 49. Ruffinus and others do interprete. That is called the Pearle in this Parable, which in the former Parable was called a Treasure, to giue vs to vnderstand, that the Diuinity of Christ (which is the Obiect of Eternall felicity, or, the Vision whereof (to speake in the Deuines dialect) is the formall Beatitude or Felicity, is indeed a Treasure, but not deuided into seuerall kinds of gould, siluer, and precious stones; but is one thing, which contayneth in it selfe the price of an infinite Treasure. Whereas the Pearle is but one only thing, contayning in it selfe (according to the iudgment of Pliny) (lib 9. c. 35.) the perfection and height of all Precious things.
Furthermore, a Treasure may consist of only money or goods, though in very great quantity, which Treasure respecteth only profit, and not pleasure, or outward Pompe. Wherefore to preuent, that a man do not gather out of the former Parable, that Celestiall Beatitude is only profitable, and not specious and honourable, our Lord did adde this other Parable of the Pearle: in which he teacheth, that the
 Diuinity of Christ, and our felicity is lyke to the Pearle; which (besides the profit of a Treasure) hath also in it fayrenes and splendour which doth adorne and delight. We may adde heerto, that the Pearle is the Symbole, Character, or signe of Christ, both as he is the Sonne of God, and also as he is the Sonne of the Virgin. For as the Pearle is ingendred of the light of the Sunne, and of the dew of Heauen (as Pliny in the place aboue cited, and others do teach) so also the Sonne of God according to his Deity, is begotten of the Father of lights, who is an increated Sunne, and therefore it is said in the Creed, Light of Light, True God of true God. And the same Christ according to his Humanity, is begotten of the dew of Heauen; because he was conceaued of the Holy Ghost, and not of the seed of man. To conclude, the Pearle is whyte, cleare, solid, pure, light, and round; In like sort the Humanity of Christ (much more incomparably his Diuinity) is whyte through its innocency, lucid or cleare, through its wisdome, solid for its co^stancy, pure as being without spot, light in regard of its sweetnes and mildnes, round in
 that it is of ech syde perfect.
Now the Pearle in the Gospell is not found by chance, but it is sought after diligently by the prudent Merchant. Neither doth this Parable contradict the former, in which the Treasure is said to be found by chance; for both these Points are true, but in diuers persons: And therefore our Lord euen out of a diuine prudence, did adioyne this later Parable to the former, lest it might be thought to happen to all men, to light vpon the Treasure vnexpectedly, and casually. For God doth illuminate some men vpon a sudden, with singular or speciall grace; so as they neither seeking, nor coueting, nor thinking thereof, do notwithstanding arriue to truth of Fayth, to a most ardent Charity, yea to a certaine hope of obtayning eternall lyfe. And these men may be said to find this Treasure by chance; although God, not by chance, but through his Eternall Prouidence, did preordayne them to this grace, and to future Glory. Now other men God doth indeed preuent with his Grace, but he doth not presently show to them the Treasure, but as it were breaths into them a
 desire of seeking the Truth, making them carefull Merchants, and helping and directing them, vntill they find the Precious Pearle.
We may glasse this different proceeding of God in S. Paul and S. Austin, S. Paul did not seeke the true Treasure, which is Christ; but did persecute Christ as a seducer, and the Christians as men seduced. And when he was in his iourney, Breathing forth threatnings and slaughter, against the disciples of our Lord, Christ did appeare vnto him, and withall did blynd the eyes of his body, that he might illuminate the eyes of his hart; and this with so great a splendour and brightnes, as that instantly he became of a Persecutour a Preacher. And although this by a happy chance did fall vnto him; yet that which was chance to S. Paul, was Prouidence in God. For thus himselfe speaketh to the Galatians, cap. 1. You haue heard of my conuersation sometime in Iudaisme, that aboue measure I persecuted the Church of God, and expugned it: and profited in Iudaisme aboue many of myne Equalls in my Nation, being more abundantly an Emulatour of the Traditions of my Fathers. But
 when it pleased God, that separated me from my Mothers wombe, and called me by his Grace, to reueale his Sonne in me, that I should Euangelize him among the Gentills, incontinently I condescended not to flesh and bloud etc. Therefore S. Paul euen from the wombe of his Mother, was separated by diuine Prouidence, that he should preach the Ghospell of Christ notwithstanding he did not find the precious Pearle, or the Treasure in the field; but the Treasure did of it selfe offer it selfe vnto him, and caused it to be beloued of him with so an inflamed Charity, as that he spared no labour, but exposed himselfe to all dangers, prizing all things, as dung, so that he might gaine Christ. Phil 3.
But now S. Austin did tread contrary steps to the Apostle herein; for euen from his youth he began to burn with desire of fynding out this precious Pearle, that is, true wisdome, and eternall Felicity. For when he fel into the Sect of the Manichees, he much laboured with himselfe, in searching, and disputing with others, how he might fynd the Eua^gelicall Truth. And whe^ as he found nothing in that Sect, but fabulous and lying Narrations, h^
 almost despayred of finding the Truth, though he had spe^t many yeares in the search therof. For thus himselfe speaketh, lib. 6. Confess. c. 6. I descended euen into the depth of the sea, and I did distrust and despayre of fynding out the Truth. Yet it pleased God, that at length he should find out the precious Pearle. And then without any delay, selling all his substance; that is abandoning the desire of mariage (with which he was most forcibly with-houlden) and contemning all lucre, and honours (to which he afore had enslaued himselfe) he vvholy for euer after espoused himselfe to the obedience and seruice of God: this therfore is the cause, why our Lord in the first. Parable, compared the Kingdome of Heauen to a Treasure, found without labour and by chance; and in the later Parable resembled it to a Pearle, found out by the merchant, with great labour, trauell, and study.
Now this one thing remaineth* I meane, that a Christian Soule do seriously ponder with it self, in the sight God setting aside all other businesse for a tyme, what kind of traffique this is, how profitable, and easy, during
 this time; and how difficult, or rather impossible vvill it be, if once the occasion of the present Market be let slip and lost. Doubtlesly, the children of this VVorld would not pretermit occasion of buying a Pearle, vvhich might be sould for many thousands of Crovvnes of gold, and yet novv at the present Fayre might be bought for one hundred only of siluer; although they should be forced to take vp the momoney at excessiue Vse. And shall then the Children of light be so imprudent, and negligent, as that they cannot be induced to buy that Pearle, vvhich shal enrich and beautify them for all Eternity; vvhen as they need not neither take vp siluer at vse, nor yet run vp and dovvne for enquiry of the price of the Pearle, but it may beholde^ as sufficie^t, freely to giue that, vvhich they haue, although all their substance arriue not to two Myres? Therfore (O Lord God) let thy light shyne in our Harts, giue to vs a desire to know the valuable pryce and Worth of this thy Pearle, and withall the vtility of that pryce, which is exacted of vs, that so we may obtaine the Pearle. Adde (O Lord) to our Mercies, that thou wilt not in
 vaine shew to vs so rich a Pearle. And thou, who hast said: Cast not your Pearles before Swyne (Matth. 7.) so worke in vs by thy grace, that if at any tyme, we haue beene like to swyne, in not knowing the dignity and worth of this thy Pearle, but preferring ackornes, and husks before it, we may now be illuminated by thee, to acknowledge and seeke after the same, and by the selling of all that we haue, with ioy may purchase and buy it.


Of the daily Penny. CHAP. III.
HEere followeth the third Parable, touching the daily Penny, promised by the Househoulder to such as labored in his Vineyard* Which Parable we find in S. Mathew cap. 20. At the first sight, the reward of eternall life seemeth to be much extenuated, and lessened in this Parable, since it is here compared but to a daily Penny, which before was compared to a Treasure, and precious Pearle. But this extenuation is annexed* that the reward
 may be sutable with the labour ^nd the Worke: For the similitude would seeme incongruous, if a huge Treasure, or a Pearle, or a Scepter, or Regall Crowne should be promised to laboring men only for the space of one day. Now that this penny is not a penny of some few brasse peeces, but a Celestiall Penny, which sufficeth for the procuring of all necessary things, and this for all Eternity, may be easely demonstrated: seing the wages or reward ought to be answerable to the labour. Now the labour of those, which worke in the Vineyeard of Christ, ought not to be prized and esteemed, only according to the substance of the Worke; For in this sense we all ought to say with the Apostle Rom. 8. The passions of this tyme are not condigne to the glory to come, that shalbe reuealed in vs. But it is to receaue its valew and estimation from the grace of God, inhabitant in the harts of the Iust, which is a fountaine of liuing Water, springing vp vnto life euerlasting. Ioan. 4.
Al^o it is to be weighed from the Ve^tue of Charity, which is infused into vs by the Holy Ghost, who is giuen
 to vs; for the Crowne of eternall life is prepared of God for all that loue him, as S. Iames writeth cap. 1. It is in like sort to be prized from the Co^iunctio^ the labour hath with Christ, who giueth a valew and chiefe estimation to the fruites of the liuing branches, as a true Vine; and to the works of the liuing members of his mysticall Body, of which he is the Head, and to whom himselfe said, Matth. 5. Be glad and reioyce, for your reward is very great in Heauen. To conclude, shall not our Lord at the day of Iudgment say, when the reward shalbe giuen to all that haue laboured in the Vineyard: Come you blessed of my Father, possesse you the kingdome, prepared for you from the beginning of the World; For I was hungry, and you gaue me to eate etc. seing the Works of Charity belong chiefly to labour, by the which we toyle, and sweat in the Vineyard of Christ(
Behould therefore how precious and inestimable is that Penny, which of our Lord himselfe is called a Kingdome. Neither can this Penny vndeseruedly be called a Kingdome, since it doth represent and figure out Christ,
 no lesse then a Treasure, or a Pearle doth. For in a Penny is ingrauen the Image of the Prince; in it are also written certaine words, and the forme of it is round. Now Christ is the Image of the inuisible God, as we learne from the Apostle, Coloss. 1. He is also the VVord of the Eternall Father, as S. Iohn the Euangelist sayth; and he hath no beginning of dayes, nor end of life, as the Apostle teacheth Hebr. 7. which is signified by the roundnes of the figure. To conclude, the most wise Salomon sayth: All things are obedient and subiect to money: and Christ is the Lord of all riches, as S. Peter witnesseth. Act. 13. Therefore it followeth, that the Penny, which is giuen to those that labour in the Vineyard, is Christ, true God, and therein Eternall life; according to that of S. Iohn: That we may know the true God, and may be in his true Sonne, this is the true God, and life euerlasting. 1. Ioan. 5.
But let vs see, to whom this precious Penny is to be giuen; the which who haue once obtayned, shall not stand in further neede of any thing. Our Lord sayth, Math. 20. Call the VVorkmen, and pay them their hyre.
 Therefore it is to be giuen vnto those, that labour in the Vineyard without intermission, without cessation, without negligence. It shall not be giuen to those that stand idle in the Marketplace, or to those who spend their tyme in hawking, hunting, playes, or sports. For the Reward or hyre is giuen onely to them that merit; it is not giuen gratis, much lesse is it giuen to those that do demerit. Which point the Apostle confirmeth saying, Rom. 6. The stipend of sinne, is death; but the grace of God, is life euerlasting. The Apostle thus speaketh, because without the precedent Grace of God no man can worke well, so, as the reward of Eternall life may be due to him; But Grace being receaued (I meane that Grace, which is giuen Gratis, and not by reason of any works) then the reward of Good workes shalbe Eternall life. And according hereto S. Austin thus speaketh: As death is giuen as a reward for the merit of sinne; so Eternall life is giuen, as a reward or stipend for the merit of Iustice, Ep. 105. ad Sixtum.
Neither are we heere to imagine, that because the same Penny is giuen
 indifferently to all the Workemen and Labourers, that therefore in the Kingdome of Heauen the Rewards are alike to all. For thou this Penny doth signify Eternall life, or God, or Christ; and that Eternall life, and God, and Christ shalbe common to all: Yet here we are to obserue, that euen as the same sunne is more clearely seene of an Eagle, then of any other Bird; and the same fyer doth more heate those who stand neere to it, then those who are further distant: Euen so among those, who shall see God and Christ, one shall see more clearely, and in seeing shall reioyce with greater pleasure, then another. And as the merits of men shalbe different, so also shall their Revvards be different. But here one doubt may be vrged, why the Lord in distribution of his revvards, did change the order, saying: Pay them their hyr^ beginning from the last, vnto the first; So shall the last be first, and the first last; for many be called, but few Elect. But here we are to conceaue, that this belongeth to the grace and priuiledge of the new Testament* that therby we may vnderstand ourselues to be more happy, then the Fathers of the Old
 Testament; and that in this respect we may be more gratefull to God, and may with more diligence and alacrity labour in his Vineyard.
The Holy Fathers, who before the Ascension of Christ, did cultiuate the Vineyard of our Lord, were Adam, Noe, Abraham, Moyses, and the rest of the Patriarchs, and Prophets. They were called in the first, the third, the sixt, the nynth hower; they not only laboured a long tyme, because they liued long; but euen after their deaths for the space of many Centuries of yeares, and some thousands, they expected not to receaue their hyre, or vvages, that is, their Peny. But the Apostles, the Martyrs, and other labourers, who came to the Vineyard at the eleauenth hower (that is, as S. Iohn expoundeth, at the last hower) wrought therein but few yeares, and presently vpon their death, entring into the Kingdome of Heauen, they receaued their Penny. Now how great and worthy is this grace, that a Christian Man (if himselfe wil^) may through his vndergoing a most short labour, ascend to that place, to the which the holy Patriarchs and Prophets for a most
 long tyme earnestly desired to arriue? Therefore not without cause, did those ancient Fathers, say with a certaine murmure (which might seeme to signify rather admiration, then complaint) Matth. 20. These last haue continued but one hower, and thou hast made them equall to vs, that haue borne the burden of the day, and the heat. But our Lord did apologize, and answere for vs thus: Friend, I do the^ no wrong, diddest not thou couenant with me for a penny? take that is thyne, and goe; I will also giue vnto this last, as vnto thee. Which answere doth not imply, that men of the New Testament receaued from Grace or fauour, and not from Iustice the same reward with them; but it only importeth, that they of the new Testament had greater abundance of Grace, by vertue wherof in a short tyme they laboured no lesse, but rather more in the Vineyard, then the Patriarchs and Prophets did in a long tyme; and therein receaued iustly the like reward, or rather greater.
Certainly the Apostles laboured but a short tyme, yet they brought great Profit to the Vineyard of our
 Lord. When euer did the Patriarchs, or the Prophets, abandoning all temporalities, make a perlustration of almost the whole Wor d, and did draw whole Prouinces of Heathens to the true Worship of God? When in those ancient tymes, was there so numerous an Army of Martyrs, suff^ring for the fayth of the true God, all torments and most cruell deaths whatsoeuer? When in the Old Testament were found so many Companyes of Holy Virgins, who following the immaculate Lambe did deuote, and render themselfes in all integrity of mind, and Body to God? Where were there in that ancie^t time so many Pastours and Doctours, who vsing all Vigilancy and care ouer their flock, most valorously by their learned Writings, resisted and oppugned the Wolues, I meane, the Heretiks and Heathens? To be short, where was then that nu^ber of Hermites, Monkes, and other religious Persons, who being vertuously emulous of the life of the Angell^, did spend both day and night in the prayse of God, and Prayers to him? These and other like Examples of most eminent and remarkable Vertue, do belong to the Grace of the
 New Testament; in regard of which Grace our Lord did rightly conclude his Parable in those vvords: So shall the last be first, and the first last; for many be called, but few are chosen. That is, many are called throughout all the ages of the VVorld, to worke in the Vineyard, euen at the eleauenth hower; but few are chosen, that is, not few in number, but that few men of one hower, and that the last hower are elected to the grace of the New Testament; by vertue and force wherof they made to themselues great benefit by their labouring, and receaued in a short tyme, most great Rewards.
Neither are we to thinke, that all those, who were called at the eleauenth hower, did receaue the Penny, but only those, who in that short time, with all their forces euen breathlesly and incessantly laboured in the Vineyard of our Lord. For there are many Men, who knowing this hower to be the last, and that there is but a short tyme left them, do not say (as they haue reason to say) Our life is short therefore let vs labour couragiously, that so in a small tyme we may ^eap great fruit; but they say with the foolish
 men, which we read in the Booke of Wisdome: cap. 2. They haue said, thinking with themselues not well: Little and tedious is the tyme of our life; and in the end of a man there is no recouery, and there is none knowne who hath returned from Hell. And a little after: Come therefore, and let vs enioy the good things that are; let vs quickly vse the Creatures, as in youth. Let vs fill our selues with precious VVynes and ointments, and let not the flower of our time passe Let vs crowne our selues with roses, before they wither: Let there be no meadow, which our ryot shall not passe through. Let none of vs be exempted from our riotousnes: Euery where let vs leaue signes of ioy, because this is our portion, and this our lot.
These be the vvords of those, who eyther know not God, or saying they know him; do neuerthelesse deny him in their deeds, and Works. VVhich men indeed are so many in number, as euen to them may be extended that Conclusion. Many are called, but few chosen. Woe therefore be to vs, who being called in the last hower, do consume a great part of that hower in playing and sleeping; whereas we
 ought to be so sollicitous and carefull, of euery litle moment thereof, as that we should not suffer any one minute to slip from vs idly, and without fruite, since of these Moments all Eternity of rewards, or punishments do depend. And without all doubt, by how much the Grace of the New Testament, granted to Christians, is greater; by so much the more grieuously shall they be punished, vvho receaue that grace in vayne. And as of those, who painefully laboured in the last hower, the last shalbe the first, in receauing of hyre or reward; so of those who refused to labour manfully in the last hower, the last shalbe the first, in suffering of punishment.


Of the Talents, and Ioy of our Lord. CHAP. IV.
THE fourth Parable is that, in the which our Lord in S. Matthew cap. 25. speaketh of the reward of Beatitude: VVelfare thee, good and fay hfull seruant; because thou hast beene
 faythfull ouer few things, I will place thee ouer many: enter into the ioy of thy Lord. In which place two things are promised to fayhfull seruants; to wit, most ample Power, and most great and ineffable Ioy: I will place thee ouer many things: And which those many things are, he explicateth in another place, when he sayth. Ibid. cap. 14. Blessed is that seruant, whome when his Lord commeth, shall find so doing, for ouer all his goods he shall appoint him. Now what other thing is it, to be appointed ouer all the goods of our Lord then to receaue power ouer all inferiour things, and to be made partaker of that Empyre and Soueraingty which God hath, ouer all the vniuersall Wolrd? Who is able to comprehend, how great this Power is? What King or Emperour on Earth can be compared with the least Saint in Heauen? But because so great power and domination in man is commonly attended on with much sollicitude, care, and perturbation of mynd, therefore our Lord (as it were) to alleuiate and ease such supposed paines, adioyneth thereto: Enter into the ioy of thy Lord. As if he should say; As I haue made
 thee consort and fellow of all supreme Power; so also will I make thee partaker of all desired rest and pleasure; the which no anxiety, toyle, or labour shall be of force to take away, or diminish. Certainly how great this Ioy is, which is promised to the Iust in Heauen, is altogether inexplicable; neither can we know it, before vve haue tasted it by Experience. In the meane tyme, we may make some cohiecture out of three VVords of this very sentence, that this ioy is most great.
The first word is, Intra, or Enter into. It is not said: Let the ioy of thy Lord enter into thee, but contrarivvise, enter thou into the ioy of thy Lord: An euident Argument, that, that ioy is greater, then vve are able to contayne wholy in our selues. Therefore we shall enter (as it were) into a great Sea of euerlasting and diuine Ioy, which shall replenish vs both within and without, and shall haue in it selfe a redundancy on all sydes. Therefore in so great an affluency of Ioy, what place can be left for care, or sadnes? The second word is, In gaudium, Into the Ioy. Where is not promised this or that ioy, of this good, or that good;
 but euen ioy it selfe is absolutly promised, to wit, pleasure it selfe, sweetnes it selfe, Contentment it selfe. And how then can it be otherwise, but that the whole soule shall euen melt, and be dissolued, being thus replenished with so great a sweetnes? And the third word, which doth mightely exaggerate this point, is, Domini tui, Of thy Lord. For we shall not enter into a Ioy, at which men or Angells do reioyce, but with which God himselfe (in whome all things are infinite) doth reioyce. What Vnderstanding can comprehend, of what nature the Ioy of God is, who knoweth perfectly his owne infinite goodnes, and who doth enioy the same, and reioyceth thereat after an infinite manner? And yet notwithstanding all this, it is in thy power (O Christian) to enioy, and tast, and to haue the fruition of that for euer, the which now thou art not able to conceaue in thought, if so thou wilt be a good and faythfull seruant.
But now let vs consider, to what men such great Promises do belong. To them no doubt, who haue beene carefull to multiply the Talents deliuered to them by God. For this similitude
 is borrowed from a Rich man, who deliuered his goods to his Seruants; entrusting one of them with fiue talents, an other with two, a third with one; strictly commanding them, that by their carefull and prudent negotiation they should labour to multiply the same. Now what these Talents may figuratiuely signify, the Iudgments of the learned Interpretes are various. For some do by the Talents vnderstand Gratiam gratis datam, which is, Grace without any interueniency on our part, freely giuen; Others do vnderstand thereby the holy Scriptures; Others will haue the fiue Talents to signify the knowledge of externall things, which is gotten by the mediation of the fiue senses: And the two Talents to signify the Vnderstanding, and the Operation; and the one Talent alone, to denote only the Vnderstanding. But notwithstanding this their disparity of iudgments, they all iointly conspire in this, That to multiply the Talents, is to worke well, and painefully, for the good of their owne Saluation, and of others. There occurreth to me another Exposition, not repugnant to the former, and seemeth
 to be fitly accommodated to all those things, the which our Lord did speake of the Talents. And first, the Talents in this place are called the Goods of the Lord, for it is said: He deliuered his goods vnto them.
Furthermore, it is commanded, that the Talents by negotiation be multiplyed in the same kynd: Fiue talents thou didest deliuer me, behould I haue gayned other fiue besids. Thirdly, the Talents are said to be giuen to euery one, according to their proper vertue and ability; Lastly, the Talent is taken away from the naughty and slouthfull seruant. Therefore I, by the Talents, do vnderstand the Soules of faithfull and pious men, which are co^mitted to the trust and diligence of Prelates. For these are truly the goods of our Lord, the which he doth not giue to vs, but only committeth them to our care and multiplication of the^: Therefore according heerunto, our Lord did not say to S. Peter: feede thy sheep, but my sheep, Ioan. 21. Other things are our goods (though giuen to vs by our Lord) as Wit, Iudgment, the Scriptures, Grace freely giuen, and all the rest: but faithfull and pious Soules
 our Lord calleth his Goods, his Vineyard, his Family, his Spouse: For these he came into the World; for these he shed his bloud to gaine these he sent his Apostles, to whom he said: I will make you to be fishers of men. Matth. 4.
Furthermore faythfull soules are said to be multiplied in the same kind, when the Prelate by word and example conuerteth sinners: Which thing S. Peter performed; for when Christ had committed in the beginning, to his charge, a hundred and twenty faythfull persons, when he said, Feede my sheep; S. Peter vpon the day of Pentecost euen by his first Sermon, conuerted three thousand men, Act. 2. and after that, fiue thousand. Act. 4. and after that againe many thousands more. In like sort S. Gregorius Thanmaturgus, when he was first created Bishop of Neocasarea, did find only seauenteene faythfull Belieuers in that Citty; but he so multiplied this small number, as that being neere to his death, he had left before his departure, in so populous a Citty, only seauenteene Infidels, or misbelieuers; which point S. Gregory Nyssene relateth in the life of the




 said Thaumaturgus, which he had fully and diligently written.
But to proceed. These Talents are committed to euery one according to his proper Vertue and Ability. For God, who knoweth the strength, that is, the prudence, knowledge, Charity, and Fortitude of all men, doth not commend soules to any, but to such whom he knovveth to be fit, and couragious inough to sustaine that burden. And therefore no man ought to intrude, and thurst himselfe into the care of soules, especially into an Episcopall charge, except he be first called thereto by him, who distributeth the Talents according to the power, and sufficiency of euery one: Since otherwise it vvill not seeme strange, if many do fall vnder the Burden. Neither shall they find any excuse with God, if they say, their shoulders were not able to beare so great a Burden: For it shall be ansvvered them: Who forced thee to vndertake a burden aboue thy strength? Wast not thou willing therto, didst thou not petition for it, and labouredst by seuerall meanes and endeauours to obtaine it? Therfore now suffer thy selfe with thy hands and feete
 bound together, to be cast into exteriour darknes.
To conclude, the Talent committed to the slouthfull seruant, is taken from him. And this point also most aptly agreeth with my former exposition, in teaching that the Talents are the soules of the faythfull. For he that taketh one talent, that is, the care of his owne only Soule, if he do not gouerne it rightly, he will lose his owne Soule: for it shalbe made the bondslaue of the Deuill. For as the Blessed do acquire, and obtaine the liberty of being the sonnes of God, by the which they remaine in all freedome where they will, and do what they will; so on the contrary syde, the Reprobate do lose all Liberty, and being bound hand and foote, neither can they vvalke vvhere they will, nor do what they desire; but are forced to remaine vvhere they vvould not, and to do nothing of those things which they would: and this is to lose a mans ovvne Soule. So as this sentence, according to which, by the Talents, are vnderstood Faythfull soules, is altogether agreable to the Parable. Our Lord therfore did commit his Talents to
 three kinds of men; To those, who were perfect (and such ought Bishops to be) he gaue fiue talents; that is, the charge of many people to be vnder them; To others, lesse perfect (as the Parish Priests are wont to be) two talents, that is, a lesser number of soules, and such as are vsually contained within one Parish. To others yet more weake and infirme (vvhich are the common People) he gaue to euery one, one talent, that is, the care of his ovvne soule only: Yet neuerthelesse such men ought to conuert other men by priuate exhortation, and example of an innocent life, from their sinnes to the vvay of Iustice; and so after that manner, to multiply the talent deliuered to him.
And vvhat is said of Bishops and Parish Priests, the same is to be vnderstoode of Princes, and of secular Magistrates, and of Maisters of families. For thus S. Austin writeth, tract. 51, in Ioan. Euery Maister, or Father of a House, or family (euen by this Name) ought to acknowledge a paternall affection and care to his family. It is his offiec in the feare of Christ, and for the hope of Eternall life, to admonish, teach,
 exhort, and correct them; in like sort to exercise his beneuolence, and discipline towards them; so as he shall fulfill and practize a certaine Ecclesiasticall, or Episcopall duty, or function in his owne House. And in this sense Constantine the Greae was accustomed to say, that himselfe was a Bishop, extra Ecclesiam, out of the Church; because he was most vigila^t (as far as he could) that the Church of Christ should be preserued and propagated; and yet he did not vsurpe, or trench vpon Ecclesiasticall Offices, or Orders.
But to preuent, that it may not be thought, that one only man, or one only kind of men is reprehended in this Parable, because we read, that he only, who had but one talent, is reprehended and punished; therefore we are to know, that our Lord from this one, would haue vs to vnderstand the dangers of greater Nature. For as at the day of Iudgment, in that he will reward those, who giue corporall Almes, and will punish such, as giue none; we vnderstand thereby, greater rewards to be giuen to such as giue spirituall Almes, and greatest to the Blessed Apostles, Martyrs, and Virgins,
 exercising Heroicall Vertues; and on the contrary, that theues, periured and sacrilegious Persons ate to vndergoe greater Punishments, then those, who did not relieue the poore and needy with Almes: Euen so in this place, in that he who receaued one talent, the which he might easily haue multiplied, and yet did not, is most grieuously punished, vve may learne, that so much the more easy it is for Bishops, Pastours, Princes, and Magistrats to offend in this kind, by how much they do exercise a more weighty and dangerous function; and that they are so much the more to be punished in the last iudgment, by how much the losse of many soules is greater, then the losse, and ouerthrow but of only one.
Let vs heare, what S. Austin speaketh of the danger of an Ecclesiasticall state or degree, Epist. 147. He thus writeth to Valerius Bishop; I desire before all other things, that thy religious Prudence would call to mind, Nothing in this lyfe, and especially at this present, is more easy and more acceptable to men, then the Office of a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, if they exercise their authority though but negligently, or sleightly.
 But in the sight of God, nothing is more fearefull, miserable, or damnable. In like sort, there is nothing in this lif^, and particularly in these dayes, more hard, laborious, perilous, then the Office of a Bishop, Priest, and Deacon; but with God nothing more blessed and happy, if so we serue in that War, as our Emperour and Generall commands vs. Thus S. Austin, who writeth further of this very Argument, through all that his Epistle to the aforesaid Valerius Bishop, as that it is to be wished, that all Ecclesiasticall Persons would with attention and reflection vpon themselues, read the same; especially such men, who rashly aspire to the function of a Bishop, or Priest; and when they haue obtayned what they desire, and found what they haue sought for, do either forsake their flock, or being busied with other affayres, do trouble their thoughts with nothing lesse, then with the care of increasing the number of pious and faithfull Christians.
Truly the Shephards, vpon the Night of the Birth of our Lord (the prince of all Shephards) did watch all the night ouer their flock. And if this was done vpon a flock voyde of reason
 by those who figure out the Pastours of the Church; how much more then ought it to be performed by Pastours, for their sheepe, indued with reason, for who^ Christ himselfe, vvhen he was conuersant vpon Earth, did watch whole nights? And if the Patriarch Iacob wasted himselfe away with such labour for the care he had of the sheepe of Laban his Father in law, as that he said: Day and night was I parched with heat, and with frost, and sleepe did flie from my eyes; what indefatigable paynes then ought the Pastours of the sheep of Christ to endure? And if the Deuill, as a roaring Lyon, goeth about, seeking whom he may deuoure; is it not then fit, that a good Pastour should also daily goe about, seeking whom he may free and set at liberty?
But here it may be vrged, that the busines and affaires of the Church, of which a man is Pastour, may sometimes force him to leaue his flock. I do not deny, but if such necessituds be of great importance, and can be brought to an end in a short tyme, that then a short leauing of the flock is pardonable; Otherwise I say, let greater negotiations
 be preferred before lesser, And such as are greater to be performed by the Pastour himselfe; whereas the lesser may be vndertaken by some others. For if busines doth force a man to depart from his flock; then greater busines, yea euen bloudy Warrs do force a man not to depart from the defence of his flock. The Apostolicall Trumpet thus soundeth in our eares. Ephes. 6. Our wrestling is not against slesh and bloud; but against Princes, and Potentates, against the Gouernours of this darknes, against the spiritualls of wickednes, in the Celestialls. And if the Captaine be absent, who shall teach the souldiers how to avoid the Weapons of their Enemies? Certainly our Lord said to S. Peter, and in him to all Pastours: Feede my sheepe: Of other things he spake nothing, that we might vnderstand thereby, that the feeding of the flocke is the principall charge, incumbent vpon a Pastour.
In like sort in the Consecration of a Bispop it is said: Vade, praedica populo tibi commisso; Goe preach vnto the people committed vnto thee. But touching temporall busines nothing is added or spoken; thereby to admonish the Bishop,






 that Temporall things are not to be ballanced and equalled with spirituall, and much lesse to be preferred.
To conclude, in the fourth Councell of Carthage Can. 17.18.19.20. Bishops are earnestly commaunded, that they shall not vndertake the gouerment of Widdowes, strangers, Pupils by themselues, but by the meanes and labour of the Arch-Priests, and the Arch-Deacons. In like sort, that Bishops shall not vndergoe the defence of Wills, or Contentions, for any transitory matters, and that they shall not ingrosse to themselues the care and dealing about other mens states; but that they shall wholy, and only deuote their labours to reading, praying, and preaching of the Word. Therefore the Councell of Africa, consisting of two hundred and foureteene Bishops (at which S. Austin was present) commanded, that Bishops should negotiate and execute all temporall affayres and occasions (though otherwise pious and necessarie) by the ministery, and labours of other men, that so themselues might more freely spend their dayes in defending and multiplying of their flock.

Therfore this Parable, as it sheweth, that Eternall Felicity is chiefefly to be desired, as containing most great power, accompained with most great Pleasure; so also it demonstrateth, that the way to this felicity is continuall and indefatigable labour, placed in seeking and procuring the Health of a Mans owne Soule, and of other mens also. Which labour whosoeuer doth seeke to decline and auoyd, shall not onely be depriued of that felicity, and of that most excellent Power and Pleasure; but being damned to Hell, shall there suffer eternall Punishments. For thus doth our Lord speake Matth. 25. The vnprofitable serua^t cast you out into vtter darknes; there shalbe weeping and gnashing of teeth. And heer we are diligently to note and obserue, that the seruant in this place eondemed to such punishment, is not called wicked, or facinorous, but vnprofitable only; for admitting that a Bishop, a Parish Priest or Prince, or Magistrate, or Father of a family, or any other may be free fro^ other vices; yet in this respect onely, that he is vnprofitable, that is, he doth not procure and labour (according to his power) his owne health, and the
 health of others subiect vnto him; in this respect (I say) he shall be cast out into vtter darknes, where shalbe weeping and gnashing of teeth, which shall neuer haue End. And if the vnprofitable seruant shall suffer these insufferable calamities, what portion then is allotted to the wicked seruant, who is couetous, malignant, proud, luxurious and wholy drowned in all kind of vices? Yf the vnprofitable Serua^t be reiected, what account and reckoning then, must he who is wicked render to our Lord, touching the talents deliuered vnto him? Truly they who deepely and intensly consider these things, will not ambitiously seeke after Honour, or Authority; and if it be forcedly imposed vpon them, let them euer watch with feare and trembling, since they are to render a most exact and strict account for the soules, committed vnto their Charge.



Of the great Supper. CHAP. V.
THe fift Parable (which is in Luke 14.) resembleth the felicity of the Saints to a Great Supper; and this truly not without iust reason. In a Great, Nuptiall, or Regall Supper all things are there found, which may delight the Senses of men, or which may shew the Power, riches, and glory of this World. Truly King Assuerus, who gouerned ouer an hundred, twenty and seauen Prouinces, desiring in great vaunting, to shew the riches, and glory of his Kingdomes, and the largenes of his power, did not find a more fitting and conuenient meanes thereto, then to make a most sumptuous, and magnificent Banquet. For first at a great supper the Eyes are delighted in the most costly furniture and hangings of the Place, in the order of Officers, in costly and courtlike Apparell, in the golden and siluer plate, wherin the Meate is serued. The Eares are much delighted with melodious musicke.
 The sense of smell is satisfyed with the odour of flowers, of precious perfumes, and with other things, breathing forth fragrant and sweet smells. The sense of Tast is rauished with the curious seasoning of the meates of all sorts, and with delicious Wynes.
To conclude, the sense of Touching is greatly contented with reposing vpon most soft and downy Beds. Therfore at a Regall Supper all corporall goods do meet togeather in the greatest affluency this World can afford. So as our Lord willing to represent that Felicity, which comprehends in it self all sort of Goods, would compare it to a Great Supper; Of which Supper we also thus reade in the Apocalyps: Blessed are they, who are called to the supper of the marriage of the Lambe Apoc. 19. Furthermore, the greatnes of that supper of our Lord may be knowne, in that the Glory of all the glorified bodies shalbe (as it were) the last Table, vpon whome all delicates and daintyes shall be placed. Now the sweetnes of these Dainties is so great, as that S. Peter once seeing the Body of our Lord, to shine like to the Sunne, said; Matth. 17. It is good for vs to be
 heare. And if the dainties of Banquets be of so great worth; of what dignity then shall the substance of the supper be, which is placed in the fruition of the Diuinity?
Finally, All the goods of this vvorld are nothing els, then as barks, or huskes of the fruites of Paradise. And if these husks be of that force, as to enchant men with the loue and desire thereof; what then are the fruites themselues able to worke in mens soules? And if the fruites be of such Vertue, what then may we conceaue the more solid and substantiall meates of this Great Supper to be? Doubtlesly they shall be such, as that they may be euer eaten, and euer desired without any fastidious satiety. Neither are we to imagine, that there shalbe a Supper in Heauen, such as great Princes haue in the celebration of their Mariage, seing in Heauen we shalbe as the Angells are, who neither marry, nor feed on Meates necessary to the mantaining of a mortall life. Therefore that Supper shalbe full of riches, full of delights, full of Ornaments, and full of glory, agreable to the state of the Blessed. These materiall things
 are spoken vnto vs in this our exile, because we do not here see better, or greater Matters. But from these we ought to learne, that that Celestiall Supper shall so much excell our suppers vpon earth (though neuer so dainty, or curious) by how much Heauen is better then the Earth, and by how much God, who shall prepare this Supper, doth transcend and surmount mortall Kings in power and riches.
But heare it may be questioned, why the felicity of the blessed is compared rather to a supper, then to a dinner? of this point the reason is, in that the tyme of Dinner is about the midst of the day, and the tyme after dinner till supper is commonly spent in executing of busines; whereas Supper is prepared at the end of the day, when as all negotiations are finished; after which Supper followeth Rest and Repose. And therefore in another Parable, which is in Matth. 22. where me^tion is made of the Incarnation of our Lord, the time of Dinner introduced for the Mariage with the Church his Spouse, is begunne in the midle of the day; that is, long before the consummation of the World. After
 which time of Dinner, many matters of greatest importance, especially the Redemption of the world, and the reconciliation of Mankind with God, are treated. But after all businesse and sollicitudes shall cease, then the bringing of the Spouse to the House of the Bridegrome, and the Nuptiall Supper shall follow; that is, Eternall Repose at the close of the day, and end of the World.
But yet it will be worthy of obseruation to knovv vvhat is to be done, that vve may be admitted vnto this Supper. And of this our Lord himself hath byn pleased to instruct vs in this Parable, saying: Luc. 14. A certaine Man made a great Supper, and called many: but they began all at once to make excuse. The first said, I haue bought a Farme, and I must needs goe forth and see it, I pray thee haue me excused. And another said. I haue bought fiue yoake of Oxen, and I goe to proue them, I pray thee hold me excused. The third said, I haue maryed a Wyfe, and therefore I cannot come. A wonderfull matter! Men are inuited by God to a Nuptiall and Regall Supper, and they refuse to come: what then would they
 do, if they vvere called to the labour of Warre, or to a long and perillous iourney? But this is humane blindnes, which can hardly be brought to belieue any thing, but what it seeth. But what is that which mortall men prefer before the Diuine Supper, which is our supreme and eternall good? Three things our Lord setteth downe, as maine impediments of our Saluation, which of their owne nature are not euill; and yet through an affection to them not vvell gouerned, they hinder mans Saluation. To buy a farme, to trye Oxen, and to marry a Wife, are no sinnes; but to aduance and prefer them before the kingdome of God, is incredible stupidity and blindnes. And yet there be found many Christians in euery place, who do affect and seeke after these temporalities with a wonderfull thirst and hunger, co^suming whole dayes and nights in pursuing of Honour, which is noted in buying of the farme; and of Lucre or Gayne, which is signified in manuring of ground, or drawing of Oxen; and of Pleasure, or Voluptuousnes, which it taken throgh new Mariage. Yea they are so absort in the depth of these earthly matters,
 as that they remayne wholy forgetfull of the eternall and most great rewards, which God hath promised to them that loue him.
Neither are many men content to buy farmes, to proue their Oxen, to marry wiues, but, that they may the further depart from hope of Saluation, they seare not to inuade other mens farmes, to steale Oxen, and to maintayne Concubins, and prostituted women; neuer euer thinking (much lesse maturely considering) what hurt and domage it is for such triffles, to suffer the losse of the Supper of our Lord. Certainly if God did not promise vnto vs (being but poore Wormes of the Earth) a Supper of infinite sweetnes in Heauen, but only did promise the crums falling from that table, or the refuse of the meates; yet it vvere most profitable for vs to contemne all temporall things whatsoeuer, that so we might feed vpon those Offalls. What madnes then is it to aduance small, decaying, and fleeting pleasures aboue the Supper of our Lord himselfe, vvhich abounds with all sempiternall goods, and at the which we shall sit downe in the Heauenly Kingdome with the holy
 Angells, and with him, who is the Lord of Angells?
To proceed. After our Lord had shevved vvhat might hinder our entrance vnto this great Supper, he therpon adioyneth certaine remedies to remoue those lets and impediments, for thus he goeth forvvard in his Parable: Then the Maister of the House being angry, said to his seruants; Goe forth quickly into the streets, and lanes of the Citty, and the poore, and feeble, and blind, and lame, bring in hither. Because rich men being occupied in buying of farmes, of Oxen, and in mariage, refused to come to the supper of this great Lord, he calleth in the Poore, Weake, and Lame, who neither haue money to buy Farmes, or Oxen, neither can easely get wyues, as wanting meanes to maintaine them. These men therefore, as free from all intanglements, wherewith the others vvere ensnared, are admitted to the Great Supper; who may deseruedly congratulate their ovvne fortune and state, that God would haue them to be Poore, weake, blynd, and Lame.
Many heere in this life do much
 complaine, that they ar^ borne Poore, or that they are often sicke, or depriued of sight, or are lame in their lymmes; and for these imperfections they hould themselues most infortunate and miserable; not knowing what good God doth prouide for them in the World to come, euen for this very cause, which many men repute as an Infelicity: But if they did know Gods sweete proceeding herein, they would doubtlesly exult and reioy^e. Th^rfore no man ought to complaine of the Prouidence of God, but in all things to loue him* with due thanks (who hath a care and vigilancy ouer vs) and euer to rest quiet* and reposed in his good Will, and pleasure. But how true soeuer these things are in a literall sense; yet in this Parable, those are said prop^rly to be poore, who are poore in spirit, not in riches and those weake, not in strength, but in confidence and trust of themselues; those blynd, not in their bodily eyes, but in subtilty and craft; those lame, not in their feete, but in their affections. I wil speake more plainly.
The Poore, who are admitted to the Supper of our Lord, are those, who hearing
 the Apostle (1. Tim. 6. desire not to be rich* and if they haue riches, they haue them not to heape vp togeather, and so to conserue them, neither to wait and dissipate them in Vanities; but to performe and exercise that, vvhich the Holy Ghost speaketh of, by the mouth of Dauid Psal. 111. He distributed, and gaue to the poore; his Iustice remayneth for euer and euer And those are he^r said to be weake and feeble, who do not confide and trust in their ovvne force, nor glory in their owne stre^gth; The blind are those, who truly belieue those things they see not; especially touching the rewards of the Vertuous, and punishmnents of the Wicked. For vvho assuredly persuade themselues, that the rewards of the Iust, are most great and sempiternall, and the punishments of the malignant and wicked; most rigorous and interminable; these men do not lye groueling vpon the Earth, neither do they much pryze any thing which ^s vnder the Moone, but there their Harts are fixed, where are true ioyes To conclude, those men are happily lame, and may most hopefully aspire to the Supper of our Lord, vvhose right foote is much lo^ger then
 the least; that is; whose affections towards God and euerlasting Beatitude, are far greater, then their sinister affections and desires tovva^ds their ovvne flesh, and temporall goods or Pleasures.
But let vs heare the Sentence of the great Maister of the Howse against those, who inconsiderarly and foolishly contemned his Supper; Thus then he sayth: I say vnto you, that none of those men, that were inuited, shall tast of my Supper. For our Lord vvell knoweth, that it shall fall out vvithin a short tyme, that those who were inuited, and contemned, and sleighted future goods, as vayne (their soules euen cleauing, and fastened to present Benefits) shall after the dissolution of their Body, and after their departure from all vvorldly matters, euen hunger after that Supper, through an incredible desire. For as the Prophet Dauid speaketh: Psal 58. they will returne at Euening, and they shall suffer f^mine, euen as dogs, and shall comp^sse the Citty. Then at the Euening (the day of this present life being ended) they shall returne, and acknovvledge their folly, vvhen their repentance shalbe,
 vnprofitable; and they shall suffer hunger like rauenous dogs, and they shall incompasse the Citty of our Lord, if perchance they may be suffered but to feed only vpon the Crums of that supper. But that Sentence stands vnalterable, and irreuocable: None of th^se men shall tast of my Supper.
O Christian Soule, that thou didest but know, what it is to say: Thou shalt not tast of my Supper, Or that thou couldst possibly conceaue, how great the hunger of reprobate sinners shalbe, and of how sweet a meate they shalbe for euer depriued; and what they would giue, that they might but tast of that, vvhich they shall couet most ardently? But they shall gaine nothing, though they had the vvhole world at their command, and though they were ready to renounce and disclaime from it, with all promptitude of mind. Now then since these things are thus, let vs returne from our sins, whyle we haue tyme, whyle the day lasteth, and while our Pennance and Repentance is fruitfull and profitable. Now let vs hunger after that most sweet Supper, let vs suff^r famine for it, not as vncleane and greedy doggs,
 who in eating, thinke nothing but of the pleasure of their tast and belly; But as men indued with Reason, let vs hunger after the meate of Eternall L^fe, the Bread of Angells, yea that hidden Manna, which no man knoweth, but he that receaueth; and which God himselfe enioyeth from all, and for all Eternity. By this meanes we shall so liue in this our banishment, as that we shall not loue the same, but shall most earnestly couet, and euen breath after our Heauenly Country; to the which after we are once arriued, we shall haue no need, to compasse about the Citty, but we may enter by the open Gate; and being freely admitted to the Supper of our Lord, we may feed and satiate our selfs vpon most pleasing meate and drinke; that is, vpon the Bread of lyfe, and Water of Wisdome.





Of the Mariage; and of the Wise, and Foolish Virgins. CHAP. VI.
THe last Parable is that, which resembles the felicity of the Saints to a Kingly mariage, to the which are inuited ten Virgins, of which number fiue were foolish, and fiue prudent. And first is to be explicated, what the Bridgrome is, what the Bride or Spouse: Next is to be shewed, how great a Good is intimated by the name of the Mariage; Lastly what is required, that we may be able to come to so infinite* and inestimable a Good.
And first it is not be doubted, but that the Bridegrome here is Christ. For this S. ^ohn Baptist in expresse words affirmeth, when he sayth: He, that hath the Bride, is the Bridegrome; But the friend of the Bridegrome, that standeth and heareth him, reioyceth with ioy, for the voyce of the Bridegrome. Ioan. 3. The same doth our Lord himselfe insinuate in the Parable of the King, who made a Mariage for his Sonne.
 And the same a^so the Apostle most euidently confirmeth, when he said to the Corinthians (2. Cor. 11. I haue despous^d you to one Man, to present you a chast Virgin to Christ. To be short, S. Iohn in his Apocalyps signifieth the same, thus saying cap. 19 Let vs be glad and reioyce, and giue Glory vnto him, because the Mariage of the Lambe is come, and the Bride hath prepared herselfe. And againe, Blessed are they who are called to the supper of the Mariage of the Lambe.
Now concerning the Bride or Spouse; it is certaine, that by her is meant the Church; For the Apostle in the Epist e to the Ephesians cap. 5. euidently sayth: As the Church is subiect to Christ, so also Women to their Husbands, in all things. Husbands, loue your wyues, as Christ also loued he Church, and deliuered himselfe for it. And after againe: For this cause, shall man leaue Father and Mother, and shall cleaue vnto his Wyfe, and they shalbe two in one flesh: This is a great Sacrament, but I speake in Christ, and in the Church.
But a^though the Church be the Spouse of Christ, and the faithfull are said to be Sonnes of the Church, because
 the Church after a certaine miner by the Sacrame^t of Baptisme doth beget them to Christ; neuerthelesse, because the Church is nothing els but the company of the fa^thfull, therefore all faithfull Soules are so many particular Spouses, as the Church it selfe is the Vniuersall Spouse. For she doth not vntruly thus celebrate the dignity of Virgins: Veni Sponsa Christi etc. Come thou spouse of Christ, receaue the Crowne which our Lord hath prepared for thee, for all Eternity. And although the Holy Virgins after a peculiar manner are called the Spouses of Christ, beca^se they refused Carnall Wedlocke, that they might spiritually espouse themselues on y vnto Christ; Neuerthelesse other Christian soules are the spouses of Christ; since they being (as it were) betrothed to him by Fayth, and vnited by Charity, do earnestly thirst after a spirituall Consummation, in the Kingdome of Heauen.
Now if one could comprehend, or but worthi^y imagine, hovv great a good it is, for a Christian Soule to be espoused vnto Christ, euen as he is God; perhaps he could find nothing
 more honorable, more profitable, more sweet neither in this world, nor in the next It is a great Glory, and pleasure, to serue the King of Kings; It is a greater to be numbred among his friends, and to be ranged (as I may say) in the role of his Domesticks, It is the greatest, to be stiled the Sonne of God, and Brother of Christ: But to haue the Honour to be called the Spouse of God, the Consort, or partaker of his throne, the Consort of his Chamber, of his Crowne, of all his Titles, seemeth to be more, then the greatest Good, if it be lawfull so to speake. For this is that, which our Lord speaketh in Esay of spirituall Eunuchs: I will giue vnto them in my house, a Name better, then Sonnes, and daughters; That is, I will giue to them the Name of a Spouse, or Wyfe. Isa. 56. Who can conceaue, how sublime, how honorable, and how pleasant it is, not only to see God, but to conuerse and liue with him? What is it then to be made one spirit with God, that is, to be transformed and changed into the Supreme Good? The Words of the Apostle are these 1. Cor. 6. He that adhereth to a Harlot, is made one Body, for they shall be two in
 one flesh; But he that adhereth to our Lord, is one spirit. And againe: But we all ^ehoulding the glory of our Lord, with face reuealed, are transformed into the same Image, from Glory vnto Glory, as our Lords spirit. What p^easu^e shall it be, when we being vnited to God, and receauing our beames from the splendour of his Countenance, shalbe transformed into the splendour of God, that so we may be made most like to God? S. Iohn sayth: We shall belike vnto him, because we shall see him, as he is. 1. Ioan. 3. We shall not be only like to him, as we are Images created to his similitude, but like in glory, in beatitude, in felicity. The Apostle S. Paul in that great Extasy, which he suff^red, when being rapt vp into Paradise, did heare those secret words, which were not lawfull to speake to Man, was not as then Blessed, and yet he was so absorpt in God, as that be obserued not, whether he was in Body, or out of Body. How g^eat then shall that most happy Vnion of a Soule with God be, and how shall that Soule (which shalbe one spirit with God) be euen drowned as it were, in sea^s of such inexplicable
 sweetenesse? Tru^y this ioy shall be such, as that (according to S. Bernards words Epist. 14.) in comparison thereof, All other pleasure is griefe, all sweetnes dolour, euery pleasant thing bitter, all Beauty foule, and finally all that may any way delight, troublesome and molestious.
But since this imbracement of the most beautifull Bridegrome with a bless^d soule, is ineffable; let vs seeke out of the propounded Parable* w^at is necessari^y requi^ed of vs, that we may be admitted ^ully to this most happy Mariage. This we know from the qual^ties of the wise Virgins, seing these alone (the folish being excluded) did enter into the Nuptialls of the Heauenly Bridegrome. There are fiue Conditions, or Quali^ies which are exacted hereunto. The first, that the sou^e be a Virgin. Next, that she be Wyse; Then, that she haue light in her Lampe, and Oyle in her Vessell. Lastly, that she be watchfull, diligently attending and obseruing the comming of the Bridegrome. Concerning the first Condition: The spouses of Christ ought all to be Virgins; but this not necessarily through Virginity of the
 flesh, but through Virginity of fayth and manners, as S. Austin (in serm. de verb. Dom. 13.) truly expoundeth, according to that of the Apostle: I haue despoused you vnto one Man, to present you a chast Virgin vnto Christ. Where, by the chast Virgin, he vnderstood the whole Church of the Corinthians, in which it is euident, that all were not Virgins according to the flesh; since the same Apostle in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, admonisheth the faythfull matried Persons of their Duty. Therefore those men and Women are Virgins in this Parable, who are not corrupted touching manners and Fayth, and flying from all Euill, do not contaminate their soules therewith.
But because it sufficeth not to the perfection of Iustice, to decline from euill, but it is necessary also to do Good according to the Propheticall King. Psal. 36. Decline from Euill, and do good; therefore the second Condition is added; to wit, that the Virgin be wyse, not foolish; Neither let her thinke it to be inough, if she hurt no man, do not kill, do not steale, do not beare false witnes; but she is to vnderstand, that she ought to proportion, and ordaine
 means to her End. And because Eternall life is the End, and the merit of good Works are the Meanes; therefore there is annexed a third Condition; that is, that the Virgin haue light in her Lampe, or, a sbining Lamp, which are good VVorks, as S. Austin teacheth in the place aboue noted; Which very point our Lord himselfe taught, when he said: Let your light so shyne before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father, which is in Heauen.
Now for that good Works do flow from Charity, as from their sourse; neither can they be preserued, except they haue their cherishment from the same Charity, euen as a light is infallibly extinguished in a Lampe, if it be not nourished, and fedd with Oyle; Therefore a fourth Condition is required, which is, that the VVise Virgin euer haue Oyle in her Vessell. By Oyle, Charity is signified, as S. Austin in the place aboue alledged doth teach. For as Oyle doth swim (as it were) aboue all Humors, so Charity is supereminent to all vertues, the Apostle saying: Eminentiorem viam etc. I show you a more eminent, or more excellent way. And a
 litle after: Nun autem manent fides, spes Cha^itas etc. Now there remaine, Fayth, Hope, Charity. These three; but the greater of these is Charity. Therefore if a man doth either prefer or eq^a l any thing in his Hart with Charity, she instantly departeth; for she will haue either the precedency and fi^st place in our Harts, or els she goeth away. Oyle is a Humour most subtill, aery, and fiery, which ascendeth aboue all o^her Humours, And so great is the force of the oyle of Charity in ascending vpward, as if it were part into a soule o a Publican, or Common strumpet, it would instantly draw it vp, making it of sinfull to become Holy, and of Carnall spirituall. Yea, I dare be bould to say, that if this Oyle of Cha^ity could be distilled into the soules of damned men, or into the very Deuils, we should presently behould all the damned either Men, or Deuils, to ascend vpward: As on the Contrary if this Oyle should forsake the Holy A^g^lls, and the soules of the Apostles, Martyrs, Vi^gins, they thereupon would become lumpish and Heauy, and wou^d descend to the lower Parts. Behould therefore of what excellency
 and vertue this Oyle is, and how deseruedly those Virgins were cal^ed Fooles, who did want this Oyle.
But there yet remaineth another Reason, why by Oyle, Charit^ is signified; to wit, becau^e Oyle doth lenify and sotten things; making them of hard and sharpe, smoth, supple, and sweet. This Oyle maket^ the yoake sweete, of which our Lord said: Iugum meum suaue est: My yoake is sw^et* and as Esay sayth, the yoake being annoynted with the force of Charity, shall putrify at the face of oyle. What made the yoake o^ Obedience sweet in the Apostles, when they made a peragration and trauaile through ^ut the whole World, to preach the Gospell to euery Creature, but the Oyle of Charity? What in like sort sweetned the yoake of Patience in Martyrs i^ suffering of many Torments, neu^r before that tyme heard of, but the Oyle of Charity? what hath made the yoake of Pouerty, Continency, and Obedie^ce so pleasing ^o so many thousands of Religious Men and Women, but the Oyle of Charity? For there is nothing more sweet to a Louer then to manifest his loue to the Party beloued, and
 to worke, or suffer for him great and hard matters; euen as our Sauiour declared his loue towards mankind, in nothing so much, as in suffering for vs.
I haue discoursed more fully of Oyle, because the reason is not obuious, and facill to euery one, vvhy it should figure out and signify Charity. The fift Condition, vvhich is the chiefest, and principally intended by our Lord in this Parable, is Vigilancy, or Watchfulnes; for thus is the Parab^e concluded: Matth. 25. Watch you therfore, because you know not the day, or the houre. Which Sentence our Lord frequently repeateth, that he may firmely print it in the Harts of the faythfull. In S. Mathew c. 24. he thus sayth: Watch therefore, because you know not, what houre your Lord will come. In S. Mark cap. 13. Watch therefore, for you know not when the Lord of the house commeth, at Euen, at midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the Morning; lest comming vpon a sudden, he find you sleeping? And that which I say to you, I say to All, Watch. In S. Luke c. 12. Blessed are those Seruants, whome when their Lord commeth, he shall fynd watching.
 And in an other place: VVatch therefore, praying at all tymes. In like sort, by the Apostle, S. Peter: Be wyse therefore, and watch in prayer. 1. Pet. 4. By the Apostle S. Paul: Let vs not sleep, as others do, but let vs watch; and be sober. 1. Thess. 5. By the Apostle S. Iohn: Behould I come as a Thiefe, Blessed is he, that watcheth. Apoc. 26.
All these sacred authorities signify, that the co^ming of our Lord to Iudgment (whether the iudgment be vniuersall at the Consummation of the World, or particular at the death of euery one) is vncertaine; and that therfore God requireth of vs, that we be alwayes watching, and expecting his Comming, that so he may find vs prepared, and that he may not be forced to exclude vs (with the foolish Virgins) from his Mariage. Therfore to sleepe, is nothing els, then to forget death and Iudgment, or to liue so heedlesly, as if we neuer thought, or tooke care of that so great a Matter, whereupon Eternall Saluation dependeth. For we are not to thinke, that corporall sleepe is forbidden to the faythfull; otherwise it would not haue beene said in the Parable: They slumbered all, and
 slept; but only Forgetfulnes and Inconsideration, is forbidden.
Therefore euery good Christian, who hath a care of his owne soule, ought euery day both morning and euening (the dore of his hart being shut from all other busines) attently to thinke, and certainly to persuade himselfe, that that day or night may easily be his last; and therefore ought seriously to prouide, that he be not found, and taken vnprepared, so that he shall lose, through such his great negligence, his owne soule, and all goods attending on it. Some men haue altogether a horrour to thinke, and meditate of death, and willingly they diuert their minds to other cogitations. But let such remember, that the sicke man hath a loathing to take his prescribed physicke; and yet for the loue of his owne life, he willingly taketh it. In like sort the eyes haue a horrour to looke vpon a dangerous and deadly wound in their body; and yet they looke vpon it earnestly, and couet to receaue a medicinable playster thereto: So is it needfull, that a prudent man do make a greater estimate of the detriment, and losse of his owne Soule,
 then of the dread and horrour of death. And therefore let him often, and often reuolue in his mind, that there is no age, no hower, in which he may not d^e. Since the meditation hereof, vvhen it en^^eth deepely into the entralls of the Ha^t, is accustomed easily to change the vvhole Man; so as of Carnall he may become spirituall, of a sinner, Holy; not any more fearing, but louing, and expecting the Comming of our Lord.
Not without iust Cause therfore doth our Lord so often exhort vs to watch: neither in vayne do we thus read in Ecclesiasticus cap. 7. In all thy VVorkes, remember thy last end, and thou wilt not sinne for euer. For what man knowing, that he is to hasten towards a Iudge, and that he must speedily be conuented before his Tribunall, dare yet in the meane tyme offend against the said Iudge? And yet we euery moment, euen posting towards our Iudgment, do in our iourney thereto (^uch is mans blindnes) prosecute the Iudge with iniu^y, and iustly prouoke his wrath and indignation against vs. And who already condemned to death, would, whiles he is ledd to the place
 of Execution, laugh, and sport, or would vaunt of his adulteries, or of his gaining of Honour, or of his encreasing his temporall riches by his trafficke, except he were wholy distracted, and besides his wits? And notwithstanding we are truly condemned to death; for not any of the Sonnes of Adam did euer escape the sentence of death; and our mortall life is nothing els, then a pace to death; yet neuerthelesse in this our iourney (which cannot be long) what do the greatest part of Christians? What do they thinke of, what do they discourse of, about what do they negoriate and busy themselues, if not about gaine, Honour, Pleasures, I may well say, about all wickednes, and flagitious Crimes, as though the way to death would neuer haue end? And what other thing is this, then to sleep, concerning matters serious, and of the greatest importance, and to watch and be vigilant about toyes and triffles? Or els to sleep, and in sleeping dreame?
Therefore with good reason our Lord crieth out: Watch, O watch: And happy are those men, who are stirred vp at this his Voyce; and do often
 thinke and meditate, where they are, and whither they are going, and in the meane tyme do labour, that their Lamps may shine, and oyle abound in their Vessells; As that when the noyse, or Watchword shalbe heard: Behould the Bridegrome commetg, goe you forth to meete him, Math. 25. they with incredible ioy may presently run to meete him, and enter into the Mariage place with him. But woe to them, who being forgetfull of so great a Busines, and are deafe to the words of holy Srciptures, and who hauing their Lamps put forth, are found sleeping; and thereby being excluded from the most pleasing and most delightfull Mariage, they shall in vayne cry out, Lord, Lord, open to vs. Matth. 25.


Of the Price, or Reward. CHAP. VII.
THe Parabolicall Names, which do occur in the Ghospell being explicated, it remayneth, that we vnfould the Names vsed by the Apostle in
 his first Epistle to the Corinthians, which are Brauium, A Pryze, or Reward; and Corona, a Crowne. Of Bra^iu^, or Prize, the Apostle thus then speaketh: They that runne in the race, all do runne indeed, but one receaueth the Prize: So runne you, that you may obtaine. And that in this place by the Word Prize; or Reward the celestiall Beatitude is vnderstood, the same Apostle teacheth in his Epistle to the Philippians cap. 3. saying Forgetting the things that are behind; but stretching forth my selfe to those that are before, I pursue vnto the marke, to the praise of the supernall vocation of God, in Christ Iesus. Therefore we see, there is a Prize, or Reward in Heauen, to the which God doth call vs, through Christ Iesus, Now although the Prizes, which the Princes of the vvorld, are accustomed to propose be of no extraordinarie valew or worth; Notwithstanding the Celestiall Prize must of necessity in euery respect be of greatest estimation; And this, whether thou considerest God, who doth propose the Prize, he being of infinit Power and magnificence, of whom the Prophet thus speaketh: Psal. 8. Thy magnificency hath
 ascended aboue the Heauens; or els the Persons that do runne and striue, to whom the Pryze is set forth; who are his Sonnes, and the Brethren of Christ, vvhome doubtlesly the King their Father would not haue inui^ed to runne, if the Prize, or Reward were not of that Worth and dignity, as that the Sonnes of God might worthily desire and couet it.
But it importeth mu^h to shew, what it is to runne for the Prize, and with what art and skill we may so run, as we may wynne, or obtaine the same, To runne for the Prize is entirely to obserue and keep the Commandements of our Lord God. For stadium, or a Ra^e heere signifieth the Law of God, eue^ as Dauid witnesseth in those words Ps. 118. Blessed are the immaculate in the way, which walke in the law of our Lord etc. I ran the way of thy Commandements, when thou didst dilate my hart. Therefore they who run the way of the Commandements, do runne in a Race for a Prize or Reward. To proceede, the skill of running so, as that vve may arriue to, and obtaine the Prize, comprehendeth three Documents. The first is, that we
 do not decline, or depart any vvay from the Race; for he vvho leaueth the Race, although he may runne speedily, yet he shall neuer gaine the Prize; since not to the Prize or reward, but to some other Vnce^taine scope he directeth his Course; The which errour the Apostle testifi^th, that he diligently auoyded, saying 1. Cor. 11. I do so runne, not (as it were) at an vncertaine thing. VVhat then is it to runne out of the place of the Race? It is not to runne in the way of the Commandements; but in running to decline either to the right or left hand.
To instance this. The Law sayth, Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. Leuit. 19. VVho so loueth his neighbour as himselfe, runneth in the Race, and runneth for the Pryze. But who so passionatly and vehemently loueth his Neighbour, as that for his sake, he is not affraid to offend God, thus making of a man an Idoll; this man declineth to the right hand, and running out of the Race, runneth not for the Pryze, but for some vncertaine thing. And by how much he more swiftly runneth in heaping benefits and fauours vpon that Person, whome
 he hath erected to himselfe as an Idol; so much the more he erreth, and further departeth from the Prize, or Reward. But he, who lesse loueth his Neighbour, then he ought to do; as when he seeth him to be oppressed with want and penury, and yet shutteth his bowells of mercy, and commiseration from him (as S. Iohn speaketh) this man strayeth to the left hand, and neither doth he runne in the race, neither runneth he for the Pryze; although many other good Workes he may seeme to do. Therefore we ought to loue our neighbour as our selfs; That is, we ought so to beare our selfs towards our Neighbour, as we expect our neighbour should comport, and beare himselfe towards vs; And this is to loue our neighbour, neither more, nor lesse then our selfs. For thus doth our Lord God, who gaue this Precept, explicate the same, Math. 7. Luc. 6.
And what I haue here spoken of loue of our Neighbour (being an affirmatiue Commandement) the same vve may speake of Negatiue Commandements. For who stealeth another Mans goods, declineth to the right
 hand of that Commandement, Thou shalt not steale, and strayeth from the race. But he vvho doth not steale another mans Goods, but maketh profusion and wast of his owne Substance and state, such an one declineth towards the left ha^d, and in like sort goeth out of the race. For a Iust man, who only remaineth in the race, doth no lesse depart from the race, if he violently take other mens goods, as if he did vainly wast his owne; Because the Vertue of Liberality (which belongeth to Iustice) is encompassed with two opposite Vices, being extremes, to wit, Auarice, and Effusion or Prodigalitie. The summe and Conclusion of all this is; that he who will remaine in the Race, ought altogeather to auoyde mortall sinne.
Another document is, that he vvho desireth to obtaine the Prize, do runne swiftly, and constantly. He runneth swiftly or speedely, vvho with an ardent and feruerous vvill, keepeth the precepts, according to that of the Prophet: Psal. 111. Blessed is the man, that feareth our Lord, he shall haue great delight in his Commandements; As also of that other sentence of the Apostle:
 In spirit feruent, seruing our Lord. Rom. 12. He runneth Constantly; vvho is neuer weary with running, nor euer ceaseth from running; knowing, that it is written: He that perseuereth vnto the End, shalbe saued. Matth. 10. And truly these tvvo actions, I meane to runne spedily, and not to be weary, or not to intermit running, seeme to be meere Contraries, and hardly compatible togeather. For he who runneth speedily, is quickly tyred. But he who will not be vvearied, runneth a slow space, and vvith moderate gate perseuers in his running. This thing is true, and therefore few they are, who do arriue, and gayne the Pryze, or Reward. For it is most necessary, that he who coueteth to gaine the Prize, doth runne speedely and incessantly; since the tyme allotted here for running, is short, and the iourney long.
Neuerthelesse if Christians would imitate men, running and aspiring but for a corruptible and small Reward or Prize, they might be of power and hability to runne both speedily, and without vvearisomnes, to the gaining of an incorruptible and sublime Prize or Reward, What course take they,
 vvho runne for the purchasing of a corruptible and tempora^l Pryze: They depose and lay aside all Heauy burdens; they cast of all their superfluous cloaths, that they may runne vvith greater expedition, and vvillingnes. The same let Christians do, let them disburden themselfs of the heauy vveight of the Cares of this VVorld; Let then put of the Cloathes of Carna^l desires, and Cupidities; or at least, let them put of all inordinate affectio^s to earthly commodities, and Pleasures. VVhen they haue performed this, let them not vaunt of their owne strength and forces, but let them trust in God; All which being accomplished, then let them complayne, if through speedy running, they be wearied in their Course.
This doctrine is not myne, but it is the doctrine of the Proph^t Esay and S. Paul. Esay thus saith cap. 4. They that hope in our Lord shall runne, and not labour. And the Apostles words are these 1. Cor. 7. This I say Brethren; the time is short, it remaineth, that they also, who haue wiues, he as though they had not; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that reioyce,
 as though they reioyced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that vse this VVorld, as though they vsed it not. In which wordes the Apostle forbiddeth not, that Christian men should haue no wyues, and that they do not lament in time of aduersity, and reioyce in prosperity, and that they should not buy thinges necessary, or vse the goods and benefits of this World; but he only admonisheth, that in the prosecution of all these matters, men should vse a mediocrity therein, and should so curbe their owne immoderate Appetites in the fruition and practise of the forsaid Points, as if they did not in any sort belong vnto them.
S. Melania (a most noble Roman Matrone) may be to vs an exa^ple, of whom S. Iero. thus writeth in Epitaph. Blesillae. S. Melania being of these tymes, and of true Nobility among the Christians, when as sbe had lost at once two Sonnes, and this immediatly before the dead Body of her husband was cold, or interred, did in this manner beare these her griefes: I am heare to relate an incredible matter, but I call God to witnes, that it is very true. VVho would
 noe haue thought, but that she would haue stroken her breast after an enraged manner, with tearing of her hayre, and rending asunder her cloaths? But she stood immouable, and kneeling at the feete of a Crucifixe did not sheed a teare* but as it were (taking hould of Christ) smyled, and thus said: I am now to serue thee heerafter with greater carefullnes and expedition, in that th^u hast freed me of so great a burden. Thus S. Ierome; vvho by this example, as by a most vvorthy Commentary hath explicated, what it is, that those who haue wyues, children, and other goods of this VVorld, should be, as though they had them not, that thereby they with greater speed, and celerity runne vnto the Prize.
But of this point we haue a more wonderfull and astonishing example in Iob; who in one day lost all his Sonnes and daughters, and his whole substance and riches, and being full of Vlcers, lay vpon a dunghill, who but a litle before, was the most happy man among all those of the East. And yet as if all these losses had nothing concerned him, he thus brake out in Words, full of Wisdome. Iob. 1. Naked
 came I out of my Mothers wombe, and naked spall I returne thither: Our Lord gaue, and our Lord hath taken away; as it pleased our Lord, so is it done: the name of our Lord be blessed. To conclude, S. Peter with the rest of the Apostles (who were the first that followed Christ, running after the Prize) that they might teach vs, vvhat is required to run both speedily and constantly, thus say. Matth. 19. Behould, we haue left all things, and haue followed thee, what therefore shall we haue? And our Lord approuing this their demaund, by his answere clearely promised to them a Prize or Reward, saying: Amen, I say to you, that you who haue followed me, in the regeneration, when the Sonne of man shall sit in the seate of his Maiesty, you also shall sit vpon twelue Seates, iudging the twelue Tribes of Israel.
There remaineth yet the third document, which teacheth vs, that who desire in running to gaine the Goale* ought to be ioyned with Christ; for as the Apostle sayth. 1. Cor. 9. All indeed do run but one gayneth the Prize. But by this One, doubtlesly is vnderstood Christ; who, ad currendam viaem, reioyced as a Gyant to the race; And of
 whom it is said in S. Iohn: No man hath ascended into Heauen, but he that descended from Heauen; the Sonne of man, which is ln Heauen, Ioan. 3. But Christ doth not ascend alone, but with all those, who are liuing and true members of his Body, of which himselfe is the Head. Therefore all those who run, though they distribute all their goods vpon the poore, and deliuer vp their bodies euen to the fyer, do but toyle and labour in vayne, except they be ioyned with Christ, by fayth and Charity, and be made one with him, as himselfe sayth: Ioan. 17. As thou (Father) in me, and I in thee; that they also in vs may be One.
But there is yet another manner of Coniunction with Christ, which in a wondefull sort doth aduantage vs both to ru^ne for the Price both swifly, and constantly. This manner consisteth in the vnion of the interiour Eye of the Soule with Christ himselfe, as Christ is the Price. For Christ, as Man did runne for the Price; and as he is God, so himself in the Price; For Christ is true God, and eternall life, as S. Iohn witnesseth; which point our Lord himselfe insinuated, when he sayd:
 I am the way, the truth, and the lyfe: For Christ as the Truth, doth leade vs; as the VVay, doth draw vs by himselfe; as the lyfe, doth bring vs to himselfe. Therefore it followeth, that nothing is more profitable, or more conducing to the gaining of the Prize, then neuer to diuert our eyes fro^ the Prize it self, and to say with the Prophet Psal. 24. Myne Eyes are alwayes to our Lord. For that man, who hath the Eye of his hart vnited, and conioyned with the Prize, neyther seeth, nor heareth, nor regardeth what the behoulders do eyther say or doe, whether they do deride, prayse, or dispraise him; but sayth with the Prophet. Psal. 17. I am become, as a man not hearing; and with the Apostle. 1. Cor. 4. To me, it is a thing of least account, to be iudged of you, or humane day.
But to passe on forward. By how much a man draweth more neare to the Prize, by so much he better knoweth the greatnes of the Prize, which greatnes inspireth strength and causeth, that a man (though spent and tired out) do not intermit his Course. Whosoeuer therefore aspireth to the Celestiall Prize, let him not depart, or decline
 from the race of the Precepts of our Lord; let him run ardently, and constantly; and he being Vnited with Christ, by true Fayth and Charity, let him neuer turne the Eye of his Hart, from the Pryze it selfe.


Of the Crowne. CHAP. VIII.
THe last Name, or Appellation of eternall Felicity, is the Crowne of Iustice; of which Crowne the Apostle speaketh thus in the same place, where he speaketh of the Prize, saying: 1. Cor. 9. Euery one, that striueth for the Maistry, refraineth himselfe from al things, that he may receaue a corruptible Crowne, but we an incorruptible. Neither can it be heere doubted, whether by the word, Agon, the Maistry, Race or Course may be vnderstood; So as this similitude should be the same with the former; or rather that a conflict, or conte^tion be to be vnderstood thereby. Now those words a litle after following do demonstrate, that by the word Maistry, a Fight, or Contention
 is meant, to vvit: I therfore do so runne, not as it were, at an Vncertaine thing; do so fight, not as it were beating the ayre. The same do those words of the Apostle shew. 2. Tim. 4. I haue fought a good fight, I haue consummated my Course, I haue kept the Fayth; concerning the rest, there is laid vp for me a Crowne of Iustice. For in both S. Paul distinguisheth a Course from a Fight; vsing in the one the name of Brauium, in the other the name of Corona, which two words are in sense euidently distinct, and diuerse.
Certainly by the name of a Crowne, eternall felicity is signifyed, which by the Apostle is called 2. Tim. 4. The Crowne of Iustice, because it is giuen, as a Reward for workes proceeding from Iustice. With S. Iames it is styled, Corona vita. Iac. 1. in that it co^taineth euerlasting lyfe. With S. Peter, An incorruptible Crown. 1. Pet. 5. seeing it comprehendeth in it selfe the splendour and beauty of Eternall Honour. To conclude in Esay, God himselfe is sayd to be heereafter, A Crowne of glory to the residue of his People. Esa. 18. From which place of Scripture, we are to vnderstand, that




 the Crowne, whereof S. Paul speaketh, and which is allotted for the Ouerco^merrs, or Maisters in the fight, is most honourable, and most sublime, since God himself vouchsafeth to be the crowne, encompassing, adorning, and glorifying the heads of the residue of his People; that is of those few of his People, who in their spirituall Warre haue become victorious. For (as often I haue sayd out of the testimonies of the Scripture) Many are called, but few elected, and at the day of Iudgement the Crowne of the Saints shall so much the more become glorious, by how much the fewer can iustly entitle themselues thereto.
In this place we must to obserue, in what kind of fight we are to exercise our selues, and what is incumbent to vs to doe, whereby to gaine the victory. And without doubt the fight (which we are to all vndergoe) is most cruell, and fraught with danger; especially if comparison therewith be made to the fight, which men heere vpon the earth do sustaine for a corruptible Crowne. For the Apostle speaketh of a sportfull fight, openly perf^rmed in the eye, and sight of the
 People. Therfore the Agonists, or Cha^pions heere did fight with men lyke vnto themselues, with equall weapons and but for a base Crowne, and becam^ subiect eyther to a popular applause, or ignominy. But Christians are to enter in combat, with those enemies, whome they see not, and yet by whome themselues are seene, and who are in number many, being most strong, and most subtile; who fight with vnlyke weapons, in the sight of God and his Angells, and for a Crowne of eternall lyfe; and this vnder the danger of eternall Damnation. To conclude* Christia^s here fight not in a sportfull game, but in a most true, most fierce, and cruell Warre. Our Antigonists, or Enemies in this battell, are the Diuells, whome the holy Scripture sometimes calleth Lyons, sometimes Dragons, at other tymes Basilisks; who haue Traytors euen within our owne houses; I meane, the Concupiscences of the flesh, vvhich are our Bodies, and which do wage war against our soules in behalfe of our Enemies, as S. Peter teacheth, saying: 1. Pet. 2. I beseech you as strangers and pilgrimes, to refrayne your selfes from carnall desires, which war
 against the Soule. We may add hereto (which is most miserable and calamitous) that this fight is to be vndertaken euen at that very tyme, at vvhich the Course in the Race is to be performed; And therefore the Apostle hath conioyned these two different Points togeather; that therby we may vnderstand, that those who are running for the Pryze, or Reward, are hindered throughout their whole Course by their Enemyes; and ^^at therefore it is necessary, that such men, do at one and the same tyme, run with their feet, and fight with their hands.
O if Christian men would haue a full resent and feeling of these things, and of their owne dangerous estates, they would not so willingly rauell out their time in trifles, sports, and playes; in banquetting, and good fellowship, in heaping vp togeather of riches, in seeking after Honours and dignities; as if the mayne matter of all were secure and in safety; But let such men heare the Apostle preaching, and crying out in these words: Eph. 6. Take the armour of God, that you may resist in the euill day, being cloathed with the Breastplate of Iustice, in all things taking
 the shield of fayth, wherewith you may extinguish all the fiery darts of the wicked One. And, Take vnto you the Helmet of Saluation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the Word of God: In all prayer, and supplication, praying at all tymes in spirit, and in the same watching in all instance. Good God, vvhat an Exhortation is this, how full of feare, terrour, and vehemency, especially if a man do throughly ponder these former words, In all prayer, and supplication; at all tymes; in all instance! And yet many of vs do beare our selfs in leading our liues, as if vve had no occasion either to run in the Race, nor fight in the Conflict.
But alas, what are we to doe, that in this dreadfull ware we may come of with victory against our enemies? The Apostle dispatcheth, and declareth this very point in few wordes, whe^ he saith, 1. Cor. 9. Euery one, that striueth for the maistry, refraineth himselfe from all things; and they, indeed that they may receaue a corruptible Crowne; but we an incorruptible. Of which Words the sense and meaning is this: All those Champions, that they may gaine a corruptible Crovvn,
 do abstaine from al such things vvhich may debilitate or weaken the Body, and make it lesse apt for fight; to wit from ouer much gorging themselues with meate and drinke, from accompanying their Wyues, from domesticall negotiations; and briefly from all things (through othervvise pleasant or profitable) vvhich may hinder the Victory in this their sportly Strife and Contention. Therefore we, who do euen sweat, and labour in a true Warre, for an incorruptible and eternall Crowne, ought much more to forbeare, and withdraw our selues from all those things, which may weaken the Soule, and cause it to be lesse prepared to vndergoe this great and serious Warre, and withall to continue its Course and running in the spirituall Race. But vvhat are those things, vvhich weaken the Soule? Euen those very things, vvhich seeme to make the Body stro^g: To wit; much meate, much sheep, frequent exercise, myrth, sporting, singning, hauking, hunting; to pray litle, to auoyde meditation, not to bewaile a mans owne sinnes; finally not to do works of Pennance; from all vvhich courses he ought to abstaine, who coueteth
 to haue his sou^e strong, that it may be apt to runne in the ^a e, and to fight for the Maistry. Our Lord sayth Luc. 21. Looke well to your selues, least perhaps your harts be ouer^harged with surfet and drunkennes, and cares of this life, and that they day come vpon you suddenly.
Novv on the contrary part; The meate of the Soule, making it vigorous is fasting; the refection and resocillation of the soule, is Prayer. The sheep of the soule, is a healthfull Contemplation of things diuine. The purging of the soule from all dangerous humours, is Confession of our sinnes. The ioy and delight of the soule, is Teares. The triumph and Victory of the Soule, is the crucifying of our flesh and Concupiscences therof. For the Apostle sayth. Gal. 5. They that be of Christ, ha^e crucified their flesh togeather with their vices, and co^cupiscences: And in like sort he thus speaketh in the place aboue alledged: I do so fight, not as it were beating the ayre: but I chastise my Body, and bring it into seruitude; best perhaps when I haue preached to others, my selfe become reprobate. Behould here a true Paraph^aze,
 or Explication of those former words He abstayneth from all things. For the Apostle sayth. 1. Cor. 9. I do so fight in this warre, as that I do abstaine from those things, which please the Body, in which do reside carnal concupiscences which do fight against me, euen in behalfe of my Enemies: And I do reduce my Body into seruitude, by chastizing it with Fasting, Watching, and other mortifications of the flesh, that so it may not rebell against the Empire, and Command of the Soule, or ioyne in Combat with myne Enemies against me.
But whome are not those wordes (lest perhaps when I haue preached to others, my selfe become reprobate) able to affright, and cause to tremble and feare? If a vessell of Election, an Apostle created and chosen by God himselfe, One who was rapt into the third Heauen, feared that he might become a Reprobate, if he did not punish his Body, and reduce it into seruitudes; Who then of vs hath not iust reason to feare Reprobation, except he crucify and mortify his flesh, with all its Vices and Concupiscenses? Certainly this Apostolicall Example is of force to admonish
 all men, that they dare not presume to hope for Victory and the Crowne, except euen in the depth of their Hart they make a serious and impartiall reflection of their owne State. doing works worthy of Pennance, and subduing in euery sort the fl^sh to the spirit. Therefore the madnes and blindnes of the Hart of many is wonderful, who though they performe none of these points so necessarily exacted; yea vvho are so far from abstaying from things lawfull, as that they will not abstaine from things vnlawfull and prohibited, do neuerthelesse liue in such security and ioillity of mind, as if they had already receaued a most certaine and infallible promise of God, touching their Saluation and Crowne of Glory. But this is a demonstration (as often we haue said) that they are but few, who shalbe saued; and that, Many are called, but few Elected.
Within the armes therefore of thy goodnes (O Blessed Lord) do I cast my selfe, I am thy Seruant, and the sonne of thy Hand-maid. Euen with all desire of my soule I do greedily thirst after that Heauenly reward, and most shyning Crowne, vvhich thou hast prepared
 and promised to those that loue. thee. I do acknowledge the greatnes of the Warre and Conflict, as also I do acknowledg the le^gth of the Race: I also ^aily feele, and am guilty of my owne imbecilli^y and weaknes; and I do confesse before thee, vvho searchest the reines and harts of m^n, that the Vertue which is n me, is very small, and almost nothing. And I am not ignorant of the great forces, and crue^ty of my inuisible Enemies, who cannot brooke or disgest, that we poore soules are called to that vnspeakable Glory of the which Pryde hath depriued them. Enlighten (Sweet Iesus) my eyes, that I may neuer sleep in death; Increase my strength, that I may not fayle in the Way; Let thy Grace fight for me, least at any time my Enemy do say, I haue preuayled against him. And what I here a^ke for my self, the same also I aske and beseech for all my Brethren, but principally for those (whether Ecc^esiast ca^l, or secular) who are placed by thee, in sublimity and height of Authority; Whose danger is so much the greater, by how much their P ace and Function is more eminent and high, and vvhose Crowne of Glory
 shall be so much the more illustrious, if so with care and sol^icitude they rightly performe their Duty; by hovv much their damnation will be the greater, if the soules which thou (O Blessed Sauiour) hast redeemed with thy precious bloud, do perish through their owne fault, and carelesse negligence.


The Conclusion of the whole* Worke. CHAP. IX.
THe twelue Considerations touching the Eternall felicity of the Saints being explicated, and vnfoulded, this Conclusion may seeme iustly to be gathered the rout. To wit, That the Felicity of the Saints is in it selfe a most great and supreme thing; as also that it is chiefly to be desired and sought after by all men. But notvvithstanding that the Way to fynd and gaine the same, is most narovv, and laborious; so as, except a man come vvith an immoueable resolution (casting off the care of all other things) to labour
 with all his forces and endeauour; he shall neuer be able, to passe or penetrate that way; much lesse to arriue and come to his desired end. And that I may briefly make this more euident to the Reader, I will in place of a Conclusion, repeate all the forsaid Co^siderations, and their chiefest difficulties.
1. In the first place then we did consider Eternall Felicity, vnder the name of the Kingdome of Heauen; yet; hauing this most great difficulty out of the Word of God, annexed vnto it, to vvit: The kingdome of Heauen suffereth violence, and the violent beare it away. Matt. 11.
2. We after considered the same felicity vnder the name of the Citty of God, or the Heauenly Ierusalem; and there also we found no small difficulty, because those, who are Cittizens of this World, cannot be Citizens amo^g the Saints; for it is most hard to liue in the VVorld, and not to be of the VVorld.
3. In the third place, we considered the same Felicity vnder the name of the House of God, in the vvhich there are many Mansions; and we aduertised, that the Port, or Gate of this House
 is most strait, and that it cannot be penetrated or entered into, without great Labour.
4. Fourthly, we did consider the same place of Beatitude, vnder the name of Paradise; but with all, we considered, with how high a price (not of gould or siluer, but) of teares and bloud, our Lord himselfe, the Martyrs, Confessours, and all the Saints both Men and VVomen, did buy this Paradise; For we read Luc. 24. Christ ought to suffer, and so to enter into his glory.
5. In the fift place, we considered the same Felicity vnder the name of a Treasure, hidden in a field; and we no lesse shevved, that this Treasure could not be possessed of him that found it, except for the purchasing thereof, he did sell all things, which he had, Matth. 13.
6. Sixtly, we considered the same vnder the name of a precious Pearle, or Margarite; for the obtaining whereof, the Buyar also ought to spend all the goods he hath, that so he may purchase the same.
7. Seauenthly, vve considered the same vnder the name of a daily Penny,
 vvhich is not giuen, but only to such, vvho labour in the Vineyard diligently, and daily.
8. Eightly, we considered, the same vnder the title, or Name of a Great Supper; and we saw, that those were not reputed worthy of that Supper, whose affectio^s were enthralled vnto Temporall benefits, and pleasures.
9. Ninthly, we haue considered the same vnder the appellation of the Ioy of our Lord; to which they onely were admitted, who with great paynes and labour did multiply the Talents deliuered vnto them; such others, as did not performe the same, being cast into vtter darknesse.
10. Tenthly, we considered the same vnder the title of a Princely Marriage; from the which a^l those were excluded, who were giuen to Slouth and Idlenes, and who did not daily watch in the exercise of good workes, and expectation of the Celestiall Bridegrome.
11. In the eleauenth place, we considered the same vnder the name of a Prize or Reward; which they only tooke hould of who did runne in the
 race towards the Prize speedily, and constantly, and this not without great ^oyle and labour.
12. In the twelft and last place, we did co^sider it vnder the name of a Crowne, which they onely did deserue, who most couragiously in fight did ouercome their enemies.
Novv what way soeuer thou dost turne thy selfe, and vnder what name soeuer thou dost consider Eternall Felicity, thou shalt find, that it cannot be obtayned, except in pursuite thereof, thou dost labour withall thy forces both of mind and Body. Therefore he who desires to become Blessed, (which no man if he be in his Wits but wisheth to be) let him shake off all drowsynes and Slouth, let him labour and sweat for the gaining of so great a reward, by doing of good VVorkes, and suffering of Euills: And let him not prefer any temporall affaires, before this so great and only necessary Busines. And let him euer retaine in memory those words of S. Paul and S. Barnabas: By many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdome of God, Act. 14.

FINIS.

