



The first letter from Constantinople, the 10. of Iune 1622.
VVE vnderstand from Tartaria that there is great mustering of men, and that they intend to challenge the Throne of Othoman, hauing heard of the death of Osman, the great Turke: for this it stands, all that vast Countrey from Russia to the Indian and Atlantick Seas, is diuided betwixt three chames of ancient and noble race: The first is called Tartar Cham, a mighty Emperor, possessing the Prouince Mangia besides diuers other great Countreyes: The second Tartar Mechrit, vnder whom is desertum de lop; and many Nations to the Caspian Sea. The third is Tartar Chrim, discending directly from the Family of Othoman, who both by birth and contract may challenge the Imperiall Crown of Turkey, if that line shall faile, as is thought that he will doe now, or otherwise reuenge the murther of the aforesaid Osman vpon the Iannissaries.

Also the Letters from Venice make mention that some of the principall offenders that layed their hands on the Emperor, are fled, and that the rest at home are diuided, some holding with Mustapha, and some with a yonger brother of Osman aforesaid. And that Mustapha desires not the Empire, longing onely to visit the Temple of Mecha, being rauished with the promises of Mahomet.
They write also, that the principall Musty, and some Doctors of the Law, haue fore-told and presaged the determination, and finall end of the Turkish greatnesse, perswading the Visirs at the imitation of the Graecians, euery one to step in for a Kingdome, or more.
From Persia they certifie vs, that notwithstanding, through this dissention in Turkey, they haue gotten good opportunity to recouer Tauris, and other places left; the Sophy being much displeased with the insolent murther of the great Turke (as one Prince may act anothers part) is onely resolued to raise an army, to be reuenged on the Iannissaires, wherevpon the Beglerbeg of Arabia hath sent him a present of diuers braue Horses.

From Alexandria we heare, that the plague is so great in Gran Cayro, that about 80000. there haue beene buried within the space of foure moneths, and that the Iewes are flocking in such numbers to the Sea Townes, whereby the traffick is much augmented, and increased in the Straites.
From Algier they write, that the Pirate begin to erect a Common wealth among themselues, and haue written to the Hollanders, that if they will vnite with their forces together, they will make an notable attempt vpon the dominions of the King of Spaine, and begin a possession there.
It is reported here that at Naples there hath been an attempt made vpon the Viceroy by the Nobility and inhabitants, being perplexed with a dearth: but they cry out vpon nothing so much as liberty, and lye in waite to put some thing in execution.
These that come from Rome, relate that the Pope hath giuen a free indulgence and pardon of sinnes to all them that will serue the Emperour in his wars, wherupon many souldiers and great store of money are sent vnto him.

The Signorie of Venice hath sent lately diuers Gallies at Sea, besides some Gulleons towards Candia, and fortified the Harbours in Histria and Dalmatia, and vpon the continent about Crema and Brescia, prouideth all the places of importance with strong garrisons.
Letters of Millane make mention, that there hath beene an insurrection amongst the Grisons, whereby diuers Spaniards and Imperialists haue beene slaine, and many places forsaken, not without great terrour of the rest.
From Genoa it is certified, that some vndertakers haue taken sanctuary, or Asylum, being denied a protection from Spaine, although they say their debts arise, for being engaged about the Catholike Kings affaires.
They write from Florence and Luca, that there is great complaint against the English, seeing they deale not for so many silkes as they were vsed to doe; and therefore they will endeauour to make cloth and cottens of their owne, and not trade with England, as in times past.

From Poland the Newes is, that the Iesuites are hatefull to the Inhabitants, wherupon the Lords of the Country haue petitioned to the Maiestie of Sigism^nd, either to banish, or dismisse them, about which there is great discontent occasioned: and heere giue me leaue a little by way of transsition to wonder at this generation, why they? ouer all the Orders of Religion should so far vary from true Religion, as to delight in murther, combustion of Kingdomes, ostentation of knowledge, rapture of visi^ns, and especially setting Princes at division, yea breaking the band of amitie betweene Prince and Subiect, sure I can yeeld you no r^ason for it? but this as it fareth with Children, who sucking of a froward nurses breast become accordingly froward and pettish in their liues: so they having one Ignatius Loyalta a Souldier to their Father of a fiery disposition, no doubt according to his name, doe immitate him in the fierie and bloody stepps of warre and dissention: God grant that all Princes
 may take heede of their pollicies. For in my Conscience they would pull down the Papacy, if they could, and set vp their owne Superintendancy.
They also write, that from the Cittie of Leopolis and the Country adiacent, much Corne hath beene transported to Constantin^ple in this time of their dearth through the Blacke Sea, whereby they haue beene wonderfully enriched, as the Turkes neighbourly are releived.
From Spaine, there is newes of the feare of the Mores, who haue lately made an attempt in Granado, and word is brought by a Brazill man into Portingall, that the wilde men about the River of Amazones, haue rebelled against the Portingals, and Spaniards, who governe the Country and rule there. Much like that vnfortunate mischiefe which hath happened of late in Virginia* where we heare almost 300. of the English Plantation were slaine by the perfidiousnes of the old Inhabitants.
The second, from Vienna the 22, day, This Cit^ie is much quieted since the Emperours
 Marriage, for heere are many Nobles and Ladies, who professe the Gospel, and haue their Congregations without the walles of the Cittie, to the number sometime of fortie or fiftie Coaches, all which liue here vndisturbed by reason the Emperesse entertaines them graciously, and they attend the Court with all humilitie when occasion serveth; whereas before they stood vppon their guard, and their Servants rodd with pistols and petronels to the Church: And (God be thanked) the Iesuites cannot divert him from his resolution, to keepe good quarter with his Subiects, although they haue many times attempted the same. Or other wise it may be, their great numbers keepe all in awe, and that the Emperour is loath to be troubled with warres abroad, and dissentions at home.
From Odenburgh, is here newes that the Emperour proposed to the Lords and States, the Coronation of his Sonne, but that they absolutely denyed it, as having made choice of another.

It was also Reported, that the Cosackes having no Warres in Poland, threatned to come downe into Hungaria, which the Iesuits vrged, and the Emperour intertayned, but it is sayd, and thought, the Tartarians and Russians will keepe them backe with their Incursions and Enterprises, which they intend to make shortly.
In those parts are still made great musterings, to supply the Emperours warres. This Cittie, Prague it selfe, hath guard and watch like a Towne of warre, and they beate vnto the Parado, as if the enemie lay before it. In plaine termes, they are iealous one of another, and the Heires and Friends of those whom the Emperour put to execution, long to be revenged. As for the Iewes, though they generally reioyce at those dissentions among Christians, and slaughtering one another, yet doe they particularly rather fauour the Protestants then the Catholiques.
From Moravia, wee vnderstand that the
 Marquis of Iaggerendorf, remayneth constant to the King of Bohemia, and hath written to Count Mansfield for his comming into Bavaria, alledging if hee doe attempt that, he shall be sure to finde many Friends for his passage into Bohemia, where, if the warre beganne againe, no question, some great alteration will follow: for Bethlem Gabor is now at leasure to take his part, and will questionlesse assist him, if he can prosecute any course to come neere him.
The fourth, from Cullen the first of Iuly. The Baron of Anholt hath threatned the Countrey of the Landtgraue of Hessen, in behalfe of the Imperialistes; hee intends to recover the places in W^stphalia, taken by the Duke Christian of Brunswick, but the Inhabitants are all rather for Brunswick, then the Bishop of Cullen, from whom they were taken.
From Franckfort we vnderstand, that the Duke of Saxony hath imposed a harsh Commandement in his Townes, for the
 searching of Passengers, and although he seemeth discontent at Bavaria's proceedings, yet doth he governe Silesia for the Emperour, or at least so much of it as the Catholiques are willing to submit vnto him. But among other things, the Bishops are most fierce against the Protestants, and will not suffer them to goe vnto their Churches.
From Poland we haue Newes, that the inhabitants being become loath of the Iesuits, the Nobilitie hath requested the King, either to banish or dismisse them, about which is great discontent occasioned.
They write from Noragrad in Russia, that the Iesuites had layd a plott with certaine Prussians, to robbe and surprise the Abbey of Saint Nuclay in Muscovia, adioyning almost to the Sea, which they did either out of envie, at the flourishing of the Greeke Church, then which there is nothing more hatefull to the Roman, or out of a common disposition, and
 wicked perversenesse to raise quarrels betweene Countries, and nourish enmitie betweene Princes.
The last from Franckfort, the first of Iuly. After the arrivall of the Duke of Brunswick at Mainhem, where he was stately well-commed; the King of Bohemia seeing the Countrey was not able to sustaine his Forces, called a Counsell of Warre, and resolved to depart; leaving the Palatinate to the care and tuition of the Lord Belfast, and Generall Vere; with whom he also left eight thousand men more then they had, and so they devided themselues, that they presently marched ten thousand horse, and twentie thousand Foote.
The King and Mansfeild ar now in Als^tia, prosecuting the Warre there against the Emperours Brother Leopaldus, burning, spoyling, and taking the Countrey to his obedience, the which will constraine Tilly soone to forsake the siege of Heidelburge, and follow the King, and so by this
 meanes divert the Warre into his Enemies Countrey: He hath sent the Duke of Brunswick into Bavaria, to furnish the Kings Armie with provision, and then to march and ioyne both together, and so to goe forward as toward Bohemia, as God shall giue them leaue. They were no sooner gone, but Tilly advanced his Forces towardes Ladenburgh, and from thence to Heidelburgh. Whereupon Sir Garret Herbert Commaunder there of the Castle, assembled the Burgers and Inhabitants to know both their abilitie, and resolutions, whether they would endure the siege or no, and how long they thought their provision would last: they answered generally, that they would liue and die with him, and so they prepared themselues to endure the siege. And it was thought that Tilly did this rather to divert them from their Iourney into Alsatia, then to bestow so much time in the siege of a Towne which could profit him l^ttle in the obtaining more, then the possession of the place, vnlesse the Emperour were
 resolued contrary to his owne Embassy, to make it a continuall warre. Tilly going on with his siege, tooke two of the inhabitants, and cut off their heads, which he pitched vpon poles, turning their faces toward the towne to terrifie the Burgers: but they in requitall cut off fiue souldier* heads, and serued them so likewise. Gonsales in the meane time being at Opp^nheim, was yet doubtfull whether he would set vpon Mainheim or Frankendale, and so to get the Palatinate at once, lest it be gotten againe: but there is a God that holdeth the windes in his hands, and will no doubt hold backe that resolution, which must be the cause of so much blood-shedding, if the warres should goe forward in such a manner: but what will be the issue, time will reueale.
The Landgraue of Hessen, mistrusting lately the forraging of his countrey by the Imperials, writ to the Princes of the vnion concerning the same, who all returned, that their cause was a common feare, and therefore they would liue and die together in maintaining the generall
 cause of Religion, and particular defending one anothers Countrey.
In the same Letter was likewise set downe the resolution of diuers Imperiall Cities, viz. Auspurg, Norremburg, Wittenburg, Francfort, Strasburg, and some other, for the maintaining of the confession of Auspurg, which was the resolution of the Protestant Faith, bought out long since by great summes of Money of Rodolphus and Matthias, former Emperors. Whereupon these Cities fortified their walls, had their Burgers in Armes, for feare to bee surprized.
We haue heard from Hagenaw, that the Imperials had lately gone about to surprize the said Citie, and had gotten fortie men through a Vault within the Walls, but were all presently shot to death, and the Citie preserued of that dangerous enterprise.
In Hungaria the matters stand yet doubtfull: the Hungarians haue flatly denyed the Coronation of the Emperors sonne: the Clergie desires to haue all the Spirituall goods backe againe, with the arrerages,
 but the States and Lay-men will restore them but a part. They can neyther agree vpon many other points: so that it is likely nothing will be concluded at the Dyet.
Here was flying newes, that the Emperor was taken prisoner, but it is not true: but this is certaine, Bethlem Gabor and the Lord Bridiani are very strongly marched vp in armes.
Those of Glatz and Klingenburgh stand yet brauely out, and haue lately giuen a great Ouerthrow vnto the Imperiallists, and they grow daily stronger and stronger. The old Count of Thorne is reported to be vpon the way with 26000. men, to rescue them.
From Denmarke they write, that the King hath sent diuerse Presents to the Queene of Bohemia at the Hage, and written sundry Letters of comfort and consolation, assuring of his assistance as wel of Men as Money: and that hee hath requested the Hauen Townes to arme diuers Souldiers to goe into Westphalia, to helpe and supply those garrisons which Brunswick left there.

The Hollanders lately come from Sweden report, that the Captaine of Calmar castle was called in question for his life, as b^ing betrayed by a counterfeit letter, written by some secret malitious enemy, as though the same came from Poland for the surrendring of the fort when time should serue: but his innocency saued his life, and the matter was soone taken vp.
From France it is written, that the king is resolued to go forward in his enterprises against the Protestant townes. That the Iesuites are iealous of the Prince of Conde, and he gets but the kings displeasure by his violent courses. That the Protestants will rather make sallies and die in the field then in their houses. That Mountalbo is so well prouided of all kind of prouision, that they thinke the king will not easily b^siege it againe. Those of Mompellier prepare themselues likewise, if his Maiestie would attempt any thing against them.
That the Duke of Rohan increase^h his army dayly, and hopeth vpon a great person in France. That the king is much
 discontented, and hath a growing disease vpon him. That the Rochellers take dayly prizes, and were resolued to make a sally vpon the Duke of Espernon, being strong and able to minister many braue souldiers. That there is a prohibition for the landing of the English at Callice, or on those Coasts. That diuers Apologies are written in the defence of the Protestants, and that the Queene laboureth what she may to pacifie the troubles.
From B^u^sels they write, that if the Ambassadours doe not suddenly agree vpon a peace, it is feared that the warre^ will increase both in the Palatinate, and the Low Countries. My Lord of A^gile hath almost filled his Regiment, and they lo^ke for foure or fiue thousand Brit^^i^^ more to come vnto them within this (...) i^ weekes.
From the Hag^ we heare, that the Prince of O^ang is marched vp with a braue army, with resolution to set downe b^fore Shertog^nb^s^h, and hath sent for all his Captaines out of England to attend his seruice^ no question S^^eola will follow him. Wee
 heare also, that there are publicke Fasts and set Prayers for the affaires of the Palatinate.
They write also, that his subiects of Austria, Stiria, Curniola, and Curinthia, haue petitioned to his Maistie, that as they proue good and obedient subiects vnto him, it would please him to be a gratious Lord vnto them, to giue them leaue to liue in the libertie of their conscience, and die in the profession of the Gospel, that liuing and dying they may giue God the praise for his protection, who openeth the hearts of kings, and his Maiestie the honour of their welfare, for being so beneficiall vnto them.
Wee doe further vnderstand, that there is co^ming to the King of Bohemia, Count Mansfield, and the Duke of Brunswicke, for their further helpe in the great enterprises they intend, ten thousand horse and foote of Switzers, and ten thousand horse and foote of Bohemians: and that the old Earle of Thorne is gone to releeue Glatz with twentie foure thousand horse and foote,
 and that Iagensdorpe is marching toward the King of Bohemia with thirty thousand horse and foote, and that Bethlem Gabor will not bee long absent from the King: God (I hope) will rayse vp friends to helpe his true Church, notwithstanding the Greatnesse of the Enemies.

FINIS.
