



A STRANGE-FOOTE-POST,
WITH A PACKET
full of madde Petitions.
IUst about that time of ye yeare when
yt Spring begins to co^mand her handmaide
Flora, to sticke the bosome of
euery watry maedow, and sedgie lake,
with nosegayes of party coloured flowers:
hauing dulled my spirits with
serious meditations, and plunged my
senses in the quicksands of Inuention,
aswell, to shake of a sullen Melancholy
that attended me, as to entertaine some quicke, and more
publicke recreation: I walked into a neighbouring meade,
where it was my chance to light vpon an Arbor so priuately
seated, as if Nature had built it a Caue, or receptacle for Solitude:
inuironed so close, with the long and slender armes
of Osiers, and so curiously intermingled with the leauy fingers
of Woodbine, and sweete Eglantine, that neither cold
nor raine could easily pierce it. In whose windowes, the feathered
Quiristers of the groue, shipping from twig to twig,
song pretty (though idle) notes, to the murmure of a siluer
spring, which made such soft and solemne Musicke, that
what with wondering, at the more then common workemanship
of Art, and the Metaphisicall indeauours of Nature,
in their ignorant (yet well according) Harmony, Leaning my
hand vpon my elbow, (being at that time destitute of a softer
pillow) I fell into a sodaine, yet sound sleepe, during
which, my imaginary insight apprehended a most strange
vision.

Mee thought I was eleuated into the Zodiack, where like
a Stranger cast vpon a forrain Coast, I was stricken with
vn-vtterable admiration, wondring at the strange obiectes I
beheld. Gazing thus on euery side, like a Country-Gentlewoman
at hir first comming to a famous Citty, one clapt me
vpon the head, whose very sight did much affright me, that
it was enough to haue put me out of the wit I had: For
the party I speake of was headed like Hydra,The description of Opinion. hauing more
Tongues, then Esope prouided for his Maisters dinner: and
for eyes, he was no Cyclops, or Polypheme, but an other
Argus: The cloathes he wore, were for all the world fashioned
like a fantasticall Englishmans, a gallimawfry of most
Countrie cuts, but not of one Cloath, Stuffe, Sattin, Ueluet,
etc. as theirs are: Nor of one, two, three, foure colour^^,
as for the most part theirs are; but heere a peece of Ueluet,
there a peece of Uellure, heere a peece of Sattin, there a peece
of Sackcloath, filled with sundry patches of seuerall patternes,
like a Taylors hole, or rather Hell, whereinto he
casteth many bodies of men and women.
This Monster seeing me so pittifully perplexed, told me
that he was not so terrible as he seemed and that his name
was Opinion, so Headed, Sighted, Tongued and arraied,
to shew the multiplicity, variety, and contrariety of mens
Opinions, Fantasies, and Conceipts: And that the place
wherein I then was, was named the Metrapolitan Cittie of
the World, seeming indeed like Heauen it selfe, inhabited by
Spirits of all sortes, adorned with Sunne and Moone, like
a contributarie King and Queene, Girt about with all the
Signes of the Zodiack, garnished with Planets, which like
Rulers ouerswayed Sublunary Creatures: Beautified
with Starres of three sortes, whereof some were tearmed
Fixae, resembling vertuous and constant women, keeping in
their Sphaeres, as in their houses. Others Errantes, wandring
Starres, gadding like Gossips, which ride from Cities
to Countries, running from their owne Mansions to
Tauernes, from their husbands bosoms to other mens beds.

The third, Cadentes, that is, falling Starres, whereunto
wantons may bee compared, which fall from the Heauen of
Honesty, to the unmoveable masse of Misdemeanour and
immodesty: Forth with he led mee through many Lanes and
shewed me the signes as wee passed along the heauen streete:
Here (said hee) is Aries, the signe of the Ramme: What the
Ramme in fleet street thought I? This is Cancer the signe of
the Crabbe: Here is Virgo, the signe of the Maide: That is
a rare signe indeede, many a young beginner would bee glad
to dwell at that signe: This is Scorpio, the signe of the Scorpion,
a venemous Serpent which hurteth with the taile:
That is Capricornus, the signe of the Goates head, some
Cuckold languisheth there, while his wife laugheth abroad:
This is Gemini the signe of the Twinnes, there dwelleth a
good member in the Commonwealth, which getteth two at
once: Heere is Leo the signe of the Lyon: There is Libra,
the signe of the paire of Scailes: Terras Astraea reliquit,
Iustice hath forsaken the Earth, and keepeth shopp there:
That is Sagittarius the signe of the Archer, blinde Cupid
maketh bird-bolts there to dazle Woodcocks: This is Aquarius,
the signe of the Water-bearer, I supposed at first a
Uintener dwelled there, which carrieth so much water to
quench the fire, which would else rise out of his Seller, till
I gazed for a Bush and could see none, but the bush Beard of
a Brewer: After he conducted me by the seauen Planets,
seauen Gates of this Cittie: The first and lowest he called
Luna,The Postern which being then in the Ecclips, I deemed the Postern
Gate shut close: The second Sol the Sunne, which I resembled
to Mooregate,Mooregate. because it is more delicious and pleasant
then the Moone, with beames and rayes, or rather rayles
on the oneside: The third Mercury the God of Theeues,
Cheaters, Nymble-fingered-fellowes, which made me call
it Newgate:Newgate. Algate. Ludgate. The fourth Venus, the Goddesse of Loue,
which I tearmed Allgate, because all goe thorough that
Gate: The fift Mars, which looked sternly like King Lud,
whose very aspect at that time wrought in my conceipt that

I feard a Sergeant was dragging mee to Lud-gate: The
sixt Iupiter,Aldersgate. which I surmisd to be Alders-gate: The seauenth
Saturne, olde, feeble, and deerepit, which I thought might
somwhat fitly be nominated Cripple-gate:Cripplegate. Are here all said
I? I haue one gate yet, standing voyd to bee shut vp with
a similitude: What gate is that said Opinion? It is
Bishops-gate said I. Some Philosophers cauill about it
said Opinion. But Aristotle and Plato make reckoning of an
eight, which is called Sphaera octaua, that is, the firmament
containing the fixed starres. Why then this Sphaera Octaua
is Bishopgate, containing all the fixed starres: that is, the
faithfull Ministers:Bishops-gate. And the Philosophers which cauill about
it, are none but contentious Brownists, and Separaters: which
because the eyes of their true vnderstanding are plucktout,
would plucke the whole house vpon their owne heads, to the
ouerthrow of the Rulers. But let these Byases passe by like
asses, with bag and baggage to Anser-dame, so long as we haue
Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers, and Plato the Diuine
on our sides. Our gardens will prosper the better when they
haue in them not one of these Elders, whereupon so many
couetous Iudasses hang themselues.
By this time we had passed through al the Planets set about
with stars, like so many gates with watchmen; and were
entred into the aire, the heauens suburbs: Here (quoth Opinion)
you may daily behold diuers that passe to and fro from all
parts to present their seueral petitions to Fortune and implore
her aide for some good hap: which many times they obtaine,
if their Petitions go not through many hands: for then they
are either lost or torn, or come to some friends hands, against
whom they are preferred, and the Petitioners are checkt and
called seditious knaues, and go home perhaps an hundred
miles with a Flea in their eare.
Then me thought I was very importimate to know the
seuerall suiters, that became so suppliant to Fortune: and euen
as Opinion was telling me he would certifie me of them
is order, Behold (quoth he) yonder is one trauelling a pace,

that ministers matter to giue you some satisfaction. And as
I was thus giuing my attendance, and obseruation, I might
see a femall comming, indeed a peart one she was, as ready to
giue the welcome to her customers, as a boy in a barre, and
as nimble as a Parasite in an old Comedie.

The harlot passeth by them.
FIe vpon her (said I) she will neuer haue good successe in
her suite,The Harlot. she hath such Anticke attire, and doth so trip and
go with her Petition: What? a woman of tall stature, and vpright
body? (would she were as vpright in her life and behauiour)
high browes, faire haire? (hath she not robbed the dead
for it)? round cheeks, currall lips, dimpled chin, sleeke necke, and
slender waste? Tis good if they be not hooks to draw men in, and
birdlime to tie the frathers of euery stranger, that none may
escape them. But I feare she is (as some say of wanton women)
like Circes witches, and can turne vaine glorius fooles
into Asses, gluttonous fooles into Swine, pleasant fooles into
Apes, proud fooles into Peacocks, and when she hath done,
scourge them out of dores with a whip.
This is one (said Opinion) whose face is a painted Sepulcher,The Opinion of a Harlot.
whereas her mind is a Tombe full of rotten bones and
Serpents: her browes (like the Diamond) containe vertue
to relieue, and payson to kill: her lookes are like Calenders,
that can determine no certainty, but (as a certaine leafe)
which is most drie, when it lookes most moist: so when shee
smiles, she imagines deceit, and her laughters are tempered
with enuy and reuenge: her vows are but as words written in
the wind: her promises Caracters figured in the aire: her flatteries,
figures grauen in the Snow, which are blowne with
the wind or melted with the Sun: and her loue, like the passage
of a Serpent ouer a stons, which once past, can neuer boseene.
She will promise mountaines, and perform Molehils.
She will say she loues with Dido, and yet faine with Crefida:
follow Demophon with Phillis, and yet be more stragling

then Luna: she hath smiles (at her wish) to bewitch, and
teares (at command) as the Crocodile, to betray. If thou
proffer her any thing, she will pockeeat all: if thou hast gold,
she is a Horsleach, and will not out of thy bosome: but shee
hates an empty purse, as the Hyenna doth the fight of a man,
and wil flie from thee, when thou art poore, as the foule from
the Faulion. In plaine termes, she is a proud prorhane Harlot.
And were she not prophane, what Athiest would frequant
her? were she not bawdy, what Puncquatero would shew his
rotten teeth to her? Were she not ridiculous, what country
Gentiles would come to her? Were she not full of toyes and
gewgawes, what Citizens would flocke to her? In a word,
Were she not as she is, she would be like a Politician without
a profound head, like a flatterer without a glib tongue,
like an Astronomer without eyes, a Musitian without hearing,
a Souldier without hands, a Porter without a strong
backe, a Gentleman vsher without straite legs, a Lackey
without feete, in no reputation. But it is not so with her, for
she is a Bona Roga: and the Petition which she comes to present,
must needs (no doubt) bring some good fruite, from that
corrupt tree.
Vouchsafe to looke vpon the lines of your humble Petitioner,The Harlots Petition.
who from fifteene yeares of age hath hene a woman of
no carriage, liuing alwaies chast both in towne and countrey,
and haue had much dealing with many of great ability, till of
late that I failed of your furtherance, and missed many of my
customers. For whom, when I made a secret inquisition, and
priuie search (fearing they had made a voyage to settle themselues
in Virginia) I met some of them prepared for Tiburne,
others I found encountred with Counters, and some laid vp
in houses of Hospitalitie: which vnexpected sight did so appaleme,
that forthwith I thought good to present this Petition
vnto you: requesting that such as are my wel willers, may
haue some longer continuance of your fauours, and not tast so
sodainly of your frownes, (which will be my vtter vndoing)
so long as they haue money or meanes. But when they are destitute

of both, then cast them off, let them steale and be hanged:
which if they deny, I wish you send them farre enough:
for there is nothing more combersome, then impecunious
hangers on.
There be also some of the officious (to whom I wish none
of your fauours) as the onely causers of our ouerthrowes.Where there is one of these officers, I would there were twentie. For
they hunt vs like Hares, and ferrit vs like Conyes. They tie vs to
stakes like Beares, and whip vs like Iades. They driue vs from
post to piller, that were we not predestinate as it were to liue
chast, they would compell vs euen against our Fate to become
chast, they do so chase vs from countrey to citie, from citie to
suburbes, from houses and husbands, to cousens and allies,
where we leade a life like brute beasts among grasse, trees; etc.
Or liue like the old water-Nymphs, or Fairies (which pinched
poore men) in wels and ditches. As Shorditch and Clarkenwell.
I therefore sue to haue an Habeas Corpus serued vpon them,
especially certaine little Annimals, called Beagles, who seeing
poore Does prostrate before their feete, haue notwithstanding
the heart to hurt, and draw blood from their ribbes and
shoulders.

Maddona Meretrix.



The Baude commeth to the Harlot.
GOe thy wayes,The Baude. thy fooles bolt is shot a Cookheight against
the starres, which will light vpon thine owne
head. Here is a Petition indeed, if all Petitions should be
granted. But there is another come vnto her, she should be
a yong woman by her great belly: but now she yawneth, I
see the marke is out of her mouth, she walloweth like a Sow
with pigge, talketh very imperiously, and is clad most modestly
But I mistike one thing, she cougheth so sorely, are her lungs
sound?
Out vpon her (said Opinion) though she speake purely,The opinion of a Baude.
sweare sparingly, looke demurely, and walke sagely, yet her
life is loathsome, and behauior beastly. She hath her roguish

Rhetorick at her fingers, ends, and can winch, kicke, and fling
when she seeth her oportunitie. She goeth to the Church with
an ill will, vnlesse to picke a pocket, or to peruert some honest
mans wife she is pued withall. But she will bestir her ^^mps
to get easie roome in a Theater; and twenty to one she will
lure some Buffard to dogge her home at the end of the Play.
She liueth by vsury, but here is the difference: the vsurer
putteth but ten (ouer and aboue) to his hundreth in the yeare,
But she brings an hundreth to ten, nay to two somtimes in
a weeke, Abhominable filth as she is, I wish thee to stop thy
eares at her words, for she is a Mer-maide, or rather Mar-maide.

Afilthie Baude.



The Spendall passeth along.
ROome for a Gentleman,The Spendall. mark the motion my Masters:
his dublet is of the ragged ranke, with neuer a button
on it, and his breeches are very faulty, they must be mended,
I maruell he buyeth himselfe no better cloathes now
his rents begin to come in so fast: Foure paire of yarn stockings
would make no great shew vpon those spindle shankes:
he looketh very Lentenly and conuneth halting on.
This tottered Colt (said Opinion) which once had high
desires,The Opinion of the Spendal hath now lowe fortunes; his thoughts were woont
to reach at starres, but now stumble at stones. He was his
fathers dotage, and his Mams darling: a toward Springall
you will say, when he lay with his mothers Chambermaide
at sixteene: and an vntoward Spendall, when he had lauished
the sixt part of a Million before he knew sixe and twentie
Birth dayes. He did of late swim in gluttonny, but now is
pinched with pennury. He was woont to deuise what to eat,
and is now destitute of any food. He hath worne more vpon
his backe then the gold (which procured passage for the Asse
into the Castle) would defray. His quondam full feeding maketh
him now took so emptily. His drinking so many healths
hath taken all health from him: his so often leaping the pale,
causeth him looke so pale: his close following the fashion,

bringeth him now (as you see) out of all forme and fashion:
had he taken time before he might haue lodged in an house like
a pallace, as he doth now in a place like a prison, lying like a
Nutmeg in a Grate, being the Embleme of vnthriftinesse, the
Hierogliphicke of Riot, the picture of the Prodigall, and the
Indiuidium vagum of a poore pitifull pennilesse Spendall.
Most humbly sueth a cashierd Caualiere,The Spendal^ Petition. no Gentleman
yet a knights sonne and heire, being richly bequeathed, and
well mannered, consorted with men of choice fashion, with
women of famous report: much indebted to merchants, and
greatly bound to their wiues. But at last wanting present
meanes to repay the one, and competent matter to come euen
with the other, which did put me to my plunges, that I was
constrained to colleague with a Miser, Qui nummos admiratur:
An vsurer that doth make much of money, who vpon some
consideration of my good conditions did supply me for a
time, but when Doomes-day came, that I should render an
account for all, all was gone, my lands were seised vpon, my
credite ceased, and I clapped vp amongst Bankrupts, and borrowers:
where now I must lie like a forlorne wretch, euen readie
to die for want of reliefe: my friends pittie me, my enemies
play vpon me.The end of Riot. All flie from me, none come nye me, but
mercilesse keepers, and miserable caytiffes, who make me remember
what I learned long agoe.

Cum fuer is foelix multos numerabis amicos,
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes:

When I was mounted vpon the chariot of Fortune, Gallants
would conuerse with me, Lawyers giue attendance to my
suites, Tradesmen cappe to me, Dependants crouch to me,
Brokers borrow for me, Vsurers lend me, Flatterets extol me,
lusty Lasses aduance me, stoope to me, and hang about my
necke like goodly Iewels, as they proue. But now I am trampled
vnder the wheele of Chance, all is turned topsie turuey,
Qui nuper albus eram, nunc sum contrarius albo. Gallants in their
Pasquill humours begin to gird at me. Curia pauperibus clausa
est. Lawyers haue no feeling of my case: Tradesmen will haue

no commerce with me; Dependants hang downe their heads
as if they were going to hanging: Brokers become boisterous:
Vsurers misuse me. Thus am I vsed for vsing them: thus
am I deceiued for trusting them: thus am I despised for imbracing
them: thus am I become a castaway for casting away my
money amongst them. Now there is no wealth left, they are
all lost, now my gold is flowne they are all fled, and now am I
in want, they are all vanished like vnto an empty cloude. Oh
that you would but send some Reuenge vpon some of them,
that others of my rancke, seeing some of their fals, may shun
the like places, and amend their follies, and they themselues
relent, and haue their remorseles hearts turned: if out of their
bellies, honestye and vpright dealing should haue no great
losse.

The Spendall.



The Sergeant attends on him.
VVOuld all our Lusty-Guts would looke in at this
looking glasse.The Sergeant. He was as well rigg'd a Pinnace,
as some that make a greater shew, and as well mann'd till
the boisterous blasts of his owne affections splitted him vppon
the rocks of Riot. He was as louely as Laeander, before
he cast himselfe into the Sea of sensuality, and might in time
haue proued a Co-adiutor of his countries weale, had hee
closed his cares at the inueigling of Sea-Lures, and shut his
mouth when Circe preferred him the cup to quaffe, which
turned him to a beast, or more wretched then a beast in these
daies, A beggar. But what is he that attendeth him so closely
in the gowne.
It seemeth (said Opinion) that you neither trust nor are
trusted:The opinion of the Sergeant. Either you haue stood in no need of money, or you
want credit to borrow: or if you haue borrowed, you pay according
to promise, and appointment; else he would haue bene
so bold as to haue clapped you vpon the shoulder, and bene
better acquauited with you, though you cared not greatly for
his acquaintance, if euer you came into the precincts of his
Iurisdiction: He is an Officer, whose office I disallow not,

but dislike some of his fratrernitie in their extreame executing
of their duties, which will fawne like Spaniels, on such
as bribe them, and will be inquisitiue after them, where
they are sure they are not: But mercilesse Furies to haunt out
poore men, which are disable to fee, and feed them with rewards,
and that which sheweth them to be no Christians on
the Sabboath day: He is at the best but a decayed Tradesman,
or vnthrifty Occupier, which, how dissolutely or basely
soeuer he liued before, is good inough to be as he is, The
quartaine Feuer to a Spendall: the Plague to bad Pay-maisters:
the Vsurers foisting hound: a necessary naile in the finger
of the Common wealth to claw men by the poles.

A Sergeant.



The countrey Client passeth along.
HE hath neuer a Petition to preferre,The countrey Client. vnlesse against such
as are wise enough to keepe their money, while they
haue it, and pay duly where they owe. But stay, what is he
that noddeth next? if my eye-sight faile me not, a short corpulent
fellow with a full face, and foule hands, couered like
a Capease all with leather, backt with a broad dagger, a long
sword which handleth the forepart of his stops very rigorously:
now is his browne bonnet whipt betweene his legs,
and he stands groping for his Petition.
This man (said Opinion) you see so plainly attird, is
quite tered with following the law:The opinion of the country Client. who though he seeme so
plaine, hath as many crooked conditions in his Costrell, as
a slight of your finest fashionmongers. If he be Churchwarden,
the Parishoner he maligneth, is summoned vpon suspition,
if he giue but a well looking Lasse a good morrow, or
good night. If he be Constable, all the Alewines are vndons:
If his neighbour trespasse against him, he will neuer forgiue
him. He will worship any man for his commodity, but
where he neither feareth nor hopeth, He is haile fellow, well
met. Cocknies may laugh at him, as he laggeth along the

pauements, and Guls giggle when he passeth by their proper
personages: but if he could get vantage, he would make
them pay for the whole dozen: Let him alone, whether hee
haue his Oates, Pease, or Beanes, yet he wanteth no fetches.
Lend an eare to his Petition, if it be truly speld, hee
will coniure somebody.
Long haue I liued,The contrey Clyents Petition. and grieued to see so many citizens become
Bankrouts, when Lawyers flourish, and breath and
braule to the vtter ruine and vndoing of such pooremen as my
selfe, who hauing an homely wife and children at home, am
compelled to come in Coram to this most deare Cittie, where
I lie at exceeding charges, following the Law, which I faine
would flie: But necessity hath no Law, for hauing no fees, I
may find a Lawyer (adding but a Maister to it) who hath either
no Law in his budget, or no conscience in his breast. So my
case hath bene considered, and hung so long in Westminster
hall, as my fathers Bowcase in mine owne hall, euer since he
died, and left certaine lands to be parted amongst his sonnes,
who, because we could not deuide them according to euery
one of our contents, were contented to crouch to certaine
Lawyers, who conceiuing the controuersie, and perceiuing
vs at such variance, like our friends and welwillers promised
to take our parts: and indeed not to belie them, they haue
bene as good as their promises, and haue taken our parts, and
not left vs an hole, or part to thrust our heads into. And now
we lacke vnde: they come ouer vs with a Quare, which putteth
vs into a Quandary, to be sent farre with neuer a farthing.
It were ingratitude not to requite our welwillers and partakers,
or at least, to wish wel vnto them that we cannot requite.
My Petition therfore is, that you would conferre an hundreth
marks or two vpon such Pillers, or rather Caterpillers, I mean
such markes, as may marke them, to make others marke and
beware of them. But for those rare, admirable, miraculous, honest,
conscionable, graue deciders, which weigh the matter
more then the money, preferre the Commonweale, more
then their owne priuate wealth: pleade for the poore, as well

as Nobles: permit the not guiltie, ouerthrow the guiltie; I
pray that they may liue many merry and Hillarie termes, for
the good of their countrey, and profit of themselues, and their
posteritie.

The countrey Client.



The Hostler followeth him.
SUre, said I, this Petition was neuer of his owne making,
it is pincked so Pedantically,The Hostler. cut vpon fustian Phrases,
and bound about with Mocke-adoes.
Resolue your selfe (answered Opinion) your countriman
in many places is so metamorphosed in maners now a daies,
and quaint tearmes, that you shall hardly distinguish Pan
from Apollo, but by the habit, and so captious in words,
that you can vtter no ward that he will not equiuocate, if
the Idiome will beare it. He speaketh so ambiguously, that
if his speech be construed one way, he knoweth how to interpret
it after another signification, and is not the man you take
him, for if you take him for a plaine, silly, honest man at all
times,The Hostler leadeth the countrey Clients horse after him. and in euery respect. You haue said enough of him,
but I pray you what is he for a man that doth follow him,
he hath a sticke in his hand, which he whisketh as he leadeth
the horse by the bridle.
He is as full of complement as his maister an Innekeeper:
You are welcome Gentlemen,The opinion of a knaue Hostler. is all his eloquence, and that
he sheweth as well to a clowne, as a knight. At your entrance
into his stable, he will be so obsequious and seruile, that he
wil wipe your very horses heeles. He stinketh like a Curricombe,
and smelleth as ranke as Stale. He will giue your
horse a pecke of prouender (if it be your pleasure) and steale
halfe of it, if you eye him not narrowly. At night he filleth tho
racke with hay, but in the morning you shal not find an handfull,
though your horse, nor any other by him eat not a mouth
full. If you abide any long time and will hourely looke vnto
your beast, as it is best (for the eye of the maister maketh

the horse fat) he can take order for his eating ouermuch, by
greasing his teeth with a tallow candle. He loueth drinke
likely, and a drab if he be not married. He hath no yearely
wages of his maister to maintaine him, but that which
guests bestow vpon him. To be briefe with him: at your departure,
if you giue him any thing in the chamber, when
you make cleare with the house, he hath a switch in one hand,
and the bridle turned ouer the maine of your horse, standing
in readinesse, to hold your stirrop steadfastly, and bid you
heartily farewell: But if he finde you miserable, your saddle
girts are tied but slackly, and if you like them not, you may
mend them your selfe, and if you looke not before you leape,
you may perchance rue it. But he will hold your stirrop if
you bid him, he dare not deny it, it is a speciall point of his
profession, but slackely, and with the head on the one side: and
he will bid you farewell (as his maister may heare) and bee
hanged, (that he muttereth to himselfe.) Though he be a
knaue, yet he is a man of great calling (especially when trauellers
ride early on their iourney.

An Hostler.



The old Seruing man passeth along.
ECce autem alterum, Behold a blew coate with neuer a
badge on it,The old Seruingman. the crowne of his head like a Franciscans,
Leno in facie, he looketh leaue in the face, and lanke in the belly:
All his apparrell looke as though they were cast, a signe
of a weake stomacke to beare strong liquour. Looke how he
kisseth his hand as if he were in loue with it, and licketh the
superficies of the floore with his knees. Fie vpon it, how semonious
he is in deliuering his Petition. Those lowe legs,
and kissing the hand (if he can cogge, and lie to) would get
him a seruice with some in the world, if he would serue three
or foure yeares for no wages, he should haue halfe a crowne
at parting.
Nay (said Opinion) he hath bene long enough in that predicament,

and now can shew nought of his getting,The opinion of the old Seruingman. vnlesse
children he dare not father. He was a pretty boy, an handsome
strippling, a proper man: peeuish in his childhood, proud
in his youth, and prodigall in his best yeares: He hath wasted
his portion in hope of preferment: spent his substance,
looking for aduancement; consumed quite all, in expectation
of some requitall. His greatest felicitie was to court the
chambermaids in some corner, and his chiefe exercise to make
his maisters friendsSeruingmen. dependants drunke. He was trained
vp in some peece of a ioyners trade to make legs, and the best
part of his Rhetoricke was, I forsooth, and No forsooth.
The iniunctios that he was tied to, were to rise at all
houres, and to ride in all seasons, eating that which was left,
wearing that which was left, and marrying oftentimes that
which his maister left. Which sheweth what he was, and is
theOne that goeth before. Anteambulo of a Gentlewoman, theOne that followeth. Subsequent
of a Gentleman, theOne that sitteth before. Presedent of a Portmantle, or a
Cloake bagge.

An old Seruingman, a young beggar.
Not without cause do I creepe to you with my Petition,The old Seruingmans petition.
praying either better fortune hereafter, or reuenge vpon them
that haue so slighted me off heretofore; who from my youth
was brought vp in seruice, not in Gods seruice, but in the seruice
of man and woman, waiting for that which now I shall
neuer get, because I can waite no longer. So long as I was
strong, I was backt with something: so long as I could performe
all seruiceable duties, I wanted for no promises. But
Time which turneth all things, hath turned me out of seruice,
and Age which altereth all men, hath changed me from the
top of Fauour to the toe of Contempt. Being now vsed like
an old horse, my cloake plucked of my backe, as his skin: Or
an old dogge, kickt with disdaine of euery vpstart. Thus haue
I bene serued for all my seruing: gained a daintie dish, for caruing
so many daintie dishes: got a goodly catch, for all my
watching, and catching cold, for all my running, and riding,
tending, and tendering the welfare of those, which consider

none, but themselues. A man were better serue hogges, then
some men, many wiues, most widdowes. Yet I would be loth
to be misconstrued, or thought to censure any, but curious
fooles, that none can please: ingratefull wretches, which although
a man hath spent the prime of his youth, hindered his
fortunes, discharged the part of a faithfull steward, when his
beautie fadeth, and strength faileth, will thrust him from them
(because he cannot performe his wonted charge) without recompence
or remorse. For the world knoweth, and thousands
acknowledge, the munificent liberalitie of true Gentry, extended
towards them, who by seruice haue climbed vp to honour,
their maisters not enuying them, but lending their own
hand and strength to their ascentions, whose childrens children
are bound to pray for them: when others, respected like
my selfe, are forced to become humble Petitioners as I am,
and are contrarily indebted, to them and theirs, if they do
not degenerate from their Predecessors.

The old Seruingman.




The widdow with the old Seruingman.
WEll (thought I) though the fellow haue gained smal
wages,The Widdow* yet hath he great words (wheresoeuer he got
them) and can say something for himselfe, though it auaile
him little. Let him he trauelling towards Beggers bush, and
thinke of his sinnes in his masters Buttery. But stay a while
he is in communication with a seeming well demeaned woman,
some what stricken in yeares, yet well fauoured, and
not past marriage.
She may do well you thinke (said Opinion) to make him
a man,The opinion of the widdow. which made her a woman, when time was (or else
there are liers.) But if she be wise, she will not hazard her
goods and her selfe. That she hath, she is sure of, and put the
case she wasteth any thing her selfe, it will be lesse care, then
to haue another to lash it out. The wilde colt may proue a
tame horse, but a wilde youth is oftentimes a wilfull man.

Vincere consuetudinem dura est pugna. It is a fore conflict to
subdue custome. She leadeth now a single life (a singular life)
she hath her necke out of the yoke, she need not thrust it into
it againe, vnlesse she lust. If she can keepe her selfe as she is,
she is well and a wealthy Widdow.


The maide gotten with childe commeth along.
LEt them goe together on Gods name (said I) but hei mihi,The maide gotten with childe.
what a wofull spectacle is this? faciem pulchram, an
amiable face, and louely looke: Prettie soule, why doth she
pouder those fresh cheekes with salt teares? Alas, she can
scarce wallow, her belly is so full, yet she ioggeth along,
though euery foote she looketh to lie downe.
This is one (answered Opinion) whom Nature hath imbellished
with her rarest ornaments,The Opinion of the maide with child. but fortune furnished with
none of her riches. She was poore, therefore despaired of an
husband. Light of beliefe, therefore at this time heauy bellied.
Another Dido to beleeue some wandering AEneas: another
AEnone to credite some wandring Paris: another Phillis
to trust some swearing Demophon. He promised, and hath
fulfilled (but I do not say his promise.) Because he sware
he would neuer forsake her, she supposed he would surely
haue her: as though he which maketh no scruple to breake the
seuenth Commandement, will make any conscience to keepe
the third. The apples were faire, the tree comely, and the diuell
at hand made her fall to them, which procured her fall,
and that fall was the cause of this swelling.
If euer any might proffer a Petition for right,The Petition of the maid with childe. or reuenge, I
haue as great reason as any, Being a pure and vntoucht virgin,
voted to Vesta, and deuoted to Chastity, till a venerous
villaine with daily assaults and nightly trecheries, neuer left
battering the weake bulwarke of my heart with piercing
words, vowes, oaths, and protestations, darted from his smooth
tongue, till he had surprised me. Hearing him oftentimes
sweare, seeing him teare his haire, nay, which is more strange

for a man, weepe in most seeming sadnesse, kisse my hand with
feare and trembling, and voluntarily proffer, and performe
much feruitude, which I neither desired nor deserued. Being
guiltlesse of effecting deceit, was free from suspecting: fearing
to breake an oath, or violate a vow, trusted that he had bene
possessed with the like feare, (as he was not) at last condescended.
Which so soone as he had accomplished, he left me: It is
no glory to deceiue a maide, no manhood to ouerthrow the
weaker vessell, Yet being outwardly garnished with the gorgeous
workmanship of Art and Nature, what labour will not
some men take to attaine this vessell? what watchings will
they not vndergoe? what wealth will they not wast to compasse
it? And when they haue gotten it, how do they esteeme
it? euen a toy to be plaid with for a time, and after too. For so
soone as they eye another deuice, they cast away the old, and
neuer are in quiet till they are fingering the new, Fie vpon
such, they are like warriours of old time, which would spend
much cost, and labour to subdue a citie, and when they had
brought in into subiection, they would instantly leaue it, and
so march to another, etc. Or like the fantasticall fellowes of
our time, which cannot keepe long in one cut, but euery foot
haue a fling at a new fashion: but all not so, and I would there
were fewer that are so.

The maide with childe.



The Parriter rideth after the maide
with childe.
I See one a farre off, riding as it were to this maide, he
will not be here very soone,The Parriter he is so ill horsed. In the meane
time I will acquaint you with a iest not vnfit to be inserted
in this place. There was a prettie maide which in her time
had many suiters, the first whereof was verie vrgent to haue
his delights with her (as I heard a crooked legd knaue terme
it:) she being a tender hearted thing, as it seemed this was,
after a little willing waywardnesse was wonne, and lost

together. After he had forsaken her, a second came, and serued
her in like manner: then a third, and after a fourth,
(birds of a feather, they flew all after the foremost.) Being
thus handled, she began to ware warie, and forswore trusting.
In this resolution a fifth came vnto her, whose condition
was to trie all, and if they did agree, he would come no
more there. This Gentleman wooing the foresaid supposed
maide, set his wit and wealth vpon the tenters, to obtaine
his purpose, but nothing could preuaile. She rayled most egregiously
against his dishonest and vniust request, and scorned
the motion: which pleased him very well (though he seemed
discontented) and married her. The second night they
lay together, he began to speake thus vnto her: Thou knowest
(sweet heart) how earnest I was to lie with thee before
I might lawfully; and I protest, if thou hadst suffered me,
we had neuer bene married together. The wife, whether
she was halfe a sleepe, or ouer-ioyed, ^or had the heart of an
Owle (which they say causeth women to reueale their secrets)
laide to her left pappe,Gesner. answered him thus. Nay, nay,
husband, I was wise enough for that, I trow: for three or
foure had serued me so before I euer beheld your face. This
tale I thought meete to set downe in this place, that if any
maide chance to reade ouer this booke, she might take heed
how she dishoner her selfe with any, whether she marrieth or
marrieth not, for it will breed future iealousie, though she neuer
after deserue it.The Parriter serueth a Processe, etc. But now the horseman is alighted and
readeth something to the maide gotten with childe, what he
is I cannot certainly say, but I do not like his looks, nor that
peece of parchment in his hand.
I will not runne (said Opinion) into any particulars wfth
him,The Opinion of the Pariter. he is better knowne in the countrey then in the citie.
And whosoeuer are intus, or in cute (as I may speake) acquainted
with him, know him to be an honest man, or a
knaue.

Pariter.




The reiected louer walketh along.
LEt him returne that answer to the Court, and see if they
can haue an action of slander against you,The Louer. and obserue
him now that commeth next with his Petition, so trimly
tricked vp: not a haire amisse with him, vnlesse that which
hangeth on the one side of his shoulder, what a pourblinde
Earber was he which polled him last. Come a little nearer
me, I see now, he can make his old cloake serue the turne, in
the last edition newly corrected and augmented, laced and interlaced.
He hath a stiffe necke, which God hateth, and a strait
dublet, which no faithfull drunkard can indure, for if he had
it but one sitting, he would not leaue if worth a button: but
the fashion of his breeches, sure he had an honest Tayler, else
hee might haue taken as much from both the out-sides
next his knees as would haue made him two ends of a wallet,
which now are very like a paire of Smiths bellowes,
standing with the smallest ends vpwards. A sweet youth
no doubt, for he hath two Roses on his shoes to quallifie the
smell of his feese, if he haue no sockes, or one would make a
Pope of him, and kisse his toe. But why doth he sigh so deepely,
and looke so sleepily?
This finicall fellow is no foole, although he be none of the
wisest: he cares no more for money (if he haue it) so he may
please his mistresse,The description of the Louer. then for such mettall as serues onely for
seruile exchange: He can fit his humour to euery estate. If
he be among Schollers he hath Aristotle at his fingers ends
and euery phrase smels of Cicero. He can shew wit in quicks
of Sophistry, and reading in disputations of Philosophy. Amongst
Courtiers he ran braue it out as well as the rest, and
court women, with most louing and amorous prattle: with
them he is in his Q. and keepes the old text, Bonum est nobis
esse hic. But their company so besets him, that he forgetteth
with Vlysses to stop his eares, and therefore the Syrens put
him to shipwracke. He carrieth not the Antidote of Caueat
Emptor, against the alluring baites of their beautie, and
therefore Folly (for the most part) is his next hauen.

He remembers not, that the eyes of wicked women are
snares, and their words charmes; that their deceipt is much,
their desires more,The Louers Petition. and their couetousnesse most; which
the more it drinkes the more thirsty it is: their consciences
like a Pomice stone, light, and full of holes: whose
loues are for lucre, whose hearts are light on his person, and
whose hands are heauy on his purse. If he hit vpon a Curtezan
that is a little coy, though she be altogether vnchast, his
delight is to be on her lappe: there he lies at racke and manger,
and thinkes there are no more maids then Malkin. There
he sitteth like Sardanapalus, dallying with the flame, till he
burne in the fire. So as in the end, comming home by weeping
Crosse, he buyeth repentance with too deare a price, and
becommeth at last, A fond, despised, and reiected Louer.
Being worne with griefe, and wasted with discontent, I
am constrained to seeke remedy and some ease to my minde,
which you may affoord by doing reuenge vpon an inconstant
Female, who plighted her faith to me, and priuatly proclaimed
me the sole Lord of her Microcosm: but before I was installed
I was forestalled by the vndermining perswasions of a trecherous
vsurper, who with his seruile curtesies hath insinuated
himself into my dominio^s. Who would trust the wind? A womans
words: who would relie vpon a broken reed? a womans
oath. They sigh for them that hate them, and laugh at most
that lo^e them. They will haue some that will not, and will
haue few that would faine. Some feeling of their folly had he,
which when he beheld his neighbors wife hang her selfe vppon
one of the trees in her husbands orchyard, requested a
graft of the same tree, to see if it would beare any more of the
like fruite. And no light burthen did that passenger account
his wife, who, when the rest in the ship were willed to cast all
the bagge and baggage, which did surcharge it, ouerboord,
was most willing to hurry his wife into the Sea. Some to shew
their learning, or rather ignorance, may make large volumes
of Encomi^ns in their behalfes, and get perhaps a Iudas kisse, or
a flap with a Foxe taile for their labours. For he that hath seene

or read any thing at all of this Common place, shall finde for
one Vesta, many vitious; for one Diana, many darlings; for
one Lucrece, many lasciuious: did neuer any but Semeramis lie
with her owne sonne? Did neuer any but Mirrha twine with
her owne father? Did neuer any but Biblis dote vpon her own
brother? Did neuer any mistresse but Iosephus tempt her houshould
seruants? One is no number, I would there were no
number of these ones, vpon which if you fall, you will be

The forlorne Louer.



The countrey Schoolemaister commeth
to the Louer.
IT is happy you are so short, else we had bene wearied with
your louely Petition.The Countrey Schoolemaster. Me thinkes yonder is one that cringeth
to him: all his apparell is not woorth one Marke, yet
he hath a hat on his head of the Spanish blocke: put the blocke
and his head together and see what they spell. Well done
honest genus and species (for thou seemest inclining as it
were, that way by thy habite, and pen and inkehorne) reade
a peece of Ouid de Remedio amoris to him, for though he raile
vnreasonably against women, yet I am perswaded he doth
chastise them, non quod odio habet, sed quod amat.
Atque hoc humanum est (said Opinion) This man you see
which maketh such action with his hands,The Opinion of the countrey Schoolemaster. as he talketh with
the Louer, is one that keepth a foule coyle in the Chancell
or Belfree of a Church. He is a most horrible Tyrant ouer
little children, and makes their breeches quauer with the
shake of his Scepter, alias ye Rod. He getteth his liuing, non
per se, but for the most part, per accidens. Yet he can teach
Grammer and AEsops Fables, for he hath them both in print,
translated verbum de verbo. Howsoeuer schollers do esteeme
of him, ignorant Hobnailes hold him for a rare Scholler,
for he will speake Latine amongst them extrumpere, and scan
verses at his fingers ends. He is a man of sharpe learing,
which pearceth hard words: he worketh by Rule, like a Carpenter,

and can cast a figure, as if he were a coniurer. He is
very curious, and standeth much a vpon points, he may fitly
be coupled with the Louer. For either he is enamoured of his
own good parts, or in loue with the waiting maid, if he tabled
in a Gentleman house, and sometimes winneth her goodwill,
but neuer can get her friends consent. To be brief with him,
as hee is with his infants, a word and a blow: Hee is the
outside of a Schollee, an imperious commander ouer boyes
and wenehes, the head maister of the Peepe-taile trade

A Pedant.



The old woman married to a yong man
commeth next.
SO let them all walke Newgate fashion, two by two:
Who is that which hobleth next? Christ blesse the woman:The old woman married to a young man.
So, wipe your mouth with your Handkerchiefe after your
coughing and spitting. Her forehead is wrinckled like a paper
lanthorne, which boyes make: with two thinne cheekes,
like two washt trenchers, betweene which, her nose seemeth
like the socket, wherein the snot stands like a peece of a farthing
Candle. Her mouth like a Caue with two clap doores,
to wit, her two lips, without a bolt, that is without a tooth,
containing a Pilgrime, a wandring tongue, which mouth
(like a Caue) standeth like a Caue betweene two sharpe
pointed hils, whose tops do almost touch one another, her
Nose and her Chinne.
Mocke Age (said Opinion) and see how you will thriue.
This toothlesse,The opinion of the old woman married to the yong man. saplesse, sencelesse Beldam, was wife to an
honest substantiall man, who during his youth endured much
labour in gathering riches to maintaine himselfe in yeares,
and her, if she should be superstes, or out liue him, as she hath.
So she had all he left (which was sufficient) at her owne disposing,
who was bad enough disposed as it seemed: For as
soone as her husband was surely buried, she was all on the
hoite, she could not lie alone. An husband was all her care,
and many graue men she had choice of, but she gaue small intertainement

to any of their haire, she had rather haue the
legge of a Larke, then the body of a Kite: yet the feathers
hang in her Maw, which she cannot digest nor vomite, till
death lance her throate with his razor. Her Petition will reueals
all, for women cannot keepe their owne secrets. Onely
this, she is, as it were, a bush of thornes thrust to the hinder
parts of a Colt. A verie old woman married to a young
man.
Though I might haue bene better aduised by my friends,The Petition of the old woman married to the yongman.
forewarning (I confesse) yet since I am in the like pickle as others,
and haue had no lesse misfortune then they, I may water
my woes, and cannot chuse but put vp my Petition with
theirs. Who as it is well knowne, was wealthy, and therefore
soone wonne: an old woman, and therefore soonest wronged
by a beggerly varlet: who at my first view seemed so ciuilly
behaued, as none could mislike him: so well proportioned, as
I could not chuse but like him, especially hauing an honest vocation,
as he professed, and was well descended though a yonger
brother, which had his portion to take, as he brought me
Certificate. But now I perceiue these were but trickes to catch
Dotterils. His smooth tongue being his onely friend, the
lleight and craft of his hands, his onely handie-craft, his proportion
his onely portion, which he had to take. For after wee
were married he soothed me vp, till I shewed him my substance,
and improuidently without any further trial, committed
it to his tuition: which when he had made sure, he handled
me most ingratefully: neuer touching my lips but with his fist,
nor warming my fides, but with an ell I vsed to measure
cloath: alledging that if I exclaimed against him, he might
safely sweare, he did neuer beate me without measure. Hee
would not be contented to waste himselfe and my riches amongst
whores and roysters all the day: but at vnseasonable
times, when I was in bed, rush into my house with his queans
at his heels, and rouse me out of my rest: make me to remake my
bed with fresh sheets for his Truls, and would leape in amongst
them, I being compelled to hold the candle to the Diuell,

whilest he did his deeds of darkenesse: Thus did he vse me, till
I complained to Authoritie which relieued me, reuiled and extruded
him my house and company. Then did he depart like a
Sheepe-biter, retiring himselfe into a priuate chamber, cast off
his guilded Rapier, spruce leather Boots, and Spurres, got him
a Cloake without laces, made a Dublet with a falling choller,
wore Gloues of sixepence a paire on his hands: no points on
his Breeches, but at the wastband: a paire of sad coloured stockings,
tied vp straight with Garters no broader then an Vsurers
belt, and his Shooe-latches bound together with russet
Inckle: frequented Sermons, sent me most passionate letters,
that he had renounced Roisters, abiured whores, setled himhimselfe
to a stayed and religious course, and that he shamed
to appeare in the place I dwelled, he had so wronged me and
himself. But if I would go into the country with him, he would
purchace some conuenient place, where he might liue solitarie
from all company, but my selfe, and seruants. His fained repentance
seemed so heartie, and his flattering lines wrought
so with me, that we became attoned, made money of all, and
went together, and for three or foure dayes he vsed me kindly
and lay very quietly with me in the nights, but the fifth night
(being farre from my friends) when I was fast asleepe, and neuer
dreamed of any such matter, stole all I had, and ranne away,
what way I cannot heare, or learne any tidings.

The old woman married with
the yong man.



The Clarke commeth to the old woman.
THis is the end of liquorice,The Clarke. when a woman hath neuer a
tooth in her head to chaw it. At a glimpse I see a young
man with her. Hath she not yet abandoned the company of
men without beards? If hee be not the man she spoke so
much of, what is he?
He is one that you shall seldome see without cleane linnen,The opinion of a Clarke.
he weareth good cloathes, and can write a legible hand: hee

hath a little learning, and will shew it all if you conferro
with him: when he rideth abroad with his master, hee carrieth
two hats, and walketh with a case of Rapiers, one by
his side, the other in his hand, his masters and his owne. At
dinner or supper, either at home or elsewhere, he waiteth
at his masters elbowe with a trencher at his backe, yet hee
can reach a cleane voider to any of the table, if he take a liking
to the peece he hath en his foule trencher, he marrieth his
masters daughter sometimes, which hee hath stolne away,
(God a mercie Oportunitie.) He can make bonds and obligations
to pleasure the parish, if their Uicar haue not so much
Latine, and indite a loue letter for himselfe or his fellowes:
if any misdemeanour be committed neare him, when complaint
is made thereof, he writeth warrants to apprehend
the offendors. He is a Iustices Clarke, which may warrant
this old woman for getting her husband or her goods againe,
though she pray, and pay neuer so many warrants.


The yong woman commeth married
to an old man.
ANother passeth on passing portly,The young woman. a sweete woman, she
smelleth hither: and a rolling eye she hath, it turneth
with a trice on both sides: a faire haire, if it be her owne: a
rare face if it be not painted: a white skinne, if it be not plastered:
a full breast, if it be not bolstered: a straite backe,
if it be not helped: a slender waste, if it be not pinched: a
likely legge if it be not lined: a pretty foote, if it be not in the
Shoomakers stockes: a faire, rare, sweete, meete body, if it be
not dishonest.
Your supposes pose me (said Opinion) neither can I say or
gainesay.The opinion of the young woman maried to the old Man. Nature in beautie is better then Art; yet Art in
shew surpasseth Nature. She is proudly attired, yet perchance
humbly minded: loftily aduanced, yet it may be lowly
descended: vildly suspected, yet peraduenture vertuously
addicted. The world now adaies is round with such as shee

is, and too rash in their censures: condemning such as are
innocent, and quitting many that are culpable: but that
which is past mending is past medling withall. Therefore
leaue it, and looke vpon this lustre: faire she is and vertuous:
riches she enioyes, yet hath no great ioy of riches:
married she is, yet I make question, whether she bee a
maide or no, being a young woman married to a verie olde
iealous man.
My requests are not vnreasonable,The Petition of the young Woman maried to the old Man. nor voide of good cause,
being a woman of tender age, as your eyes may witnesse,
and of a vexed spirit, as these lines will manifest: that would
chuse rather to be laide in my graue then on my bed; feede of
the wormes, then eate with such a worme-eaten old iealous
husband as I doe: whose age I doe reuerence, and find fault
with no deformitie, which time hath thrust vpon him, but
with his causlesse suspitions, and immerited mistrusts of me.
For did he hemme more then a towne of Taylers, or hawke
oftner then a countrey of Faulkners, I could endure it, I am so
enured thereunto: were the parts of his body neuer so nauseas
and detestable, I could away with the^, so his reason were sound
and sauory: but his wisdome (like his eyes) is sunke into his
head, too farre for hereafter appearing: his will stronger
then his breath: his vnderstanding feebler then his fingers: and
his iudgement corrupter then his body.The praise of some olde Men. It is an admiration
to see the difference of some of his yeares, how directly they
will talke, what maiestie is in their lookes, what wisedome in
their discourse? Not a word without his weight, not a sentence
without good sence: not a deed vnlesse absolutely performed.
They will blame nothing that is not blame worthie,
nor condemne any without assured reason. But my Zelotipus
raileth without reason, knocks his staffe against the stones,
blames me without offence. Oh that some good Fortune
would therefore cure me of this care, and salue me of this sorrow:
For neuer shall I reape dayes rest, nights content, houres
quiet, minutes mirth, so long as I haue this impostume in my
head, this pinne and webbe in mine eye, this canker in my

nose, this scabbe on my lippe, this iealous old husband.

The young woman married with a very old iealous man.
Now I heare this Petition, it bringeth into my minde a
merry conceit. There was a very old man, which married a
maide, who meeting a friend of his, did importune him to
know what the people spake of his marriage. Who made
him this answer: There was a poore man which had but
one pecke of corne to grinde, and would needs build a Mill to
grinde it, and when he had ground his corne, the mill stood
emptie, so that afterwards all the neighbours came to grind
their grists there. This I inferre, not to defame any, but to
shew how ready the world is to speake the worst.
Whatsoeuer you say (said Opinion) vnequall marriages
doe marre ages, and such made matches as these, proue
but mad matches, yet of the two, I hold it more conuient
that old Tithon should haue a fresh Amora, then an aged woman
to be linked in matrimony with a beardlesse boy.



The Cuckold passeth along.
SUfficnt for this theame, another doth appeare or rather
peere.The Cuckold Heauens secure my sences, if I be not distracted,
he is a Proteus, a Camelion, an Omnigatherum, God make
him an honest man, for I would be loath to make any one such
a one as he is.
He will trouble me to paint him,The Opinion of a Cuckold (said Opinion) I know
not what coulours to lay vpon his face, for some times he is
of a sanguine complexion, sometimes he looketh pale, sometimes
tawny, or Moritawny, like Tobacco. Neither can I
tell how to frame him, for he is sometimes tall, sometimes
lowe, sometimes grosse, sometimes gracile. Nor expresly say
what vocation he is of, for sometimes he is a Citizen, sometimes
a Farmer sometimes a Lawyer; sometimes a Scholler,
etc. He hath a proper woman to his wife, yet common,
he toyleth to maintaine other mens labours, yet he reapeth
that which he neuer wrought for, he wasteth all the corne in
his owne hatches on other mens Barnes, yet he keepeth that
which he neuer got, But to draw you out of this Laborinth

with one line, Cornu ferit ille, If he haue not Cornes on his
Toos, he hath Hornes on his Head. He is his wiues foole
amongst her copesmates, wanton wenches pastime amongst
themselues, and wagges game to play at with two fingers.

A Cuckold.
Loath I am to bewray my griefes vnto you,The Cuckolds Petition. did not the
loathing of the life I lead egge mee against my nature to wish
that I would not: I haue many yeares beene bound in a bond,
which hath vndone mee, yoaked with a curtall which hath
plaide me many Iades trickes, a wanton wayward wel fauoured
wife: who falsifying her faith and breaking the bondes
she sealed most solempnely before a congregation, doth often
that which shame sylenceth me for vttering. I dare not
meete her, she keepes such couragious company I cannot
content her any way, she hath outwardly what she likes vnwardly:
and what she thrustes away with one finger, she pulles
againe with both her hands: when I fawne on her, she will be
froward: If I be but a little absent, she wishes my presence.
Her thoughts are like Babyes fancies, that will, and will not.
My deedes cannot suffice her, for she is a woman, My speech
cannot please her she is so captious, nor my lookes like her,
she is so curious. None feele the rages of deseases, but they
which haue them. None so truly knovv the torments of hell,
as they which feele them? Nor any feeleth the torments, or
knoweth the rages, that I doe, vnlesse he liue in such an hell,
or haue the like desease, as I haue. Many, are haunted with
hagges, but neuer any with such an haggarde: They liue caute
though not caste: but my Venus lyeth so visibly in her Networkes,
that not only Gods eyes, but mens behold her. Yet
fayne would I reforme her, but neither faire meanes can perswade
her, nor fowle scarre her. If I indeauour with good
counsell to dissawde her from her former follies, her answer
is, I preach too learnedly for her to edify by me. If I plead
plainely with her, then at the next word, I am Sir Iohn
Lacklatine: If I can collect some witty saying fit for
my purpose, that will touche her to the quicke, then she saith,

I am all wit, or a wit all: If I threaten her, she hath enough
to shield her: If I mention but a bill of diuorcement, it is her
only desire: If I keepe her short of money, shee makes deuillish
oathes and vowes that shee will haue Money, or some body
shal pay for it: if I for quietnes sake should lock her vp into her
chamber, the next time I stirre abroad, I am arrested for some
debt of hers, which shee ranne into for such a purpose.
In me turba ruunt luxuriosa proci,In mea regnant nullis prohibentabus, aula.
Neuer shall I enioy rest, so long as shee and I breath together.
Such therefore as haue not the same causes of complaintes
as I haue, and yet liue not contented I wish their fortunes
to bee, that they may be troubled with my paine and
head-ache.

The Cuckold,




The olde Souldier commeth along.
BUt stay, heeres an other limpeth a long: pitty a mee, an
Hetaroclite,The old Souldier. hee lacketh an hande. There are scarres on
his face, would scarre a timorous body to behold: he looketh
grauely, as though he had not long to liue, and leaneth vpon
his trunchion, as if his body were about to fall away: come
alongst lustily, and halt not before thy freinds. Sure hee is
a man of worth for hee hath his hangers on.
Your iests (said Opinion) are too tart,The Opinion of the old Souldier. and your merryment
ouer much vpon so monefull a Man, which deserueth
to be pittyed, rather then to be plaide vpon, and meriteth releife
more then mocking. He hath borne Armes, howsoeuer
now hee be disarmed: he hath had a sword to stieke by him,
though now he hath no other weapon then a stieke in his
hand: he hath lost his limmes but not in some druncken
fray, and got those Cycatrices, but not in the defence of any
Cocatrices: He hath fought against the walles of the enemy
but neuer fought against any for the wall, as he walked in
the streete. He will not stabbe for the lye, and yet he will

not take the lye in his Countries disgrace. Hee is none of
your swashing Captaines, that vsurpe the title, when they
neuer fought vnder any coulours but Venus-es: and they
will dye rather then they will flye from her coulours. Neuer
handled peece, vnlesse of meat, bread etc. Neuer discharged
shot vnles in a Tauerne where they met with too hot shots
sometimes for their discharging. Neither is he any of your
counterfet Duello's, discoursing of battailes they neuer came
neare, telling of monsters they neuer beheld, vnles in a painted
cloath: swearing they were hurt in the defence of Christianity
against Mahomotistes, when if they were wounded,
it was at Groyne at farthest. He is no Triton of his owne
praises: nor Chronologer of his olde exploites, he is an arrant
Coward in wrangling brawles, a more Crauen in vniust
conflictes, a very Pigmey in paltrey frayes: but in a iust
cause as valorous as Hector, and as puissant as Hercules,
a true, faithfull and religious Souldier.
My humble sute is for better Fortune,The Petition of the old Souldier. for men are now become
so ingratefull and hard hearted, that they doe not consider
those which haue bene their friends, nor reward such
as when neede serued, warded them from imminent distresses:
the times past no man thinkes vpon: the time to come few
dreame of: but all are for the time present. A Souldier hath
helped them, and now God helpe Souldiers, for not many
will: a souldier may helpe them, and then may helpe himselfe,
and then they will helpe him also: but now a Souldier doth
them no good, and therefore they will doe him as little. They
liue in peace, that bringeth plentie, and that pride: but pride
may haue a fall, and peace and plentie their hoods turnd ouer
their heads: which I neither wish nor pray for, but if they
haue, Spernitur orator bonus, horridus milos amatur. In the
meane time, we, who haue wholly decayed our limbes, and
impouerished our estates in the warres, may shew our scarres
to vncompassionate eyes, and receaue no further helpe then
Christ helpe you, good words, would we were able: good wishes
for themselues: when as the superfluitie of one paire of their

shoe-ties would yeeld vs much comfort: but I cannot, neither
will I goe about to condemne any absolutely, the world
is so pestered with idle vagabonds, which vnder the name of
Souldiers and forged pasports, haue so wronged some, that
it withdraweth the hearts of most from conferring their beneuolence
vpon any: for I am perswaded that no true borne spirit
will deny some reliefe to a true Souldiers in his want. And
Preheminence hath allowed them well, though it be ill enough
distributed in some places: the fault is not in the giuers,
but of inferiours which are put in trust to dispose it. But the
God of war hath so many Apostataes, that the true borne, fare
the worse for the illegitimate. This boone I therefore craue,
that all the ranks of rogues, and runnagates, shrouding themselues
in the cast-suites of Souldiers, might be rooted out, or
sent vpon a boone voyage to the new found Land, by which
meanes Hens and Capons may sit at roost quietly in the night,
and pecke about the garth all the day: shirts and other naperie
hang vpon hedges, till the Sun set, shops be kept shut, and
windowes stand vvide open to let in aire, vvithout feare of
Creepers, to the great comfort both of citie, and countrey.

The old Souldier.



The Prentise cometh along.
VVHen the Lion was old,The Prentise. the Asse came and kicked him:
and when a Souldier hath lost his limmes, euerie
coward will crow ouer him. I would say more in thy behalfe,
and doe as much as I speake, if I were able. But I am anticipated
by the speedie entrance of another, with his cloake
clapt vnder his left Arme. A prettie youth, very decently apparelled,
but he goeth very fast, as if he went of an errant,
what may he be.
He may be a man (said Opinion) if he liue,The opinion of the Prentise. an honest man
man if he liue vpright. A sound man, if he flie surfets,
and whores: a thriuing man if he shunne riotous company:
a rich man, if he be thriuing: a Sheriffe, if he be a rich man:

An Alderman if he be a Sheriff: A Maior, if he be an
Alderman: a Knight if he be a Maior: But yet he is a
Prentise.
Diuers are the calamities of some of my rancke,The Petition of the prentice and many
the miseries they are exposed to, faring hardly, and labouring
hardly: but such as will we are Gold must get it, they which
will wynne honour must wage with many aduentures: He
which thincketh to proffit must cashier the very thought of
pleasure, Ryding with care and running with paine: Sitting
with prouidence, and lying with consideration: Eating with
frugality and drincking with moderation: Synce therefore
honorable men must endeauour for Renowne: Learned men
study for their knowledge: Richmen labour for their gaines:
Tradesmen trauell for their Sciences: All men, (which will
liue like men in their age) labour like beasts in their youth,
vnles they haue Lands to trust to: My meaning is not to disparage
learning, because it is hard to attaine dispraise honour,
because it is difficult to get: discourage Prentises, because
their beginnings are laborious: for I haue read that the base of
Pernassus is full of briers, thornes, and thistles, but the toppe,
plaine as heauen, and smooth as the Moones face. I haue heard
that the steppes which ascend to honour, are like the staires
which mount to the hight of a Maze, many and endles. The
dores conducting thervnto, infinite, and intricate, but the top
like the toppe of Olimpus, and the roomes pleasant, and spatious,
garnished with more then mortal obiects. And I know
by Experience that the skill and secrecy of mechanicall Artes,
are not got (like a loose woman) at first sight. Neither
will yeild any great proffit at first labouring, any more
then a barrein ground at the first sowing, I doe not therefore
Cauill with my calling, nor am pensiue for the paines
I indure; but the originall of all my sorrow is a Mistresse so
peeuish, proude, petulant: oh si fas dicere. She came naked into
the Citty and shall returne naked out of the citty, vnles she
doe pennance with a white sheete pind about her when she is
dead, as she deserueth now she liueth. Her Mother is very

well knowne for a poore woman, but I thinke she neuer knew
her father. My honest maister married her for loue, and had
nought with her, and he is likely to haue nought so long as he
hath her: yet she flaunteth with the finest, and gaddeth abroade
with the giddiest: looketh for greater seruice then
an Empresse; and more duty then a Dutches: enuying all
that are more brauely trapped then her selfe, and confederates
with few, but such as are wantonly entrapped as she is. Her
Wenches feele the weight of her light fingers, and we
haue many a peale wrong about our eares too: We waite
all the day to serue our maisters Chapmen, but when any
of her Customers come, we are sent abroade on a sleeuelesse
errand, and then what becomes of our maisters ware? I doe
now wish that some faire Chaunce may light vpon her, to rid
my suspectlesse maister of so foule a mischiefe, both for his
owne sake and welfare, and the future quietnesse of his trustie
Seruants. But to all good Mistresses, whose conditions
are contrary to hers, I do wish Fortune to poure vpon them
the aboundance of her fauours.

The Prentise.



The Mal-content walketh along.
VVEll said yong Prentise,The Male-content. Macte tua virtute puer, Sic itur
ad astra. Proceed as thou hast begun, and doubt
not to become a good Common weales-man, when thou hast
gotten thee a bigger purse, a better office, and a larger beard.
Another ioggeth along, spurning the pauement as if he were
angry with it. For shame let not thine hat hang ouer thine
eyes? Dost thou dispaire of thy face, thou maskst it so with
thy cloake? hold vp thine head like a man: and pinne thy band
thou slouen; Button thy wrists, it is wholesome, and garter
thy stockings it is hansome.
His thoughts (said Opinion) are as confused,The Opinion of the Male-content. as his apparell:
he brableth with his starres, and brauleth at his creation:
he wisheth the Caule which wrapped him in his mothers

wombe, had bene his winding sheete: and he which breathed
that Promotheon fire into him, had put it out. The welfare
of others is his bane, and their ruine Balsamum to him: He
thinks better of himselfe then he diserueth, and worse of others
then they demerit: He preacheth that which he will not
follow, and followes that which no true Christian will preach:
his words are lightning, which though they alight vpon all,
yet they fire few: what he thinketh, he bolteth out without
charity. He wipeth vices taile with his tongue, and that is
the reason his words are so vnsauory. He is like a bauling
dog, that barks at all that gallops on horseback, when he goes
a foote: like a mad dogge that snappeth at all that meete him:
like a mastiffe that worrieth oftentimes such as come neare
him. He is other mens foe, and none of his own friend: he disliketh
both extreames, and thinketh meanely of the meane:
he is a Misanthropos, which hateth men, a Narcissus which
loueth not women, a Diogenes which carpeth at all, a malitious
Mal-content.
If you tender the welfare of a Discontent,The Mal-contents Petition. whose perturbed
Spirit, haunteth you in this white sheete, poure downe your
disastrous accidents vpon the worlds wasters, disorders, vice,
and villany. Say this Petition be preiudiciall to many: many
haue stradled ouer the like style, and more would walke in the
same path, were they not extruded and excluded. What rare
Machiauils (right matchlesse villaines) how many be directed
to the Barathrum of beggery, so they be mounted vppon
the heauen of honour? What remorse hath a reprobate
who starue and want cloathing, so he be full fed, and gorgeously
arrayed? I am no Spaniell to fawne vpon men, nor
little Puppy to licke the excrements of women. The Diuell
domineereth like a great commander, and his souldiers march
vnder the colour of honesty, which now a dayes is accounted
like a strumpet, He which vseth it shal die a begger. Couetousnes
is become a Tradesman, and Pride his wife. Drunkennes the
onely sociable companion, and Lechery the sole good fellow:
Gluttony is a great man, and Enuy a yonger brother: Sloth

hath got a liuing: Oh Sodome, thou wast fired for thy sinnes,
yet thy sinnes escaped, and range hic and vbique, Old Tyre, thou
wast deiected, new tires are erected: Redit or bis in orbem. The
Asse hath got on the Lions skin, lusty Harts cast their horns amongst
the Faunes: Spiders make their Cobwebs in kings
Courts: little Conyes vndermine huge Castles, and pull the
wals vpon their owne heads: Omnium rerum vicissitudo. Freemen
are become slaues: Rich men turnd beggers: Beggers
changed to rich men, Asperius nihil est. Oh tempore, oh mores!
Beasts lie in houses, Serpents craule in corners, Cookes keepe
in citties, Dawes in old Churches, Wag-tailes in great places:
Saint Peters Vicar is turnd Myner, and doth trafficke with
Salt-peeter; Monstrum informe, ingens, cui lumen veraepietatis
est ademptum.

The Mal-content.



The poore Scholler walketh by.
HE fisheth finely and is likely to catch Carpes,The poore Scholler. and powtings.
But what Mounsier Male-goe is this, that commeth
next, so displaying the fretted Tuffe-Taffity-facing
of his thread bare cloake? Cannot he walke vprightly like an
honest man, but iet it so like a Iennet, and wagge his head
to and frolike a Weathercocke? Fie vpon it what Rusticall
lagges he maketh like a Tennant, or a countrey Curate,
which neuer came any nearer to an Uniuersity then Lincolne
Minster. Odit prophanu^ vulgens, He is none of your Plebeians
in his own conceit, but Apollos godson, christened in the
Pirenean, or Hyporrenean fount, he is a common Souldiour
vnder Mineruas ensigne, and fighteth like a Grammer scholler
with Pen and Inkhorne.
Oh forbeare (said Opinion) doe not beray your owne
nest,The Opinion of a poore Scholler. turne not student of the law, and forget your old Academicall
associates: yet I thinke you speake not this out of malies
to the parties, but of meere loue, that they seeing their foolish
gates gibed at, may amend them: for theere are some of your

peart Iuuenals, that mince it, as if they were citizens wiues:
and yet I will not say that it proceedeth from any pride, or ouerweening
conceit in all that do so: but of an ill habit, which
they haue gotten by a careles and fantasticall carriage. But
let that passe, and ile shew you what this present Petitioner
is: to wit, One which though he did neuer eate Porridge
in the Innes of Court without a spoon^, yet he hath made
foule shift to deuoure his dinner in a Colledge without a
Trencher; though he cannot carue a Capon without the
helpe of a Cleauer, or vnlace a Rabbet like a cunning Caruer.
Rostra disertus amat, yet he can eate rost well enough to
please himselfe. He is a King in his owne conceit: and hath
more in him then euery one can conceiue: He deserueth better
fauour then the world affordeth him: and yet he hath as good
fauor as any in the world which hath no better then he hath:
How he hath bene estimated in former times, it bootes him
not, yet he hath Bootes when he rideth, though he borrow
them. To be short, and serious, he is reiected of fools, respected
of the wise, held in disgrace among prophane, but in reuerent
reputation with those, which are sincerely religious,
Nothing regarded by the couetous and base minded churles,
but greatly rewarded by the liberall and truly descended
Gentilitie, a Scholler.
Would it not grieue that gentleman,The poore Schollers Petition. which had sold his signories,
and spent the mony vpon hopes of preferment, and in
fine, behold his inferiours aduanced, and himselfe obtaine no
greater reward then faire promises and faithles protestations?
Would it not kill that Souldiers heart with grief, which when
he had lost his limmes, and left his liuing for his Countreys
good, returning feeble, and decrepit to his natiue Countrey,
to be Caged, Stockt, and baited with Beadles? And would
it not pine that Scholler, and make him looke like the vicar of
Saint Albones, that hath bene brought vp seuen yeares vnder
the lanching lash of a left-handed School-master, and after that
feed with 3. penny chops, and very singular beere in an Vniuersity,
rose early, and watched late, Per tot discrimina reru^ tendimus

ad latium, thorough many troubles we attayne to Latine, and
after all this, to be a poore Pen-an-Inck-horne wearer, a Pedagog,
one that teacheth Schollers for 5. pence the weeke,
and at the quarter day is glad to take choake-cheese, and barrell
butter for the Summa Totalis: Proh deum, atque hominum
fidem. Oh that some fellow which had but a little wit, and
no wisdome, might trauerse this Parenthesis: Me thinke I apprehend
him already how vnreasonably he would raile vpon
the 7. liberall Sciences, wish Pernassus turn'd to a Molehill,
and that Vulcan, when he claue Minerua out of Iupiters braine,
had knockt out the braines too, because that he carrying the
Muses, as familiars about him, should be pinched with want,
when he knoweth many seruile groomes, whose qualities or
dimentions are no way surpassing his, promoted from the
stable to the table, from the table to the bed. But hoe there
Signiour: Hee that can picke any thing out of a painted
cloath, may perceiue by fortune painted muffled in a tree,
throwing downe vpon some, Crownes: others, military weapons:
some bagges of Gold, others Sackes of Salt: Some one
thing, others another thing: Some must be Kings and ouerrule
all, some must be Souldiers, and fight for their Countrey,
some must be husbandmen, and digge commodity from the
earth, some must be Astronomers, and plucke proffit from the
starres: some must haue more then they can carry, and such
are richmen: some must be men of good carriage, and can
get little, and such are Porters: some must haue liuings enough
be queathed them, and some must not haue so much as an
haire left them: some must lead the world in a string, and some
must leaue the world in a string: Quae cum ita sint (oh most
mutable) I doe not grudge at my calamities, but the causes:
Aueroas Maecenasses and dunsticall Dondegoes, which will
allow a Scholler no more, that should waft them to heauen,
then a Sculler that should cary them alongst the Theams, or
any other hauens: Musas facientes Mulos: Making the Muses,
Mules, Iades, or Hacknies: For suppose a Scholler (like olde
Byas) carrieth all his Lands about him, be intertaynd into any

of their houses, as many be: Though he be a good Gramarian,
one that can chop Logick, and like the freshman, returning
from Athens, make three egges of two, and his father
eating the two, bad him take the third for his cunning: imagine
he can pretty well in Philosophy naturall, and metaphisicall,
tell halfe an hundreth lyes out of Pliny: hath some insight
in Poetry, and if he had maintenance and countenance
would be come a sound Practitioner in the deepest Science:
This fellow for all this shal be lodged next the kitchin, where
the Cookes, and sculles keepe such a scolding that they will
take order for his studying: or in some ruynous roome, where
his Masters Fathers Ghost is reported to walke: and Robingood
fellow and Hobgoblins, are said to play their fagayries
in the night, so that he will take no rest for sleeping and all the
day he shall spend himselfe poaring ouer my Lady Faynewoulds
capable eldest: and three or foure froward (I should
say toward) younger Brothers: for which turmoyles his
yearely stipend shall be 5. markes, besides the Patrons, or the
Widdowes countenance: Which may be so good that few
Schollers hauing reasonable Noses in their faces, would be
loath to haue it for fourty poundes. Now for his fare, it is
lightly at the cheefest Table, but he must sit vnder the Salt,
that is an Axiome in such places: and before he take his seat,
Memorandum he haue two legs in store, one for the Maister,
another for the Mistresse: Then hauing drawne his Knife
leisurably, vnfoulded his Napkin mannerly, after twice or
thrice wyping his Beard (if he haue it) he may reach the
Bread on his Knifes point, and fall to his porridge and betweene
euery Sponefull take as much deliberation, as a Capon
cra^ming (least he be out of his porridge before they haue
buried part of their first course in their Bellyes) And at the
second seruice (if there be any such hot seruice) the refuse of
the former shall be set before him, but oftentimes like a rifled
Souldier, hauing not so much as a good peece left, or like
the picture of death, all bones, which putteth him in minde to
decline bonus, bona, bonum: but this must be vnderstood to

happen at an hunting dinner, or after he hath whipped his eldest
Scholler, for so long as my young Maister liketh his
Scholemaister, and may take no farther at his lesson, then he
list, his mother will be most respectiue, but if he once contradict
him, and printe winger vpon his posteriors, then laments
are raisd, there is an insurrection amongst the pen-boys
Peter Prouin the horse-keeper will doe Zauods that he will.
The Cooke will put poison in his porridge, or worke him
some other mischiefe, if he durst: then enters the Fleire, like
the Chorus in a Tragedy, and telleth all. The mother like a
tender hearted Auditor, pittieth the Scene, busseth her boy,
and telleth him he shall be beaten no more, No, that he shall
not. Thus doth the olde foole hugge young lackanapes, till
she spoile him: yet heere is not the full Catastrophe, for she
will neuer rest till she haue lifted him out of her house, and
will haue another in his roome, it maketh no matter what he
be, so he will not whippe her boy and serue for little wages,
he will serue the turne: I mary, this maketh so many wilde
youthes, and wise aged men: When the earth is not well
manured, tilled and ploughed, it is rancke, and sterile, and
where youth wanteth nurture, age is ignorant, and ill mannered.
The Beare by licking her whelpes bringeth them into
some forme, but many mothers by lolling their children turne
them out of all good fashion. The loue of Parents towards
them children is naturall and not to be blamed, but this Cockering
is fond, and hurtfull: Waxe being softe, will suffer any
impression, and children being young are as capable of goodnes,
if they be trayned vp therafter: as they are prone to
knauery without any great inducements. The Colt at first
backing will curuet, and winch, but after he hath chancked
the bit a while, and felt the Spurre in his side, he becometh
more tractable: Not an Hedgeplasher but can say, he which
will haue a thorne, must cut a thorne, and if they would haue
these tender plantes to proue godly Columnes in the Commonwealth,
let them be lopt, and dressed in drie season: let
them be carefully tutored, and encouraged by faire meanes,

and reasonable recreation: If that will not worke with them,
vse a stronger potion: Qui non vult, duci, debet, trahi, He that
will not goe gently, must be dragged vncourteously: The
tranquill gouernement of our commonwealth doth sufficiently
manifest, how much our Land is blessed with a
thrice worthy King: prouident Counsell, vpright Iudges,
learned and well educated Gentlemen, zealous Diuines,
any cunning Lawiers enow, yet it may be obserued in some
places where many are congregated about publique affaires,
others shuffled in, which whilst the others are poising the
weightiest matters, sit like Cyphers, and if any question
be put vnto them. Obmutuerunt; Putas ne verbum
potuisse proloqui: They can tell the Clocke dandle their
gloues, or play with their forepoints, their Mothers
taught them those Lessons, when they satte playing with
them vpon their Knees: They thinke they pleasure their
Countrey, if they vouchsafe their presence, and grace
themselues, if they put of the hatte hansomely, and nod
the head with a Clowdy countenance, as who would say,
it is an hard case, but Verbum non amplius: And what
is the cause of this, but whilst the one kept close at their
bookes both at home and abroad in the Vniuersity and
Innes of Court, the other were yalping after a Kennel of
Hounds, in their youth, or whoping at an Owle in an Iuybush.
Their parents would not be at the cost to maintaine
a good Scholler to traine them vp* nor their Mothers
suffer them to indure any hardenesse, or labour:
without which true knowledge cannot be attained: And
as many of these are carelesse for the well educating of
their children: So most of them are supine and negligent
of themselues. What careth the couetous Patron, so he
can compound to his contentement: Be he one of Bale
Priests, or a bald Priest, if he can read the Authorised
Seruice: Be he of what Tribe he will, if he can hoble
ouer an homily with a weekes warning: As for
monethly Sermons, it is but greasing a Parater; and the

Churchwarden, is his Tennant: he will be sworne on a booke
to an omne bene: Infoelix oh semper ouis. Too many places are
full of such, which are more meete to be fishermen, then fishers
of men, and fitter to catch soales, then, soules, which either
behaue themselues like the dogge in the Manger, which
neither would eat hay himselfe, nor suffer the beast: Which
either keepe the childrens bread from them, or if they giue
them any, they doe so mouth it, and mangle it, that it becommeth
most loathsome, comming from such filthy hands, and
handling, which I wish were otherwise, that the pouerties of
poure Schollers might be pittied, their Petitions preferred,
their fortunes bettered, and what is amisse, might be amended.

The poore Scholler.



The Scholler hath frustrated my expectation (said I) for
I did expect he should haue wished ill lucke to light vpon his
enemies as the others haue. Touching his speech I durft
auerre it to be true: For drones driue out the Bees, and the
wolues in sheeps cloathing werry the Lambes: They take
the tythes, though they take not the paines. Amongst all
which I thinke it reason, that that Parson should haue tyth
porridge, which out of the heat of a good stomacke (I iudge
it was) taught his parishioners wiues in a quarterly Sermon
fower wayes to heele a pot, when it began to seeth ouer:
A right worthy domesticall Chaplin for Helihogabalus, yet
if yow marke, it is a profitable dish of doctrine, for unlesse
it be fellowed, all the fat is in the fire: But how now? who
commeth next? There are many Petitioners behinde. How
chaunce they steppe not forward? I perceiue the Beadle is
angry, and will suffer no more to be preferred or brought
into the Citty, till answer be made to the rest that are already
exhibited.




A PROSOPOPAEIA OR
IMAGINED ANSWER TO
THE FORMER PETITIOners.
by Dame Fortune

NO more Petitions, I haue heard too much,
Too mischieuous, and monstrous wickednesse,
Nor will I condescend to any such
As seeke by others woe to purchace blisse:
Your suites so wicked, your Petitions full
O sensuall appetites, I disanull.


Fond worldlings, thinke you, that euery furious curse
Belcht gainst your foes, shall bring them to their wracke?
Or euery foolish wish your fancies nurse,
Will with an approbation be sent backe?
Then should the world be as it first began,
Repleate with beasts, but dispossest of man.


For as you are by naturall instinct
Infirme, and subiect to affections:
So are your wilfull Supplications linckt
With others ruines, and subuersions:
But he that knoweth best whats good, whats ill,
Payes all, not as they would, but as he will.


And therefore know, that whosoere you curse,
Are not accursed for your curse alone,
Nor they whom you wish punishments, are worse
For your rash wishes publicke or vnknowne:
Nor I my selfe, if that I would, can doe

Hurt to the parties, you incite me to.


For that Ens Entium, all the worlds first maker,
Existent without fine, and vncreate
Makes any thing the cause and ioynt pertaker
Of his consuming rage, to ruinate
His chiefest earthly fabricke, when and where
He please, it from a sinfull earth to teare.


Thus much ingenerall: Now I will regresse
More specially to each particular,
And as you did appeare at first, redresse,
To here your answers, which Ile not deferre
With dull procrastinations, but begin
With her, who first put her Petition in.


Detested woman,The answer to the Harrlot shame vnto thy Sexe,
Which prostitut'st thy body vnto all,
Making thy selfe the filth and loathsome fex
That brings thine owne decay and others thrall:
Leaue of thy loathed trading, and be bound
A new to honesty, thats safe and sound.


Consider why thou wert created first
To serue thy Maker, and bring forth increase,
From which, thy loathed life, and quenchles thirst
Of variable lust, compels thee cease.
For thy foule life so odious in heauens eye
Can leaue the world no prosperous progeny.


Next call to minde the pleasures thou hast past,
The dainty fare, sweet musicke, and delight,
How momentarily and soone they wast,
Like to a flash of lightning in the night,
Or like a Larke, that swiftly mounts the skie,
Now seene, but out of prospect by and by.



And last of all, thinke but vpon thine end,
When Age begins to nestle in thy bones,
What anguishes thy former courses send,
Fraught with heart-wasting aches, pangs and grones:
And after all, how thou art sure to fry,
If thou dost perseuere, eternally.


Thou which hast lauisht thy estate, and spent
Thy prime of time,To the Spendall. in vnaduis'd excesse,
Do not mispend the refidue thats lent
To cure thy cares, and driue thee from distresse:
If thou hast grace, ther's grace inough in store,
For him that truly can that grace implore.


Lust, Pride and Riot, wrestling in thy brest,
Haue giuen thy Fortunes, and thy selfe the fall,
Yet lie not groueling with dispaire opprest,
Although thou canst not all tha's past recall,
Thou maist redeeme that thou hast pawn'd to hell,
Thy pittious soule hereafter, liuing well.


Thou country Client with inuectiue Iawes,
Darting thy malice and intestine griefe,To the countrey Client.
Vpon some bad peruerters of the Lawes,
Shalt ease thy selfe and purchase great reliefe,
By shunning the occasions of thy fals,
Vncharitable deeds, litigious brauls.


If thou wouldst haue reuenge vpon them all,
Liue orderly, deuoyd of wrong and strife:
So maist thou such contentious wrangles gall,
By leading a contented and mylde life:
For while each petty trespasse, brawl and taunt,
Are tooke in snuffe and dudgeon, Lawyers flaunt.


The Seruingman came next, which hath reuilde

The slight rewarding of his youthfull paines,
Though some that trust to others, are beguild,
Yet faithfull seruice oft reaps certaine gaines,
Ingratitude if rife, yet there are such
That deeme no guerdon for their seruants much.


But seeing thou felst (as thy Petition showes)
Betweene the griping clawes of auerous churles,
Impatient speech, proclaim'd against all those,
To further inconuenience hurles
Thy desperate state: how ere it did commence,
Tak't as thy sinnes deserued recompence.


Thou, which wert credulous to iudge all true
A yong man vttered in the heate of blood,To the Maide with childe.
So piteously dost now too late bedew
Thy cheeks with teares: it is a token good,
If they do trickle from a sorrowing soule,
Not for thy Loues losse, but thy deeds so foule.


Where sores are cureles, ther's no helpe by care
Content will mittigate each Discontent,
Kept as a shield to ward thee from Dispaire,
And fierce assaults of future languishment,
The causer cannot thriue: vvhat heretofore
You did commit, Repent: but sinne no more.


You are too hot, too eager, and to keene
Gainst those you loue so well, the female kinde,
Bolting outragious termes,To the Louer oreclog'd with spleene,
From the distracted passions of your minde,
Sincerely vertuous, many may be found,
Though some with many vices do abound.


If one haue wrong'd you, wrong not all for one
Nor dote on her, that hath forsaken you,
One precious stone doth cut another stone,

Thers plenty yet abroad, goe get a new,
Seeke with discretion, and doubt not to finde
A constant Mate, that may content thy minde.


Old woman,To the olde woman married with the young man. leaue complayning, 'tis too late
For you to lodge within a youngsters bed,
You are decrepit, and growne out of date
To reyne a flinging Colts, vnweldy head
A prayer booke linckt to your shaking hands
Were fitter farre then youngest wedlocke bandes.


Doe not repine,To the young woman married to the old man. or grudge, young louely creature
At vnescaped Destiny, Mariage:
Nor macerate with cares your beauteous feature
Banning cannot abate your griefe, nor rage
Nor any other thing salue your disease,
Vntill the cutting Destiny doth please.


Imagine that thou art a weaned childe
Hugd in the bosome of an aged nurse
Let deeds and wordes be dutifull and milde
Least they doe make thy anguishes the worse,
For in a moment Age with Rage is tost
And waxeth most impatient, being crost.


Thou that Petition'st gainst thy wiues offence
Se thou be cleere thy selfe of the like spot,To the Cuckold.
Then maist thou with more right thy suite commence,
Or els take quietly thy crooked lot,
For he that strikes with Sword, it is decreed
Shall be restruck with Scabberd, till he bleed.


Couragious Souldier,To the Souldier. whose true valorous heart
Was neuer daunted with inuading foes
But causd thy greatest enemies to start
(At thy assayling them) like timorous Doos,

Vanquish thy selfe, and chance which puls thee downe
A thing more mighty then to winne a Towne.


Liue carefully young Prentise,To the Prentise. be no waster
Of others goods, abandon filthy whores,
And dissolute assemblies: Please thy Maister
And all the night keepe close within his dores,
Roue not about the suburbes and the streetes
When he doth thinke you wrapt betweene your sheets.


Too many take such courses vile and base
To their owne miseries and maisters fall
But if thou doe thy duty in thy place
And prouidently keepe within thy stall,
When they ride bound, or lurke in some by-lnae
Thou maist ride with thy foot-cloth, and gold chaine,


Thou that in vaine dost wrangle with thy starres,To the Malecontent.
And cauill at the factes by others done,
Leaue of thy selfe-destroying ciuill warres,
And intermedling with all others, shunne,
Enormeties enow thou hast to mend
If to thine owne affaires thou doe descend.


And to conclude,To all. let all for certaine know
That Gods reuengefull Yron Bowe is bent
And shaftes in readines to ouerthrow
Synnes harbourers, that doe not soone repent,

Let each one therefore his vilde courses meud,


A wicked life makes seldome a good end.


With that, me thought, I saw Fortune transported out
of sight, and the Petitioners made such an huming at her departure,
as if it had beene at the applonsiue end of an Uniuersity
oration, or other Scholler like exercise, that they awaked
me with the noyse, who in the end, writ the premises.
FINIS.


