



A STRANGE FOOTE-POST, WITH A PACKET full of madde Petitions.
IUst about that time of ye yeare when ye Spring begins to co^mand her handmaide Flora, to sticke the bosome of euery watry maedow, and sedgie lake, with nosegayes of party coloured flowers: hauing dulled my spirits with serious meditations, and plunged my senses in the quicksands of Inuention, aswell, to shake of a sullen Melancholy that attended me, as to entertaine some quicke, and more publicke recreation: I walked into a neighbouring mends, where it was my chance to light vpon an Arbor so priuately seated, as if Nature had built it a Caue, or receptacle for Solitude: inuironed so close, with the long and slender armes of Osiers, and so curiously intermingled with the leauy fingers of Woodbine, and sweere Eglantine, that neither cold nor rains could easily pieree it. In whose windowes, the feathered Quiristers of the grous, skipping from twig to twig, song pretty (though idle) notes, to the murmure of a siluer spring, which made such soft and solemne Musicke, that what with wondering, at the more then common workemanship of Art, and the Metaphisicall indeauours of Nature, in their ignorant (yet well according Harmony, Leaning my hand vpon my elbow, (being at that time destitute of a softer pillow) I fell into a sodaine, yet sound sleeps, during which, my imaginary insight apprehended a most strange vision.

Wee thought I was eleuated into the Zodiack, where like a^ stranger cast vpon a forrain Coast, I was stricken with vn-vtterable admiration, wondring at the strange obiectes I beheld. Gazing thus on euery side, like a Country-Gentlewoman at her first comming to a famous Citty, one clapt me vpon the head, whose very sight did much affright me, that it was enough to haue put me out of the wit I had: For the party I speake of was headed like Hydra, hauing more Tongues,The description of Opinion. then Esope prouided for his Maisters dinner: and for eyes, he was no Cyclops, or Polypheme, but an other Argus: The cloathes he wore, were for all the world fashioned like a fantasticall Englishmans, a gallim^^ry of most Countrie cuts, but not of one Cloath, Stuffe, Sattin, Veluet, etc. as theirs are: Nor of one, two, three, foure colours, as for the most part theirs are; but heere a peece of Veluet, there a peece of Vellure, heere a peece of Sattin, there a peece of Sackcloath, filled with sundry patches of seuerall patternes, like a Taylors hole, or rather Hell, whereinto he casteth many bodies of men and women.
This Monster seeing me so pittifully perplexed, told me that he was not so terrible as he seemed, and that his name was Opinion, so Headed, Sighted, Tongued and arraied, to shew the multiplicity, variety, and contrariety of mens Opinions, Fantasies, and Conceipts: And that the place wherein I then was was named the Metrapolitan Cittie of the World, seeming indeed like Heauen it selfe, inhabited by Spirits of all sortes, adorned with Sunne and Moone, like a contributarie King and Queene: Out about with all the Signes of the Zodiack garnished with Planets, which like Rulers ouerswayed Sublunary Creatures: Beautified with Starres of three fortes, whereof some were tearmed Fixae, resembing vertuous and constant women, keeping in their Sphaeres, as in their houses. Others Errantes, wandring Starres, gadding like Gossips, which ride from Cities to Countries, running from their owne Mansions to Tauernes, from their husbands bosoms to other mens beds.
The third, Cadentes, that is, falling Starres, whereunto wantons may his compared, which fall from the Heauen of Honesty, to the immoveable masse of Mis^ou^ and immodesty: Forthwith he led mee through many La^es and shewed me the signes as wee passed along the heauen streete: Here (said hee) is Aries, the signe of the Ramme: What the Ramme in floor street thought I. This is Cancer the signe of the Crabbe: Here is Virgo, the signe of the Ma^de: That is a rare signe indeede, many a young beginner would be^ glad to dwell at that signe: This is Scorpio, the signe of the Scorpion, a venemous Serpent which hurteth with the farie: That is Capricornua, the signe of the Goates head, some Cuckold languisheth there, while his wife laugheth abroad: This is Gemin^ the signe of the Twinnes, there dwelleth a good member in the Commonwealth, which getteth two at once: Heere is Leo the signe of the Lyon: There is Libra, the signe of the paire of Sea^les: Terras Astraea reliquit, Iustice hath forsaken the Garth, and keepeth shopp there: That is Sagittarius the signe of the Archer, binde Cupid maketh bird bolts there to daile Woodcocks: This is Aquarius, the signe of the Water bearer, I supposed at first a Vintener dwelled there, which cartieth so much water to quench the fire, which would else rise out of his Seller, till I gazed for a Bush and could soe none, but the bush Beard of a Brewer: After he conducted me by the seauen Planets seauen Gates of this Cittie: The first and lawest he called Luna, which being then in the Ecclips,The ^odern I deemed the Postern Gate shut close: The second Sol the Sunne, which I reseen bled to Mooregate,Moor^^^^ because it is more delicious and pleasant then the Moone, with beames and rayes, or rather ^avies on the one side: The third Mercury the God of Th^^ues, Cheaters, Nymble-singered fellowes, which made me call it Newgate: The fourth Venus,New^^^^ A^gate Laug^^^. the Goddesse of Laue* which I tearmed Allgate, because all goe thorough that Gate: The fist Mars, which loo^^ed sternly like King Lad, whose very aspect at that time wrought in my concerpt that
I feard a Sergeant was dragging mee to Lud-gate: The sixt Iupiter,Aldersgate. which I surmisd to be Alders-gate: The seauenth Saturne, elde, ^^ble, and deerepit, which I thought might somwhat ^^tly be nominated Cripple-gate:Cripplegate Are here all said I? I haue one gate yet, standing boyd to bee shut vp with a ^^^^titude: What gate is that said Opinion? It is Bishops-gate said I. Some Philosophers cauill about it said Opinion. But Aristotle and Plato make reckoning of are eight, which is called Sphaera octaua, that is, the firmament containing the fired starres. Why then this Sphaera Octaua is Bishopgate, containing all the fired starres: that is, the faithfull Ministers:Bishops gate. And the Philosophers which cauill about it are none but contentious Brownists, and Separaters: which because the eyes of their true vnderstanding are pluckt out, would plucke the whole house vpon their owne deads, to the ouerthrow of the Rulers. But let these Byases passe by like asses, with bag and baggage to Anser-dame, so long as we haue Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers, and Plato the Diuine on our sides. Our gardens will prosper the better when they haue in them not one of these Elders, whereupon so many couetous Iudasses bang themselues.
By this time we had pasied through al the Planets set about with stars, like so many gates with watchmen; and were entred into the are the heauens suburbs: Here (quoth Opinion) you may daily beheld diuers that passe to and fro from all parts to present their scueral petitions to Fortune, and implore her (...) for some good hap: which many times they obtaine, if their Petitions go not through many hands: for then they are either lost or torn or some to some friends hands, against whom they are preserred, and the Petitioners a recheckt and called seditions knaues, and go home perhaps an hundred miles with a Flea in their eare.
Then me thought I was very importunate to know the seuer all suiters, that becau^e so suppliant to Fortune: and euen as Opinion was telling me he would certifie me of them in order, Behold (quoth he) yonder is one trauelling a pace,
that ministers matter to giue you some satisfaction. And as I was thus giuing my attendance, and obseruation, I might see a semall comming, indeed a peart one she was, as ready to giue the welcome to her customers, as a boy in a barre, and as nimble as a Parasite in an old Comedie.

The harlot passeth by them.
The Harlot.FIe vpon her (said I) she will neuer haue good successe in her suite, she hath such Anticke attice, and dosh so trip and go with her Petition: What? a woman of tall stature and vpright body? (would she were as vpright in her life and behamour) high browes, faire haire? hath she not robbed the dead for it)? round cheeks curt all lips, dimpled chin, sleeke necke, and slender waste? Tis good if they be not hooks to draw men in, and birdlime to tie the feathers of euery stranger, that nons may escape them. But I feare she is (as some say of wanton women) like Circes witches, and can turne vame glorius footes into Asses, gluttonous fooles into Swine, pleasant fooles into Apes, proud fooles into Peacocks, and when she hath done, scourge them out of dores with a w^^^.
This is one (said Opinion) whose face is a painted Sepulcher, whereas her mind is a Toinbe full of rotten bones and Serpents:The ^^inion or (...) Harlot. her browes like the Diamond) containe vertue to relieue, and poyson to kill: her lookes are like Calenders, that can determine no certainty, but as a certaine lease) which is most drie, when it lookes most mo^st: so when shee smiles, she imagines deceit, and her laugnters are tempered with enuy and reuenge: her vows are but as words written in the wind: her promises Caracters figured in the a^re^her ^a^teries, figures grauen in the Snow, which are blowne with the wind (...) melted with the Sun: and her loue, like the passage of a Serpent ou^r a stone, which once past, can neuer vs seene. She will promise mountainies, and perform Moie^is. She will say she loues with D^^o, and yet fame with Crenda: follow Demophon with Phillis, and yet vs more stragling
then Luna: she hath smiles (at her wish) to bewitch, and teares (at command) as the Crocodile, to betray. If thou proffer her any thing, she will poc^ee at all: if thou hast gold, she is a Hors^each, and will not out of thy bosome: but shee hates an empty purse, as the Hyenna doth the sight of a man, and wil she from thee, when thou art poore, as the foule from the Fauhon. In plaine termes, she is a proud prorhane Harlot. And were she not prophane, what Athiest would frequent her? were she not bawdy, what Puncquatero would shew his rotten teeth to her? Were she not ridiculous, what country Gentiles would come to her? Were she not full of toyes and gewgawes, what Citizens would flocke to her? In a word, Were she not* as she is, she would be like a Politician without a profound head, like a flatterer without a glib tougue, like an Astronamer without eyes, a Musitian without hearing, a Souldier without hands, a Porter without a strong backe, a Gentleman vsher without straitelegs, a Lackey without feete, in no reputation. But it is not so with her, for she is a Bona Roga: and the Petition which she comes to present, must needs (no doubt) bring some good fruite, from that corrupt tree.

Vouchsafe to looke vpon the lines of your humble Petitioner, who from fifteene yeares of age hath hene a woman of no carriage,The Harlots Petition. liuing alwaies chast both in towne and countrey, and haue had much dealing with many of great ability, till of late that I failed of your furtherance, and missed many of my customers. For whom, when I made a secret inquisition, and priuie search (fearing they had made a voyage to settle themselues in Virginia) I met some of them prepared for Tiburne, others I found enconntred with Counters, and some laid vp in houses of Hospitalitie: which vnexpected sight did so appale me, that forthwith I thought good to present this Petition vnto you: requesting that such as are my welwillers, may haue some longer continuance of your fauours, and not tast so sodainly of your frownes, (which will be my vtter vndoing) so long as they haue money or meanes. But when they are destitute
of both, then cast them off, let them steale and be hanged: which if they deny, I wish you send them farre enough: for there is nothing more combersome, then impecunious hangets on.
Where there is one of these officers, I would there were twentie.There be also some of the officious (to whom I wish none of your fauours) as the onely causers of our ouerthrowes. For they hunt vs like Hares, and ferrit vs like Conyes. They tie vs to stakes like Beares, and whip vs like Iades. They driue vs from post to piller, that were we not predestinate as it were to liue chast, they would compell vs euen against our Fate to become chast, they do so chase vs from countrey to citie, from citie to suburbes, from houses and husbands, to cousens and allies, where we leade a life like brute beasts among grasse, trees; etc. Or liue like the old water-Nymphs, or Fairies (which pinched poore men) in wels and ditches. As Shorditch and Clarkenwell. I therefore sue to haue an Habeas Corpus serued vpon them, especially certaine little Annimals, called Beagles, who seeing poore Does prostrate before their feete, haue notwithstanding the heart to hurt, and draw blood from their ribbes and shoulders.

Maddona Meretrix.




The Baude commeth to the Harlot.
The Baude.GOe thy wayes, thy fooles bolt is shot a Cockheight against the starres, which will light vpon thine owne head. Here is a Petition indeed, if all Petitions should be granted. But there is another come vnto her, she should be a yong woman by her great belly: but now she yawneth, I see the marke is out of her mouth, she walloweth like a Sow with pigge, talketh very imperiously, and is ^lad most modestly But I mislike one thing, she cougheth so sorely, are her lungs sound?
The opinion. ^^a Baude.Out vpon her (said Opinion) though she speake purely, sweare sparingly, looke demurely, and walke sagely, yet her life is loathsome, and behauior beastly. She hath her roguish
Rhetorick at her fingers ends, and can winch, kicke, and fling when she seeth her oportunitie. She goeth to the Church with an ill will, vnlesse to picke a pocket, or to peruert some honest mans wife she is pued withall. But she will bestir her stumps to get easie roome in a Theater; and twenty to one she will lure some Bussard to dogge her home at the end of the Play. She liueth by vsury, but here is the difference: the vsurer putteth but ten (ouer and aboue) to his hundreth in the yeare* But she brings an hundreth to ten, nay to two somtimes in a weeke, Abhominable filth as she is, I wish thee to stop thy eares at her words, for she is a Mer-maide, or rather Marmaide.

A filthie Baude.



The Spendall passeth along.
The Spendall.ROome for a Gentleman, mark the motion my Masters: his dublet is of the ragged ranke, with neuer a button on it, and his breeches are very faulty, they must be mended, I maruell he buyeth hunselfe no better cloathes now his rents begin to come in so fast: Foure paire of yarn stockings would make no great shew vpon those spindle shankes: he looketh very Lentenly and commeth halting on.
This tottered Colt (said Opinion) which once had high desires,The Opinion of the Spendal hath now lowe fortunes; his thoughts were woont to reach at starres, but now stumble at stones. He was his fathers dotage, and his Mams darling: a toward Springall you will say, when he lay with his mothers Chambermaide at sixteene: and an vntoward Spendall, when he had lauished the sixt part of a Million before he knew sixe and twentie Birth dayes. He did of late swim in gluttonny, but now is pinched with pennury. He was woont to deuise what to eat, and is now destitute of any food. He hath worne more vpon his backe then the gold (which procured passage for the Asse into the Castle) would defray. His quondam full feeding maketh him now look so emptily. His drinking so many healths hath taken all health from him: his so often leaping the pale, causeth him looke so pale: his close following the fashion,
bringeth him now (as you see) out of all forme and fashion: had he taken time before he might haue ledged in an house li^e a palloce, as he doth now in a place like a prison, lying like a Nutmeg in a Grate, being the ^mbl^me of vnthristi^^sse, the Hierogliphicke of Riot, the picture of the Prodigall, and the Indiuidium vagum of a poore pitifull pe^^ilesse Spendall.

Most humbly sueth a cashierd Caualiere, no Gentleman yet a knights sonne and heire, being richly bequeached,The Spendals Petition. and well mannered, consorted with men of choice fashion, with women of sam^us report: much indebted to merchants, and greatly bound to their wiues. But at last wanting present meanes to repay the one, and competent matter to come euen with the other, which did put me to my plunges, that I was constrained to colleague with a Miser, Qui nummos adm^ratur: An vsurer that doth make much of money, who vpon some consideration of my good conditions did supply me for a time, but when Doomes-day came, that I should render an account for all, all was gone, my lands were seised vpon, my credite ceased, and I clapped vp amongst Bank^^pes, and borrowers: where now I must lie like a forlorne wretch, eue^^eadie to die for want of reliefe: my friends pittie me, my enemies play vpon me. All she from me, none come nye me, but mercilesse keepers, and miserable caytisses,The end of Riot. who make me remember what I learned long agoe.

Cum fuctis foelix mult^s numer abis amicos,
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.

When I was mounted vpon the chariot of Fortune. Ga^^^^^ would conuerse with me, Lawyers giue attendance to my suites, Tradesmen cappe to me, Dependants cro^ch to me, Brokers borrow for me, Vsurers lend me, Flatterers extol (...), lusty Lasses aduance me, stoope to me, and hang about my necke like goodly Iewels, as they proue. But now I a^^tra^^pled vnder the wheele of Chance, all is turned topsie turney, Qui nuper albus cram, ^unc sum con^rarius ^lbo. Gallants in their Pasquill humours begin to gird at me. Curia p^^peribu^ c^a^^ est. Lawyers haue no feeling of my case: Tradesmen will ^^ue
no commerce with me; Dependants hang downe their heads as if they were going to hanging: Brokers become boisterous: Vsurers misuse me. Thus am I vsed for vsing them: thus am I deceiued for trusting them: thus am I despised for imbracing them: thus am I become a castaway for casting away my money amongst them. Now there is no wealth left, they are all lost, now my gold is flowne they are all fled, and now am I in want, they are all vanished like vnto an empty cloude. Oh that you would but send some Reuenge vpon some of them, that others of my rancke, seeing some of their fals, may shun the like places, and amend their follies, and they themselues relent, and haue their remorseles hearts turned: if out of their bellies, honestye and vpright dealing should haue no great losse.

The Spendall.




The Sergeant attends on him.
The Sergeant.VVOuld all our Lusty-Guts would looke in at this looking glasse. He was as well rigg'd a Pinnace, as some that make a greater shew, and as well mann'd till the boisterous blasts of his owne affections splitted him vppon the rocks of Riot. He was as louely as Laeander, before he cast himselfe into the Sea of sensuality, and might in time haue proued a Co-adiutor of his countries weale, had hee closed his cares at the inueigling of Sea-Lures, and shut his mouth when Circe preferred him the cup to quaffe, which turned him to a beast, or more wretched then a beast in these daies, A beggar. But what is he that attendeth him so closely in the gowne.
It seemeth (said Opinion) that you neither trust nor are trusted:The opinion of the Ser. geant. Either you haue stood in no need of money, or you want credit to borrow: or if you haue borrowed, you pay according to prounse, and appointment; else he would haue ben^ so bold as to haue clapped you vpon the shoulder, and ben^ better acquainted with you, though you cared not greatly for his acquaintance, if euer you came into the precincts of his Iurisdiction: He is an Officer, whose office I disallow not,
but dislike some of his fratrernitie in their extreame executing of their duties, which will fawne like Spaniels, on such as bribe them, and will be inquisitiue after them. where they are sure they are not: But mercilesse Furies to haunt out poore men, which are disable to fee, and feed them with rewards, and that which sheweth them to be no Christians on the Sabboath day: He is at the best but a decayed Tradesman, or vnthrifty Occupier, which how dissolutely or basely soeuer he liued before, is good inough is be as he is, The quartaine Feuer to a Spendall: the Plague to had Pay-maisters: the Vsurers foisting hound: a necessary naile in the finger of the Common wealth to claw men by the poles.

A Sergeant



The countrey Client passeth along.
The countrey Client.HE hath neuer a Petition to preferre, vnlesse against such as are wise enough to keepe their money, while they haue it, and pay duly where they owe. But stay, what is he that noddeth next? if my eye-fight faile nie not, a short corpulent fellow with a full face, and foule hands, couered like a Capease all with leather, backt with a broad dagger, a long sword which handleth the forepart of his slops very rigorously: now is his browne bonnet whipt betweene his legs, and he stands groping for his Petition.
This man (said Opinion) you see so plainly attired, is quite tired with following the law:The opinion of the country Client. who though he seeme so plaine, hath as many crooked conditions in his Costrell, as a slight of your finest fashion mongers. If he be Church warden, the Parishoner he maligneth, is summoned vpon suspition, if he giue but a well looking Lasse a good morrow, or good night. If he be Constable, all the Alewines are vndone: If his neighbour trespasse against him, he will neuer forgiue him. He will worship any man for his commodity, but where he neither feareth nor hopeth, He is haile fellow, well met. Cocknies map laugh at him, as he laggeth along the
pauements, and Guls giggle when he passeth by their proper personages: but if he could yet vantage he would make them pay for the whole dozen: Let him alone, whether his haue his Oates, Pease, or Beanes, yet he wanteth no fet^hes. Lend an ears to his Petition, if it be truly speld, hee will coniure somebody.
The contrey-Clyents Petition.Long haue ^^iued, and grieued to see so many citizens become Bankrouts, when Lawyers flourish, and breath and braule to the vtter ruine and vndoing of such pooremen as my selfe, who hauing an homely wife and children at home, an compelled to come in Coram to this most deare Cittie, where I lie at exceeding charges, following the Law, which I faiue would flie: But necessity hath no Law, for hauing no fees, I may find a Lawyer (adding but a Maister to it) who hath either no Law in his budget, or no conscience in his breast. So my case hath bene considered, and hung so long in Westminster hall, as my fathers Bowcase in mine owne hall, euer since he died, and left certaine lands to be parted amongst his sonnes, who, because we could not deuide them according to euery one of our contents, were contented to crouch to certaine Lawyers, who conceiuing the controuersie, and perceiuing vs at such variance, like our friends and welwillers promised to take our parts: and indeed not to belie them, they haue bene as good as their promises, and haue taken our parts, and not left vs an hole, or part to thrust our heads into. And now we lacke vnde: they come ouer vs with a Quare, which putteth vs into a Quandary, to be sent farre with neuer a farthing. It were ingratitude not to requite our welwillers and partakers, or at least, to wish wel vnto them that we cannot requite. My Petition therfore is, that you would conferre an hundreth marks or two vpon such Pillers, or rather Caterpillers, I mean such markes, as may marke them, to make others marke and beware of them. But for those rare, admirable, miraculous, honest, conscionable, graue deciders, which weigh the matter more then the money, preferre the Commonweale, more then their owne priuate wealth: pleade for the poore, as well
as Nobles: permit the not guiltie, ouerthrow the guiltie; I pray that they may liue many merry and Hillarie termes, for the good of their countrey, and profit of themselues, and their posteritie.

The countrey Client.



The Hostler followeth him.
SUre, said I, this Petition was neuer of his owne making, it is pincked so Pedantically, cut vpon fustian Phrases,The Hostler and bound about with Mocke-adoes.
Resolue your selfe (answered Opinion) your countriman in many places is so metamorphosed in maners now a daies, and quaint tearmes, that you shall hardly distinguish Pan from Apollo, but by the habit, and so captious in words, that you can vtter no word that he will not equinocate, if the Idiome will beare it. He speaketh so ambignously, that if his speech be construed one way, he knoweth how to interpret it after another signification, and is not the man you take him, for if you take him for a plaute, silly,The Hostler leadeth the countrey Clients ^orse after him. honest man at all times, and in euery respect. You haue said enough of him, but I pray you what is he for a man that doth follow him, he hath a sticke in his hand, which he whisketh as he leadeth the horse by the bridie.
The opinion of a kn^ue Hostler*He is as full of complement as his maister an Timekeeper: You are welcome Gentlemen, as all his eloquence, and that he sheweth as well to a clowne, as a knight. At your entrance into his stable, he will be so obsequious and seruile, that he wil wipe your very horses heeles. He stinketh line a Cure^^combe, and sinelleth as ranke as Stale. He will giue your horse a pecke of prouender (if it be your pleasure) and steale halfe of it, if you eye him not narrowly. It night he filleth the racke with hay, but in the morning you shal not find an handfull, though your horse, nor any other by him ca^not a mouth full. If you abide any long ti^e and will hourely looke vnto pour beast, as it is best (for the eye of the maister maketh
the horse sat he can take order for hes eating ouermuch, by greasing his teeth with a tallow candle. He loueth brinde likely, and a drab if he be not married. He hath no yearely wages of his maister to maintaine him, but that which guests bestow vpon him. To be briefe with him: at your departure, if you giue him any thing in the chamber, when you make cleare with the house, he hath a switch in one hand, and the bridle turned ouer the maine of your horse, standing in readinesse, to hold your stirrop steadfastly, and did you heartily farewell: But if he finde you miserable, your saddle gir^s are tied but slac^ly, and if you like them not, you may mend them your selfe, and if you looke not before you leape* you may perchance rue it. But he will hold your stirrop if you had him, he dare not deny it, it is a speciall point of his profession, but slac^ely, and with the head on the one side: and he will did you farewell (as his maister may heare) and bee hanged, (that he muttereth to himselfe.) Though he be a knaue, yet he is a man of great calling (especially when trauellers ride early on their iourney.

An Hostler.



The old Seruingman passeth along.
ECce a^^em alterum, Behold a blew coate with neuer a badge on it,The old Seruingman. the crown^ of his head like a Franciscans, Leno in facie, he looketh leane in the sace, and lanhe in the belly: All his apparrell looke as though they were cast, a signe of a weake stomarke to beare strong liquour. Looke how he ^i ^^oth his hand as if he were in loue with it, and licketh the superficies of the floore with his knees. Fie vpon it, how semonio^^ he is in deliuering his Petition. Those lowe legs, and kissing the hand (if he can cong^, and lie to) would get him a seruice with some in the world, if he would serus three or foure yeares for no wages, he should haue halfe a crowne at parting.
Nay (said Opinion) he hath bene long enough in that predicament,
and now can shew nought of his getting,The opinion of the old Seruingman vnlesse children he dare not father. He was a pretty boy, an handsome strippling, a proper man: peeuish in his childhood, proud in his youth, and prodigall in his best yeares: He hath wasted his protion in hope of preserment: spent his substance, looking for aduancement; consumed quite all, in expectation of some requitall. His greatest felicitie was to court the chambermaids in some corner, and his chiefe excercise to make his maisters friendsSeruingment. dependants drunke. He was trained vp in some peece of a ioyners trade to make legs, and the best part of his Rhetoricke was, I forsooth, and No forsooth. The iniunctions that he was tied to, were to rise at all houres, and to ride in all seasons, eating that which was lest, wearing that which was left, and marying oftentimes that which his maister lest. Which sheweth what he was, and is theOne that goeth before. Anteambulo of a Gentle woman, theOne that followeth. Subsequent of a Gentleman, theOne that sitteth before. Presedent of a Portmantle, or a Cloake bagge.

An old Seruingman, a young beggar.
Not without cause do I creepe to you with my Petition, praying either better fortune hereafter,The old Seruingmans petition. or reuenge vpon them that haue so slighted me off heretofore; who from my youth was brought vp in seruice, not in Gods seruice, but in the seruice of man and woman, waiting for that which now I shall neuer get, because I can waite no longer. So long as I was strong, I was backt with something: so long as I could performe all seruiceable duties, I wanted for no promises. But Time which turneth all things, hath turned me out of seruice, and Age which altereth all men, hath changed me from the top of Fauour to the toe of Contempt. Being now vsed like an old horse, my cloake plucked of my backe, as his skin: Or an old dogge, kickt with disdaine of euery vpstart. Thus haue I bene serued for all my seruing: gained a daintie dish, for caruing so many daintie dishes: got a goodly catch, for all my watching, and catching cold, for all my running* and riding, tending, and tendering the welfare of those, which consider
none, but themselues. A man were better serue hogges, then some men, many wiues, most widdowes. Yet I would be loth to be misconstrued, or thought to censure any, but curious fooles; that none can please: ingratefull wretches, which although a man hath spent the prime of his youth, hindered his fortunes, discharged the part of a faithfull steward, when his beautie fadeth, and strength faileth, will thrust him from them (because he cannot performe his wonted charge) without recompence or remorse. For the world knoweth, and thousands acknowledge, the munificent liberalitie of true Gentry, extended towards them, who by seruice haue climbed vp to honour, their maisters not enuying them, but lending their own hand and strength to their ascentions, whose childrens children are bound to pray for them: when others, respected like my selfe, are forced to become humble Petitioners as I am, and are contrarily indebted. to them and theirs, if they do not degenerate from their Predecessors.

The old Seruingman.




The widdow with the old Seruingman.
VVEll (thought I) though the fellow haue gained smal wages,The Widdow yet hath he great words (wheresoeuer he got them) and can say something for himselfe, though it auaile hun little. Let him be trauelling towards Beggers bush, and thinke of his sinnes in his masters Buttery. But stay awhile he is in communication with a seeming well demeaned woman, somewhat stricken in yeares, yet well fauoured, and not past marriage.
The opinion of the widdow.She may do well you thinke (said Opinion) to make him a man, which made her a woman, when time was (or elso there are hers.) But if she be wise, she will not hazard her good^ and her selfe. That she hath she is sure of, and put the case she walieth any thing for selfe, it will be lesse care, then to haue another to lash it out. The wilde cost may proue a tame horse, but a ^^lde youth is oftentimes a wilfull man.
Vince^e consuetudin^m dura est pugna. It is a ^o^e conflict to subdue custome. She leadeth new a single life (a singular life) she hath her necke out of the yoke, she n^^^ not thrust it into it againt, vnlesse she lust. If she can keepe her selfe as she is, she is well and a wealthy Widdow.


The maide gotten with childe commeth along.
The maide gotten with childe.LEt them goe together on Gods name (said I) but hei mihi, what a wofull s^ectacle is this? faciem pulchram, an amiable face, and louely looke: Prettie soule, why doth she pouder those fresh cheekes with salt teares? Alas, she can scarce wallow, her belly is so full, yet she ioggeth along* though euery foote she looketh to lie downe.
The Opinion of the maid^ with child.This is one (answered Opinion) whom Nature hath imbellished with her rarest ornaments, but fortune furnished with none of her riches* She was poore, therefore despaired of an husband. Light of beliefe, therefore at this time heauy bellied. Another Dido to beleeue some wandering Aeneas: another Aenone to credite some wandring Paris: another Phillis to trust some swearing Demophon. He promised, and hath fulfilled (but I do not say his prounse.) Because he sware he would neuer forsake her, she supposed he would surely haue her: as though he which maketh no scruple to breake the seuenth Commandement, will make any conscience to keepe the third. The apples were faire the tree c^^^ly, and the diuell at hand made her fall to them, which procured her fail, and that fall was the cause of this swelling.

The Petition of the maid with childe.If euer any might proffer a Petition for right, or reuenge. I haue as great reason as any, Being a pure and vntoucht virgin, voted to Vesta, and deuoted to Chastity, till a venerous villaine with daily assaults and nightly trecheries, neuer left battering the weake bulwarke of my heart with piercing words, vowes, oaths, and protestations, darted from his smooth tongue, till he had surprised me. Hearing him oftentimes sweare, seeing him teare his ^aire nay, which is more strange
for a man, weepe in most seeming sadnesse, kisse my hand with foure and trembling, and voluntarily proffer, and performe much seru^^^de, which I neither desired nor deserued. Being guilt lesse of effecting deceit, was free from suspecting: fearing to breake an oath, or violate a vow, trusted that he had bene possessed with the like feare, (as he was not) at last condescended. Which so soone as he had accomplished, he left me: It is no glory to deceiue a maide, no manhood to ouerthrow the weaker vessell. Yet being outwardly garnished with the gor^^ous workmanship of Art and Nature, what labour will not some men take to attaine this vessell? what watchings will they not vndergoe? what wealth will they not wast to comp^sse it? And when they haue gotten it, how do they esteeme it? euen a toy to be plaid with for a time, and after too. For so soone as they eye another deuice, they cast away the old, and neuer are in quiet till they are fingering the new, Fie vpon such, they are like warriours of old time, which would spend much cost, and labour to subdue a citie, and when they had brought it into subiection, they would instantly leaue it, and so march to another, etc. Or like the fantasticall fellowes of our time, which cannot keepe long in one cut, but euery foot haue a ^^ing at a new fashion: but all not so, and I would there were se^er that are so.

The maide with childe.




The Parriter rideth after the maide with childe.
I See ^^e a ^^^ce off, riding as it were to this maide, he will not be here very soone,^^e Pa^^^er he is so ill horsed. In the meane t^^e I will acquaint you with a iest not vnfit to be inserted in this place. There was a prettie maide which in her time had many su^ters the first whereof was verie vrgent to haue his delights with her as I heard a crooked legd knaue terme it: ^^e being a tender hearted thing, as it seemed this was, after a little willing waywardnesse was wonne, and lost
together. After he had forsaken her, a second came, and set lied her in like manner: then a third, and after a fourth, (birds of a feather, they flew all after the foremost.) Being thus handled, she began to ware warie, and forswore tensting. In this resolution a fifth came vnto her, whose condition was to trie all, and if they did ag^^^, he would come no more there. This Gentleman wooing the foresaid supposed maide, set his wit and wealth vpon the tenters, to obtaine his purpose, but nothing could preua^^e. She rayled most egregiously against his dishonest and vniust request, and scorned the motion: which pleased him very west though he s^^med discontented) and married her. The second night they lay together, he began to speake thus vnto her: Thou knowest (sweet heart) how earnest I was to lie with thee before I might lawfully; and I protest, if thou hadst suffered me, we had neuer bene matried together. The wife, whether she was halfe a sleepe, or ouer ioyed, ^o^ had the heart of ^n Owle (which they say causeth women to reuea^e their secrets) laide to her left pappe,(...). answered him thus. Na^ ^a^ husband, I was wise enough for that, I tr^w: for three or foure had serued me so before I euer beheld your face. This tale I thought meete to set downe in this place, that if any maide chance to reade ouer this booke, she might take been how she dishoner her seife with any, whether she ma^^^^th (...) marrieth not, for it will breed future ^alousie though she neuer after deserue it. But now the horseman is alighted (...) readeth something to the maide gotten with childe,^^e ^^^^ter crueth a ^^^^^se. etc. what he is I cannot certainly say, but I do not like his looks (...) that peece of parchment in his hand.
I will not runne (said Opinion) into any particulars with him,The ^^^^on ^^^e (...). he is better knowne in the countrey then in the ^^^e And whosoeuer are ^^tus, or in cuts as I may speake (...) ^quainted with him, know him to be in ^^^est man (...) knaue.


Par^ter





The reiected louer walketh along.
LEt him returne that answer to the Court, and see if they can haue an action of slander against you,The Louer. and obserue him now that commeth next with his Petition, so trimly tr^ked vp: not a haue ^^isse with him, vnlesse that which (...) the one doe of his shoulder, what a your blinde (...) was ^e which polled him last. Come a little nearer (...), I (...) now, he can make his old cloake serue the turne, in the last ^^^tion ne^ly corrected and augmented, laced and interla^ed. He hath a sti^^enecke, which God hateth, and a strait (...), which no faithfull drunkarde an indure, for if he had what (...) ^^^ing, he would not leaue if worth a botton: but the (...) of his b^aches, sure he had an honest Tayler, else he^ might haue taken as much from both the out does next his knees as would haue made him two ends of a wallet, which now ^^e very like a paire of Smiths bellowe^, sta^d^ng with the smallest ends ^^wards. A sweet youth (...) doub^, for he hath two Roses on his shoes to quallisie the sm^ll of his (...) if he haue no s^ckes, or one would make a Pope of him, and (...) his toe. But why doth he sigh so deepely, and (...) so ^^^^ly?
This (...) f^llow is no feele, although he be none of the wisest: he ^^^es no more for money (if he haue it) so he may please his (...),The desc^iption of the Louer. then for such mettall as serues onely for (...): He can fit his humour to euery estate. If he be^^^^g Sch^llers he hath Aristotle at his fingers ends and ^^^^y ph^^se smels of Cicero. He can shew wit in quicks of s^^ph^^try, and reading in disputations of Philosophy. Amongst Courtiers he can braue it out as well as the rest, and (...), with most louing and amorous pratile: with them he is in his Q. and keepes the old text, Bonum est nobis esse ^ic. But their company so besots him, that he forgetteth (...), V^ysses to stay his cares, and therefore the Syrens put him to ship^er^cke. He carrieth not the Antidote of Caueat Emp^or, against the alluting baites of their beautie, and therefore Folly (for the most part) is his next hauen.

He remembers not, that the eyes of wicked women are snares, and their worde charmes, that their deceipt is much, their desires more, and their couetonsnesse most;The Louer^ Petition. which the more it drinkes the more thirsty it is: their consciences like a Pomice stone, light, and full of holes: whose ^ones are for lucre, whose hearts are light on his person, and whose hands are heauy on his purse. If he hit vpon a Curtezan that is a little ioy, though she be altogether vnchast, his delight is to be on her lappe: there he lies at racke and manger, and thinkes there are no more maids then Malkin. There he s^iteth like Sardanapalus, dallying with the sla^^e, till he burn^ in the fire. So as in the end, comming home by weeping Crosse, he buyeth repentance with too deare a price, and becommeth at last, A s^nd, despised, and reiected Louer.

Being worne with griefe, and wasted with discontent, I am constrained to seeke remedy and some ease to my minde, which you may affoord by doing reuenge vpon an inconstant Female, who plighted her faith to me, and priuatly proclaimed me the sole Lord of her Microcosm: but before I was installed I was forestalled by the vndermining perswasions of a trecherous vsurper, who with his seruile curtesies hath insinuated himself into my dominio^s. Who would trust the wind? A womans words: who would relie vpon a broken reed? a womans oath. They sigh for them that hate them, and laugh at most that loue them. They will haue some that will not, and will haue few that would faine. Some feeling of their fo^ly had he, which when he beheld his neighbors wife ^ang ^er selfe vppon one of the trees in her husbands orchyar^, req^^tled a graft of the same tree, to see if it would beare any more or the like fruite. And no light burthen did that passenger account his wife, who, when the rest in the ship were willed to cast all the bagge and baggage* which no surcharge ^t, ouer^oo^^, was most willing to ^uity his wife into the Sea. Some ^o ^hew then learning or rather ignorance, may make ^arge ^o^^^nes of E^comions in then behalfes, and get per^aps a Iudas ^^ile, o^ a flay with a Fo^e ta^le for their labours. For he (...)
or read any thing at all of this Common place, shall finde for one Vesta, many vitious; for one Diana, many darlings; for one Lucrece, many lasciuious: did neuer any but Semeramis lie with her owne sonne? Did neuer any but Mir^ha twine with her owne father? Did neuer any but Biblis dote vpon her own brother? Did neuer any mistresse but Iosephus tempt her houshould seruants? One is no number, I would there were no number of these ones, vpon which if you fall, you will bee

The forlorne Louer.




The countrey Schoolemaister commeth to the Louer.
The Countrey Schoolemaster.IT is happy you are so short, else we had b^ne wearied with your louely Petition. Me thinkes yonder is one that cringeth to him: all his apparell is not woorth one Marke, yet he hath a hat on his head of the Spanish blocke: put the blocke and his head together and see what they spell. Well done honest genus and species (for thou seemest inclining as it were, that way by thy habite, and pen and inkchorne) reade a pee^e of Ouid de Remedio amoris to him, for though he raile vnreasonably against women, yet I am perswaded he doth chastise them, non quod odio habet, sed quod amat.
The Opinion of the countrey Schoolemastes.Atque hoc humanum est (said Opinion) This man you see which maketh such action with his hands, as he talketh with the Louer, is one that keepeth a foule ioyle in the Chancell or Belfree of a Church. He is a most horrible Tyrant ouer little children, and makes their breeches quauer with the shake of his Scepter, alias ye Rod. He getteth his liuing, non perse, but for the most part, per accidens. Yet he can teach Grammer and Aesops Fables, for he hath them both in print, translated verbum de verbo. Howsoeuer schollers do esteem^ of him, ignorant Hobnailes hold him for a rar^ Scholler, for he will speake Latine amongst them extrumpere, and scan verses at his fingers ends. He is a man of sharpe learing, which pea^e^th hard words: he worketh by Rule, like a Carpenter,
and can cast a figure, as if he were a coniurer. He is very curious, and standeth much a vpon points, he may ^^tly be coupled with the Louer. For either he is enamoured of his own good parts, or in loue with the waiting maid, if he tabled in a Gentleman house, and sometimes winneth her good will, but neuer can get her friends consent. To be brief with him, as her in with his infants, a word and a blow: Hee is the outside of a Sohollee, an imperious commander ouer boyes and wenches, the head maister of the Peepe taile trade

A Pedant.



The old woman married to a yong man commeth next.
SO let them all walke Newgate fashion, two by two: Who is that which hobleth next? Christ blesse the woman:The old woman married to a young man. So, wipe your mouth with your Handkerchiefe after your coughing and spitting. Her forehead is wrinckled like a paper lanthorne, which boyes make: with two thinne cheekes, like two washt trenchers, betweene which, her nose seemeth like the socket, wherein the snot stands like a peece of a farthing Candle. Her mouth like a Caue with two clap doores, to wit, her two lips, without a bolt, that is without a tooth, containing a Pilgrime, a wandring tongue, which mouth (like a Caue) standeth like a Caue betweene two sharpe pointed hils, whose tops do almost touch one another, her Nose and her Chinne.
Mocke Age (said Opinion) and see how you will thriue. This toothlesse, saplesse, sencelesse Beldam,The opinion of the old woman married to the yong man. was wife to an honest substantiall man, who during his youth endured much labour in gathering riches to maintaine himselfe in yeares; and her, if she should be superstes, or out liue him, as she hath. So s^e had all he left (which was suff^cient) at her owne disposing, who was had enough disposed as it seemed: For as soone as her husband was surely buried, she was all on the ho^te, she could not he alone. An husband was all her care, and many graue men she had choice of, but she gaue small intertainement
to any of their haire, she had rather haue the legge of a Larke, then the body of a Rite: yet the feathers hang in her Maw, which she cannot digest nor vomite, till death lance her throate with his razor. Her Petition will reneale all, for women cannot keepe their owne secrets. Onely this, she is, as it were* a bush of thornes thrust to the hinder parts of a Colt. A verie old woman married to a young man.

The Petition of the old woman married to the yong man.Though I might haue bene better aduised by my friends, forewarning (I confesse) yet since I am in the like pickle as others, and haue had no lesse misfortune then they, I may water my woes, and cannot chuse but put vp my Petition with theirs. Who as it is well knowne, was wealthy, and therefore soone wonne: an old woman, and therefore soonest wronged by a beggerly varlet: who at my first view seemed so ciuilly behaued, as none could mislike him: so well proportioned, as I could not chuse but like him especially hauing an honest vocation, as he professed, and was well descended though a yonger brother, which had his portion to take, as he brought me Certificate. But now I perceiue these were but trickes to catch Dotterils. His smooth tongue being his onely friend, the sleight and craft of his hands, his onely handie-craft, his proportion his onely portion, which he had to take. For after wee were married he soothed me vp, till I shewed him my substance, and improuidently without any further trial, committed it to his tuition: which when he had made sure, he handled me most ingratefully: neuer touching my lips but with his fist, nor warming my sides, but with an ell I vsed to measure cloath: alledging that if I exclaimed against him, he might safely sweare, he did neuer beate me without measure. Hee would not be contented to waste himselfe and my riches amongst whores and roysters all the day: but at vnseasonable times, when I was in bed, rush into my house with his queans at his heels, and rouse me out of my rest: make me to remake my bed with fresh sheets for his Truls, and would leape in amongst them, I being compelled to hold the candle to the D^^^ll,
whilest he did his deeds of darkenesse: Thus did he vse me, till I complained to Authoritie which relieued me, reuiled and extruded him my house and company. Then did he depart like a Sheepe-biter, retiring himselfe into a priuate chamber, cast off his guilded Rapier, spruce leather Boots, and Spurres, got him a Cloake without laces, made a Dublet with a falling choller, wore Gloues of sixepence a paire on his hands: no points on his Breeches, but at the wastband: a paire of sad coloured stockings, tied vp straight with Garters no broader then an Vsurers belt, and his Shooe-latches bound together with russet Inckle: frequented Sermons, sent me most passionate letters, that he had renounced Roisters, abjured whores, setled himhimselfe to a stayed and religious course, and that he shamed to appeare in the place I dwelled, he had so wronged me and himself* But if I would go into the country with him, he would purchace some conuenient place, where he might liue solitarie from all company, but my selfe, and seruants. His fained repentance seemed so heartie, and his flattering lines wrought so with me, that we became attoned, made money of all, and went together, and for three or foure dayes he vsed me kindly and lay very quietly with me in the nights, but the fiftth night (being farre from my friends) when I was fast asleepe, and neuer dreamed of any such matter, stole all I had, and ranne away. what way I cannot heare, or learne any tidings.

The old woman married with the yong man.




The Clarke commeth to the old woman.
THis is the end of liquorice, when a woman hath neuer a tooth in her head to chaw it.The Clar^e. At a glimpse I see a young man with her. Hath she not yet abandoned the company of men without beards? If hee be not the man she spoke so much of, what is he?
He is one that you shall seldome see without cleane linnen,The opinion of a Cla^^e. he weareth good cloathe^, and can write a legible hand: hee
hath a little learning, and will shew it all if you conferre with him: when he rideth abroad with his master, hee carrieth two hats, and walketh with a case of Rapiers, one by his side, the other in his hand, his masters and his owne. At dinner or supper, either at home or elsewhere, he waiteth at his masters elbowe with a trencher at his backe, yet hee can reach a cleane voider to any of the table, if he take a liking to the peece he hath on his foule trencher, he marrieth his masters daughter sometimes, which hee hath stolne away, (God a mercie Oportunitie.) He can make bonds and obligations to pleasure the parish, if their Vicar haue not so much Latine, and indite a loue letter for himselfe or his fellowes: if any misdemeanour be committed neare him, when complaint is made thereof, he writeth warrants to apprehend the offendors. He is a Iustices Clarke, which may warrant this old woman for getting her husband or her goods againe, though she pray, and pay neuer so many warrants.


The yong woman commeth married to an old man.
ANother passeth on passing portly, a sweete woman, she smelleth hither:The young woman. and a rolling eye she hath, it turneth with a trice on both sides: a faire haire, if it be her owne: a rare face if it be not painted: a white skinne, if it be not plastered: a full breast, if it be not bolstered: a straite backe, if it be not helped: a slender waste, if it be not pinched: a likely legge if it be not lined: a pretty foote-if it be not in the Shoomakers stockes: a faire, rare, sweete, meete body, if it be not dishonest.
Your supposes pose me (said Opinion) neither can I say or gainesay.The opinion of the young woman maried to the old Man. Nature in beautie is better then Art; yet Art in shew surpasseth Nature. She is proudly attired, yet perchance humbly minded: loftily aduanced, yet it may be lowly descended: vildly suspected, yet peraduenture vertuously addicted. The world now adaies is round with such as shee
is, and too rash in their censures: condemning such as are innocent, and quitting many that are culpable: but that which is past mending is past medling withall. Therefore leaue it, and looke vpon this lustre: faire she is and vertuours: riches she enioyes, yet hath no great ioy of riches: married she is, yet I make question, whether she bee a maide or no, being a young woman married to a verie olde iealous man.

The Petition of the young Woman maried to the old Man.My requests are not vnreasonable, nor voide of good cause, being a woman of tender age, as your eyes may witnesse, and of a vexed spirit, as these lines will manifest: that would chuse rather to be laide in my graue then on my bed; feede of the wormes, then eate with such a worme-eaten old iealous husband as I doe: whose age I doe reuerence, and find fault with no deformitie, which time hath thrust vpon him, but with his causlesse suspitions, and immerited mistrusts of me. For did he hemme more then a towne of Taylers, or hawke oftner then a countrey of Faulkners, I could endure it I am so enured thereunto: were the parts of his body neuer so nanseas and detestable, I could away with the^, so his reason were sound and sauory: but his wisdome (like his eyes) is sunke into his head, too farre for hereafter appearing: his will stronger then his breath: his vnderstanding feebler then his fingers: and his iudgement corrupter then his body.The praise of some olde Men. It is an admiration to see the difference of some of his yeares, how directly they will talke, what maiestie is in their lookes, what wisedome in their discourse? Not a word without his weight, not a sentence without good sence: not a deed vnlesse absolutely performed. They will blame nothing that is not blame worthie, nor condemne any without assured reason. But my Zelotipus raileth without reason, knocks his staffe against the stones, blames me without offence. On that some good Fortune would therefore cure me of this care, and salue me of this sorrow: For neuer shall I reape dayes rest, nights content, houres quiet, minutes mirth, so long as I haue this impostume in my head, this pinne and webbe in mine eye, this canker in my
nose, this scabbe on my lippe, this iealous old husband.

The young woman married with a very old iealous man.



Now I heare this Petition, it bringeth into my minde a merry conceit. There was a very old man, which married a maide, who meeting a friend of his, did importune him to know what the people spake of his marriage. Who made him this answer: There was a poore man which had but one pec^e of corne to grinde, and would needs build a ^ill to grinde it, and when he had ground his corne, the mill stood emptie, so that afterwards all the neighbours came to grind their grifts there. This I inferre, not to defame any, but to shew how ready the world is to speake the worst.
Whatsoeuer you say (said Opinion) vnequall marriages doe marre ages, and such made matches as these, proue but mad matches, yet of the two, I hold it more conuient that old Tithon should haue a fresh Amora, then an aged woman to be linked in matrimony with a beardlesse boy.



The Cuckold passeth along.
SVffient for this theame, another doth appeare or rather peere.The Cuckold heauens secure my sences, if I be not distracted, he is a Proteus, a Camelion, an Omnigatherum, God make him an honest man, for I would be loath to make any one such a one as he is.
The Opinion of a CuckoldHe will trouble me paint him, (said Opinion) I know not what coulours to lay vpon his face, for sometimes he is of a sanguine complexion, sometimes he looketh pale, sometimes tawny, or Moritawny, like Tobacco. Neither can I tell how to frame him, for he is sometimes tall, sometimes lowe, sometimes grosse, sometimes gracile. Nor expresly say what vocation he is of, for sometimes he is a Citizen, sometimes a Farmer sometimes a Lawyer, sometimes a Scholler, etc. He hath a proper woman to his wife, yet common, he toyleth to maintaine other mens labours, yet he reapeth that which he neuer wrought for, he wasteth all the corne in his owne hatches on other mens Barnes, yet he keepeth that which he neuer got, But to draw you out of this Laborinth
with one line, Cornu ferit ille, If he haue not Cornes on his Toes, he hath Hornes on his Head. He is his wiues foole amongst her copesmates, wanton wenches pastime amongst themselnes, and wagges game to play at with two fingers.

A Cuckold.
The Cuckolds Petition.Loath I am to bewray my griefes (...) you, did not the loathing of the life I lead egge mee against my nature to wish that I would not: I haue many yeares beene bound in a bond, which hath vndone mee, yoaked with a curtall which hath plaide me many Iades trickes, a wanton wayward wel fauoured wife: who falsifying her faith and breaking the bondes she sealed most solem^nely before a congregation, doth often that which shame sylenceth me for vttering. I dare not meete her, she keepes such couragious company I cannot content her any way, she hath outwardly what she likes vnwardly: and what she thrustes away with one finger, she pulles againe with both her hands: when I fawne on her, she will be froward: If I be but a little absent, she wishes my presence. Her thoughts are like Babyes fancies, that will, and will not. My deedes cannot suffice her, for she is a woman. My speech cannot please her she is so captious, nor my lookes like her, she is so ^curious. None feele the rages of deseases, but they which haue them. None so truly knovv the torments of hell, as they which feele them? Nor any feeleth the torments, or knoweth the rages, that I doe, vnlesse he liue in such an hell, or haue the like desease, as I haue. Many, are haunted with hagges, but neuer any with such an haggarde: They liue caute though not caste: but my Venus lyeth so visibly in her Networkes, that not only Gods eyes, but mens behold her. Yet fayne would I reforme her, but neither faire meanes can perswade her, not fowle scarre her. If I indeauour with good counsell to dissawde her from her former follies, her answer is, I preach too learnedly for her to ^^fy by me. If I plead plainely with her, then at the next word, I am Sir Ionu Lacklatine: If I can collect some witty saying fit for my purpose, that will toucho her to the quicke, then she saith,
I am all wit, or a wit all: If I threaten her, she hath enough to shield her: If I meation but a bill of diuorcement, it is her only desire: If I keepe her short of money, shee makes deuillish oathes and vowes that shee will haue Money, or some body shal pay for it: if I for quietnes sake should lock her vp into her chamber, the next ^^e I stirre abroad, I am arrested for some debt of hers, which shee ranne into for such a purpose.

In me turba ruant luxur of a proci*
In mearegnant, nullis prohibentibus, aula.

Neuer shall I enioy rest, so long as shee and I breath together. Such therefore as haue not the same causes of complaintes as I haue, and yet liue not contented I wish their fortunes to bee, that they may be troubled with my paine and head-ache.

The Cuckold,




The olde Souldier commeth along.
BUt stay, heeres an other limpeth a long: pitty a mec, an Hetaroclite,The old Souldier. hee lacketh an hande. There are scarres on his face, would scarre a tumorous body to behold: he looketh grauely, as though he had not long to liue, and leaneth vpon his trunchion, as if his body were about to fall away: come alongst lustily, and half not before thy freinds. Sure hee is a man of worth for hee hath his hangers on.
Your iests (said Opinion) are too tart, and your merryment ouer much vpon so monefull a Man,The Opinion of the old Souldier. which desecueth to be pittyed, rather then to be plaide vpon, and meriteth releife more then mocking. He hath borne Armes, howsoeuer now hee be disarmed: he hath had a sword to sticke by him, though now he hath no other weapon then a sticke in his hand: he hath lost his limmes but not in some druncken fray, and got those Cycatrices, but not in the defence of any Cocatrices: He hath fought against the walles of the enemy but neuer fought against any for the wall, as he walked in the streete. He will not stab be for the lye, and yet he will
not take the lye in his Countries disgrace. Hee is none of your swashing Captaines, that vsurpe the title, when they neuer fought vnder any coulours but Venus-es: and they will dye rather then they will flye from her coulours. Neuer handled peece, vnlesse of meat, bread etc. Neuer discharged shot vnles in a Tauerne where they met with too hot shots sometimes for their discharging. Neither is he any of your counterfet Duello's, discoursing of battailes they neuer came neare, telling of monsters they neuer beheld, vnles in a painted cloath: swearing they were hurt in the defence of Christianity against Mahomotistes, when if they were wounded, it was at Groyne at farthect. He is no Triton of his owne praises: nor Chronologer of his olde exploites, he is an arrant Coward in wrangling brawles, a more Crauen in vniust conflictes, a very Pigmey in paltrey frayes: but in a iust cause as valorous as Pector, and as puissant as Hercules, a true, faithfull and religious Souldier.

The Petition of the old Souldier.My humble sute is for better Fortune, for men are now become so ingratefull and hard hearted, that they doe not consider those which haue bene their friends, nor reward such as when neede serued, warded them from imminent distresses: the times past no man thinkes vpon: the time to come few dreame of: but all are for the time present. A Souldier hath helped them, and now God helpe Souldiers, for not many will: a souldier may helpe them, and then may helpe himselfe, and then they will helpe him also: but now a Souldier doth them no good, and therefore they will doe him as little. They liue in peace, that beingeth plentie, and that pride: but pride may haue a fall, and peace and plentie their hoods turnd ouer their heads: which I neither wish nor pray for, but if they haue, Spernitur orator bonus, horridus wiles amatur. In the meane time, we, who haue wholly decaved our limbes, and impouerished our estates in the warres, may shew our scarres to vncompassionate eyes, and receaue no further helpe then Christ helpe you, good words, would ^o^ were able: good wishes for themselues: when as the superfluitie of one parre of their
shoe-ties would yeeld vs much confort: but I cannot, neither will I goe about to condemne any absolutely, the world is so pestered with idle vagabonds, which vnder the name of Souldiers and forged pasports, haue so wronged some, that it withdraweth the hearts of most from conferring their beneuolence vpon any: for I am perswaded that no true borne spirit will deny some reliefe to a true Souldiers in his want. And Preheminence hath allowed them well, though it be ill enough distributed in some places: the fault is not in the giuers, but of inferiours which are put in trust to dispose it. But the God of war hath so many Apostataes, that the true borne, fare the worse for the illegitimate. This boone I therefore craue, that all the ranks of rogues, and runnagates, shrouding themselues in the cast-suites of Souldiers, might be rooted out, or sent vpon a boone voyage to the new found Land, by which meanes Hens and Capons may sit at roost quietly in the night, and pecke about the garth all the day: shirts and other naperie hang vpon hedges, till the Sun set, shops be kept shut, and windowes stand vvide open to let in aire, vvithout feare of Creepers, to the great comfort both of citie, and countrey.

The old Souldier.




The Prentise cometh along.
VVHen the Lion was old,The Prentise the Asse came and hicked him: and when a Souldier hath lost his limmes, eueris coward will crow ouer him. I would say more in thy behalfe, and doe as much as I speake, if I were able. But I amanticipated by the speedie entrance of another, with his cloake clapt vnder his left Arme. A prettie youth, very decently appacelled, but he gorth very fast, as if he went of an errant. What may he be.
The opinion of the PrenuseHe may be a man (said Opinion if he line, an honest man man if he liue vpright. A sound man, if he flie surfets, and whores: a thriuing man if he shunne riotous company: a rich men, if he be thriuing: a Sheriffe, if he be a rich man:
An Alderman if he be a Sheriff: A Maior, if he be an Alderman: a Knight if he be a Maior: But yet he is a Prentise.

The Petition of the prenticeDiuers are the calamities of some of my rancke, and many the miseries they are exposed to, faring hardly, and labouring hardly: but such as will we are Gold must get it, they which will wynne honour must wage with many aduentures: He which thincketh to proffie must cashier the very thought of pleasure, Ryding with care and running with paine: Sitting with prouidence, and lying with consideration: Eating with frugality and drincking with moderation: Synce therefore honorable men must endeauour for Renowne: Learned men study for their knowledge: Richmen labour for their gaines: Tradesmen trauell for their Sciences: All men, (which will liue like men in their age) labour like beasts in their youth, vnles they haue Lands to trust to: My meaning is not to disparage learning, because it is hard to attaine dispraise honour, because it is difficult to get: discourage Prentises, because their beginnings are laborious: for I haue read that the base of Pernassus is full of briers, thornes, and thistles, but the toppe, plaine as heauen, and smooth as the Moones face. I haue heard that the steppes which ascend to honour, are like the staires which mount to the hight of a Maze, many and endles. The dores conducting thervnto, infinite, and intricate, but the top like the toppe of Olimpus, and the roomes pleasant, and spatious, garnished with more then mortal obiects. And I know by Experience that the skill and secrecy of mechanicall Artes, are not got (like a loose woman) at first sight. Neither will yeild any great proffit at first labouring, any more then a barrein ground at the first sowing, I doe not therefore Cauill with my calling, nor am pensiue for the paines I indure; but the originall of all my sorrow is a Mistresse so peeuish, proude, petulant: oh sifas dicere. She came naked into the Citty and shall returne naked out of the citty, vnles she doe pennance with a white sheete pind about her when she is dead, as she deserueth now she liueth. Her Mother is very
well knowne for a poore woman, but I thinke she neuer knew her father. My honest maister married her for loue, and had nought with her, and he is likely to haue nought so long at he hath her: yet she flaunteth with the finest, and gaddeth abroade with the giddiest: looketh for greater seruice then an Empresse: and more duty then a Dutches: enuying all that are more brauely trapped then her selfe, and confederates with few, but such as are wantonly entrapped as she is. Her Wenches feele the weight of her light fingers, and we haue many a peale wrong about our eares too: We waite all the day to serue our maisters Chapmen, but when any of her Customers come, we are sent abroade on a sleeuelesse errand, and then what becomes of our maisters ware? I doe now wish that some faire Chaunce may light vpon her, to rid my suspectlesse maister of so foule a mischiefe, both for his owne sake and welfare, and the future quietnesse of his trustie Seruants. But to all good Mistresses, whose conditions are contrary to hers, I do wish Fortune to poure vpon them the aboundance of her fauours.

The Prentise.




The Mal-content walketh along.
VVEll said yong Prentise, Macte tua virtute puer, Sicitur ad astra.The Malecontene. Proceed as thou hast begun, and doubt not to become a good Common weales-man, when thou hast gotten thee a bigger purse, a better office, and a larger beard. Another ioggeth along, spurning the pauement as if he were angry with it. For shame let not thine hat hang ouer thine eyes? Dost thou dispaire of thy face, thou maskst it so with thy cloake? hold vp thine head like a man: and pinne thy band thou slouen; Button thy wrists, it is wholesome, and garter thy stockings it is hansome.
The Opinion of the Malecontent.His thoughts (said Opinion) are as confused, as his apparell: he brabieth with his starres, and brauleth at his creation: he wisheth the Caule which wrapped him in his mothers
wombe, had bene his winding sheete: and he which breathed that Promotheon fire into him, had put it out. The welfare of others is his bane, and their ruine Balsamum to him: He thinks better of himselfe then he diserneth, and worse of others then they demerit: He proacheth that which he will not follow, and followes that which no true Christian will preach: his words are lightning, which though they alight vpon all, yet they fire few: what he thinketh, he bolteth out without charity. He wipeth vices taile with his tongue, and that is the reason his words are so vnsauory. He is like a bauling dog, that barks at all that gallops on horsebach, when he goes a foote: like a mad dogge that snappeth at all that meete him: like a mastiffe that worrieth oftentimes such as come neare him. He is other mens foe, and none of his own friend: he disliketh both extreames, and thinketh meanely of the meane: he is a Misanthropos, which hateth men, a Narcissus which loueth not women, a Diogenes which carpeth at all, a malitious Mal-content.

The Mal-contents Petition.If you tender the welfare of a Discontent, whose perturbed Spirit, haunteth you in this white sheete, poure downe your disastrous accidents vpon the worlds wasters, disorders, vice, and villany. Say this Petition be preiudiciall to many: many haue stradled ouer the like style, and more would walke in the same path, were they not extruded and excluded. What rare Machiauils (right matchlesse villaines) how many be directed to the Barathrum of beggery, so they be mounted vppon the heauen of honour? What remorse hath a reprobate who starue and want cloathing, so he be full fed, and gorgeously arrayed? I am no Spaniell to fawne vpon men, nor little Puppy to licke the excrements of women. The Diuell domineereth like a great commander, and his souldiers march vnder the colour of honesty, which now a dayes is accounted like a strumpet, He which vseth it shal die a begger. Couetousnes is become a Tradesman, and Pride his wife. Drunkennes the onely sociable companion, and Lechery the sole good fellow: Gluttony is a great man, and Enuy a yonger brother: Sloth
hath got a liuing: Oh Sodome, thou wast fired for thy sinnes, yet thy sinnes escaped, and range hic and vbique, Old Tyre, thou wast deiected, new tires are erected: Redit orbis in orbem. The Asse hath got on the Lions skin, lusty Harts cast their horns amongst the Faunes: Spiders make their Cobwebs in kings Courts: little Conyes vndermine huge Castles, and pull the wals vpon their owne heads: Omnium rerum vicissitudo. Freemen are become slaues: Rich men turnd beggers: Beggers changed to rich men, Asperius nihil est. Oh tempore, oh mores! Beasts he in houses, Serpents craule in corners, Cookes keepe in citties, Dawes in old Churches, Wag-tailes in great places: Saint Peters Vicar is turnd Myner, and doth trafficke with Salt-peeter: Monstrum informe, ingens, cui lumen vera pietatis est ademptum.

The Mal-content.




The poore Scholler walketh by.
The poore Scholler.HE fisheth finely, and is likely to catch Carpes, and powtings. But what Mounsier Male-goe is this, that commeth next, so displaying the fretted Cuffe-Taffity facing of his thread bare cloake? Cannot he walke vprightly like an honest man, but iet if so like a Iennet, and wagge his head to and fro like a Weathercocke? Fie vpon it what Rusticall logges he maketh like a Te^nant, or a countrey Curate, which neuer came any nearer to an Vniuersity then Lincolne Minster. Odit prophanu^ vulgens, He is none of your Plebeians in his own conceit, but Apollos godson, christened in the Pirenean, or Hyporrenean fount, he is a common Souldiour vnder Mineruas en^gne, and fighteth like a Grammer scholler with Pen and Inkhorne.
The Opinion of a poore Scholler.Oh forbeare (said Opinion) doe not beray your owne nest, turne not student of the law, and forget your old Academicall associates: yet I thinke you speake not this out of malice to the parties, but of meere loue, that they seeing their foolish gutes gibed at, may amend them: for theere are some of your
peart Iuuenals, that mince it, as if they were citizens wiues: and yet I will not say that it proceedeth from any pride, or ouer woening conceit in all that do so: but of an ill habit, which they haue gotten by a careles and fantasticall carriage. But let that passe, and ile shew you what this present Petitioner is: to wit, One which though he did neuer eate Porridge in the Innes of Court without a spoon^ yet he hath made foule shift to denoure his dinner in a Colledge without a Trencher; though he cannot carue a Capon without the helpe of a Cleauer, or vnlace a Rabbet like a cunning Caruer. Rostra disertus amat, yet he can cate rost well enough to please himselfe. He is a King in his owne conceit: and hath more in him then euery one can conceiue* He deserueth better sauour then the world affordeth him: and yet he hath as good fauor as any in the world which hath no better then he hath: How he hath bene estimated in former times, it bootes him not, yet he hath Bootes when he rideth, though he borrow them. To be short, and serious, he is reice^ed of fools, respected of the wise, held in disgrace among prophane, but in renecent reputation with those, which are sincerely religious. Nothing regarded by the couetous and base minded churles, but greatly rewarded by the liberall and truly descended Gentilitie, a Scholler.

The poore Schollers Pention.Would it not grieue that gentleman, which had sold his signories, and spent the mony vpon hopes of preferment, and in fine, behold his inferiours aduanced, and himselfe obtaine no greater reward then faire promises and faithles protestations? Would it not kill that Souldiers heart with grief, which when he had lost his limmes, and left his liuing for his Countreys good, returning feeble, and decrepit to his natiue Countrey, to be Caged, Stockt, and baited with Beadles? And would it not pine that Scholler, and make him looke like the vicar of Saint Albones, that hath bene brought vp seuen yeares vnder the lanching lash of a left-handed School-master, and after that feed with 3. penny chops, and very singular beere in an Vniuersity, rose early, and watched late, Per tot discrimina reru^ tendimus
ad latium, thorough many troubles we attayne to Latine, and after all this, to be a poore Pen-an-Inck-horne wearer, a Pedagog, one that teacheth Schollers for 5. pence the weeke, and at the quarter day is glad to take choake-cheese, and barrell butter for the Summa Totalis: Proh deum, atque hominum ^idem. Oh that some fellow which had but a little wit, and no wisdome, migh^ ^rauerse this Parenthesis: Me thinke I apprehend him already how vnreasonably he would raile vpon the 7. liberall Sciences, wish Pernassus turn'd to a Molehill, and that Vulcan, when he claue Minerua out of Iupiters braine, had knockt out the braines too, because that he carrying the Muses, as familiars about him, should be pinched with want, when he knoweth many seruile groomes, whose qualities or dimentions are no way surpassing his, promoted from the stable to the table, from the table to the bed. But hoe there Signiour: Hee that can picke any thing out of a painted cloath, may perceiue by fortune painted muffled in a tree, throwing downe vpon some, Crownes: others, military weapons: some bagges of Gold, others Sackes of Salt: Some one thing, others another thing: Some must be Kings and ouerrule all, some must be Souldiers, and fight for their Countrey, some must be husbandmen, and digge commodity from the earth, some must be Astronomers, and plucke proffit from the starres: some must haue more then they can carry, and such are richmen: some must be men of good carriage, and can get little, and such are Porters: some must haue liuings enough bequeathed them, and some must not haue so much as an haire left them: some must lead the world in a string, and some must leaue the world in a string: Quae cum ita sint (oh most mutable) I doe not grudge at my calamities, but the causes: Aueroas Maecenasses and dunsticall Dondegoes, which will allow a Scholler no more, that should waft them to heauen, then a Sculler that should cary them alongst the Theams, or any other hauens: Musas facientes Mulos: Making the Muses, Mules, Iades, or Hacknies: For suppose a Scholler (like olde Byas) carrieth all his Lands about him, be intertaynd into any
of their houses, as many be: Though he be a good Gramarian, one that can chop Logick, and like the freshman, returning from Athens, make three egges of two, and his father eating the two, bad him take the third for his cunning: imagine he can pretty well in Philosophy naturall, and metaphisicall, tell halfe an hundreth lyes out of Pliny: hath some insight in Poetry, and if he had maintenance and countenance would be come a sound Practitioner in the deepest Science: This fellow for all this shal be lodged next the kitchin, where the Cookes, and sculles keepe such a scolding that they will take order for his studying: or in some ruynous roome, where his Masters Fathers Ghost is reported to walke: and Robingood fellow and Hobgoblins, are said to play their fagayries in the night, so that he will take no rest for sleeping and all the day he shall spend himselfe poaring ouer my Lady Faynewoulds capable eldest: and three or foure froward (I should say toward) younger Brothers: for which turmoyles his yearely stipend shall be 5. markes, besides the Patrons, or the Widdowes countenance: Which may be so good that few Schollers hauing reasonable Noses in their faces, would be loath to haue it for fourty poundes. Now for his fare, it is lightly at the cheefest Table, but he must sit vnder the Salt, this is an Axiome in such places: and before he take his seat, Memorandum he haue two legs in store, one for the Maister, another for the Mistresse: Then hauing drawne his Knife leisurably, vnfoulded his Napkin mannerly, after twice or thrice wyping his Beard (if he haue it) he may reach the Bread on his Knifes point, and fall to his porridge and betweene euery Sponefull take as much deliberation, as a Capon cr^^ming (least he be out of his porridge before they haue buried part of their first course in their Bellyes) And at the second seruice (if there be any such hot seruice) the refuse of the former shall be set before him, but oftentimes like a rifled Souldier, hauing not so much as a good peece left, or like the picture of death, all bones, which putteth him in minde to decline bonus, bona, bonum: but this must be vnderstood to
happen at an hunting dinner, or after he hath whipped his eldest Scholler, for so long as my young Maister liketh his Scholemaister, and may take no farther at his lesson, then he list, his mother will be most respectiue, but if he once contradict him, and prince ^winger vpon his posteriors, then laments are raisd, there is an insurrection amongst the pen-boys Peter Prouin the horse-keeper will doe, Zauods that he will. The Cooke will put poison in his porridge, or worke him some other mischiefe, if he durst: then enters the Fleire, like the Chorus in a Tragedy, and telleth all. The mother like a tender hearted Auditor, pittieth the Scene, busseth her boy, and telleth him he shall be beaten no more, No, that he shall not. Thus doth the olde foole hugge young Iackanapes, till she spoile him: yet heere is not the full Catastrophe, for she will neuer rest till she haue lifted him out of her house, and will haue another in his roome, it maketh no matter what he be, so he will not whippe her boy and serue for little wages, he will serue the turne: I mary, this maketh so many wilde youthes, and wise aged men: When the earth is not well manured, tilled and ploughed, it is rancke, and sterile, and where youth wanteth nurture, age is ignorant, and ill mannered. The Beare by licking her whelpes bringeth them into some forme, but many mothers by lolling their children turne them out of all good fashion. The loue of Parents towards their children is naturall and not to be blamed, but this Cockering is fond, and hurtfull: Waxe being softe, will suffer any impression, and children being young are as capable of goodnes, if they be trayned vp therafter: as they are prone to knauery without any great inducements. The Colt at first backing will curuet, and winch, but after he hath chancked the bit a while, and felt the Spurfe in his side, he becometh more tractable: Not an Hedgeplasher but can say, he which will haue a thorne, must cut a thorne, and if they would haue these tender plantes to proue godly Columnes in the Commonwealth, let them be lopt, and dressed in drie season: let them be carefully ^^tored, and encouraged by faire meanes,
and reasonable recreation: If that will not worke with them, vse a stronger potion: Qui non vult / duci, debet / trahi, He that will not goe gently, must be dragged vncourteously: The tranquill gouernement of our commonwealth doth sufficiently manifest, how much our Land is blessed with a thrice worthy King: prouident Counsell, vpright Iudges, learned and well educated Gentlemen, zealous Diuines, any cunning Lawiers enow, yet it may be obserued in some places where many are congregated about publique affaires, others shuffled in, which whilst the others are poising the weightiest matters, fit like Cyphers, and if any question be put vnto them. Obmutuerunt; Putas ne verhum potuisse proloqui: They can tell the Clocke daudle their gloues, or play with their forepoints, their Mothers taught them those Lessons, when they satte playing with them vpon their Knees: They thinke they pleasure their Countrey, if they vouchsafe their presence, and grace themselues, if they put of the hatte hansomely, and nod the head with a Clowdy countenance, as who would say, it is an hard case, but Verbum non amplius: And what is the cause of this, but whilst the one kept close at their bookes both at home and abroad in the Vniuersity and Innes of Court, the other were yalping after a Kennel of Hounds, in their youth, or whoping at an Owle in an Iuybush. Their parents would not be at the cost to maintaine a good Scholler to traine them vp, nor their Mothers suffer them to indure any hardenesse, or labour: without which true knowledge cannot be attained: And as many of these are carelesse for the well educating of their children: So most of them are supine and negligent of themselues. What careth the couetous Patron, to he can compound to his contentement: Be he one of Bale Priests, or a bald Priest, if he can read the Authorised Seruice: Be he of what Tribe he will, if he can hoble ouer an homily with a weekes warning: As for monethly Sermons, it is but greasing a Parater, and the
Churchwarden, is his Tennant: he will be sworne on a booke to an owne bene: Infoelix oh semper ouis. Too many places are full of such, which are more meete to be fishermen, then fishers of men, and fitter to catch soales, then, soules, which either behaue themselues like the dogge in the Manger, which neither would eat hay himselfe, nor suffer the beast: Which either keepe the childrens bread from them, or if they giue them any, they doe so mouth it, and mangle it, that it becommeth most loathsome, comming from such filthy hands, and handling, which I wish were otherwise, that the pouerties of poure Schollers might be pittied, their Petitions preferred, their fortunes bettered, and what is amisse, might be amended.

The poore Scholler.




The Scholler hath frustrated my expectation (said I) for I did expect he should haue wished ill lucke to light vpon his enemies as the others haue. Touching his speech I durst auerre it to be true: for drones driue out the Bees, and the wolues in sheeps cloathing werry the Lambes: They take the tythes, though they take not the paines. Amongst all which I thinke it reason, that that Parson should haue tyth poridge, which out of the heat of a good stomacke (I iudge it was) taught his parishioners wines in a quarterly Sermon fower wayes to keele a pot, when it began to seeth ouer: A right worthy domesticall Chaplin for Helihogabalus, yet if yow marke, it is a profitable dish of doctrine, for vnlesse it be fellowed, all the fat is in the fire: But how now? who commeth next? There are many Petitioners behinde. How chaunce they steppe not forward? I perceiue the Beadle is angry, and will suffer no more to be preferred or brought into the Citty, till answer be made to the rest that are already ^^hibited.




A PROSOPOPAEI A OR IMAGINED ANSWER TO THE FORMER PETITIOners. by Dame Fortune

NO more Petitions, I haue heard too much,
Too mis chieuous, and monstrous wickednesse,
Nor will I condescend to any such
As seeke by others woe to purchace blisse:
Your suites so wicked, your Petitions full
O sensuall appetites, I disanull.


Fond worldlings, thinke you, that euery furious curse
Belcht gainst your foes, shall bring them to their wracke?
Or euery foolish wish your fancies nurse,
Will with an approbation be sent backe?
Then should the world be as it first began,
Repleate with beasts, but dispossest of man.


For as you are by naturall instinct
Infirme, and subiect to affections:
So are your wilfull Supplications linckt
With others ruines, and fubuersions:
But he that knoweth best whats good, whats (...),
Payes all, not as they would, but as he will.


And therefore know, that whosocre you curse,
Are not accursed for your curse alone,
Nor they whom you wish punishments, are worse
For your rash wishes publicke or vnknowne:
Nor I my selfe, if that I would, can doe

Hurt to the parties, you incite me to.


For that Ens Entium, all the worlds first maker,
Existent without fine, and vncreate
Makes any thing the cause and ioynt pertaker
Of his confuming rage to ruinate
His chiefest earthly fabricke, when and where
He please, it from a sinfull earth to teare.


Thus much ingenerall: Now I will regresse
More specially to each particular,
And as you did appeare at first, redresse,
To here your answers, which Ile not deferre
With dull procrastinations, but begin
With her, who first put her Petition in.


The answer to the HarrlotDetested woman, shame vnto thy Sexe,
Which prostitut'st thy body vnto all,
Making thy selfe the filth and loathsome fex
That brings thine owne decay and others thrall*
Leaue of thy loathed trading, and be bound
A new to honesty, thats safe and sound.


Consider why thou wert created first
To serue thy Maker, and bring forth in crease,
From which, thy loathed life, and quenchles thirst
Of variable lust, compels thee cease.
For thy foule life so odious in heauens eye
Can leaue the world no prosperous progeny.


Next call to minde the pleasures thou hast past,
The dainty fare, sweet musicke, and delight,
How momentarily and soone they wast,
Like to a flash of lightning in the night,
Or like a Larke, that swiftly mounts the skie,
Now seene, but out of prospect by and by.



And last of all, thinke but vpon thine end,
When Age begins to nestle in thy bones,
What anguishes thy former courses send,
Fraught with heart-wasting aches, pangs and grones:
And after all, how thou art sure to fry,
If thou dost perseuere, eternally.


Thou which hast lauisht thy estate, and spent
To the Spendall.Thy prime of time, in vnaduis'd excesse,
Do not mispend the refidue thats lent
To cure thy cares, and driue thee from distresse:
If thou hast grace, ther's grace inough in store,
For him that truly can that grace implore.


Lust, Pride and Riot, wrestling in thy brest,
Haue giuen thy Fortunes, and thy selfe the fall,
Yet lie not groueling with dispaire opprest,
Although thou canst not all tha's past recall,
Thou maist redeeme that thou hast pawn'd to hell,
Thy pittious soule hereafter, liuing well.


Thou country Client with inuectiue Iawes,
To the countrey Client.Darting thy malice and intestine griefe,
Vpon some bad peruerters of the Lawes,
Shalt ease thy selfe and purchace great reliefe,
By shunning the occasions of thy fals,
Vncharitable deeds, lirigious brauls.


If thou wouldst haue reuenge vpon them all,
Liue orderly, deuoyd of wrong and strife:
So maist thou such contentious wrangles gall,
By leading a contented and mylde life:
For while each petty trespasse, brawl and taunt,
Are tooke in snuffe and dudgeon, Lawyers fla^^^.


The Seruingman came next, which hath reuilde

The slight rewarding of his youthfull paines,
Though some that trust to others, are beguild,
Yet faithfull seruice oft reaps certaine gaines,
Ingratitude if rife, yet there are such
That deeme no guerdon for their seruants much.


But seeing thou felst (as thy Petition showes)
Betweene the griping clawes of auerous churles,
Impatient speech, proclaim'd against all those.
To further inconuence hurles
Thy desperate state: how ere it did commence,
Tak't as thy sinnes deserued recompence.


Thou, which wert credulous to iudge all true
To the Maide with childe.A yong man vttered in the heate of blood,
So piteously dost now too late bedew
Thy cheeks with teares: it is a token good.
If they do trickle from a sorrowing soule,
Not for thy Loues losse, but thy deeds so foule.


Where sores are cureles, ther's no helpe by care
Content will mittigrate each Discontent,
Kept as a shield to ward thee from Dispaire,
And fierce assaults of future languishment,
The causer cannot thriue: vvhat heretofore
You did commit, Repent: but sinne no more.


You are too hot, too eager, and to keene
Gainst those you loue so well, the female kinde,
To the Loue:Bolting outragious termes, oreclog'd with spleene,
From the distracted passions of your minde,
Sincerely vertuous, many may be found,
Though some with many vices do abound.


I^ one na^^ wrong'd you, wrong not all for one
Nor dote on her, that hath forsaken you,
One precious stone doth out another stone,

Thers plenty yet abroad, goe get a new,
Seeke with discretion, and doubt not to finde
A constant Mate, that may content thy minde.


To he olde woman married with the young man.Old woman, leaue complayning, 'tis too late
For you to lodge within a youngsters bed,
You are decrepit, and growne out of date
To reyne a slinging Coles, vnweldy head
A prayer booke linckt to your shaking hands
Were fitter farre then youngest wedlocke bandes.


To the young woman married to the old manDoe not repine, or grudge, young louely creature
At vnescaped Destiny, Mariage:
Nor macerate with cares your beauteous feature
Banning cannot abate your griefe, nor rage
Not any other thing salue your disease,
Vntill the cutting Destiny doth please.


Imagine that thou art a weaned childe
Hugd in the bosome of an aged nurse
Let deeds and wordes be dutifull and milde
Least they doe make thy anguishes the worse,
For in a moment Age with Rage is tost
And waxeth most impatient, being crost.


To the Cuc^^^.Thou that Petition'st gainst thy wiues offence
Se thou be cleere thy selfe of the like spot,
Then maist thou with more right thy suite commence,
Or els take quietly thy crooked lot,
For he that stri^es with Sword, it is decreed
Shall be restruck with Scabberd, till he bleed.


Iome Souldier.Couragious Souldier, whose true valorous heart
Was neuer daunted with inuading foes
But could thy greatest enemies to start
(At thy assayling them) ^^e ^^morous Doos

Vanquish thy selfe, and chance which puls thee downe
A thing more mighty then to winne a Towne.


Liue carefully young Prentise, be no waster
To the Prentise.Of others goods, abandon filthy whores,
And dissolute assemblies: Please thy Maister
And all the night keepe close within his dores,
Roue not about the suburbes and the streetes
When he doth thinke you wrapt betweene your sheets.


Too many take such courses vile and base
To their owne miseries and maisters fall
But if thou doe thy duty in thy place
And prouidently keepe within thy stall,
When they ride bound, or lurke in some by-lnae
Thou maist ride with thy foot-cloth, and gold chaine,


To the Malecontent.Thou that in vaine dost wrangle with thy starres,
And cauill at the factes by others done,
Leaue of thy selfe-destroying ciuill warres,
And intermedling with all others, shunne,
Enormeties enow thou hast to mend
If to thine owne affaires thou doe descend.


And to conclude, let all for certaine know
To all.That Gods reuengefull Yron Bowe is bent
And shaftes in readines to ouerthrow
Synnes harbourers, that doe not soone repent,

Let each one therefore his vilde courses mend,


A wicked life makes seldome a good end.



With that, me thought, I saw Fortune trnasported out of sight, and the Petitioners made such an huming at her departure, as if it had beene at the applausiue end of an Vniuersity oration, or other Scholler like exercise, that they awaked me with the noyse, who in the end, writ the premises.

FINIS.


