



THE FIRST SERMON. Of Murther.



1 IOH. 3.12.

Not as Cain who was of the deuill and slew his brother, and wherefore slew hee him? because his owne workes were euill and his brothers good.


IT is the will of God that deadly sinnes should not die, that they which take away the life of men, should not bee able to take away life from the memory of their wicked deeds: Wherefore in Diuine History the detestable facts of sinners are infamous and eminent spectacles threatening and admonishing a farre off: To this end the pillar
of Salt was erected, and Saint Peter saith, of the combustion of Sodom, and her neighbour Citties, (...) they lye out as an apparant, and prominent spectacle: that bituminous lake doth still demonstrate the ebullition of vnnaturall lust. So Cain who murdered his brother in the beginning of the world, still hangeth vpon a gibbet vntill the worlds end.
All manner of death is mute,
Psal. 115.17. and the graue is called Domus silentum: onely those that are murdered talke after they are dead,
Reu. 6.10. How long Lord: and in the 11 to the Hebrewes, Abel the iust being dead, yet speaketh: (...). Where speakes hee? marry in Scripture, saith Beza: wheresoeuer there is relation of this murther, they bee the words of the bloud of Abel. So the words which I haue read suppose them to bee sighes of Abel rendred from his graue: Gemitus lachrymabililis im^, auditur tumulo, as the bloud of Polydor in Virgil, biddeth flie or depart: so the bloud of Abel bids beware, eschew: (...), Be not like to Cain who slew his brother, etc. which words haue three parts: First, a
dehortation from being like vnto Cain, in the first words, Not as Cain. Secondly, a description of the person to whom wee must not bee like: 1. from his nature, or quality, he is of the deuill: 2. from his fact, he slew his brother. The third part containes the cause that moued Cain to this horrible fact, consisting of a question and an answere, the question, wherefore slew hee him, the answere because, etc. heere be two motiues; one outward, the sight of his brothers vertues, the other inward, the beholding of his owne vices: the comparison of which two, strucke such a fire of hatred within him (strange monster) as would not bee extinguished but by his brothers bloud.
First then of the dehortation, or prohibition, Not as Cain. The sacred Scripture which euer suffered more calumniation from her owne, was slandered by heretickes for the narration of euill deeds; whereas, saith Saint Augustine, wicked facts are alwaies expresly condemned, either where they are related, or in some other place of Scripture: Indeed there are ambiguous facts of the
Fathers, as Abrahams cuasion to Abimelech, and Iacobs simulation to his father, which as wee must not condemne, so wee must not imitate, not knowing whether they were sinnes, or no sinnes in them: but for the manifest crimes occurring in the History of the Booke of God, what madnesse to esteeme them otherwise then as euill actions, in good men to bee pittyed that they cannot alwaies bee good, and to bee detested in euill men because they would neuer but doe euill.
Manacheus. Yet such spirits of errour haue not wanted; some condemning the Scriptures because they record wicked deeds. Others commending wickednesse because it is recorded in Scriptures,
Tertul. praser. as the followers of Marcion and Carpecrates. And for the other kind which were doubtfull actions whether they were good or euill: if they were euill, Facta credamus, non facienda: Beleeue that they were done, beleeue not that they ought to be done. And if they were good in those men, it was by extraordinary dispensation which is not granted vnto vs: and therefore such examples, do neither excuse the old Priscilians
from lying, nor the faithlesse generation of Equinocators, which sweare with their tongues but keepe their mindes vnsworne.
Now for these words, Not as Cain: Who would beleeue that any iudgement were so corrupt, as either to praise Cains fact, or to honour his person? but that wee reade in Tertullian, Epiphanius, S. Austine, and others, of a brood of heretickes called Caiani, who did honour Cain, affirming that hee was a worthy man, conceiued by some powerfull nature, which therefore shewed it selfe mighty within him, that his brother was conceiued of a weaker and inferiour conception: The same Heretickes honoured Core, Dathan, and Abiram, as men of courage and resolution: yea, they adored Iudas the traitor, being perswaded that some Diuine operation, and Propheticall instinct, did direct him, that by deliuering of his Maister to the Iewes, all men might bee deliuered from the deuill. Thus Adams eating of that forbidden fruite, hath put the iudgements of his posterity out of taste. Hence woemen long for meates that are
noysome, taking it from the first woman, and all men being concelued in that corruption haue their iudgements and appetites so absurd, as Dauid complaineth, according to the Greeke Tranflation: (...): in sinnes my mother longing hath conceiued mee: This Insipience appeareth strangely in some, that they affect and like such things as bee openly repugnant vnto right reason, and distastefull vnto nature corrected: So the Persians admired Nero, that hatred of God and men (and as Suctonius reporteth) whom all others thought vnworthy of common buriall: they sent yearely some with flowers and odours to adorne his sepulcher: Thus, as Saint Ierome saith, there are men which admire none but the basest wits and obscurest Authours: Neque est fere tam ineptus scriptor quin sui similem inueniet lectorem: What stupidity to preferre Cartright and Brightman, and such trash, before all the Worthies, both new and old. What is this, but in our iourny towards heauen to forsake the glorious Lampes which haue guided all our Ancestors, and to follow euery Ignis fat^^s:
euery new light: These are (...) senselesse appetites,
1. Tim. 6.9. as Saint Paul cals them (...), that is of me^ whose iudgements are corrupted, and out of taste: Wherefore almighty God is not so much displeased with Israel for her spirituall fornications, although hee was displeased, as that shee doated vpon such beastly and clownish louers (...) Asses and stallions:
Ezechiel 23.30 Septuag. Like Pasiphae, which doted on a Bull. The like infection is in all-those vnderstandings which relish nothing that is plaine and profitable, ancient and honest, but profane nouelties: Euery worthy man hath his imperfections: There is no fish without bones; yet some embrace nothing but these, Colligentes spinas librorum: Gathering thornes out of bookes, whence proceed all these bitter pamphlets and inuctiues: All these are appetites of absurd Cainites, whom Saint Iohn did in these wordes preuent: And iointly all of that humour: peruerse louers, and peruerse imitators: which thing also in his third Epistle, and verse 11, hee generally forbiddeth.

Beloued be not imitators of that which is euill: the Holy Ghost fore-saw that such besotted iniquities would arise, that the examples of wickednesse would bee so abused, therefore hee thought it not needlesse to set this marke vpon them, Not as Cain, enuious and murtherous, and Heb. 12.16. not as Esau, fornicators and prophane. It is the crooked disposition of man to promote his sinfull actions by such examples as should restraine him. So whereas amongst the Grecians some vsed to drinke out of a dead mans scull, to moderate their pleasures by consideration of their mortality, others applyed it to the prouocation of intemperance, saying, (...) let vs eate and drinke, for to morrow wee shall dye.
Further, if they doe not thus peruert examples, yet how little are they moued by them: wherefore doth the world still offend vpon the same, and no sinne can be consumed by punishment, although the monuments of precedent ages doe exclaime against vs, and there is no offender which hath not seene others perish by the same sinne. O seeke not your
death in the error of your life: looke vpon your predecessors: Thou intendest murder, behold Caine, how he is stricken with the palsie of an affrighted conscience, a quaking runnagate, restlesse when he resteth, tormented with repentlesse horrour, and vnprofitable griefe. And is not euery homicide signed in the forehead?
Now followeth the description of this wicked person, first of his nature, and badnesse of disposition, he was of the Diuell. Euery worker of imquity is the Diuels bastard, and the Diuell is a father, not by substantiall procreation, but by originall cause and similitude of disposition. For as there is semen Dei, the incorruptible seed, whereby the begotten of God are the sonnes of God: so there is semen Diabolt, and that is concupiscence, which conceiueth and bringeth forth vnto the Diuell: hence sloweth that similitude of nature which discouereth the true father of the children: first in countenance, none are like vnto him, but they that paint saith Tertullian: but in speech, in gesture, in action innumerable: in speech, all slaunderers and detracters, (...), he Diuels, and she Diuels, Tit us
2.3. In gesture, hee that winketh with his eye, treades with his foote, signifieth with his fingers for to raise dissention, he is a sonne of Beliall,
Pro. 6.13. as Salomon describeth: and as for action, when iniquity is growne to ripe age, and maturitie of defection, the children of Sathan doc so resemble their father, that they bee often supposed fiends incarnate: so S. Paul calleth Elimas the Magician son of the Diuell,
Acts 13.10. because he was replenished with all deceit.
Now Caine is not onely begotten, but first begotten of this euill one, the first branch of sinne, the first propagated euill. Marke how soone ill weeds shoote vp: the mother is corrupted of the serpent, and the first she beares is a serpent, who no sooner growne able, but declares his father: the father the first murtherer of soules, the sonne the first murtherer of bodies: the father procures the first curse vpon the earth, the sonne procures the second: the father first brought in death, the sonne vntimely death. And sure, if you obscrue the progeny of Satan, (let no discreet man bee offended) you shall finde that it much
tanne vpon the elder brothers. First, besides that Satan may bee called an elder brother, being the chiefe of the wayes of God,
Iob. 34. Cain was the first eldest brother in the old world, then cutsed Cham the eleldest of the new world, and wild Ismael the eldest to the father of the faithfull, and prophane Esau, which sold his birthright, the father of all vnthrifty heires, which sell their honour for their pleasure. Lastly, Ruben, which desiled his fathers bed. But we reade in the Gospel, that the elder liued soberly at home: the running Prodigall was a yonger brother. This I obserue, first to note the despite of Satan, because the first borne is Gods, therefore he endeuoureth his vtmost for that: secondly, how the Almightie suffers him to carry it oftentimes, perhaps to signifie that these first fruits of nature are not in such high request with God: there is a new creature, a second Adam which he esteemeth, which therefore he causeth to spring often out of yonger and inscrior Nature, because the excellencies of nature were so vngratefull vnto him. Againe, to abate the admiration of prime Nature, wherewith the
most spirituall sonnes of God haue been taken. O that Ismael might liue in thy sight, saith Abraham. And Isaac would gladly haue blessed Esau, but God would not. So Ioseph would gladly put the right hand of his father vpon Manasseth: and in Iacob I heare the voyce of Nature Iamenting, Ruben my eldest sonne, my might and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignitie, and the excellency of power: thou wast light as water, thou canst not be excellent, and thy dignitie is gone. To conclude, seeing in this corrupt masse of humanitie, the first generation that was formed was euill, it argues that no man is good which is not first regenerated out of euill. Nemo bonus qui non ex mal^ bonus, saith S. Augustine against the spirit of Pelagius. Who knowes not the vanitie of the Manichies, and the dotage of Illirieus, who out of this and other places made sinne substantiall, and the Diuell a creator of sinfull men: which follies to name is to confute them.
Neither am I perswaded, that euill spirits haue any part in the generation of the most vngratious natures, although the worthiest Christian wits did hold,
that they had knowledge of the faire daughters of men, and thence to haue proceeded the race of Giants, as monstrous for their vices and conditions, as vast and enormious in their bodies, that this infectious and detestable seed being dispersed through the whole earth, doth now and then spring vp and produce such abhominable monsters as Heliogabalus and Mahomet, and other carnall fiendes. The prodigious lewdnesse of some violent, and in corrigible natures hath caused this opinion more probable then true: howsocuer, it is sure the Diuel hath a lineage vpon earth, and Cain is the most ancient of that kindred.
In this paire of brothers were the two houses first diuided, and as they begun with fighting, so they haue continued vntill now. Hence multiplied the two Cities, Cinitas Dei, and Terrena ciuitas. whose beginnings, proceedings, and wonderful variety of fortunes, how learnedly hath S. Austin followed in those sweet bookes which begin Gloriosissimam ^iuitatem Dei. Where he teacheth how euery man belongs to one of those Citties, being descended either of the malignity
of Cain, or of the bloud of Abel which Cain spilt. There are but two factions: if thou beest of Abels bloud, declare what house thou commest of, by thy innocency, and patience of the Saints: If thou art of Caines kindred, then deny not thy name, bee content to bee numbred amongst thine owne. And thus much of the nature of Cain. Of the stocke and discent: he is ex maligno of the Diuel, of the malignant faction: to conclude, a vessell of dishonour, made of the corrupt masse: for if he had not beene of the euill, he should not haue beene euill: hac enim,
Aug. epist. 106 massa, si ita esset media: vt quemadmodum nihil bont ita nec mali aliquid mereretur non frustra videretur iniquitas vt ex ea fierent vasa in contumeliam. This masseis it were of indifferent quality neither good nor euill, there might be cause to thinke it iniustice in God to make out of it any vessels of dishonour.
Now such as the tree is, such is the fruit. Who was of the Dinell, there is the tree: who slew his brother, there is the fruit: bitter and deadly fruit, especially in the manner, (...), the word signifies to cut in peeces like a sacrifice, because
he had sacrificed so well. Cain would sacrifice him. So Pilat mixed the Galileans bloud with their sacrifice. And at the time of Immolation of the Passouer, the Iewes sacrificed the innocent lambe of God: thus the innocent when they are murdered, they are offered to God in contempt of God, and his worship, that they may seeme to perish by him in whom they trusted. Another circumstance is of the time how soone Cain shed bloud, and the Diuell slaieth in the morning: in the morning of youth, and in the morning of the world. By him death entered, and how hee longeth to see it worke? and that in the first blossome of vertue. It is his cunning to stop the first step to goodnesse, therefore haue care of the beginning of thy wayes of thy youth and good endeuours, for there the Diuell is most instant; he knowes well, that in euery beginning is contained more then a beginning. As soone as the Temple began to be re-edified, he opposed mainly, hee stirred euery stone, that no stone might bee stirred. And immediately when the Sauiour of our soules beganne the office of Christ, the Diuell
tempted him in the desart: so in the natiuity of the creation, he slew the first innocency of Nature, and in the entrance of generation, the first innocencie of grace. So he persecuted the tender infancie of our Lord, and he made the Primitiue Church to swim with bloud. Hee knew that if the world were stained when it was a new vessell, that colour would continue vnto the end. So Rome an Epitome of the world, in token that it should be died with the bloud of Martyrs, the foundations of her walles were dipt in brothers bloud. Cain and Romulus, both elder brothers, both furious and potent: Cain in his name, which signifieth possession, shewed that he had elenen parts against one: so Achab killed Naboth, and tooke possession, and euer the greater part ouercommeth the better: Abel could not kill Cain if he would; but where might and malice, wealth and wrath are ioyned, there breake forth iniuties and oppressions. (...) wealth brings forth wrong. Wherfore God set a marke vpon Cain, that men might beware of him. As the Romans vsed to bind some hay to the hornes of a madde
Bull, to signifie (saith Plutarke) that too much sodder made him mad; wherevpon they applyed this prouerbe: Foenum habet in cornu: beware of him that is iniurious and rich. Now as Cain was a patterne of all oppressours, hauing power, and doing wrong: so Abel signifying vanity, in the beginning, was a type not onely of death, but of the vanity of life; for euery man liuing is altogether vanity: How many haue their sunne-setting in the morning, and they which haue the longest day, liue but a day, so soone doe wee appeare, and vanish. Vanity in apparell, walking in a vaine shadow, talking vainely, disquietting our selues in vaine, vaine hopes, and vaine desires. In the daies of my vanity (saith Salomon) I saw this and that vanity, and whatsoeuer I beheld was vanity of vanities. Another thing was allegorized in this History, namely, how our Sauiour Christ, the second Adam, was murthered by the Elders of the Iewes, and his Bloud shed, though speaking better things then that of Abel. without the gates, as Abels in the fields: for which horrible sinne of Godslaughter,
the Iewes shall bee errant vagabonds vnto the worlds end, signed by God, that although all men hate and eschew them, yet none shall kill them. Destroy them not O God (saith the Psalmist) least my people forget it, but scatter and despearse them: So they are aliens in the whole earth, a common prouerbe, a common prey, not borne but by leaue, nor breathing but by good will. And surely it is seldome seene, but shame and beggery is the end of those which destroy the innocent, either by the mouth of the sword, or by the sword of the mouth: and they which kill mens soules by heresy and selusme, and they which slay by hatred, and they which rauen and oppresse. As the great fish eates the lesse, and the greater cates the great, and the greatest the greater; so greedy Cainites deuoure and are deooured, but at last the biggest (saith S. Basil) comes into the net, and the deuill rips the prey out of his bowels, thou appeares the insatiablenesse of these swallow-goods that haue more riches then they can digest, when the whole estate of such and such a man, shall bee found in their bags
indigested. The last degree of Cain his exceeding wickednesse, that hee killed his brother, his naturall brother, and his onely brother; and which aggrauates his villany, in whom were all the kinds and degrees of brother-hood vndiuided. For then there were not brothers, some by the father, some by the mother, brothers by friendship not by bloud, brothers by affinity not by consanguinity, brothers, that is, the same Countrymen not strangers, brothers of the same Religion and not diuers, but all these strings of loue and affection they were vnited in one. Neither did he it for want of lands and territories: for was he not heire of the whole earth? but Ambition and Couetousnesse are impatient of consort and fellowship, be they neuer so much dilated. Further, by this murther Caine is guilty of the bloud of Christ, and all the blessed Progeny, which should haue beene deriued from him. Nay yet further, he hath slaine all posterities that followed, all generations may call him cursed: For if God had destroyed him, and giuen Eue no more children, as iustly he might haue done, the propogation
of man-kind had beene cut off, and this faire world shut vp, as soone as it was made, like goodly new houses which haue no inhabitants.
But the loue of brothers will not suffer me to passe it thus, which the more sacred it is, with the greater sinne was it violated by this vnnaturall. Why did he not consider that hauing a brother his strength was doubled? For what are brothers but two in one, two in labour but one in enioying, two against all others, one betwixt themselues? What aduantage is it to bee in two places at once, to watch when he sleepeth, to haue his health when hee is sick, and all this not by a deputy, but by himselfe? for this vnion is in some sence naturall, not onely of affection. Two hands, two feet, two eyes, two cares, in one body, do resemble brothers, which are two bodies in one. Wherefore fraternall loue being a patterne of all loue, when wee would haue any to loue entirely wee stile them by the name of brethren. As brethren enuy not one another: for the loue of husband and wife though it bee great, yet it is not naturall but grafted, the loue
of parents and children greater, but not reciprocall, for loue descendeth not ascendeth, but the loue of brothers is naturall and collaterall, neither ouer-awed with reuerence, nor by satiety intermitted.
How full of sweetnesse is it, to remember, (saith Valerius) that we liued in the same lodging before that we were borne, and past the time of our infancy in the same cradle, smiled vpon the same parents, preserued by the same prayers and vowes, drawing equall honour from the same Ancestors? hauing had the same parents, the same wombe, the same bloud, the same beginning, the same education, the same nobility, the same estate, the same discipline, why should they not will and nill the same, bee of the same minde and affections? But this is the mischiefe of sinne and of the deuill, that the sweetest loue turneth into the sharpest hatred, brothers being incensed are vnquenchable; as much water will not quench their loue, so not the Ocean their hatred. Because euery iniury is more grieuous proceeding from a friend, (...); what will Brutus stab
Caesar? that strikes him to the heart. And our Sauiour to his Apostles,
Iohn 6. will you also forsake mee? you? But this woefull discord of brethren is not vsually kindled but by extraordinary wrong. What was it that enslamed Cain, wherefore slew he him?
This interrogation is to stirre vs to attention, and makes way for an euident reason following:
Rom. 9.22. for no man will demand of himselfe vnlesse his answere be plaine and ready. Then the reason is because his owne workes were euill, and his brothers good. Because his owne workes were euill, therefore will he make them worse? and because his brothers workes were good, did that onely offend him that his brother did not offend? if he liked his owne euill workes better, why was he not content with them? and if he loued his brothers good workes, why did he not make his owne like them? So wickednesse is loathsome to the wicked, yet he will retaine it, and thought he chuse to bee euill, yet he would not bee so accounted. But what were his euill workes? No man is extremely sinfull all at once, vice groweth
vpon men by degrees, therefore before this oblation it is probable that he was disobedient to his parents, proud, voluptuous, preferring the world, despising the simplicity of innocency, and the infirmity of vertue, and comming thus affected how could his offering please God? how could the fruites of the earth be acceptable, when the fruites of good workes were wanting? an honest man will not take a gift from a knaue, much lesse will God admit of such giftlesse giftes. Thought he by those giftes to bribe the Almighty, and procure conneiuance to his sinnes? so it was: and so it is the daily practise of secular manners, to serue God onely to make vse of him: for as religious men (saith Saint Austine) doe vse the world that they may enioy GOD; so the vngodly do vse GOD that they may more freely enioy the world, which indeed is to make themselues a friend of the righteous GOD, that they may more plenteously enioy the vnrighteous Mammon. Abel was not thus conditioned, but offered vnto God himselfe also by mortification, and sacrificed in the faith of that alone Sacrifice,
to come with liuing sacrifice God accepted, neglecting the inanimate oblation of Cain, Viua accipien^ terrenarecusans, saith Prudentius: the sight of these vertues made Cain to deiect his countenance, and enuy followed, and murther the brood of enuy. So the brethren of Ioseph being moued with enuy, sold him into Egypt, and there can bee nothing excellent, but the eye of enuy espyes it. An euill eye (saith our Sauiour) therfore euill because anothers is good, a sore eye which cannot endure to looke vpon a quality that is bright and amiable in his brother. This insatiable vice being that which first moued the Diuell against our nature intire, and first moued Cain against Abel, it is one also of the first vices which appeareth in our nature. Vidi puerum amaro vultu in tuentem collactaneum suum. I haue seene an infant (saith S. Augustine) looke bitterly vpon his fellow-suckling,
Confess. and it is one of the last sinnes. Hence is bewitching commonly in old women, which antiquitie did beleeue to be effected by the poyson of an enuious eye, as appeareth by the name (...) and fascinus that is, killing
with the eye: this made them so fearefull of any singular or admirable nature, least it should bee blasted with enuy, and perish, especially if it were a maturitie before his season, praecox fructus, a hasty fruit, wit or valour aboue his yeares. (...). saith Menander, therfore when any one praised it, they were wont to say, prefiscini, God blesse it; least perhaps selfe-loue might breed within it, or rather, because enuy did pretend flattery; I omit superstition: but sure it is, whether the world be not worthy of things worthy, or because God permits the diuel still to exercise his inueterate enuy, or whether the substance of these beauties is not durable, howsoeuer it is, things wonderfully amiable, haue no long continuance. Whilst vertue is in health, malice hates it, and loue neglects it; and if it perish not quickly of it selfe, enuy murders it: enuy will consume it selfe vntill it bee consumed. Which coniunction of enuy and murther, the Greekes expressed in the similitude of their names: there is but one letter betweene enuy and death;
(...) and that is a deadly and dismall letter.




So the Apostle ioynes them together:
Rom. 2.19 Full of enuy and murther. And Gal. 5.2. The workes of the flesh are enuies and murthers. Wherefore if thou wilt preuent the one, suppresse the other. Thou beholdest in another that good which is not in thy selfe: either it is thine owne fault, or in recompence thou hast that which hee wanteth. Or why doest thou maligne him when God gaue it him? or may not God dispose of his owne? or is there not another world to giue euery man satisfaction? Further, alasse what is there in this world worthy of enuy? is not euery good thing haunted with his spirit? are not the vertues of the best poore inough, but wee must paire them by detraction? if thou wilt needs enuy, enuy within thy self, to see the worse part get the better, to see the prosperitie and insolencie of the flesh aboue the spirit. Woe to them (saith Saint Iude) which walke in the way of Cain: for they contemne the simplicitie of Grace, for they admire things transitorie, and there is no loue in them. From which sinnes the blessed spirit of loue preserue vs, which combineth the Father and the Sonne,
vnto whom one GOD bee all honour, praise, and confession for euermore. Amen.
The end of the first Sermon.



THE SECOND SERMON. Of Humane Miserie.



IOB. 3.20.

Wherefore is the light giuen to him that is in misery, and life to them which are bitter in spirit?


THINGS Tragicall which in themselues are fearefull and vnpleasant, notwithstanding they are represented or remembred with delight. But besides that the suffsrings of the Saints recorded in Scripture, doe affoord vnto a Christian further instruction, namely with the Greeke Church to pray to haue his purgatorie
in this life, and to say with S. Austen; Domine hic seca, hic vre, vt in aeternum parcas. Lord here lance mee, and here lash me, that thou maist spare mee for euer. A famous patterne of these passions was happy Iob, and amongst other his tragicall exclamations is this miserable and dolefull complaint powred out of the aboundance of his griefe. In which text consider two things, First the griefe and passion of Iobs minde expressed by an interrogation, quare, wherefore. Secondly, the cause and matter of his griefe in the words following, which is the misery of mankind, and that hee diuides into two kinds, the troublesome things which we do, out of these words, light and labour: and the miserable things that we suffer in the words following, and life to them that are bitter in spirit. For hee thinketh that light doth aggrauate our labours, and life augment our sufferings.
This interrogation wherefore is not a word of indignation or murmure against God, but of sorrow and complaint. For sighes and groanes, and miserable outcries, they are the irruptions of a heart
burdened with griefe, which if it should not finde passage that way, would bee combust, or cleaue asunder. And they are caused oftentimes from extreame heate and affection of loue, when the minde being stricken with some vnexpected accidents, vttereth tearmes which seeme to be of hatred and disgrace, which notwithstanding doe indeed proceed onely from the affection of loue troubled and distracted. Such affectionate speeches the Psalmes, the Canticles, and the booke of Iob, they be full of; where the Saints of God are expressed, varying themselues into all shapes of affections. Into feare, into hope, into chiding, into weeping, into sudden silence, into shew of despaire, into forsaking, and suddenly into earnest intreating. Hence we learne two things: The first, that the violence of affection and griefe, it may be pleasing vnto God sometimes, and compatible with the gouernement of reason and of grace. There is in vs naturally in some more, in some lesse, a softnesse and flexiblenesse of nature, which takes impression of griefe: it is created of God, and the operations of it are not in vaine:
When God is angry hee will haue vs grieue: when hee chides, or when hee scourges, hee will haue vs weepe and powre out our soules into deprecations and complaints. Yea then our loue appeares to him, when wee melt like waxe before the heate of his anger, when we seeke him, and sorrow that wee cannot find him, and when wee feele the discontinuance of his fauour. This bleeding of the heart of man, it is delightsome both to God and to vs, therefore saith Saint Austine: Possumne audire abs te Domine, Cur fletus dulcis sit miseris? an hoe tibi dulce est quod speramus ex audire te? Neither is the extremity of any passion to be blamed, but the perturbation, or disobedience to reason? Therefore wee read in Scripture of the boly men of God when they were afflicted with any occasion of griefe, that their sorrow is expressed in termes of greatest lamentation. They rend their hearts and their garments, they afflict their soules with fasting, they put on sackecloth and ashes, because as Saint Ierome saith, Ieiunus venter and hahitus lugubris Ambitiosius dominum deprecantur. Lastly,
their words are dolefull aboue all the Tragicall exclamations that Art can find. How exceeding great was the lamentation of Ieremy, for the good King Iosias? that it came to bee a Prouerbe, as the mourning of Hadadrimon in the valley of Megiddon. Wherefore there being a meane and measure in mourning, two extremities are to be auoided: the first is dulnesse and sencelessenes of heart, a pretended calmenesse, but indeed a stoicall and vnnaturall carelessenesse, proceeding from the loue of case and want of compassion and affection, either in our owne troubles, or the troubles of others. These men will neither weepe, nor exclaime, nor giue any signes of violent passions, as if this were fortitude and patience, which is rather stupidity and want of charity. What father will like his sonne if vpon his displeasure he shew himselfe nothing daunted, nor moued in his countenance, nor stricken at the heart, to looke pale, or to humble his voyce, or to weepe, or to deiect his eyes? Will a father call this patience, or stubbornesse, in his sonne? Such are they, who when their heauenly
Father afflicts them make hast presently to stop their passions, that neither teares, nor groanes, nor complaints, may finde any passage, through too much selfe-loue, or indolence, hasting to heale their hearts before they are wounded, and to comfort their consciences before they be afflicted. Heerevpon they condemne all deep sorrow and lamentation as soft and effeminate, or want of faith and patience, all funerall rites and ceremonies as Heathenish and Vnchristian, all solemne afflicting of the soule, himnes, supplications, fasting, and almes deeds; which notwithstanding hath beene practised of holiest men and women in all ages. In the eighth of the Actes, the second verse, deuote men beare out the body of the blessed Martyr Saint Stephen, (...) and made great lamentation. The word signifies extremity of griefe with beating and knocking of the breast. With what extraordinary sorrow did Saint Austine mourne for the death of his mother? Et libuit flere in conspectu tuo de Illa and pro illa, de me and pro me and dimisi, lachrimas vt effluerint quantum vellent. Lastly, which is the
greatest commendations of this goodnesse and softnesse of nature, wee reade that our Sauiour Christ was deeply moued, and did weep at the departure of his friend, wherevpon the Iewes obserued how greatly hee loued him. God hath created in our hearts, Dulce nomen: (...), this sweete name of naturall affection. Which is as a sparke of that eternall loue wherewith the indiuided Trinity is enslamed. Which is so spirituall and actiue, that being moued it doth presently heat and dissolue the heart into passion.
The second extreme to be auoided is, immoderation of griefe, which proceeds from impatience and vnbeleefe. For when men beleeue not that God is the God of the dead, as well as of the liuing, and of the sicke as of the whole; that all things worke vnto the good of the godly: then loue sayling them, and their hope, they sorrow like them which haue no hope. And how can they haue any hope, when they want the Comforter, who is so called, saith Saint Austiue, that they which suffer losse of things temporall might
bee comforted with hope of things eternall. Therefore when any crosse befals them, through immoderate loue of these transitory things, they are infinitely deiected, full of bitter thoughts, of cursing and howling, Desperate mourners, not capable of consolation; accusers of God, reuolters from Religion. One example for all, take the King of Israell in that miserable siege and famine of Samaria, how he railes; first, against the Prophet of God; secondly, against God himselfe, for that is the methode, and these are his blasphemous words: Behold what euill commeth from the Lord! why should I wait longer vpon the Lord? Ecce tantum malia Domino, quid amplius expectabo a Domino? A true example of impatience and insidelity. Likewise the Gentiles when the hand of God was vpon them, they vsed to breake out into exclamations and accusations against God; as in that: Atque Deos, atque astra vocat crudelia mater. As Quiutilian: quis mihi alius vsus vocis qua^ vt incusem Deos? And, Iure per mala mea per infelicem conscientiam, Hence rise their funerall pompes, and superstitious exequies
for the dead: Sacrificing of men and women, in honour of the defunct; ertificiall howling and cutting of their flesh, ambitious Sepulchers, and excessiue feasts of many daies continuance: In which kind euery Nation had some peculiar vanity and superstition aboue the rest. Lastly, in all their troubles and calamities they captiuate their vnderstandings to their affections, wayling without restraint, raging against God and his creatures. But Iobs lamenting was not of this kinde; neither are his words otherwaies to bee interpreted, then as signes of extraordinary griefe easing his oppressed heart, although not without some perturbation. Hitherto of the griefe and passion of Iobs minde, expressed by this interrogation, Quare, wherefore? Which is a word of sorrow not of indignation.
Now to the matter and cause of his griefe: namely, that such benefites of God as light and life, should bee so blotted with miseries and vexation of spirit. Although according to the vsuall interpretation, these words haue one and the same sence; light and life, and
labour and bitternesse of soule; yet their proper acception, and signification, will affoord vs this difference of discourse. All the misery of man is either labour, or bitternesse of soule: By labour vnderstand all that wee do with difficulty and impediment, whether they be actions, and operations, of the mind or body. By bitternesse of soule is ment all that wee suffer in our soules, either immediately or from the body, or any outward affliction. These two diuers kinds of misery do planely and distinctly appeare in that sentence of woe which God pronounceth against Adam, In dolore comedes, heere is the misery of suffering: In sudore comedes, there is the misery of working. In like manner the good things which we enioy, they bee either such as guide and ease our actions, which Iob comprehends vnder the name of light: or those which sustaine and benefite our passions, which are contained in the word Life. For the first, Light is of three sorts; sensible, intellectuall, and spirituall. Sensible light is either artificiall, or naturall: Concerning naturall light, as of it selfe
nothing is more sweet and cheerefull, so to the spirit which is in wearinesse and toyle, nothing is more tedious. In the 10 of Eccle. the 7 verse: Lighe is sweete. And in the Creation, light is the first creature that is made, and first hallowed. Hence is it adorned with so many Epithits in Greek (...) Therefore as poore labourers by singing do sweeten their paines; for which cause S. Basil cals their singing (...) the sauce of their toyle: So the light of the Sunne doth lighten their labour, and makes them more cheerefull in their worke. Yet how much pleasanter is light to them that are at liberty and rest? which haue leasure to contemplate the beauty of the heauens, or to discourse of the benefites of light. But if they bee bound to some grieuous taxe, and incessant labour, as the Israelites, then light is but an eye-sore. Whilst they see their owne vexation, and how much worke they haue to doe: whilst they see others sporting and themselues toyling. Lastly, whilst they see their misery to bee exposed to the sight of all. They see youth dancing, and age wooing; women
walking to theaters to see and to be seene. Lastly, they see the day distribrute beauty and cheerofulnesse to all creatures but vnto themselues: vnto birdes, vnto buildings, to the clouds, to the aire, to the earth, to the waters. And therefore vnto them which in time of old tyranny, were condemned ad lapicidiuas, yet this was some comfort, that they neither so much saw their own miserie, nor the happinesse of others. The Sunne in the creation was ordained for signes and seasons, to rule the day, and to shine vpon the earth: but after sinne had brought in labour, the sun became a taske-maister to call men forth vnto their worke, as it is in the 104 Psalme. The sunne riseth, and man goeth forth vnto his labour vntill the euening. Likewisese Ecclesiastes the King, speaking of toyle and labour, hee vsually stiles it, Labour vnder the sun. What profito hath a man of all his labour wherein hee labours vnder the sinne? So that as the eye of the maister vrgeth the seruants worke: so the eye of heauen exacts labour, and vpbraids rest vnto miserable and mortall men. And yet when
the sunne is downe, still light continues labour by artificiall lampes and candles, holding them to their taske. Whereupon from the name of light this labour is called Lucubration. Therefore Iob lamenting the affliction of mankinde, doth fitly vse this speech, Wherefore is light giuen to them that labour? the sweete sight whereof they cannot enioy. Which haue no leasure to feed their eyes with pleafant colours, or with sights and theaters? Wherefore doe they see light? light the measure of paines, the renewer of wearinesse, the enemy of rest, the opener of the eyes which want sleepe. Wherefore is light giuen to augment labour, and pursue the poore seruants in the night? The painfull housewise rises in the night, and holds her maides to their taske. Prou. 31. Noctem addens operi, famulasque ad lumina longo exercet penso, castum vt seruare cubile coniugis and possit paruos educere natos. So euery Carpenter and Workemaister that labours day and night, and watches to finish a worke, operi perficiendo inuigilat. The Smith also by the Anuill, early and late, are not his eyes put out with too much light? whiles the vapour of the fire
wastes his flesh, and the noyse of the hammer is euer beating in his earer, and ad poliendum opus aduigilat, and he watcheth to polish his worke. To conclude then, seeing as light was first ordained for delight and pleasure, and to direct and illustrate our actions; So now since wee were condemned to labour and trauell, it is become tedious and cruell; let vs with Iob bewaile our finnes, which haue so altered our condition, and sigh to be deliuered from the house of bondage into that libertie where the wearied be at rest, where the seruant is free from his maister, and the voyce of the oppressour is not heard.
Now besides this sensible light, there is also the light of knowledge and vnderstanding, which in stead of ioy and delight, how it addes affliction vnto those that labour, doth more easily appeare. For as it is Eccles. 1. vlt. in multa sapientia multa indignatio, and qui addit sapientiam, addit laborem. The eye of the vnderstanding is so owlish, that the light of knowledge doth offend it. So that most men do either decline wisedome and experience, or else complaint of the labour
wherewith it is accompanied. It is true which Salomon saith, Ecles. 2. That wisedome excelles folly as much as light excelles darknesse: and that the eyes of a a wise man are in his head, but the foole walkes in darknesse. Yet when the light that is within vs is darknesse, saith our Sauiour, how greatis that darkenesse? For which cause wee may complaine with Iob, Wherefore is knowledge giuen to them that labour? Wherby they know this one thing, that they know nothing whereby they know God, but better what he is not then what he is. Whereby they know themselues to be most misescrable and wretched. Wherefore is knowledge giuen to those that labour? whereby their labour is more increased by knowledge, then their knowledge by labour. Whereby they know what it is to labour. For as children and fooles are most indefatigable in paines, because they do not prize nor esteeme labour: so wise men, the more wisedome they haue, the more sensible they are of pains, and the cogitation and weighing of their labour, makes it appeare more grieuous and more weightie vnto them.
Pueris continuus lusus, and totius dici discursus non nocet, quia pondus illis abest, nec se ipsi grauant. Children (saith Quintilian) are not weary, because they haue not weight of vnderstanding: but in men consideration and iudgement makes their mindes more ponderous, and so labour becomes more difficult and burdensome vnto them. Lastly, this modell of knowledge which this world affords vs, is so small, that as the Oratour sayes of the poore pittance of a paisoner, (...), it neither can strenthen the body, nor will suffer it to die. So this knowledge neither can make a man happy, nor will suffer some men to seeke for that knowledge which would make them happy. But this is true of intellectuall light, it is not so of spirituall. Yet surely euen this light also hath his spots of darkenesse. For the beames of spirituall graces which are extraordinarily infused by the holy Ghost, being (...), illuminations, or (...), sanctifications they are mixed with the imperfections and frailties of these corrupt soules and bodies of ours. We here see in part, and we know in part; and the beautie of our
puritie consisteth more in the loue of God, then in the louelinesse of man.
Now followes the last part of Iobs complaint. And life to them that are bitter of soule. Where he laments two things: The misery of life, and the life of miserie. Bitternesse of soule, there is the miserie of life. And life to them that are bitter in soule, that is the life of miserie.
When the childe is borne into the world, he weepes, prophesying (saith S. Austen) of his miserie to come. His cradle is his graue: hee suckes errour with his milke: and when his vnderstanding first appeares, the weedes of bad affections spring vp with it. Before hee knowes what vice is, hee becomes vicious. Further, how many cruelties do they suffer? whilst some are snatcht from their mothers breasts, and either exposed with Moses, or dasht against the stones as the children of Babylon. Whilst some are the death of those that beare them, and loose their mothers before they can smile vpon them. Whilst some doe but once by breath take in the aire, and then breathe out their soules into the aire. Whom God onely shewes vnto the
world, and takes them away as soone as he hath giuen them. And if they liue till youth, what saith the wise man of youth? (...). Youth is vanitie it selfe. ruled by fancie and affection, adoring pleasure, and treasuring vp matter of repentance for age, full of hopes and crednlity, ouer-growne with vice: by waste and prodigalitie making warre against himselfe, as disobedient to reason, as to his parents. Lastly, what is youth, but the boyling of outragious, bloud, which when it is decocted, and somthing more moderate by age, although it bee lesse boasting, yet is it more pernicious and hurtfull. For most men when they grow to experience and yeares, they striue to put off simplicitie, and to put on craft. And then they haue well profited, when they can deceiue, and not bee deceiued. Their knowledge is now to vnlearne that they learned before. Their bodies how much the stronger, so much the longerenduring of sicknesse, of consumption, of death. Vaine-glorious, cruell, dissembling, rising by the ruines of others. Lastly, what is man-age, but the Giantnesse of sinne, and the power of miserie?
But when these ages of childe-hood, youth, and man-hood are worne into old age, then you haue the recapitulation of humane miserie: the infirmitie of childe-age, the incorrigibilitie of Boy-age, the subtiltie of Man-age: and all these greater here then in the former Ages. Here the prodigalitie of youth is dried vp into auarice: pride, and lust bee sinnes here out of fashion, but not out of vse, vndecent and vnbeseeming vices. Here wisedome doateth, and of power to sinne is left a will to sinne, the greater torment. Lastly, what is old age, but the store-house of repentance and obliuion, the ragges of life, the ashes of a lustfull body, and wearinesse of a wandring minde? Atque hi sunt manes quos patimur: these are the miseries which we suffer in all ages, sin, and sorrow, and folly, vexation and bitternesse of spirit. Hence spring complaints and discontent, either for want, or disease, or the frustration of our hopes, or some other euill. No prosperitie without change, and in the midst of laughter the heart is heauie. What way and course of life can a man cut out, wherein there
is not trouble and vexation of spirit? Theologie neuer so full of questions, the law as full of difficulties as men of quarrels. Physicke as manifold in cures as the appetite in absurd desires. In Courts few prosper, and those that prosper perish. The Countrey makes beasts, and the Citie Diuels. Single life is solitarie, and marriage ill company.
This is the miserie of life. Now followes the life of Miserie. Who knowes not that life, and all the comforts of life, they bee but increase of afffliction to those that are plunged in griefe? What pleasure is there in melodie to a man that mournes? And to him that is in an ague, how vnseasonable is the discourse of loue and iollitie. Eternitie of torment is the hell of hell: so continuance, or life in miserie, there is the misery of misery. Space of time diminishes sorrow that is past, but increaseth that which is present, because it weakens patience, and prolongs the hope of deliuerance. Therefore the Patriarch complaines that his dayes were few and euill. Not euill and few.
For to haue a short time allotted him, and yet euill dayes intermixed, is more euill. But being afflicted with euill yeares, to haue them shortened, is lesse euill. (...). O daies few and euill, briefe and tedious. How it lies vpon vs beloued, to lengthen them by good deeds. And so much the more because the shortest of the yeare is certaine, but the shortest of our life is vncertaine. Let vs frustate the tenure of iniquitie, and in euery age doe the vertue of the age, not the sinne of the age; that so not liuing after custome, but after truth, nor making profusion of the bloud of CHRIST, that it may not faile vs at our greatest neede, wee may preserue the seale of our redemption inuiolate, and bee bold euery one of vs to pray: O my GOD, let not the end of my deuotion bee suddaine, but after much mortification of heart, and long consumption of languishing desires to see thee, make a ripe dissolution of my flesh and spirit, close vp my wearied thoughts, and receiue mee to thy mercie. Amen.

Liue sweete IESV, and reigne with the Father, and Holy Ghost, one God, etc.
The end of the second Sermon,



THE THIRD SERMON. Of the loue of Christ.



1. PET. 1.8.


Whom you loue though yee haue not seene.



THAT which blessed Saint Peter commends in the dispersed Iewes of Asia, Pontus, Cappadocia, that they loued Iesus whom they had not seene. The same is the praise of all deuout Catholickes, who haue liued these many yeares, that being scattered from sea to sea, vnder euery starre, and throughout all lands, yet they loue their one Head vnseene; as they loue their many fellow-members vnseene. Which
is a singular commendation in the Daughter of Christ dispersed, His espoused Church, so deerely to affect Him whom Shee neuer saw: Whereas the daughters of men make sight a necessary antecedent of affection, and will esteeme highly of no obiect vntill the eye haue set a price of it.
This word, (...) (though) contained in the aduerbe (...), or else vnderstood, not expressed in the originall: implies another loue of Christ; namely, as hee was visible in the state of Mortality, making that to be the greater, but this the harder. As if hee should say: You loue Christ whom you haue not seene; How much more vehement would your loue haue beene if you had seene him? These then be the two parts of my Text: First, the loue of Christ being seene: Secondly, the loue of Christ being not seene. If any man loue not our Lord Iesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha. Of all the senses there is none so proper a mediator of loue, as is the sight: It is the beginning of loue, according to the Prouerb, exaspectu nascitur amor: and it is the perfection thereof,
whilst we desire to see that whereof we haue much read, or heard. Therefore we loue our eves aboue all parts of our body, giuing them the names of the most louely creatures in the world: as the Sunne and Moone: O oculi gemiua sydeva: And that which wee loue deerest wee compare it to the eye: as, Ocule, ocelle ni; and Psal. 7.8. Keepe mee as the apple of an eye. Now the causes why sight so much procureth loue. First, it is the most spirituall sense, and may bee called (...), a corporall minde, whereby we vnderstand things sensible. By reason of which affinity, videre is put for intelligere: For this cause the mind best liketh that obiect which is commended to her by the eye. Secondly, it is the quickest sense, and therefore doth soonest fire the affections: According to that, Segnius irritant animos immissa per aures, quam quae sunt oculis subiecta sidelibus. Thirdly, it is the surest euidence, and most certaine demonstration: Whence, by metaphor, the word demonstration is drawne: And therefore the fruition of eternall happinesse is called Vision. Lastly, it is the most
vnwearied, and vnsatiable sense; the eye being neuer satisfied with seeing. Which makes for the continuance of loue. For loue hateth nothing more then mutability, and fastidious inconstancie. For these causes, I say, sight is the most peculiar Factor for Loue.
Now that wee may the better vnderstand this loue of Christ which they had that saw him in the flesh: let vs consider a little of the diuers kindes of loue.
There is a sensuall loue, or rather lust, which the base Iewes, nor other Infidels, euer suspected in Christ Iesus, although hee loued the two sacred sisters of Bothania; and though Saint Iohn leaned in his bosome, and many woemen vsed to accompany him: therefore the malicious Iewes, amongst all their false accusations, durst not offer to staine his credite with the least suspition of any folly. There is another loue rising from concupisence of the eye, which is not lust, but curiositie: When men desire to see rare, or strange things, without any further benefite but to satisfie the eye. Such loue, no doubt, had many of the
Iewes, who desired to see Iesus for his fame and wonders, but with a naturall and humane loue. Other loues there be whereof some bee lawfull, some vnlawfull; some sensuall, some intellectuall; but all naturall and humane. But the loue which wee enquire after, is spirituall and sacred; yet much communicating with sense and affection. For the vnderstanding whereof, I must premise these.
I haue obserued a double loue of God. There is a kind of loue which is holy, but meerely spirituall; when the soule being a spirit loueth the Father of Spirits, in spirit: abstracting all mediation of body, and bodily accident, vsing no helpe of imagination, or any sense: But considering him to bee an eternall Goodnesse, Incorporeall, Incomprehenble, the Authour of all being, and of all good. Whereupon the will doth immediately embrace this obiect of Goodnesse, resteth her selfe in the loue, and delight thereof. This loue will haue no communion with sense, or any imagination drawne from sense, or any affection, accounting them to bee
perturbations, and staines of this sincere delight. This religious loue is more contemplatiue, and therefore in the Angels, and in men of knowledge and vnderstanding, nourished by vision, and by discourse. To this the Platonicks speake proportionably, who were esteemed the most Theologicall Phylosophers. They making the perfection of mans felicity to consist in this intellectuall loue: and, as I may say, abstracted ideall delight: spend much inke in blacking and dispraising bodily and sensible things: calling them shadowes of things spirituall, images, and not substances, obscurers of the vnderstanding: And the body to bee the sepulcher of the soule, and the affections to bee as the rebellious rogues, and vnquiet multitude in a Common-wealth.
There is another kind of sacred loue which is placed in the affections, being not meerely spirituall, but making vse of all sensible obiects, for the enslaming thereof. Thus wee loue God whilst wee consider the excellent beauty of all his creatures, giuing him the eminencies of them all; and turning our affections
from euery creature to burne towards him which is the Authour of all these. And this is most properly called deuotion, nourished by sense, and sensible accidents: without which no Religion of any Age, or Nation, euer flourished. Wherefore the most wise God knowing man by nature, to haue so much co^merce with body and bodily things, ordained so many Ceremonies, and Sacraments, in his worship: And, at the time appointed, sent his Sonne in the visible forme of a man, that Hee being Spirit and flesh, both these, our loues, both spirituall and caruall might bee spent on him. That our affections might haue something to feede on, as well as our vnderstandings. And this is the loue whereof the Apostle heere speakes which was in the Saints that see Christ in the flesh: Which is seated in the affections, and is called deuotion. And surely, if wee looke into the examples of piety, and deuotion, in all times, you shall finde that the most holy and pious men, were men of the most hottest affections: as the Prophets, as King Dauid, as Saint Augustine, who after their loues
were diuerted from doting vpon vanity, and worldly shadowes. They outstripped all men in the ardencie of deuotion, as their Writings and Meditaons witnesse: breathing nothing but spirit. Psal. 18.1. Ex intimis visceribus diligam te demine: And S. Austens Workes to a iudicious Reader, will plainely shew, that though hee bee the most profound Father, yet hee speakes more out of his heart, then his head, full of actionate deuotion, euen then when the subiect of his Discourse is subtilty and vnderstanding. Hence it is, that woemen bee called the deuoute Sexe, by reason of the feruencie of their loue: According to that, Thy loue to mee was wonderfull passing the loue of woemen. Whereof excepting the mother of God, amongst thousand others, the most eminent examples be Mary Magdalene, and Mary the Egyptian: Which two holy women, the one hauing seene Christ, the other the place where hee was crucified, they changed their lewd lusts, for hallowed, and incorruptible loue: they washed their wanton eyes with teares: And for the latter, her whole flesh
which had beene fired with lust, shee sacrificed it an whole burnt-offering vnto God, exhaling it with fasting and penance vntill her dying day. Lastly, deuout old age, which after much dammage and losse of grace, would gladly preserue the relique of deuotion: they keepe it in the warmth of their affections, as appeareth by their tendernesse to Religion, often weeping, fasting, and Almes-deeds. This being so naturall a ground, that deuotion especially confisteth in affection, and that affections are chiefly moued by sensible obiects, and bodily exercise: Therefore all Religions necessarily haue Ceremonies, and inuitations of this kind: Some profitable, some necessary, some superstitious. For the eye, as goodly Temples, ornaments of pictures, vestures, and such like. Musick for the eare.
See Caluin. Instit. q. 4. c. 10 Set times of fasting, prayers, offering, and other outward actions: The ruine whereof ouerthrowes deuotion.
See the Marginall note in the Geneua Bible. Hither you may referre Allegories and Metaphors, which bee the greatest part of cloquence in Sermons, and bee nothing else but speaking pictuers, according to that Gal. 3.1. Before
whose eyes Christ Iesus was described crucified with in you. Seeing then that these things cannot bee gaine-said; How ill do they deserue of Christianity, who delight in nothing so much as ruines of Churches, Church Orders, and Church Ceremonies. They place no more holinesse in a Temple then a Schoole-house; Counsell them to fast, they answer they fast from sinne; Tell them of sitting bare at Diuine Seruice, they answere, all things are vncouered before God. They giue no honour to the Sacraments; bid them kneele at the entring into a Church, and when they receiue the holy Eucharist, they answere, they bow the knees of the heart. They offer no other sacrifice but the calues of their lippes. Insteed of Almes, they giue poore men good counsell, as if men could cate precepts, and drinke good counsell. They are affected with the sight of no sacred Monument. Nay, if our Sauiour himselfe were aliue they would not go farre to see him, or not haue worshipped him for feare of superstition. Hence comes it thar they haue so common a conceit of the blessed
Virgine that bare him in her wombe; that they giue so little priuiledge to the Apostles that eate and drunke with him: Finally, to any holy place where hee walked, or any Saint to whom hee appeared. They would hold it no happinesse to haue touched the hemme of his garment. Then Nathaniel was vnwise who desired to see Iesus, and little Zacheus who climed the Tree to looke downe vpon him that was higher then the skie: Then the Wise men of the East were not worthy of that name, who came so farre to see him. Saint Ierome might haue made a better wish then aboue all things to haue seene Christ in the flesh. But our Sauiour himselfe condemnes these men, when he saith; the Queene of Saba shall rise vp in iudgement against this Generation, for shee came farre to heare the wisedome of Salomon, and behold a greater then Salomon is heere. And Luke 10.25. Blessed are the eyes that haue seene what you see: for I say vnto you many Prophets haue desired to see that which you see, and could not see it: Which is ment of seeing Christ Iesus in his mortall estate. Foelix qui potuit
fontem boni visero lucidum: To apply that speech vnto this sence. If the eye of a man were suddenly made able to behold the Heauens, the Sun, and Moone, and Starres, in their iust splendure, and bignesse: Or to see the whole earth with all the creatures in it, at once: Vuo and distincto intuitu: How would his mind bee rapt with admiration? But the sight of God manifested in the flesh, was a farre more admirable obiect, the extasie of men and Angels, and as I may say the proper end why the eye was created. Of which fight, if the senselesse creatures had beene made capable, How, thinke you, would the Sunne haue desired to shine continually in that climate where Hee breathed: And the other parts of the earth haue contended that they also might haue receiued the impression of His sacred feete, enuying the felicity of Canaan.
Then let all true Christians honour the happy memories of those blessed Saints, who were ordained to see that Iust One, and to bee eye-witnesses of that Mysterie, into which the immateriall Angels do delight to pry. And as
for vs, wee that had not that prerogatiue to see him in the flesh, yet for increase of our deuotion, let vs euer beare Him in our fancies, and vse all meanes that wee may seeme to see him, that with a readier passage wee may feele him, and beare him in our hearts. This is the recompence of absence, and onely solace vnto true loue, by imagination to fill vp the distance of time and place, and transforme things past into things present. Quem vidistis pastores? whom saw yee shepheards? tell vs, tell vs. We saw the Omnipotent infant, and Angels worship him. But where? and when? and how? tell mee some circumstance that I may seeme to see him. Vidimus Deum parvulum pannis inuolutum, matrem vbera admouentem. Wee saw God a little one, swadled and lying in a cribbe, and his mother giuing him suck. O happy sight! O vnspeakeable mysterie. O gratissimi vagitus per quos eternos ploratus euasimus! O foelices pannim, quibus peccatorum sordes abstersimus! O praesepe splendidum vbi iacuit panis angelorum. Lacta Maria creatorem tuum, lacta virgo gloriesa. O foelicia oscula
lactentis labijs impressa. It is S. Austens meditation. Sapientia si oculis cerneretur quantos amores excitaret sui? Wisedome (saith Plato) if it could be seene with bodily eyes, how would it stirre vp men to loue it? But the wisedome of God became visible and manifested in the flesh, and how should it stirre vp men to loue it? This did so inflame the beloued Disciple, him which dranke wisedome our of the bosome of our Lord, that his Epistle which is wholly precepts of loue, hee beginnes with, mention of seeing Christ, and repeates the same word againe and againe. That which wee haue seene with our eyes, which wee haue looked vpon, and our hands haue handled of the word of life. For the life appeared, and we haue seene it, and it appeared: that I say which wee haue seene and heard, declare wee vnto you. And the whole number of the twelue, when after his last farewell hee ascended, how stood they gazing on him, as being loth to loose the last minute of his visible presence. And no maruell: for the very sight, no doubt, conueighed vnto the faithfull, a benigne influence prefigured in the old Testament, where to looke
stedfastly vpon the brasen Serpent, was soueraigne against the poysonfull sting of fierie Serpents. What deuout Christian now liuing, would not giue the whole world if he had it, for to see him? To see him either in his childe-hood, or in in his youth, in his humilitie, or in his maiestie. When it pleased him sometimes to make his glorious deitie shine through his man-hood, as Saint Ierome thinkes he did when he called S. Peter and S. Andrew, who therefore presently laid away and followed him. Heare the meditation of the blessed Father S. Austen vpon this poynt. Hei mihi quia videre non potui Dominum angelorum, heu quod tam inaestimabili pietati presens obstupescere non merui. And further. Cur o anima, etc. Wherfore o my soule, wast thou not present that thou mightst haue beene pierced through with sharpest griefe, when thy Sauiours side was pierced with a speare? where thou couldst not haue endured to haue seene the hands and feet of thy maker rent with nailes: that thou mightst haue swounded to haue seene the bloud of thy redeemer spilt, that thou mightest haue condoled with the blessed virgin.
O gracious good Lady, what streames of teares may I thinke flowed out of thy most chaste eyes when thou beheldedst thy innocent, thy onely son bound, scourged, murdered, flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy bone so cruelly cut and mangled. And further, vtina^ cum felice Iosepho dominum meu^ de cruce deposuissem, cur non fui deosculatus loca vulnerum? etc. Thus holy men were wont to incense their loue, and their deuotion, to cleanse their imaginations from the idols of carnall beautie, which hauing entred at the eyes haunt the disquiet fancies of poore youth, and cannot be spelled, nor expelled, but with the image of God incarnate.
For this cause our venerable ancestors from all clymates of the Christian world, haue resorted to the holy Cittie, that although they could not see their Sauiour, yet they might see and worship where his feete had trode or walked, where he wept, and swet, and bled, and died. There was the price of our redemption numbred, that earth and that heauens shal witnesse, that there the summe was tendered, and that innocent heartbloud
powred out, which none can powre into his breast againe. This made good Paula, and her daughter Eustochium, Romane Ladies of the honourable family of the Grachi, remoue with all their substance to Bethleem, and there they liued, and there they died with S. Ierom. This made S. Helen honour of our English nation, the happy mother of great Constantioe, so deuoutly to visite euery place where our Lord conuersed, and euery where to erect so many famous memories, so many goodly Churches. This caused S. Ierom to spend the greatest part of his life there. There hee commented, there he indited, there hee translated. And for this cause many learned Diuines, amongst whom S. Ierom and Eusebius, with diuers of late memorie, haue carefully described all the sacred places, and religious monuments of the Holy land, that those which haue not seene them really, might see them imaginarily, and nourish their Diuine cogitations without supestition, without any great cost, or trouble: I that they might see Canaan a farre off, as Moses did from mount Phasga.

Now looke what hath been said concerning deuotion nourished by sight, the same is true likewise of the other learned sense, namely, hearing, as the hearing of musicke, or eloquent discourse, which being vsed without curious scrupulositie, and affectation, how greatly they increase the loue of God, and of his true worship, it appeares to any liberall and ingenious disposition, vnlesse any man thinke the vse of musicke proper to stirre vp vanity, to nourish pleasure, to maintaine lightnesse and obscenitie. And not
1 To raise vp mens minds to meditation of heauenly ioyes, whereof musick may seeme a kinde of type.
2 To confider the harmonie and consent of the world, how all Ages, all Nations, all Languages praise Him.
3 Out of the mouthes of Babes sucklings hee prepareth praise.
4 To expiate the eares which haue beene polluted by wanton madrigals, and lasciuious ditties.
5 To kindle the affections with loue of God.
6 Lastly, to praise him with learned hymnes, who is the giuer of all excellencies.
Vnlesse any man thinke that eloquence was giuen naturally to adorne folly, and flatteries, to ouerthrow right, to colour falshood, and deceaue simplicity, and to be misvsed, when it is appliyed to strengthen truth, to sweeten diligence, and commend pietie. Quis ita desipiat vt hoc sapiat? saith Saint Augustine 4. de Dectrina. Chr. And if any man obiect that Saint Austin could not resolue himselfe concerning the lawfull vse of artificiall Musicke in Churches, it is false: For though hee speakes of his owne experience, that the delight of his sense did sometimes preuaile aboue reason; yet hee confesses the excellent vse of Musick for deuotion. And for being too scrupulous hee checkes himselfe, calling it nimia seueritas; and concludes that hee approues the custome of the Church: Vt per oblectamenta aurium infirmior animus in affectum pietatis assurgat: That by delight of the eare, the weake minde of man might rise vp into pious affections: whereof hee makes himselfe an example, with delightsome remembrance how hee was moued to teares at the hearing of artificiall
Church Musicke: Cum reminiscor lachrymas quas fudi ad cantus ecclesiae tuae, magnam instituti huius vtilitatem agnosco: Besides, what Saint Austine saith there of artificiall musicke, may bee as well an argument against plaine song, and common tunes in Churches, which affect some men as much, and of many are sung with as great affectation. Againe, if for this difficulty, they would wholy reiect the lawfull vse of musicke, let them reade the two chapters next going before, and they shal find that he maketh the same difficulty in the vse of all the senses, which if they will refuse therefore, then must they neither see, nor smell, nor eate, nor drinke. But this holy man there expresses his carefulnesse to auoide sin; as also did Saint Athanasius, whom hee there citeth. But how farre their spirit was from preiudicing others, or from scrupling mens consciences in the vse of the approued Institutions of the Church, their other speeches and actions are sufficient witnesses. Wherefore to shorten this discourse, let vs all endeuour to haue a zealous and deuout loue of Christ; both that which riseth out
of knowledge and vnderstanding, and that which riseth out of sense and affection. And to this purpose vse all those meanes which the practise of most holy Fathers. and the law of Nature her selfe doth warrant: which is not sensuall loue, but affectionate, and holy, raised out of sense. As they which saw Christ loued him the more, not for the lineaments of his body; but being enflamed with consideration that they should see their Creator become Flesh, who is in his owne Nature inuisible. That they should see the same passions as in themselues, in him which was Impassible: and all their owne infinrmities without deformitie of sinne: That man might not now chuse but loue God, vnlesse he would not loue himselfe: This, I say, bred admiration and loue in them, a spirituall loue, yet raised out of sense, and is chiefe part of that which wee properly call deuotion.
And thus much of the first part of my Text; namely, the loue of Christ, being seene: Where I haue shewed how much sight augmenteth loue: And how all other sensible meanes and externall
practises are incitements and inuitations to encrease deuotion. Deuotion, which is the onely happinesse of this life, and to be preferred before wisedome, subtilty, or discourse, being indeed the end and perfection of all. The delicious taste of heauenly ioyes, which God giues vnto his Saints here, that they may long after the fruition of the whole: Whereof Saint Austine speakes in the 40 chap. of the 10. booke of his Confessions: Et aliquando intromittis me Domine in affectum multum inusitatum introrsum ad nescio quam dulcedinem, quaesi perficiatur in me nescio quid erit, quod vita ista non erit.
Now to the second part, which is the loue of Christ not seene: Quem cum non videritis diligitis: whom yee loue, though yee haue not seene. This, not onely S. Peter heere, but S. Paul also, with many other Worthies haue admired; to see how soone the world, without compulsion, consented to follow, and to loue Him whom they neuer saw: How so many thousands and millions were moued with such a strange instinct, to leaue their goods, their wiues, their children, parents, their deerest Country:
and lastly, to loose their liues so willingly for loue of him whom they neuer saw. This amazed the vnbeleeuing world, to see her number daily minished, and most furious persecutors become the hottest louers. What secret influence so raigned in mens hearts? what cruel loue made them so impatient that they ranne showting to their death? Wherefore forsooke they all their present ioyes, which they not onely saw, but caryed in their eyes, to loue him whom they saw not? Crying, Hunc amemus, huno amemus. Nothing could bribe them, or abalienate their mindes. Youth was not moued with beauty, nor old age with money, nor children with feare of death, nor States-men with preferment: No contumelies, no disgraces preuailed, they suffered all things, they endured all things, and all this for the loue of him whom they neuer saw. The new married preferred the graue before the bed. Honourable and beautifull maides choose rather to bee called virgins of Christ, then queenes to great Princes. The fraile sexe was crowned with Martyrdome, and compassionate
mothers ouercomming nature, beheld with cheerefull countenance their swete infants killed for the loue of Christ, as wee read of that happy childe which died with the constant martyr Romanus. How willingly his mother gaue him to the hands of the tormentor; kissing him but once, which was as little as a mother could doe.

Nee immorata est fletibus tantum osculum
Impressit vnum, vale, ait, dulcissime,
Et eum beatus regna Christi intraueris
Memento matris.

Now if a man inquire into the inward mouing cause for which the world was so strangely carried away with affection vnto Christ, hee shall find it to bee faith. Which faith though the Scripture opposeth to vision, yet calleth it a kinde of sight. So faithfull Abraham desired to see Christs day, and saw it, and reioyced. By faith Moses indured patiently as if he had seene the inuisible. And by the eye of faith all the Saints since the Apostles, beleeuing them that saw him, haue loued him as firmly as if themselues had seene him. They seeing the head, beleeued of the body: wee seeing the body, beleeue
concerning the head. Namque habet fides oculos suos, quibus quodammodo videt verum esse quod nondum videt. For faith hath it eyes, whereby in some manner it sees that to be true, which as yet it sees not, saith S. Auste^. Faith is opposed to the corporall view of things visible, and to the demonstratiue knowledge of things intelligible. Which knowledge is also called intuitiue knowledge. Now the bodily sight of Christ in his humilitie, was onely proper to them that liued in his time. Though by imagination wee can likewise represent vnto our selues the same. But the sight of his spirituall and glorified body shall be the reward of all. And as for the intelligible visiun of invisible glory of the Godhead of Christ, and of the eternall Trinitie; they that see it here in twy-light, shall then behold it as at noone day, and loue it there with incomparable feruencie of spirit, if they continue here in that modell of warmth which this life affoordeth. The hope whereof how greatly doth it sustaine the patience of his absence, and confirme the constancy of louing Christ vnseene, when we haue so good assurance to see
his spirituall body, and that happinesse which neuer eye hath seene? Where if he shew his fiue wounds, and the veritie of all which hee did and suffered in this life, what can be wanting to the destruction of that which is in part, and conuerting faith into vision?
Meane while wonderfull is that grace which makes vs now to loue him. For although the conuersion of the world, the strange preseruation of the Catholicke Church, the authoritie of the same Church, the bloud of so many Martyrs, the fulfilling of Prophecies, the superexcellent learning of Catholicke Writers, and Catholick Gouernours, with many other vnanswerable arguments, haue in a manner demonstrate the whole truth of Christian Religion: Insomuch that hee which will not now beleeue without seeing wonders, is himselfe a wonder, saith S. Austen. Yet in many ages when God hath permitted generall inundations of Gothes and Vandals, of Turkes and Saracens ouer the Christian world, which the old serpent hauing spued out of his mouth, desired to make (...) the woman to bee
carried away of the floud; or when fearefull tempests of heresie doe obscure the Church, that for a time neither Sunne nor moone appeare, till controuersies bee determined, till ancient records bee se arched, and vnquiet nouelists suppressed, the safest way was alwayes to cast himselfe into the bosome of the Church, that faith might support where knowledge failes, and the loue of Christ continue, where he was not seene.
Faith is the subsistence of matters hoped for, and the euidence of things not seene, by the firme embracing whereof in the midst of all miserable temptations, and inuestigable errours, the faithfull louers of Christ Iesus haue loued him whom they neuer saw neither with the eye of sense, nor the eye of reason. Great friendship hath there beene betwixt men which neuer saw one anothers faces, yet true report of wisedome and vertue hath bred strange coniunction and familiaritie of mindes, as if their soules had met together in the night when their bodies rested: or because that mindes being incorporeall, neede not visible presence to vnite them, nor
are their loues separated by distance of place. Which if it be true in natural loue, and humane affection, how much more certaine is it in spirituall and Diuine? where not onely similitude of nature combines, but also vnitie of spirit. If thou louest none but whom thou seest (saith S. Austen) then shouldst thou not loue thy selfe. Neque enim teipsum nisi in speculo vides.
Many men there be, whose wisdome will not suffer them to bee credulous, their hands haue eyes, and their hearts haue eyes: they beleeue that which they see, and they will loue that which they see: vnknowne vnbeleeued, vnseene vnloued. But vnto the most of faithfull Christians, Almightie God hath left more things to bee beleeued then knowne, that there might bee place for reward. For hope that is seene, is no hope. Euery one could not liue at that time when Christ was liuing, nor see the wonders which he wrought, or which his Prophets did before him, or his Apostles after him. Yet many will say hereafter, if we had liued in those times, or if whe had talked with one risen from the
dead, we had surely repented. Indeede the Tyrians and Sidonians, if they had seene the miracles at Corazin and Bethsaida, they would haue turned their purple into sackcloth: but they had sufficient helpes, and so hast thou: neither knowest thou whether thou mightst be so obdurate, through thine owne first wilfull negligence, that the sight of Christ wold haue caused no more loue in thee, then it did in Herod, who defired of long to see him, and not beleeuing Moses and the Prophets, neither wouldest thou beleeue if one should rise from the dead. S. Austen sayes hee was often tempted to desire a signe from God concerning him selfe; but by Gods grace he alwayes resisted that temptation. So our Sauiour taxeth the Gentleman of Cana in Galilee, whose sonne was sick at Capernaum, Vnlesse you see signes and wonders you will in no wayes beleeue. The Atheist if he might see the Diuell, he would hate him. And the Idolater, if hee may haue a palpable visible God, hee will worship him. Make vs Gods to goe before vs, cry the Israelites, as if things that were inuifible, were not. They that desire to see the holy Cittie,
vpon distrust or curiositie, which is concupiscence of the eye, or dwelling farre off, greatly indanger their present estate, their fame, their liues, and neglect their necessary functions. I see not how they can warrant that action. Against which S. Gregorie Nissen speakes in an Epistle of his. Locall motiou (saith he) makes thee not neerer vnto God, which is in all places. And it is better to goe a pilgrimage from thy body to God, then from thy countrey to Iurie: for whilst wee are at home with the body, wee are steangers vnto God. Ierusalem is not now the necessary place of worship, the word is neere thee, and euery faithfull soule is Ierusalem. For as goodly vineyard which cost the Husbandman much care, and his servants long labour, being the sweetest plot of ground which hee could chuse, and hauing the indulgence of the heauens, and all the elements to cherish it, whilst it was tender, and flourished, and at the time of vintage all men resorted thither, to see the beauty and temperate situation, and to reape the fruit which grew not else where: but after the fruite was gathered, the hedges being broken, and the swine hauing defaced it, and other
beasts haunting it, though the Winter beautie thereof be louely, yet the necessity of comming thither it abolished, and the conuenience of seeing is much limitted: So Ierusalem that pleasant Citty of God, where the word of life grew, so watred by Prophets, so watched by Angels, during the beautie and glory of her summer age, thither the Tribes came vp, and from all Countries there they worshipped: but when the fulnesse of time was come, wherein the grapes of this holy vine were pressed, and the bloud thereof conueighed by Apostles and Euangelists throughout the world, to cheare the hearts euen of the coldest nations, Ierusalem became (...), as the Prophet speaketh, no longer necessary, and though euer holy and reuerend, yet often dangerous to be visited, being polluted by wilde infidels, and now possessed of vnchristened Turkes. The orchard of Balsamon is remoued from the Hilles of Engaddi into Egypt, and so saluation, which was only of the Iewes, is now translated to the Gentiles, Et Assyrium vulgo nascitur amomum. To conclude then, although the most worthy
and deuoute Christians haue increased their deuotion and pietie by sight of the holy monuments at Ierusalem, yet many who neuer saw them, haue beene more godly then some others that haue seene them, and beleeue as firmely, and loue Christ Iesus their redeemer as deerly as if they had seene him, or seene the place where he was seene. (...). For (sayes Gregory Nissen) if thy inward man be full of bad thoughts, although thou standest vpon Golgotha, or mount Oliuet, or vnder the monument of his resurrection, thou art as farre from Christ, as they which neuer acknowledged him. The same is true of all sensible meanes, and outward actions, which if they bee not ioyned with sinceritie of the spirit, they are vnprofitable to vs, and disstastfull to the father of spirits. Many are content to performe these externall actions, which they do perfunctory, meerely for fashion, without any tincture of spirit: Especially where there is a multitude of ceremonies, as in the Romane Church, and in the superstition of the Easterne Churches, is most
apparant. Wee are all by nature ready to chuse that which is of eafier performance: and in actions, and matters of Religion which of all others are most tedious, because they touch the conscience, the crafty Mind would gladly rest herselfe, and thinke to discharge all by light workes of the body, and of the senses. Is this the fast which I haue chosen, saith God, for a man to bow his necke, being weake with abstinence, to put on sackecloth and ashes: Is this the fast which I haue choson? Nay, is not this the fast which I haue chosen, to loose the bands of wickednesse, and to let the oppressed go free? and to deale thy bread vnto the hungry: Where God hates the outward obedience, if it bee without fasting from sinne. And in comparison, better spirituall worship without externall, then externall without that which is spirituall. So hee saith, Rend your hearts and not your garments. And I will haue mercy and not sacrifice, Where the aduerbe is a Comparatiue rather then a Negatiue: And therefore the Septu. well translate it: (...). sub (...). God forbids neither, nay hee commands
both; but preferres the one before the other. So many, saith Saint Austine, they will eate no flesh in Lent, but they will bite and deuoure their brethren: They will drinke no wine, but they will drink iniquity like water. What profites it to bee pale with fasting, and at the same time to bee leane with hatred, and euuy? What profites it if wee abstaine from flesh, which is sometime lawfull, and do those things which are neuer lawfull? therefore I say with Scripture, and with holy Fathers, that as the presence and sight of Christ would little haue encreased loue in his Disciples, vnlesse they had also seene him with the eyes of the inward man: No more doe any sensible, and externall meanes further deuotion, if they bee separated from the inward and spirituall motions of the heart My sonne giue mee thy heart. Why drawest thou neere mee with thy lips when thy heart is farre from mee? To proceed then, though euery one haue not that glorious pretogatiue giuen them to bee Martirs; to die for loue of him that died for their saluation: Yet ouery one may mortifie his earthly members, and die to sin,
which is a kind of Martirdome. In like manner, though euery one could not see Christ, and so loue him; yet they may loue him whom they haue not seene by faith, which is a kind of sight. Nay, if they which saw him, and loued, were such as would not loue him vnlesse they had seene him; greater is their reward that loue him whom they haue not seene. For what said our Lord to Saint Thomas: Thomas because thou seest, thou beleeuest; happy are they which beleeue and see not. What remaines now but to prouoke you to the loue of him whom you doe not see: who first loued you, vnseene? Nay, when you were worse then nothing: Whom you hope to see, and see him as he is. Let mee say vnto the afflicted that liue in obscurity, and misery, wait till the cloud bee broken, and the Sunne shine out. Let mee say vnto the simple and ignorant, but louing and faithfull: bee constant, and you shall see as you are seene. Let mee say vnto the wise and learned: helpe yee the weak sighted, and make him louing that is blind. Lastly, to all men, though you loue him which is vnseene, yet let
your loue bee seene. Loue in deed, and not in word: By this wee know that wee loue him, if wee keepe his Commandements. If your loues burne vehemently vpon things temporal and visible; how are you said to loue him whom yee haue not seene. Siluer, and gold, and gay apparell, ample possessions, and goodly buildings, faire flesh and bloud compounded of corruptible elements, whatsoeuer deceiptfull time hath coloured, or the world hath set a glosse on: if yee bee euer gazing and admiring these things, how are yee said to loue him whom you haue not seene? When woemen go to see, and to bee seene: when men, the litle good they do, they do it to be seene of men: When most had rather seeme then bee good: how are they said to loue him whom they haue not seene? He that longs to see euery strange thing hee heares of, and to haue euery costly thing which he sees, how can this loue of Christ bo in him? He which hateth his brother whom he daily sees, how can hee loue his Sauiour whom hee neuer saw? When the concupiscence of the eye is waxen dimme, and the faire forbidden
fruit is faded: Alas, how will yee wish that yee had seene lesse, and lesse loued that yee saw, and more loued him whom yee neuer saw. Behold him in his members, behold him in his poore distressed membes; behold him harbourlesse and naked, behold him hungry and thirsty: Cloth him, lodge him, feed him, if you loue him: that when you shall see him comming in the Clouds, with glory, yee may heare, Come yee blessed, for when I was hungry you fed mee, when I was naked you clothed mee. Which happinesse Hee grant vs, that liueth and raigneth with the Father, and Holy Ghost, to whom bee all praise and glory euermore. Amen.
The end of the third Sermon.



THE FOVRTH SERMON. Of the frailty of Man.



1. PET. 1.24.

All flesh is as grasse, and all the glory of man as the flower of grasse.


THIS is the echo of a cry in the fortieth chapter of Esay, the sixth verse, rebounding from the solidity of Peter: The voice said cry: Because all flesh, the whole world, must heare. And because the whole world is so ingurgitate in the dulnesse of flesh, that without a cry they, cannot heare: It seemes then
that God will haue this cry to bee (...), a resonance, in our eares, which no melodie of pleasure should take away. The Heathen man caused one to cry daily vnto him, (...), Remember thou art a man. And there are two maine cries in the Scripture: The one puts vs in minde of our immortality, which S. Ierom saith hee heard alwaies sounding in his eares, Arise you dead and come to iudgement. The second of our mortality, and is of necessity precedent to the former, proclaimed by this Harbinger: Omnis caro foenum: All flesh is grasse, and all the glory of man: Wherefore, hee that hath eares to heare let him heare: 1. the common meannesse of his nature, al flesh is grasse. All, there is the community, Flesh, that is the name of his nature: thirdly, Grasse, there is the meanenesse of his nature. In the second part, the meanenesse of the excellency of his nature: The glory of man, that is the execllency; The flower of grasse, there is the frailty of his excellence. Lastly, without exception all: all the glory of man is as the flower of the grasse.
All flesh is grasse: For God hauing
made all men (...) of one bloud, although they haue variety of distinction, yet they all meete in this ground that they are grasse. I am no better then my fathers, saith Elias. And the Apostles make themselues leuell in the same vaile of miserie, with the common people of Iconium, that they were (...), subiects of the same sufferings. For this cause the Holy Ghost calles the poore mans body the flesh of the rich. Despise not thou thine owne flesh. Now the second poynt is the name of our nature, which is here called flesh. The body is our worse halfe, and flesh the worse of the worse: for it is tender, and subiect to change and losse. Further, the flesh lusteth against the spirit. Therfore S. Gregori cals it with co^tempt (...) this enuious little flesh. By this name the Scripture calling the body, or the whole man, and vsing the part for the whole, yet would not haue the part to bee the whole: for then we should bee like the Cretians, who were nothing but belly and beast: or as the Israelites, who seeking to fat their flesh, the Psalmist saith, that God sent leanesse into their soules.
Howsoeuer then you interpret the word flesh, either of the body, or of the nature and estate of man, which confisteth much of things bodily, or of carnalitie, which is perishing of the soule in fauour of the body. Of all these the Prophet cries aloud, Omnis caro foenum, all flesh is grasse.
To enter then vpon this argument, which is the grassie substance of our nature, did not the first man spring out of the earth? and though he grew amongst the delicious fruits of paradice, and had no poyson in his roote, yet he continued not in honour, but being transplanted into that common where we grow, spred his degenerous of-spring ouer the whole earth, whose seed multiplying innumerable, was nourished with no other food vntill the floud came, and corrupted the vertue thereof. Since which time, although our diet bee changed, and flesh be nourished with flesh, yet the chiefe of that flesh is but grasse concocted and conuerted into flesh: and the flesh of men and beasts are both resolued into one dust, which dust by perpetuall reuolution in the same circuit, sends forth
againe that aliment which sustames both them and vs. Before that iust and vniversall deluge had discoloured the earth, it seemeth probable that as the dayes of man were of a greater length; so the vegerable verdure of the earth was of more continuance in all habitable elymates thereof. But after that calamitie immediatly in the distinction which tho Almighty established, a greater portio^ was allotted to the harder times, the sweet seasons of the yeare were contracted, and decaying Autumne, and the aspetitie of barren Winter prolonged. Agreeably whereunto the spaces of our life were measured. The yong springall soone passeth through his greene hopes, and ripe manhood being straightned in the middest, encroching age extends the rest in trouble and tempest vntill death. There is Cruda viridisque senoctus, whom the Greekes call (...), who through the indulgence of a milde Winter, besides the venorable antiquitie of their gray haires, which is the uncture of wifedome, and sage experience, haue also fresh vigour in their bloud, and actinity in their wittes and vnderstandings. But
for the most part the strength of these yeares is labour and sorrow: for it is soone cut downe, and with one blast of Gods anger they flye away. So the famous Champion sighed to see his ^ere and dead armes: And Helen wept when shee sawe her withered beautie in the glasse. So that the Philosophy of nature doth restraine our pride, comprising the progresse and persection of our life within the period of one yeare. Quale gonus foliorum, tale est and hominum. There is a time of growing, and a time of fading: but no part of our time passeth out of this co^passe. Which affordeth matter of consideration. For as plants depend vpon the planots, and are more beholding to the Suimne their father, then the Earth their mother: so that which we liue, although it be supplied by an inward cause, like to that power where with the earth was first indued by the creating Word; yet the fauour or displeasure of heauen conferreth more to this effect, then either the natiue facultie within vs, or all our owne industry and endeuours. That which we plow, and sow, and grinde, and bake, it is not our worke, but Gods. So sings the
Psalmist: Hee brings forth bread out of the earth. Not corne, but bread. What should I speake of the Mildew of Serenes, of feuers and consumptions, which like canicular feruours, burne vp our bodies by the rootes? What of blasting of cankers, and the greene sicknesse? all which doth shew the similitude of our flesh with grasse. The remembrance of which originall God hath signed vpon our heads, whose change of colour, and leafe-fall declareth plainly that his body is Congestum cespite culmen, a poore cottage, whose toppeds couered with a sodde of earth. Earth, earth, earth, (saith the Prophet) earth thou wast, and earth thou art, and earth thou shalt be, whose bones are stones whose veines are riuers, onely in this it differs; the earth is fixed, and immoueable, man is (...), earth walking vpon earth. Can any cogitation make vs more humble, or more humane? Humus aut humi repens es. Grasse, or grasse-hopper, saith Dinine Esay. Hee sitteth vpon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grassehoppers. Poore grashoppers, that sing care away, merry and pleasant in
their summer-dayes, and not prouiding for the aduersity of Winter, and of want. O remember thy Creator before the yeares draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I haue no pleasure in them. When all the daughters of musicke shall bee brought low, when the Grashhopper shall bee a burthen, and dissipabitur capparis, and appetite shall faile, when man goeth to his long home, and the mourners goe about the streets, and the voyce saith Cry. what shall I cry? All flesh is grasse, and euery man is vanitie. Vanitie of vanities (saith the preacher) all is vanitie. Omnis caro, all; but especially the many, vere foenum est populus, surely the people, which grow so triuiall, and so innumerable vpon the the face of the earth. (...), saith Clemens, the domesticals of worldly delight. (...). Earth liuing, and earth louing, and affecting any thing but truth. vere foenum est populus, surely the people are grasse: the multiplying multitude, foecunda paupertas, saith Lucan, prolifical and fertile poore. Who whe^ they be as poore in spirit as in substance, are the most proper subiect of Gods mercy. (...),
saith the mercifull Lord Iesus, my bowels are tender to this poore multitude: but when their sinnes spread as themselues, luxuriant, and infinite, the displeasure of Almighty, God mowes them downe by whole millions at once, they are troden vnder the feet of Souldiers, pestilence and famine do depopulate great Cities, and for an embleme of sinfull flesh, grasse groweth in the streetes. Poore Christian brethren, saith S. Chrysostome, you that replenish the earth, why do ye cumber the ground? and make the land grone, and lade God with your iniquities, and presse him vnder you, as a Cart that is pressed with straw. Your sinnes turne you into straw, and know ye not that God is a consuming fire? For if you lust, lye, sweare, purloyne, and will not trust him for raiment, which clothes the grasse of the field: you make your selues like to that grasse which is to day, and to morrow is cast into the ouen. When the root of bitternesse springs into infidelitie, and thorny cares choake the word, and when that saying of the Pharisees is verified, (...) the people are accursed being ouer-growne and
ouer-grast with thistles, and malice, with cursings, with drunkennesse, and other venemous and vitious weeds, what are they but fruites of the first malediction, whose end is to bee burnt? Thus Sodom, which was greene as the garden of God, whem their sinnes were ranke, and growne ouer their heads, they were destroied with fire from heauen. And the populous Israelites, which grew as plentifull as the grasse of Goshen, their carkasses were strowed in the drie wildernesse, and of all that preuailing multitude, but two were planted in the land of Promise. Calamitie comes of Calamus, the conflagration of a whole countrey like a stubble field. And in Christian landes, what wofull desolation hath deuoured the miserable vulgar? As an Oxe licketh vp the grasse round about him, Numb. 22. Or as the Prouerbe speakes, that where the foote of the grand signior his horse treadeth, nothing will grow that is greene. Popule, popule mi, my people, my people, saith Almightie God, quid potui facere, quodnon feet? What could I doe for you which I haue not done? I haue watered you
with the deaw of Heauen, giuing you showers and fruitfull seasons, nourishing your sucklings with the sweetest iuyce, filling your hearts with ioy and gladnesse, couering your imperfections with mercie, and remembring that you were but flesh. But because you longed for anger, behold your land is left vnto you desolate.
Beloued in our Lord, (...), are these things so? hath God wasted our brethren, and made way for his wrath through the throngest of them, and shall wee muster our sinnes, and thinke our selues as farre remoued from God, as we are diuided from the whole world? when wee shall haue beene, shall praeterciroumcised Saracens, or other outlandish locusts graze on our posteritie, and deglut our labours? Barbarus has segetes? shall barbarous miscreants swallow these fields? shall the abhominable Alcora^ supplant our Bibles, or vnknown language bellow in our Churches, or the bodies be prostrate to infernal Mahomet, whose knees would not bow to the blessed name of Iesus? (...). I heare the soft murmure of your
hearts, God forbid. Then let vs seeke Him, before He slay vs: and bee not like the Israelites, who when He slew them, they sought Him, and sought Him early, when it was too late. But hitherto the Apostle hath compared the common frailty of our nature with the ordinarie pasture of the field. (...), that is, gramen, aut stramen, grasse withered, or greene. But is there nothing excellent and glorious in humane estate aboue this? Yes, and that's the second poynt. What is the glory of man? As the flower of grasse (saith the Apostle; or as the Prophet stiles it, All his goodlinesse is as the flower of the field.
The top of eminence is a crowne, and that's as Circular, and of as short continuance as the crowne of the yeare, (...) Psalm. 65. the two great Caesars haue their names in two moneths, which are the strength and glory of the yeare, as they the Maiesty and maturitie of the Romane Empire. Neither was euer knowne more then one (...), or summer vigor in the period of any kingdome. What constance then in a voluble Diademe, which being carried about
(...) in the course of nature, hath ben translated fro^ the Cedar to the brier; from the Maister to the seruant, which proud Popes haue spurned from the heads of Princes, and was disparaged in that Thorny Wrearh that pierced the sacred temples of our Lord. Roses and Lillies are the ensignes of this happy Kingdome: long may they flourish. For this is the peculiar honour of our state, Not Salomon in all his royalty was clothed like one of those: And though the Lillie withered is of no vse, yet Roses retaine their sweetnesse after death. If supreme Potentates, and mighty Monarches of the earth, had considered how transitorie is that felicity whereon they boasted: then would they haue endeuored, as they were flowers of ornament, so to haue bin fruites of benefite to the Country where they grew; but when their chiefe end was to shine in admiration, and to draw the eyes of the world vpon the colour of their present glory, Hee consumed their short daies in vanity, and no more was spoken of them but that they had flourished. As Iob cals them, (...), yesterdaies men, who like to Solstitinlis
herba, suddenly sprung vp, and suddenly decayed. When Nabuchadonosor outbraued God, he was deposed from his throne, he fed on grasse, and the dew of heauen wet him like grasse, to make him know by sensible experience what insimilitude he would not vnderstand. Lord what is man that thou regardest him, saith Dauid? the poore sonne of Adam, or the rich Sonne of Man. Man that is borne of woman hath no long time to liue, he commeth forth like a flower, and is cut downe: Take him in his beauty, what is beauty? but a brag of nature, an illusion of desire, exhaling into vanity: a selfe adoring idoll, the first baite of sin, which breathing vpon the concupiscentiall eye of the woman, hath euer since with her, and by her, continued the concubine of a doting soule. This felicity of body (saith Tertullian) what is it, but vrbana vestis, a trimme suit vpon the soule which inuites the Thiefe and Murderer, and is often extreme dangerous to them that weare it: Witnesse the examples of Sara and Ioseph, whose wanton Mistresse would haue stript him also of his chastity. But in the lustre of those colours,
if the white of simplicity, and the red of modesty bee away, it may take the vulgar, but the wise esteeme it no other then a garish garment on the backe of fooles. Come on therefore, let vs enioy the good things that are present, and let no flower of the spring passe by vs. Let vs crowne our selues with Rose-buds before they bee withered: let vs take our part of iollitie, and leaue the signes of voluptuousnesse in all places. Thus talke these wantons, when they inuite their fellowes to repentance: which being seasonable follies are more excusable, but when age reuokes these fugitiue pleasures, renewing youth with artificiall deuices, as if they were ashamed of that season which brings them neerer vnto God, and deliuers them from the vnquiet perturbations of the flesh, What argues it but that they are resolued to make the vtmost farthing of the good of this life, and will forgoe no delight heere for hope of recompence in the life to come. A painted flower in Summer who respects when they are produced by nature? and in Winter which hath other fruitions, it is vnseasonable
and against Nature. Now well doth the Apostle heere call this, and whatsoeuer is amiable, the flowre of grasse, or the flower of the field. For after that Adam was translated out of Paradice, all his glory was but wild and common: as best appeareth in the barbarous vast Regions of the earth, where verus cultus the true worship is wanting, where euery flower of beauty is the prey of violent, and vnruled lust. And yet these small parcels of ciuill States which are so fenced with Lawes and Religion, where beauty is manured by education, nourished by speciall care, and cherished by best counsell, according to that, Quem mulcent aurae, firmat sol, educat imber: Yet how seldome is it preserued and kept safe, that the inuasion of forraine lust do not breake in and deflowre it? But let these flowers fade, the glory of wealth will not leaue vs. Saint Iames answereth, As the flower of the grasse, the rich passe away. For the Sun is no sooner risen with a burning heate, but it withereth the grasse, and the flower thereof falleth, and the grace of the fashion of it perisheth:
So also shall the rich man fade away in his waies. Name mee any other excellence, and yee shall find it but a choice flower of short continuance. Wit, and eloquence are but blossomes, which falling off, the fruit of wisedome succeedeth and vnderstanding. To conclude, whatsoeuer is desireable in the world, whatsoeuer fawnes vpon the fancy of men, whatsoeuer makes our wils idolatrous: all is but a flower of grasse, a thing of small vse, but no fruition. Yea the Diuine Maiesty hath so abbreuiated all earthly glory, that those excellencies which spring from an immortall roote, and are by nature not lyable to vanity and consumption, yet they will not thriue vpon earth: and though they bee illustrious for a time they are suddenly snatcht from vs. Piety, and goodnesse, and Diuine knowledge, which perfume the sinfull world, and send vp a sweet sauour of pacification into heauen, how thinnely do they grow, and how quickly are they exhaled? Saluete flores martyrum, quos lucis ipso in limine, Christi insecutor sustulit, ceu turbo nascentes rosas, flores martyrum: Innocent martyrs, whose
names Christ hath written red in letters: of bloud in earth, and of gold in heauen. The Flower of Iesse, (...): whether you will call him a Starre, or a Flower, the skill of neither languague can determine: and the Holy Ghost (I thinke) left it ambiguous, to signifie that Hee is the Off-spring of both, both heauen and earth. As flowers are starres on earth, and starres are heauenly flowers. This coelestiall Flower was no sooner sprung, and declared by a Starre, but the rude hand was ready to nip him off: and Hee had not long adorned the earth with His glorious presence, but in the latitude of his goodliest yeares, Hee breathed out his sweete Soule, And who can expresse the abrupt cruelty of His bitter ending? he bowed downe his Head: It is a circumstance which none but (...), the Disciple of his bosome obserueth:
-- Inque humeros ceruixcollapsa recumbit,Purpureus veluti cum flos succisus aratroLanguescit moriens, lassoue papauera colloDemisere eaput. --

By this gesture hee might signifie that his triumphant Soule was now descending to the lowest parts of the earth: Whence, according to the deepe roote of his humiliation, hee rose againe, and ascended aboue the highest heauens, and we with him: For heeres our comfort, that being complanted in the similitude of his death, wee shall bee made partakers of his resurrection. All flesh is grasse, there is mortality and depression, all flesh shall see the saluation of God, there is the spring and resurrection. This is the true condition of our nature: Although death reape a whole field, and leaue no flower, nothing that is greene, yet the roote remaining, all flesh shall bee restored, all glory shall be new coloured: Yea and with aduantage: Lucrodamno, saith Tertullian, with lucre-losse, with honest vsury. It heere growes in weakenesse, it shall there rise in strength; it is cut downe in dishonor, it springs in honour: here naturall, there spirituall. It is a Plant whose flower shal bee exasperate with no thorny care, not greennesse be euerwithered. What hurt, what hurt then can death doe vs? wee
shall not laugh heere: Nor shall wee weepe. We shall not bee admired, neither shall wee bee contemned: But wee shall do no more good, but the good we haue done shall follow vs: But we shall not liue to lament sinne, but the sinnes wee haue lamented shall bee forgiuen vs. Lastly, as the day springs after night, and the Sunne reuiues, and flowers returne, and the earth is refreshed: Sic nos resurgere deuota mente credimus, So wee beleeue to liue againe: Which that wee may do with him, he grant which liueth and raigneth, etc.
The end of the fourth Sermon.


