



Sir Thomas Sherley his Trauailes,
together with his three yeares imprisonment in Turkie, his Inlargement
by his Maiesties Letters to the great
Turke: and lastly, his safe returne into
England this present yeare,
1607.
IT is a naturall qualitie,
both customarie, and commendable
in all Countries,
to enlarge their
fames, by divulging the
memorable Actes of
such worthy personages,
whose Noble Spirits,
showne by their honourable attempts and atchieuements,
haue drawne other Nations into
admiration of their valours, and emulation
of their vertues. It were then a fault vnpardonable
in vs of the English Nation (whose acts
and high attempts haue not giuen place to any

people) to burie in obliuion the vertues of those
our country Men, whose noble deedes deserue
for euer to liue vpon the tongues of men, with
honorable mention. Amongst whom, the Three
Heroes of our Time, the hopefull issue of a happy
father, haue so glorified their names by their
honourable Actes, and hostile imployments, against
the common Enemie of Christendome:
that honour by them hath added to her glory,
and Enuy lost the sting of her Detraction. And
here am I drawne into a deepe meditation of
the Minde of man how infinite it is in opinion,
and weening, and vnquiet by Nature: that
where it is once set vpon the desire of honour,
nothing can stay, or limite her aduentures: But
as the Clowds are harried by the windes from
one part of the Hemispheare to the other, so the
Body is carried by the Minde, euen through
the world, by land, by sea, with toyle and danger,
making it to suffer hunger, watching, and
cold; where at home, it might slepe with peace,
and feed with plenty. The manifestation wherof,
is knowne in the tedious Trauailes, and dangerous
Aduentures of these three excellent spirits,
that hauing no other Motiues, but the
honourable desire and pursuit of Glorie (which
indeedeis the Spurre to euery noble minde)
haue iustly by their deserts obtained her, both
for themselues, and for their Countrie: whose

fame and renown, being by them made known,
me thinkes they were vnkindly vsed by vs, to
be made strangers here at home. Hauing therefore
receiued some particulars of their trauels,
and their Occurrents in them, though (I must
confesse. I am but lame as well in the instructions
of their Aduentures, as also in mine owne
worth, to display their worthinesse; I haue neuertherlesse
attempted, though not to satisfie,
yet in some sort to make knowne to expectation
(which euer gapes after Nouelties,) their
variable fortunes, and honorable imploiments
in strange Countries, and vnder great Kings,
so farre as my knowledge of them, and hability
in my selfe, will giue me leaue.
And first to begin with Sir Thomas Sherley
the yonger, who as hee was eldest by the Fortune
of his birth, so is he not inferiour to the rest
in the commendable parts, and honorable qualities
of his minde; though happily not so succesfull
in his Trauels, as his other brethren:
Hee began his last voyage in Anno 1602. who
hauing long time kept the Seas vnprosperously,
and with vnequall fortune to his hopes and
deseruings at length landed in Italie, and was
for a time highly respected in the Duke of Florence
his Court, where hee carried himselfe in
that honourable port as became both a Souldier
and a Courtier, in all those commendable

qualities that serue both for vse and ornament.
But to stay there long, was no life for him: the
State beeing setled, and no imployments forraine,
or domesticall, fit for the leuell of his
thoughts and purposes; which ayming at a
higher proiect, grew soone weary of the pleasures
of Italie. Which the Duke perceiuing, and
knowing the wants that his long vayage by
Sea had before bronght vpon him, did honourably
furnish him with such necessaries, as for
his purposed imployments did fully satisfie his
longing expectation.
Beeing thus once more at Sea, full of hope
and courage, he lay houering too, and againe a
long time vpon the Straites of Giblater, in a co^tinuall
expectation of some purchase or other, to
satisfie the desires both of himselfe, and of his
company. In whom of late hee found a strange
alteration, both in their countenances, and behauiours
towards him, sauouring of Discontent
(the da^gerous disturber of any setled state)
whether it was deriued from a despaire they
had of the successe of the voyage, or from a desire
of returne to England, I know not; but afterwards
it turned to a mutinous reuolt. He first
perswaded them with faire words of hope and
comfort, and afterwards for the time appeased
them; by applying himselfe in many things to
their humors: but as fire cannot be hidde, whose

smoke betraies it, so this poison of their minds
and intents, could not bee long contained, but
at last it brake out into an vlcerous falshood,
and mischiefe which occasion afterwards did
thus reueale.
Sir Thomas hauing spent some time, and
much part of his victualls in the Straits, and
doubting of successe to satisfie the greedy hopes,
and vngorg'd desires of his company, and fearing
least through idlenes hee might adde more
matter to their mutinous mindes, hauing three
Shippes, and fiue hundreth men, held on his
course towards Turkie. In the mouth of the
Straits hee met with a great Hulke, and (hauing
cause giuen) fought with her a long time before
hee could come to boarde her, and afterwards
fought 8. houres aboard, before he could take
her. In this fight hee lost aboue an hundreth
of his owne men, besides those that were hurt
and maymed: and when all his cardes were
told, hee found that the gaine did not answere
the losse hee had sustained.
Thus the hopes of his company being frustrate,
and failing of their expectation, are readie
vpon the least cause to turne the nature of
commaund into contempt, wherof at that
time some of his company gaue an ill president;
for that present night one of his three ships forsooke
him, and ranne away.

From thence with his two bigger shippes he
went to Legorne, where he stayed eight dayes,
as well to refresh his hurt men, and to furnish
himselfe of fresh water and victuals, which hee
then wanted; as also to receiue directions from
the Duke of Tuscan, during which time diuers
Marchants corrupted his men and made them
mutinous, alleaging that the course hee tooke
was indirect, and dangerous, his plots shallow
and vnlikely to succeed, and that he faild of warrant
and authoritie for his proceedings. Thus
the matter of their mutinie being set on fire,
which burnt vp all dutie in the^, possessing them
with nothing but a neglect of obedience, which
in their lookes, wordes, and behauiours was
soone made knowne. Sir Thomas being much
perplext in minde through this vnnaturall reuolt
of his men, and vsing all meanes he could
to appease them, with much care and discomfort
tooke sea againe. But the third night after
when hee came within kenne of Capaslera, a
Towne in the Island of Scicilia, one Peacocke an
English Pilot, whome not long before hee had
taken in at Legorne, went away with his second
shippe.


Of Sir Thomas his attempts in
Turkie, and the trecherous reuolt
of the rest of his company.
IT is the nature of Fortune seldome
times to bee singular either in her
frownes or fauours, but that one is
commonly heaped on the necke of another,
as appeared in this wayning state of
Sir Thomas his hopes, for the next morning
after this reuolt of Peacocke, a like part was
plaid euen in his own ship, for the most part of
his men begun a dangerous mutiny against
him. They plainly told him that they would
be no longer vnder his command, and did absolutely
refuse to follow the courses and plots
that hee had laid, alleadging with vnkind
wordes and vncomly speeches, that their hopes
and expectations were deceiued of him, that he
was both vncircumspect in his attempts, and
vnfortunate in his actions, they vtterly
dislike his intendments, refusing to heare any
thing that might sound of it, there being no
possibilitie of good, and a certaine and continuall
assurance of danger; lastly they protested
vnto him that they would still keepe the
Sea, and be no longer restrained of their owne

purposes, but lay hold vpon all occasions that
should be offered to inrich themselues, and satisfie
their longing hopes Perfas, aut nefas, by any
meanes whatsoeuer. Sir Thomas being much
perplext with the contempteous and vnruly behauiour
of his men in his own ship first vsed
threats and menaces besitting his place and command:
but the mutinie being general, and that
he that was their Generall being forsaken and
left alone, he did but thereby adde fuel vnto that
fire that raged so fore in the minds and tongues
of his mutinous company, that hee was inforc't
at last to leaue all the extent of the authoritie
of a Commander, and as a common and
a priuate person, with tongue, gesture, and countenance
vnanswerable to his mind, in milde
tearmes and gentle wordes, to intreate them
that they would not thus dispise and forsake
him, whome they before had called their Captaine,
and their Generall, and had vowed to
follow him in all his Fortunes. Let not (quoth
hee) the conceit of our hard successe discourage
your hopes so farre, as to make a desperate account
both of your selues and mee; neither
suffer the remembrance of those runagates that
haue so trecherously forsaken mee, draw you on
to doe the like, by their example, I haue made
choise of you, into whose handes I haue committed
my life, and whatsoeueris deere vnto me.

Two ships I haue already lost, not by the vnsteadfast
fortunes of the Sea, but by the vnfaithfull
dealing of my followers: I haue onely
this one left me, and you in it, in whom I haue
hitherto put a speciall trust; wherein it you likewise
deceiue me, let mee not liue any longer, lest
one day I record the place, where you vnkindly
and vnmanly forsooke, and betrayed your Captaine:
We haue yet a liuing hope of our successe,
which if you kill not by these Mutinous dissentio^s,
may yet ere long inrich your expectations:
for mine owne part, I shall omit nothing that
may doe you good, nor doe any thing vnfit or
vnworthy either your account of mee, or mine
owne reputation.
His men nothing satisfied with these words,
but bearing still a mutinous and rebellious
minde against their Captaine; Sir Thomas in
doubt what to doe, calles before him the Lieuetenant,
the Master his Mate, the Master gunner,
and other principall Officers in the Ship,
and demaunded of them, whether they ioynd in
minde and malice with the company against
him: They answered him, that they had
no such meaning; but protested vnto him, they
were willing to sollow him, and obey him, as it
should please him to dispose of them, and to partake
with him in all his Fortunes. Whereupon
Sir Thomas taking aduantage of their

proffers, ioyned with them in the perswasion of
the rest: and so for the time the mutinie was appeased.
Sir Thomas to keepe his company still
imployed, directed his course towards Millo,
with a purpose to haue taken an English Pirate
that was there; but fowle weather and contrary
winds draue him to Geo: where he found
a Venetian Ship at Anchor: and here againe his
men began to mutinie, and hee had much a doe
to keepe them from spoyling that Ship. The
greedines of that prey, and the ill affection they
had to make triall of their Fortunes, elsewhere,
increased their mutinie extreamely; which with
much adoe, was once againe pacified: and in
this place, by contrary windes, he was forced to
stay eight daies. And to diuert their humor, by
putting Idlenesse from them, hee attempted the
surprizing of an Island belonging to the Turke,
which was not farre off: the inhabitants beeing
both Turkes and Greekes; which in this sort
was managed, and put in execution.
The 15. of Ianuarie 1602. Sir Thomas landed
one hundred of his men betweene 3. or 4. of the
clocke in the morning, the Moone beeing at
full, and shining very cleere; hee diuided them
into two squadrons: whereof the vanguard
was commaunded by his Lieutenant, and hee
himselfe lead the Rere: and thus they marched
vp towards the Towne, beeing three miles distant

from the Sea: after they had passed thorough
a plaine, which was about a Mile in
length, they came to a crooked rocke, through
the which, there was a way cut so narrow, that
not aboue two men could march afronte. Hauing
passed the rocke without any interruption,
they came to a hill, which was very high and
steepe, and hauing recouered the toppe thereof,
they saw the Towne, and were soone masters
thereof, it beeing a place vndefencible: and suddainly
abandoned of the inhabitants, who fled
into the woods and rockes, and other places
vnpassable. Here he gaue charge vpon paine of
death, that no Souldier of his company should
touch the person or goods of any Christian; but
that needed not, for they had carried all their
goods with them, leauing naught behind, but
their naked and empty houses. Being thus in
possession of the Towne, where finding nothing
to satisfie their expectations, and in doubt what
to doe, whether to goe forwarde, or to returne,
he suddainly had intelligence by his Espials,
that a great rabble of the Islanders had gathered
head together, with purposed resolution to
set vpon them, and of greater force then they
were able to withstand: which Sir Thomas
vnderstanding: and perceiuing his men to murmur,
and be afraide, commaunded his Liuetenant
to lead them downe the hill, in a Souldierlike

retreat, and to keepe an easie pace towards
the Shippe, encouraging them not to
feare the number of the Turkes, for that they
were a people in those parts vnpractized and
vnskilfull in any Militarie Discipline, and
their best weapons were but staues and stones.
Hee further gaue directions, that when they
came into the plaine, they should make a stand,
assuring there could bee no danger for them
there: and for his owne part, he promised to doe
the like with the rereward. But his me^ being
now changed from mutiners to cowards, not
obseruing any charge or direction of their Captaine,
without any order posted downe the hill,
as fast as they could trot: which the Rere perceiuing
began to doe the like. Whereupon Sir
Thomas, taking a Gentleman by the hand, we^t
a head the Rere, and so stopt the passage, that
except they would haue trode vpon him, they
could not passe in that troubled and disordered
maner. Here they were sore beaten with stones,
and many of his men hurt, and himselfe hurt in
the legge: howbeit, they maintained skirmish a
while with them, and kild some of them, and
then marched quietly for a quarter of a mile, the
inhabitants still watching all aduantages to
endamage them: but at last they recouered the
plaine, which was within a mile of their Ship;
where, when the Rere perceiued that the Uanguard

was fled so farre before, that they were
ready to goe aboard, they followed as fast after,
leauing their Captaine in the midst of all his
enemies, where hee could not make any of his
men to stay, and share fortunes with him, notwithstanding
be commanded, perswaded, and
intreated all he could.
Sir Thomas beeing thus forsaken of his me^,
and enuironed of his enemies, hauing neither
minde to flie, nor desire to liue with a setled resolution,
and out of all hope of life, yet desirous
to sell it at as deere a rate as he could, prest vpon
his enemies, and hauing tenne Greeks assayling
him at once (onely accompanied with two
that could not escape) forced himselfe to make
way through them, bestowing his blowes on
all sides, that the Islanders themselues well
perceiued, how hard a matter it had beene for
them to haue ouerthrown, or defeated his company,
if the rest had retayned his courage, and
resolution. But hee beeing ouercharged with
multitudes, was in the endesore wounded, and
beaten downe: where beeing thus taken, and
disarmed, they only can iudge, that haue vndergone
the like danger (if any such there be) what
thoughts possessed his minde, when in this
change of Fortune hee found himselfe forsaken
of his own men and nowe in the handes of a trustlesse,
bloody, and barbarous people.



The miserie of Sir Thomas Sherly
his imprisonment in a Turkish
Island.
THough it bee a heauy thing for a man to
fall from a happie and prosperous estate into
a wretched and lamentable condition, yet is
affliction the true and perfect triall or touchstone
of the soule and mind of man: for shee
makes a deepe search into our inward parts,
whether shee can finde a residence of those heauenly
and humane vertues, that in the time of
calamitie ought to be in euery Christian: wherof,
shee found such store in the immutable mind
of this most worthie gentleman, that notwithstanding
this forlorne and miserable change of
his estate, hee neuertheles held on the setled
course of that confidence and constancie, that he
before had in the time of his prosperitie. But to
returne to our History: Sir Thomas and two of
his men being thus taken, and in the hands of
tenne of the Inhabitants, nine of them were
resolued to kil him, howbeit the tenth by intreatie
and perswasion saued his life; but they stript
him of all hee had, euen to his bootes and stockings,
and binding his handes with one of his
garters led him backe bare footed through the

rocke, so into the Towne. In all which time
there was not a Grecian man or woman that
they met by the way, but either did, or assaild to
strike him: His Shippe staide ^. dayes after in
the harbor, but neuer made any attempt either
by force or intreaty for his deliuerie. All the
while the shippe staid there, they kept him in irons,
but when the ship was gone, they tooke
them off, and vsed him in better manner then
he expected from the handes of so barbarous a
people. Here was he kept prisoner for the space
of a whole moneth, and from thence was sent
in a small open boate to Nigro Ponte, and there
deliuered to the Caia, for so is the principall officer
of that Island called: at the first hee was vsed
kindly, and intreated well, but safly kept,
and watched euery night with a guard of eight
men, 4. Turkes, and 4. Greekes. After the end of
fiue dayes, he lent him a Ianissarie to carry his
letters to the English Consul of Petrasle, which
was 5. dayes iourney from thence, howbeit hee
receiued no answere of his letters from the
Consull; but vpon the Ianissaries returne, hee
was presently committed into a darke dungeon,
and with a great gally chaine, bound fast with
a slaue that was before taken, which greeued
him worst of all.
He continued in this loathsome prison, from
the 20. of March, 1602. vntil the 25. of Iuly 1603.

during which time, his best diet was but bread
and water, and his warmest lodging, the cold
ground: hauing oftentimes besides the miserie
of his imprisonment, many threates and menaces
sent him, sometimes of death, sometimes of
the Gallies; being thus out of al hope of liberty,
and in a daily expectation of death, without any
comfort, but such as his patience ministred vnto
him, where nothing was presented to the eye,
or eare, but matter of horror and dispaire; yet
did he still retaine in his mind, that guidance and
command of his affections, as they were neuer
much moued, or inwardly disturbed with the
outward distraction of his sences. In this time
hee wrote diuerse letters to the English Embassador
at Constantinople, intreating him that
in regard of his country, hee would deale with
the Admirall Bashaw (whose prisoner he in right
was) for his inlargement, protesting that as
he was a gentleman, (whose name and family
hee knew well) he would in as short time as he
could postbly requite his kindnes at full to his
contentment. But prisons are like graues,
where a man, though aliue, is neuertheles buried
from the regard, or respect of any; for the
Embassador did not answere any of his letters,
but told the Bashaw hee might vse him according
to his discretion. During this time of his
miserable imprisonment, some or other had enformed

the Bashaw, that hee was able to pay 50.
thousand Chickeno's for his ransome: whereupon
the Bashaw sent him guarded by 4. Cappages,
(whome wee here call Pursiuants) from
Nigro Ponte to Constantinople. Thus were his
miseries ended in one place, to bee begun and
continued in another.


His miserie in his imprisonment
in Constantinople.
THe sicke man that shifteth place, yet alters
not his disease, findes little comfort in the
change of ayre, or climate, for that the nature
of sicknes doth kill, or controule that pleasure
and delight, which commonly keepes company
with a healthfull bodie. Such was the conditio^
of Sir Thomas in his remoue from Nigro Ponte
to Constantinople, for both his vsage by the way,
and his entertainment there gaue him small
cause of comfort, in that only he found the place
was changed, but not the nature of his imprisonment.
Betweene Nigro Ponte and Constantinople is
fiue hundreth miles, and all that way he was carried
vpon a Moyle, riding vpon a pack-saddle
with a great gally chaine about his legges, and
another about his waste, and many times his

legges bound vnder the horse belly, sometimes
he lay in houses, sometimes vnder trees, and
whensoeuer he lay in any Towne where there
were any stocks, there they lodged him: and when
they faild of such a place, they bound his legges
together with a little chayne, besides the great
chaine about his waste, and his hands fast lockt
with manacles of iron: his guard were the 4.
Cappages which were sent by the Bashaw: It
would haue moued the patience of the best
tempered mind, to heare, and be forced to indure
the dispightful taunts and approbrious speeches,
which though not by their language, yet by
their stearne countenances and behauiours, he
might well vnderstand in all his iourney between
Nigro Ponte, and Co^stantinople, The 12. day
after their setting forth, about three of the clock
in the after noone, they entred the Cittie: Immediately
vpon his co^ming, he wrote againe to
the Embassadour giuing him to vnderstand the
cause of his imprisonment, together with the
manner of his former vsage, and the nature of
his present misery: he much importund him that
he would not leaue him in his calamitie, nor suffer
him, being his Countryman, and a Gentleman,
to spend his hope, his youth, his fortune,
nay his life, in so vild and dishonorable a prison,
vnder the cruell tyranny of an vnbeleeuing people.
But hee flatly sent him word, That hee

would neither meddle nor make with him. Sir
Thomas being thus left all desolate and disconsolate,
stil armed himselfe with his wonted patience,
and setled confidence against the horror
of despaire, not suffering his minde to bee chained,
and fettered (as his bodie) with seruile
thoughts and fearefull apprehensions; but in
the freedome of his Spirite maintayned her libertie,
and in the midst of all his feares, made
hope the predominant.
The next day after his co^ming to the Cittie,
he was brought before the Bashaw, who demanded
what he made in the Arches, and why
in that hostile maner against the law of Armes,
and conditio^ of the League betwixt both kingdomes,
without any leaue or admittance, hee
had landed a forcible power, with purpose to
spoyle and prey in that part of the Turkes Dominion?
sir Tho. answered, that being violently
driuen into wants by the Fortunes of the sea
and his long trauels, hee was compelled to
land, onely to refresh his men, and the rather in
that country which hee knew to bee friend vnto
his King. The Bashaw replyed againe, that his
entrance was against law, and right and that
hee was iustly his prisoner, and therupon asked
him presently, and in peremptory manner, what
ransome hee would pay for his deliuery? Sir
Thomas told him he knew no reaso^ he should be

enforced to pay any ransome being in a friendes
hands, whome neither in substance nor circumstance
he had offended: and that if his cause were
rightly scand by an impartial Iudge, together
with the long time and vilde manner of his imprisonment,
it would bee thought but equity,
that he himselfe should both require, and receiue
a sufficient recompence for the wrongs and miseries
that he had sustained. Finally, he told the
Bashaw that he held him in his own conceit and
opinion, to be too iust, and honorable to demand
a ransome of him, that neuer deserued to bee a
prisoner. But (to be briefe) the Bashaw told him
that he knew he was a malefactor, and that his
acts were violent and indirect, which hee auerd
he could not answere, or otherwise the Embassadour
would not haue abandoned him: withal
protested with a high voyce, and stearne countena^ce,
that he would haue 50. thousand Chickeno's
for his ransome, or his head for satisfaction.
sir Tho. doubting the crueltie of this barbarous
Turke, and being much wearied and weakned
with the misery of a long and vilde imprisonment,
to buy some ease and quietnes, was content
to promise the payment of 12. thousand
Chickeno's, with condition that hee might bee
well vsed, and weare no more irons: the proffer
was neither taken, nor refused; howbeit a promise
was made that he should be wel intreated,

but it was slenderly kept; for hee was had presently
into the porters lodge in the great Turks
Court, and put into a filthy common Gaole;
where, though the first night hee had a good
supper, hee founde no other bedde to lie vpon,
but the colde stones: Now ebeit, this had beene
well, if worse had not succeeded: for the Bashaw
belike hauing new intelligence both of his state
and aliance, and supposing that no better meanes
could bee vsed for the recouery of his ransome,
then rough handling, gaue straite charge that
he should from time to time be worser handled
then hitherto he had beene, since the first time of
his imprisonment.
Whereupon, the next morning at breake of
day hee was remooued to a worser place, and
both his feete put into the Stockes, a great
yron chaine about his necke, both his hands tied
before him, and his body stretcht out all along,
with a great sharpe stone laied vnder the
raines of his backe; so that it was impossible
for him to stirre, beeing also vexed continually
with lyee, which was not the least torment hee
endured: so that hee often wished that the sentence
of his death had beene pronounced, and did
willingly frame his thoughts, and order his
minde, to entertaine with patience the destinie
of such a doome: for this miserie toucht him so

neere, that he was content to relinquish all hope
and desire of life, and to meditate on nothing,
but of death.
He continued in this estate, from Saturday
the 23 of August, 1603. vntill the Tuesday following*
in which time, hee was suffered to rise
but 4. times in 24. houres. That Twesday, about
nine of the clocke, he was brought againe
into the presence of the Bashaw, as he fate in ope^
Court, where he renued his olde demaunde of
filtie thousand Chickeno's. All Christian Embassadours
haue in the Bashawes Court continually
two Interpreters, to haue a care and regard
of such causes and occurrents, as may
concerne their Country. This day the English
Embassador had none there, belike to avoyde
the unportunities that Sir Thomas in this his
Tragicke state might haue vsed. But to return
to the Bashaw his demand: Sir Thomas answered
him, that hee found little constancy in his
wordes; that if his life might make satisfaction,
that was in his power: and more iust, and
honourable it were for him to take it, then to
prolong it still with torment: for his own part,
hee would promise no more, because hee could
performe no more. To be briefe, he told him, hee
might haue his life, but neuer his demaund.
The Bashaw neuer replied, but presently commanded
his head should bee stricken off. But

though he was rash in the doome, he did deliberate
in the deede: for Sir Thomas was carried
backe into prison, where though hee found rather
an increase, then any mittigation of his former
torments, yet was his life still
preserued by the miraculous
power of Almightie
God.



The Continuation of Sir Thomas
Sherleys miserie in his imprisonment
in Constantinople.
SIr Thomas beeing thus returned into prison,
and his old torments renuing, hauing
small hope of life, and lesse expectation of
release, euery houre awayting the execution of
his doome; a certaine Iewe dwelling in the Citie,
vnderstanding his imprisonment, and his
vild manner of handling; and that he was also
a Gentleman of account, and estimation in his
Country: in pittie and compassion of his estate,
found the meanes to come and speake with
him in prison: where, after a few salutations,
the Iew reasoned with him in this manner. As
you are a stranger both by your birth, and language,
to this Nation; so you also seeme to bee
strange and ignorant of their Natures and Conditions.
I haue heard of your long imprisonment,
and though I know not the cause, yet I
grieue much at the manner of your handling.
You shall doe well in this, rather to follow my
counsell, that haue a little experience of their customes,
then wilfully to cast your selfe away by
ignorance. Be ruled by me, and make promise
of this great summe of money to the Bashawe,

but take a long time for the paiment. It can bee
no way preiudiciall to you, if you way your
owne state, and his case aright: for if your King
hold his amitie with the Turke, and that the
league bee continued, whereof there is yet no
doubt, you may before the prefixt day taken for
the payment, by the benefit of your King, bee
freed without ransome. If that faile, and a farre
lesse summe be brought in the meane time, and
that he findes there is small hope of more; they
will rather accept that, though it be little, then
hazard your life, and so loose all. And I will also
giue you a further comfort, which though it
proceedes but from mine owne opinion, without
particular intelligence of any such matter,
(for in this blindfolded state of Turkie, men may
obserue, howbeit knowe nothing, but to obey:)
This Bashaw, this great aduersarie of yours,
that now hath your life in pursuite, is like ere
long to loose his owne, for the nature and qualitie
of his place will not hold an officer long.
Sir Thomas hauing a Woolfe by the eare,
wherein there was danger, either to hold or let
goe* doubting whether he were best follow the
counsell of a Iewe, or trust the cruelty of a Turke:
yet hauing well wayed his wordes, wherein he
could finde nothing that sauoured of deceipt, hee
thought it best to follow his aduice. And so holding
that determination, he found means shortly

to send vnto the Bashaw, to whom he promised
fourtie thousand Chickeno's, conditionally
to haue reasonable day for the paiment, and in
the meane time to be vsed like a Gentleman, to
bee kept in a house by himselfe, and not to bee
troubled with all manner of Rascals: to haue
allowed him two hundred Aspers a day for his
diet, which is tenne shillings sterling, and a seruant
to waite vpon him.
The Bashaw was glad to receiue this proffer,
and promised him more then he demanded: that
he should haue a good house, and a faire garden;
that he should haue two hundred Aspers a day
allowed him, and two seruants, at his choyce,
either men or women to attend vpon him: and
that for his money he should haue good meate,
and wine, because (quoth the Bashaw) I wil haue
you contented.
Though Sir Thomas was glad of this
proffer, yet was there an occasion ministred
very soone after to dislike it: for the next
day the English Embassadour wrote vnto him
that hee was as sorry for his error, as for his
imprisonment, and that hee intangled himselfe
into an intricate laborinth; out of the which, he
could not winde himselfe, without payment of
the money. He therefore aduised him, to reuoke
his promise, and by no meanes to accept the Bashawes
proffer: for if he did, he was either tied to

his worde, or his life to the Turkes disposing:
and to comfort him withall, hee told him that
within tenne daies hee would procure his
release, get him home to his owne house, and
become his Baile.
Whereupon Sir Thomas trusting the Embassadours
promise, refused the Bashawes proffer,
and so was carried backe into his olde prison,
where with great miserie and distresse, hee
lay long after.
About Michaelmas after, this Visior Bashawe
his great Aduersarie was hangd, according to
the Iewes Prophecie, which gaue him cause to
entertaine a newe hope of his Deliuerie: for
presently vpon the death of the Bashawe, hee
wrote agame to the Embassadour, requesting
him that now he would remember him, or neuer,
for nowe was the time, if it pleased him to
extend his eredit in the Court, to procure his
Release, his Aduersarie beeing dead, and no
barre in the way to hinder it: and this hee did
with the greater instance importune, because
(quoth hee) I am not able to holde out long,
hauing endured so many grieuous, and strange
afflictions: and beeing so much weakened with
the tedious and miserable indurance of the
same.
Howbeit, the Embassadour returned him

this discomfortable answere, That hee coulde
doe nothing, till there were a newe Visior Bashawe
ordained in his place, and then he would
doe what he could for him.
It was tenne daies before there was a new
one made: As soone as hee was installed, the
Embassadour (as Sir Thomas was informed)
dealt with him for his libertie: but to no
purpose, for the Bashaw answered him, that it
lay not in his power to doe him any good, for
that hee was a prisoner belonging to the great
Turke, and therefore could not bee deliuered
without his consent. Wherupon the Embassadour
preferred a petition to the great Turke in
his behalfe, who presently gaue commandement
hee should bee enlarged the day following,
which was Thursday: and vndoubtedly,
had the Embassadour not slacked this matter,
but presently laied hold vpon the Turkes commaund,
it had beene an easie matter to haue
set him at libertie that night. But whether it
was the too much confidence that hee had in
the Turkes variable and vncertaine humour, or
that other businesse and intendements of his
owne carried his thoughts other waies* or that
it was so ordained, that Sir Thomas his miseries
should not yet haue ende, I cannot tell,
but the matter of his release was lingred, till

the Sunday following. At which time, vpon
new aduertisements the commandement of
his libertie was reuersed, and hee retained stil
in prison, loaden with more cares, and
lesse hope then euer he
had.



The maner of Sir Thomas Sherley
his deliuery, by the benefit of the
King of Englands princely and
gratious letters to the
Turke.
THe Marchant after a long, and dangerous
voyage, hauing recouered with safetie the
Hauen of his desire, though vtterly lost the fruit
of all his labours, recounts with pleasure the
perils past, leauing a glad memoriall to be told
in after times by his posteritie: for Contraria
contrariis magis elucescunt, Contrary is best
knowne by his contrary: we should neuer know
the excellencie of rest, but by labour; nor of plentie
but by want; nor of safty but by danger; nor
of libertie, but by restraint. And I doubt not
also but sir Thomas, together with the pleasure
that he now conceiues in the remembrance
of his forepassed miseries, doth not forget in his
daily prayers the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiuing,
vnto that diuine power that preserued
him so wonderfully in all his troubles, and deliuered
him so happily, euen from the very gate,
and gulfe of death and danger. But to returne
to Turkie, for wee haue not yet brought him to

England. Within a fortnight after the countermaund
of his deliuery, the great Turke died-leauing
his sonne, (a boy of some 14. yeares) to
succeed him: sir Thomas in this new world, retaines
a new hope of his deliuery, and not slacking
to lay hold of any occasion, writes againe to
the Embassadour, requesting him with much
importunitie, that it would please him to take
the opportunitie of this tune for his release, for
that he had a hope, the yong King whose mind
was flexible, might easily bee wrought to deale
gratiously with him. Howbeit the Embassadour
sent him word, that they boy King could
do him no good, he being by reason of his youth
vnder gouernment and protection; till either the
Admirall came, who was then vpon the confines
of Turkie; or the Protector, who was
shortly to returne out of Egypt. At the arriuall
of either of them (whosoeuer was first) he protested
he would sollicite him in his behalfe, and
doubt not but hee should soone worke the
meanes of his deliuery; in the meane time hee
willed him to comfort himselfe, for he would not
pretermit any occasion proffered to doe him
good Sir Thomas lingered on this hope, and
bare out the brunt of many a cold and bitter
houre, vntill the first of December, at what time
the Admirall was returned: who being importuned
by the Embassador; answere was made,

that hee would not deale with the Prisoner, till
the comming of the Protector. Not long after
the Protector returned, whome the Embassador
belike finding vntractable, soone gaue ouer
his suite.
The first day the Protector sate in Iudgement,
was Christmas day, before whome Sir
Thomas was sent for to appeare, and this day also
the Embassadour had no Interpreter there.
The Visior Bashaw hauing called him before
him, askt him why hee was committed to prison?
Sir Thomas answered boldly, that his
fortune, and the mistaking of his attempt and
enterprise in the Island was first the cause of
his restraint, but the malice and ill opinion that
Hashan Bashaw conceiued against him, without
cause, had held him so long, a poore and miserable
prisoner: Honorably desiring the Protector,
that sith there was nothing questionable
that might touch his life, except the enforc't
power, and extent of authoritie; and that if any
fault were committed, his punishment was
greater then the cryme: That it would please
him now at last to giue him his liberty. But
here was no such grace seated in the Protectors
heart, for without any reply, processe, or order
of law, he gaue a present, and peremptory
command, That hee with his two men should bee
hang'd. It booted him not to aske why; but
hauing prepared his mind before to such an

horror, and liuing long in a continuall expectance
thereof, hee yeelded himselfe willingly
thereunto; for he knew wel that nought but his
death would satisfie the doome. Hereupon was
sir Thomas and his two men bound all together,
and lead presently away towards the place of
execution: what could he wish in such a case (besides
his diuine meditations) but that his
mind and thoughts might suddainly bee transported
into England, to execute his tongues
office, (that is) to commend his humble dutie to
his Father, and his kind remembrance to his
friends and allyes; to let them vnderstand the
miseries of his imprisonment, and the vildnes
of his death, occasioned by the trecherie and cowardice
of his own men: from thence he might
wish them sodainly posted to Spaine and Persia,
that his honorable brethren might vnderstand
the manner of his life and death, that in their
hostile imployments against the Turkes, they
might bee sufficiently reuenged of his death.
But God did suddainly possesse the heart of one
of the Interpreters to the Venetian Embassador
with a Christian pittie, and regard of his estate,
who sodainly repaired (for otherwise that
had bin too late) to the Protector, beseeching
him that hee would not in his furie take away
the life of so gallant a gentleman, vpon bare
surmises that if he held him worthily a prisoner,

(and that but supposed) being no greater, it
might please him rather to take his ransome,
then his life. At the first the Protector was very
obstinate, being importuned, and hauing a
hope of the gaine of 40. thousand Chickeno's,
(which were proffered) made him a little to relent:
and so hee commanded to stay his Execution.
Thus Sir Thomas brought from the
place of death, and presently carryed to another
place little better, it being a prison called
the seue^ Towers, where he was put into a miserable
darke dungeon, and extreame cold.
There he continued till one of the clocke in the
afternoone the next day; at which time the
Embassador hauing vnderstood of the misery
of that place, sent one of hismen to the Gaoler
to intreat him, that hee might bee remoued to
some better place: whereupon hee was had out
of the dungeon, and put together with his two
men, into a little shed, but two yardes square,
built against a wall; hauing neither cloathes,
bed, fire, nor any good meat. In this state hee
continued foureteene dayes, in extreame cold,
weather, of frost and snow: during which time,
one of his men perished, and died euen of very
cold: and he himselfe was so benummed in all
his limbes, as he feared he should neuer againe
haue the vse of them. In this poore estate hee
continued till the beginning of Aprill, 1604, at

which time there were Letters sent from the
Kings Maiestie to the great Turke, and money
from his Father; for before that time, hee had
receiued no newes out of England: But whether
by negligence, or some ill accident, the letters
were lost; Notwithsta^ding, by reason of his
money, he was admitted to buy a Chamber,
and to hire a Seruant to attend vpon him, being
stil a prisoner, and hauing a watchful guard
about him. Thus he continued till the Christmas
following; In which time his father hauing
vnderstanding of his great miserie sustayned,
together with the losse of his Maiesties
former Letters, and his Sonnes present case
(as it stood) became againe an humble suiter to
the King in his Sonnes behalfe, and eftsoones
obtained his Maiesties gratious letters to the
great Turke for his deliuery: howbeit those letters
did not worke his release, for hee was still
continued in prison: But by meanes of them he
had not torture, nor torment inflicted vpon him,
as before, but continued a prisoner till the middle
of Nouember. 1605. It which time his Maiesty
of his Princely grace and fauour, directed
new Letters to the Turke, of greater force
then before: by veriue of which, and God assisting)
he was deliuered, vpon friday, the sixt
of December, in the yeare aforesaid: which was
in this manner. The Protector Bashaw that

day came in person to the prison, and causing
him to be brought forth; deliuered him, together
with his man, into the hands of the Lord Embassador
with these wordes, Hee is your Prisoner
till the morning. Thus being deliuered, but
not absolutely freed; the Lord Embassador receiued
him, promising to send him the next
morning to the Duana, which is the name they
giue to their principall, Court: because the
Bashaw tould him the Emperour held him to
be his lawfull prisoner, and that he had forfeited
his life vnto him. Howbeit to gratifie the Ma.
of England, hee was pleased to giue him as a
present to his King, and therefore hee should be
deliuered to his Ma. officers in open Court.
The next day following, beeing Saturday,
he was brought into the Duana, there was no
great doubt or question made of his deliuery,
onely the Testados (who is, as we tearme him,
the L. Treasurer) cast forth a word about the
Kings Letters, aduising the Bashaw to consider
what he did, in the deliuery of him, for that hee
seemed to be a great man.
The Cadiliscar, (that is as it were the chiefe
Iudge in deciding mens causes) answered, hee
knew that well enough, and it was so generall
vnderstood, for so great Kings, (quoth he) as is
the Maiestie of England, vse not to write for
meane men; and that their Emperour had freely

giuen him to the King of great Britaine, and
therefore willed him to holde his peace: but his
man ran a daugerous fortune that day, for diuers
great men of the court stood much against
him, affirming the Bashaw had no reason to deliuer
him, because he was neither mentioned in
his Maiesties Letters, nor in the Emperours
graunt. But the Bashaw hauing vnder hand
the pronuse of a great summe of money, after a
speech made, and some solemnitie vsed, deliuered
both. Howbeit, the Monday following, beeing
the 16. of December, remembring himselfe began
to finde his error, and to bee afraid that hee had
runne into danger for releasing of his man, and
thereupon presently sent to the Lord Embassadour,
that hee would send both Sir Thomas and
his man to him againe. The L. Embassadour
went to the Bashaw himselfe, refusing to send either
of them backe, and with much adoe perswaded
the Bashaw, for though he found no danger
in Sir Thomas, yet hee teared much the Bashaw
had a purpose to stay his man: and Sir
Thomas was very loath to haue his man returned
againe to his miserable kennell. The
Turke is very strickt and prccise in punishing
faults in his Officers, for that very Euening
the Bashaw was depriued of his place, for ro other
cause, but deliuering of his man without
Commission.

Thus ended the tedious trouble and miserie
of Sir Thomas Sherley in his imprisonment,
which beginning in the Island where he was
first taken, the 15. of Ianuarie, in the yeare 1602.
was afterwards continued in Nigro Ponte, and
at last ended in Constantinople vpon a friday
the 6. of December, 1605. So that the whole
time of his imprisonment was 3. yeares, sauing
a fewe daies. And here is to bee noted what a
stampe and impression of duty and regard the
countenance of a Kings Letter makes in the
hearts of subiects, though in places farre remote.
For the Embassadour that before that
time did but faintly assist him in all his atte^pts
and intreaties, and was many times afraid to
speake in his behalfe, and often refused to trouble
himselfe in this businesse; vpon the receit of
his Maiesties Letters, stood so stoutly by him,
that he flatly refused to send Sir Thomas or his
man backe, notwithstanding the strickt command
of the Visior Bashaw, who in his place
was a man of principall authoritie in the countrey.
Sir Thomas staied in Constantinople (a
free man) from the time of his deliuerie, which
was the 6. of December, vntill the 15. of Februarie
following, 1605. during which time, hee tooke
pleasure to solace himselfe there, where before
he had endured so much sorrow and miserie, taking
a view and surucy of the seat, and scituation

of the Citie obseruing their lawes, customs,
and ceremonies, beholding their Courts, Synagogues,
and Temples, with other things
not vnworthy a strangers obseruation. And
vpon the 15. of February hee departed from Constantinople
in a Ragousian Ship, called the Maria
de la Rosaria, and landed at Callipoly the 19. of
the same moneth, from the^ce to Naples, and so at
last to England: where beeing ioyfully receiued
of his Father, and his Friends, hee
now liues by the benefit of his
Maiesties fauour.
FINIS.





@ SIR ANTHONY
Sherley his Aduentures, and Voyage
into Persia.
MAnkind doeth vniustly, and
without cause complaine of
the state and condition of his
life, for that it is fraile, subiect
to infirmities, of a short continuance,
and gouerned rather
by Fortune, then by
Uertue. But if we shall consider
what excellent sparks
of ornament there are yet left in Mans nature, notwithstanding
the soyle of some, which by the corruption of
Adam, is vniuersally centracted vnto all: and that we
would but descend into our mindes, to see what matter
of worth there is, or might be lodged there, both for
the life, Actiue, and Contemplatiue: we should not find
Mankinde so wholly depraued in his degenerate nature:
but that we may obserue some signes and tokens
yet left in him, of the notable light and resplendant
beautie of his first creation, which by the two principall
parts whereon the mind consisteth, viz. Vnderstanding
and Will, and the faculties belonging vnto them, may
easily be made mauinifest, what notable memorials both
of their studies, and trauels, haue beene recorded to the
world, and worthy to bee continued to all ages, vntill

the end of time, and the beginning of eternitie, by the
naturall instinct, and industrious labours of the mind,
to checke and controll the dull and sluggish conditions
of such men, as in their home-bred affections consume
their time in base humor, and the delights of idle pleasure.
And when I thinke vpon the circumstance of the
subiect I am to intreat of, I am drawne into an admiration,
that Sir Anthony Sherley, hauing so slender beginnings,
should neuerthelesse continue that state, cou^tenance,
and reckoning, as hee hath done euer since his
departure out of England, euen in the Courts of the
greatest Princes, in, and out of Christendome: so farre
exceeding Stukeley, that I am afraid to bee taxed of an
impartiall, and rash iudgement, but to intimate a comparison
between them, there being so great difference,
both in the manner of their trauels, the nature of their
imployments, and the ende of their intendements. The
one hauing his desire vpon a luxurious, and libidiuous
life: The other hauing principally before him, the proiect
of honour: which, not in treacherous designes (as
Stukeley attempted in the behalfe of the Pope, against
his Countrie) he hath impaired, or crazed: But contrariwise
hath so inlarged, and enhaunsed the same, that his
fame and renowne is knowne, and made glorious to
the world, by his honourable plots and imployments, against
the enemie of Christendome: which, according to
the instructions I haue receiued, I will briefly relate
vnto you.
After Sir Anthony his departure out of England, he
landed in a short time at Vlishing, where beeing honorably
entertained, and feasted by the Lord Sidney, Lord
Gouernor of the Garrison, hee held on his iourney towards
the Hague, as well to visit his Excellencie, as to

receiue his passe for his better conuoy through the
Countrey. From thence he past along by many parts
of Germanie, as Franckford, Noremberge, and so to
Augusta, and from thence passed the Alpes, and within
10. dayes after came to Venice, hauing a purpose
from thence, to take his course to Ferrara, in aydance
of the Duke against the Pope. But the matter being
before compounded, and agreed betweene them, that
iourney was stayed.
He continued for the space of 10 weekes in Venice,
where the Duke gaue him Princely entertainment*
sending a mightie and Courtly banquet vnto him, of al
sorts, of Italian delicates: but being soone tyred with
the pleasures of Venice, in May following, hauing
with others compounded for one Italian shippe, in one
and twentie dayes he landed in an Island called Zane.
In which time hee was much distressed for want of
victuals, certaine Italians being in the shippe, vsing
them vnkindly, of whome they could not get any for
loue or money. Howbeit some Persians that were likewise
in the shippe, releeued them, and did very kindly
supplie their wants. There fell also a iarre between the
English, and the Italians, about the baffeling of one of
their Countrey, for wordes of Contumely, spoken against
the late Queenes Maiestie, which iu the end was
pacified to the disgrace of the Italians, and the honour of
the English. At Zane he stayed 10. dayes, and was driuen
to take Sea in a little old open boate, in which he passed
with danger into the Isle of Candie, where he stay.
12. dayes, and was honourably intreated of the Gouernour
of that Isle, it being vnder the Venetia^ State.
From thence he passed into the Isle of Ciprus, which is
part of the Turkes Dominions: Here the Italians that

before had iarred with them in the shippe (being landed
before them in the Island, and bearing in mind their
old grudge) had so incensed the Inhabitants of Ciprus
against Sir Anthony, and his company, by telling
them that they were Pirates, and Rouers, wayting
onely for prey aud spoyle: that Sir Anthony and his
company were no sooner la^ded, but they were stayed by
the Turkes, and threatned to be sent prisoners to Constantinople,
but this storme was with a little money
soone ouerblowne.
From Ciprus hee purposed to passe into the holy
Land, and had hyred a little boate of some tenne tunne
for that passage, but contrary windes droue him vpon
Trypoly, passing the famous riuer of Orontes, where
they were driuen to endure many villanies, and approbrious
speeches by the Turkes that dwelt vpon the
borders of that Riuer. From hence he sent to Antioch,
to hire certaine Ianissaries to safeconduit him to Aleppo,
being 6. dayes iourney. At Aleppo he was much
honoured, and respected by the English Consull, and
other Marchants there resident. Sir Anthony stayed
at Aleppo 6. weekes, after which, hauing receiued the
Bashaws passe, (which is gouernour of that place) together
with the Consuls, and Vicconsuls for their safeconduit,
through the heart of Turkes Countrie, hee prosecuted
his iournie through the heart of Turkie, which he found
to bee much vnanswerable for the strength and populausnes,
to the report and opinion that the world conceiues
of it. From Aleppo he came to a towne called
Birrah, by which runnes the famous riuer of Euphrates,
that parteth the two Countries of Mesopotamia,
and Syria: From hence after 7. or 8. dayes tarriance,
hee sailed in the company of certaine Turkish Marchchants

along Euphrates, by the space of 2. or 3. and twentie
dayes, and were stayed by the King of Arabs, (his
Court and abiding being at that time vpon the Riuer
side in Tents) Before whome, Sir Anthony and his
company being brought (after they had kist his hands)
he demanded what they were? Answere being made
they were English Marchants, and come to trafficke in
those parts: the King was very desirous to see their
Marchandize, which they not daring to contradict; hee
borrowed without any specialtie, thirtie yardes of the
richest cloth of siluer, to be payed, ad Calendas Graecas.
From thence hee iournied to Babylon, where, by the
Bashaw, all his goodes were stayd, and arrested to bee
sold at his rate: and they were constrayned to take halfe
that they were worth for payment. Hee also extorted a
great deale of plate from Sir Anthony, made of pure
Emerald, which hee pretended to send as a present to
the Persian King. Hauing stayed a monteh or more in
Babylon, hee receiued Letters from Aleppo, wherein
hee was councelled to make what hast hee could from
thence, for that their were letters shortly to come to Babylon,
by which the Bashaw had a strict commaund to
make stay of him, and all his company: whereupon sit
Anthony made what hast he could out of Babylon, being
both wearie of his entertainment there, and throughly
weakned with this newes, and so passed through
the waste Countrey of the Medes, in company of a Carauan,
which is a great many Camels together, and
men to driue them not much vnlike to our English
Carriars. Within sixe dayes after they entred the Consines
of Persia.


Of Sir Anthony Sherleys entertainment in
Persia, and of his imployments to many
Christian Princes, to ioyne in League
against the Turke.
TO set downe the whole proces of Sir Anthony his
voiages and trauels, both by Sea, and Land, with
his variable fortunes in them, from the time of his departure
out of England, till his comming into Persia,
and the manner of his receiuing, and vsage in seuerall
Courts of many forraine Princes, were a Subiect of
it selfe, fit for a large volume, which happely my selfe
or some other more worthy (vpon better intelligence of
the occurrents thereof) may hereafter publish to the
world, as a matter worthy of memoriall. I will now
relate his comming into Persia, his honorable entertainment
there, and high imployments in those partes,
according to the notes and instructions I haue receiued.
Sir Anthony after his long and wearie iourneis, at
last entered ye King of Persia his Countrey, hauing his
brother Robert Sherly in his company, who still continued
with him in all his trauels, a kind and naturall
partaker of all his fortunes. He found his entertainment
good, the climate healthfully, the soyle fruitfull;
and full of pleasure; the people ciuill, and very gentle;
farre differing from the nature of the Turkes, whose
Countrey hee had already passed: Insomuch that hee
wondred with himselfe, that being so little difference
(as there is) betweene them in climate, there should
be so great diuersitie in condition. The borderers vnderstanding
that his comming was to their King, attended

him with the more regard, and obseruance, and
still as he past, sent past before to the principall Officers
of their townes, and citties, to giue notice of his comming,
where he wanted not any thing that was worthy
of acceptance, both for himselfe, and his traine. When
he came neere Casbin (their Capital city in those parts)
he sent word to the principall Gouernor, to giue him to
vnderstand what he was, and that hee was come to see
the King, hearing of his worth. Whereupon the Gouernour
prepared one of the Kings horses for him, richly
furnished, and appointed many gentleman of the best
reckoning to entertaine him But Sir Anthony not desirous
of any solemne entertainment, beeing in his trauelling
apparell, (his carriage yet behinde) and vnfurnished
of shewe, stole by night at vnawares into the citie.
Howbeit the Gouernor, the next morning, accompanied
with diuers of the chiefe Gentlemen of the Kings
house, with certaine Officers also of the Citie, came to
his lodging, where after many Courtly salutations, according
to the custome of the Countrey, hee told him, he
was welcom, and that his presence would be very gratious,
and acceptable to the King: in whose absence, hee
should not want those things, which either his owne
worth deserued, or the citie could affoard, for his pleasure,
or prouision: and that hee would speedily direct
Posts vnto the King (who was then in Person in the
warres of the Tartarians, his borderers) to inform his
Maiestie of his comming: and that in the meane time he
would rest, and solace himselfe in the Citie. Sir Anthony
gaue him thanks, and after some complement between
them, they parted for the cime each from other.
The next day, a post was dispatched to the King to
giue him notice, that a Christian, a man of some account

and reckoning, very well accompanied, vnderstanding
of his great fame and power, was come from farre to
see him, and to doe him honour.
The King sent word backe, that he should be well intreated,
vntill his owne returne. In which meane time,
the Gouernor of the citie, and the Kings Steward, did
many times feast Sir Anthony, and his company, bringing
them to the Kings Palace gate, to doe that homage
that all Strangers vse to doe: viz. To kisse the entrance
of his Palace 3. times.
Not many daies after, the King made his returne towards
Casbin, and approching neere vnto the citie, sent
to the Gouernor, giuing him commandement, that hee
should furnish Sir Anthony and his company with horses,
the next day to meete him on his way, beeing then
not farre from the cittie. Which beeing performed accordingly,
Sir Anthony set forward towards the King, in
this manner.
His whole company past not the number of xxvi.
their apparell beeing rich, and differing from the Persians,
made a faire and delightfull shewe: Sir Anthony
himselfe in cloath of gold, and his brother Robert in
cloth of siluer, both their vpper and vnder coates: some
Gentlemen of his traine, hauing their vpper ceats of
cloth of siluer, their nether coates of silke. The chiefe of
his seruants in silke vnder coats, the vpper crimson veluet:
the rest in a faire kind of stuffe, all their vpper coats
beeing watched Damaske. The King came forward, in
princely and triumphant manner, in honor of a late obtained
victory, against the Tartars: hauing a thousand
of their heads aduanced vpon Pikes, and carried before
him, according to the custome of the countrey.
Sir Anthony beeing brought in presence of the King,

dismounted his horse, obseruing the manner of the countrey,
and comming towards the King, bowed downe
his body, to kisse his foote: which the King perceiuing,
did preuent, for in an vnusuall manner he suddainly put
his hand betweene his mouth, and his foote, and so in a
princely fauour gaue him his hand to kisse. The rest of
his company, according to the custome, performed that
dutie.
The King hauing welcomed Sir Anthony, caused
him againe to be mounted, and so holding their way towards
the city, Sir Anthony riding next vnto the King:
many signes and tokens of fauour and accepta^ce were
all the way shewed vnto him.
Hauing entered the citie, and the state and solemnity
of the triumph beeing that time to be performed, according
to the custome, in honour of the late succesull victorie,
the King commaunded one of his greatest men to
accompany Sir Anthony, and to conuey him and his
company to the principall place of the city, there to behold
the solemne manner of the triumph. Which done,
and the King repaired to his Palace, he caused Sir Anthony
to bee brought before him: who beeing by the
Kings appointment, and his brother placed neere vnto
him, sitting vpon his Throne, where he discoursed vnto
the Sophi of Persia, his countrey, the state, power, and
Maiestie of his Prince, the religion, and conditions of
the people, the manner of gouernment, with the nature
and discipline of their warres: then he descended to particularize
the cause, and the seuerall occurrents of his
Trauels: Lastly, he declared the speciall matter and occasion
that drew him into Persia: namely the fame and
renowne that he heard of his Actes and Gouernment,
and the inueterate hatred hee bare vnto the Turkes.

The King was highly pleased with his discourse, and al
this while hauing well obserued his speech, gesture, and
countenance, hee held him in his conceipt to bee of very
honourable reckoning, which after Princely thankes
giuen, and many graces and fauours showne, hee made
manifest: for he tooke Sir Anthony by the hand, and leade
him into other inward Chambers, where beeing that
night royally feasted, hee was after Supper by many
principall Gentlemen of the Court, conuayed and attended
to his lodging, which in a farre more sumptuous
manner then before, was newly prouided for him.
Not many daies after, the Persian King sent him a rich
and costly present by his Steward, to demonstrate his
loue, and the account and estimation
he had of him.



Of the Manners, Conditions, and Customes
of the Persians.
OUr English nation within these fewe yeares, by
reason of their trauels (wherein I suppose they are
at this day second to no countrey) haue such knowledge,
and experience of all people, of their customs and
conditions, that it is an easie matter to controll a writer,
that discourseth only vppon report, except he be truly
and directly instructed, but so farre as I haue read and
heard by the testimony of such persons as knowe somwhat,
(and haue little cause to say more then they know)
I will be bolde, for the better vnderstanding of those
that are ignorant, in some sort, to relate the Manners and
Conditions of the Persians, as not impertinent to this
present purpose.
For their deuotion, it is much after the Turkish ceremonies,
their Priests somewhat differing in their Orders,
and habit, their Temples and religious places,
much after their building and fashion. The Persian
praieth to Mahomet, and Mortus Ally, The Turkes
both to them, and three others, that were Mahomets
seruants: against which three, the Persian still inueighs,
and is an enemie.
Their conceit of Christ, is, that hee was a great Prophet,
a most holy and religious man, beloued of God, and
mighty both in deed and word, but no way to bee compared
to Mahomet, for Mahomet (say they) was that
most excellent and final Prophet, through whose grace,
vertue, and power, all things concerning the Resurrection,
and saluation, are made full and perfect.

Further being onely gouerned by Naturall and Carnal
knowledge, and wanting the illumination of Gods
heauenly and powerfull Spirit to lighten the vnderstanding
part of the Soule, with the inward apprehension
of the excellent misteries of faith, and mans redemption,
they affirme, that because God had neuer
no wife, nor neuer knew woman, it was therefore impossible
that Christ could be his sonne: So hard a matter
it is for naturall reason to comprehend the misteries
of Faith. And therefore as Pallengenius saith in his
Zodiake:
Succumbat ratio fidei, et Captiua quiescat.
But to leaue their religion to themselues, and their
conuersion to his diuine power that hath their hearts in
his disposing, let vs speake a little of the commodities
that their Country affords. They haue great
plentie of silkes of all colours, great store of spices,
drugs, pearles, and pretious stones, Carpets they
make of diuers kindes, in which workes they are excellent.
Their principal marchandise among themselues,
is, to buy and sell men and women in their markets,
They are a people for the most part vnlearned, ignorant
in all kind of liberall Sciences, yet are they good
warriours, polliticke and valiant, obseruing order, and
discipline, they haue heretofore beene held a people
fierce and vnciuill, little better then the Turkes; But
of late they are growne very courteous, and respectiue
vnto strangers, by whose conuersation they haue much
bettred their manners and conditions. Certaine Townes
and Prouinces, belonging to the Persian, bordering
vpon the Turkes, were lost by this Kings predecessors,

which he hopeth to recouer, being now better able then
euer they were, or he himselfe hath beene in times past,
for he hath lately taken in certaine other Townes, vpon
the frontiers of the Turke, that will much aduantage
him, whensoeuer he begins to warre. For the vndertaking
whereof, Sir Anthony ceased not, during the
time he lay in the Cittie, by all importune meanes, and
forcible reasons, to animate and incense the Persian:
alleaging how easie a matter it were for him, by his
meanes, being a Christian, to ioyne many of the Christian
Princes, his borderers, in League and friendship
with him, and draw them to the assistance of these wars,
both with supplies in his owne Countrey, and also
with powerfull inuasions in many other places of the
Turkes dominions, farre remote: that hee being thus
driuen to sunder his forces into many partes, his armie
should bee the weaker against Persia, and hee himselfe being
the head of this League and combination, would
be the surer guarded. He further alleaged how honourable,
and easie it would be for him not onely to recouer
those his Townes and Prouinces, which now the
Turke holds in his possession: But be also able in short
time to winne vpon him euen in his owne Countrey,
and that no time could bee fitter then now, for that of
late hauing obtained a great victory against the Tartars
hee had no cause to feare them, they being so weakned
with their ouerthrowe, that it was an easie matter for
his garrisons being manned, to keepe them from all incursions,
or other Acts of hostilitie.
The Persian being tickled with this deuise, and proiect
of Sir Anthonies, set the Lordes a worke in councell
and consultation of this ouerture, whilst he himself
in wordes and opinion gaue his approbation, hauing

now nothing in his conceipt, and phantasie, but plots,
draughts, and stratagems, concerning this warre, and
there was not a day past ouer his head, but hee would
send for Sir Anthony and his brother, to conferre with
him about these matters, sometimes at midnight into
his bedde chamber: at last the King and his Councell
fully concluded and resolued to further these dessignes,
and negotiations in what they might, and by a speciall
direction from the King, and a generall consent of all,
Sir Anthony was made choise of, as a man most fit for
these imployments: not onely for that he was a Christian,
and so might the rather induce the friends of his religion,
to the vndertaking of this worthie enterprize;
but also that he had such an assured trust, and confidence
in his wisedome, and resolution, that hee thought nothing
could miscarry wherein he was imployed. So the
managing of that was committed to Sir Anthony,
and a greatman of Persia appointed to accompany him;
but the whole burthen of that imploymentt, obee vpon
Sir Anthony, who vndertooke it.
This concluded, they resolued to depart, and to take
their iourney from the Persian Court, to some conuenient
place, where they might bee imbarked to passe the
Caspian Seas: for their intent was first to the Emperour
of Russia, and so forward to other Princes. To
shew how he was entertained in the seuerall Courts of
such Christian Princes, as hee had to deale withall in
those affaires, is needles, for it may bee imagined, his
entertainment to bee so great and honorable, as befitted
the State of such worthy imployment. All things
sorted to his desire, and expectation, but that this crosse
fell by the way, namely a iarre betweene Sir Anthony
and the Perasin, that accompanied him, who striued

for the first place of that Embassage, albeit the dispose
thereof was wholy committed to the order and discretion
of Sir Anthony: But his high Spirit not borne to
brooke such indignitie, did so thwart the Persian in his
pride, as that he followed his daring presumption euen
to his deepe disgrace.


Of the Manners and Fashions
of the Turkes.
THere are two sorts of Turkes: the natural Turke,
and the Renegado.
The Naturall Turke hath his originall in Scithia,
not farre from the Caspian Seas, and they are, and haue
beene euer the most inhumane of all other Barbarians.
Their manner of liuing is for the most part vnciuill,
and vitious. For their vices, they are all Pagans, and
Infidels, Sodomites, and Liars. They are a very
scornefull people, and their pride is so great, as it is not
possible to be described. Next that, followeth their crueltie;
in which their Kings exceed, Nero, Calliggula, or
any other Tyrant whatsoeuer. They take pleasure in
bloodie delights, and to see men put to death: For their
breach of promise, they hold it an high, and commendable
vertue: for they say, if a man speake what hee thinketh,
his purposes will be preuented.
Touching their Iustice, that is the most ordinary
Marchandize, that is bought and sold amongst them.
For first the great Turke selleth all his offices, and gouernments
to such Bashaws as will giue most for them:
And the chiefe Visior Bashaw sitteth euen in Iudgement:
If any other Bashaw offer no littie more

then he giueth for his place, the Tyrant will presently
send, and cut off his head without any further circumstance.
So did he to Mustapha Bashaw, the last of December
1604. and to Hashan Bashaw in September
1605.
Their Renegadoes are for the most part Roagues,
and the skum of the people, which being villaines and
Atheists, vnable to liue in Christendome, are fled to the
Turkes for succour, and releefe. And of these are most
of the Bashawes made. Their auncient respect is
now quite lost, and weakened, because the arrogance of
this king, and the dissolute negligence of his three Predecessors,
Selim, Amureth, and Mahomet, haue caused
the Turkes to loose the awfull regard, which they vsed
to beare their King in former times. His chiefest forces
by land consist of Ianizaries: these Ianizaries are al made
of the sonnes of Christians, that are taken from their
Parents, when they are very young, and are called Tribute
children. They are at the first diuided into two
sorts, when they are first brought to Constantinople, and
Adrianople: for in these parts, they are brought vp. The
one sort, the Turkes call Hitch Oglandes: of them are
made the Sphayes. These are horsemen, and haue fifteen
Aspers a day, he that hath most: but many of them but
twelue. The other are called Iam Oglandes, of these are
made the Ianizaries: no Ianizarie hath aboue nine Aspers
a day: many of them but fiue. The manner of the
fights the Turkes vse, are strange, and altogether vnsouldierlike,
for they are all vnarmed, and the horsemen
haue for weapons, a Launce de gay, a bowe and arrowes,
and a Semitary, which is their best weapon.
They weare no armor, nor euer fight in ranke, or troope,
but disperse themselues, and come to fight more like me^

that would play at iogo de taro, or iogo de caro, then
Souldiers. Of the foote: the Ianisaries doe vse a certain
peece, as long as a Musket, and the hight of a Calliuer,
which makes it carrie farre: they haue very good Match
there, but no good powder, but what they haue got from
ouerthrowne Christians, or els brought them out of
England. The other sort carrie halfe Pikes, or short axes,
and their bodies vnarmed.
The Turkes are beyond all measure, amost insolent,
superbous, and insulting people, euer prest to offer outrage
to any Christian, if he bee not well guarded with
Ianisaries. They sit at meat, as Tailors vpo^ their stalls,
crosse legged, and their meat serued them vpon the
ground, passing the day for the most part in banquetting,
and carousing. They will not permit a Christian
to come within their Churches, for they hold their prophane
and irreligious Sanctuaries defiled thereby.
They haue no vse of belles, but some Priest three times
in the day mounts to the top of their Church, and with
a lowd voice cries out, and inuocates Mahomet to come
in haste, for they haue long expected his second comming.
They that haue passed through the heart of the Turks
Countrey, report the strength thereof to be very small, and
that if the Christian Princes knew as much as they do,
that in their Trauels with all circumspection obserued
it, doubtlesse they would with no great difficultie vtterly
suppresse him, or at the least, so put him to the worse,
that they would constraine him to embrace the Christian
faith, and rest at their deuotion: or else remooue his
seat from the help land, and parts adiacent. To giue a
taste how probable this is, they alleadge that in all Palestine,
and Syria, there are but one thousand and fiue

hundreth Ianisaries, that guard the cities of Aleppo, Damascus,
Antioch, and Ierusalem: as for Grand-cagro
they are not able to stirre, for diuers Arabs that lie in the
hills betwixt Ierusalem and it: Betweene whom, and
those Turkes of Grand-cagro, there is a deadly emnitie.
As for Babylon and Balsera, they haue like wise continuall
warres with those Arabs of Arabia Foelix. Besides,
there are a great number of Christians borne, and
bred in those parts, which would most willingly be assisting
for their liberties.


Sir Anthony his receiuing into Prague, by
Rodolphus, Emperour of Germanie.
SIr Anthony failing of his expectatio^ in Russia, made
what haste he could in Germany, but for want of true
instructions, we must let slip his occurrents in the way,
and with a pace as swift as thought, bring him from
Russia to Prague. The Emperour vnderstanding of his
comming, (as wheresoeuer he came, his fame went still
before him) commanded 13. Coaches to be sent for him,
the Persian, and their traine. There came also to meete
him, and to doe him honor, at least fiue thousand men,
whereof the most of them were Coronels, Captaines,
Lieutenants, and Gentlemen of note and account, together
with many of the Nobilitie; and with his
traine and attendance hee was brought with solemne and
obseruant state and regard into the citie of Prague:
where beeing royally entertained in the Emperours
Court, and hauing deliuered the purport and tenor of
his Embassie, found al things answerable to his worth
and the weight of his affaires. His lodging, together

with the Persian, was prouided in a faire house, not farre
from the Court, they were serued all in plate parcel gilt,
but in diuers manner, according to the seuerall customs
of their Countreys. Hee lay in Prague at least halfe a
yeare, in all which time, hee found nothing but Reuels,
Feastings, and other pleasures of Court. Whensoeuer
he went abroad, he had allowed him by the Emperours
appointment, a faire coach drawne with 6. horses: the
Persian had the like, but still Sir Anthony had the chiefest
place and regard, which was the onely cause of the
often iarres and breaches that was between them: for
the Persian beeing haughtie and ambitions, would many
times in his pride, and insulting humor, as well ope^ly
in wordes, and behauiours, as closely vnder hand
with plots and deuises, attempt many things to bring
Sir Anthony into disgrace, which still was reuealed,
and in the end reuenged, euen by his owne Prince, in
his owne country, as you shall afterwards heare, to
Sir Anthonyes honor, and the Persians shame and confusion.
But to returne: hauing taken his leaue of the Emperour
in all reuerend and solemne manner, he came from
thence to Norremberge, where, by his welcom and costly
entertainment, the citizens shewed what account and
estimation they helde of him: where also, besides many
stately banquets, and rich presents, they bare all his
charges for foure dates; and at his departure, they presented
two cups of gold, the one to Sir Anthony, the other
to the Persian. Howbeit the lining of Sir Anthony
his cup, was better then the outside, for it was stuft full
of gold. Hauing taken his leaue at Norremberge, he
came to Augusta, where he was well entertained: from
thence to Minikin, where also the Duke of Bauier gaue

him great entertainment. From Minikin he cam to Insbrooke,
where stands the stately house of Austria: from
thence to Trent, and so to Rome: in all which places, hee
still found his entertainment beyond expectation.
At Rome the Persian and hee fell againe at oddes, about
superioritie, where Sir Anthony plainly told him,
that he had many times borne with his prowde and insolent
behauiours, more then stood with his own honor,
and naturall condition, onely for the furtherance of the
negotiations they had in hand, which since (saith he) you
haue done what lies in your power to crosse, obseruing
rather your own ambitious humor, then the nature, and
qualitie of our imployments, I will giue you to vnderstand,
that from henceforth I will take a more strickt
note, and vse a more peremptory controlement, both of
your words, gestures, and actions, and you shall learne
to know I am your superiour, and that I doe nothing
that becomes me not, both in the worthinesse of mine
owne person, and in the vertue and authoritie of my
commission. The Persian beeing thus gauled, hauing
neither a mind to suffer, nor a heart to rauenge, in a sullen
maner departed from Sir Antho. and tooke his iourney
towards Persia, plotting and deuising by the way all
means he could to article against Sir Anthony, letting
nothing slip either from his owne mischieuous conceit,
or the false and malicious suggestions and informatio^s
of his followers, to bring Sir Anthony into contempt
with his King. But as many a man digges a pit for others, and fals into it himselfe: so this vnhappy Persian,
supposing he had carried the poyson of Sir Anthonies
disgrace, brought in his heart the haue of his owne vndoing:
for being come to Court, and hauing deliuered
before the Persian King in the presence of Ma. Robert

Sherley the whole processe of their trauels, hee did in a
particular manner, and with an enuious and a malicious
tongue preferre his suborned, and suggested accusations
against Sir Anthony: which Robert Sherley
hearing with countenance and wordes, both befitting
himself and his wronged brother, humbly besought the
King, that there might be an indifferent hearing of this
matter, and himselfe admitted to pleade his brothers
cause: which being graunted, he did so trip and confound
the Persian in his informations, that being found guilty
in the breach of his Commission, and that hee had demeaned
himselfe in these great affaires with actes and
behauiours derogatorie to the honour of his King, and
daungerous to the effecting of so great a businesse, his
accusations also against Sir Anthony sauouring of malice,
and not of truth, he was finally doomed by the king
to haue his hands cut off, and his tongue cut out, in the
presence of M. Robert Sherley, who being demaunded
what he would haue more done vnto him, in the reuenge
of his brothers wrong, he answered that he tooke
no delight in his torment; and that which was already
done, was more then he was willing, or consenting to:
and that now he would (...) in the behalfe of the miserable
Persian, for that he supposed there could not bee
in his case a greater pleasure done vnto him, the^ to haue
his head follow the fortune of his tongue and hands.
Thus ended at one time both the pride and life of this
vnhappy Persian.



Of Sir Anthony Sherleyes Voyage and Trauels
into Spaine, vvith his entertainement
there.
MAn in regard of his mind and body, being compared
to Heauen and Earth, is said to bee a little
world: the one subiect to corruption, the other to
immortalitie. Gold and siluer therefore, which Saint
Bernard calleth Terra rubra and alba, are not said to bee
the riches of the mind, but vertue is her diuine substance:
by the power whereof shee doth extinguish that
immoderate fire of sence and appetite, wherwith mans
Nature is dangerously inflamed, drawing it to bee gouerned
by the qualified and temperate rule of reason:
and in the excellencie of her owne account being caried
aloft with her celestiall wings (her obiect being drawn
another way) she either beholds not or doth not esteeme
the riches, pleasures, and profits of the world, or whatsoeuer
the base delights and erronious desires of men
holds to bee precious. From hence it comes, that hauing
the bodies gouernment and vertue to be her owne
guide, she doth so rule and order it in al her proiects and
intendments, that she suffers it to commit nothing vncomely
or vnworthy her direction: but with a mutuall
sympathy and agreement they passe the whole progresse
of this life, shewing themselues in all their desires and
designes, to bereligious, temperate, iust, honorable and
worthy the image of their Creator. They are not seruilely
tyed to any place, or countrey, nor lulled with the
delight of idlenesse and home-bred pleasures, but as wel
to enrich the intellectuall part with knowledge and experience,

as also to exercise the body with the practises
of labour, and grace the life with vertuous attempts,
they seeke out other climates, preferring the honourable
drift of their desires before the respect of life, or whatsoeuer
is deerest vnto man.
And thus hauing the assistance of the diuine power,
what a memoriall do they leaue behind, worthy to bee
recorded to all posteritie. Such was Paulus Aemylius,
and Publius Cornelius Scipio, who in their hostile employments
and successefull attempts against Perseus
and Hanniball, the two obiects of their honorable emulations,
and the daungerous enemies of their countrey,
besides their valours, directions, policies, stratagemes,
ordering, and ending of the warres were otherwise:
also euen in their victories, and all their ciuile actions
so temperate and so vertuously gouerned, that at their
returne, men of all Countries repaired to Rome, onely
to see them, and honour them, as men exceeding the state
of Mortalitie.
And when I compare the time of Sir Anthony Sherleyes
departure out of England, together with those
great attempts he hath vndertaken and compassed (wherof
I cannot discourse at large, being solemnely instructed)
I am drawne to wonder, that neyther the desire
which euery man naturally hath to his owne Countrey,
nor the ioyfull welcomes nor honourable entertaynements
that attend him here, can any whit stir his mind,
or draw his affections from his purposed intendements
against the Turke, as well to shew the Christian respect
he beares to his Religion (it being the principall
Square and Rule of all his attempts and actions) as
also to make god his promise and protestation to the
Persian King, still to persist in stirring vp the minds and

powers of the bordering Kings, enemies to the house of
Ottoman, and the Turkish Alcoran, that there is a great
hope and expectancie in short time to see a sodain darkning
and eclipse of that glaring beautie and out stretched
bounds of the Turkish Empire.
Let vs therefore attend him a while into Spaine (hauing
already passed Russia and Germany, and other
parts) where, being entertayned with all the honour of
the Court, and hauing deliuered his Message, (wherein
was included the scope and purport of his co^ming thither,
both in regard therof, and ef the honorable League
newly made, and likely to be continued betwixt the two
famous Kings of England and Spaine) he found his entertaynement
doubled, his lodging and prouision both
for himselfe and his retinue in sumptuous manner prepared.
To be briefe, nothing wanting that might eyther
satisfie the delights and pleasures of an honorable
Stranger, or set forth the state and Maiesty of so great
a Prince.
But Sir Anthony not desirous to bury his thoughts
in the delights of the Court, nor sleeping in the pleasures
of that flourishing Kingdome, had still his minde
waking vpon his affaires, holding al time mispent that
was not spent in the reuoluing, consulting, and concluding
of the businesse he had in hand, that his toyling
minde scarce gaue his body rest, so great a desire had he
both to redeem his brother, whom he left as pledge with
the Persian King, but chiefly to restore Religion to those
vnhappy conquered Kingdomes by the Turke, where
now the holy Churches and sanctified Temples of our
Sauiour are changed to be the idolatrous places of the
blasphemous Synagogue of Mahomet.
He stayed not long in Spaine, before the King installed

him one of the Knights of the Honourable Order of S.
Iago, and created him Captaine of his Galleyes for the
warres against the Turkes: So great a liking and loue
he seemed to beare as well to his person, as to the State
and condition of his affaires, which Sir Anthony at all
conuenient times did vrge and prosecute, pretermitting
no occasion that might still stirre vp and enflame the mind
of this young King with an honourable desire to vndertake
this warre.
As he had thus many honors done vnto him by the
King of Spaine, and was well intreated by most of his
Nobility, so was he as much crost by some other of that
countrey, who^ he had freed from captiuitie. For hauing
by suit obtained the liberty and ransome of three, who
had bin taken prisoners: the said prisoners vpon this inlarged,
and Sir Anthony expecting the payment of their
ransomes, receiued very good dealing at the handes of
two of them: But the other vnthankfull wretch to saue
the ransome which he was to pay, ministred a dramme
of poyson to him: which wrought so far with him, that
it caused both the haire of his head and the nayles of his
fingers to fall off; but yet tooke not that diuellish effect
that he desired: for in short time he recouered, and God
restored him to his former health.


Sir Anthony his expedition into Turkie, vvith
his respectiue kindnesse done to an
English Marchant at Lisborne.
BUt to returne to Sir Anthony, his expedition into
Turkie being thus concluded on, great preparation
was made for the warre: Souldiors and Saylers take^

vp in all parts; prouision for armour and artillerie, rigging
of ships and gallies, great suite for places of commaund
and offices of account, new Coronels, Captaines,
and Lieutenants made: In all which, Sir Anthony
had the most speciall place of commaund. In fine, his
Commission was signed, wherein hee was established
Captaine Generall of the Nauie, consisting of 200.
great ships, besides Gallies, and many other smaller
vessels for prouision, and 30. thousand land Souldiors.
All things being thus in a readinesse, Sir Anthony repaired
to the Court to take his leaue of the King. The
King after many great signes and tokens of grace and fauour,
tooke from his owne necke a Iewel of great price,
with the picture of Philip his father on the one side, and
his owne on the other, and deliuered it to Sir Anthony
with these wordes: When you looke vpon it, thinke
on me. Sir Anthony receiuing it in all humble and
thankfull manner, protested, that his life and that should
part together.
Thus when all solemnities and complements of parting
were ended, Sir Anthony made what hast he could
to Lisborne, where his Army stayed his comming; and
where in a second state of entertainement he found his
welcome beyond expectation. But the winde ioyning
with the necessitie of his affaires (that required expedition)
stayed him not long there. Howbeit, before his departure
from Lisborne, wee should doe him wrong, vnkindly
to forget the remembrance of a great benefit and
good turne done by him to a certain English Marchant,
whose name and credit is well knowne in London: for
Sir Anthony had euer a care in al his trauels to relieue
such whom he found distressed, and especially his countrey
men, as among others, this for instance.

This Marchant hauing against the lawes and customes
of Spaine, embarked 12000 duckets of gold of the Spanish
coyne, with a purpose to haue transported them into
England: The searcher and other officers for the K.
hauing knowledge thereof, seised the whole summe into
their owne hands, it being by authority prohibited, and
therefore forfeited vnto them by the Lawes of the land.
The Marchant being much mooued with this vnfortunat
and vnexpected chance, it being the principall stocke
whereon his state relied, with a heauy heart repaired to
Sir Anthony, vnto whom complaining of his miserable
estate by this accident, besought his fauor, that it would
please him to extend the credite of his place for the recouery
of this great somme: which being lost, he knew wel
would be the vndoing, both of himselfe, his wife and children:
protesting, that in lieu thereof, he should co^mand
what part of it, it pleased him, and that hee should euer
hold himselfe so much bound vnto him, as that he would
thence forwards still acknowledge him to be the principall
vpholder of his state and fortunes.
Sir Anthony being moued with pity of the Marcha^ts
mischance, so charmed the watchfull keepers of this
Treasure, that to his great honor and co^mendation, without
improprating any part thereof to his owne vse, hee
soon returned back this great summe into the Marcha^ts
possession, who like Iason with his co^panions did merrily
saile homewards with this golden fleece. Shortly after
Sir Anthony with all his Nauy weighed anker, and
with a presperous gale of winde soone lost the sight of
Spaine and Portugall, and we must now (for want of further
intelligence) leave him vpon the Leuant Seas, to
that hopefull happy fortune that attends this honorable
Enterprise.




Of Master Robert Sherleys imployment
in the warres of the Persian against the
Turke, after Sir Anthony his departure: Of his
Victories, and his Marriage with the King
of Persia his cousin Germaine.
MAster Robert Sherley after his brothers departure
was made Generall, and possessed
the chiefest place in the King of Persia his
warres against the Turke, wherein hee so
valiantly bestirred himselfe, that the Persians
gaue him a crowne of Lawrell for the victorie: for being
armed and made ready for fight, taking a Pollaxe
in his hand, he himselfe gaue first such an honorable attempt,
and so amazed and repulsed the enemies, that his
souldiers imitating his courage, put all the foes to the
edge of the sword: onely reseruing aliue some thirtie of
the chiefe Commanders among them, whom hee led in
triumph to the King, hauing taken them prisoners: and
forthwith dispatched a messenger to the Turke with letters
to this effect: That for the redemption, and liberty
of one that he kept prisoner (meaning Sir Thomas his
brother, who was then vndischarged) hee should command
the liues of those thirtie, and haue themsafely without
danger, or ransome deliuered vnto him. But enuie
that hangs vpon the sword point of the Turke, did so
stirre vp the mind to reuenge, that he was so farre from
entertaining this proffer, as hee did not onely make refusall

thereof, and bid him doe his worst with his prisoners,
but he also returned wordes of defiance, and menared
that the sunne should not twice step from the bed
of Aurora, but he would waken him with such an Allarum,
as should strike his whole company into wonder
and amazement.
This might haue daunted the mind of Robert Sherley,
knowing his men to bee weake, and weary, and ouertoyled
in the late battel and victory, to be so suddenly
called againe vnto Armes: and considering the strength
of his enemie, and that the Turke had alwaies three
hundred thousand men in readines, but that honor (the
chiefest marke he aimed at in all his actions) abandoned
Feare and Timiditie: for he no sooner receiued the daring
threats of the Turke, and the deniall of his gentle
offer, but he presently cut off the heads of those 30. Commanders,
and (according to the custome of Persia) caused
them to bee carried in triumph about the Market
place, on the top of his Souldiers Pikes, and swore in
great choller, that that day should prooue dismall vnto
his enemie, for either he was resolued to returne Conqueror,
or to leaue his carkasse in the field. And thereupon
set his Souldiers in array, and imbattailed them
with all speed: who comming within view, might coniecture
by computation their enemies to bee ten to one,
which much affrighted the mindes of his men: but hee
perceiuing it, began to giue them encouragement, on
this manner.





Master Robert Sherley his Oration
to his Souldiers.
I Need not (worthy Gentlemen, and souldiers of Persia)
seeke to encourage you with a long discourse, lest
putting oyle in the flame, I should adde spurs to a free
horse: your former valiant resolution manifested as
well in this last, as in many other battailes, assure me,
that were the enemies multitude greater, yet (our quarrell
good and honourable, and our mindes armed with
true valour) in despight of Fortune, wee shall, (as hitherto
we haue done) returne in Triumph, and victorie.
And for that it toucheth mine honor, I will be the first
man in the battaile, and the last man in the field, vnlesse
death giue an honorable quittance to my life: Let mee
be this day a mirror of your Magnanimitie: let my actions
be your presidents: presse but as farre as your Generall,
and courage Gentlemen, the victorie is ours: and
with that catching a strong staffe, pulling down his be^er,
and putting spurres to his horse, he furiously rushed
vpon the Enemie, his souldiers following with such a
desperate resolution, that the Turkes were amazed at
his valour: for he ran without stoppe through the troops,
and like alyon massacred whom he met: which the Enemie
perceiuing, and what a great slaughter hee had made
amongst them, many of them fled, many laid down their
weapons, and yielded, the rest hee put all to the sword,
without partialitie or sauour.




Out of this his second ouerthrow of the Turkes, hee againe
reserues aliue some threescore of the chiefest of
them, and sends the like proffer to the Turke, for redemption

of his brother (the Kings Letters not then come for
his enlargement.) But the Turke enraged that Fortune
had thwarted his high hopes with such contrary euents,
vtterly refused to subscribe to his request, but bad him
still continue to doe his worst, for he intended not to depart
with his prisoner. Vpon which reply, Ma. Robert
Sherley, as he did the first, so put he the last to the sword,
in remembrance, and reuenge of the crueltie done to sir
Thomas, whose miseries (in the time of intercourse betweene
the Turke and his brother) were much more
aggravated, and made so great, as the truth vpon report
will hardly be beleeued.
In these warres against the Turkes, this yonger brother
purchased such honour and estimation, as the cousin
Germaine to the King of Persia (beeing the widowe
of a Duke in that countrey) entred into such liking of
his worthinesse, as shee resolued (with Andromache)
to rest her whole estate vpon his prowesse: saying,
Tu dominus, Tu vir, Tu mihi frater cris.
The which affection of hers, was likewise on his part
answered with equall proportion; so that after their priuate
interchanging of faith and troth, their seuerall desires
were made ioyntly happy in the honorable ende of
marriage. Cuius virtus valde efficax est ad concordiam
faciendam, quae adeo Deo placet, sicut discordia multum
ei displicet: Whose vertue is of great force to make
peace and concord, with which God is as much pleased,
as he is displeased with discord.
The King himselfe also was so well pleased with
this match, that for many daies together he solemnized
the marriage.
It is reported, that Ma. Robert Sherley since his marriage
with the Kings cousin Germaine, hath had isiue

by her, two children, both Christened in that Countrey,
in the Christian faith, the King himselfe beeing a witnesse
to one of them in Baptisme. He labours the King
very much to christianisme, to which (it is said) he lends
such attentiue eare, that he doubteth not, but by Gods
assistance and his good perswasions, he may in time bee
brought to become a Christian.
To strengthen which hope, Robert Sherley hath already
erected there a church, called after his own name,
in which he hath diuine seruice as duely read, as here it
is on this side the seas. Hee hath also obtained of the
King a number of young infants of that country to be
brought vp in a house appointed for that purpose, that
altogether estranged, and kept from hearing or speaking
their owne Language, may in time learne our English
Speech, and come at length to Christian knowledge,
being brought vp and educated among Christians. Howsoeuer
the effect answere the intent, his purpose is most
honourable and religious, and deserues such worthy commendations,
that what Princes soeuer lend furthera^ce
to his godly proceedings, I may say with the Euangelist:
Merces corum copiosa est in coelis: Their reward
is very great in Heauen, where they
shall enioy the aboundant fulnes
of all felicitie.
FINIS.


