



AN EXPOSITION VPON THE whole Epistle of Saint Iude.


VERSE. 1.
The Author and Pen-man of this Epistle.Iude the servant of Iesus Christ, etc.


BEfore I enter upon the handling of this Epistle, I will speake briefly, first of the Author, 2. of the Penman, 3. of the Argument. 4. of the Occasion of this Epistle. For I cannot dilate at large as Salomon did of trees, from the Cedar to the Isop: nor as Pliny did of beasts, fro^ the Elephant to the Pismeire, nor as Lactantius did of Fishes, from the Whale to the Lamprey. And first, for the Author of this booke: it is the holy Ghost For all Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and Prophecie, came 1 Tim. 3, 16. 2. Pet. 1. 20. Luke 1. not in old time by the Will of man, but holy men spake as they were moved by the spirit of God, and it was God that spake by the mouth of all his Prophets which have been since the World began. And as he directed the tongues of Holy men to speake, and therfore saith our Saviour, It is not yee that speake but the spirit of my father in you; so he directed Mat. 10. 20. their pens to write, so that it was not they that wrote, but the holy Ghost by them. By this therefore it evidently appeareth, of what reverent account this Epistle, ought for to bee, seeing it hath the holy Ghost for the Author.
2 The penman or writer was Iude, or Iudas, and of this name our Saviour had two disciples: The one called Iudas Iscariot, Who for thirty peeces of silver betraied, and basely sold his Lord and Master. Servus Dominum, discipulus magistrum, homo Deum, creatura Mat. 26. creatorem vendidit, The servant betraid, sold, most basely sold his Lord. The disciple his Master, man God, the creature the Creator; Infoelix mercator Iudas, O unhappy Merchant, Iudas!
The other called Iudas, the son of Alphaeas, called also Thaddeus and Labbeus, who was brother to Iames, and cosin to the Lord Iesus, in the flesh: The occasion of which name, with the reason therof, is set down in the 29. of Gen. the 35, V. For when Leah had borne Iudg. 15. Act. 18. 28. cap. 6. 10. three sons to Iacob, she conceived and bare a fourth Sonne, saying, Now will I praise and confesse the Lord, and shee called his name Iudah.
This Iude was as rare and notable an Apostle to beat downe the Heretickes of that time, as Sampson did the Philistines, as Apollo did the Iewes, as Stephen did the Libertines and Cirenians, as Paphuntius did the Councell of Nice in Ministers marriage.

Concerning the Argument, of this Epistle, it is a stirring The Argument and occasion or this Epistle. them up to a Christian life, to shew foorth the fruits of faith to ioyne with Words, Workes, with communication, conversation, with hearing, keeping, with profession, practice: For after planting must come growing, after light walking Col. 1. Ephes 5. 9. 2 Pet. 1. Esa. 2. 3. Iam. 1. 22. after faith workes, after teaching obedience, after a good profession some good practice.
Beside, here in this Epistle, hee inveigheth sharpely against carnall profession, and grosse abusing of Christian Religion. And also he admonisheth them to beware of imposters, seducers, false teachers, cunning deceivers, which were craftily crept in amongst them, drawing men from purity in Religion to impurity of the flesh: Whom the Apostle lively painteth out in their severall colours, and against whom hee denounceth many Iudgements of God.
The occasion of writing this Epistle was this; It is affirmed by the most learned of all times, and agreed upon by the best writers, that this Apostle Iude, outlived many (yea most) of the Apostles, continuing and preaching in Mesopotomia, Pontus, Persis, and other parts of the world, till the Reigne of Domitian the Emperour; in whose reigne Iniquity reigned, Impiety abounded, corruption of manners and dissolution in life raged in every place; for many there were, that were Wantons in manners, and heretikes in opinion, against whom hee did lift up his voyce like a trumpet. So that this Epistle is notable, and written for our learning; howsoever some deny, this Epistle to bee Cannonicall; as Cardinall Cajetane, who Esa. 58. 1. Rom. 15. 4. calleth it Aprocriphall: Which I note the rather, to meete with Campian, and Reighnolds, who say, that wee Protestants reject the Scriptures, that wee leave no ground for a Christian to rest his Faith on, because Luther doubted of Iames his Epistle, and wee of the Apocripha. But did not Dionisius Alexandrinus say, that most of his predecessors reiected the Apocalips? Did not the Councell of Laodicia leave it out of the Canon? Did not Eumil^us Africanus, deny the bookes of Esra, Iob, Paralipomenon? Did not Ierome call the history of Davids Marriage, a Poeticall fiction, an unseemely iest? Did not Cardinall Caietane, a Piller of the Church, a Peere of the Court of Rome, accuse the Epistle to the Hebrewes to containe too weake grounds to prove Christs divinitie, and yet left they ground for our faith to rest on. So that there was no cause for Campian and Reighnolds to pearch on their rowses, to clap their wings, to crow so lowd, to whet their dogges eloquence against us. Some Scriptures have beene doubted of of some Churches, as the second Epistle of Saint Peter, the second and third, of Saint John, and some have beene reiected of all Churches, As the Epistle of Barnabas. The Acts of Peter, The booke of the Pastor. The Gospel

of Nicodemus and Thaddaeus, etc. God hath kept the Scriptures. Of the parts the Epistle. The person writing it.
God hath kept the Scriptures in all ages, so much as is necessary for our salvation. At the giving of the Law, it was reserved in tables of stone. After the giving of the Law the writings of the Prophets were nailed to the doore of the Temple, and reserved in the Lords treasury. Before the captivity the Septuagint turned them into Greeke, and Ptolomaeus Exod. 34. Heb. 2. the King kept them; After the captivitie; Ezra gathered all into one volume, in the dayes of Artaxerxes; and the Church have kept them as Aarons Rod, and the pot of Manna, and as the two Tables were kept in the Arke, etc. In the primative Church, the Gospell of Mathew was kept in Iewry, the Gospell of Marke at Alexandria, that of Luke at Antioch, that of Iohn and the Apocalips at Ephesus: Nam triplex est munus Ecclesiae, the Churches office is threefold; Sacros libros servare instar testis, eos promulgare instar proeconis, eos ab aliis discernere; to keepe these sacred bookes as a witnesse, to promulgate them, as a Preacher, and to discerne them from other bookes whatsoever. And thus the Church hath kept this Epistle of Iude, unto this day. Fremat licet C^jetanus. All Tyrants have raged against the Scripture; Antiochus, for his hatred of the Scriptures is called (...), for he beheaded them, that had the Bible; Dioclesian commanded the bookes of the Scripture to be burnt, yet by the wonderfull providence of God they are preserved.
And thus much being spoken concerning the Author, the Penman, the Occasion, and Argument of this Epistle, I will now come unto the Epistle it selfe: the which may be divided into five parts.
First, The title or superscription.
Secondly, The Exordium.
Thirdly, A proposition.
Fourthly, Exhortations, and dehortations.
Fiftly, The conclusion, or the shutting up of the Epistle, with a prayer to God.
But first to begin with the title or superscription, and therein observe with me three things.
First, The person writing.
Secondly, The persons written unto.
Thirdly, The Salutation.
Now the person writing is described three wayes:
First by his name, Iude.
Secondly, By his calling, a servant of Christ.
Thirdly, By his kindred, The brother of Iames.
But first, the person writing is described by his name, and that was Iude, or Iudas, not Iudas Iscariot, the traytor, but Iudas the brother of Iames, and Cousin to the Lord Iesus Christ in the flesh, yet both were the Apostles of Christ, but this man good

and godly, that wicked and ungodly: For it is nor the name or The Writer by his name and calling described. office that makes a good man; but the Grace and Mercie of God; If outward titles could make good men, Iudas Iscariot, had beene as good as this Apostle, Nay better, for Iudas Iscariot was Christs steward, his pursebearer, disburser of all things for Christ and his company, and yet a theefe, a traytor, a devill: Non omnes filii Sanctorum, qui loca sancta tenent. They are not all the sonnes of Saints, nor Saints themselves, which hold the places of Saints. God oftentimes bestoweth upon wicked men lofty titles and high places, partly to their greater condemnation; the mighty, shall be mightily tormented; and partly for the punishment of ungratefull people, as Saul over the Israelites.
Againe, in that Iude was not ashamed of his name, but in the very first inscription of this Epistle setteth downe his name, wee which are the Ministers of God are taught, not to be ashamed of our calling, though scornefully by scorners of Religion, wee are termed Priests. The Iewes though they mocked Christ, when bowing their knees, they cryed, Haile King of the Iewes, against their wils they honoured him; for indeed he was King of the Iewes, and of the Gentiles: So these gracelesse contemners of our glorious calling, when they thinke to vilifie us, by calling us Priests, (against their wils) they magnifie us: their reproachfull scoffes should not daunt us, nor discourage us in our calling, for he that hath called us and sent us, will bee with us, as hee was with Moses, and as he was with Ieremie. Be not affraid Exod. 3. 12. Ier. 1. 8. of their faces, I will be with thee.
Secondly, the person writing is described by his calling, for he calleth himselfe, Servum Dei, The servant of God.
Of servants there bee three sorts: Some are servants by slavish and voluntary subjection; these the Apostle calls, The servants of sinne; Qui facit peccatum servus est peccati; He which Iohn 8. 34. Rom. 6. 16. committeth sinne, is the servant of sinne, and they which serve sinne, Duram serviunt servitutem, serve an hard service, for the wages of sinne is Death.
Secondly, There be servants by condition; which are either born such by nature, or taken captives in Warre, or bought with money. To these servants, Saint Paul speaketh thus, Servants obey those which are your Masters, according to the flesh, with feare and Ephes 6. 5, 6. August de Civu Dei, lib. 19. Cap. 15. trembling, and with simplicitie of heart, not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ: Nomen istud culpa mervit, non natura, This name of servant not nature but sinne deserved; For the name of servant was never heard of, till Noah cursed Canaan, the sonne of Cham, Who discovered his fathers nakednesse, Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he bee. Gen. 9. 25.
Thirdly, Servants by Office, Calling and Profession, and these are of two sorts; for men are either the servants of God generally, or particularly.

Generally, they are Gods servants, which acknowledge Servants of God, divors kinds of them.To be Gods servant the greatest honour. him for their Lord, and doe that service which is due to him, Hi veri servi Dei, These are the true servants of the true God; and such servants must wee bee, if wee will be saved.
Particularly, they are the servants of God, who in some severall calling doe service to God, as Magistrates and Ministers, these, (...), in a speciall service be the servants of God. Now Iude professeth himselfe a servant of Iesus Christ; First, by condition, because by Christ hee was redeemed and delivered from the slavery of Sinne, and tyranny of Satan. Secondly, by Office, and calling also, hee was the servant of Iesus Christ, not onely in his generall calling, as hee was a Christian, but also in his particular, as he was an Apostle. And note that Saint Iude doth not call himselfe a governor, a or teacher, or an Apostle, but the servant of Iesus Christ, as Paul doth, and as Iames and Peter did; For this is the best title, above the title of Lords, Dukes, Phil. 1. 1. Iam. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Esa. 40. 23. Kings, Emperours, who perish. For God bringeth the Princes to nothing, and maketh the Iudges of the Earth as Vanitie. It is more to bee the servant of Iesus Christ, than to be the greatest Prince, Potentate, or Personage in the World, for if the servants of Iesus Christ, though never so poore, base, and beggerly, yet happy and blessed: if not the servants of Iesus Christ, though never so rich, noble, and great, yet miserable and wretched. This knew Paul, and therefore trode all his titles under his feet as Phil. 3. 5, 6. dung, so that he might know Christ and serve him. This service lasteth for ever, as a colour set on with oyle. And the Lord Iesus as Man is called a servant, as God he was Lord of men and Angels, for he was the man Iesus, and the Lord Iesus. Gods service is perfect 1 Cor. 8. freedome, Gods servants on Earth, are freemen in Heaven. Citizen with the Saints, Free Denizens of the celestiall Ierusalem, their Ephes. 2. 19. Rom. 6. 22. fruit is in holinesse, and their end everlasting life. What honour should wee desire but this, to bee the servants of God? Godlinesse 1 Tim. 1, 6. is great gaine; and to serve God, hath promise, both of this life, and the life to come. If the service of Salomon was so good a service: That they were counted happy that stood before him. 1. Chro. 12. What is the service of God, and how happy are his servants? Many thinke themselves much graced and honoured, if they can get into some Noblemans service, and weare his Livery, as did Doeg, and the servants of Saul; how much more honour is it to 1 Sam. 22. bee Gods servant? Who will make us of servants Sonnes, heires Ephes. 5, 6. and coheires with Christ. The Israelites found Gods service to be the best service, 2 Chron. 12. 8. Cyrus at the conquest of Babylon, offered largely to them, that would serve him; but God offereth more largely. Theodosius held it more noble to be membrum Ecclesiae, quam caput imperii, a member of the Church, than the head of the Empire. So we may resolve, that it is better to be a servant of God, than Lord of all the World. For while

wee serve him, all other creatures in earth and in heaven serve God needs not our service, wee need his Lordship. us. But if we will be Gods servants, we must addict our selves wholy to his service, and to serve God in earth, as the Angels doe in heaven: for so wee pray, Thy Will be done in earth as it is in heaven. And for this end were wee created; therefore saith the Mat. 6. 10. Apostle, Wee are the workemanship of God, created in Christ Iesus unto good workes. And what better worke than to serve the Lord Iesus? Nay, the service of God is the end of our Redemption, For he Luke 1. 74. hath delivered us from the hands of our enemies, that wee should serve him without feare in holinesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of our life. Nay, the service of God is the end of our glorification; Therefore the Apostle would have us to walke worthy our God, who hath 1 Thess. 2. 12. called us unto his Kingdome of glory. And therefore unlesse wee esteeme vilely of our Creation, Redemption, and Glorification, wee must become Gods servants, and serve him in feare, and rejoyce Psal. 2. 11. before him with trembling.
Austine Observeth, God was never called Lord, until he had placed Adam in Paradise, before he was called God simply; but now the Lord God, because hee was not so much a Lord to Angels and other creatures as unto man, to teach him that hee must live under Gods lordship, and serve him. For though Adam was lord of the creatures, and the creatures must serve him; yet Adam had a Lord whom he must serve. And yet God needeth not our service, and therefore saith David, O my soule, thou hast said unto Psal. 16. 2. Psal. 50. 10, 11. the Lord, my well doing extendeth not to thee: all the beasts of the Forrests are his, and the beasts on a thousand Mountaines, hee knowes all the fowles on the Mountaines, and wilde beasts of the Fields are his. Who (saith the Apostle) hath knowne the minde of the Lord? or Who was his Counsellor? or Who hath given unto him first? and hee shall bee recompenced? Rom. 11. 35, 36. But howsoever hee standeth not in need of our service, wee stand in need of his Lordship and protection; that wee may bee safe under his Wings; that wee feare not the feare of the Psal. 91. night, nor the arrow that flyeth by day, nor the pestilence that walketh in the darke, nor the plague that destroyeth at noone-day. And doe wee stand in need of his Lordship? Let us understand our wants, and performe our service and duty to the Lord: For thus hee reasoneth by the Prophet; The Sonne honoureth his Father, the Servant Mal. 1. 5. his Master: If I bee your Father, where is my honour? If your Master, where is my feare? Let not God say of us, as of the Israelites, I have nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled against mee. Ravenna saith thus, A move radium a Sole, and non lucet, rivulum Esa. 1. 2, 3. a fonte, and arescit, a radice ramum, and exiccatur, a corpore membrum, and putrescit, obedientiam a Christiano, and perit. Take away the beame from the Sunne, and it shineth not, the river from the Fountaine, and it dryeth up, the bough from the Roote, and it withereth, the member from the Body, and it rotteth, and obedience from a Christian, and hee perisheth.

Consider what Adam lost by his evill service, he fell from purity Adams losse for his evill service.If we wil serve God, the creatures shall serve us. to corruption, from eternitie to mortalitie, from Angels to men, from heaven to hell, had not the promised seed come in. Hee was expelled out of Paradise as a Rebell, an Outlaw, and a shaking Sword hanging to keepe him out. Hee came out of Eden a pleasant garden, to toyle among Nettles, Bryers, brambles, like the men of Penuel: Hee became a slave to the creatures, Gen. 3. 15. Iudg. 9. the creatures rebels against him to this day. Homo nascitur cum dolore, man is borne with griefe; Vivit cum labore, he lives by labour; Moritur cum moerore, hee dyes with sorrow. Quis mihi dabit fontem lachrymarum, ut defleam hominis miserabilem ingressum, culpabilem Innocentius. progressum, desolatum egressum? Who shall give mee a fountaine of teares, that I may bewaile mans miserable ingresse, his culpable progresse, and desolate egresse? I know that God hath turned this curse into a blessing; for Plus in Christo lacrati sumus, quam perdidimus in Adamo, wee have gained more in Christ, than ever wee lost in Adam. For if by the offence of one (saith Saint Paul) Death raigned through one, much more shall they which Rom. 5. 17. 18. receive the abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousnesse reigne in life through one, that is Iesus Christ. Likewise then, as by the offence of one, the fault came on all men to condemnation: So by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward all men, to the justification of life. Thus wee have gained more in Christ than wee lost by Adam. Yet this is of mercy, not of merit; of favour, not of duty; Witnesse the Apostle, saying, But when the bountifulnesse and love of God our Saviour towards man, appeared not by the workes of Tit. 3. 4, 5. righteousnesse, which wee had done, but according to his mercie hee saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost: Which he shined on us abundantly, through Iesus Christ our Saviour. But Augustine answereth this more fully, and saith, That Adams disobeying God lost his honour, hee serving God, all creatures served him, hee disobeying God, all disobeyed him: The earth bringeth forth Weedes, Thornes, Venimous things: The sea swallowes us up, with flowes and stormes: the ayre fighteth against us with Thunders, Lightenings, Tempests, the heavens conspire against us with mortality of Pestilence, the wilde beasts devoure us. But to them that serve God, God maketh his creatures serve them, the earth to bring forth corne, grasse, fruits; the ayre, to be sweet, the sea, to bee calme, the beasts, to be helpefull: Even so the Lions hurted not Daniel, the Viper stung not Paul, the Whale crushed not Ionas, the Crowes Dan. 6. Act. 28. Iob. 2. 1. Reg. 19. Luke 16. Num. 21. fedde Elias, the dogges licked Lazarus, the Serpents of Sinai poisoned not Israel. The Ecclesiasticall and tripartite historie tels us how the Crowes nourished Anthony an Hermit: and Paulus Thaebeus, how a Lionesse fedde Marcarius; how an Hart brought Egidius meat into the Wildernesse; how Helenus commanded a wilde Asse to carry his burthen. I passe over that of

Linus, Romulus and Rhemus nourished of a shee-Woolfe; and God must bee served: sinne brought in the first service. that of Plutarch, of the Elephant that loved a Maid of Etholia; and that of Plinie, of a Panther that ledde a man out of the desart into a plaine way; and that of Lucian, of a Dolphin that carried Arion. If wee serve God, The stones in the streete shall bee in league with us, and the beasts of the field shall bee at peace with us; Ieb 5. 23. that is, all creatures shall serve us.
Let us then addict our selves wholy unto his service, not serving any other Master, but him, not the World, not the Flesh, not the Divell, not Antichrist. Not the World, Ne illecti, lest wee are allured with vaine pleasures, and the lying vanities thereof: not of the Flesh, Ne infecti, lest stayned, polluted, defiled therewith: not the Divell, Ne interfecti, lest devoured and destroyed by him; not Antichrist, Ne decepti, lest seduced and misled by him. It is a base service to serve the World, for that is to become a vassall unto our servants; it is an uncertaine service to serve the Flesh, this master is so cholerick, so weake, so sickly, that wee may looke every day to be turned out of doores, and that which is worst of al he is least, contented when he is most satisfied: It is an unthrifty service, to serve the Divell, all his wayes are death, the more service wee doe him, the worse is our estate: It is an irreligious service to serve Antichrist, for such as have the marke of the Beast, shall perish with the beast: But he that serves God, hath the greatest Lord, who is most able, and the best Lord, who is most willing to preferre his followers, and reward his servants. Let us then serve him, for we are his servants, Iure creationis, jure sustentationis, jure redemptionis; By right of creation, sustentation, redemption. If every haire of our head were a life, and every life as long as Methuselahs, it were too little to serve God.
True it is, that Cham was pronounced the first servant, as I observed Gen 3. Gen. 8. before; for man was made to rule, and not to serve. But as sinne brought in the first nakednesse, and the first travell of women in paine, and the first death, and the first sorrow, and the first flood; so it brought in the first service: Onely by Christ wee are Manumised: Hominis dignitas in tribus splendet, The dignity of Rom. 8. 15. man shineth forth in three things, In imagine Dei, in the image of God; In ejus creationis ex nihilo, in his creation of nothing; In eius dominio super omnes creaturas, in his dominion over all his creatures; ut ergo tria haec per peccatum amisit, sic per gratiam recuperavit, as hee lost these three things by sinne, so by grace hee hath recovered them, dum Domino servit, a quo defecit, while hee serves God from whom hee fell.
Now therefore by grace, wee are called servants; and if that John 15. Iohn 3. Mar. 3. Gal. 3. be too little, wee are called the Friends of God, Friends of the bridegroome: and if that be too little, wee are called Brethren, Sisters of Christ: if that be too little, wee are called The Sonnes of God: if that be too little, wee are called the Spouse of God, the wife of the Apoc. 19. 7.

Lambe: And if all this bee too little, wee are called the members of The Pope no Apostle of God, yet cals himselfe, servum servorum. God, and of Christ Iesus. O the breadth, and length, and depth, and heighth of the love of God towards us, that we should be called, not forreiners, but servants; not servants, but friends; not friends, but brethren; not brethren, but sonnes; not sonnes, but wives; not wives, but members. 1 Cor. 12.
By the way observe here, that the Pope not calling himselfe, servum Dei, the servant of God, but servum servorum, a servant of Gen. 9. servants; calleth himselfe by a cursed title, as Cham was, and indeed he is a servant of servants, that serveth not Christ.
But (say some) hee calleth himselfe a servant of servants, to shew his humility. Indeed hee is lowly in name, as any Apostle, but as proud in spirit as the Whore of Babylon, that makes herselfe Lady over Kings and Emperours. For did not Pope Zachary make Childerike the French King, to trot by his bridle three miles together? Did not Hildebrand cause Henry the fourth to stand three dayes at his gates, with his wife and his child barefooted? Did not Clement the fifth make Dandalus Duke of Venice to lye under his Table like a dogge, to gather crummes? Did not Alexander the third tread on the necke of that noble Fredericke in Venice? Did not Innocent depose King Iohn of England? Did not Clemens the seventh labour to depose Henry the eighth? Did not Pius quintus send a Bull against our Queene? Did not Clemens the eighth cause the French King to goe barefooted to Saint Dennis, as a Penitentiary? The troubles of these five hundred yeeres past, may bee ascribed to Popes; all Grecia yet rueth it; all Africa, the mother of Martyrs, feeleth it; the German Emperours tossed like tennise balles, may not forget it; the Kings of France have felt it; the States of Italy have beene shaken with it: the Kings of England have beene deposed, whipped, murdered; Let King Iohn speake, Richard the second, Henry the eighth, and Queene Elizabeth. Is this a servant of servants, that will thus insult over Kings and Emperours? Oh no, no.
But to leave him; Are we with Iude, the servants of Iesus Christ? Then must we not onely apply our selves to serve him, as I have already said; but we must imitate the vertues of Iesus Christ, and we must attend his pleasure.
But first, wee must imitate his vertues. In our Lord and Master Christ Iesus shined many excellent vertues: Yea, all vertues; Love, Patience, Humility, Meekenesse, Mildenesse, Mercie, Puritie, Pietie, Constancie, Obedience, etc. these must shine in us, else falsely wee are called the servants of Christ. Christiani nomen frustra ille sortitur, qui Christum minime imitatur: August. de vita Christian^. Quid tibi prodest vocari quod non es? In vaine hath hee got the name of a Christian, which doth not imitate Christ: What doth it profit thee to bee called that which thou art not? To bee

called a Christian, and not to bee indeed a Christian; a Saint, and not to bee Saint; the servant of Iesus Christ, and not to bee We must attend to Gods service. We owe more to God than servants to their Masters. the servant of Iesus Christ. Qualis haberi velis, talis sias: If thou wilt be the servant of Iesus Christ, thou must bee holy as hee is holy, gracious, as hee is gracious, mercifull, as hee is mercifull, yea, perfect as hee is perfect, though not by adequation, for that is beyond our power, yet by imitation, for that is all our duties.
Againe, are wee Christs servants? then must wee attend his Pleasure, and depend upon his Will, and performe all such holy offices as becommeth servants. But as Peter Martyr saith, wee In Rom. cap. 1. are contrary to servants, we are rather Quarter-masters, and checkemate with God; for servants bestow all their time in their Masters businesse, we no time, or little time in Gods matters: For our goodnesse is as the Morning cloud, and as the Morning dew it Hos. 6. 4. goeth away. Servants beaten fall to prayers, wee being chastised of God, fall to murmuring and cursing, like Iob, that cursed the day of his birth; Like Ieremy, that cursed him, that told his father of a man-child. Servants are not familiar with their Masters Iob 3. Ier. 20. enemies: wee countenance Gods enemies in all places: Many Protestants are like Aesops Crow, of divers feathers; their Religions like Ioseph his party-coloured coat, or like the rainebow, of all colours: we read how Iehoshaphat joyned with Ahab to Ramoth-Gilead; how the Corinthians drew the yoke with infidels; how the 2 Chro. 19. 3. 2 Cor. 6. 14. Esa. 31. 13. Iewes strengthened themselves with the Aegyptians: I wish the like were not to have been found among Protestants. Wee have sate with Psal. 26. 4. vaine persons, and kept company with dissemblers. Servants, if they be threatned, tremble; Wee, if Gods Prophets reprove us, are the prouder: Wee say of Gods Prophets, as the Iewes did of Ieremy, Come, let us imagine some device against Ieremy* For the Law shall not perish from the Priests, nor Counsell from the Wise, nor the Word from the Ier. 18. 18. Prophets: Come, let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words. And yet wee owe a thousand times more to God than servants to their Masters; God doth not onely feede us and cloath us, as Masters doe their servants, but hee giveth us all things besides: Hee ladeth us dayly with benefits. Servants, by Psal. 68. 19. their travell profit their Masters, wee profit God nothing: If thou bee righteous, what givest thou unto him, or what receiveth he at thy hands? Servants receive small wages, God to us hath given Iob 35. 7. Rom. 8. 32. his Sonne, and with him all things: his face was buffeted, his checks nipped, his eyes blinded, his hands nailed, his side lanched with a speare: Hee was as water powred out, all his bones were out of joint, his heart like Wax molten within the middest of his bowels, his strength was Psal. 22. 14, 15. dryed up like a pot-sheard, his tongue did cleave to his jawes, and hee was brought unto the dust of death: Non ergo caput, faciem, oculos, manus, cor illi trademus, ut illi serviamus? Must we not therefore give him head, face, eyes, hands, and heart, to serve him? Wee must not

give our members, weapons of unrighteousnesse unto sinne: What then? All servants in Gods Church. Wee must give our selves to God, and our members of righteousnesse, to serve God. But alas, wee serve not God, he hath the least part of our service, if hee hath any at all: The Covetous serve Mammon; the Malicious, their Envie and Rancour; the proud, their Arrogancie; the Gluttonous, their Belly; the Voluptuous, their Pleasure. Tot Dominos habemus, quot peccata, Wee have so many masters, as wee have sinnes, according to the Axiome of the Apostle. Of whom soever a man is overcome, even unto the same is hee in bondage. Thou art a slave to thy malice, thy ambition, 2 Pet. 2. 19. thy belly: Sed nemo potest duobus Dominis servire, Non man can serve two masters.
Againe observe, That this title Servus Dei, the servant of God, meeteth with the Manichoeans and Libertines, who raile on all the Apostles; for they call Paul, Vas confractum, a broken Vessell; Peter, abnegatorum Dei, a denier of his Master; Andrew, Medicantem piscatorem, a begging Fisherman; Iohn, Stolidum adolescentem, a foolish young man; Luke, Ineptem medicum, an unskilfull Phisitian; Mathew, Faeneratorem, an Vsurer.
To conclude this point: in that Saint Iude calleth himselfe a servant wee learne, that wee are all but servants in Gods Church, and therfore to make no Lawes, to alter no decrees, to change no ordinance, to injoyne no orders, but such as the Word of God alloweth, and liketh of. Moses, the greatest Prophet that ever Hebr. 3. 5. rose, or should rise in Israel, yet but a servant; David, a rare Prophet, the sweet singer of Israel, a man after Gods owne heart, yet he calleth himselfe a servant, Thy servant, Lord, thy servant loe, Psal. 116. 16. I doe my selfe confesse, etc. Paul, taken up to the third heaven, taken into Paradise, where hee heard (...), Secrets not to bee uttered, honoured above all the Apostles, yet but a servant: What is the Rom. 1. 1. Pope then, or what is his parentage, that he may dispence with the Doctrine of the old and new Testament? a vile man, that was never further than Rome, and as far from Paradise, as Heaven from Hel: Abolebit eum Dominus, for the Lord shall abolish him: I confesse, 2 Thess. 2. 8. that Gregory matcheth the foure Oecumenicall Councels, with the foure Gospels, the Nicene, Constantinople, Ephesian, and Chalcedon, hee calleth them, Lapidem quadrantem, ex quo sanctae fidei Structura assurgit: The foure corner stones, upon which the building of the holy Faith doth rise. But hee spake like a man, for those Councels could make no orders, but from the Lords.
The third thing to bee considered in this Apostle, is his alliance and kindred; he nameth himselfe the Brother of Iames.
First, Honoris gracia, for honors sake to distinguish himself from Iudas Iscariot, the sonne of Simon, whom our Saviour calleth a Divell. Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Divell. For John 6. 70. Iames? was a piller in Gods Church, he was Bonarges, the sonne of Thunder; hee was a chiefe man in the Councell of Ierusalem,

hee was Bishop of Ierusalem, and Paul answereth before The alliance and kindred of the Apostle Iude. him, hee was with Christ at his transfiguration, hee was one of the three at his passion, hee was the brother of the Lord, that is, a kinsman unto Christ, for he was the son of Marie Cleophas, Sister to the Virgin Mary and so Christ cousin germane, called his Brother, Mat. 17. Mat. 26. Gal. 1. after the manner of the Hebrewes, Mar. 3. 32. Behold thy Mother and thy Brethren seeke for thee without: and Mat. 13. 55. Is not this the Carpenters Sonne? is not his Mother called Mary, and his Brethren Iames and Ioses, and Simon and Iudas.
This Iudas is elsewhere called Thaddeus and Labbeus: but hee graceth himselfe by this, that hee was the Brother of Iames, a Mat. 10. Iohn 6. 70. Iohn. 12. 6. Act. 1. 18. rare Apostle, not Iudas the traytor whom Christ (as yee heard before) called a Divell, whom Saint Iohn calleth a thiefe, whom Peter calleth an hangman who burst asunder, but the Brother of Iames, the sonne of Alpheus, who wrote the Canonicall Epistle: for there were two Iameses, one the sonne of Zebedie, Brother to Iohn, the other the sonne of Alpheus Brother to Iude.
Secondly, Hee calleth himselfe the Brother of Iames, to win more credit, not to his person, but to his Doctrine: that all men might know that this Epistle was penned, not by Iudas the traytor, but by Iude the Brother of Iames the just, and therefore might more reverently receive it, and more religiously regard it: Nam dictum clari hominis facile admittitur, For the saying of an excellent man is easily admitted, these are the causes why he calleth himselfe the Brother of Iames.
And observe with me here, that first hee glorieth of his Profession, that hee was the servant of Iesus Christ, before hee maketh any mention of his alliance: For no kindred, Fatherhood, or Motherhood can grace us with God: God is no accepter of persons, but in every nation hee that feareth him, and worketh righteousnes Act. 10. 34, 35. is accepted with him.
Many will glory of their alliance and kindred, and albeit they haue neither Learning, nor Living, nor Wisedome, nor Civility, nor Honesty, nor Piety at all: yet if they can fetch their Pedigree from some Noble or Worshipfull House, they boast thereof, and hold themselves worthy of reverence and honour. The Iewes gloried, that Abraham was their Father, but what gained they by it? When Christ told them, Vos estis ex patre Iohn 8. 44. diabolo, You are of your Father the devill, and his workes yee doe. 2 Reg. 21. 2. Reg. 20. David, had Absolom: Salomon, Rehoboham: Amon a wicked Father, had Iosiah to his sonne, a good man: and Ezekiah a good father, had Manasses to his sonne, a vile man: Ismaell had Isaac to his brother, so had Esau Iacob: Caine had Abell, Absolom had Salomon: But Caine was a Vagabond, Ismaell a persecutor, Absolom a Rebell, Esau a Reprobate. 'Tis follie in men to glory in Gen. 4. Gal. 4. stocke or kindred: If they will glory, let them glorie in this that they are the servants of Iesus Christ: for outward titles

without inward vertues availe nothing, for what shall it profit Not to glory in Alliance and Kindred. us to bee intituled Christians, and yet live as prophanely as Infidels? to be called the Church of God, and yet in conversation to resemble the Synagogue of Satan? to bee counted the children of God, and yet spend our times like the sonnes of Belial? to bee reputed the servants of Christ Iesus, and serve the World, the Flesh and the Divell? to descend of noble, godly Parents, and yet degenerate from their noble, godly wayes? God is not pleased with shadowes, but with substance; not with outward titles, but with truth in the inward parts. If then Psal. 51. thou wilt boast of thine honourable Kindred, labour, strive, endevour that thou mayest glory and say, That God is thy Father, the Church thy Mother, Christ Iesus thy elder Brother, that is most High, Holy, Honourable Kindred. Thus much for the Person writing, his Name, his Calling, his Kindred.




THE SECOND SERMON


VERS. I.

To them which are Called and Sanctified, etc.
Vocation the beginning of Salvation.



I Am now come to the persons, to whom he wrote this Epistle, and they are described three wayes:

1 By their Calling.
2 By their Sanctification.
3 By their Preservation.

But first, they are described by their calling, To them that are called, saith hee. The beginning of our Salvation is, that wee are first called of God, wee come not of our selves, God calleth us, Nemo venit ad Christum nisi pater traxerit: Iohn 6. 44. No man commeth unto Christ except the Father draw him: Et ista attractio est nostra vocatio per Evangelium and Spiritum sanctum: and this drawing is our calling by the Gospel, and holy Spirit. Caro and sanguis non revelat, etc. Flesh and Bloud doe not reveale these Mat. 16. 17. things, but God our Father by our calling in the Gospel: As the Sheepheard with his whistle calleth his sheepe: as the two silver trumpets called Israel to warre; as the master-Bee calleth the Num. 10. whole hyve together with his humming; So God calleth his Church running from him, by his Word and Spirit.
Wisedome (saith Salomon) cryeth without, shee uttereth her voyce in Prov. 1. 20. the streets, shee calleth in the high street, among the prease in the entrings of the gates, and uttereth her words in the City. And againe he saith, Wisedome hath built her house, and hewen out her seven Pillars, she hath killed her Victuals, drawne her Wine, and prepared her Table, she hath Prov. 9. 1, etc. sent forth her Maidens, and cryeth in the highest places of the City, saying, Whoso is simple, let him come hither, and to him that is destitute of

Wisedome, shee saith, Come and eate of my Meat, and drinke of the Christ profitable to none but to them that are called. Wine that I have drawne: Wisedome there, is Christ Iesus, who calleth us by his Gospel.
The lowest staffe or step of Salvation, is Vocation; the highest, is Glorification. For whom hee predestinated, them also hee called: and whom hee called, them also hee justified: and whom he justified, Rom. 8. 30. them also hee glorified. I speake in respect of men: For with God praescientia, his prescience is the first step of salvation, For those which he knew before, he predestinated: Wee runne from God, but he Rom. 8. 29. calleth us, and cryeth after us, as the Canaanite did after Christ, hee seeketh us being lost, hee calleth us being deafe, he lighteneth Luke 4. 18. 1 Sam. 26. 14. us being blind, hee freeth us being slaves, hee healeth us being lame, he quickeneth us being dead, he awaketh us by his Gospell, as David did Abner with his showting: The top, the roote, the foundation, and the roofe, the beginning, increasing, and finishing of our salvation is of God. Coepit and perficiet, Hee hath begunne, and he will finish it. So saith the Apostle, Hee that hath begun this good worke in you, will performe it, untill the day of Iesus Christ.
Paul arrogateth nothing to himselfe, but placeth himselfe in the ranck of the Wicked, till God called him: his words are, We are by nature the children of wrath as well as others. And to the Ephes. 2. 3. Gal. 1. 13. 15. Galathians, hee writeth thus, Yee have heard of my conversation in times past, in the Iewish Religion, how that I persecuted the Church of God extreamely and wasted it: But when it had pleased God, which had separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his Grace, etc. The Galathians, were Idolaters, and knew not God, til God called them. The Ephesians were darkenesse, but being called, they were lux Gal. 4. 8. Ephes. 5. 9. in Domino, Light in the Lord: The same is said of the Corinthians. But what doe I light a candle at noone-day, or adde legges 1 Cor. 12. to the Dromedarie, who runneth most swiftly? or powre water into the Sea, which overfloweth? or prove a knowne truth received of all men?
But to proceede; Christ is not profitable, but unto them that are called; otherwise hee is as a Medicine not taken, as a Plaister not applied, as Meate not eaten, as Light to them that are in a dungeon: Hereupon saith Paul, Wee preach Christ crucified, to the Iewes a stumbling-blocke, to the Gentiles foolishnesse, but to them that are called of God, the Wisedome of God, and the Power of God. Persius wept when he saw a Toade, that hee had not given thanks to God, who made him not a Toade, but a Man. Socrates thanked Nature, that had made him a reasonable creature, and not a Beast, and among them a Man, and not a Woman, and among men an Athenian, not a Thebane. Philip, rejoyced that Alexander was borne, in the dayes of Aristotle. The Queene of Sheba, pronounced Salomons men happy, for hearing him. How happy 1 Reg. 10. are wee then, that live in the call of the Gospel? Blessed are the

eyes (saith our Saviour to his Disciples) which see that yee see, for I A little part of the World called. tell you, that Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things which yee see, and have not seene them, and to heare those things that yee heare, and have not heard them: O terque, quaterque beati oculi nostri, O Luke 10. 23. thrice and foure times blessed are our eyes. For as God called a little angle of Iewry, and passed over all the World besides: For hee suffered all the Gentiles to walke in their owne wayes. So God Act. 14. 16. hath passed over all Africa, Asia, America, and called a little piece of Europe; all nations else are polluted. The Grecians adore the Virgin Mary, and Saints painted, the Creature for the Creator. The Aethiopians adore the Emperour Presbyter Iohannes. The Tartarians, the Great Cham. The Persians, the Fire and the Sunne. The Turkes, Mahomet. The Borussians, many gods, as Antrimpus, Protrimpus, Pelintus, etc. The Indians, spirits called Zemes. The Papists, Images: But wee adore the true God: They worship they know not what, we worship that which wee know: God hath given his Iohn 4. 22. Word to Europe, hee hath given to other Nations other blessings. To the Muscovites, hides and precious skinnes; to the Moores of Barbarie, sugar and sweet spices: to the Spaniards, wine and fruits; to the Indians, gold and silver; to them of Cathai, pearle and precious stones; to the Persians, silke and margarites; to them of Island, Finland, Greenland, fish and fowles: But to us hee hath given his Gospel, Blessed be the day, and happy bee the houre, wherein it came to us. Let that day, be as the day wherein Israel came out of Aegypt, let it bee the head of the yeare, let no cloud staine it, nor darkenesse possesse it. If we had as many tongues as Argus had eyes; if every haire of our head were a life, and every life as long as Methuselahs; all were too little to praise God. Thanke God that thou livest in this time of the Gospel, Let thy soule praise God, Let all that is Psal. 103. 1. within thee praise his holy name. Thus must God call us by his Word, else wee are reprobates in the Church, but not of the Church: For as excrements are in the body, and not of the body; so reprobates are in the Church, but not of the Church. They wet 1 Iohn 2. 19. out from us; but are not of us: for if they had bin of us, they would have continued with us. Many that heare this Sermo^ are among us, but not Mat. 25. of us: and the time shall come, that the Goats shall be separated from the Sheepe, the Dogs from the Lambes, the Crowes from the Doves, the Bastards from the Children, the Chaffe from the Corne. Oh then heare the call of Gods Ministers.
Calling is of two sorts; Externall. Internall.
Externall, is either common to all, by the instinct of nature, and workes of God, or not common to all, by the Word preached.
Internall and effectuall, is the worke of the whole Trinitie, whereby God the Father, through the Sonne, by the holy Ghost,

not onely offers Grace but giveth it to the Elect. Vocantur electi Calling externall and internall.Externall calling vnprofitable without the Internall. vel foris per externam praedicationem, vel intus efficaci operatione spiritus Sancti: The Elect are called either without by outward preaching of the Word, or within, by the inward effectuall operation of the holy Ghost.
This hath two parts; The one, Invitement. The other, Admission.
Invitement is, when God offers remission, and life everlasting to all that doe beleeve, and this outwardly by the preaching of the Word, and inwardly by inspiration of heavenly desires.
Admission is, when men are entred into the kingdome of Grace, and this outwardly by Baptisme, and inwardly by the spirit, engraffing them into Christ, and making them reall members of Gods Kingdome.
Of this effectuall calling speaketh Iude here, the greatest blessing in the World, For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Spiritus Dei non amittitur totaliter and finaliter, quos semel, Rom. 11. 29. Iohn 13. semper diligit Deus: The spirit of God cannot totally and finally bee lost, for whom God loveth once, hee loveth ever. Et quos semel, semper vocat deus, ejus vocatio irrita fieri non potest: And whom God once, hee ever calleth, for his calling cannot be frustrate, For all things worke for the best to them that love God, even to them that are called of purpose. Rom. 8. 28.
The externall calling is often unprofitable, because it is not joyned with the internall: the Ministery of man in the Church wanteth the Ministery of the spirit in the heart. Paul planteth, Apollo watereth, but God giveth the increase: Wee call you, but 1 Cor. 3. God chooseth you: We light a candle often before them that Mat 22. 14. Eccles. 24. Psal. 58. are blind, as Christ did to the Pharisees: Wee cry to them that are deafe, as David did to Abner: Wee set meate on the graves of dead men, that cannot eate: We charme deafe Adders, which will not heare: Wee mourne to them that will not weepe: Wee pipe to them, that will not dance: Wee preach to them, that will not repent. Luke 7. Laterem crudam lavamus; We wash a raw brike. For if the internall calling wanteth, wee may preach all our life, and you may heare ten thousand Sermons, and yet bee never the better, except the inward Schoole-master, the Spirit of God joyne with the Preacher. We cannot command Grace; For to one is given by the Spirit, the word of Wisedome: to another, the word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit: to another, is given Faith, by the same Spirit: to another, the gift of Healing, by the same Spirit: and 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10, 11. to another the operation of Great workes: to another, Prophecie: to another, the discerning of Spirits: to another, diversity of Tongues: and to another, the Interpretation of tongues: and all these things worketh even the selfe same Spirit, distributing to every man severally even as he will. The Blacke-moore will not change his skin, nor the Leopard

alter his spots; the Panther will not be tamed, nor the Adder The Gospell powerfull to them that are called. charmed, nor the crooked Serpent made straight, nor the salt Sea made fresh, and wicked men will not bee taught; wee can but preach to you, God by his Spirit must call you.
Lactantius speaking of the Word and the Minister, meaneth the inward calling joined with the outward; Da mihi (inquit) Libro 3. de falsa sapientia. hominem iracundum; and uno verbo Dei reddam placidum ut ovem, da avarum, and liberalem tibi reddam, da timidum, jam Cruces, ignes Phalaridis taurum contemnit; da libidinosum, and continentem reddam; tanta Doctrinae vis est, etc. that is, Give me an angry man, and with one Word of God, I will make him as meeke as a Lambe; give mee a covetous man, and I will render him againe liberall; give me a fearefull timerous man, and by and by hee shall contemne Gallowes, Fire, yea and Phalaris his Bull; give me a lecherous man and I will make him chaste and continent; such is the force of Doctrine. As the Load-stone draweth not Iron except it bee pure: So the Word of God doth not draw men from the mire and dirt of sinne, except they be purified with the Spirit. Briefly in one word, I say with Tertullian in Apologetico, Fiunt homines Christiani, non nascuntur; Men are made Christians, not borne; Ephes. 2. 2. Tit. 3. wee are by nature the children of Wrath, by grace wee are the Sonnes of God.
Once againe, Christ is not profitable, the Gospell is not availeable, but to them that are called; but being called, it is powerfull.
When the men of Cyprus and Cyrene spake unto the Grecians, and preached the Lord Iesus, The hand of the Lord was with them (that is, the power and vertue of the Spirit) so that a great number Acts 11. 21. beleeved and turned unto the Lord: Whereupon Chrysostome, libro adversus Gentiles, proveth the deity of Christ, that using no Arms but twelve poore Apostles, silly, weake, unlearned men, subdued the whole world to him: He overthrew the Lawes of the Fathers, he abrogated the ancient customes. A marvelous power by the Doctrine of Fishers, Toll-gatherers, Tent-makers, to raise the dead, to cleanse the Lepers, to expell Divels, to vanquish Tyrants, to put death to flight, to stay the tongues of the Philosophers, to shut the mouthes of the Orators, to conquer Kings and Princes, Barbarians, Grecians, and all men: Alexander with the sword, and the Apostles with the Word to conquer the World: For their sound went out through all the earth, and their Rom. 10. 18. words unto the ends of the World. Pray therefore, that God by his Spirit would make the Word effectuall, to be odorem vitae, a favour of life to life, and not a fauour of death unto death; (...); surely God, even God by his Spirit doth all.
In a word, God calleth us, else we come not; and his calling is diverse. 1. In respect of time: 2. In respect of place. In respect of time; For God calleth in divers houres of the day, that

is, in divers ages of the world, and in divers yeeres of our age. Gods calling diverse both for time and place. Some before the Law, as Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham; some under the Law, as Moses, David, Iosias, Esay, with other Kings and Prophets: Some after the Law, as the blessed Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors. Some in the first houre (their childhood) as Samuel, Ieremy, Iohn Baptist; some in the third houre (their youth) as Daniel and Iohn the Evangelist: some in the sixth houre (their middle age) as Peter and Andrew: some in the eleventh houre (their old age) as Gamaliel, Ioseph of Arimathea: some in the last houre of the day (the last houre of their life) as the Theefe upon the Crosse.
In respect of place; For God calleth some from their ship, and some from their shops, some from the Markets, some from under the hedges.
This diverse calling, at divers times, and in divers places, intimates A Caveat. A Comfort.
A Caveat for such as are called, that they magnifie not themselves and vilifie others. Nemo dicat ideo me vocavit, quia colui Deum, quomodo coluisses si vocatus non fuisses? let no man say, God August. de verb. Apost. hath called me for that I worship him, how shouldest thou worship him if thou wert not called?
A Comfort for them, that feele not themselves sufficiently called, that they rest in hope. God can and will call, when, where, and whom he will, either at the last houre, with the theefe upon the gallowes, or out of oppressing Egypt, with the Israelites, Luke 23. Exod. 3. or in the middest of the persecution of the Saints of God, as he did Saul. Let us then patiently attend our calling. Deus adversum Acts 9. vocat, credentem docet, sperantem consolatur, diligentem exhortatur, conantem adjisvat, precantem exaudit, and tamen Deus solus fidem, spem, charita tem, laborem, preces operatur: God calleth the adverse, teacheth the beleever, comforteth him that hopeth, exhorteth him that loveth, helpeth him that laboureth; and yet God alone worketh faith, hope, charity, etc.
Ille vocat aversos, vocatos justificat, justificatos sanctificat, sanctificatos glorificat: Hee calleth the averse, justifieth them that are called, sanctifieth them that are justified, and glorifieth them that are sanctified. The Whelpes of a Lion are borne dead; but at the yelling and roaring of the Lion they are quickned, and raised from death: So we are borne dead, dead in our trespasses Ephes. 2. 1. Phil. 2. 16. and sinnes; but by the calling of the Gospell, as by the roaring of the Lion, wee are quickned. It is a word of life, our calling, and all good is wrought by it. As it is verbum scientiae and prudentiae, a word of knowledge and wisedome; and potentiae, 1 Cor. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 1. 23. Acts 14. and of power; and gratiae, and of grace; sic est verbum vitae, so it is the word of life: Nulla scientia, nec potentia, nec gratia, nec vita sine Evangelio; there is no knowledge, nor power, nor grace, nor life, without the Gospell.

Well, God calleth inwardly by his Spirit, outwardly by his Our Vocation what it teacheth us. Sanctification. Word. This should teach us: first, to walke worthy our calling, that as he which hath called is holy, so should we be holy in all our life and conversation, according as it is written, Bee yee holy for I am holy: We are called not to ncleannesse, but unto sanctification; Levit. 11. 44. 1 Thes. 4. for unto this end hath the grace, goodnesse and bountifulnesse of our Lord appeared, that we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: because sancta conversatio confundit inimicum, aedificat proximum, glorificat Deum; a holy life, a godly conversation doth confound and stop the mouthes of our enemies, doth edifie and build up our Brethren, doth glorifie God.
Secondly, Seeing the internall meanes of our calling is the Spirit, this should teach us never to grieve the Spirit, by whom we are called out of darkenesse into light. Nature teacheth us not to grieve our naturall parents, and Religion should teach us not to grieve the Spirit: Grieve not the Spirit by whom ye are sealed Ephes. 4. to the day of Redemption.
Last of all, seeing we are called not onely inwardly by the Spirit, but outwardly by the holy Word. This word must bee unto us dearer than thousands of silver and gold, more precious than the gold of Ophir; sweeter than the Honey, or the Honycombe: For albeit God can onely, by the inward motion of his blessed Spirit, worke out, make-sure, and perfect our salvation; yet it pleaseth him in his eternall wisedome, to use the word as an ordinary meanes of our vocation and salvation. As then God giveth learning by study, wisedome by experience, riches by travell, and like things by like meanes: so he maketh perfect the calling of his Saints, by the preaching of the Word, which Rom. 1. 16. is the power of God to salvation to every man that beleeveth.
The second title of honour given here to the Saints, is Sanctification; he calleth them sanctified of God the Father: this is the next grace wherewith he adorneth them. For God continueth his graces, as Iacob continued his wrastling, as Peter continued his knocking till they let him in: and God will not leave calling and working till hee hath sanctified and perfected his graces; like the Sunne that never leaveth shining, but commeth Psal. 19. Exod. 17. forth as a Bridegroome out of his Chamber, and rejoyceth as a Giant to runne his course. Like the Fountaine of Elim, and waters of Shilo, that never leave running. The calling of God is without repentance: Rom. 11. 29. For God is not a man, that hee should lye; neither as the Sonne of man, Numb. 23. 19. that he should repent; as Balaam, though a false Prophet, said most truely. Whom God calleth, them he justifieth; whom hee justifieth, he sanctifieth; and whom he sanctifieth, he glorifieth. The learned call this Text in Rom. 8. Auream catenam, a golden Rom. 8. 29, 30. Chaine; hee that draweth one linke, draweth all the Chaine: For as hee that hath one damnable sinne, hath all sinne, and is

guilty of all; so hee that hath one grace effectually, hath all. God perfects his Workes. God is not like a stepmother, that putteth out her child to nurse; he is not as the Partridge or Bird, that forsaketh her nests; nor Ier. 1. 17. Iob 29. 1 Reg. 3. like the Ostrich, that leaveth her egs in the dust; like Salomons Harlot, that exposed her child to the sword: But he is as the Eagle, that carrieth her yong in her wings, till they can flie; as the Pelicane, that feedeth her yong ones with her heart-bloud till they can feed themselves: He blesseth us, untill he hath brought us into his Kingdome of blisse, where wee shall never hunger nor thirst any more. For, Hee will destroy Death for ever, and the Lord God will wipe away teares from all faces, and the rebuke of his Esa. 25. 8, 9. people will hee take away out of all the Earth, for the Lord hath spoken it, and in that day men shal say, Loe this is our God, We have waited for him, and hee will save us; this is the Lord, wee have waited for him, we will rejoyce and bee joyfull in his Salvation. So the Lord Iesus hath perfected the worke of our Redemption; hee was borne for us, he lived, hee died, he rose againe, he ascended, hee maketh intercession for us, and hee will glorifie us: so saith our Saviour; Father, I will that they which thou hast given me, bee with mee, even where I am, that they may behold my glory, that is, that they may enjoy the Iohn 17. 24. eternall glory with mee.
This is a Doctrine of singular comfort, like the wine and oyle that revived the wounded man; like the news of Iosephs honour, Luke 10. Gen. 45. 28. Luke 2. that comforted old Iacob; like the song of the heavenly souldiers, that rejoyced the Sheepheards; like Davids Harpe, to drive away Sauls melancholy. Hath God begun with thee? hath he called thee? hast thou felt the motions of his Spirit in thy heart? Noli timere, bee not afraid; hee will end with thee, and accomplish all his graces in thee; I meane not in perfection: Nam sanctitas tribus gradibus perficitur, Holinesse consisteth in three degrees: In this life, while we are regenerate by water and the holy Spirit: after this life, while the Soule enjoyeth the presence of God: after the day of Iudgement, when in Soule and body wee shall bee united to our head Christ Iesus.
In this life there is a threefold Sanctification:

1 Imputed unto us.
2 Wrought in us.
3 Wrought by us.

Imputed Sanctification is, when God imputeth unto us the sanctification of Christ; Who is made to us Wisedome, Righteousnes, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Sanctification and Redemption, By this wee are said to bee sanctified, when the vertue of Christs Passion, the fruit of his Death, the power of his Resurrection is applied unto us, and Christs Sanctification made ours, by imputation. Therefore the Apostle saith, That Iesus Christ to the end that hee may sanctifie his people with his owne bloud, suffered without the gate. Heb. 13. 12.
Sanctification wrought within us is, the inward change of a

man iustified, whereby the image of God is restored in him, a Protestants Religion teach Sanctity. change, not a non esse ad esse, from a not being to a being; for the faculties of the soule were before; not ab esse ad non esse, from a being to a not being, for the faculties of the soule remaine still; but ab esse ad esse, from an ill being to a good being; not abolishing the will, minde, and affections, but rectifying and renuing them, a change of a man iustified; for we are iustified before we are sanctified. Iustification is actus individuus, Sanctification is actus dividuus; we are iustified at once, we are sanctified by degrees: wee are iustified when our sinnes are not imputed unto us; we are sanctified when a cleane heart is created, and a right spirit renued in us.
Sanctification wrought by us, is that, whereby wee sanctifie and make holy the outward works and actions of our life. This the Lord requireth, Be ye holy for I am holy. To this Saint Paul Levit. 11. 44. exhorteth; let us cleanse our selves from all silthinesse of the flesh and 2 Cor. 7. 1. of the spirit, and grow up to full holinesse in the feare of God. The righteousnesse of Justification is by faith without works; the righousnesse of Sanctification is by workes, and by faith; justifying righteousnesse is perfect, but not inherent; sanctifying righteousnesse is imperfect, but inherent; glorifying righteousnesse is perfect and inherent: neverthelesse we must confesse, that all our sanctification is from God.
Here the slander of the Papists is answered for Justification, for whom God calleth, he justifieth; and whom hee iustifieth, he sanctifieth: We preach not an idle faith, as they say, opening windowes and doores to all wickednesse, by a Solifidian error, and an imputative Iustice. A late Papist in his Treatise of the Eucharist, saith, We preach liberty, we hinder good workes, we teach a naked faith: No, no, wee teach sanctity, holinesse, more than they, who with Alexander the third, call whoredome and adultery, Peccadilia, little sinnes; who cry, Si non caste tamen caute, if not chastly, yet charily: who maintaine open Stewes with Pius Quintus, who dispence with all sinnes. Allen the arch Papist said, Commit our men what sinne they list, omit what goodnesse they list, yet we teach them that bare faith iustifieth them. No, no, we say with Zachary, God hath delivered us out of the Luke 1. 74, 75. hands of our enemies, that we should serve him without feare in holinesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of our life. We say with Paul, that The Tit. 2. 11, 12. grace of God that bringeth salvation to all men hath appeared, and teacheth us to forsake all impiety and wicked worldly desires, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. We say with Saint Peter, If ye call him Father, which without respect of persons iudgeth according 1 Pet. 1. 17. to every mans worke, passe the time of your dwelling here in feare. We say with Saint Iohn, and all other holy men, Let us love one another, for love commeth of God, and every one that loveth is borne of God and knoweth God; he that loveth not, knoweth not God, for God is love.

We say with Christ, Blessed are they that heare the Word of God, and Iustification and Sanctification though joyned yet distinguished. keepe it. Wee urge men more to holinesse than they doe; wee use more sharpe and effectuall reasons, not like the leaden blunt Doctors in Popery, but arrowes drawne out of a better Quiver. Paul thought this a principall reason above others, to move them by the wounds, and blood, and merits of the Lord Iesu: For having spent eleven Chapters in the Treatise of Iustification, at last he breaketh out, as the Sunne out of a cloud, and moveth them to holinesse, by the name, the death, and merits of Christ Iesu; saying, I beseech you Brethren by the mercies of GOD, that yee give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, Rom. 12. 1, 2. which is your reasonable serving of God, and fashion not your selves like unto this world. A more effectuall reason, than to argue from our workes, our merits, our deserts, which is death; For the wages of sinne is death. Rom. 6. 23.
Iustification and Sanctification goe together, yet wee enter not into heaven chiefely as wee are sanctified and regenerated: For that is but in part, but as wee are iustified by the death and righteousnesse of Christ, which is perfect, compleat, and absolute. Yea, say the Romanists, faith and workes cannot be sundred: Ergo, we are iustified by workes aswell as by faith. But I deny the Argument, they reason like blind men, the light of righteousnesse hath not shined on them, they feed on ashes. For many things are conioyned, which yet have diverse operations; as the light and heat of the Sunne, where the one is there is the other, yet are we not warmed by the light, but by the heat, nor yet directed by the heat, but by the light of it. Fides est sola, at non solitaria, sola in actu justificationis, at non solitaria in usu and operatione quotidiana, nam operatur per dilectionem; Faith is alone but not solitary, alone in the act of iustification, but not alone in the use and daily operation, for it worketh by love, or as Chemnitius reasoneth against Andradius, and the Councell of Trent: We have eyes and eares at once, and they are ioynt members of the body, yet we heare not with our eyes, and see not with our eares; Manus non est sola, sed coniuncta cum reliquiis membris, at manus sola scribit; the hand is not alone, but ioyned with the other members, but the hand alone writeth; the tongue is not alone, nor severed from the rest of the members, yet the tongue alone speaketh; the Prince goeth not without the Court, yet the Prince ruleth alone, and not the Court; Fidem and opera coniungi magis quam confundi vellem, I had rather conioine faith and works than confound them. Finely therefore, saith a Schoole-man; Deus justificat effective, fides iustificat apprehensive, opera iustificant declarative, God iustifieth effectually; Faith iustifieth apprehensively; Tho. Aquin. Workes iustifie declaratively; that is, they shew and declare unto the world that we are iustified; Iustificatio est verbum forense, nec qualitatem aliquam denotat sed absolutionem a reatu, non Rom. 4. 26.

consistit in qualitatum infursione, sed peccatorum remissione, Iustification Iustification how wrought. is a Law word, neither doth it note any quality, but absolution from guilt, neither consisteth it in the infusion of qualities, but in the remission of sinnes. Our invisible faith iustifieth us before our invisible God; for he seeth into the heart, and our visible workes doe iustifie us before men that be visible and which behold our lives and conversations. And Paul placeth our Iustification, Non in qualitatum infusione, sed peccatorum remissione, not in the infusion of qualities, but in the remission of sinnes. Deus dat beatitudinem, Christus redimit, Spiritus obsignat, Fides apprehendit, Opera testificantur; God giveth happinesse, Christ purchaseth it, the Spirit sealeth it, Faith apprehendeth it, and Workes testifie it.



THE THIRD SERMON.

VERS. I.
Reconciliation part of Redemption.

AS I have begun to speake of this Heavenly Doctrine of Sanctification, so will I proceed therein. And to speake in order, wee must know that of Christs Priesthood there bee two parts: Redemption and Intercession.
Redemption is the first part, whereby hee hath wrought for us the matter of our Deliverance from all evils; as Hell, Death, Damnation. Heb. 7. 24. Now of this Redemption, there be two members: The Luke 1. 74. merit or matter of Reconciliation, and Sanctification. According to that of the Apostle, But yee are sanctified, but yee are justified in the name of the Lord Iesus, and by the spirit of God. 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1.
Reconciliation is the first part of our Redemption: whereby we are restored from the Curse into the love and favour of God: For when wee were enemies, wee were reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, etc. for hee is our peace. And it pleased the Father that in him Rom. 5. 10. Ephes. 2. 14. Col. 1. 20. 22. all fulnesse should dwell, and by him to reconcile all things unto himselfe, and to set at peace through the bloud of his Crosse, both the things in Earth and the things in Heaven.
Now againe of Reconciliation there bee two parts: Remission of sins, and Imputation of righteousnesse: For saith the Apostle; He was delivered to Death for our sins, and is risen againe for our justification. And againe, God was in Christ, and reconciled the Rom. 6. 25. World to himselfe, not imputing their sinnes unto them, and hath committed to us the Word of Reconciliation. Now then are wee Embassadors 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20, 21. for Christ, as though God did beseech you through us, wee pray you in

Christs stead, that ye be reconciled unto God. For hee hath made himselfe Iustification upon remission of sinnes, and Christs righteousnesse imputed. sinne for us, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God, through him.
Remission of sinne is the first part of Reconciliation; whereby the guiltinesse and punishment of our sinnes is removed from us by Christs sufferings. For thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise againe the third day, that Repentance and Remission of sinnes might bee preached in his name to all nations. And, Hee through Death, hath destroyed him that had the power of Death, that is the Divell; and that hee might deliver all them, which for feare of Death Hebr. 2. 14, 15. were all their life time subject to bondage. Yea, it is Christ alone: That Apoc. 1. 5. hath washed us from our sinnes with his bloud; Yea, His bloud it is that cleanseth us from all sinne. 1 Iohn 1. 7.
Imputation of righteousnesse is the other part of Reconciliation; whereby, by Christs righteousnesse being imputed unto us, we appeare just and blamelesse before God our Father: For by him wee have received the attonement. And as by the offence of Rom. 5. 11, 16. one, the fault came on all men to condemnation; So by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded towards all men to the justification of life. And Hee hath now reconciled us in the body of Col. 1. 22. his flesh, through Death, to make us holy and unblameable and without fault in the sight of God his Father.
Now againe, of Remission and Imputation spring Iustification and Adoption: For, Being justified by Faith wee have Peace Rom. 5. 1. towards God, through our Lord Iesus Christ. For, when the fulnesse of time was come, God sent foorth his Sonne made of a woman, and made under the Law, that hee might redeeme them which were under the Law, that wee might receive the adoption of Sonnes.
Iustification is that, wherby we being delivered before God of the guiltinesse of sin, are accounted just. For, Who shall lay any thing Rom. 8. 33. to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifieth, who shall condemne? As by one mans disobedience many are made sinners; so by the obedience Rom. 5. 19. of one, shall many also bee made righteous.
Adoption is that whereby wee are accounted. Sonnes and heires of God, For yee have not (saith Paul) received the spirit of Rom. 8. 15. bondage to feare againe: but yee have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we crie Abba Father: And hee further affirmeth, That we are all the Sonnes of God by Faith in Christ Iesus.
From these two, wee obtaine these two blessings: First, that all crosses turne to us to the best: so saith the Apostle, All Rom. 8. 28: things worke together for the best, ^o them even them that are called of purpose. For though hee visit (...) sinnes with rods, and our offences with scourges, yet his loving kindnesse will hee never take from us, nor suffer his truth to faile.
Secondly, by Iustification and Adoption wee obtaine a chiefety or rule over all Creatures, except Angels. For so saith David; Thou hast made him little lower than Angels, and crowned him Psal. 8. 5, 6. with glory and worship: Thou hast made him to have dominion in the

Workes of thy hands, thou hast put all things under his feete. And the Sanctification in Mortification and viyification. Sanctification imperfect in this life. same also the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrewes affirmeth.
Now for Sanctification, whereby God beginneth in us holinesse; that hath two members: Mortification to sinne, and Resurrection to righteousnesse.
Mortification is the first part, whereby the power of sinne is killed in us; and of this Mortification Paul speaketh thus: Our old man is crucified within, that the body of sinne might bee destroyed, that henceforth wee should not serve sinne. And againe, That Rom. 6. 6. Gal. 2. 19. I might live unto God, I am crucified with Christ.
Resurrection unto righteousnesse is, whereby sanctity, holinesse, is really inherent, and begun in us, and is increased dayly more and more. For, Wee are buried with Christ by Baptisme unto his death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of his Rom. 6. 4. Father; So wee also should walke in newnesse of life.
These parts of Sanctification, referred unto the Soule, are called (...) but referred to the Body, they are called frustus seu (...), fruits. This (...) is a renewing of all the faculties of the Soule; a converting them from evill to good; A bringing foorth of fruits worthy amendment of life. And Luke 3. 8. this (...) hath his Initium, beginning, and comitem, and his companion. His beginning is is godly sorrow: for whose heart Gods spirit doth touch, is sorry for his sinnes committed against so mercifull a Father. His Companion is a spirituall combate: for, the Flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh. Gal. 5. 17.
This Sanctification, being the second principall part of our Redemption, is the quallity, whereby Gods spirit doth renew us, and begin in us newnesse of life: but it is not perfect, absolute in us. Paenitentia and amor sequuntur noticiam nostram: Repentance and Love follow our Knowledge, but our knowledge is 1 Cor. 13. 9. but in part. And this I note against the blasphemy of Osiander, who saith that the essentiall righteousnesse of Christ is in us: but the righteousnesse of Christ is without us, not within us, and is apprehended by Faith. And therefore Pauls care was to bee found in him, that is in Christ, Not having (saith Paul) mine Phil. 3. 9. own righteousnes, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, even the righteousnesse which is of God through Faith. For the righteousnesse whereby wee are justified, is the meere imputation of Christs worke unto us: and therefore this word Imputation is tenne times recited in one Chapter. When a friend Rom. 5. of his owne goods and not of mine, payeth debt that I owe, that payment, or satisfaction is mine, it is imputed to mee, when as yet it is the worke of my friend, and none of mine. After the same manner, the righteousnesse of Christ is ours. This righteousnesse therefore, whereby wee are justified, is Grace and not Nature; Imputation, not Essence; it is a Communication

of the benefit of Christ, not a commixion of essence: it is Holinesse is said in diverse senses. an effect of the proper worke of Christ, non substantia ipsa Christi; not the very substance of Christ. The other righteousnesse, wherewith he sanctifieth us, is but begun onely, it is not absolute: For as the Sunne shineth, and as the fire warmeth us, and yet doe not transferre their essence into us: So Christ doth regenerate and sanctifie us by the vertue of his Spirit, (quo homo and Deus est) as he is man and God, not as he is man alone, or as he is God alone; and yet he doth not transferre his essence into us: and therefore Osiander is much deceived. The place of Paul, quoted by him, helpeth him nothing; for we are the righteousnesse 2 Cor. 5. 21. of Christ, ut ille fuit peccatum pro nobis, as he was sinne for us: but sinne was not really in Christ, no more is Christs righteousnesse really in us, but onely imputatively: faith as the hand applyeth it unto us, and flyeth into heaven, and there maketh us partakers of his Sanctity. Our faith wrastleth with God in heaven, our charity wrastleth with men here below on earth; both of them are exercised, neither idle nor unfruitfull: and therefore the Apostle joyneth, Faith in Christ and love toward Col. 1. 4. all Saints together. O Brethren, how many bee there that can tell a smooth tale of Christ, and yet cannot speak one wise word of Iustification and Sanctification; and yet Peter requireth it of all.
Hence am I to derive an exhortation to all men to holinesse and sanctification, seeing that Rahabs house was knowne by a Ios. ^. Iudg. 11. Mat. 26. 2 Reg. 9. red thread, and the Ephramites by lisping, and Peter by speaking, and Iehu by driving his Chariot: So Christians are knowne by sanctification. Every child of God is sanctified, Secundum plus aut minus, either more or lesse. But first let me speake of the diverse acceptions of the word, ne inpingamus ubi non est lapis, lest we stumble where there is no stone.
1. It is taken for that which is pure and perfect and cleane: Levit. 19. 2. So God alone is said to be holy.
2. It is taken for that which is lawfull, as 1 Cor. 7. 14. The unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the Husband, else were your children uncleane, but now they are holy.
3. For that which is separated and set apart from common uses, and reserved to sacred and holy uses. Thus in the Law, those things were called holy and sanctified, which were taken from the common use of the people, and set apart for the use and service of God; as the Oyle, Shew bread; first fruits, vessels of the Tabernacle. In this sense the Priests were called holy, because they were separate from the common life of men, to serve in the Tabernacle. Thus the people of Israel, separated from the rest of the Nations, were called by Moses, a sanctified people to the Lord; and by Ieremy, a thing hallowed to the Lord.

4. For that which is consecrated to a godly and holy use: Wee must bee holy because God is holy. In which respect it is opposite to prophanenesse. So the Temple was holy, Ieremy was sanctified, that is, consecrated to be a Prophet. So Christ sanctified himselfe, that is, dedicated himselfe to be a sacrifice for the sinnes of the world.
5. It is taken for purity of body and minde; as 2 Cor. 7. 5. So it is taken here.
And that wee should bee holy, that is, pure both in body and in minde, it is the will and commandement of God. Would you know his will and doe it, that thou maist enter into heaven? For not every one that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter into heaven, but hee that doth the will of my Father which is in heaven: then be holy; For Mat. 7. 21. this is the will of God, even your holinesse. 1 Thes. 4. 3.
There be many reasons to move us to Sanctification, to Holinesse; whereof one is often used, drawne from the person of God our Father; that children must resemble their Father, else are they Bastards rather than sonnes. So reasoneth God, Ye shall be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy: repeated by Peter, As hee Levit. 19. 2. which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; because it is written, Be ye holy for I am holy. All that is in God our Father is holy, all that pertaineth to Gods name is holy: Holy is his name. His person is holy. Hereupon the Seraphins cryed Luke 1. 49. one unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole world is full of his glory, his workes are holy: So saith David, Esay 6. 3. The Lord is righteous in all his wayes, and holy in all his Workes. His Iudgements are holy: O my God, (saith the Prophet in his distresse) Psal. 45. 17. I cryed by day, but thou hearest not, and by night, but have no audience, but thou art holy, etc. His Temple or House is holy: so Psal. 22. 1, 2. saith Paul, The Temple of God is holy, which ye are. His Mountaine is holy, and therfore called A holy Mountaine. His Kingdome is 1 Cor. 3. 17. holy, for no uncleane thing shall enter his Kingdome, neither whatsoever Psal. 15. worketh abomination or lyes. Therefore we must be holy if wee Apoc. 21. 27. looke to live with God; Extra sunt Canes, without bee dogges, prophane and polluted persons. Apoc. 22. 15.
The same reason holdeth for holinesse, that doth for mercy, clemency, love, meeknesse, and all other attributes of the Lord. Let mee reason as the Scripture reasoneth. God is mercifull, therefore wee must bee mercifull; God forgiveth his enemies, therefore we must forgive. So reasoneth Christ himselfe; Love your enemies, blesse them that curse you, doe good to them that hate you, and pray for them that hurt you and persecute you, that you may bee the Children of your Father which is in Heaven. God is love, therefore we must love: So reasoneth Saint Iohn; Beloved, let us love one another, 1 Iohn 4. 7, 8. for love commeth of God, and every one that loveth is born of God and knoweth God, he that loveth not, knoweth not God, for God is love. God is meek, therfore we must be meek: Learn of me (saith Christ) for I am meek, etc. So God is holy, therefore we must be holy. Mat. 11. 29.

Another reason is taken from the end of our Redemption, urged Holinesse the end of our Redemption: without it wee shall not see God. by the Apostle, saying; The grace of God that bringeth salvation to all men, hath appeared, and teacheth us, that we should deny ungodlinesse, and worldly lusts, and that wee should live soberly, righteously, and holily in this present world. Hath Christ sweat water and blood? hath his heart beene molten like waxe? his strength dryed up Tit. 2. 11, 12. Psal. 22. 14, 15. like a potsheard? hath his tongue cloven to his iawes and brought to the dust of the earth, that wee should be wantons? O caecas hominum mentes! O pectora caeca! nati sumus e silice, nutriti lacte ferino: O blinde mindes of men! O blind hearts! wee are borne of a flint-stone, and nourished with the milke of wilde beasts. If Iacob sorrowed so for Ioseph; if David would have dyed for Absalom; if Rachel wept for her children and would not be comforted because they were not. Let the death of Christ Gen. 37. 35. 2 Sam. 17. Mat. 2. Luke 1. 75. Luke 7. Mat. 26. Psal. 51. pierce our hearts, and move us to holinesse, and let us serve him in holinesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of our life. The Lord sustaine our hearts, that with Mary we may wash his feet with our teares, and with Peter wee may weepe bitterly. Create in us Lord a cleane heart, and renue in us a right spirit.
Another reason is taken from our Salvation, for without holinesse we cannot be saved. For though wee be not saved for it, yet we are not saved without it. Hereupon saith the Apostle; Follow peace with holinesse, without the which yee cannot bee saved. A Heb. 12. 14. sore, a fearefull speech, like the thunder in Mount Horeb; which I adde the rather, because men mocke at holinesse: Oh say they, you are holy men, you are men of the Spirit, you are Saints, you are Sermon-men. The Bastard Ismael flowted at Isaac, Gal. 5. 29. 2 Sam. 6. Ier. 18. Michol skorneth at Davids dancing before the Arke, the men of Anathoth did smite Ieremy with their tongue, the Adversaries of Iuda jested at the people. But if thou beest not holy, if thou beest not a Saint, thou art a divell: and know, that if ye Esra 4. Rom. 8. 13. Gal. 6. 8. live after the flesh ye shall dye; for he that soweth to the flesh, shall of the flesh reape corruption. As Naomi said, Call me not Naomi, but Mara: So call not these men Christians, Gospellers, but call them swine, dogges, that tread pearles under their feet; call them Adders that will not be charmed; call them Wolves that heare Mat. 7. Psal. 58. Iohn 10. Hebr. 12. Iohn 6. not their shepheard; call them Bastards, and not sonnes; yea, call them divels, as Christ called Iudas; and say unto them, as Christ said to Peter, Come behind me Satan, thou understandest not the things that bee of God, but of man. I marvell that the Sunne, that is witnesse of these villanies, standeth in the heavens, that the heavens raine not downe fire and Brimstone, as Gen. 19. 23. that the earth swallow them not up, as Numb. 16. that the creatures put not on their harnesse, as Ioel 1.
Lastly, wee are sanctified; wee must therefore be holy, that our names and our natures, our calling, and conversation may be correspondent; if then we will have part with Christ we must

live after the example of Christ; if wee will have Communion Causes of Sanctification. The whole Trinity sanctifie. with the Saints, on Earth, wee must bee Saints on Earth, if wee will have the company of Saints in Heaven, our conversation on Earth must bee heavenly: Partly, Wee are chosen in Christ that wee should bee holy, and without blame before him, and partly, because the heavenly Court receiveth none, but such as are pure, Ephes. 7. 4. Apoc. 21. 27. holy, innocent.
David saith, holinesse becommeth thy house for ever. If holinesse become Gods house, much more us, which are the servants of his house. Wel, the God of peace sanctifie you throughout, and I pray God that your Spirits, Soules and Bodies may bee holy and harmelesse, untill the comming of the Lord Iesus.
For all our sanctification and holinesse is from the Lord, as it appeareth plainely by the words of my Text; Sanctified of God the Father: Causa efficiens sanctitatis; the efficient cause of holinesse is God the Father: Instrumentalis causa fides; the instrumentall cause is Faith; for, Fides cor purificat, Faith purifieth the heart. Materialis causa, the materiall cause, est energia sanctitatis quae est in Act. 15. 9. Iohn 1. 16. Christo, for of his fulnes we have all received, even grace for grace. Formalis causa, the formall cause; est nostra renovatio ab impuris qualitatibus ad puras and integras: is our renewing from impure qualities to pure and sound: Finalis, Dei cultus, the final, Gods worship, to the honour of God and the edifying of our neighbour.
But yet observe with mee, that though sanctification bee attributed to the Father, yet the Sonne, and the holy Ghost are not excluded: for wee hold the principle of the Schoolemen; Opera Trinitatis quoad extra sunt indivisa; the outward workes of God are common to the whole Trinity; and so are we sanctified by Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost: yet sanctification is here ascribed to the Father, as being the ground and first author thereof. For the Son ne sanctifieth by meriting sanctification; the holy Ghost sanctifieth by working it; but the Father sanctifieth, both by sending his Sonne to merit it, and also by giving the holy Spirit to worke. Thus Opera Trinitatis, the outward workes of God are common to the whole Trinitie. Sed opera Trinitatis, quoad intus esse singularia; the inward workes of God are singular, and proper to some persons of the Trinitie: Vt patri potentia, filio redemptio, spiritu sanctificatio tribuitur; as power is ascribed to the Father, redemption to the Sonne, sanctification to the holy Ghost: and yet these three now and then bee attributed to all the three persons. Quod Vrsinus; servato ordine agendi, for as the Father and the holy Ghost doe redeeme, and yet mediately by the Sonne, so the Father and the Sonne doe sanctifie, yet mediately by the Holy Ghost. The proper or incommunicable workes of the Trinity, are the inward eternall and hypostaticall properties, as thus, Pater generat, the Father

begetteth, the Sonne is begotten, and the holy Ghost proceedeth, Distinction of persons in the Trinitie. and yet the Father is not the Sonne, nor the Sonne the Father, nor the holy Ghost either Father or Sonne. The other workes of the Trinity are indivisible, how soever sometimes distinct, as Creation to the Father, Redemption to the Sonne, Sanctification to the holy Ghost. Peter Martyr sayth thus; Pater ut fons, filius ut flumen, spiritus ut rivus ab utroque procedens; The Father as the Fountaine, the Sonne as the flood, the Spirit as the River proceeding from them both. The fountaine is not the flood, nor the flood the fountaine, nor the river either fountaine or flood, and yet all these bee one water. So the Father is not the Sonne, nor the Sonne the Father, nor the Spirit either Father or Sonne; and yet but one God. Et hi tres sanctificant, and all these three sanctifie: quoth Lactantius. Ab uno omnia, per unum omnia, in uno omnia, a quo, per quem, in quo omnia, unus a se unus ab uno, unus ab ambobus; una tamen and eadem operatio? All things from one, all things by one, all things in one: from whom, by whom, and in whom are all things: one of himselfe, one from one, one from both, and yet one and the same operation. Tres sunt in trinitate, non statu, sed ordine, non essentia, sed forma, non potestate, sed specie, unus status, essentiae and potestatis, quia sunt unus Deus. There bee three persons in the Trinity, not in state and condition, but in order; not in essence, but in forme; not in power, but in kinde: for there is one and the same state of essence and power, because these three persons bee but one God.
But to leave this: The persons of the Trinity are here distinguished: they are sanctified of God the Father, and reserved unto Iesus Christ. The persons of the Father and the Sonne are discerned, as in all other places: Pater quasi fons exuberans; filius ut rivus defluens; ille ut Sol, hic ut radius; ille ut os, hic ut vox procedens: nonautem separantur, sicut nec rivus a fonte, nec radius a Sole, nec vox abore: quia aqua fontis est in Rivo, and solis lumen in radio, and oris virtus in voce: The Father, as the fountaine abounding, the Sonne, as the river flowing; he as the Sunne, this as the beame; hee as the mouth, this as the voice proceeding: they are not separated, as neither the river is separated from the fountaine, nor the beame from the Sunne, nor the voyce from the mouth, for the water in the fountaine is in the river, as the light of the Sunne is in the beame, and the vertue of the mouth in the voyce.
The distinction of the persons obscurely delivered in the Old Testament, in the New is made clearer than the noone-day. For at the Baptisme of Christ, the Sonne was seene: The holy Ghost descended like a Dove. Againe, Christ bade them Baptise, In the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost. Againe, Mat. 3. 16. this was Pauls farewell to the Churches: The grace of our Lord Iesus, the love of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with you, etc. Mat. 28. 19.

Againe, Saint Iohn saith, That there are three that beare witnessein Sanctification not available without preservation. heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one: Also the place, Luk. 1. 35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee and the power of the highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing that shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Sonne of God; doth 1 Iohn 5. 7, 8. sufficiently prove the Trinity; which places the Confession of Belgia quoted against Iewes, Mahomitans, Marcion, Mans, Sabellius, Samositanus, etc.
The third title of honour here given unto the Elect, is reservation, that they are reserved unto Christ Iesus; that is (as St. Peter saith) They are kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation. All former blessings without this is to small purpose, 1 Pet. 1. 15. in that God not onely calleth us, but sanctifieth us, and not only so neither, but also reserveth us in Christ Iesus. This maketh Luke 6. 38. up the measure of our joy, till the Bushell runne over. So Paul told the Corinthians, that God had called them, and would confirme 1 Cor. 1. 8. them unto the end, that they may bee blamelesse in the day of Lord Iesus. This is the Anchor of our hope, as the Sun at noone day, as the Moone in the Full, that God preserveth us for ever. He that keepeth Israel, doth neither slumber nor sleepe; the Lord is thy keeper, the Psal. 121. 4, 5. Lord is thy defence upon thy right hand, the Sunne shall not burne thee by day, nor the Moone by night. He that keepeth a sicke man, sleepeth; but he that keepeth us, never sleepeth: his eyes are alwaies open day and night, like the gates of the new Ierusalem. Apoc. 20. Christ giveth this reason why his sheepe doe not perish: My sheepe (saith hee) heare my voyce, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternall life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck Iohn 10. 27, 28. them out of my hand. Our life is like a Ship in the Sea, beaten with winde, tossed with waves, turmoyled with all kind of troubles; and were it not that Christ is in this Ship, we were like to sinke, nor with Peter into the Sea, but with Iudas into hell. And this point is most notably handled by Master Calvin, who affirmeth, that Gods providence is over all the parts of our life; we cannot Calvin libro 1. cap. 17. Instit. (saith he) take heat nor cold without danger; by heat wee may surfeit, and by colde catch an ague, if wee mount up an horse, In lapsu unius pedis periclitatur tota vita; in the sliding of one foot is the danger of our life; if wee enter into a Ship, we are but an inch from death; if we walke in the streets, so many tiles, so many deaths hang over our heads, walk into the Forrests or Fields, so many beasts, so many enemies that conspire our destruction, shut thy selfe in a Garden, there a Serpent may kill thee: Latet anguis in herbis. And to recapitulate all this: Bibulus a noble Romane, riding thorough the streets in great pompe, a tile fell from the house, and strooke him so deepe into the head, that it killed him. Pope Adrian, drinking at a Fountaine, was choked with a flye: Anacreon the Poet was choked with the graine of a Grape; Gregory the 13. was suddenly

strangled with a rheume, and it is said of Plato, that he dyed in a Gods providence watcheth over all, especially his. dreame, and of Publius Crassus, that hee dyed laughing. Into these dangers might wee have fallen, if God had not preserved us.
Marvellous is the providence of God in our lives: Iob in his misery saw the want of it, and therefore wished, saying, Oh that I were as in times past, when God preserved me, when his light shined upon Iob. 29. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. my head, and when by his light I walked through the darkenesse; as I was in the dayes of my youth, when Gods providence was upon my Tabernacle, when the Almighty was with me, and my children round about me; when I washed my pathes with butter, and when the rocke powred me out Rivers of Oyle, etc. In all the parts of our life God miraculously preserveth us, miraculously doth he preserve us in our conception: and therefore saith the just man; Thou hast powred me out like milke, turned me to Curds like Cheese, thou hast cloathed mee with skinne and flesh, and joyned mee together with bones and sinewes; thou hast given me life and grace, and thy visitation hath preserved my spirit. Miraculously did hee nourish us in our Mothers wombe, Psal. 8. 2. miraculously nine moneths preserved hee us; miraculously did he deliver us out of the wombe of our Mother; for at our birth Psal. 34. not onely women but Angels did assist us; miraculously God keepeth us in our youth: For CHRIST speaking of his little Mat. 18. 10. ones, saith, The Angels of his little ones doe alwaies behold the face of his Father which is in Heaven. Miraculously doth hee keepe us untill the day of our death: Therefore saith David, Thou hast shewed mee great troubles and adversities, but Psal. 71. 18. thou wilt returne and revive mee, and wilt come againe, and take mee from the depth of the earth. Miraculously doth he continue his benefits towards us: Therefore saith the sweet Singer of Israel; Cast me not away in the time of my age, forsake me not when my strength Psal. 71. 8. faileth me: let it be our Prayer. If God had not aswell preserved us and kept us, it had beene to small purpose to call us and sanctifie us. This Doctrine then is a Doctrine of comfort, that God preserveth us; it is as Davids Harpe, which rejoyced Saul in his melancholy. God hath not onely made us, but also preserved us in a wonderfull mercy. He telleth all our steps. He numbreth Iob 14. Psal. 56. Psal. 38. Psal. 139. Psal. 34. Mat. 10. our teares. He counteth our dayes and times. He telleth our members. He reckoneth our bones. Yea he telleth our haires.
Our steps, our teares, our dayes, our members, our bones, our hayres are told; and yet all these are but little; a steppe is but a little space, a teare is but a little water, a member is but a little flesh, a bone a little substance, our dayes a little time, our haire a little exerement; yet all these are kept of God; he that keepeth these little things, will keepe our bodies and soules: As Paul prayed for Thessalonica, Now the very God of peace sanctifie you throughout, and I pray God, that your whole spirit, soule and body may 1 Thes. 5. 23. bee kept blamelesse untill the comming of our Lord and Saviour ^esus

Christ. God therefore is continually to be praised: (quoth Ambrose) The Saints though afflicted yet delivered. In prosperis, quia consolamnur; in adversis, quia corrigimur; in prosperity, because we are comforted; in adversity, because we are corrected; before we were borne, because he made us; after we were borne, because he saveth us; in our sinnes, because hee Ambr. in ora fu. nebri in Theodosium.Apoc. 2. 10. pardoneth us; in our conversion, because hee helpeth us; in our preservation, because he keepeth us and crowneth us. But some will say, doe we not see good men take harme, sometime breake an arme, a legge; yea, and sometime their necke? Where is Gods providence? how are they preserved? I say, that GOD sometime throwes them down, and leaveth them to themselves, that they may the better see their weakenesse and Gods power; and being delivered, glorifie him in it, according to that precept of the Almighty; call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie mee. Hereof come all those tragicall Psal. 50. 15. speeches of the Saints, that God maketh them as Buts, and all his arrowes sticke deepe in them; that hee feareth them with Iob 7. 12. 14, 19. dreames, and astonisheth them with visions, and will not give them so much rest, as to swallow their spettle; that their heart panteth; that their strength faileth; the light of their eyes is Psal. 38. 5. 8. 10. gone; that their wounds are putrified and corrupt; that they are weakened and sore broken, and doe rore for the very disquietnesse of their hearts; that they are as water powred out; that all their bones be out of ioynt; that their heart is as waxe melted Psal. 22. 14. in the middest of their bowels; that God bruiseth them as a Lion; like a Crane or Swallow, so God maketh them to chatter, and to mourne like Doves. True it is, that they bee often Esay. 38. 12, 13. 14. in perill for a time.
Iacob lyeth in the Fields.
Gen. 30. 1 Sam. 24. Psal. 125. Ier. 20. Dan. 3.David in the Wildernesse.
Ioseph in Prison.
Ieremy in the Dungeon.
The Three Children in the Oven.
Iohn in the hot Oyle at Ephesus.
Elias among Crowes.
Moses among Sheepe.
1 Reg. 17. Exod. 2. Mat. 12. Dan. 6. Luke 16. Acts 27.Ionas among Fishes.
Daniel among Lions.
Lazarus among Dogges.
Paul among Snakes.
But at last commeth the yeere of Iubile, and they are freed; the cloud is dispersed, and the Sunne shineth; the clay is removed, and the water runneth; the ashes is scattered, and the fire burneth; the snare is broken, and the Birds are delivered. It is God that preserveth all things, that he may have the glory. Psal. 174. 7. He kept the old world many yeeres from perishing; and when it was destroyed, he reserved a seed of 8. persons: He will keep Gen. 8.

this new World in the great burning: For there shall bee a new God hath preserved his Scriptures. God preserves Bodies and Soules. Heaven and a new Earth. Hee kept the primitive Church from ten great persecutours, when the rivers were dyed with bloud; when five thousand died every day, except the Calends of Ianuarie; hee kept the Scriptures from Antiochus (...) and Dioclesian, the one made monthly Inquisition for the Bibles, and 2 Pet. 3. beheaded them that kept them; the other commanded all to bee burnt, yet Ezra and they continue to our good; hee kept the knowledge of his Name in all the darkenesse of the World. For as Iosephus saith, Adam made two tables of stone, or pillars, Euseb. lib. 1. in the one hee wrote, Hominis lapsum, Mans fall: In the other Promissionem de Messia, the promise of the Messiah; and so that (...). continueth to this day: hee kept the Religion in the dayes of Queene Mary, as hee kept the Law in the dayes of Manasses and Amon; two or three Berries were left on the top of the tree, some grapes after the vintage, some eares of corne after the gleaning. Hee kept our late blessed Queene, when Stephen Gardiner bad, Hew at the roote, and when some others used her roughly, when the plot of her death was layd. Let our Soules praise the Lord, and Psal. 103. all that is within us, praise his holy name.
God preserved the Fathers, Aegypt received Athanasius from exile, having beene seven yeeres in a Cisterne at Treveris: France received Hilary, returning from battell: Antioch received Chrysostome, from the malice of Arcadius, and Eudoxia: Italy welcomed Eusebius, from exile: and Millaine entertained Ambrose, from the rage of Valentinian and Iustina; God preserveth the World, and all men in it; and this preservation of the World is greater, than the Creation of the World, greater than the Ios. 10. Iohn 2. John 6. drying up of the redde Sea, greater than the standing of the Sunne and Moone in Aialon, greater than the turning of Water into Wine, greater than the feeding of five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes: Et tamen haec omnes mirantur, non quia majora, sed quia rariora: Vilescunt miracula, and Dei opera assiduitate; And yet all men wonder at these things, not because they August. Tract. 24. in Iohn. be greater, but because they bee rarer Miracles, and the workes of God waxe vile by assiduitie. August. Oh brethren! It is as great a worke of God to keepe us in body from the Divell: For if hee might have his minde, hee would teare us in a thousand pieces; and there should not bee a man left a live upon the Earth. Hee that deceived Eva, he that slew Iobs children and Gen. 3. Iob 1. 1 Reg. 22. Act. 19. Tob. 3. cattel, hee that was a lying Spirit in the mouth of the false Prophets, hee that wounded the seven sonnes of Sceva a Iew, overcame them and prevailed, he that killed Sara her seven husbands, in seven nights, would kill us every night, if God kept us not. Let us therefore commit our selves to God. Tertullian saith, Tertul. libro de Patientia. Si injuriam apud Deum deposueris, ultor est; si dolorem, consolator est; si morbus, medicus est; si damnum, restitutor est; si mortem, resuscitator est.

If thou indurest wrong for Christ sake, hee is a revenger; if sorrow, God preserves bodies and soules. hee is a comforter; if sickenesse, he is a Physitian; if losse, he is a restorer; if death, hee is a reviver, he is the resurrection and the life. He is (quoth one) in our sickenesse a restorer; in our prisonment, a deliverer; in our saile, a marriner; in our cities, a Mat. 9. Psal. 146. Psal. 107. Psal. 127. Exod. 15. Act. 17. 1 Cor. 13. Psal. 30. 5. watchman; in our buildings, a carpenter; in our battels, a souldier; in our life, a keeper; in our death, a restorer. Blessed be God who alwaies keepeth us. In how many Agues, Palsies, Gouts, Apoplexies, hath God kept us? in how many sicke nights, hath hee watched at our bed side, and joy hath come in the morning?
But if I would speake of our spirituall Deliverance, Preservation from Satan, in our Soules; Where shall I beginne? or Where shall I end? Dies citius quam dicta, tempora citius quam verba deficerent: The day sooner than words, the time sooner than speech should faile mee. A most large field is offered mee to walke in; but I will confine my selfe. God hath kept us in Soule from the great sinnes of the World; though wee cannot say with Christ, Which of you can accuse mee of sinne? yet wee can say, who can accuse us of notorious, grosse, open sinnes. Wherein wee have beene scandalous to the Church of God? Iohn 8. 46. Wee are content to walke by good report, and evill report: and are loth to give occasion of offence in any thing. August. hath a patheticall speech, to noto how God keepeth us in Soule: Quantum (inquit) debeo diligere Deum? redimit me, cum perieram; quando ignoravi, 2 Cor. 6. 3. docuit me; quando erravi, reduxit me; quando peccavi, corripuit me; quando cecidi, erexit me; quando steti, tenuit me; quando ivi, deduxit Aug. me; quando veni, suscepit me; quando clamavi, exaudivit me; How much am I bound to love God? I had perished, if hee had not redeemed me; when I was ignorant, he taught me; when I erred, hee reduced mee; when I sinned, he corrected me; when I fell, hee erected mee; when I stood, hee held mee; when I went, hee led me; when I came, hee received mee; and when I cryed, he heard me. Therefore this was Saint Augustines praier, Custodi me Domine, hic and ubique, nunc and semper, intus and foris, ante and retro, circum circa; in me nullus pateat locus insidiis Diaboli. Preserve me o Lord here and every where; now and ever; within Aug. lib. Medit. and without; before and behinde; round about mee; that no place may lie open for the snares of the Divell. Christ praying for his Apostles, and in them for us, saith thus; I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou keepe them from evill. If God kept us not in Soule, the Divell would destroy us all; Iohn 17. 15. not a man in the World should be saved, all should goe to Hell, note his malice to Adam; hee was by Satans envy, formed and deformed, made and marred in one day; hee lodged not (say the Fathers) one night in Innocencie.
Wee read of one in the Gospel, that had a deafe Divel, of another that had a dumbe Divell, of Mary Magdalen, that had

seven Divels: of a man that had a legion of Divels, that is, No safety from Sathan except God preserve. eight hundred Divels: For a Legion containeth five hundred footemen, and three hundred horsemen. Ecce tetendit Satanas ante pedes nostros laqueos insinitos, etc. Behold, Satan layeth before Mar. 2. Luke 5. Luke 7. Luke 8. August. in soliloq. our feete (saith Augustine) infinite snares, hee filleth our wayes with deceits to catch our poore Soules. Hee layeth snares for us in Riches, in Poverty, in Meate, in Drinke, in Sleepe, in Waking, in Word, and Worke, and in every thing. In Riches, wee are proud; in Poverty, wee murmur and steale; in Meate, wee surfet; in Drinke, wee are drunken; in Dreames, wee wander, etc. It is reported of Anthony, that on a time looking up to Heaven; hee saw all full of snares, and hee cryed out; Who shall deliver us? Answere was made. I the Lord will deliver you. Oh then let us alway pray with Augustine, Dominetur carni anima, animae ratio, rationi gratia, etc. Let the Soule rule the Flesh, Reason the Soule, Grace Reason, and subdue mee to thy will Lord, both within and without: sharpen my Tongue, to sound forth thy praises, illuminate my minde, inlarge my heart to receive thee, give me a wise and understanding heart, etc.
Iovem and Iunonem a juvando dictos esse, ait Cicero: Cicero saith, that Iupiter and Iuno were so called, a iuvando, of helping: Sed hoc in Deum (quoth Lactantius) optime quadrat, but this, saith Lactantius, Lactan. lib. 1. cap. 10. doth best of all befit God, Qui juvat, servat, salvat, who both helpeth us, keepeth us, and saveth us, who by Faith Ephes. 8. 17. quencheth all the fiery darts of the Divell. That wee have not filled our eyes with vanity, our eares with slander, nor our mouthes with blasphemy, nor our bellies with gluttony, nor our bodies with lechery, nor our hands with bribery, it is Gods worke. For seedes of all sinne are in us by nature, and wee are no better than others; but hee reserveth and keepeth us: wee neede not then feare what man can doe unto us. Nay Ephes. 2. 4. wee need not feare the day of Death, or the day of Iudgement. For in the last day it shall be said to every one reserved and kept of God, Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso, this day shalt thou be with Luke 23. me in Paradise. And in the last day of the World to them all, Venite benedicti, come yee blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdome Mat. 25. 34. prepared for you: and therefore as the Hart desireth the water-brookes, so long their Soules after God, their Soules after God, yea after the living God, and they cry day and night, Come Lord Jesus, come quickely. Thou which art our Lord by right of creation, by right of redemption, by right of gubernation, Apoc. 22. by right of preservation, Come, come away quickely, and crown us with glory, receive us into thy kingdome, where is Gaudium sine fine, sine metu finis, Ioy without end, without feare of end. Thus much of the Persons saluted, their vocation, sanctification and reservation to Iesus Christ.



THE FOVRTH SERMON.


VERS. II. 

Mercie unto you, and Peace and Love, etc.
Mercy, Peace, and Love from Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost.



I Am now come to the Salutation, wherein the Apostle wisheth and prayeth for three things.

1 Mercy.
2 Peace.
3 Love.

Three things more excellent than Mat. 2. the three gifts, which the Wisemen bestowed on Christ; Gold, Frankincense, 2 Sam. 23. and Myrrh; three things more puissant to overthrow the Divell, than the three mighty men that were in the hoast of Israel to overthrow the Philistines, and to fetch water out of the well of Bethelem, that David longed for; three things more comely, than the three things that Salomon commended, that is, a Lion Prov. 30. among beasts, a Gray-hound, and a Goat.
Mercy, which is the first thing here wished for, is ascribed to God, the Creator; Peace, which is the second, to Christ, the 2 Cor. 1. 3. Ephes. 2. 14. Rom. 5. 5. Reconciler; Love, which is the third, to the holy Ghost, the Comforter. For God hee is called, The Father of Mercies, Christ is called, Our Peace, and the holy Ghost, Love. The Apostle therefore in saying, Mercy, Peace, and Love be multiplied, is as if he should have said; The God of Mercy forgive you your sinnes, the God of Peace give you Peace that passeth all understanding, and the God of Love grant that your Love may abound more and more, that yee may bee rooted and grounded in Love.

And yet all this proceedeth from one and the same person; Generall and speciall Mercies of God. for albeit Mercy be ascribed to the Father, Peace to the Sonne, and Love to the holy Ghost: Creation to the Father, Redemption to the Sonne, and Sanctification to the holy Ghost, yet all these create, redeeme, and sanctifie. For wee worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Vnity; wee confound neither the persons, nor yet their worke.
Mercie be unto you, Mercy in God is not passive, but active, Non quoad affectum, sed quoad effectum. No suffering with us in our wants, but succouring us in them.
Mercy is here taken for grace and the meere favour of God: The Apostle therefore in wishing Mercy, Peace and Love to the Saints, teacheth us, Quales esse debent Christianorum salutationes, nos literis nostris and epistolis, honorem, opulentiam, salutem, longam vitam amicis optamus, Iudas vero, misericordiam, pacem, charitatem, and dona coelestia, his tribus, Ecclesia opus est, aliter, actum esset. And first hee beginneth with Mercie: For instead of Grace used by the Apostle Paul in sundry of his Epistles, Iude heere nameth Mercy, which is all one; Mercy and Grace is that, whereby all good is conveyed to us: therefore an excellent blessing to bee prayed for, and this Grace and Mercy of God is fourefold:
1 Generall.
2 Speciall.
3 Temporall.
4 Eternall.
The generall Grace and Mercy of God, are those graces and mercies, that hee bestoweth upon all men; Hence is it, that hee causeth, the Sun to shine upon good and bad, and his Raine to fall upon the just and unjust: For there bee some good things, which God giveth indifferently both to the good and bad, as Riches, Honour, Strength, Beautie, Health, etc. And there be some good things, which God giveth onely to the good, and not to the wicked; as saving Faith, saving Grace, a new Heart, a right Spirit, peace of Conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, eternall Life: And there are some evill things, whereof the good taste as well as the bad; as Sickenesse, Sorrow, Weakenesse of body; Imprisonment, Famine, Sword, losse of Friends, etc. And there are some evill things which God layeth upon the wicked, and not upon the good; as intolerable horror of conscience, desperation, Psal. 104. 17, 18. damnation, etc. This generall Grace and Mercy of God is over all his cratures, the Fowles of the Aire, the Fishes in the Psal. 145. 9. Sea, the beasts of the Fields; His Mercie is over all his Workes.
His speciall Mercy is that, whereby hee succoureth his elect. This was the Mercy of God, that preserved Lot, from the burning of Sodome; Daniel, from the devouring jawes of the hungrie Gen. 19. Lions; David, from the cruelty of Saul; and the Israelites, Dan. 6. from the firy Furnace. This is that Grace and Mercy, which the child of God above all things desireth. Lord lift thou up Psal. 4. the light of thy countenance upon us.

His temporall Mercie is that whereby hee spareth sinners, and standeth at their doores, expecting and waiting their conversion. Temporall and eternall Mercies. Hereupon one descanteth very finely, saying, When vaine pleasure biddeth us to sell God, and be gone, his Mercy and Grace will not so part with us; when we are lost in our selves his Mercy and Grace findeth us out; when wee lye long in our sinnes, his Mercy and Grace raiseth us up: when wee come unto him, his Mercy and Grace receiveth us; when wee come not, his Mercy and Grace draweth us; when we repent, his Mercy and Grace pardoneth us; when wee repent not, his Mercy and Grace waiteth our repentance.
The eternall Mercy and Grace of God is that, which concerneth our everlasting Salvation; and this is that Mercy and Grace principally wished for, By Grace wee are saved through Faith, not of Ephes. 2. our selves, for it is the gift of God.
This word Mercy or Grace teacheth us to looke up unto God, not unto our selves, if wee looke to bee saved; wee choose not the Lord, but he us, Vt salus esset penes figulum, non penes lutum: Aug. Paul ascriberh all to Grace and Mercy, By the Grace of God (saith hee) I am that I am, and his Grace which is in me, was not in vaine: and thus he taught the Romanes: At this present, there is a remnant through the election of Grace; and if it bee of Grace, it is no more of Workes, or Rom. 11. 5, 6. else Grace were no more Grace; but if it bee of Workes, it is no more Grace, or else were worke no more worke: an invincible Argument.
Peter letteth the Iewes see, Terminum a quo, and terminum ad quem pervenerunt; their state under the Law, and under Grace. Hee hath called you (saith Saint Peter) out of darkenesse into his marvellous 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. light, which in times past were not a people, but now the people of God: which in times past were not under Mercy, but now have obtained Mercy. We have not loved God, but hee us, Venit medicus ad aegrotos, via ad errantes, lux ad tenebras, vita ad mortuos, redemptor ad Bern. captivos: The Physitian came unto the sicke, the way to wanderers, light to darkenesse, life to the dead, a redeemer to the captives. Wee were sicke, hee healed us; wee wandered, hee reduced us; wee were blind, hee lightend us; wee were slaves, hee redeemed us: No man commeth to the Father but by him. Iohn 14. 6.
This is not onely that generall (...) Mercy and Grace of God, which pertaineth to all creatures, Beasts, Fowle, Fishes, whereof I spake before: but this is (...) peculiar to man only: the Scripture calleth it, (...) the riches of his bountifulnesse, etc. For The Lord is rich in Mercy: rich in mercy, because Ephes. 2. 4. the treasury of his Mercy and Grace is never exhausted, the fountaine never dryed up; rich in Mercy, because he never ceaseth to communicate the riches of his Mercy and Grace to us; rich in Mercy, because hee pardoneth all our sinnes upon our true repentance; rich in Mercy, because he not only pardoneth al

our sins upon our true repentance, but giveth us repentance, and The abundant riches of Gods mercies. faith to beleeve the remission of our sinnes; rich in mercy, because he giveth us privative grace to escape evils, and positive enabling us to doe good; finally, rich in mercy, because he preventeth us with mercy and grace, before we seeke him, and followeth us with mercy and grace when we have found him.
Bernard in a certaine Sermon, makes mention of a seven-fold De Evang. septem panum. mercy or grace, which (hee saith) each child of God may finde in himselfe.
The first is a preventing mercy or grace, by which the Lord preserves his Elect from falling into grosse evils; Fateor and fatebor (saith he) nisi quia Deus adiuvit me paulo minus cecidisset in omne peccatum anima mea; I doe and will ingeniously confesse, that unlesse the Lord had preserved mee by grace, my soule had gone neere to have fallen into all sinne.
The second is his forbearing mercy or grace, whereby the Lord waiteth for the conversion of a sinner: in regard whereof, the same Author writeth thus; Ego peccabam, and tu dissimulas; non continebam a sceleribus, and tu a verberibus abstinebas, I sinned, O Lord, and thou seemest not to regard it, I contained not my selfe from wickednesse, and thou abstainest from scourging me for the same.
The third is an altering and changing mercy or grace, which makes a man setled in the resolution of holinesse, whereas before he was prophane, and loose in behaviour.
The fourth is an imbracing mercy or grace, whereby God assureth the Convert of his favour.
The fifth is a confirming mercy or grace, which strengthneth and upholdeth the righteous in his goodnesse.
The sixth is a mercy or grace, that sets him in hope and expectation of glory.
The seventh is a crowning mercy or grace, which is the Livery and seisin, and full possession of the Kingdome of heaven.
Thus the LORD hath seven mercies or graces, nay seventy times seven mercies, even an innumerable multitude of compassions; all which Saint Iude here wisheth unto the Saints; by which it appeareth how great a blessing the Apostle wisheth in wishing mercy. Mercy be unto you.
For indeed all that wee have is of mercy; not of merit, of favour, not of debt; of grace, not of nature. It is his mercy that wee Lament. 3. 2. be not consumed: therefore when we pray, let this be our petition, O God be mercifull unto me a sinner: and when we give thankes, let Luke 18. 13. Psal. 36. this be the foot of our Song, For his mercy indureth for ever; For his mercy indureth for ever.
His mercy is Communis peccantium portus, the common harbor of all penitent sinners: For it is not the wisdome God, nor his power, noriustice that preserves us from destruction, but his

mercy. So many idle words uttered in a day, so many vaine Mercy that we are not consumed. thoughts conceived, so many evill workes committed; I speake positively, and now privatively; so few prayers in us, so few thankesgiving, so few almes, so weake faith, so little knowledge, so cold zeale, so small love; It is not a mercy, but a miracle, that we are not all consumed, that the ayre infecteth us not, as it did Iuda; that the heavens raine not downe fire and brimstone, 2 Sam. 24. as they did upon Sodome; that the clouds open not and drowne us all, as they did the old world; that the earth doth not open Gen. 19. and swallow us all, as it did Dathan; such pride in the rich, such envie in the poore, such peevishnesse in age, such riot in youth, Gen. 6. Numb. 16. such robbery on the land, such piracy on the Sea, such impiety in the Church, such iniury in the Common-wealth, such wickednesse and Atheisme in all; it is a rare mercy that wee be not all consumed.
The Angels desire an end of this evill world, the Saints departed wish the accomplishment of the Elect, the number full, the body of Christ made perfect. The Saints in earth cry, Veni Esa. 6. Apoc. 6. Apoc. 22. Domine Iesu, veni cito; Come Lord Iesu, come quickly. Why doe wee not desire to be loosed, that as wee are partakers of his generall, speciall, and temporall mercies and graces here: so we may be partakers of his eternall mercies in heaven.
The second blessing, which the Apostle prayeth for, is peace; which is taken three waies:
First, for externall peace between man and man.
Secondly, for internall peace, betwixt God and man, peace of conscience.
Thirdly, for prosperity, and the happy event of all things.
And in all these significations it may be taken in this place, in a godly sense; if wee take it in the first sense, it is a notable blessing, and to be prayed for of all men, as Iude doth here: for peace is the ornament of all places, as a Crowne of gold upon their head, the Kingdome of Christ is adorned by it. The Wolfe shall dwell with the Lambe, and the Leopard shall lye with Esa. 11. 6. 7. 9. the Kid, and the Calfe and the Lion and the fat beast together, and a little Child shall lead them, and the Cow and the Beare shall feed together, their yong ones shall lye together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Bullocke, and the sucking child shall play upon the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned child shall put his hand upon the Cockatrice hole, then shall none hurt nor destroy in all the Mountaine of my holinesse. Here men by reason of their cruell affections are called by the name of beasts; but Christ by his Spirit shal so reforme them, and work in them such mutuall peace and unity, that they shall bee as Lambes favouring and loving one another, and cast away all their cruell affections. And againe, the Prophet speaking of the Kingdome of Christ, saith, They shall breake their swords into mattocks, and their speares into sithes, Nation shall not lift up a sword against Nation, neither Mich. 4. 3, 4.

shall they learne to fight any more, but they shall sit every man under his Peace both good and pleasant. Vine and under his Fig-tree, and none shall make them afraid; meaning that peace and unity shall flourish among them, and division and dissention shall be utterly banished.
Our God is the God of peace; the Divell on the contrary is Heb. 13. 20. the Author of all dissention; it was he that caused division between Abimelech and the men of Sichem. Hee was a murtherer Ind. 9. 23. from the beginning: But God is the Author of peace; Litigiosi Iohn 6. 44. ergo non sunt ex Deo; Contentious persons therefore are not of God: For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace. Peace is one fruit of the Spirit: so saith the Apostle, The fruits of the Spirit 1 Cor. 14. 33. are love, joy, peace, etc. but no peace, no Spirit of God. Paul is not earnester in any thing, than in moving men to imbrace peace: Writing to the Philippians he saith thus; If there be any Phil. 2. 1, 2. consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any compassion and mercy, fulfill my joy that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one judgement, that nothing bee done through contention or vaine-glory, etc. And againe, I pray Phil. 4. 2. Evodias, and beseech Syntiches, that they bee of one accord in the Lord. This was Christs Ave and Vale ever, Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: Dulce nomen pacis, res ipsa tum jucunda, tum salutaris; the very name of peace is sweet and comfortable, the fruit and effect thereof pleasant and profitable; Innumeris potior triumphis, more to bee desired than innumerable Triumphes. This blessed peace is the language of heaven; the Angels brought it from heaven: Glory in the highest heavens to God, in earth peace, towards Luke 2. men good will. This is the Legacy which Christ bequeathed to his Disciples; Pacem meam do vobis, My peace I give unto Iohn 20. 19. you; this was the usuall salutation of the Iewes, Shenim Vbenim, peace be unto you: this is one of those speciall blessings, which all the Apostles in all their salutations pray for; Grace bee with you and peace: this David commendeth; O quam bonum, and quam Gal. 1. 9. jucundum, O how good and pleasant a thing it is for Brethren to dwell together in unity; it is not bonum and non jucundum, good Psal. 133. 1. and not pleasant, or jucundum and non bonum, pleasant and not good, but bonum and jucundum, good and pleasant. There bee some things that be bona sed non jucunda, good and not pleasant, as patience and discipline; some things be jucunda sed non bona; pleasant but not good, as voluptuousnesse carnall pleasure; some things are nec bona nec jucunda, neither good nor pleasant, as envie, worldly sorrow, etc. and there be some things, and bona and iucunda, which are both good and pleasant, as peace, honesty, charity. This peace Christ commendeth to his Disciples; Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another: this was a Mar. 13. peece of the blessing which God taught the high Priest, that God would grant them his peace. When GOD would have a Numb. 6. 6. Temple builded for his worship, he would not have it in Davids 2 Sam. 7. 5.

time, because it was troublesome, and full of Warre: but in the Contention cause of Destruction. dayes of Salomon, who is interpreted Rex pacis, the King of Peace. When Christ came into the World, it was in the dayes of Augustus, when the whole World was at Peace; and Christ is the corner Luke 2. stone, making peace among men. Tale bonum est bonum pacis, Aug. ut in rebus creatis nihil gratiosius soleat audiri, nihil delectabilius concupisci, nihil utilius possideri, such and so great a good, is the good of Peace, that among al the things created, nothing is heard of more acceptable, nothing desired which is more delectable, nothing possessed more profitable; Peace is the sweetest harmony that ever sounded, the strongest bond that ever united politicall bodies together, the chiefest prop, pillar and preservative of common wealths. Cum alii sunt pacem recipientes, alii retinentes, alii facientes; when some embrace Peace, others retaine it, others make it.
Let us therefore, Brethren, Bee diligent to keepe the unity of the Ephes. 4. 3, 4, 5. spirit in the bond of peace, being one body and one spirit, even as wee are called into one hope of our calling. For there is but one Faith, one Baptisme, one God and Father over all, which is above all, through all, and in us all. For contention breedeth division, and division is the mother of destruction, here and ever hereafter, here it impoverisheth us; so saith the Apostle, If yee barke one at another, and bite one another, yee shall at last bee devoured one of another: the end of Gal. 5. 15. barking is biting, the end of contention is consumption, the end of dissention destruction. This Christ layeth out by two similitudes, saying, Every Kingdome divided against it selfe shall be Mat. 12. 25. brought to nought, and every Citie or House divided against it selfe cannot stand, hereafter it damneth us. For unto them that are contentious and disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousnesse, shall bee Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, etc. Herein the Divels are wiser than Men, Est Daemonum legio concors, there is an agreement among Aug. the Divels. In Mary Magdalen, of seven; in another of a whole leagion: and Christ saith, That if Sathan cast out Sathan, hee is divided against himselfe, and how shall his Kingdome indure? The Divels Mat. 12. 26. Luke 11. 15. agree in mischiefe, and they all obey one head to do a mischiefe: Conyes are but small things, yet joyning together, they overthrow the Isles of Anaph, Maiorica, and Minorica. The Cranes are not great, but being conjoyned they beate the Pigmae, Herrings are but little, yet their forces being put together, overturne a great ship. Gnats are but small creatures, yet many being united together, drave backe Iulian the Apostata. Rats are not great yet many of them together devoured Hatto of Moguncia. Hist. tripart. Our bodies stand of foure contrary Elements, Fire, Water, Ayre, Earth; but because they are combined together, therfore live wee well, but if there bee a jarre among them, that one overcome another, the body then perisheth by and by.
What shall I say then of these brawling, sewing, wrangling spirits; they are like the Salt pillar, that Lots wife was turned Gen. 45.

unto; they bee of a salt and fierie humor, like the seven blasted Motive to true Peace. eares, that consumed the full eares; like the seven leane kine that eate up the fat; like the worme that smote Ionas wilde gourd, they hurt themselves and others also, they strive in the law, like the mouse and the frogge for the marish ground, till the kite swee^s them both away, till the Lawyer eate them both up; they are like Fooles that bore holes in shippes to let out the water, and to let in the whole Sea; so to gaine six pence, they will spend six pounds, and at last die beggars. As the Friers of old lived of the ignorance of the people: so the Lawyers now live of the sinne and malice of the people; they, as the Locusts, eate up all. Wherfore if yee love your wealth; Seeke peace and insue Psal. 34. 14. Rom. 12. 18. it, and if it be possible as much as in you lyeth, have peace with all men. Remember that our God is the God of peace; Christ the Prince of peace; Angels the messengers of peace; the Ministers, the preachers of peace; the Magistrates, defenders of peace, and that we are the children of the God of peace. Let us have therefore peace amongst our selves; not polluted peace, such as was anong Davids enemies, which laide waite for his soule, and tooke Psal. 71. 10. 2 Sam. 13. 28. counsell together against him; nor counterfeite peace, as was betweene Absalom and Ammon: for Absalom prepared a feast for Ammon his brother, but caused him to be murthered in the middest of the banket. So the Spaniards, in 88. treated of peace, but prepared themselves to warre: nor inordinate peace: for of this peace saith our Saviour, I came not to bring peace into the world, but a sword: nor peace with sinne, the world and the flesh: For this is the Divels peace.
Of every of these kindes of peace, I say with a Father; Melior est talis pugna quae proximum facit Deo, quam illa pax quae separat a Greg. Nazian. Deo; Better is that fight and conflict, which maketh a man draw neere to God, than that peace which separates a man from God; such agreement is not union, but conspiracie. Our peace therefore must bee a Christian peace; and this peace hath for her elder sister, Righteousnesse: So saith David, Iustitia and pax osculatae sunt; Righteousnesse and peace have kissed each other: Psal. 85. 10. As Augustine upon the place, fiat justitia, and habebis pacem; if thou wilt have peace, worke righteousnesse so peace shall be within thy walls, and plenteousnesse, within thy palaces.
Secondly, peace is taken for the quietnesse and peace of conscience betwixt God and man; and of this peace the Apostle speaketh thus; Being justified by Faith, wee have peace with God. This Rom. 5. 1. peace passeth all understanding, the tongues of men and Angels cannot utter it; the goodnesse of this peace cannot be perceived by the eye, nor received by the eare, nor conceived by the heart; yet the eare can heare much, as Saul asleepe heard David; and 2 Sam. 24. Sap. 1. 10. The eare of Iealousie heareth all things. The eye can see further: for Moses saw Canaan from the top of Pisgah. The tongue can utter

more than the eye can see; so Achitophels mouth was as an Oracle Peace of conscience most excellent. of God. The heart can conceive more, than the tongue can utter; so Salomons heart is said to be large, like the sands of the Sea; yet cannot our eyes, nor eares, nor hearts comprehend this peace. It passeth all understanding. It is nothing to have all peace, and to Phil. 4. 7. want the peace of God, the peace of conscience. It is nothing to have 900. chariots of Iron, with Sisera; to have stately buildings Iudg. 4. Dan. 4. Act. 4. with Nabuchadonezer; to have the applause of the people with Herod; to plant orchardes, to digge fountaines, to water gardens, to heape and gather gold, to provide men singers, with Salomon; to have all pleasures, with Xerxes, and to want this peace. For Sisera died miserably; Nabuchadonezer was turned into a beast; Herod was eaten of lice: Salomon called all delights, vanities; and Xerxes promised reward to him, that could finde him out a new pleasure. Qua tum inventa non fuit contentus; Which being invented, yet he was not contented.
Hath God given thee house and lands, wife and children, men-servants, and maid-servants? Hast thou thy coffers full, with Croesus? thy purse full with Dives? thy barnes full with the Epulo? thy grounds full with Iob? thy stable full, with Salomon? and thy table full with Balthazar? yet all is nothing without this peace; and therefore looke into thy heart: Is there peace betweene God and thee? as he said finely; Is it peace Iehu? is there not Intus vermis? a worme within byting thy conscience? if there 1 Reg. be, looke to thy selfe, suffer not thine eyes to sleepe, nor thy eye-liddes to take any rest, untill thy peace be made with God, and thy pardon sealed; O pray, pray, that thou maist have this peace, it is the peace of peace, and without it there can be no peace. The name of peace between man and man is sweet, like the precious oyntment upon the head of Aaron, that ranne downe unto his beard, and from his beard unto the skirts of his clothing, but this peace of conscience is farre sweeter. Iuge Convivium, a continuall Pro. 15. 15. Feast, a daily Christmas unto a good man. This peace the godly seeke: so saith David; marke the upright man, and behold the just for the end of that man is peace, but the transgressors shall be destroyed Psal. 37. 37, 38. together, and the end of the wicked shal be cut off. The comparison is, inter pium and impium, between the godly and the ungodly man; the end of the godly man is peace, when he goeth to bed, he saith, I will lay mee downe in peace, and take my reste: When he Esa. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 14. Luke 2. riseth, He is carefull to be found in peace. When he is sicke he saith, Lord let thy servant depart in peace. Let us then be diligent to be found in peace, then shall we see hell abolished, death troden under feete, the first sorrow cast out into shame, immortalitie shall lengthen our dayes, and the glorie of God shal be before us as in a glasse. This testimonie is true, the Heavens have sealed unto it, and the living God hath spoken it of the Sons of men; and blessed are we, if we doe beleeve it. There is more happinesse

in one day in Gods service, than in tenne thousand dayes of vanities, No peace to the wicked. in which we fall from the Lord of life: One day in thy Courts (saith David) is better than a thousand other where: I had rather be a doore keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tabernacles of wickednesse.
Sed impiis non est pax; there is no peace unto the wicked, their hearts never rest, they are never quiet, their sinne lyeth at the doores, Esa. 57. 20. Gen. 4. 7. alwayes dogging them, and ever ready to pull out the very throat of their soules. As good men have the first fruits of the Spirit, and certaine tastes of heavenly joyes in this life. So on the contrarie, the wicked have certaine flashings of hell-flames on earth, and are as the sea, which alwayes rageth and never resteth. And as the good man when he dyeth, bequeatheth his body which is earthly to the earth; and sinnes which are divellish unto the Divell, and his goods that are worldly to the world, and his soule that is heavenly to heaven: So the wicked when he dyeth, bequeatheth his goods to the world, his body to the earth, his soule to the Divell. But some will say, The wicked are merry and quiet, none so merrry as they, they sing like birds in May, like Nightingales in a cleare night.
I must distinguish, and say, that some wicked are blockish and senselesse like swine, their consciences are seared like dead flesh; Mat. 7. 6. 1 Tim. 4. 2. others are desperate, having an hell in their conscience, trembling like Agag: but yet both states damnable. For is the fish that skippeth in the net? or the bird that singeth in the snare? or the prisoner that is merry in the iayle in any good case? No, 1 Sam. 13. 1 Thes. 5. 3. Esa. 9. 6. Ephes. 2. 17. no: Even so is it with the wicked: when They crie peace, peace, sudden destruction shall come upon them, as upon a Woman in travell: But there is peace to the godly: Peace shall come, they shall rest in their beds, etc. Christ is their peace. Pacem Evangelizavit iis qui prope, iis qui procul: he preached peace unto them that are neare, and unto them that are afarre off. To this end he died, rose againe, ascended into heaven; the first was the lowest step of his humiliation in earth, the second the highest steppe of his exaltation in earth, the third the highest steppe of his glorification in heaven; In the first he suffered, in the second he conquered, in the third he triumphed; the first tooke away sinne, and destroyed death, and him that had the Lordship of Death: The second brought Righteousnesse, for he rose againe for our justification: The third Heb. 2. 14. Rom. 4. 25. bringeth glory, and all to this end, to make peace between God and man.
Thirdly, peace is taken for prosperitie and happy successe of all things; as in the Psalme, O pray for the peace of Ierusalem, they shall Psal. 122. 6. prosper that love thee; peace be within thy walls, and plenteousnesse be within thy palaces. Peace and plentie are here Synonymies, the one openeth the other, he prayeth for plentifull peace, or peaceable plentie. God hath promised his Church this peace (saying,) The

Lord shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of thy body, in the Prosperitie is termed peace. fruit of thy cattell, in the fruite of thy ground, the Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, even the Heaven to give raine unto thy land in due season, and to blesse all the workes of thy hands, thou shalt lend to many Deuter. 28. 11, 12, 13. nations, and not borrow thy selfe. The Lord shall make thee the head, and not the taile, and thou shalt be above only, and not beneath, etc. Iacob blessing Iudas, saith, That he shall bind his Asse fole to the Vine, and his Asses colt to the best Vine, he shall wash his garments in wine, and his Cloake with the Gen. 49. 11, 12. blood of the grape: that is, he shall have all prosperitie: and this prosperitie Iude wisheth unto them (saying,) peace be multiplied upon you. Esay prophecied of the wealth and abundance of the Church (saying,) Thou shalt sucke the milke of the Gentiles, and shalt Esa. 60. 16, 17. sucke the brests of Kings, and thou shalt know that I the Lord am thy Saviour, and thy redeemer the mightie one of Iacob: For brasse I will bring gold, and for Iron I will bring thee silver, and for stones Iron: I will also make thy government peace, and thine exactors righteousnesse, violence shall no more be heard in thee, neither desolation nor destruction, etc. And God wisheth that his Church had hearkened to his commandements, Then had thy prosperitie beene as the Flood, and thy righteousnesse as the Waves of the Sea. In six evils God would have delivered Esa. 48. 18. Iob. 5. Psal. 65. 11. Mal. 3. Iob. 1. Gen. 26. 1 Reg. 10. 27. it, the clouds shall droppe fatnesse upon it; God would open the windowes of heauen, and powre downe a blessing with plenteousnesse. God hath inriched the members of his Church in all ages, as Iob in Huz, Isaac in Gerar, Salomon in Israel, who had silver as stones.
Yea this peace and plentie is proper and peculiar to the Church onely, to the godly; the wicked have no right nor interest in the blessings of the earth: For the elects sake God made Gen. 1. 1 Tim. 4. 8. Iohn 3. Mar. 13. Apo. 6. Rom. 8. the world; For them he enriched it; for them he redeemed it, for their sakes he preserveth it, for their sakes hee deferreth his comming to judge this world. That the wicked enjoy ayre, fire, water, let them thanke the godly, who are coheires with Christ in all things: the wicked are usurpers intruders into all Gods blessings, they have no right to any furrow or foot of land. The faithfull only are coheires with Christ, in whose right they are invested into all the benefits of this life. Thou art no more a servant but a Sonne, (saith Paul) now if thou be a Sonne, those art also the heyre of Gal. 4. 7. God through Christ. As a bastard hath no inheritance among the legitimate Children; So the wicked, as bastards, have no inheritance among the faithfull. They may say of God and heaven, as the tenne Tribes said of David and his Kingdome. What portion have we in David? we have no inheritance in the Sonne of Ishai. So they have no portion in heaven, no inheritance in the Sonne of God, Christ Iesus; they are Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenant and promise: But the godly have right and interest in earth, and heaven also; In their elder brother Christ Iesus, heaven is theirs, heaven and earth is theirs, land and sea

are theirs, yea all theirs, men and Angels are subject unto them. Prosperitie oft hurt to the Church. All things are ours, (saith the Apostle,) whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or death: Whether they be things present, or things to come, even all are yours, and yee are Christs, and Christ 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. Psal. 112. 6, 7. 9. Gods, (an elegant Climax or gradation.) For he riseth by steppes. Such a like figure, (...); is 2 Cor. 6. 9. 10. Obiter now, that peace and plentie are so farre given unto the Church as is profitable for it, and expedient for the setting out of Gods glory. The Church sometime eateth ashes as bread, and mingleth her drinke with weeping, she is as a Pelicane in the wildernesse, and like an Owle, that is in the desart: She is as a Sparrow, that sitteth alone upon the house top, and her enemies revile her all the day long; Sometime she is eaten up like a Sheep, and scattered among the Heathen, she is sold for nought and made a rebuke, Psal. 44. 9. 11, 12. rebuked of her neighbours, laughed to scorne and derided of all: Nay, sometime she is smitten into the place of Dragons, and covered with the shadow of death.
The Church is oftentimes more hurt by plentie, than penurie, according to the voice in Constantines dayes: Hodie venenum effusum est in Ecclesiam; this day is poison powred into the Hierom. Church. The Church, when it came to Christian Princes to be defended, Major erat divitiis, virtutibus minor.
Againe, God putteth off her sackcloath and girdeth her with gladnesse. He giveth her beauty for ashes, and rich apparell instead of sackcloath, Psal. 30. 12. Esa. 61. 3. as he seeth it expedient. Non audit ad voluntatem, ut audiat ad salutem.



THE FIFTH SERMON.


VERS. II. 

And Love bee multiplied.
Gods love the cause of all good.



THe third and last blessing, which the Apostle here prayeth for, is Love, which of some learned men is thought to bee the cause of Mercie and Peace: For Mercy and Peace are the fruits of Love; Love is the fountaine, Mercie and Peace the water that floweth from the fountaine; Love is as the mother, Mercy and Peace as her daughters; Love as the cause, Mercy and Peace as the effects; yea Love is the cause of al blessings, and as I may say, the cause of it selfe: yea, Causa causarum, the cause of causes; or Causa causae, the cause of the cause; or Causa causati, the cause of the thing caused. God is mercifull because he loveth us, and hee loveth us because hee loveth us. Eligit quia diligit, and ideo diligit quia diligit; thee hath chosen us because hee loveth us, Aug. and therefore hee loveth us because hee loveth us: No reason can bee rendred of the love of God, but the love of God. Let us not buzze too neere the candle, with the flye Farsalla, lest we burne: Let us not soare too high with the Eagle, lest wee melt; let us not wade too deep with the Elephant, lest we drown. Let us not bee curious in these things: It is enough that Moses setteth downe, Love to bee the cause of all blessings. So God turned Balaams curse into a blessing unto Israel. The cause Moses affirmeth to bee Gods love (saying) Because the Lord thy God Deut. 23. 5. loved thee. So Moses telleth Israel, that God did set his Love upon them, and did chuse them, not because they were more in number than any people. For they were the fewest of all people; but Because hee loved them. Iude here prayeth for it, as a most excellent blessing, without which all is nothing. For as Deut. 7. 7, 8. wee say, In triviis. Hee is poore whom God hateth; so hee is

rich and happy whom God loveth; his favour is as the dew of the Gods love abundant, unmeasurable, immutable. morning, as the shadow in the heate, and as an haven to them that are tossed; as the Cities of refuge to them that are pursued. In thy presence (saith David,) is fulnesse of ioy. That is; where God loveth and favoureth, there is perfect felicitie.
Iohn calleth all men to behold the love of God: Behold what love the Father hath shewed us, that we should be called the Sonnes of God: behold his love, that hee calleth us his servants: and behold a 1 Iohn 3. 1. 2 Cor. 6. Ephes. 2. greater love, in that hee calleth us his Sonnes: and yet behold a greater love, that he calleth us his heyres and coheyres with Christ; and yet behold a greater love, in an higher degree, that he calleth us his Mother, Brethren and Sisters; but behold the greatest love of all, that he calleth us his Spouse, or Wife, to note, that he loveth us, with all loves; with the masters love, as Abraham loved Eleazar; with the friends love, as David loved Ionathan; with the Childes love, as Ruth loved Naomi; with the Gen. 15. 1 Sam. 16. Ruth. 1. Gen 29. husbands love, as Iacob loved Rachel: What heart of stone is not moved with this love: Nati sumus e silice, nutriti lacte ferino. This love of God is gratuitall free, partly because it floweth from his grace and goodnesse, and partly because he loveth, not for his owne, but for our good. And it is unmeasurable; therefore saith the Apostle, Herein is love, not that wee loved God, but that hee 1 Iohn 4. 10. loved us, and sent his Sonne to be a reconciliation for our sinnes: greater love could not the Father shew, than to send his Sonne out of his owne bosome, and greater love could not the Sonne shew, than to die for his enemies.
Yea, this love of his it is immutable and constant: For whom he loveth, he loveth to the end, hereupon the Apostle calleth God love. God is love (saith he) and not only love; for there are many properties and attributes in God, as Truth, Mercie, Iustice, Power, Eternitie: Novit omnia, ut veritas, tuetur ut salus, Iohn 13. 1 Iohn 4. 16. sedat ut aequitas, dominatur ut majestas, operatur ut potentia, manet ut aeternitas; he knoweth all things as veritie, defendeth all things as health and salvation, appeaseth all things as equitie, ruleth all things as Majestie, worketh all things as omnipotencie, and abideth and remaineth as eternitie. God is not made of love only as wood of trees, as a fountaine of water, as a plaister of Balme; but all these attributes are in the Lord equally: But because God delighteth in love, and he reposeth a great part of his glory in love, therfore is he described by that attribute of Love; by this attribute the Evangelist describeth him, God so loved the Iohn 3. 16. Cap. 10. 16. 1 Iohn 4. 18. World, that he gave his only begotten Sonne, etc. And by this attribute the beloved disciple describeth him, saying, God is love, and hee that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him. By this attribute David describeth him, As a Father hath compassion on his children, so hath the Lord compassion on them that love him. And againe; The loving Psal. 103. 13. 17. kindnesse of the Lord indureth for ever and ever, upon them that

feare him, etc. This made Paul to say, Who shall separate me from the Love exceeds all other vertues. love of God? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakednesse, or perill, or sword? I am perswaded that neither death nor life; nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate Rom. 8. 35. 37, 38. us from the love of God which is in Christ Iesus our Lord. Malitia nostra finem habet; Our malice hath an end, but Gods love hath not; our malice is finite, but his love infinite. As a drop of water to the whole Sea, so are our sinnes in regard of the love of God, his love is so great, as it cannot be measured; so much as it cannot be numbred; so precious, that it cannot be valued; so large and long, that it cannot be ended: the bredth and length, the height and depth of his love, all the tongues of men, and of Angels cannot utter. As Iude wisheth unto them, the love of God, so hee wisheth them also mutuall love, whereby we love one another; he meaneth both these loves in this place.
Mutuall Love is a chiefe and principall vertue: Faith and Love, the one with God, and the other with men, be as the roote and the branch, as the mother and the daughter, as the foundation and pillars of all Christian building: the end of all is Love; the end of the first table is the Love of God, the end of the second table is the love of man: so saith the Apostle; The end of the Commandements is Love, out of a pure heart, out of a good conscience, and 1 Tim. 1. 5. Gal. 5. 22. Exod. 16. Iudg. 6. out of a faith unfained, Paul reckoning up the fruits of the Spirit, nameth Loue first, as the Gentleman-usher to goe before all: For as Manna excelled all bread, as Aarons rod did eate up all the rods of the sorcerers, as Gedeons sword passed all the swords of the Madianites; so love passeth all other vertues: all our debts should stand in love; Owe nothing to any man, but this, that yee love Rom. 13. 8. Num. 14. Iohn. 2. one another; our debtes were sooner paid, and our executors but smally troubled, if this were; of this debt, wee cannot bee discharged so long as we live. The journey of the Israelites was ended in forty yeares; Herods Temple was finished in six and forty 1 Iohn 4. 7, 8. 16. yeares; Noahs Arke was perfected in an hundred and twentie yeares, but this debt is never ended. Let us therefore love one another: For love commeth of God, and every one that loveth, is borne of God, and knoweth God, he that loveth not, knoweth not God: but he that dwelleth in Love; dwelleth in God and God in him. S. Peter naming 2 Pet. 1. 5. 7. many vertues, maketh up the measure, and ends in Love. Ioine (saith he) vertue with your faith, and with vertue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience godlinesse, and with godlinesse, brotherly kindnesse (Love.) This vertue above all is as the hoope or faggot bond, that keepeth all close. Therefore let me exhort you, with the Apostle, Above all Col. 3. 14. things put on love, which is the bond of perfectnesse. As the Sunne giveth light to all planets, as salt seasoneth all meates, as the Moone ruleth over the Sea, and all moist bodies, as the rod of

the tribe of Levi passed in honour all other tribes: So love passeth Little love to be found on earth. all qualities in men; therefore let us follow after Love, and let us not give over till we have overtaken her.
Love is as the apple-tree of Persia, which buddeth and blossometh and beareth fruit every moneth. Now abideth faith, hope and Numb. 17. 1 Cor. 14. 1. 1 Cor. 13. love, but the chiefe of these is love. It lasteth longer, like a pillar of salt, it reacheth further, it profiteth more among men. Faith flieth up to heaven, Love is occupied below, on earth; Faith wrastleth above with the promises of God, Love is busied in good workes, as Faith is with God: Paul prayeth for it, in respect of the scantnesse and excellency of it: For Charitas laudatur and alget; Aug. de eivitate Dei. lib. 14. c. 7. yet, diligi non potest Deus sine proximo, nec proximus sine Deo, qui proximum amare negligit, Deum diligere nescit.
England is as the Land of Canaan, wee have corne, cattell, flesh Psal. 65. 11. Iudg. 1. 1 Sam. 13, 1 Reg. 8. fish, wooll, cloath; our vallies stand thicke with corne, we have plenty of all things, but of Love, that is scant: As in the dayes of Debora there was neither speare nor shield; As in Saul his daies there was no Smith; as in the dayes of Salomon, there was no Manna to be found: so in our dayes little or no Love.
When I behold the state of many townes, me thinke I see Bulls, Beares, Lions, Tig^es, Wolves shut up, as it were in an iron cage biting, tearing, renting and devouring one another, view all Courts, Assises, Sessions, Leets, Law-dayes, and you shall see, there is no difference betwixt us, and the Corinthians, but they went to law under Infidels, and wee under Christians. 1 Cor. 6. Gal. 5. 15. We forget Pauls Caveat; If yee bite and devoure one another, take heed yee be not devoured one of another: If there be an hundred men in a towne, scarce two love together as they should: We are divided into three companies, like Labans sheep, some white, some blacke, some speckled; some Protestants, some Papists, some Neuters: Nay, even among Protestants there is hard agreement. But God I hope will make us friends in heaven, where al injuries shall be forgotten; where are those noble pair of lovers David and Ionathan? Who had but one soule; Eusebius, and Pamphilus, Martyrs, 1 Sam. 18. who had but one name; Pilades and Orestes, who had but one life, Ruth. 1. the one being dead, the other died also: Ruth and Naomi, who had but one grave; Basill and Nazianzen, of whom it is said, Anima una erat inclusa in duobus corporibus, one soule was included in two bodies: Mariage maketh two bodies, one, but love maketh two soules, one; yea many soules, many bodies, but one: If an hundred love, together it is but one heart; as it is said of them of the primative Church, That they had but one heart and one soule. If a man hath an hundred friends, that man is become as an hundred Act. 4. 32. men: Nam amicus alter idem, a friend is a second selfe: Charitas Chrysost. est res augmentativa. There was a day when Herod and Pilate, were made friends, but that day (I feare) with many will never bee, they are like the stone Asbestos, found in Arcadia, being once

kindled is never quenched; once angry never pleased. The Heathens We must love as God doth without desert were wont to say of themen of the primitive Church; Ecce ut invicem se diligunt: behold, how they love one another; they knew Christians by that badge: but we may say (quoth one) Ecce Zaneh. ut invicem se oderunt: behold, how they hate one another, oppresse one another: not Christians but Wolves, Lions, Leopards, Divels, nay worse: for one Lion eateth not another, and the Divels strive not amongst themselves, but maintaine their kingdome. Let Tygers, and Beares, and Leopards teare one another; Let Scythians and Cannibals eat one another, who Mat. 12. know not God nor good humanitie. Let them bee, without naturall affections; but let us love one another, and let the Apostle his precept be our practise; Be of one minde, one suffer with another, 2 Tim. 3. 3. love as brethren, bee pittifull, bee courteous, not rendring evill for evill, nor rebuke for rebuke, but contrariwise blesse, knowing that yee are thereunto 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9. called, that yee should bee heires of blessing.
But yee will say, such and such men deserve no kindnesse nor love at our hands: I but see what Christ deserveth, his eyes blinded, his face smitten, his hands nailed, his feete pierced, his heart thrust through with a speare; how ought wee then to love one another? Beloved (saith the Apostle) if God so loved us, wee ought to love one another. In no quality doe wee resemble God 1 Iohn 4. 11. more than in this Love: God the Father is Love, God the Son is Love, God the holy Ghost is Love: God the Father in Love gave his Sonne, God the Sonne in Love gave himselfe, God the Iohn 3. 16. cap. 10. 16. holy Ghost in Love applyeth all this unto us, Charitas Dei diffusa in corda nostra per spiritum.
But note here what love Iude praying for, a true Christian love: framed by knowledge, for among theeves, murderers, Drunkards, ther is a kind of Love.
First, therefore the love of Atheists is condemned, which come from profit or from pleasure, which love men, as the dog doth the bone; but this love proceedeth not Excorde puro, from a pure heart, therefore to be condemned.
Secondly, the love of Gamesters, Drunkards, and Pot-companions is here condemned: For to glosse, play, eate, drinke, game bee no good workes, therefore this is not to love; wee call it good fellowship, but such good fellowes will go to the good fellow the Divell, if they repent not.
Thirdly, all carnall love is here condemned: For love in man may bee a vice aswell as a grace, it is a vice, when it is set upon a wrong object, or is disordered, and that three wayes:
First, when wee love things unlawfull, as sinne.
Secondly, when wee love things lawfull, but too much, as the world.
Thirdly, when love is turned into lust, and so it is the mother of fornication, adultery, incest, and such like.

But if wee will have our love a grace, it must be a Christian Our love must be truly Christian.Graces must be dayly increased. love, we must love one another in the Lord, and for the Lord: this love is the badge of Christs disciples: By this shall all men know that you are my disciples indeed, if yee love one another as I have loved you. To this S. Peter exhorteth, Above all things have fervent love among your selves, for love shall cover a multitude of sinnes. Non expiando, non veniam Iohn 13. 1 Pet. 4. promerendo, sed fraterne condonando, non vindicando, non diffamando; not by purging or satisfying for sinnes, not by deserving pardon, and binding God to forgive sinnes, but by brotherly forgiving trespasses, not revenging our selves, not defaming others.
Here also is condemned the love of Papists, In cathedra unitatis Deus posuit doctrinam veritatis; In the chaire of unity God hath put the doctrine of verity: they agree as the false Prophets did, not in the Lord, but against the Lord; they make adoe of their councell of Trident, and how they agree in all meetings. Alas a few buckrome Bishops of Italy conspired together, but thirtie eight Bishops in all, not like the councell of Nice, where were three hundred and eighteene; or of Arimine, where were sixe hundred Bishops: Nor like the Councell of Constance, where were foure Patriarks, twenty nine Cardinals, two hundred threescore and ten Bishops, forty seven Archbishops, five hundred threescore and foure Abbots and Doctors, at the deposing of Benedict the third.
But let our love bee, as it should bee, Christian love: Let us love as brethren, and then the God of Love and Peace shall bee with us: and so much for this love, that Saint Iude prayeth for.
But before I shut up this heavenly doctrine, note that the Apostle wisheth an increase of Mercy, Peace and Love; he would have these things to be multiplyed, Mercy, Peace, and Love be multiplied unto you: in that he wisheth a multiplication of these Graces, he sheweth that there is no perfection of vertues in this life: for there is a double grace of God.
A Restraining and A Receiving Grace.
The one to keepe us from sinne, the other to increase all vertues in us; for in all vertues wee creepe like Snayles, wee glide like Wormes, wee goe like the Messenger of evill newes: but in all vices wee runne like Hazael, or the Roe of the field, we flie like Doves, wee grow like the Lily in a night. Paul therefore exclaimed; The Law is Spiritual, but I Carnall, sold under sinne, for Rom. 7. 14, 15. I allow not that which I doe: for what I would, that doe I not; but what I hate, that doe I. Whereupon Saint Augustine saith, Impii and volunt and valent peccare, pii volunt sed non valent, bene agere, quia nequiunt quod desiderant; the wicked are willing and able to sinne, the August. godly are willing, but not able to doe well, because they cannot

doe that which they desire to doe. This made this holy Father Never perfect till wee come to Glory. to pray, Domine dominetur carni anima, animae ratio, rationi gratia, etc. Lord, let the Soule rule the Flesh, Reason the Soule, Grace Reason; subdue me to thy will inwardly, outwardly sharpen my tongue more and more to sound forth thy praises, illuminate my mind more and more to see thee, inlarge my heart more and more to beleeve in thee, etc. For we comprehend not the Mercy, Peace, and Love of God in any measure; Beatitude nostra tribus gradibus perficitur: in hac vita per spem and fidem quotidie crescentem; post hanc vitam, cum anima Dei praesentia fruetur; post extremum judicium, cum anima and corpore glorificabimur. Our happinesse is perfected in three degrees; in this life by Faith and Hope increasing and growing daily; after this life, when the Soule shall enjoy the presence of God; after the last Iudgement, when as in Body and Soule wee shall be glorified; and when as wee shall sing the songs of triumph, such as none can understand save the hundred and forty foure thousand which are Apoc. 14. 3. brought from the Earth.
Let us therefore pray for grace to increase in us, and say with Augustine, Si quando steti, per Dominum steti; si quando cecidi, per me cecidi, etc. If at any time I stood, I stood by the Lord; if at any time I fell, I fell of my selfe: his Grace did prevent me, saving me from evils past, preserving me from evils present, and defending me from evils to come. But I will follow this point no further: but as Iude prayed that Mercy, Grace, and Love might be multiplied; So shall I pray, Mercy, Peace and Love bee unto you. Mercie from God the Father, the Father of Mercies; Peace from God the Sonne, the Prince of Peace; Love from God the holy Ghost, the Love of the Father and the Sonne: Mercy unto you releasing your sinnes; Peace unto you, quieting your consciences; Love unto you, joyning you to God, and one unto another: Now the very God of Mercy, Peace, and Love give you Mercy, Peace and Love. Amen.



THE SIXTH SERMON:


VERS. III. 

Beloved when I gave, etc.
Faith and Gods worship must be maintained.



HAving spoken of the Title or Inscription of this Epistle, I am now come unto the second part thereof, namely, the Proposition, which is a stirring of them up to maintaine the Faith, worship and religion of God, which was now at an ebbe, like the Sea, and eclipsed like the Sunne with false Apostles, and had shaken her leaves like a tree in winter. Where note two things.
1 That they must labour for Faith.
2 The reasons, why they must so labour.
The Reasons be three:
The first, taken from the person of the Apostle.
The second from the person of God.
The third from the person of the Adversaries.
From the person of the Apostle three wayes:
From 1 His love. 2 His paines. 3 His mildnesse.
The second reason is taken from the person of God, in that he gave this Faith; where note three things:
The necessitie and excellencie of Faith. That it is 1 His gift. 2 Once given. 3 Given to the Saints.
The last reason is taken from the Adversarie; where note two things:
1 The qualities 2 The end of the Adversarie.
But first, for Faith; all men must labour for it, that they may say on their death-beds with Paul, I have fought a good fight, I 2 Tim. 7, 8. have finished my course, I have kept the faith, from hence-forth there is laid up for me a Crowne of righteousnesse, which the Lord, the righteous Iudge will give me at that day; and not to me onely, but unto them also, that love his appearing: None can speake of a Crowne of glorie, but he that can say, that he hath kept the Faith; For without Faith, it is impossible to please God: Wilt thou please God as Enoch did? and Hebr. 11. 6. not grieve God like Israel? then get faith. Quod enim non est a fide, peccatum est; whatsoever is not of faith, is sinne Paul describing (...) Christiani, the armour of a Christian, compareth faith unto a shield; all armour is necessarie, but specially a shield: Therefore saith the Apostle, Above all things take the shield of faith, Ephes. 6. 17. wherewith we shall bee able to (...) all ^he (...) of the wicked. Where note, that the Apostle contenteth not himselfe with a bare exhortation to stirre us up to labour for faith, but with weighty reasons presseth his exhortation before and behind: before comparatively, preferring it before all other graces (Above all:) behind simply, declaring the vertue and efficacie of it (Wherby yee shall bee able to quench, etc.) By the first, hee maketh way to his exhortation; by the last, he knocketh it downe fast, even to the head, as wee use for to say.
And the Apostle writing to Timothie, willeth him to get faith 1 Tim. 1. 19. and a good conscience, naming two fearefull examples; One of Hymenaeus, another of Alexander, who had made shipwracke of faith, and a good conscience: And therefore Paul delivereth them up to Satan; That they might learne not to blaspheme; that is, he did excommunicate them.
Faith is the vertue of all vertues: As all rivers runne into the Sea; so all vertues come of faith. It giveth light to all vertues, as the Sunne doth to all planets: therefore the Apostle is so prolix in it: Faith maketh us the sonnes of God, else are we bastards illegitimate; So many as received him, to them gave he power to be the Hebr. 11. 4, 5. Iohn 1. 12. Epist. ad Adimanth. Gen. 26. 2 Tim. 1 Cor. 4. 15. Gal. 4. Sonnes of God, even to them that beleeve in his name. Augustine distinguisheth of Sonnes, that they are threefold; sonnes by Nature, so Esau was the sonne of Isaak; sonnes by doctrine, or imitation, so Timothie was Pauls sonne, so he begat the Corinths, so hee travelled of Galatia: Lastly, sonnes by inspiration or faith, so are we the sonnes of God: Christ is the naturall, wee the adopted sonnes of the Almightie. The third is best; for well is hee that

hath God to his Father: for the Sonne abideth in the house for Faith must be striven and laboured for. ever. Faith is the life of the soule, as the soule is the life of the body: Quod carni esca, hoc animae fides; what food is to the flesh, the same is Faith to the soule; quod cibus corpori, hoc verbum spiritui; what meat is to the body, the same is the word to the Spirit. Iohn 8. 35.
To stirre us up to strive for this Faith, the Holy Ghost adorneth it with many Epithetes: he calleth it Rich faith, 1 Pet. 1. Holy faith. Iude vers. 20. strong faith, 1 pet. 5. 8. a saving faith, Ephes. 2. 8. a pure faith, Act. 15. 9. a precious faith, 1 Pet. 1. 7. If their we regard riches, strength, holinesse, salvation, puritie, let us maintaine Faith, which hath all graces in it; as Paradise had all fruites in it, as Lapis Indicus hath all cures in it.
And note, that they must contend, strive for faith, for all they are accursed that doe the worke of the Lord negligently; and all Ier. 48. they shall be spued out of Gods mouth who are key-cold, lukewarme, and not fervent in the faith. Most men therefore shall Apoc. 3. 15. goe unto the Divell, and be vomited out of Gods mouth; for they are, Tepidi in Fide, they care not what become of faith and religion, so they may prosper in the world: they say unto God, Ioh 21. 14, 15. Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy wayes: Who is the Almightie, that we should serve him? and what profit shall we have, if we should pray unto him? they say with Alexander Borgia; Da mihi divitias, caetera tolle tibi, fidem, spem, charitatem: Give me riches, take all the rest to thy selfe, (speaking unto the Divell,) Faith, Hope, Charitie, body and soule, and what thou wilt: for many are cold in faith and many are utterly ignorant in the faith, and regard no faith; they are like Horse and Mule, in whom is no understanding; Psal. 32. but are men Omnium horarum, as one saith, like the raine-bow of all colours, like the Troianes tun to hold all liquors; like the Israelites, that cried haile King Salomon, haile King Adonia: So they have cried, haile Queene Marie, haile Queene Elizabeth; they can live in all times, for they can shift their sailes for all windes; they regard no faith, but are fit for all faiths, all Princes; yea, for the Divel, as the men of Calecut at this day; they have two faces with Ianus, two tongues with Iudas, two hands with Ioab, Psal. 78. one to embrace withall, the other to stabbe withall; they have two hearts with Israel, a double heart, a heart, and a heart. Paul compareth a Christian to a husband-man, to a wrestler, to a souldier, all which labour hard or else they get nothing. No man that 2 Tim. 2. 4, 5, 6. warreth (saith Paul) entangleth himselfe with the affaires of this life, because he would please him that hath chosen him to be a souldier: and if any man also strive for a masterie, he is not crowned except he strive as he ought to doe: the husbandman must labour before hee receive the fruites. Such like similitudes he hath in another place: know yee not that they which runne in a race runne all, etc. In this sense saith Salomon, Buy 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25. Prov. 23. 23. the truth, purchase it, redeeme it with the losse of all that thou

hast. But wee will give all gold and silver for lands, but not a Ministers must maintaine true faith to death. penny for Gods truth and Religion, that ware is out of request; So Christ saith, Strive to enter in at the straite gate; for many shall seeke to enter and shall not be able. The Antithesis is betweene seeking and striving; some seeke, and have some cold desire but they Luk. 13. strive not; Paul therefore calleth it, The fight of faith: and he 1 Tim. 6. 12. 2 Tim. 4. 7. Iude v. 9. 1 Pet. 5. 8. saith of himselfe, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the faith, etc. The Divell never so strove with Michael for Moses his body, as he doth with us for faith; therefore resist him in the faith. Thus Ambrose said to Valentinian, Prius animam, quam fidem auferes mihi, o Imperator; O Emperour, thou shalt first take away my life, before my faith: Hic; hic occidite; here, here kill me, and doe with me what 1 Reg. 21. thou wilt: Si Naboth vineam patrum tradere noluit, if Naboth would not depart from the vineyard of his Fathers; Absit ut vineam Domini tradam; God forbid, that I should depart from the vineyard of the Lord: So Ierome said to Ruffine; Si veritas est causa discordiae mori possum, tacere non possum; If truth be the cause of discord and jarre, I may dye, but I may not hold my peace: thus Chrysostome would not give place to Arcadius and Eudoxia, but went into exile; and Calvin said in a like case to the Syndici of Geneva, Exarescet hoc brachium pr^^squ^m coenam Domini indig^i^ praebere velim; this arme of mine shall first wither, before I will give the supper of the Lord to the unworthy. Hemingius saith, that there Libro de Pastorum. is a foure-fold fight and a fourefold-flight in Ministers; his words are these; Quatuor modis sunt mercenarii, cum se non apponunt Sophisticae, tyrannidi, flagitiis, and Hypocrisi; exponant Sophisticae veram doctrinam seu fidem tuendo; tyrannis, tum voce tum precibus, non adulando; flagitiis, ea accusando; quarto hypocritis eorum larvam detrahendo. Men become hirelings foure manner of wayes, etc. Quia tacuisti, fugisti; tacuisti, quia timuisti; because thou wert silent, thou fled'st; thou wert silent, because thou fearedst. Aug.
Thirdly, they must strive, and that earnestly, even strive unto death; so saith the Wiseman, Strive for the truth unto death, and defend justice for thy life, and the Lord God shall fight for thee against Eccles. 4. 28. Esa. 59. 4, 5. 14. thine enemies. God complaineth of the want of this, saying, No man calleth for justice, no man contendeth for truth, they trust in vanitie and speake vaine things, they conceive mischiefe, and bring forth iniquitie, they hatch Cockatrice egges, and weave the Spiders webbe; he that eateth of the egges dieth, and that which is troden upon breaketh out into a serpent; therefore iudgement is turned backeward, and iustice standeth farre off, for truth is fallen in the streete, and equitie cannot enter. In Gods matters we must be earnest, and say, Be strong, and let us be valiant for our people, 2 Sam. 10. 12. and for the Cities of our God, and let the Lord doe that which is good in his eyes. Even so let us fight for our God, the Gospell, and the sacraments of our God. If every haire of our head were a life, and every life as long as Methusalah's, all are to be ventured for the faith of Gen. 5. our God, every drop of blood must bee powred out. So the Apostle

telleth the Hebrewes, yee have not yet resisted unto blood, striving The earnestnesse of Idolaters must make us zealous. against sinne: yet had they striven much, and long; and therefore the Apostle telleth them, that they had endured a great fight in afflictions, partly whiles they were made a gazing stocke both by reproches and afflictions; and partly while they became companions of them, which were so tossed to and fro: he putteth in Heb. 12. 4. this word (Earnestly,) because of the adversaries, that will so earnestly impugne it. Who use their profession, as Iehu used his chariot, he drove as if he had beene madde; who plead for Baal, 2 Reg. 9. 20. as Crassus pleaded for Pompey; who brake his sides, and died within three dayes after; for they are earnest in all errors. The Israelites gave all their Iewels to make an Idoll, a Golden Calfe: The men Exod. 32. Ier. 44. 19. Act. 19. 1 Reg. 18. 28. Mat. 23. Levit. 20. in Ieremies time were at great cost and burnt incense to the Queene of heaven, and powred out drinke offerings unto her, made Cakes, etc. The Ephesians yelled together, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: Baals priests cried loud, and cut themselves, as their manner was, with knives and Lancers till the blood gushed out upon them: The Pharisies compasse Sea and Land to make one Proselyte: The Canaanites burnt their children to Moloch. The Pagans did eate Cyrils heart or liver with salt: The Turkes in the service of their Mahomet on fridayes houle, that yee may heare them (...) off* The Aethiopians tread not in their Temples but barefooted: The Indians kill their Children to the Zemes: The Papists take great paines in their pilgrimages and fastings: A condemnation to us, that are so cold in Religion.
But will some say though we be not so earnest; yet we love God and his truth: I confesse, that there be degrees in zeale; All have not the like earnestnesse, yet all must have some earnestnesse and fervencie of spirit; some creepe, some goe; some runne, some flie, and, all doe well, that tend to perfection. For wee must all forget that which is behind, and endeavour our selves to that Phil. 3. 13, 14. which is before, and follow hard towards the marke, for the price of the high calling, which is in Christ Iesus: some creepe like snailes, some goe like horses, some runne like dromedaires, and some flie like Eagles, and all doe well, that doe their best to Godward: Some creep like Agrippa, who was almost perswaded to be a Christian; Act. 26. 28. some goe in Religion, like the Galathians, Yee did runne well, (saith the Apostle) but who did let you that yee did not obey the truth? Some Gal. 5. 7. Psal. 119. 32. runne like David; I will runne (saith he) the way of thy Commandements, when thou hast set my heart at libertie. Some flie like Monicha: volemus in Coelos; volemus in Coelos; Let us flie into heaven; let us flie into heaven. Christ riding to Ierusalem, all strawed not carpets and coverlets in the way; some strawed their garments, some cried Hosanna. All did their endeavours; and hee that doth his best, doth as much as God requireth. For if there be a willing minde, it is accepted, according to that a man hath, and not according to 2 Cor. 8. 12. Luk. 8, that he hath not. All have not the like measure of zeale; some have

thirty, some sixty, some an hundred fold; and hee that hath the All have not the same measure of zeale. least zeale, if it be in sinceritie, it is not rejected of God. A drop of water, is water, and a dramme of zeale, is zeale. Let every man strive to his power, and doe that he may, and God will accept it: Saul slew his thousand, and David his tenne thousands, and both did valiantly. Still I say, that he that hath some heate, must labour 1 Sam. 18. to have more; wee must both shine and burne, like Iohn the Baptist, who was A burning and a shining candle: Lucere parum est, Iohn 5. 35. ardere parum est; lucere and ardere perfectum est; To shine, it is not enough, to burne, it is not enough; but to shine and burne, this is as it should be: he that burneth a little, like a sea-cole, must burne more like the Iuniper, that keepeth heate a moneth long. Some shine, like the glow-worme, but have no heate; some burne like rotten wood, but have no light: But a Christian must be like the Sunne at Noone-day, which hath Magnum splendorem, magnumque fervorem; great shining, and great heate. Where the dead carcase is, thither the Eagles resort, Christi doctrina est cadaver, and nos aquilae; Christ his doctrine is the carkase, and wee be the Eagles; Contendamus pro ea, ut aquilae pro cadavere; Let us strive for it, as Eagles for the carkase; Let us not as Iayes, hop and skippe here below, sed (...), but let us flie aloft like the Eagles.
Yet still I say with Ambrose, Qui non potest volare ut aquila, volet ut passer; he that cannot soare as the Eagle to the circle of the Sunne, let him flicker like a Sparrow to the house top. If wee cannot with Paul set our feete in the third heaven, yet let us lift up our eyes and hearts to heaven: Let us strive in beleeving, as 2 Cor. 12. the Nightingales doe in singing, Qui prius spiritum quam vocem Strigelius. amittunt; that lose their breath before their voice. So much for this that we must labour for the faith, yea strive for it, and that earnestly.
And now to the reasons, why we must so labour and strive: and the reasons be three:
The first, taken from the Person of Iude, and that three wayes:
First, from his love and good will towards them: For he calleth them Beloved, I love you, I care for you, I desire your salvation; thus he shewes his love to winne them. Now love asketh love, and it pierceth a man much and deepely, like an arrow out of the hand of a Giant, when he seeth the partie that speaketh, to speake in love: then vulnera diligentis, the wounds of a lover, are better Prov. 28. 23. taken than oscula blandientis, the kisses of a Flatterer. Therefore Paul to perswade the Churches, ever protested his love; writing to the Church of Philippos, he saith thus; God is my record, how I long after you all from the very heart roote in Christ Iesus. And writing Phil. 1. 8. to the Church of Corinth, he saith thus; Yee are our Epistle written in our hearts, not with inke, but with the spirit of the living God, not in 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. tables of stone but in the fleshly table of the heart. And againe, O yee

Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is made large, yee Love ought to be the motiue in all actions. are not kept straite in us, but yee are kept straite in your owne bowels. And having chidden the Corinthians, saying, Now are yee full; now are yee made rich, yee reigne as Kings without us, and I would to God, yee did reigne, that wee also might reigne with you. For, I 2 Cor. 6. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 4. 8, 9, 10. thinke that God hath set forth us the last Apostles, as men appointed to death, for wee are made a gazing-stocke unto the World, unto Angels, and unto Men. Wee are fooles for Christs sake, and yee are wise in Christ; Wee are weake, and yee are strong; Yee are honourable, and wee are despised. And though hee did thus taunt them, yet hee protested, that hee did it in love; and therefore hee saith, I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved children, I admonish 1 Cor. 4. 14. Gal. 3. 1. you. And though he spake roughly to the Galathians, saying, O ye foolish Galathians, who hath bewitched you? Yet hee did it not as one that hated them, but as one that loved them; and therefore hee saith in the subsequent Chapter, Am I therefore become your enemy, Gal. 4. 16. Ephes. 4. 15. because I tell you the truth? (...), Let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up to him which is the head. Let us pray in love, not as Iames and Iohn did, for fire to come downe from Luke 9. Heaven to destroy Samaria; Let us argue in love, not as the Ephramites did wi^h (...) fuerunt verbera, whose Iudg. 8. words were nothing else but wounds; Let us talke in love, not as the men of Anathoth did with Ieremy, Qui loquuti sunt ampullas, Ier. 11. 21. and sesquipedalia verba, which spake proud, haughty, great, and stout words; Let us reprove in love, not as Saul, who breathed Act. 8. out threatenings and slaughter against the Congregation of Christ; but Let all things be done in love. For love is like honey 1 Cor. 16. 14. in bitter broth, and sugar in sowre wine; it is like the Sunne unto the world, and a candle unto the house; a light for our journey, a line for our life, and a rule for our reprehensions: Si diligis, fac Aug. in Epi. Iohn quicquid vis; If thou beest in love, doe what thou wilt, speake, or be silent, exhort and rebuke, call or cry, so it bee in love, all is well.
But wee are like the dogges of Coriben, wee speake not, but barke and bite one at another. Such were the men, that Paul Phil. 3. 2. gives us warning of, saying, Beware of dogges, beware of evill workers, beware of concision. The mother of Nero, shewed him her wombe to move him, but he unnaturally ript it up: but the mother of the seven children shewed them her brests, in token 2 Mach. 7. of love, and they would not eate Swines flesh, to dye for it. Sic Bern. ministri proferant ubera, non verbera, so let Ministers shew their breasts, not their battes; Docendo, non jubendo, movendo potius quam minando procedant, let them proceed and goe forward in teaching, not in commanding; in monishing, not in menacing: Nam Aug. plus penetrant mollia quam aspera verba, milde and gentle speeches doe more penetrate and pierce, than tart and bitter. As for example, the milde zeale of Paul, preaching before Agrippa, perswaded Chrysost.

him almost to become a Christian. They that goe about In Gods matters we must be diligent and zealous. to perswade with roughnesse; Quos volunt meliores, plerumque faciunt deteriores, whom they would amend and make better, many times they marre and make worse. Ministers must be like unto Paul, and handle their people as he did the Philippians, kindly Act. 26. 28. Aug. Phil. 4. and lovingly, My brethren, beloved, and longed for, my ioy and my Crowne: they must strengthen the weake, heale the sicke, binde up the broken, bring againe that which is driven away, they must seeke up the lost, and not rule with crueltie and rigour; they must bee as the Pelicane, that feedeth her yong with her heart bloud; like the Eagle, that carrieth her yong on her wings: so much for the first reason.
Another reason drawne from Iude's person, is taken from his paines; He gave all diligence to write of Faith, In Gods matters, wee must be diligent, like the Dromedaries of Aegypt, like the wilde Asse used to the Wildernesse, that snuffeth up the winde Ier. 2. 24. at her pleasure, etc. wee must bee swift as Hazael or the wilde Roe in the cause of God; not creepe, nor goe, nor run, but flye. Wee must march on in Religion, like Iehu in his Chariot, swiftly and couragiously; wee must be like the ships of Merchants, that bee good under faile. Esay compareth the Church unto Esa, 60. 8. Doves; Who are these that flye like a Cloud, and as Doves to their Windowes? Doves they flye swiftly, and they flye in companies, so should we in matters of Religion.
Demosthenes was ashamed, if hee heard the Smiths hammer goe, before hee read his booke in the morning; Plus olei quam vini expendisse dicitur; hee wrote more than hee dranke. If this diligence was in him for humane learning, what should be in us for divine Knowledge? It is said of Alphonsus King of Naples, that hee read the Bible over fortie times in his life; such paines did he take for Salvation, and so diligent was hee in the worke of the Lord; and so must wee. Many for the goods of the World, Rise early, goe to bedde late, eate the bread of carefulnesse. Psal. 127. Looke upon the covetous man, hee runnes through thicke and thinne for gold; the voluptuous, he refuseth no paines in pursuing his pleasures: Now this care must bee in the Church, for the Religion and the worship of God. Let us learne husbandry for our Soules, from the husbands of our bodies, they are diligent to provide for the body, let us be as provident for our Soules: let us say with the faithfull, Wee, o Lord, have waited for thee in the way of thy Iudgements, the desire of our Soule is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee; with my Soule have I desired thee in the Esa. 26. 8, 9. night, and with my Spirit within mee will I seeke thee in the morning. Wee must take all paines to doe the Church good; Iewell said, oportet Episcopum mori concionantem, a Bishop must dye preaching: Paul for the space of three yeeres ceased not to warne every one Act. 20. 31. night and day, hee was as diligent in teaching, as Iude was in

writing, and as diligent must wee be in reading and hearing, like Most men more diligent in earthly than heavenly things. the men that followed Christ into the Wildernesse, and abode with him three dayes, hearing him and eating nothing. The Artificers left their trades, the Chapmen their shops, the Merchants their exchange, the Mariners their nets, the husbandmen their fields and vineyards, yea blind Bartimaeus left his cloke Iohn 6. 2. to follow Christ and to heare him. Salomon would have men labour for Wisedome, as they doe for Silver, and then they should have it; If it concerne our profit, or our pleasure, Lord, what paines will wee take? Impiger extremos currit mercator ad Indos, the unwearied Merchant runnes to the furthest Indies. Againe, as touching pleasure; pernoctant venatores in nive, pugiles cestibus, contusi non ingemiscunt, the Huntsmen sleepe in the Snow, watch Tulli. in Tuscuk. upon turffes, though bruised they are not moved. Onely for Faith wee will take no paines, though Christ cry unto us, Ho, every one that thirsteth, come unto the Waters, and yee that have no mony, Esa. 55. 1. come buy and eate; come I say, buy wine and milke without silver, and without money, yet wee come not.
But to proceede, why was Iude so carefull and earnest, that hee gave all diligence to write unto them? It was because he wrote to them of Salvation, (...) was it that carryed him into this heate; as the Apostle said, They could not but speake the things which Act. 4. 20. they had heard and seene: So Iude gave all dilgence to write of Salvation which hee had heard and seene. If a man had as many hands and pennes as Argus had eyes, all were too little to write of Salvation, the worthinesse and rarenesse of the Argument is such.
What a care had Paul of his Salvation; it carried him away in such sort, that hee said; Behold I goe bound unto Ierusalem, and know not what things shall come unto mee there, saving that the holy Ghost Act. 20. 24. witnesseth in every Citie (saying) that bonds and afflictions abide me: but I passe not at all, neither is my life deare unto my selfe, so that I may fulfill my course with joy, and the ministration which I have received of the Lord Iesus, etc. And how desired hee it in the Iewes? Brethren. Rom. 10. 1. my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved. And he biddeth Timothy lay hold on it, saying, Fight the good 1 Tim. 6. 12. fight of Faith, lay hold on eternall life, whereunto yee are also called, etc. And when the Church would triumph, it is in this, Now is Salvation in Heaven, and strength, and the Kingdome of our God, and the Apoc. 12. 119. power of his Christ, for the accuser of our brethren is cast downe, which accused them day and night before God. And this was the earnest Psal. 67. 1, 2. prayer of the Church, God bee mercifull unto us, and blesse us, and cause his face to shine among us, that thy way may be knowne upon earth, Tit. 2. 11. thy saving health among all nations, not a bodily health, but a spirituall heavenly health. When Paul will commend the grace of God, and make way for it in the Gretians, hee calleth it a saving grace. The Physitian can give thee but health, as the Ier. 9.

Physitians of Gilead did; The Lawyer can but pleade for thee, as Many regard more vaine pamphlets than found doctrine. Tertullus did for the Iewes; The Magistrate can give thee but thine owne, as Salomon did to the two harlots; The musitian can give thee but pleasure, and tickle thine eare a little, as the Sonnes of Asaph did: The historiographer can give thee but the knowledge of the times: But the Divine offereth thee salvation, Act. 24. 1 Reg. 3. 2 Sam. 23. 1 Tim. 4. 16. he writeth and speaketh of salvation. Hereupon saith Paul to Timothie, Take heed unto thy selfe, and unto thy doctrine, and continue therein, for in so doing thou shalt save thy selfe, and them that heare thee. If one should come from the Prince, and offer to every one of you an acre of Land; how would you heare him? as they heard Paul at Troas, till midnight. But wee from God offer you an inheritance in heaven, and yet yee regard it not: Pausanias wrote of Act. 20. Nettles; Erasmus, of Foolishnesse; Demosthenes, of the shadow of an Asse; Musonius, of the wooll of a Goate; Virgil, of Gnats; but Iude wrote of salvation. If Alexander slept alwaies with Homers Iliades under his pillow; If Lepta forgot to sleep, reading Tullie de oratore; If Cyprian read daily Tertullius Apologiticon: If Chrisippus, read Logicke, so that he had perished, but for Melissa his mayd: how should the Church read this Epistle? There be many that follow the Apostles diligence in writing, but then it is in foolish, filthie, bawdie matters. To this purpose wee have gotten our songs and sonnets, our palaces of pleasure, our unchast fables and tragedies: Our fathers had their spirituall inchantments; as Gui of Warwicke, Bevis of Hampton, Arthur of the round table, and a number of such vanities: as Garagantua, Howleglasse, Frier Rushe, the Fooles of Gotham; strong illusions of the Divell to keepe them from reading the Scriptures: And we, like new borne Moabites, that wallow in our vomit, have gotten the Court of Venus, the Castle of love, Perce-pennylesse, etc.
But if he was so carefull to write of salvation, wee must be as carefull to heare and learne salvation. The Iaylor made inquirie after it, saying to Paul, and Silas; Sirs, what must we doe to be saved? And let us also search, and enquire after salvation. For many never Act. 16. 29. looke in what state they stand, whether in the state of grace and salvation, or in the state of death and damnation. But as it was said of Bonosus the Emperour, That he was borne not to live, but to eate and to drinke, and to scrape in the ground like molles, or to play like the dormise of India, that sleepe all winter, and play all summer. There are none, but must have a care of salvation, except they be Reprobates. The scoffing Iewes cried, Da Iohn 6. nobis semper hunc panem, give us evermore of this bread. The man in the Gospell would eate of the bread of heaven, and therefore cryed, Happie is he that eateth bread in the Kingdome of Heaven. Balaam prayed to die well; O that my soule might die the death of the righteous, Luk. 14. Numb. 23. 10. and that my last end might be like unto his. There is none so wicked,

but he would be saved; but if that wilt be saved, examine thy Every man to be carefull to know in what state he stands in. selfe, and aske thy soule; whether thou beest a dogge or a Lambe, a Citizen or a stranger, a sheep or a goate, to stand on the right hand or the left.
All men know their state, saving Christians; the Merchant can tell whether he gaineth or loseth; the Mariner can tell his Mat. 25. 40. course, whether he be right or wrong on the sea; the Husbandman knoweth his times for earing and reaping; the Physitian knoweth his body whether it bee in a (...), consumption, or in good estate? But we looke not whether we be saved or damned; but looke into thy selfe as thou doest into the world, whether thou beest even with God, whether his debt-booke bee discharged, whether thy sinnes bee forgiven, or no, whether God hath given thee Faith to apprehend his promises, whether the fruites of Faith appeare in thee or no. A prisoner will looke unto himselfe before the Assises, and looke into thy selfe before the Iudgment day, empanell a Quest on thy selfe and let thy heart bee the Foreman of the Iurie.
And note, that he calleth it Common salvation, not proper to Abraham, Isaak, Iacob, David, Peter, etc. but common to all.
1. First, hee calleth it common salvation. First, to admonish all men to lay hold of it. So saith Paul to Timothie, lay hold of eternall life. And also to admonish Ministers to neglect no sheep of God, not the very least. Paul said that he was a debter both to the Grecians and Barbarians, both to the wise and vnwise, that hee was not Rom. 1. 14. 16. ashamed of the Gospell of Christ, for it was the power of God to salvation to every one that beleeveth, to the lew first and also to the Grecian. And further he saith, that hee made himselfe a servant unto all men, that he might winne the more, that unto the Iewes he became as 1 Cor. 9. 20, 21, 22. a Iew, that hee might winne the Iewes; to them that were under the law, as though he were under the law, that hee might winne them that were under the Law; to them that were without law, as though he were without law, that he might winne them, that were without Law; to the weake he became as weake, that hee Act. 20. 20. 1 Thess. 2. 11. might winne the weake; and became all things to all men, that by all meanes he might winne some: Hee taught publikely and privately, throughout every house, exhorting and comforting every one, as a Father doth his Children: Even so the Minister of God must be carefull of every soule, that he may bee partaker of this common salvation.
2. Secondly, hee calleth it common salvation, because it is not prepared for some few, as the Arke was for the Deluge; For 1 Pet. 3. 20. Exod. 19. Iohn 4. 22. then but a few, that is, Eight persons were saved in the water: Neither because it appertaineth to one nation, Kingdome or people, as the Law of Moses to the Israelites; Salvation is of the Iewes: But the doctrine of the Gospell is offered unto all. Christ sent his Apostles in orbem, non in urbem; Goe into the world, preach the Gospell

to every creature. Erunt illi testes usque ad fines terrae, they were As Salvation is common, so the Church is Catholike. his witnesses to the end of the world. With these places, Augustine refuted the Donatists, which tyed the Church to a small corner of the world, Africa.
Thirdly, hee calleth it common Salvation, because we are all saved by one common meanes, that is, by Christ; Salvation is of the Lord. Ego sum, ego sum, and praeter me non est Salvator, I am, I Psal. 13. Esa. 43. am, and besides mee there is no Saviour, no true Saviour. All other come short; Vana salus hominum, Mans salvation is in vaine. And therefore the Elders, the Angels, and all Creatures give this glory to Christ, Salvation is of him that sitteth on the Throne, and of the Lambe; and they all together, cry, Amen. For these causes it is called common Salvation.
In this sense, as Salvation is called common, so the Church is Apoc. 4. called common or Catholike in three respects:
First, it is not tyed to any time, as the time of the Law, but it endureth ever. Mar. 16.
Secondly, it is not tyed to any place as to Iuda: For in Iuda was God knowne, and his name was great in Israel; but to the whole Psal. 76. 1. Act. 10. 34. world: For God is no accepter of persons, but in every nation hee that feareth him and worketh righteousnesse, is accepted. And the true worshippers, worship him in spirit and truth: As Christ said unto the woman. Iohn 4. 23.
Thirdly, it is not tyed to any persons, as to the seed of Abraham, but to all that beleeve: There is neither Iew nor Gentile, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, but wee Gal. 3. 28. are all one in Christ Iesus. In these respects Salvation is called catholicke, or common, and so is the Church.
It is worth your noting, that Iude sayth, hee gave all diligence to write. For Iude speaketh here of necessity of writing. For Hosius, Eckius, Pigheus, Andradius say, that Christ commanded the Apostles to preach, not to write; and that their writings are subesse, non praeesse fidei nostrae; that Scripturae sequuntur Ecclesiam, the Scriptures follow the Church, and not the Church the Scriptures. But Saint Peter saith, he wrote that the truth might remaine to posterity; his words are these; I thinke it meete so long as I am in 2 Pet. 1. 13, 14, 15. this tabernacle, to stirre you up, by putting you in remembrance, seeing I know the time is at hand, that I must lay downe my tabernacle, etc. I will endevour therefore alwayes, that yee also may bee able to have remembrance of these things, after my departing. So Saint Iohn wrote to all, Little children I write unto you that your sinnes are forgiven you. And againe, I write unto you Fathers, because yee have known him 1 Iohn 2. 12, 13, 14. that is from the beginning. And againe, I write to you young men, because yee have overcome the world. I write unto you babes, etc. Chrysostome writing upon these words, They that are in Iewry let them flie to the Math. 24. 16. mountaines: Id est, qui in fide sunt, conferant se ad Scripturas, that is, quoth Chrysost. Let them that are in the* Faith flie unto the Scriptures.

I love not allegories, but it is true, that Chrysostome said, Traditions the meanes of propagating errors. though not upon that occasion. S. Iohn saw three Gospells written; viz. Mathew, Marke, and Luke, and approved them. S. Peter allowed of Pauls Epistles, and commended them unto the Churches; yea, the Prophets nayled their prophecies in writing 2 Pet. 3. 15. Hebr. 2. 2. Hebr. 2. 1. 2 Tim. 3. 16. to the doores of the Temple, which the Priests reserved in the Sanctuarie, lest the things should runne out that they received by word of mouth. Paul at the end of his life saith of all the bookes of the New Testament, that they were able to make the man of God perfect.
Traditions, and unwritten verities, or vanities, have beene ever the Pandora-boxes, full of poyson; the Troiane horse, out of which all enemies have issued; that cursed water of Styx, that killeth them that taste it. These traditions the Holy Ghost sometime likeneth to sowre grapes, which cannot bee eaten; Sometime to broken cisternes, that can hold no water; Sometime to sand, wherupon Esa. 5. Jer. 2. Mat. 7. Esa. 64. to build it is not lawfull; Sometime to a menstruous cloth; And sometime to things more base and vile than any of these.
On the Contrarie, the written Word is called a Fountaine, waters of life, a Rocke whereupon the Church is built, the sword of the Esa. 55. Apoc. 21. Luk 6. Ephes. 8. Ephes. 2. 19. spirit; Basis Ecclesiae, the foundation of the Church. But what will not hungrie dogs eate, and Papists receive? all the spite of the Papists is against the written word, that they may give us poyson for meate, sowre Leaven for sweet dough, thornes for grapes, thistles for figges, the Legend for the Gospell, mens traditions, Mat. 15. 9. Gen. 8. for Gods precepts; the cup of the whore of Babylon for the cup of the Lord.
But as Noahs dove found no rest, but in the Arke; so our consciences find no rest, but in the Word: Augustine calleth the scriptures, the Lords Scales, which shew Quid grave, quid leve, what August. contra Donat. is heavie, and what is light; Vbi non appendimus, quid volumus, sed omnia per trutinam Domini; whereby wee apprehend not what we would, but all things according to the ballance of the Sanctuary, of the Lord himselfe: And he saith unto them often, Auferantur de medio chartae nostrae, procedat in medium codex Dei; take away from among us our owne writings, and let the booke of God be brought forth: Non audiamus, Haec dico, haec dicis; sed hoc dicit Dominus; Let us not heare these words, This say I, this saiest thou, but this saith the Lord. Christ entring into his glory, could have said much of the traditions of the Prophets; yet notwithstanding he alledgeth only those things that are written; Luk 24. 44, 45. Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, etc. Traditions and leaving the written word, is the originall of all mischiefe: Hence came the Iewish Cabal and Thalmud, the Turks Alcoran, the Russian tales of S. Nicholas, the Irish fables of S. Patricke, the Romish traditions of their new Saints: hence come the horrible opinions of Ebion and Cerinthus de regno Christi terreno, of the earthly

Kingdome of Christ, and of the Leviticall observations, under Milde exhortations more powerfull than menaces. colour or pretext of Apostolicall traditions: And the Apostles being all dead, Sua dogma vocarunt (...) as though it contained the most deep knowledge of heavenly things, but was indeed drawne out of the dungeon of hell. Thus, as Midas had power to turne all he touched into gold, so these men have power to turne all they touch into lyes, and all under colour of traditions. The Apostles dehortation therefore is to bee embraced; Beware lest there be any man that spoile you through Philosophie, and vaine deceit, Col. 2. 8. through the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.
The third reason, taken from the Person of the Apostle, is from the mildnesse and manner of his doctrine: For he exhorted them, he intreated them, as if a man should lay his hands under their feet; he came not in the Imperative, but in the Optative mood; hee came not like Tyrants, or great men, with Sic volo, sic jubeo: For me^ will rather be drawne with lenitie, than driven by extremitie. He came not with a searing iron, not with vinegar to ulcerate, but with oyle to mollifie; he came not with a rod, as Paul to the Corinthians, sedspiritu lenitatis, with the spirit of gentlenesse. 1 Cor. 4.
Exhortation is Gods whetstone to ^et an edge of our zeale, it is Gods spurre to make us runne faster in Religion; it is Gods milke to nourish us: What face of flint or heart of Adamant, but will be moved with exhortation? The three thousand Iewes, though vile men, were moved by it, it pricked their hearts, and made them crie out, Men and brethren, what shall we doe? It moved Valentinian much when Ambrose said, Rogamus Augustum non Act. 2. 46. pugnamus, we pray Augustus, we fight not; Arma nostra sunt preces and lachrimae, our weapons are prayers and teares. And it moved Arcadius much, when Chrysostome wished that the Emperor might see his heart as he saw his face, that he might see his care to doe him good.
The Minister must learne here to be diligent in exhorting: So saith the Apostle; Preach the Word, be fervent in season and out of season, improve, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine; and 2 Tim. 4. 2. as Paul commanded it, so he practised it: You know (saith Paul) how we exhorted you, and comforted you, and besought every one of you, as 1 Thess. 2. 11. a father his Children. The shepheard hath his whistle and his dog, and the Minister hath exhortation and reprehension; witnesse the Apostle; These things speake and exhort, and rebuke with all authoritie.
And as the Minister must exhort, so you the people must suffer the word of exhortation. I beseech you brethren (saith the Author to the Hebrewes) suffer the word of exhortation. The wounded man must suffer the Surgeon to lanche, to seare his wounds; The Hebr. 13. 22. sicke man must suffer the Physitian to prescribe sweet or bitter potions unto him; and the ignorant man of a dull spirit must

suffer the Minister to exhort him. So God cried unto Ierusalem, As Ministers must exhort so the people must suffer the word of exhortation. Be you instructed o Ierusalem, lest my soule depart from you, lest I make you desolate as a land not inhabited. So wee cry to you to bee instructed; O England, bee instructed; O Norfolke, bee instructed, O Northwalsham bee instructed, lest the soule of the Lord depart from you; and the rather, because we have cried long, like Cocks that crow at midnight, and againe, at three of the clocke, but Ier. 6. 8. longest and loudest towards day. The ministers are Gods Cocks, they crowed in King Edwards dayes and in Queene Elizabeths days, but longest and lowdest in King Iames his dayes. As Peter therefore wept at the crowing of the Cocke; so let us weep and wake at the crowing of these cocks: For now considering the season, it is high time for us to wake out of sleep, for our salvation is neerer than Rom. 13. 11. when wee beleeved: the night is past, the day is at hand; let us cast away the works of darknesse and put upon us the armour of light: Bee awake therefore and strengthen the things which remaine and are ready to dye; Even so awake England, thou hast slept fifty yeares, like Endimion, like the seven boyes of Ephesus mentiond by Nicephorus; like Abner, that would not be awaked. The cruellest Lion is tamed 1 Sam. 28. 15. by long art; the stiffest yce is thawed with long heate: the hardest marble is pierced with continuall dropping; and let us be pierced with continuall exhorting. We teach and exhort you from yeare to yeare, from thursday to thursday; let us not rolle Sisyphus stone, nor reach for Tantalus apples; let us not cast pearles before swine, nor give holy things to dogs. Mat. 7. 2 Cor. 5. 20.
We intreate you, as Paul did the Corinthians, That yee will be reconciled unto God; wee pray you to heare the word, not to sweare; we pray you to sanctifie the Sabboth, to be chast, liberall, mercifull, etc. The unrighteous Iudge, though a vile man, was overcome with importunity, and let our importunity overcome you, Suk. 18. and be you moved with continuall exhortation: Let not God say of us, as he did of the Iewes; I have spread only my hand all the day unto a rebellious people, which walked in a way that was not good, even after their owne imaginations, a people that provoked me ever to my face, Esa. 1. etc. But let us be warned by the admonition of the Prophets: for by these God exhorteth continually, and stretcheth out his hand to draw us.



THE SEVENTH SERMON.


VERS. III. 

For the maintenance of the faith, which was once given to the Saints.
Faith a gift of God a fruit of the spirit.



THE second reason is taken from the person of God, that he gave Faith. Now every man must maintaine the ordinance of God: For we can doe nothing against the truth, but for the truth: So reasoned Ambrose with Valentinian, when hee commanded him to give up his 2 Cor. 13. 8. Church to the Arrians; Si Naboth vineam patrum tradere noluit, etc. If Naboth wold not deliver up the vineyard of his fathers, he must not deliver up the vineyard of the Lord. 1 Reg. 21. Here note three things:

1 That Faith is a gift.
2 That it is once given.
3 That it is given unto the Saints.

And first, that faith is a gift, it is evident by the Apostles owne words, where he calleth Christ, The author and finisher of our faith; as the Athenians were called, Inventrices and perfectrices omnium doctrinarum, the inventers and perfecters of all good learning: The Hebr. 12. 2. Romanes had their learning from the Grecians, and the Grecians from the Aegyptians, and the Aegyptians from the Chaldees, and they from Adam, Seth, Noah and the old Patriarchs: but the Church 1 Cor. 2. 22. Act. 7. 222. hath all her learning, religion and faith from God; he gave it at the first, and he confirmed it at the least: He gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, some Pastours and teachers, for gathering

together of the Saints, for the worke of the ministerie, and for the edification Faith diversly taken. of the body of Christ, till wee meete together in the unitie of faith, and knowledge of the Sonne of God, etc. Luke, having spoken of Stephens faith, noteth the cause of it, that is, that Stephen was full of the Spirit; Ephes. 4. 11. Act. 7. 55. Gal. 5. 22. 1 Cor. 12. 9. Rom. 3. 3. For God worketh it by his Spirit: All good workes are the fruits of the Spirit, therefore faith; The fruits of the spirit are love, ioy, peace, long-suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faith, etc. and it is reckoned up among the gifts of the spirit; To another is given faith (saith the Apostle) by the same spirit: But faith is in the Scriptures diversly taken; sometimes it is given to God, and it signifieth his faithfulnesse in his promises: In this sense the Apostle useth the word, saying, Shall their unbeleefe make the faith of God of none effect? when it is given to man, it is taken seven manner of wayes.
First, it is taken for Fidelity, as it is a vertue in the second Mat. 23. 23. table; So Christ useth the word; where speaking to the Pharisees, he saith, Yee tythe Mint, Anise and Commin, and leave the weightie matters of the Law, as iudgement, and mercie, and faith.
Secondly, It is taken for the doctrine of faith, and Christian Religion; so it is said, Many were added unto the faith; that is, to Act. 6. 7. Christian Religion. And againe* God opened the doore of faith unto the Gentiles; that is, of Religion. Act. 14. 27.
Thirdly, It is taken for profession of religion; thus Elimas is Act. 13. 8. charged, To turne the Deputie from the Faith; that is, to make no more profession of Religion.
Fourthly, It is taken for Christ himselfe, by a Metonymie, who is both the object and cause of faith: So the Apostle useth the word saying, But after that faith is come, wee are no longer under a Gal. 325. schoole-master.
Fifthly, It is taken for knowledge only; and thus the Divels are said to beleeve.
Sixthly, It is taken for the gift of working miracles; If I had 1 Cor. 13. 2. all faith so that I could move mountaines, etc.
Lastly, It is taken for that grace by which, felicity and the chiefe good is applied; and thus it is taken in my Text.
And this the Apostle Paul cals the faith of Gods elect; For none but the elect, have it, and al the elect have it, at one time or another; and once had it can never be finally and totally lost, but it continueth with them, till they come to see the goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the living and then they shall have no more need of it: It is therfore called Saving faith, because it brings us to salvation: Ephes. 2. 8. And Iustifying faith, because it is that meanes or instrument which Gods spirit worketh in us, whereby wee apply unto our selves Christ Iesus, in and by whom wee are iustified: And Sanctifying faith, because by it God purifieth our hearts. This saving, iustifying, sanctifying faith is Gods gift: for hee is the Authour of this faith; From whom every good gift, and

every perfect gift commeth. And that which is said of Lydia, is true The meanes to beget faith. of all the faithfull, That the Lord opened the heart of Lydia, so that shee beleeved. And Christ saith, This is the worke of God, that yee beleeve; not the worke of the Father alone; or of the Sonne alone, Iam. 1. 17. Iohn 6. 29. or of the Holy Ghost alone, but of the whole Trinity: For this is one of the workes of God, which are said to bee Ad extra, and therefore attributed to all the three persons. To the first, where Christ saith, No man can come unto me, (that is, beleeve) except the Iohn 6. 44. Father draw him: to the second, where the Apostle calleth Iesus, The author and finisher of our faith: to the third, where the Apostle reckoneth faith, amongst the fruits of the spirit: And the onely Hebr. 12. 2. thing that moved God to worke this precious gift in us, is his meere good will: So saith our Saviour; It is so Father, because thy good pleasure was such. And the end at which he aymed in working Mat. 11. 26. this grace, is, first, the setting forth of his owne glory: secondly, the salvation of mankinde; and therefore S. Peter calleth salvation, The end of our Faith. 1 Pet. 1. 9.
This doctrine serveth to humble us; to let us see, that it is not in our power, that faith is not hereditary: God beginneth it, and increaseth it, and finisheth it. The Apostles prayed, Lord, increase Luk. 17. our faith: The meanes to get this ^aith is double; Outward; Inward. The outward meane is the word; hereupon saith the Apostle, How shall they beleeve in him of whom they have not heard? Rom. 10. 14. Rom. 10. 8. and thereupon thus concludeth, faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God: and hereupon it is called, The Word of faith. And Paul saith of the Ephesians, that they beleeved, After they Ephes. 1. 13. heard the Gospell. And finely saith Chrysostome, Accenditur fidei lampas igne divini verbi; the lampe of our faith is lighted by the fire of the divine word. And this faith, is wrought in us, both by reading and preaching of the word, and both are commended and ordeined of God: and first for reading, God himselfe commandeth it; and by reading, S. Augustine was converted: for he confesseth Deut. 3. 1. 9. of himselfe, that being inclined to the heresie of the Manichees, he heard a voyce, saying, Tolle and lege, take up and read; meaning the booke of God; which he presently did, and so by reading was converted: for surely the reading of the word is a meanes appointed of God, to the begetting of faith and raising up the Kingdome of God in the hearts of men; And to say that bare reading is bare feeding, and a thing unable to worke faith in us, is to avouch a great untruth.
But the especiall ordinary meanes, and the most powerfull usuall meanes, is the word preached. This is that which the scripture laieth downe: How shall they beleeve in him, of whom they have not heard? how shall they heare without a preacher? And againe, It pleaseth Rom. 10. 14. Gal. 3. 1 God by preaching to save. Reading is profitable, but preaching doth profit more than reading doeth: Spice, when it is whole smelleth sweetly, but when it is broken and bruised by the hand of the Apothecarie,

it smelleth a great deale more: So is the word read of The ministery of the word and motion of the spirit meanes of faith. us, or to us, sweet as they hony, and bringeth the light of life to many; but if the spirituall Apothecarie breake it and bruise it, cut it, and divide it, as the Lord hath appointed by preaching, then reacheth the savor of such heavenly sweet to many moe, in a fuller measure, by reason of the blessing, that God giveth unto it. The Eunuth read, but he understood not; but when Philip preached unto him, the sweet brake out to his lasting good. Act. 8.
The inward meanes wherby faith is wrought in us, is the blessed Spirit of God, which softeneth, and openeth our hearts, and maketh them as good ground, that when the seed of the Word is cast into them, it taketh deep rooting, and bringeth forth the blessed fruit of faith. The Apostle saith, that His preaching was 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. in demonstration of the spirit, that their faith might be in the power of God. And the preaching of the Gospell is tearmed, A ministration of the Spirit: yea, he useth this phrase, The Spirit of faith; because 2 Cor. 3. 8. cap. 4. 15. that faith is wrought inwardly by the Spirit. Thus yee see, faith is wrought in us outwardly by the word of God, and inwardly by the Spirit of God; he is (...) and (...).
Where are confuted Andradius, Latomus, Hosius, who say, that Philosophie iustified the Gentiles; that Socrates, Plato, beleeved aswell as Abraham, Isaak, and Iacob. Yet Howlet, a Papist saith, that faith is both begunne and increased by the word preached, 1 Pet. 1. 23. and that therefore it is called Incorruptible seed.
Here are confuted also the Atheists, that thinke, that faith is common: For all of them say, that they beleeve: but faith is a gift, yea a most rare gift of God; God sent his Patriarchs in the ancientest age of the world, and could find no faith: Hee sent his Prophets in a latter generation, and could find no faith: Last of all, he sent his owne Sonne, a man approved of God, and approved his doctrine with miracles and signes following, and could find no faith. And when the Sonne of man shall come, shall he find faith on the earth? We read but of two beleevers in all the host of Luk. 18. 8. Num. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 20. 2 Tim. 1. 26. Act. 1. 15. Apoc. 3. 4. Mat. 16. Iam. 2. 19. Israel; but of eight in all the old world; but of one family that beleeved in all Asia; but of a hundred and twentie in all Christs time; but of a few in all Sardis: Caro and sanguis non dant fidem, sed pater in coelis; Flesh and blood give not faith, but the Father in heaven. Many boast of faith, but if they have any, it is the Divels faith. Nay, many beleeve not so much as the Divell doth; but say with the foole, Non est Deus, non est daemon, non est infernus, non Psal. 14. 1. est coelum; There is no God, no divell, no hell, no heaven. All by nature are Infidells, we draw it from Adams loynes, and sucked Gen. 3. it from the breasts of Heva, who beleeved the divell before God. And in that some few beleeve, it is by grace, not by nature. Now grace is rare; therefore saith the Apostle, unto you it is given for Christ, that not onely yee should beleeve in him, but also, etc. If any aske me, when God gave this faith, I answere, that he did it in

the beginning and it hath, doth, and shall continue for ever. This As God is immutable, so true faith and Religion. commendeth the Faith, the Religion of God, that it is before all religions; the ancientest Philosophers, and Poets, as Orpheus, Homer, Hesiod, exceeded not the dayes of Salomon, who yet lived five hundred yeeres after Moses the writer of the Law.
Againe, all the wonderfull things recounted in the Scripture are recorded by the Heathen; as Noahs flood by Berosus, the tower of Babel by the Sibyls, the storie of Abraham by Dupolimus, the acts of Salomon recorded by Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus.
But to proceed to the next point: This faith was once given, once for all, once for ever; which commendeth unto us the constancie of God, With whom is no variablenesse, nor shadow of change: Hee Iam. 1. 17. Psal. 33. 9. speaketh, and it is done; he commandeth, and it is made; he giveth and granteth without revocation. Therefore it was well said Balaam, God is not as man that he should lye, nor the Sonne of man, that he Num. 23. 19. should repent: Shall God say, and not doe? shall he speake, and not performe? With men there is unconstancy; as in Iael; who offered Sisera rest and milke, but there withall a nayle and a hammer. Saul granted peace to David, with a breath, and with a breath revoked Iudg. 4. 1 Sam. 26. 2 Sam. 13. Iohn 6. it. Ammon loved Thamar once, but hated her by and by more than hee loved her. The Iewes gave Christ the title of a King, and anon after the title of a Rebell. The Antiocheans honored Paul as a God, but after changed their mind. There is such mutabilitie in men, that they change like the Moone, they alter like the Cameleon; but God alters not; but giveth his gifts to his Church once for ever. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Rom. 11. 29.
Note this word (Once) so often repeated, once God gave the Law, once he gave the Gospell; Once more will I shake, not the earth only, but also Heaven: And againe, After he had offered one sacrifice Hebr. 12. 26, 27. for sinnes, sitteth for ever at the right hand of God. And againe, with one offering he hath consecrated for ever them that are sanctified. And againe, Heb. 10. 12. 14. Hebr. 9. 27, 28. Rom. 6. 10. It is appointed for men once to dye, etc. so Christ was once offered to take away the sinnes of many. And againe, In that he died, he died once to sinne. Note all these Texts; one Gospell, one Sacrifice, one death, one appearing of Christ, one death of Christ, one for all, and one for ever.
If any object, and prove a change in God, because God gave Circumcision, the Passeover, the Sabboth, the Sacrifice, and after tooke them away againe; yee shall understand, that hee gave them as figures and shadowes, and therefore no mutability in the Lord: The shadow must give place to the body, the figure to the truth, the greene blossome to the ripe fruit, the seed time to the harvest. So reasoneth Paul, Let no man condemne you in meate and drinke, or in respect of an Holy day, or of the new Moone, or of the Sabboths, which are but a shadow of things to come; but the bodie is in Christ. The day-starre must give place to the Sunne-rising,

and that to the Sunne at Noone-day. Chrysostome compareth Though types cease, yet truth and substance remain ever the same. the Iewes to a candle; the Christians, to the brightnesse of the Sunne; The Iewes, to the first draught of an Image in bare lines; the Christians, to the same Image filled up with all due proportion and furniture of colours; the one to the seed-time, Hom. 10. in Mat. Gal. 4. the other to the harvest, and reaping of the Corne: So Paul compareth the Iewes to a Child, the Christians to a perfect man: the same light, though not in the same quantitie; the same Image, though not with like furniture; the same corne, though not growne to the like ripenesse; the same person, though not in the like perfection of age.
The Iewes note five things wanting in the Gospell, and in the latter Temple, that were in the first (to disprove this that I have said.)
First, the fire that came downe from heaven, to burne the Holocausts.
Secondly, the glory of the Angells appearing among the Cherubins.
Thirdly, the inspiration of Gods spirit speaking in the Prophets.
Fourthly, the prefence of the Arke.
Lastly, Vrim and Thummim. But all this is nothing: for there is now a fuller knowledge of God, and greater liberty to the conscience; yet the same faith still. For the Fathers and we have all Col. 2. Ier. 23. 5. but one faith; they beleeved that Christ should come, according to Ieremies prophecie, Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord; that I will raise unto David a righteous branch and a King shall raigne and prosper, and shall execute iudgement and iustice in the earth. We beleeve that he is come, and that Christ our Passeover is sacrified for us. 1 Cor. 5. 7. Esa. 7. They said, Virgo concipiet, a maid shall conceive, and bring forth a Sonne; we say, Virgo concepit, a maide hath brought forth her S^^ne: For when the dayes were accomplished, that she should be delivered, Luk. 2. 7. she brought forth her first begotten Sonne, and wrapped him in swadling clothes, and laid him in a Cratch. They had sacrifices that prefigured his comming, we have Sacraments that represent his comming Heb. 9. and being with us: they and wee had but one light; they had Lucem matutinam, the moning light; wee, Lucem meridianam, the light at noone-day. Wee differ but In plus and minus: therefore saith Christ; Blessed are the eyes that see the things that yee see: Mat. 10. 24. For I tell you, that many Prophets and Kings have desired to see the things that yee see, and have not seene them, and to heare those things that yee heare, and have not heard them.
If any object, that God giveth us daily new Paith, new graces.
I answere, that God giveth not a new, a strange faith, but addeth to our old faith, to our old graces, God increaseth, faith and his graces in us, but not a new, a diverse faith, like the Arrians

that had Fidem annuam and menstruam, a yeerely, and a monthly The Gospell immutable: Traditions uncertain. Faith; For whom God loves, hee loves to the end.
This also commendeth unto us the Gospell: that whereas other Lawes and Doctrines are changed, altered, augmented, and diminished, Gods Law is not: The Law of the Lord is perfect. Iohn 13. 1. Psal. 19. The Lawes of the Romanes written by Numa Pompilius, in Gold; The Lawes of the Athenians, written by Draco, in Bloud; the Lawes of the Persians, written in Brasse; The Lawes of the Lacedemonians, written in Milke, were altered; but Gods Lawes are not. Quoad substantiam, as concerning their substance; Sed quoad maledictionem, as concerning the curse. 2 Cor. 3.
All traditions therefore, all Gospels of Thomas, Nicodemus, Thaddeus, and the eternall Gospell invented in Saint Cyrils time, by abusing the place in the Revelation which runneth thus, I saw another Angel flying in the middest of Heaven, having an Apoc. 14. 6. everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the Earth, etc. must fall to the ground, like the house built upon the sand; as also all those Revelations of the Paraclete, devised by Montanus, together with all those that came after the giving of the Gospell, which is perfect for ever, and so perfect, that If any man shall adde unto it, God shall adde to him the plagues that are written in Apoc. 22. 18, 19. the Booke; and if any man shall diminish from the words of the Prophecie of Gods Booke, God shall take away his part out of the Booke of Life, and out of the holy Citie, etc. Let us not then adde nor diminish from the Gospell being so perfect; for there is but one God, one Faith, one Baptisme, one Christian Hope, once revealed Ephes. 4. for all.
But of the late Romish traditions, which have entred long since the Gospell entred, one may say to Rome as Esay said to Ierusalem, Thy Gold is turned into Drosse, thy Wine is mixed with Water, thy Seede with Cockle; thou wert sometime a faithfull Esay 1. City, but now become an Harlot, thou wert once the house of God, but now turned into a cave of theeves. Thou sayest that thou art rich, and increased in wealth, and standest in neede of nothing; Apoc. 3. 17. but thou art poore, and blind, and naked, (as God said to the Church of Laodice) poore, and blind, and naked indeed, God give them hearts to understand, and eyes to see their poverty and nakednesse.
But to passe with this heavenly Scripture, as Moses did with the people to the land of Canaan.
Thirdly, this Faith is given to the Saints: By Saints hee meaneth the children of God, truely converted; not because they are perfectly holy and without sinne, but in these foure respects:
First, in respect of Separation: for they they are elected, and gathered out of this world, and joyned to Gods people, and dedicated to holy services and uses.

Secondly, In respect of Vocation, and therefore the Apostle The Saints the subiects of Faith and all Graces. when hee said, they were sanctified, he said by explication, that they were Saints by calling.
Thirdly, In respect of Regeneration, because they are now new creatures. 1 Cor. 1. 2.
And lastly, In respect of Iustification or imputation, because the holinesse and sanctity of Christ is imputed unto them. For men may be Saints in this life; For there are Saints in Earth as well as in Heaven: Hereupon saith David, All my delight is upon Psal. 16. 3. Psal. 37, 28. Ephes. 3. 8. the Saints in Earth, and on such as excell in Vertue: And againe, Hee forsaketh not his Saints. And Saint Paul calleth himselfe, The least of all Saints. And Saint Iude here speaketh of Faith given unto the Saints. The Papists will acknowledge no Saints till three things come unto them: first, they must bee canonized, by the Pope; secondly, they must bee dead first; and thirdly, it must be an hundred yeeres after death: Risum teneatis amici?
But to leave all this. In that this Faith is given unto the Saints, wee learne, that holy things are not to be given to Dogs, Mat. 7. 6. a Gold ring becommeth not a Swines snout; Cardui benedicti are not for the mouthes of Mules, the songs of Nightingales are not for the eares of Asses.
Faith is not given to the Reprobate: God hath made other Pro. 11. 22. things for them, and they for other things: He hath made them For Prov. 16. 4. Deut. 4. Jer. 6. the day of evill. God gave the Law, yet to the Israelites, not to the Hittites, Canaanites, Peresites: Hee gave the Arke, but not to the Philistines: He gave Incense to Sheba, Balme to Gilead, fine Spices to Arabia, Ezek. 37. Milke and Honey to Canaan, Silver to Tharsis, Gold to Ophir: but Hee gave his word to Iacob, Ier. 9. Ezec. 37. Deut. 6. 1 Cbr. 29. Psal. 147. Mat. 13. 11. 13. 1 Cor. 10. 15. his Statutes and his Ordinances unto Israel; hee hath not dealt so with every nation, neither had the Heathen knowledge of his Lawe, Christ speakes mysteries, but hee explaned them only to his Apostles, Paul spake, but yet unto them that had knowledge; I spake to them (saith Paul) that have understanding, judge, yee what I saw. So wee speake, but not to them, that are wilfully ignorant, that shut their eyes, stoppe our eares, and harden their hearts against the Word, with such men we meddle not, but in the sin wherein we finde them, in that we leave them; we speake onely to beare witnesse of their sinne, against the day of the Lord, they have sinned, and their sinne will finde them out; as Moses said to the two tribes, Behold yee have sinned against the Lord Numb. 32. 25. and be sure your sinne will finde you out; and yee shall bee assuredly punished for your sinne; All things are given unto the Saints, and nothing is given to the Reprobate but in Gods wrath, and for the elects sake: for their sake God made the world; for their sakes hee redeemed it: For God so loved the World, that hee Gen. 1. gave his onely begotten Sonne, that who soever beleeveth in him might not perish but have life everlasting: For their sakes he preserveth it, and Iohn 3. 16.

when the body of Christ is made perfect, the number of the The wicked usurpers of Gods gifts. Saints accomplished, God will dissolve the frame of this evill World: and therefore when the soules of the Saints that were killed cryed out, How long Lord holy and true tariest thou, to iudge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? Answere was made, that they should rest for a little season untill their fellow servants Apoc. 6. 10, 11. and their brethren, that should bee killed, even as they were, were fulfilled.
That the wicked live, they may thanke the Saints, the Godly; how soever they hate them, yet they enjoy all for their sakes: the wicked are but usurpers and intruders, to gift of God is due unto them, but plagues onely; Vpon them hee shall raine snares, fire and brimstone, storme and tempests, this shall be their Psal. 11. portion to drinke: For judgements are prepared for the scornefull, and stripes for the fooles backe. For tribulation and anguish shall be upon the Soule of every man that doth evill. Rom. 2. 9.
As Elisha would not have spoken, but for Iehosaphats sake, so wee would not speake unto you, but for some good mens sake that are amongst you, otherwise you should dye in your sinne, and rot and dye in your sinne; you have neither part nor fellowship Act. 8. Apoc. 22. in Iesus Christ, as Philip said to Simon Magus; Let him therefore that is filthy be filthy still.



THE EIGHTH SERMON.


VERS. IV. 

For there are certaine men crept in, etc.
The Church and Religion, hath their adversares.



WEE are now come to the third reason, taken from the person of the Adversaries; and it lyeth thus; The adversaries impugne the Faith; therefore the Saints must stand for it.
The Church hath many adversaries, like Bees in an hyve, like Moates in the Sunne, like Pismires on a molehill. Iohn saith, That Apoc. 12. 7. he saw a great battel in Heaven, that is, in the Church, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragonfought and his Angels: And Paul said, There were many 1 Cor. 16. 9. adversaries: Wee may say of the Church, the Faith and Religion of God, as David said of his owne person, Mine enemies Psal. 38. 19. live and are mightie, and they that hate mee wrongfully, are many in number.
As there is a contrary in all, day and night, cold and heate, sicknesse and health, life and death; so in Religion. Chrysostome In ser. de nequitat depulsa. saith, Ferrum rubigo laedit, lanam tinea, ovem lupus, Polium segetes, grando vineam, etc. Rust hurteth Iron, the Moth Wooll, the Woolfe the Sheepe, the Leopard the Kidde, the Haile the Vine, the Cockle the Corne, the Caterpillar the Fruits; few but have their adversaries. So Faith and Religion, Atheists, Papists, Pagans, Heretickes, Schismatickes, Sectaries, all these barke against the Saints, as dogges against the Moone.

Religion divideth men in an house, I am come (saith Christ) Secret enemies most dangerous that pretend Love. to put fire on the Earth; and what is my desire, if it be already kindled? Thinke yee that I am come to give peace in earth: I tell you nay, but rather debate: From henceforth there shall bee five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three. The Father shall be divided against the Sonne, and the Sonne against the Father; the Mother Luke 12. 49, 51, 52. 53. against the Daughter, and the Daughter against the Mother; the mother in law against the daughter in law, and the daughter in law against the mother in law. The godly, the faithfull are as Lambes amongst wolves, as Lilies amongst Thornes, as Doves amongst Ravens; Mat. 10. 16. many oppugne the Faith, therefore wee must be ready to defend it, yea strive for it unto death, as Ioab fought for God: so let us speake for God, and write for God. If wee had as many tongues and pennes, as Argus had eyes, let them all speake and Eccles. 4. 2. Sam. 10. write for the Truth; yea, if wee had as many as haires on our heads, as Ierome said to Helvidius, Si veritas est causa discordiae, mori possum, tacere non possum; If Truth bee the cause of our discord, I may dye, but I may not be silent: Wee cannot but speake the things Act. 4. 20. wee have seene and heard.
But to come to the description of these Adversaries; they are here described two wayes.
By their Life, End.
By their Life they are described foure wayes:
First, they creepe into the Church.
Secondly, they be (...), men without God.
Thirdly, they bee Libertines.
Fourthly, they are Blasphemers, Denying God and Christ.
By their End also they be described; they are ordained to Iudgement, written in the blacke Booke, not of Life, but of Death.
But first, they are described by their Life: and they are said first, to creepe into the Church. The Greeke word signifieth a craftie entrance into the Church; they come not in by the Doore Iohn 10. into the Sheepefold, but clime up some other way; they come not in the Day but in the night, like theeves; they are Woolves in Sheepes clothing, Caterpillers to devoure the vineyard of Christ; Mat. 24. they thrust in themselves, like Iudas amongst the Apostles; therfore the more to bee resisted; for no enemy is so dangerous as a secret enemy; It was not an open enemy (quoth David,) that did defame mee, for I could have borne it: neither did my Adversary exalt Psal. 55. 12, 13. himselfe against me, for I would have hidden mee from him: but it was thou o man, even mine own companion and guide, and my familiar. They pray with us in one Church, and dip their hand with us in one dish; these creepers are the most dangerous hell-hounds above all others, they have Butter in their mouths, but Swords in their hearts: A Dogge that barketh may bee prevented before hee

bite, and the serpent that hisseth, before hee sting, and the fire Satan assaults. sometime by cruelty; sometime by subtilty. that smoketh, before it burne; so may a knowne enemy, but a secret enemie, a creeper, is hard to prevent. Satan prevaileth many wayes, sometime as a Lion, sometime as a Serpent; sometime by force as a Lion, as in Nero, Domitian, Trajane, Vulerian; sometime by fraud, as a Serpent, as in Herod, in the Pharisees, in Iulian the Apostata, who corrupted by the faith more by lenitie and rewards, than all the bloody persecutors did by the sword; wherupon one distinguisheth of Divels, and saith, that some are blacke, and some are white; to teach, that he hurteth not one way, but many wayes; he sheweth himselfe a blacke Divell, when He goeth about like a roaring Lion seeking to devoure; a white Divell, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Luk. 4. 41. Act. 16. 17. when hee cried, Thou art Christ the Sonne of God: and againe, hee shewed himselfe a white Divell, when as he cried, These men are the servants of the living God, which shew untous in the way of salvatio; meaning Paul and Silas. But whether Divells be white or blacke, yet they be Divells still; yea and so much the more vile, that they be Mat. 26. Mat. 7. 2 Cor. 11. 14. white: For there is no kisse to the kisse of Iudas; no woolfe, to him that is clad in a Lambes skinne; no teare to the teare of a Crocodile; so no Divell to him that appeareth in the shape of an Angell. Satan hath sore wounded the Church every by open and tragicall persecutions; as in the dayes of Christ, Even among the cheefe John 12. 42. rulers many beleeved in him; but because of the Pharisees, they did not confesse him, lest they should be excommunicate. And in the ten persecutions, Satan raged against the Church horribly; but never so much as by inward enemies in the bosome of the Church: For when the Officers that were sent to apprehend Christ, told the Pharisies, saying, Never man spake as this man; The Pharisees answered, Are yee also deceived? Doth any of the rulers or the Pharisees Iohn 7. 48. beleeve in him? Christ had no greater enemies than the Church, the Synagogue. For who resisted him? not Atheists, but the Church, the Scribes and Pharisees, the expounders of the Law, the friends of the Gospell: Paul had more adoe with false Apostles, than with the uncircumcised, the infidells, the Pagans; Some would destroy the purity of majesty and the Gospell by their eloquence; some would bring in Iudaisme: The subtle Gibeonites troubled Iosua more than the open Canaanites: The Manichees did more hurt the Church, than all heretikes, and that under the colour of not marrying, not eating of flesh, not drinking of wine. None will weep faster than a Crocodyle; none will make a greater face of godlinesse than these hedge-creepers. Ismael will Ier. 41. weep to Gedaliah; Herod will bid the wise men seeke diligently for Christ, and when they have found him, to bring him word, Mat. 2. that he may come and worship him; The Herodians will salute Christ Mat. 22. with many goodly titles, saying, Master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God truly; for thou carest for no man; thou considerest not the outward appearance of men, etc. Dalila will pretend all

love to Sampson; O, I love thee Sampson. The adversaries of Iuda Popery prevailes more by fraud than by force. and Benjamin will say to Zorobabel, and to the rest, Wee will build with you, wee will sacrifice with you: but Ismael killed Godaliah; Herod would have butchered Christ; the Herodians tempted him; Dalila betraied Sampson; and the adversaries of Iuda would have pulled downe the Church, and not built it up. Such trees without Iudg. 15. Esder. 4. fruit, such eares without corne, such nets without fish, such lampes without oyle, such clouds without raine shall perish: As they have lived without feare, so shall they did without hope; as they have a body without an heart, so have they a soule without God. They in felle nequitiae, even in the gall of bitternesse, and in the bond of iniquity; and therefore they have neither part nor fellowship in Gods Kingdome.
To apply this to the present state of the Church: Satan hath prevailed more in Popery, by fraud, than by force; by creeping, than by breaking in with a skaling ladder. The first Romane Monarchie stood of unjustice, maintained by armes; and this latter of impietie, maintained by fraud and hypocrisie: Whose comming is by the working of Satan with all power and signes, and lying 2 Thess. ^. 9, 10. wonders, and in all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousnesse: The Popes Kingdome is not described by force and armes, but by sleights and wiles, by the names of women, enchantments, cups, Apoc. 17. and. 19. fornications. The beast representing the Romane Empire, had the hornes of a Lambe, and the mouth of a dragon. In all the Kingdome of Popery, in Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Monks, Friers, Nunnes, what was there but hypocrisie? How deceived they the world with their Prayers, Almes, Fastings, Crossings, Greasings, Purgatory, Auricular confessions, Trentas, Dirges, Masses, Prayer for the dead, going on Pilgrimage, etc. The Friers under a colour of wilfull povertie, begged and robbed the world: The Nunnes, under a shew of single life, filled the world full of bastardie: Sexcenta millia capita infantum in Gregorii piscina reperta sunt; there were six hundred thousand Childrens heads found in Gregories fishpoole. The Priests by a colour of Masses, made merchandise of soules, and filled Iudas satchells; The Abbeies, under a colour of almes and hospitalitie, robbed most parishes of their Ecclesiasticall livings; they stole a goose, and gave a feather; greater theeves than ever was Barabbas; they gave a meales meate, and robbed a parish of their Church maintenance. The Confessors, under pretence of auricular confession, knew the secrets of all Kingdomes: It was the Popes fishing net, it hath deposed more than two hundred lawfull Princes; it made Fredericke Barbarossa the Popes Footstoole at Venice; it exiled the King Desiderius into Lions. The Pope under shew of Bulls or pardons, hath robbed God of his glorie, men of their money and, soules of salvation: he hath gotten thereby in America foure millions yearly: they are like their fathers the Pharisies, They devoure

widowes houses, even under a colour of long prayers; wherefore they shall All Atheists before regeneration and conversion. receive the greater damnation. The whore of Babylon giveth poyson in a golden cup; Beda, Venerable Beda, saith, that the serpent in paradise had vultum virgineum, a virgins face, that hee might deceive Heva, a virgin: for he is a deceiver; Yea from the beginning, Math. 23. 14. Apoc. 18. Iohn 8. 44. Apoc. 20. 2. and abode not in the truth, (...). The Dominicans, under the pretence of preaching; the Franciscans, under pretence of chastitie, (Nam virilia amputarunt;) the Carmelites under shew of virginitie; and the Augustines, under pretext of povertie, have erected the Papall Kingdome by hypocrisie, under colour of religion. But Babylon is fallen, even Rome, the Queene of pride, the nurse of idolatries, the mother of whordomes, the sinke of iniquitie, Sentina malorum, lacuna scelerum; yea, the Romish Iezabel is throwne downe, and if the palmes of her hands and her skull, or any thing of her remaine with us, let us pray, that it may bee buried also. This Dagon is fallen downe twise, once in King Edwards daies, and againe in our dayes, and let it never rise againe. Let this golden Diana be beaten downe for ever; Let this whore of Apoc. ^8. Babylon perish, and let her smoke rise up for evermore, and let all that love the Lord Iesus say, Amen.
But to proceed in the description of the wicked. Secondly, they are here described by their impietie, hee saith that they were (...), without God, without Faith, without religion; they denie God the only Lord, and our Lord Iesus Christ; so Paul said Ephes. 2. 12. Phil. 3. 17, 18. of the Ephesians before their conversion, They were without Christ; alienes from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenant and promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the World. And such were the Philippians; They were enemies of the Crosse of Christ, whose Ephes. 4. 17, 18. end is damnation, whose God is their bellie, and whose glorie is their shame; which mind earthly things. Such were all the Gentiles, spiced with impietie: For they walked in the vanitie of their minde, having their cogitations darkened, and being strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that was in them. The world is full of such Atheists, they swarme like bees in Hibla, they abound like lice in Aegypt, all the dust was turned into lice; and in England all or most mens profession is turned into Atheisme, Machivelisme; saying, that Religion is but policie, to keep men in awe. Many are of the Luk. 12. fooles religion, to eate, drinke, play; but to remember no God, to pluckedown, to build up, to gather in, but not to serve God in holinesse and righteousnesse. Heu vivunt homines, tanquam mors nulla sequatur, Et velut infernus fabula vanaforet: Alas, men live as if no death should follow, and as if Hell were but a fable. There be many now like that Captaine, that warred under Adrian the Emperor, called Similus, who at his death caused this Epitaph to be written upon his tombe, Hic jacet Similus, etc. Here lieth Similus, a man that was of many yeares, and lived only but Seven; many yeares without God, but seven yeares in God; many yeares

wickedly, but seven yeares religiously; many yeares like an Atheist, Atheists consuted by reason and sense. but seven yeares like a Christian: So a number of us may say, that we have lived many yeares, and yet but few yeares for God; many yeares in sinne and wickednesse, but few yeares in vertue and godlinesse.
There is a double life, of Nature. Grace.
In the one all live, but in the other, the elect only. In all ages Atheists have abounded: in Davids dayes, The foole said in his heart, there is no God: In Salomons dayes; they cryed, A quicke dog is better Psal. 14. Prov. 9. than a dead Lion. We know what we have here, but we know not what we shall have in another world. In Esayes dayes; For there were that said: We have made a covenant with death, and with Hell are Esa. 28. 15. we at agreement: In Christs time; For there were Sadduces that denyed the Resurrection, and affirmed that there was neither Angell nor spirit: In Peters dayes; For there were that said, Where is the promise of his comming? and so denyed the last Iudgement: In 2 Pet. 3. Chrysostomes time they cried, (...), etc. give us that which is present; let God alone with that, which is for to come. In Calvins time; for then there were such, that tooke away all difference betweene good and evill, vertue and vice, sinne and righteousnesse: And in our dayes, wee have, that deny God and Christ, and heaven and hell, Angells, Spirits, and all. David calleth them fooles; Salomon calleth them Epicures; Esay noteth them as blasphemers; Christ calleth them Sadduces; Chrysostome, Nullifidians; Calvin, Libertines; wee call them, Machiavels, ungodly men.
Such are worse than the Divell: For hee confesseth God, but these perhaps deny that there bee Divells, so did the Sdaduces: these men therfore shal feele Divels, before they beleeve Divels. I would not be in their coate for the Kingdome of England; no, not to be Monarch of the world for ten thousand yeares: Divels are seene, they are felt, they are heard, yet these men deny them: but I will remit them to Philosophie to bee counselled, that Sensus non fallitur circa proprium objectum; sense cannot be deceived about his proper object.
The very Heathen will condemne us: Tullie saith, Non temere nec fortuito sati aut creati sumus, sed profecto fuit divina quaedam vis, quae generi consuleret humano, nec id gigneret quod cum exantlavisset labores omnes, tum incideret in mortis malum sempiternum; portum potius nobis paratum putemus; We are not borne or created rashly or by chance, but verily there was a certaine divine power, which did provide for mankind, neither would it suffer them so to be borne, as that when they had undergone all manner labour, they should be utterly lost in the everlasting evill of Death; but rather let us thinke some haven of rest is prepared for us. A divine speech of a prophane man. The Epicures said, that God was idle in heaven,

quodque Deus ambulat circa cardines Coeli: and that he was walking about Gods power and providence governe^ all things. the poles of heaven; that nature ruleth all, by chance, and at adventure: On the contrary, the Stoickes held that God is nothing but nature, and that all things are wrought by necessity and destinie, that God can worke no miracle, nor contrarie to the course of nature, But the Platonists held, that nature is, Quicquid Deus vult; that it is subject to God, that there is neither chance nor destinie, but all things are done by God. Some therefore compare Nature to an horse, and God to the rider, that bridleth her and ruleth her as he list. Anima mundi est virtus Dei, the power of God is the soule of the world; Mundus est schola animarum, the Origen. Basil. world is the schoole of soules, to lead us to the knowledge of God: God therfore (quoth he) was able by his power to change the course of nature as thus:
To divide the Sea in two parts. Exod. 14. Ios. 10. Num. 16. Ios. 3. Psal. 114. Dan. 3. Dan. 6. Luk. 7.
To stay the Sunne.
To open the Earth.
To drie up the Waters of Iordan.
To make the Mountaines skippe like Rammes.
To quench the Flame.
To mussell the Lions.
To raise the Dead.
In this sense Simonides the philosopher said, that Solus Deus est metaphysicus, that God alone was supernaturall. Pindarus called God (...), the best artificer. Diogenes seeing Harpalus that great theefe to be fortunate a long time, said, that he gave a lively testimony against the Gods: So Dionysius said, that God favoured pirats, for that he had a good winde after the robbing of the Temple: So Hermogenes reasoned, seeing so much evill in the world, Aut voluit Deus tollere mala, and non potest, and tunc infirmus est; aut potuit and noluit, and tunc invidus est: God either would take away evill and cannot, and then he is impotent; or could and would not, and then he is envious: But Tertullian retorted it thus on him, Deum velle and posse omnia mala tollere quatenus expedit: God is Rom. 8. 28. both willing and able to take away all evill, so farre as it is expedient; For all things worke for the best unto them that love God. Quaedam tollit in hac vita, alia reservat in extremum judicium; some hee takes away in this life, some hee reserves to the last iudgement. Facessant ergo illi monoculi Cyclopes, qui Deum negant; istud quatenus expedit relinquamus Deo; herewith therefore let those one-eyed Cyclopes, which deny God, be content; let us leave to God that same, so far forth as it is expedient. So reasoneth the Manichaeans against Moses, when he said, In the beginning God made heaven and Gen. 1. 1. Aug. lib. 1. de Genes. Iohn 1. 2. earth; quaerentes in quo principio Deus fecit Coelum? Quibus respondit Augustinus, Deum non fecisse in principio temporis, sed in Christo per quem omnia facta sunt; nam antequam fecit Deus tempora, non erant tempora; nam tempus est creatura, and dicit Paulus veritatem fuisse ante

tempora aeterna: Asking, in what beginning God made heaven? All men by the light of nature have acknowledged a divine power. To whom Augustine makes answer; God made it not in the beginning of time, but in Christ by whom all things were made; for before God made time, time was not: for time was a creature, and S. Paul saith, The truth was before time eternall. These men say much, but to little purpose; Loquacior est enim vanitas, quam veritas, and altius clamat: for vanity prattles more than verity, and Ephes. 3. 9. makes a greater noise. I alleage not all these prophane writers for need; I know that the darts that are taken out of the Lords armorie pierce deepest, that the arrowes that are drawne out of the Lords quiver are the sharpest, that the sword of the spirit cutteth deepest, that proofes taken from the Scripture are strongest. But it is not amisse to confute a naturall man by naturall men, as here by Philosophers.
But to follow this point a little further: Naturally a kind of religion is found in all men, in genere, though they erre in specie. Caine and Abel did first sacrifice to God; Enoch was the first that Gen. 4. instituted prayer; After Noahs flood were many Lawes of religion given to many nations; Mercurie, and Mena gave lawes to the Aegyptians; Melissus to them of Candie; Faunus and Ianus to the Latines; Orpheus to the Greekes; Numa pompilius to the Romanes; Draco to the Athenians; Lycurgus to the Lacedemonians; Deuter. 4. but Moses and Aaron gave lawes to the Hebrewes, that passed them all. Naturally we know that there is a God; For the invisible Rom. 1. 20. things of God, that is, his eternall power and Godhead are seene by the creation of the world. The very Poets spake of Iupiter, Castor and Pollux, Venus, Saturne, Vulcan, Mars, Mercurie; yet Iupiter was an adulterer; Gastor and Pollux, two incestuous twinnes; Venus an harlot in Cyprus; Saturne a Runnagate in Italie; Vulcan a theese; Mars a bastard; yet this sheweth, that there is Divinum numen, a divine power, that the Heathen thinke so, therefore they adore something as God: they invented Gods in hell, as Pluto and Proserpina; the Aegyptians worshipped Calves; the Ophytes, serpents; the Persians, fire; they of Canopus, water; the Coloridians, Heva; the Philistines, Dagon, halfe-fish and halfe-flesh; the Turkes at this day worship Mahomet; the Tartarians, grand Cam; the Calecuts, the Divell.
But there be many reasons to prove, that there is a God; all the creatures of God doe it, from the Eagle, to the Flie; from the Elephant, to the Pismire; from the great Whale, to the little Lamprey; from the Camell, to the Gnat; from the Cedar, to the Brake-bush; from the Starres of Heaven, to the Dust of the Earth; from Angels, to Wormes. And therefore men that deny God, may be sent to the creatures, to learne that there is a God. Esay reasoneth thus: Who hath measured the waters Esa. 40. 17. 21, 22. in his fist, and counted Heaven with the spanne, and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a measure, and weigheth the Mountaines in a

weight, and the hils in a ballance? And againe, Know yee nothing? Conscience in man a testimonie of the divine power. have yee not heard it? hath it not beene told you from the beginning? have yee not understood it by the foundation of the Earth? Hee sitteth upon the circle of the Earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as Grassehoppers; he stretcheth out the Heavens as a curtaine, and spreadeth them out as a Tent to dwell in. And Salomon reasoneth thus: Who hath ascended up to Heaven and descended? who hath gathered the Wind in his Prov. 30. 4. fist? who hath bound the Waters in a garment? who hath established all the ends of the World? what is his name, or his Sonnes name, if thou canst tell? And God reasoning with Iob saith, Where wast thou when Job 38. 4, 5, 6. 8. I layd the foundations of the Earth? declare if thou hast understanding: who hath layd the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line over it? whereupon are the foundations thereof set? or who hath layd the corner-stone thereof? or who hath shut up the Sea with doores. When it issued, and come forth out of the Wombe? etc.
The world is, Schola Dei, the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth his handy worke. And the Apostle affirmeth, Psal. 19. 1. that God left not himselfe without witnesse, in that hee did good, and gave us raine from Heaven, and fruitfull seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladnesse. O every showre of raine is a Preacher, and tels us there is a God.
Note this, that nothing was made of it selfe, nor for it selfe, but for another. The Heavens (we see) doe serve the Ayre, the Ayre serveth the Earth, the Earth the Beasts, the Beasts serve Man; Man therefore not made of himselfe, was made to serve another, which can bee no other but God; The Lord hath made all things for his owne sake: If all things, therefore Man; which Pro. 16. 4. confuteth Atheisme.
Againe, it is an arrow, yea a hammer against Atheisme, that all men have a conscience of sinne, and are affraid of it: Conscience is a witnesse either with us, or against us; either to excuse us, or accuse us. It beareth witnesse, of what? of secret particular actions. Against whom? against thy selfe. To whom? to God; (seeing neither men nor Angels know the secrets of thy heart.) Let all Atheists barke against the God-head: as long as they will; Intus est vermis qui illos mordet; within there is a worme that gnaweth them. In that men are afraid and ashamed of sinne, it argueth that there is a God: we see, that all creatures purge themselves of their corruption; The Sea her froth, the water her skumme, the earth her vapours, the birds their feathers, the wine his lees, the fire his smoke, the oile his some; Man therfore that would avoid his sinne, and be rid of it, hath a conscience of God, and proveth there is a God.
But alas, Religion beggeth in these dayes; Probitas laudatur and alget; our religion is in imagination, not in faith; in opinion, not in judgement; in the braine, not in the heart; in word, not in deed and effect: They professe they know God, but inwardly in their

works they doe denie him, being abominable, disobedient and unto every Few truly religious but many Epicures and Atheists. good worke reprobate; they have a shew of godlinesse, but have denyed the power thereof. O vile times; the worst that have beene ever since the creation of the world; and if these dayes should not be shortned, no flesh should be saved; but for the Elects sake God hath shortned them. We Tit. 1. 16. 2 Tim. 3. 5. Mat. 24. 22. Esa. 58. 1. 1 Reg. 19. Mar. 3. had need crie aloud and not spare, lift up our voices like trumpets; For ordinary speaking hath no proportion with extraordinary sinning. We cannot come to you, as God came to Elias, in a still wind, in a soft voice; we must have Stentors voice, be like Iames and Iohn, the sonnes of thunder.
The Heathen said of their infidels, Plus amant bovem qua^ Iovem, they love the oxe more than Iupiter: we may say of many Christians, Plus amant coenam quam coelum, cibum quam Christum; they love more their supper than heaven, more their meat than Christ: they be (...), like lapwings, that delight in dung; like Vespatian, who took a tribute of urine. Many nations have lived without cloaths, without King, without armour, but never any without God, as Tullie said, Nulla gens tamfera, tamimmanis, etc. never nation was so wilde, so cruell, so barbarous, but have acknowledged and confessed that there was a God. Neere the river Ganges in India be men (...), without mouthes, that live by the sent of flowers; among us (...), men without hearts, that beleeve nothing. Socrates said, Hoc scio, quod nihil scio; I know this that I know nothing; and they, hoc credo, quod nihil credo, I beleeve this that I beleeve nothing: they have set downe their rest, Non esse Deum, non esse daemonem, non esse coelum, non esse infernum; there is no God, there is no divell, there is no heaven, there is no hell; and therefore they say, Our life is short and tedious, and in the death of a man there is no recovery, neither was any knowne that have returned Wisd. 2. 1, 2, 3. 4, 5. from the grave; wee are borne at all adventure, and wee shall be hereafter, as though we had never beene: for the breath is as smoake in our nosthrills, and the words as a sparke raised out of the heart, which being extinguished, the body is turned to ashes, and the spirit vanisheth, as in the soft ayre, etc. Come therefore, let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, etc. These wilde Bores roote up the Lords vineyard, these Foxes destroy the grapes, these Ionas's trouble the ship of England. For Christs Psal. 80. 13, 14. Church is Christs ship, tossed with waves: but let us runne with the Apostles, and awake our Saviour, that hee may hurle out Mat. 14. these Ionas's.
Thirdly, the wicked are here described by their carnalitie and libertie, they turne grace into wantonnesse: for ungodlinesse hath two branches, iniquitie in life and manners, and impuritie in religion: of the first, he saith, They turne grace into wantonnesse: of the second it is said, that they denied God and Christ Iesus. Of the Act. 6. Rom. 8. first sort were the Libertines that disputed with Steven: Paul had to doe with such hereticks, vile men, that said, faciamus mala ut inde

veniat bonum; Let us doe evill, that good may good come thereof. Gods grace ought to lead to repentance. Or let us be evill, that God may be good: let us commit iniquitie, that Gods glorie may bee revealed; let sinne abound, that grace may superabound. But their judgement is just, and their damnation sleepeth not; such are all presumptuous sinners, Rom. 6. 1. that will sinne of purpose, with an high hand, an hard heart, and a whorish forehead: such are idolaters, blasphemers, drunkards, usurers, adulterers, robbers, which say, yet once more will I doe this or that sinne, once more will I dallie; one cup more will I have; for God (say they) is patient and long suffering: thus sin toucheth sinne; but God will whet his sword and bend his bow, and Psal. 7. 11, 12. then yee know what followes, the blacke arrowes and instruments of death.
Paul sheweth a better end of grace, than wantonnesse; hee saith, The grace of God, that bringeth salvation to all men, hath appeared, Tit. 2. 11, 12. and teacheth us to deny impietie, and wicked worldly desires, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. The goodnesse of God leadeth us to repentance, honor, health, wealth; long Rom. 2. 4. life taketh thee by the hand, and leadeth thee to repentance; as the Angell led Ezechiel into the Sanctuarie: Noli peccare spe, nam Bern. paenam dabis re; sinne not in hope, for thou shalt smart for it indeed. It is as great a sinne to presume of grace and mercy, as to despaire of grace and mercie: for they that despaire may be raised up, but such as presume are seldome saved: He that heareth Deut. 29. 19. 20, 21. the Words of this curse, and blesseth himselfe in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, although I walke in the stubbornesse of my heart, thus adding drunkennesse to thirst: The Lord will not be mercifull unto him, but then the wrath of the Lord, and his iealousie shall smoake against that man, and every curse that is written in this booke shall light upon him, and the Lord shall put out his name from under Heaven: Therefore Paul in all his writings, when he handleth the doctrine of grace and mercie he handleth it very warily, as a man handleth gunpowder or quicke-silver, lest they should turne it into wantonnesse; As 1 Tim. 4. 10. We trust in the living God, which is the Saviour of all men, 1 Tim. 4. 10. Rom. 8. 1. especially of those that beleeve. And Rom. 8. 1. Now there is no condemnation to them that are in Cerist Iesus, which walke not after the flesh, but after the spirit. And Gal. 5. 24. They that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. And 1 Pet. 2. 9. Yee are a chosen generation, Gal. 5. 24. a royall priesthood, an holy nation, that yee should shew forth the vertues of him, that hath called you out of darkenesse into his marveilous light. God is a Saviour of all, that is, of all beleevers; there is no condemnation, so that we walke in the spirit; we are Christs, if we crucifie the flesh; a royall priesthood, if we shew forth the vertues of him, that hath made us Kings and Priests. Other wisdome hath no portion of the Spirit of God; we have neither part nor fellowship in Iesus Christ, Sumus in felle nequitiae, wee are in gall of bitternesse.

Let us not then turne the grace of God into wantonnesse, as Gods benefits and bounty oft make licentious and impious. many do; for the better God dealeth with them, the worse they deale with him, turning grace into wantonnesse, and Christian libertie into carnall licentiousnesse; not regarding the Apostles Counsell, Brethren, yee have beene called into libertie, only use not your libertie, as an occasion unto the flesh, but by Love serve yee one another. Gal. 5. 13. If God give us an inch, wee take an ell, and abuse his goodnesse; God dealeth with us, as a nurse doth with her Child, he nourisheth and bringeth us up; but wee deale with him, as the Asses foale with her damme, when she hath sucked her damme, shee kicketh with her heele; as the swallow doth with men, she harboureth with us all summer, and in winter departeth, and leaveth nothing but dirt behind her. Thus Moses complained of Israel; Doe yee so reward the Lord, O yee folish people and unwise? Is not he thy father that hath bought thee, he hath made thee and proportioned thee: So Deut. 32. 6. Esau complaineth of Iuda; I have nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me: The oxe knoweth his owner, and the Esa. 1. 3. Asse his masters cribbe; but Israel hath not knowne; my people hath no understanding. Ieremie reneweth the same complaint a little before the captivity; They said not, where is the Lord that brought us out of the land of Aegpyt? that ledus thorough the wildernesse, thorough a desart, Ier. 2. 6. a wast land, thorough a dry land, and by the shadow of death, by a land that no man passed thorough, and where no man dwelt: and againe, O generation, take heed to the word of the Lord; have I beene as a wildernesse unto Israel, or a land of darkenesse? wherefore saith my people then, wee are Lords, we will come no more unto thee? Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? Yet my people have forgotten me dayes without number. The matter is more fully handled by Ezechiel, Ieremie his mate and companion, both before and in the captivity, saying; Thou hast not remembred the dayes of thy youth, when thou wast naked and bare, and wast polluted in thy blood. Thus all the Prophets Ezech. 16. 22. with open mouth crie out against iniquitie: The richer wee are, the vainer wee are; the higher wee are, the prouder wee are; the stronger wee are, the crueller, and the more quarrellous wee are; the yonger, the lascivier; the more healthfull, the more sinnefull and carelesse: wee wound God with his owne weapon; For hee that should have beene upright, when hee waxed fat spurned with the Deut. 32. 15. heele; thou are fat, thou are grosse, thou art laden with fat; therefore hee forsooke God that made him, and regarded not the strong God of his salvation. We abuse every blessing of God; wee are like Aesops snake, that lay still in the frost, but stung him that warmed her in his bosome; so long as God keepeth us sicke, and lame, and poore, we are in some order, our eares are full of Sermons, our lips full of prayers, our hands full of almes, our hearts full of holy meditations; For when the outward man perisheth the inward man is renewed daily: but if we come to health, and wealth, and strength, we rage 2 Cor. 4. 16. like Giants, we are like bad ground, which the more sweet dewes

it receiveth, the more weeds it bringeth out; And therefore wee Gods patience makes us presumptuous. are neere unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. If God give some libertie and remission, wee stretch it too farre; if hee permit hawking and hunting, we spend most of our dayes in it, wee make an Hebr. 6. 8. occupation of play: Because God permitteth us to eate and drinke, and weare apparell, wee eate till wee surfet, and drinke till wee be drunken, and attire our selves like peacocks; like Geta the Emperor, that was served in dishes, after the manner of an Alphabet: like Bonosus who (as one saith) was borne, not to live, but to drinke: like Tiberius Nero, called Biberius Mero; like Iezabel, that painted her face: wee powre out our selves in all excesse of riot, and so turne all grace to wantonnesse: But let us thinke it sufficient for us, that we have spent the time past of this life, after the lusts of the Gentiles, walking in wantonnesse, lusts, drunkennesse, in gluttonie, 1 Pet. 4. 3. 4. drinkings, and in abominable Idolatrie: Wherein it seemeth to them strange, that yee runne not with them unto the same excesse of riot, etc. They be vile creatures that are unkinde to their Sires: as the Hippotamos of Nilus, that eateth his damme; as the Pelicane, that sucketh the heart-blood of the old one; as the wilde Asse, that kicketh her damme; as the Viper, that eateth out the belly of the old one; and such be we; God may say of us, as Ieremie of the Ier. 5. 7. Iewes, I have fed them to the full, yet they committed adulterie, and assembled themselves by companies in harlots houses: They rose up in the morning like fed horses, every man neyed after his neighbours wife.
Here I have to deale with two sortes of men; the first are they that refuse the grace, and gifts and goodnes of the Lord in the land of the living. Such were the Stoickes, that would enjoy no more than they could carry with them; they said, with Bias, Omnia mea mecum porto; All that is mine I carry with me; that with Crates, hurled their silver into the Sea: Such were the Essenes in Christs time, that had a bed but a span-broad, that strawed thornes under them, lest they should sleep too long: Such were the Hermites in the primitive Church, as Antonie, Macarius, Paulus, Thebaeus, Hilarion: Such were the Monks in Ieromes dayes, of whom he maketh three kindes, Anchorites, Caenobites, and the Enobites,, which fled all company; Oppidum illis erat carcer, the towne was their prison; solitudo autem erat Paradisus, the wildernesse was their paradise; their bread was acornes, their drinke water, their meate rootes, their bed cold ground: Biberunt non e calice, sed e concha, they dranke not out of a cup, but out of a shell; Amicti erant non pannis, sed pellibus; they were clad not with cloth, but with skinnes: such were our Fryers that professed wilfull poverty: such were women the Anchoresses, that had no more ground, than they scraped with their nayles: but God hath given the earth, and the fruits thereof to the Sonnes of men: So saith the Psalmist, The Heavens, even the Heavens are the Lords, but he hath given the earth to Psal. 115. 16. the Sonnes of men: It is as lawfull to enjoy the creatures of God,

as to live. The wicked eate the bread of wickednesse, and drinke the Pleasure oft ends with sudden destructio^. drinke of violence, which is unlawfull; but to eate the bread of righteousnesse, and to drinke the wine well got is lawfull.
Many are theeves both to their backs and bellies, and unthankfull Prou. 4. 17. unto God; but so must not wee: Christ was present at the Iewes feasts, he came Edens and bibens, eating and drinking; therefore they said that he was Edax and bibax, (...), as if Luk. 7. 34. he had surfeited: wee are the heires of heaven and coheires with Christ, and have right in all the creatures of God, all is ours; heaven is ours, heaven and earth is ours, if thy garments be silke, 1 Cor. 3. thou maiest put them on; if thy table be furnished with meate, thou maiest eate what thy stomacke craveth; if thy Hounds will take the beasts of the land, or thy Hawk, the fowles of the aire, thou maiest doe it.
I speake not to justifie the abuse of the world, that have turned all into riot, and usurped upon al the creatures of God; with such men, or monsters rather, I meddle not; but in the sinne wherein I found them, in that I leave them: I speake only of the recreation that God hath given unto his Saints in this wearie life; From the heavens, in the Sunne, Moone, and Starres; from the ayre, in fowles and birds, some made for meate, some for mirth; from the earth, in trees, fruits and flowers, and hearbs, some made for necessitie, some for pleasure, as seeing and smelling; from the Sea, in variety of fishes: Whereupon the Prophet exclaimeth, saying; O Lord, how manifold are thy workes, in wisdome hast thou made them all; the earth is full of thy riches; so is the great and Psal. 104. 24. wide Sea also, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small beasts and great: If by faith thou art made a member of Christ, his right is thine in all the creatures of the world, and in his name, and to his glory thou maiest use them.
But we are not troubled with Stoikes, Essenes, Hermites, Monkes, Fryers, Anchoresses, etc. but with Epicures, qui ducunt dies in bonis, and subito descendunt ad infernum; which a learned man englisheth thus: They sleepe soundly, and drinke profoundly, and goe to the Divell roundly, and that is no lye: For they live, waxe fat, and grow in wealth, their seede is established in their sight Iob 21. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. with them; and their generation before their eyes: their houses are peaceable, without feare, and the rod of God is not upon them: their bullcoke gendreth and faileth not: their Cow calveth and casteth not her calfe: They send forth their children like sheep, and their sonnes dance: they take the tabret and the harpe, and rejoyce in the sound of the organes, they spend their dayes in wealth, and sodenly they goe downe to the grave. Their throates are sepulchers, their stomacks sponges, their bellies graves, their hands talons, their fingers loadstones: they eate with Ceres, and drinke with Bacchus, and sport with Venus: Apollo must tickle their eares with the Lute, the Muses must sound in that service, the Graces must waite on their trencher; Ganimede

must fill them the cup, they are sorry that their patrimonies are Voluptuous mens practises described. no larger, their bellies no wider, their throats no deeper, their lives no longer, that they might live still in all pleasure: So that the saying of S. Iames may be verified in them, Yee have lived in Iam. 5. 5. pleasure on the earth, and in wantonnesse, yee have nourished your hearts as in the day of slaughter. They wish, with Philopenus, a necke as long as a Cranes necke, that they may feele the sweetnesse of their meate a long time; in their companie is the tabret, harpe, lute, and a paire of cards sooner than the New Testament: and as the Prophet speaketh, The harpe, the viall, the timbrell, and pipe, and wine Esa. 5. 12. are in their feasts, they regard not the workes of the Lord, neither consider the worke of his hands. God calleth them to prayer, fasting, mourning, Et ecce mactant boves and oves: They fall to killing of sheepe, and Esa. 22. 12, 13. slaying of oxen, eating flesh, and drinking wine; eating and drinking, for to morrow we shall dye. They turne praying into playing, fasting into feasting, mourning into mumming, almesdeeds into misdeeds: As Xerxes, being weary of all pleasures, promised rewards to the inventers of new pleasures, which being invented, Ipse tamen non fuit contentus, he himselfe was not satisfied, was not content.
The word here is (...), which is derived from a towne in Pisidia, called Selge, built by the Lacedaemonians, where all were temperate and not one drunkard; the contrary whereof is named (...), lasciousnesse; such men sinne with an high hand. All sin, but these men sinne presumptuously: they never pray with David, Keepe thy servant from presumptuous sinnes. Sinne in them raigneth, Psal. 19. not dwelleth; contrary to the rule of the Apostle, Let not sinne Rom. 6. 12. 2 Cor. 10. Ephes. 4. 19. Esa. 5. raigne in your mortall bodie, that yee should obey it in the lusts thereof: they walke not after the spirit, but after the flesh; they commit sinne with greedinesse; they draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sinne as it were with cartropes. But man with man will not reason so, the sonne with his Fathers, the servant with his master, the subject with his Prince; will the servant be vile and unfaithfull, because his master is courteous unto him? Absit; God forbid.
Here I must answer one slander or challenge of the Papists; they call us Libertines, as Howlet, and others; but they take upon them to iudge betwixt us, and the Libertines, as the Asse tooke upon him to judge between the Cuckow and the Nightingale: of all others, the Asse might worst doe it; and of all others, they may worst do it, seeing most of their doctrines tend to libertie, proving all men to sinne by their pardons and indulgences, saying, that holy water doth take away sinne, that the signe of the Crosse driveth away the Divell, calling with Alexander, whordome, adulterie, incest, Peccadilla, little sinnes* excusing the Popes theft as the theft of Israel, his drunkennesse as that of Exod. 11. Gen. 9. Iudg. 15. Noah, his murders as those of Samsons. All their doctrines tend to libertie, as their doctrine of ignorance to be the mother of devotion, the doctrine of auricular confession, which some learned

call the Popes fishing net, the doctrine of Purgatorie, which Popish Doctrine tend to liberty. others call the Popes milch Cow, or the soule or panche of the Masse: their doctrine of satisfactions, that a man may be delivered out of hell by the satisfaction of others, as was Traian the Pagane Emperor by the prayer and almes of Gregory. What naturall man under heaven would not sinne, if hee knew that the Pope could give him pardon, that hee could free him from hell and purgatory? So that truly, if I were not a Protestant, I would be a Papist, if I respected the pleasure of the flesh.



THE NINTH SERMON.


VERS. IV. 

And deny God, the onely Lord, and our Lord Iesus.
God is denyed many wayes.



SAint Iude having described the wicked by their hypocrisie, that They creepe into the Church, and by their Atheisme: For hee saith, they were Vngodly men, and by their Licenciousnesse, saying, They turne the grace of God into wantonnesse; hee commeth now fourthly, to describe them by their Blasphemy, That they deny God, the onely Lord, and our Lord Iesus Christ. Now there bee many wayes to deny God, as to deny his Attributes, his Power, Providence, Iustice, Mercy, Truth, Strength, Eternity, for these be the names of God, and of the essence of God, and these are denyed in the lives of most men. Some deny his Power, as the Proud do: some his Providence, as the Infidels: some his Iustice, as the Impenitent: some his Mercy, as the Desperate: some his Truth, as Lyars and perjured men: some his Strength, as the Fearefull doe. Of the first sort was Pharaoh; of the second sort were the Israelites; of the third sort were the Libertines; of the fourth was Caine; the fifth were Zedeohia and the house of Saul, of the last were the Iewes. Pharaoh asked, Who is God, that Exod. 5. 2. Psal. 78. 19, 20, 21. I should let Israel goe? The Israelites distrusted God for bread, Can God (quoth they) prepare a Table in the Wildernesse? behold, hee smote the Rock, that the water gushed out, and the streames overflowed: Can

hee give bread also, and prepare flesh for his people? Of the third sort Outward professio^ nothing without inward integritie. were the Libertines, Which turne the grace of God into wantonnesse: Of the fourth sort was Cain, my sin is greater than can bee forgiven? Vpon whom Augustine replyeth finely: Mentiris Cain, mentiris in gutture, major est Dei misericordia, Cain, thou lyest, thou lyest in thy Iude 4. Gen. 4. Aug. throat, greater is Gods Mercy than any mans Iniquity? of the fifth, was Zedechias who forswore himselfe, and had therfore first, his children slaine before his Face; then his own eyes put out, and lastly, he was carryed away prisoner into Babylon: of the last sort were the Iews, who relyed upon the Egyptians. Now who offendeth 2 Reg. 25. Esa. 31. not in one of these, or most of these?
But especially wee deny God in our lives, in our deeds, thus the Cretians deny him, They professed they knew God, but by workes they did deny him, and were abominable, disobedient, and unto every Tit. 1. 16. Tit. 2. 3. 5. good worke reprobate: and so are we, wee have a shew of Godlinesse, but wee have denyed the Power thereof. I say of Professors, as Paul said of the Iewes, He is not a Iew, that is one outward, neither is that Circumcision, which is outward in the Flesh, but hee is a Iew, that is Rom. 2. 28. 29. one within, and the Circumcision of the heart is the true Circumcision: So hee is not a Christian, that is one outward, but hee is a Christian, that is one within; that serveth God in Spirit and in Truth. And if wee will serve God truly, these Divels must be cast out of us, that are in us, and wee must say unto them, as Christ said to Peter, Come behinde me Sathan, videl. the Divels of Avarice, Pride, Envie, Malice, etc. Which have filled our hearts, Mat. 16. 23* as they filled the heart of Andnias. The profession of God is knowne by the fruits of it, as fire is discerned by the smoke that commeth out of the Chimney, as life is discerned by the motion of Man. On the contrary, if a man would perswade us, Act. 5. 3. that there is fire where as there is no heat, or that there were life in a carcasse that never moved, wee would not beleeve him: so beleeve not him, that speaketh of God, and liveth not in God. This is an Axiom in Divinitie, that all Adulterers, Swearers, Theeves, Vsurers deny God, whatsoever they pretend in words, Quid dicta audiam, cum facta videam, what doe I heare thee talke, when I see thy deeds? Not every one that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdome of Heaven (saith Christ) but he that Mat. 7. 23. doth the will of my Father which is in Heaven. Those men are come to the height of sin; For there be sixe degrees of sin, first Neglectus Ephes. 4. 2 Thes. 2. Rom. 1. Esa. 40. notitiae Dei, the neglect of the knowledge of God; the second is, Execatio, execation, blindnesse; the third is Idolatry, a fruit of execation, of blindnesse; the fourth, outragious wickednesse, the effect of idolatry; the fifth, a reprobate mind; the sixth, the fruits of a reprobate mind, that is, an universall injustice in all their workes: for they deny God in every worke. The wicked deny God, and yet all his creatues declare him; and Psal. 19. 1. that foure wayes, saith Hemingius in his Enchiridion.

First, In the Varietie of them. They that here feele not Gods graces shall feele his power.
Secondly, In the Vtility of them.
Thirdly, In the Order of Creation.
And fourthly, In the End of their Creation.
The first declareth his Power.
The second, his Iustice.
The third, his Wisedome.
The last, his Glory.
Seeing all things are made for man, it cannot bee but man is made for another, and that is God onely, but the wicked shall find God and feele God, when it is too late, though here they doe deny him. Therefore Hemingius distinguisheth of Gods presence, that it is fourefold: A presence of Power in all men, even in the Reprobate; a presence of Grace, even in the Elect only, a presence of glory in the Angels and Saints departed, and an hypostaticall presence of the Father, with the Sonne, Quoad essentiam, as touching his essence. The wicked that deny God here, shall feele his power one day, and say, Wee have erred from the way of Truth, the light of Righteousnesse hath not shined unto us, Wis. 5, 6. 7. and the Sunne of Vnderstanding rose not upon us: We have wearied our selves in the wayes of wickednesse and destruction, and wee have gone through dangerous wayes, but wee have not knowne the wayes of the Lord, etc. Thus God complained of Israel and Iuda, saying, They have grievosly trespassed against me saith the Lord, they have denyed the Lord, and said, It is not hee, etc. Thus may wee complaine. Therefore Ier. 5. 11. 12. I say to England, as hee said to Iuda: O daughter of my people, gird thee with Sackcloth and wallow thy selfe in the ashes, make lamentation and bitter mourning, as for thine onely sonne, for the destroyer shall suddenly come upon us.
They deny the onely God, etc. God here is called (...) the onely God to note the Trinity in Vnity; there is one God, one Essence of the three persons, Deus unus and trinus; unus Essentia, trinus Hierom. personis, God is one and three, one in Essence, and three in persons. Thus Moses taught Israel; The Lord our God is Lord onely. Deut. 6. 4. Malachi asketh the Iewes, if one God hath not created them? As if hee should say, yee know well enough; for the question Mal. 2. 10. is more Emphaticall, than a simple proposition. In this point Paul noteth a great difference betwixt the Christians and the Heathen, saying, Though there be many, that are called gods, in Heaven or in Earth (as there bee many gods, and many Lords:) yet unto us 1 Cor. 8. 6, 7. there is but one God, which is the Father, of whom are all things, and wee in him; and one Lord Iesus Christ, by whom are all things, and wee by him. Againe, hee speaketh of the Deitie, as of the Mediatorship, Vnus Deus and unus Mediator, etc. There is one God and one Mediator 1 Tim. 6. betweene God and Man, even the Man Christ Iesus. And a number of vnities he commendeth to the Ephesians: There is one Body andone Spirit, one hope of your Vocation; there is one Lord, one Faith, Ephes. 4. 4, 5, 6.

one Baptisme, one God and Father over all, etc. We must neither confound Many resemblances to illustrate the Vnity and Trinitie. the persons, nor divide the Essence, but hold the plurality of persons, and the unity of the Essence.
The Heathen thought it impossible for one God to governe this great world; therefore they made one God for Heaven, as Iupiter, another for Hell, as Pluto; one for Bread, as Ceres; another for Wine, as Bacchus; one for the Sea, as Neptune; another for the Winde, as Aeolus; one for Learning, as Minerva; another for Merchandize, as Mercury. Thus the Heathen vowed Tenths to Hercules, that they might be rich; they killed a Cock to Aesculapius, that they might recover their health; they sacrificed a Bull to Neptune, that they might saile prosperously.
But what doe I name the Heathen, when the Papists multiplied to themselves many gods? they prayed to Sebastian for helpe from the Plague; to Anthony, for the Gangrene; to Patronilla, for Agues; to Apolonia, for the Touth ache; to Benedict, for the Stone; to Hubert, for the biting of a madde Dog; yea they have made a severall God for every Countrey, as Saint George for England, Saint Iaques for Spaine, Saint Dennis for France, Saint Patricke for Ireland, Saint Palladius for Scotland. Yea, for every beast a severall God; as Loye for Horses, Anthony for Pigges, Wendeline for Sheepe: But their madnesse is evident to all 2 Tim. 3. 9. men. If they say, they make not these Gods: I aske, why pray they unto them? How shall they call on him in whom they have not beleeved? But wee beleeve in God alone, therefore must we pray to Rom. 10. 14. him alone. There is but one Sunne in the Heavens, one Phaenix in Arabia, one master-Bee in an Hyve, one Pilot in a Ship, one God in the World. The Trinity of Persons the Fathers have shadowed forth unto us by divers similitudes, as in the Rainebow, in which is one substance, namely the cloud, and yet three differences, which thou art not able to discerne: In the Fountain, where there is Scaturigo, the boyling or rising up of the water out of the Spring; Rivus, the River; and Stagnum, and the Poole: In the Minde, where there is Intellectus, Vnderstanding; Voluntas, the Will; and Memoria, and the Memory: In the Soule, where there is (...), the Soule; (...), the Minde, and (...), the Spirit; and yet there bee not three Mindes, nor three Soules, but one Minde and one Soule, but three powers in the Minde and Soule: In the Sun, where there is, Corpus, the Body; Calor, Heate; and Splendor, Light or Brightnesse; and yet not three Sunnes, but three distinct things in the Sunne. The Orthodoxe Fathers said truely and wisely, (...), One Godhead, and one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Vnity. And God is three, not by composition of parts, but by coexistence of persons. The Iewes also note in the verbe (...) Bara, the mysterie of the Trinity, by (...) Beth,

the Sonne, by (...) Resh, Ruah, the Spirit, by (...) Aleph, Ab, the Father. Christ is many wayes divided. But this holy mystery is more clearely taught by Moses, Gen. 3. 22.
Againe, They deny Christ; of which sort there bee many. The Iewes deny, that he is come; the Pagans deny, that ever he will come; the Turkes confesse that hee is come, but yet as a man, not as a God, inferiour to their Mahomet; the Papists confesse in words that hee is come, but in truth denying the person of Christ, making his body every where, that is, no where: yea many have denyed Christ, and robbed the Creator, to give to the Creature; the Italians ascribe all to the Pope; the Irish to Saint Patrick; the Scots to Palladius; the Russians to Saint Nicholas; Munster in Cosmog. and the Calicutes to the Divell.
But to speake orderly; men deny Christ many wayes. Some deny his Divinity, as the Arrians; some his Humanitie, as the Vbiquetaries; some his Natures, by renting them a sunder as the Nestorians, who make two Christs, one the sonne of God, another the sonne of Mary; some deny them by confounding them, as Eutiches, Qui dixit humanitatem a divinitate absorptam esse, which said, that his Humanity was swallowed up of his Divinity; some deny him, by concealing him in time of persecution, as the Nichodemites doe: A Sect against which we are to lift up our voyces like Trumpets, for He that denyeth Christ in Earth Mat. 10. 33. before men, shall be denyed in Heaven, before Angels. For this cause, they of Ephesus are said not to have denyed Christ, but to have suffered for his sake, and to have laboured without fainting. And Apoc. 2. 3. they of Pergamos are said, not to have denyed Christ: For though their habitation was where Sathans throne is, yet they professed his name, and not denyed the faith. Remember that the fearefull are placed with Vriah in the forefront, in the vauntguard Apoc. 2. 13. of the damned; so saith Saint Iohn, The fearefull and unbeleeving, and the abominable, and murtherers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all lyars, shall have their part Apoc. 21. 8. in the Lake that burneth with fire and brimstone which is the second Death.
On the contrary, Righteous men are compared to Lions, which feare no colours? so saith Salomon, The wicked flee, when Prov. 28. 1. Luke 8. 1 Pet. 1. none pursueth him, but the Righteous are as bold as a Lion: on the other side, its naughty ground, that will be scorched with heat; it is drosse, not gold, that will bee melted in the fire, it is counterfeit, not right Balme, that will not abide the water: it is a bastard Eagle, that soareth not to the Sunne: Hee is a Coward, Exod. 19. not a Souldier, that shrinketh in the battell, Hee is an Infidell, and not a Christian that denyeth Christ in persecution. For one Faith is named, one Profession: Hold fast (saith the Apostle) the Profession of your hope without wavering. And againe, Heb. 10. 23. Heb. 3. 1. Consider the Apostle, and high Priest of your Profession, Christ Iesus:

Much Profession, much Faith; no profession, no Faith. Christ is denied, when the efficacie of his death is denied.
But chiefely we deny the Lord Iesus two wayes: First, by denying the sufficiencie of his death, as the Galathians did, and as the Iews did, and as our Papists now, who will not let Christ be a Saviour alone, but they joyne workes with him; but all workes are accursed (so saith the Apostle) As many as are of the workes Gal. 2. Rom. 10. Gal. 3. 10. of the Law (that is, thinke to bee justified by them) are under the Curse.
Secondly, wee deny the Lord Iesus, by denying the efficacie or vertue of his Death, not dying unto sinne: Therefore Awake thou that sleepest, and stand up from Death, that Christ may give thee Ephes. 5. 14. Light. For as the Sunne doth not warme all whom it lighteneth, as the people under the North Pole, who have the Sun sixe moneths together, and yet freeze; so the Spirit of God doth not cause all to feele the vertue of his Death, whom hee illuminateth with the knowledge of his death. Such are our Atheists, the former are Papists, the later are Atheists, and both deny Christ.
The profession of Christ standeth not in words, but in deeds, not in tongue, but in heart, not in opinion, but in life. The Apostle nameth a true Knowledge; for many know not God truely. Saint Peter calleth it an Idle knowledge, distinguishing of knowledge, that it is Operans, and otiosa, a working and an idle 2 Pet. 2. 8. knowledge: for some carrie Christ in their mouth and braine, as perfume in a Pomander, without smell; as a sword in a scabbard, without cutting; as fire in a flint, without heat. But this I will say to thee in the sight of God and his Angels; that if thou doest not dye to sinne and rise againe by a new life; if thou doest not kill sinne in thee, as Murder, Whoredome, Malice, covetousnesse, Vsury, Pride, Drunkennesse, etc. thou doest neither beleeve the Death nor the Resurrection of Iesus Christ. So saith Paul, Know yee not that all wee which have beene baptized into Iesus Christ, have beene baptized into his Death? And againe, If wee Rom. 6. 3, 5, 6. be grafted with him to the similitude of his Death, even so shall wee be to the similitude of his Resurrection; Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sinne might be destroyed, that henceforth, we should not serve sinne. And Saint Iohn the disciple whom Iesus loved, and which leaned on his breast at supper, saith, Hereby are wee sure that wee know him, if wee keepe his Commandements; hee that saith, hee knoweth him, and keepeth not his Commandements, is a 1 Iohn 2. 4, 5. Lyar, and the Truth is not in him. This Death unto sinne, and Resurrection to newnesse of life, Paul calleth it the vertue of his Death, The vertue of his Resurrection? The stone Dioscorides is nothing Phil. 3. 10. in the mouth of a dead man. And all knowledge of Christ is nothing in a carnall man. The death of Christ truely beleeved, will cause thee to dye unto sinne; and the Resurrection of Christ will cause the dead body to rise unto eternall life,

and the dead minde to an holy life. So saith the Apostle, If yee The Papists deny the offices of Christ by consequence. bee risen with Christ, seeke the things that are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God, set your affections upon Heavenly things, and not upon Earthly, for yee are dead, and your life is hid in God, etc. The Iewes know Christ, but not truly, that they know him it is evident Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. by the testimony of the Apostle, Behold thou art called a Iew, and restest in the Law, and gloriest in God, but that they did not know him truly, the same Apostle also testifieth, saying, The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you: yea, the Rom. 2. 17. 24. Divels knew him, and his death, but yet idly, historically onely, not unto Salvation. And many so beleeve historically, and no further than the very Divels themselves doe. For sinne still raigneth Iam. 2. 19. in them, notwithstanding the commandement of the Apostle, Let not sinne raigne in your mortall bodies, that yee should obey it in the lusts thereof. Rom. 6. 12.
But to returne to our Papists, who have opened their mouth against Heaven, whose tongue walketh through the world; for pride is to them as a chaine, they are found to be notable hereticks, denying, not in words, but in truth, the Lord Iesus: First, they make him no Iesus, by ascribing purging of sin to the bloud of Martyrs, which they call, Thesaurum Ecclesiae, the treasure of the Church; out of which they grant their Indulgences.
They make him no Christ, by denying his Offices; first, they make no Priest, by erecting a daily unbloudy sacrifice, they rob him of his intercession, by praying to Saints.
They make him no Prophet, by ascribing so much to their traditions, by giving the Pope authority over the Gospell, to coyne Lawes as they list, by bringing in with Cyrill the Monke, Evangelium aeternum, an everlasting Gospel, which (say they) abolisheth the Gospell, of the Father in the time of the Law, and the Gospell of Christ, in the time of Grace.
They make him no King, by giving all power to the Pope, to save and to destroy, to pull out of Heaven, to pluck down to Hell: Such a Cerberus is this of Rome, not with three heads, but with three crownes, boasting De plenitudine potestatis, of the fulnesse of power, whose comming is by the working of Sathan with all power and signes and lying wonders, and in all deceivablenesse of unrighteousnesse among them that perish.
This hath Sathan parted his Kingdome, that the Turke in the 2 Thess. 2. 9. East should deny Christs Natures, and the Pope in the West his Offices and Merits. For the former Romane Empire stood on Injustice, the latter of Impiety, the first injuring Men, the other God, yet not so much (...), against God, as (...), against Christ. The Papists alleage the words of the Apostle, Hereby shall yee know the spirit of God, every spirit that confesseth that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: but by the Spirit there is meant the doctrine, not of men; the doctrine is of God, though

not the man. They quote also another place of Iohn, Whosoever Christ alone paid the whole ransome of our Redemption. beleeveth that Iesus is Christ, is borne of God; but Saint Iohn speaketh not of a bare confession, but of a right beleefe, for the Divels confessed Christ.
To conclude, they hold not the foundation with us, For other 1 Iohn 5. 1. Luke 4. 1 Cor. 3. 11. Gal. 5. 2. foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Christ Iesus: For if the Galathians, joyning Circumcision with Christ, overthrew all; for so saith the Apostle, If yee circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. The Papists joyning workes with faith, nature with Grace, the Law with the Gospell, the Sacrifice with the Sacrament, Moses with Christ, must needs overthrow all: for whole Christ or no Christ, Totus Christus, aut nullus Christus, Hee payd (...), the Ransome, and either hee paid all, or not a 1 Tit. 2. Act. 4. penny: Non est aliud nomen, there is no other name given unto men, whereby they shall bee saved, save onely by the name of Iesus. One compareth Christ to a man that purchaseth a Lease with his owne money, and lets it to his successors, to hold it by a Pepper kernell, or a Rose leafe: Christ hath paid for our Salvation, For we are redeemed not with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, etc. But with the precious bloud of Christ, as of a Lambe undefiled; all our 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. workes are but as a pepper kernell; yea as nothing, For when we have done all those things that are commanded us, wee may say, that wee are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duties to do. Luke 17. 10. If the fathers of these men had never sinned, yet could they not doe greater injury to the Church of God than to beget such sonnes, or monsters rather, as Tully said of Catiline, Ecce ecclesiam apostaticam and (...), non Catholicam, utinam Deus Nestorem excitaret, qui lites inter nos and illos componeret, Behold a Church Apostolicall, and strife-stirring, not Catholike: I would God were pleased to raise some Nestor up to compose these jarres, betweene us and them.
But to leave this, note that Christ here is called our Lord; which he is two wayes:

Iure creationis.


Iure redemptionis.

First, By right of Creation: for by him God made the World. Hebr. 1. 2.
Secondly, By the right of Redemption: for God so loved the world that he gave his onely begotten Sonne to save the World: Hereupon Iohn 3. 16. 1 Cor. 6. 20. saith Paul, Yee are bought with a price. Now redeeming is either by price and paying, or by power and force. Christ hath done both; hee gave a price to God, And gave himselfe a ransome for all 1 Tim. 2. 6. men, Hee came by water and bloud, not by water onely, but by water 1 Iohn 5. and bloud. In water, is signified washing; by bloud, Redemption.
Secondly, by his Power he redeemeth, and hath taken us from the Divell. So saith the Author to the Hebrewes, Hee hath delivered Hebr. 2. us from death, and him that hath the Lordship of death. And Saint

Iohn saith, that Hee saw a great battell in Heaven, Micbael and his Divers effusions of Christs bloud. Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels, but prevailed not, neither was their place any more found in Heaven. It was a greater matter to Christ to redeeme the World, Apoc. 12. 7. than to make the World. Hee made it in six dayes, but he was thirtie and three yeeres in redeeming it; hee made all with a word, yea, with a breath, By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and the hoast of them by the breath of his mouth. For the letter Psal. 33. 6. (^ He) in the Hebrew is but a breath: But hee redeemed it with a great price, not with silver and gold, but with bloud, not with bloud of Buls and Goats, but with his own precious Bloud: 1 Pet. 1. 18. Gold and silver are but red earth, and white earth, which the error of man hath made to be esteemed; but the bloud of Christ was so precious, that as a Father saith, Tanti quid valet? what is Aug. of equall price with it? The least drop of Christs bloud was of such value, in regard of the person, that it was able to redeeme tenne thousand worlds; but lesse than Christs bloud could not redeeme one Soule.
And there were divers and sundry effusions of his bloud. The first bloud he shed was at his Circumcision, when hee was but De passione Dom. cap. 36. eight dayes old; which S. Bernard cals Maturum martyrium, a timely martyrdome: to which end hee further addeth, Vix natus est Coeli gloria, Coeli divitiae, deliciae, dulcis Iesus, and ecce recenti ortui crucis dolor copulatur; Scarce was sweet Iesus come into the world; who was the Glory, the Riches, the Delight of Heaven, but he underwent the painefulnesse of the Crosse.
The second effusion of bloud was in his Agony, whereof Saint Bernard speaketh thus, Ecce quam rubicundus, and quam totus rubicundus, Behold, how red, and how wholly red hee is? For Saint Luke affirmeth, that his sweat was like Drops of bloud trickling downe to the ground.
The third effusion, was at his whipping; O cum quanta quantitate put as illum sanctissimum sanguinem, e conscisso corpore and flagellato distillassein terram? Oh in what abundance thinke yee, did the most sacred bloud of his, powre downe from his torne and scourged body, even to the ground?
The fourth effusion of bloud was when the crowne of thornes was despightfully clapt upon his head, Nec hicputo defuisse rivos sanguinis, saith Bernard, nor can I thinke, that at this time there wanted rivers of bloud.
The fifth and last effusion of bloud was upon the Crosse, where his Hands, and Feete, and Side were pierced. Quis unqua^ tam gravia tam pudenda passus fuit? who was ever thus cruelly, Bern. and shamefully handled? Contendunt passio and charitas, illa ut plus ardeat; ista ut plus rubeat, his passion and love did strive together that, that it may be hotter; this, that it may bee the redder: O suavissime universorum Domine, etc. O blessed Iesus, the most gracious

Lord and Saviour of all thy chosen, how can I render thee As Christ gave himselfe for us, so should we give our selves to him. sufficient thankes? For thy garment is dipt in bloud, and the chastisement of my peace hath beene upon thee, from the beginning of thy dayes unto thy death; yea, and after thy death. Thus Christs bloud was often shed to redeeme us: Heare this, you that Apoc. 19. 13. make so small account of your soules, and learne to esteeme them at a greater price: Heare this, you that are so carelesse of your sinnes, and learne to shunne them as Hell; heare wee this all of us, and learne to be more thankefull to Christ for his benefits. Persius wept when he saw a Toade; and being asked why he wept? hee answered, that hee bewailed his ingratitude, who served not the Lord, that had made him a Man, and not a Toade: Christs face was buffeted, his eyes were blinded, his hands nayled, his feet pierced, his side launched, that wee may give our eyes, hands, feet, heart to Christ in his service, that as wee have given our members weapons of unrighteousnesse unto sin, so Rom. 6. 13. we should give our selves unto God, as they that are alive from the dead, and give our members as weapons of righteousnesse unto God. Finely saith one; O stulti! cur Satanae in membris vestris servitis? O yee fooles! Why serve ye Satan in your members? Ille non creavit, non redemit, non sanctificat nos, non pascit nos, hee hath not created us, not redeemed, not sanctified us, nor feedeth us: Quae haec insania Christum relinquere, a quo omnia bona, Diabolo servire, qui est homicida? what madnesse is this, to leave Christ from whom we receive all good, and to serve the Divell, who is a murtherer? Iohn 8. 44. Stultum est servire Diabolo, qui nullo placatur obsequio; It is a foolish thing to serve the Divell, whom no obedience, no service will content. But the wicked shall one day curse these members, that have served the Divell, Vae vobis (inquient) pedes maledicti, qui per gressus and saltus illicitos me ad infernum traxistis; woe to you (shall Greg. they say) cursed feet, which by unlawfull leaping and dancing have drawne me to Hell: Vae vobis manus rapaces, woe to you ravenous hands: Vae tibi cor maledictum, woe to thee cursed heart, which seldome or never thoughtest of God: O cursed tongue which hath uttered so many obscene and filthy words; O cursed eye, which never sheddest teare for thy sinne, and therefore many thousand yeares shalt thou weepe, and no man shall pitty thee. God challengeth both heart and body; My sonne give mee thy heart. Whereupon one descanteth very finely; fili mi Mat. 22. 13. per creationem, fili mi per redemptionem, da mihi cor tuum per dilectionem Pro. 23. Holcot. and devotionem, My Sonne by Creation, my Sonne by Redemption, give mee thy heart by Love and devotion. And the same Author compareth Christ to a Falcon, and hee saith thus Falconi volanticor datur pro mercede; to the flying Falcon, the heart, of the Fowle shee taketh is given her for her reward; this Falcon is Christ, Ipse volavit de Coelo in uterum, hee flew from Heaven into the Wombe of the Virgin; out of the Wombe into

the Manger, out of the Manger into the World, from the Christs passions ought to move us to dutifulnesse and thankefulnesse. World unto the Crosse, from the Crosse into the Grave, from the Grave, to Heaven againe, Ergo cor vendicat pro praeda, therefore hee challengeth ^hy heart for his prey. And Saint Chrysostome, that golden-mouthed Doctor, bringeth in Christ thus speaking, Ego propter vos factus sum homo, propter vos ligatus, propter Chrysost. vos in patibulo mortuus; ecce precium sanguinis, quod pro vobis dedi, ubi est ergo servitus vestra pro tanto pretio? for your sakes I became man, for your sakes was I bound, for your sakes dyed I upon the Crosse; Behold, the price of bloud that I payed for you, where is therefore your service and dutie, for such a price? your service to him that gave himselfe for you, that hee might redeeme you. Vide quid pro te patior, vide dolorem, cum Angelus venit de coelis ad consolandum, vide clavos, quibus confodior, ad te clamo qui pro te morior; See what I suffer for thy sake, see my sorrow, which was so great, that an Angel from heaven was made to come to comfort mee: See the nailes wherewith I was pierced and thrust through: I crie to thee, which died for thee, etc. A most elegant Prosopopeia: What heart of flint will not be moved with it? O Iesu! take away these stony hearts, and give us fleshly hearts. O duri and indurati and obdurati filii Adae! O durate, indurate and obdurate sonnes of Adam! quos non movet tanta benignitas, whom such great gentlenesse and courtesie cannot move. Let us sorrow with Corinth, wash Christs feet with Mary, let us weepe bitterly 2 Cor. 7. with Peter, that wee serve God no better. The Sunne knew Christ, and therefore against kind was eclipsed, the wind knew Luke 7. Mar. 15. Mar. 2. Mat. 14. Mat. 28. Iohn 1. 10. him, and therefore left blustring at his word, the Sea knew him and therefore bare him up that hee walked drie foote upon the waters, the Earth knew him and therefore opened when hee rose, the Divels knew him, onely vile man knoweth him not. Hee came among his owne, and his owne received him not, but let us receive him, and serve him in holinesse and righteousnesse, let us obey his commandements, feare his judgements, and submit our selves 1 Sam. 3. 18. to his blessed will and pleasure; saying with Eli, It is the Lord, let him doe what seemeth him good.



THE TENTH SERMON.


VERS. IV. 

Which were of old before ordained to this condemnation, etc.
Destruction the end of the the ungodly.



HAving thus described the wicked, Which were before of old ordained to condemnation, by their life; hee commeth now to describe them by their end: and here hee preventeth an objection, by a figure called Praeoccupatio, lest they should take offence, and say, why doth God suffer these wicked men, Hypocrites, Atheists, Wantons, Libertines, Blasphemers; why doe they prosper? why is pride unto them as a chaine? why doe the wicked live Psal. 73. 6. Iob 21. 7, 8. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and waxe old, and grow in wealth; their seede is established in their sight with them, and their generation before their eyes; their houses are peaceable and without feare? and the rod of God is not upon them; their Bullocke gendreth and faileth not, their Cow calveth, and casteth not her calfe, they send forth their Children like Sheepe, and their sonnes dance, they take the Tabret and Harpe, and reioyce in the sound of the Organs, they spend their dayes in wealth, and suddenly they goe downe to the grave. Iude answereth them, That God hath ordained them to Iudgement. Fret not thy selfe therefore because of the ungodly, neither Psal. 37. 1. bee envious for evill doers: For they shall soone be cut downe, as the grasse, and withered like the greene hearbe: Here they fare well, here they have cappe and knee, and all the honour that may bee; but Respice finem, they walke upon ice, in the end they fall. For evill doers shall bee cut off; yea, the armes of the wicked shall be broken, the Psal. 37. 9, 10. 20. wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall bee consumed as the fat of Lambs, even with the smoke shall they consume away. Looke

not therefore to their lives, but to their end; their end is damnation; The enemies of Gods Church and Children shall not long flourish. For tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soule that doth evill. In the end, God will raine upon them fire and brimstone, storme and tempest, this shall be their portion to drinke. Wheat and Chaffe goe together, till they come to the flaile, but then the wheat is reserved, and the chaffe burned: Sheepe and Goats goe together, Rom. 2. 9. Psal. 11. 6, 7. Mat. 3. 12. Mal. 3. 17. 1 Pet. 1. Deut. 32. 19. till they come to the fold, but then they are separated; Gold and Drosse goe together, till they come to the Fornace, but then the Gold is the purer, and the Drosse is moulten. Respice ergo finem, looke not unto their lives, but unto their end, O that they were wise, then they would understand this, they would consider their latter end. For surely the prosperity of the wicked, shall not continue, it shall have an end, and their hope shall be cut off. God Prov. 24. 19. hath appointed them to Iudgement, they shall have no inheritance in the Kingdome of God. Thou seest Pharaoh in his Chariot, Exod. 14. pursuing Israel; but looke againe, and thou shalt see him in the Sea, feeding Haddockes. Thou seest Nebuchadnezzar in his Palace of Babel, vaunting and bragging, Is not this great Babel that I have built for the use of my Kingdome, by the might of Dan. 4. 27. my power, and for the honour of my Majestie? but looke againe, and thou shalt see him in the wildernesse amongst brute beasts. Thou seest Herod in his Throne, honoured as an Angell; but looke againe, and thou shalt see him on the ground amongst Act. 12. wormes: Thou seest Dionysius in his Chaire of Gold in Siracusa; but looke againe, and thou shalt see him in Corinth teaching Boyes, tossing a Scepter inferulam. A Christian must not bee like Polipheme, the one-eyed Giant: If with one eye wee see Damocles in a bed of Gold, with the other eye wee shall see a Sword hang over him in a haire, to dash that pleasure: If thou lookest on the prosperity of the wicked, looke on his end also, which is Damnation: Antiochus shall not ever make havoke of the Church: the rich man shall not ever ruffle in Silke and purple; Senacherib 2 Mach. 9. Luke 16. shall not ever raile on the daughter Sion; Sapor of Persia shall not ever bee drawne in a Chariot by foure Kings; there will be an Prov. 23. 18. end, there will bee an end, and their hope shall bee cut off.
They here used more the Greeke word, signifieth noted or written in a booke, (...), a phrase often used. The Prophet Mal. 3. 16. Malachi useth it saying, Then spake they that feared God, and the Lord harkened and heard it, and a booke of remembrance was written before him for them that feared God, and thought upon his name. And Christ our Savior useth the very phrase, saying, Rejoyce not that the Luke 10. 20. spirits are subdued unto you, but rather rejoyce, because your names are written in Heaven. And Saint Iohn useth also the same phrase; I saw the dead, both small and great stand before the throne, and the bookes Apoc. 20. 12. were opened, and another booke was opened, which is the booke of Life. And againe, the same phrase is used in the description of the heavenly Ierusalem, And there shall enter into it no uncleane thing,

neither whatsoever worketh abomination or Iyes; but they which are Gods decree hath two parts Election, Reprobation not to be enquired into. written in the Lambes booke of Life. Not that God needeth any Booke; for this is spoken (...), for our capacitie; For hee is God onely wise, in him are hid all the treasures of Wisedome, Knowledge and Vnderstanding; hee knoweth all from everlasting, and is the cause of all the Knowledge, that is in all, both Cap. 21. 27. 1 Tim. 1. 17. Col. 1. 9. Iob. 14. Iob. 38. 36. Men and Angels. Hee calleth all the starres by their names, he hath put Wisedome in the reines, and hath given to the heart understanding, his Wisedome is infinite. But let us see the certainty of his Iudgements; for, as the voice vanisheth, but litera scripta manet; So the damnation of the wicked is certaine, his heart cannot endure, nor his hands be strong; that is, hee shall never bee able to defend himselfe, he shall be as drosse, as brasse, Ezech. 22. 14. 18 as tinne, and iron, and lead in the middest of the fornace, as God shall melt them, that is, destroy them.
But to proceede orderly: the decree of God hath two parts: Election, and Reprobation.
That some are elected, appeareth by many testimonies of the Scripture: Paul saith, Whom hee hath predestinate, them hath hee also called, etc. Moses willeth Israel to Remember the dayes of old, when Deut. 32. 8. the most high God divided their inheritance, when he separated the sonnes of Adam, etc. And Paul saith, That God hath chosen us in him (that is, Christ) before the foundation of the World: Wherefore some are Ephes. 1. 4. Rom. 9. 17. elected, some not; For he hath Mercie on whom he will, and whom he will he hardeneth. God hath made all things for his glory; yea even the wicked for the day evill. If any will goe further, and say, why will God be thus glorified? The Apostle answereth him, that hee will have mercy on him to whom hee will shew Mercy, and he will have Rom. 9. 15. 18. compassion on him on whom he will have compassion. And againe, he hath mercy on whom he will, and whom he will hee hardeneth: hee doth as pleaseth him; even as the Psalmist saith, Our God is in Heaven, he doth whatsoever hee will. Christ giveth no other reason; It is so, O Psal. 115. 3. Mat. 11. 26. Psal. 39. 9. Father, because thy good pleasure was such. Obmutui (quoth David) quia tu Domine fecisti, I became dumbe and opened not my mouth, because thou diddest it. But if any proud man go yet further, and say, Why will God have it so? It is a proud question for either man or Angell, and the Apostle answereth him, O man! who art thou that pleadest with God? Shall the thing formed say Rom. 9. 20, 21. to him that formed it, why hast thou made mee thus? hath not the Potter power of the clay, to make of the same lumpe one vessell to honour, and another to dishonour. Inscrutabilia sunt Dei judicia; and therefore the Apostle breaketh out, saying, O the deepenesse of the riches? both of the Wisedome and Knowledge of God? how unsearchable are his Iudgements, Rom. 11. 33. 34. and his wayes past finding out; for who hath knowne the minde of the Lord, or who was his Counsellor? I say with Augustine; Cave

praecipitium; Take heed of a breake-neck; With Iob, lay thy hand Gods will most perfect, his proceedings most iust. o^ ^y mouth; With David, meddle not with matters above thy reach, Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos; What are above us, pertaine not to us; With Paul, Sape adsobrietatem; Presume not to understand above that which is meete to understand but that yee understand according to sobrietie. Iob 39. 37. Psal. 131. 1. Rom. 12. 3. Gods glory is above the Heavens; wee may barke at it, as Dogges doe against the Moone, but we cannot pull it downe.
To speake more fully: Gods will is a reason of all reasons, it is the rule of all equitie, Ideo vult, quia vult, Hee will, because he will, E^ ideo justum est quia vult, and it is therefore just because hee will. Tangere vis coelestes ignes? liquesces, wilt thou touch these Lipsius. Heavenly fires? thou shalt melt. Scandere vis in providentiae montem? wilt thou climbe up into the high mount of Gods Providence? Cades, thou shalt fall, Natabis in abysso Dei? wilt thou swimme in Gods bottomelesse waters? Mergeris, thou shalt be drowned: Thou seest a little living creature the Flye, buzzing about the Candle till shee bee burned: So our minde waxeth wanton about Gods secrets, till wee be overwhelmed. The will of God is Causa causarum, the cause of causes; Cui licet quod libet, and nil libet, nisi quid licet: The Iudgements of God are August. oftentimes secret, hid, but never unjust. Let us learne Heavenly things by Earthly: A man hath in his house vessels of Gold, and of Clay for his use and pleasure; That a Prince pardoneth one malefactor, and punisheth another, and yet justly; That a Creditor exacteth tenne pounds of one Debtor, and remitteth twenty pounds to another, and yet in the one is but just, in the other is mercifull: So God damning some is just and saving other, is mercifull, and in neither cruell or unjust. David compareth the judgements of God to a great Deepe, saying, Thy Iudgements are like a great Deepe, wee cannot Psal. 36. 6. wade in them. Finely saith Augustine, Tu homo expectas a me responsum, and ego sum homo, itaque ambo dicentem audiamus: O homo, tu quis August. ser. 10. de verbis Apost. es? melior est fidelis ignorantia, quam temeraria sententia. Petrus negat; Latro credit: O altitudo! quaeris turationem, ego expavescam; tu rationare, ego mirabor; tu disputas, ego credam; altitudinem video and profundum non pervenio: O altitudo! Thou O man expectest an answere from me, and I am a man as well as thou, let us therefore both heare another speaking. O man, who art thou? Faithfull Ignorance is better than a rash unadvised Sentence. Peter denyeth; the Theefe beleeveth: O height! thou demandest a reason of this, I will feare and tremble; thou reasonest, I will wonder; thou disputest I will beleeve: I see a depth, but I cannot come to the bottome; O depth!
But we, as though God had made us his fellowes, as though wee were of privie Councell, will rush into his Chaire, and determine rashly of his Iudgements. Some grant election, but then they adde, that it standeth upon our workes: that godly are

elected because they will bee holy: but wee are elected, that we God elects us of his free Grace. may be holy, not because we will be holy. Holines is the (...) or effect, not the cause of election. So saith Paul, He hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the World, that wee should bee holy, and without blame before him in love, who hath predestinate us to bee adopted, Ephes. 1. 4, 5. through Iesus Christ unto himselfe, according to the good pleasure of his Will. As if Paul had said, that he considered nothing without himselfe, but therefore chose us, because hee loved us; no cause can bee rendred of our election, but the Will of God. Vocavit 2 Tim. 1. 9. nos Deus, non secundum opera, etc. he hath called us unto an holy calling; Not according to our workes, but according to his owne purpose and grace, which was given us through Christ Iesus, before the World was. It is true of all men, that Christ said of his disciples, non vos me elegistis, yee have not chosen mee, but I have chosen you; yea, God so preventeth us with his grace, that hee findeth nothing past or to come, whereby God chose us, and bee reconciled unto us; For who hath given unto him first? that is, provoked him, by his good workes? A lively example wee have in these two brethren Esau and Iacob, both twinnes, both inclosed in one wombe, yet hee rejected the one, and chose the other; Non ex operibus, not by workes, but by him that calleth: Deus coronat opera Rom. 9. 11. sua, non merita nostra; God crowneth his gifts, not our merits: Cui daret justus judex coron^^^, nisi cui dedisset pater misericors indebitam gratiam? To whom should the just Iudge give the crowne, but unto whom the Father of Mercy giveth undeserved Grace? And he addeth, Ne dicas ideo electus sum, quia credebam, Aug. tract. 86. in Iob. si enim credebas, jam cum elegeras, non ipse te, and sic judicium esset penos lutum, non penes figulum: Doe not say I am elected, because I did beleeve; for if thou diddest beleeve, thou haddest now chosen him, and not hee thee, and so the Iudgement had beene in the power of the clay, and not of the potter. But heare what Christ saith, Yee have not chosen mee, but I have chosen you. I say therefore with Saint Ambrose, Iustitia nostra magis constat remissione peccatorum, quam perfectione virtutum, our righteousnesse consisteth more in the remission of our sinnes, than in the perfection of our vertues. Even as David declareth the blessednesse of the man, unto whom God imputeth righteousnesse without workes, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose Psal. 32. 1, 2. sin is covered; blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputeth no sinne.
One Father saith thus, when wee were not, God made us; when wee were sinners, hee Iustified us; when we were in prison, hee freed us; when wee were mortall, hee glorified us. Another Rom. 5. 1. Luke 4. 18. Rom. 8. 30. Father saith, God by his Wisedome hath foreknowne us, by his Gospell hee calleth us, by his Faith hee justifieth us, by his Iustice hee damneth us, by his Grace he saveth us: So that all is of his meere goodnesse, and no cause to expostulate with God: His Iudgements are just, but yet secret. Secret things (saith Deut. 29. 29.

Moses) belong to the Lord our God, but the things revealed belong unto Five signes of Election, two internall. us. But if the Heavens declare the glory of God, let us speake to his glory: Secreta Dei sunt adoranda, non scrutanda; Secret things are to bee adored, not searched: It is not good to eate too Prov. 25. 27. much Hony; so to search their owne glory, is not glory. It is reported of Augustine, that being about to write his bookes of the Trinity, hee was taught by a childe, who laded the Sea into a little spoone; to whom Augustine said, that hee laboured in vaine, for his little spoone could not containe the Sea. To whom the child replied, that his little Wisedome, his shallow braine could not containe the depth of the Trinity.
But you will say, how shall wee know our election, that wee may bee comforted against all the assaults of Satan, that wee may say with the sweet singer of Israel; Though I should walke through the valley of the shadow of death, I will feare no evill; for thou art Psal. 23. with mee, thy rod and thy staffe shall comfort mee? And with Paul, I 2 Tim. 4. 6, 7. 8 have fought a good fight, I have kept the Faith, I have finished my course, from hence forward there is laid up for mee a crowne of glory, which the Lord will give mee at that day, and not to mee onely, but unto all them also that love his appearing.
I answere, that no man can bee deceived in the state of his election, but hee that deceiveth himselfe; for wee may know whether wee stand in the state of Grace, or no. Danaeus maketh Danaeus in Isagog. five signes of election; As the comming of the Swallow is a signe of the Spring; as the putting forth of the figge-tree is a signe of Summer; as the whitenesse of the region is a signe of Harvest: So there bee many undoubted signes of our election.
1 The first is the inward testimony of Gods Spirit, the seale and earnest-penny of our Salvation. For it is God that hath Sealed us, and hath given us the Earnest of his Spirit in our 2 Cor. 1. 22. hearts. The Apostle compareth the Word to a writing, the Spirit to a seale, that ratifieth all. Clamat in nobis Abba, the same Rom. 8. 16. Gal. 4. 6. Luke 11. 11. Spirit beareth witnesse to our Spirit, that wee are the children of God. And because wee are Sonnes, God hath sent the Spirit of his Sonne into your hearts, which cryeth Abba, Father. And if God be our Father, how can wee doubt of our inheritance? If wee aske Fish, he will not give us a Serpent, If Heaven, he will not give us Hell.
2 The second signe is our faith, which is knowne by the effects, as the Eagle by her feathers, as the tree of Life by the fruits of it. Thus Paul bade the Corinths, try their faith, Prove your selves whether yee are in the Faith, examine your selves, etc. Qui 2 Cor. 13. 5. credit, salvabitur, he that beleeveth shall bee saved: and this faith may be knowne to us, if wee will search our selves. Christ asked Mar. 16. 16. Iohn 8. the woman taken in Adultery, where her accusers were? So aske thy heart where thy sinnes are? and if thou doest beleeve, it will

say with the woman that they are all gone: Qui enim credit transit Three externall signes of Election. a morte ad vitam, Hee that beleeveth in him is passed from death to life: for all that are borne of God overcommeth the World. And this is the victory that overcommeth the World, even our Faith. Iohn 3. 1 Iohn 5. 4. Hereupon Paul triumpheth over Death, Hell, Hunger, Cold, Nakednesse, Perill, Sword, and concludeth; That neither Death, nor Life nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Power, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, Rom. 8. 38, 39. shall bee able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Iesus our Lord.
3 The third signe is the conformity of our will to Gods will, to love that which God loveth, and to hate that which God hateth: therefore wee pray, that Gods will may bee done on Earth as it is in Heaven. He that doth the will of God shall abide Mat. 6. for ever: For not everie one that saith Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of Heaven, but he that doth the will of the Father which is in Heaven.
4 The fourth signe is a strife against sin: For as the Flesh lusteth against the Spirit, so doth the Spirit against the Flesh. And they that are Christs, Have crucified the Flesh, with the affections and lusts. Gal. 5. 17. 24. And hee that is elected, will cry out with the Apostle, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver mee from the body of this death? Rom. 7. 24. Meaning the corruption which yet remained. The Law in our members which rebelleth, they will tame, and give no way to the motions of the flesh.
5 The fifth and last signe is, the reformation of our whole life, a generall walking in the paths of righteousnesse and holinesse, as our election is knowne unto God from all eternity; For the foundation of God remaineth sure, and hath his seale: The Lord knoweth 2 Tim. 2. 19. who are his, so is it knowne to us by our workes: and therfore wee are willed, To give all diligence to make our election and calling sure, by good workes, if wee can so live, that at the last; when we 2 Pet. 1. 10. shall leave this World? wee can say with Simeon, Lord now lettest Luke 2. thou thy servant depart in peace. It is an undoubted signe of our election.
Our election is perfected by many degrees, Paul nameth three degrees of it: Vocation, Iustification, and Glorification: for so runne his words, Those whom hee knew before, hee predestinate; and whom hee predestinate, them also hee called; and whom Rom. 8. 29, 30. hee called, them also hee Iustified; and whom hee Iustified, them also hee Glorified. But others make other degrees:
The first, to be Christs, with his gifts.
1 Cor. 3. Rom. 8. 2 Tim. 1. 9. Rom. 4. 25. Ephes. 2. 10. 2 Tim. 4. 8. The second degree is our Adoption.
The third, is our Vocation by the Gospell.
The fourth is Iustification.
The fifth, is our Sanctification.
The sixth, is our Glorification.

These are the signes of our election, and this election is every God reprobateth in Iustice, as well as elocteth in Mercy. way free: Never man layd hand on this worke, never man brought stone to this building, but all is from God, and his Mercy. Let us therefore throw downe our crownes with the Elders, and let us say with David, Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the praise: And if our reason cannot comprehend this our election, Psal. 115. 1. let our Faith comprehend it: Vbi ratio definit, sides incipit: where Ambr. reason faileth, faith beginneth. Let our reason bee as Hagar, our faith as Sara; if reason will presume, let Sara, let faith take her downe a pegge.
The other part of Gods decree is Reprobation, here named of Iude, Of old ordained to condemnation. Now whereas many grant election, but not Reprobation, Reprobation is proved by many places of Scripture. Christ saith, Every plant which my Heavenly Mat. 15. 13. Father hath not planted, shall bee rooted up. And Paul speaketh of Vessels of wrath, ordained to destruction: And Esay telleth us that Rom. 9. 22. Tophet is prepared of old, it is prepared even for the King, hee hath made Esa. 30. 33. it deepe and large, etc. yet many are squeamish of Reprobation, utterly denying it: And Ierome was once of the minde; hee said, that God elected some, but reprobated none. Now if he deny all reprobation, this must bee wrapped up amongst the rest of his errors: Haec patrum pudenda tegi patior: I love to hide these imperfections 1 Cor. 3. of the Fathers; for they did not ever build gold upon the foundation, but sometime hay and stubble, etc. Indeed God reprobates none but for sinne: but for sinne he reprobates. And thus God is righteous, and his judgements just: thus Christ divideth the whole world into two parts, Corne and Tares, Goats and Sheepe; the Tares shall bee bound up in bundels, and cast into the fire, the Goats Mat. 13. and 25. shall stand at Christs left hand, and shall heare, Goe yee cursed into everlasting Hell fire, prepared for the Divell and his angels: and marke that he saith, prepared for the Divell and his angels. If of five senses, we want foure, we cannot deny this Reprobation.
But what should I light a candle at noone-day, or powre water into the Sea, or bring the breath of a man to helpe the blast or gale of wind? Magna est veritas and praevalet: great is truth and prevaileth: for wee cannot doe any thing against the truth, but for the truth. 2 Cor. 13. 8. Reprobation standeth with the glory of God: for as his Mercy appeareth in Election, so his Iustice in Reprobation, and his Iustice in punishing sinne, is as lawfull, as holy, as glorious, as his Mercy in Christ Iesus. For in God they are equall, and not qualities, but of the essence of God. For hee is Iustice and Mercy it selfe: God is not made of mercy only, as a loafe is of Corne, or wood of Trees, but of Iustice also: And Gods glory shineth as much in his Iustice as in his Mercy, God hath made all things for his glory, and the wicked for the day of vengeance. Shall wee then reason against God, and say, Why doth he thus? Absit, God forbid.

Againe, all the works of God have their contraries, wherein God not the author of evil, but the disposer. the infinite Wisedome of God appeareth. In Physicke one thing bindeth, and another looseth; one thing comforteth nature, and another thing destroyeth it: In the state of the World, there is light and darkenesse, hony and gall, sweet and sowre, prickes and roses, faire and foule, hearbes and weeds. In the creation of the creatures, every thing hath his contrary; the Woolfe to the Sheepe, the Weesell to the Cony, the Mouse to the Elephant, the Dragon to the Vnicorne, the Spider to the Flie, the Lion to the Beasts, the Eagle to the Birds. Againe, in the Church there are contraries; the Elect to the Reject, Cain against Abel, Ismael against Isaac, Hagar against Sara, Esau against Iacob, Pharaoh against Moses, Saul against David, the Pharises against Christ, the false god against the true God. Againe, all vertues have their contrary vices, Falshood against Truth, Hatred against Love, Faith against Infidelity, Temperancie against Riot, Prudence against Folly, Liberality against Covetousnesse, Chastity against Incontinency, Fortitude against Pusillanimity. So God hath them that are elected to life, and fore-written to judgement: for in the whole state of the world God hath shewed himselfe the Authour of Iustice and Mercy. If there were no Darkenesse, wee should not know the benefit of Light; If no sicknesse, wee should not know the benefit of health; If no death, wee should not know the goodnesse of life. So Hell makes the blisse of Heaven seeme the greater; and this destruction of the wicked, the salvation of the godly, more happy and glorious.
But perhaps this seemeth hard, that God should reprobate some, ordaine some to condemnation; but I answere, No, sith hee reprobates none but such as voluntarily sinne, and so are the Authours of their owne destruction. Obj. But sinners cannot but sinne. Answer. 1. But by grace they might bee saved. Secondly, though being left to themselves they sinne necessarily, yet they sinne willingly: for necessity is to bee distinguished from coaction. To cleare this point and the Lord, Deus est necessario bonus, non coacte: God is necessarily good, not coactedly: Diabolus and mali necessario peccant, non coacte: the Divell and the wicked sinne, necessarily, not coactedly. But they say, God will have all men to bee saved: Audio Paulum loqui de 2 Tim. 2. 4. generibus singulorum, non de singulis generum: I heare Paul speake of some of all estates and degrees of men, not of all in generall. Noble therefore and Base, Learned and Vnlearned, Rich and Poore, God will have to bee saved; For there is neither Iew, nor Grecian, there is neither Bond, nor Free, there Gal. 3. 28. is neither Male, nor Female: For yee are all one in CHRIST IESVS.
If any man say that our sinne is extenuated by predestination:

I answere with Augustine, Deus non est vitiorum nostrorum author, Mans sinne and destruction from himselfe. sed ordinator: God is not the Authour of our sinnes and vices, but the ordinatour, the disposer. Hereupon saith Salomon, The Lord hath made all things for his owne sake, yea even the wicked for August. lib. de Genesi ad cap. 5. Prov. 16. 4. Hos. 13. 9. Iob 34. 10, 11, 12. the day of evill. Blame not God, as Hosea said to Israel, One hath destroyed thee, but in mee is thine helpe. Finely said Elihu, God forbid that wickednesse should bee in God, and iniquity in the Almighty: For hee will render unto man according to his worke, and cause every one to finde according to his way, and certainely God will not doe wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert Iudgement. Our sinne is our owne; if wee perish, it is our owne fault: many lay 2 Pet. 2. 12. the fault in Adam, but the Wise-man saith it is our owne sinne, therefore hee counselleth us, Say not thou, It is through Eccles. 15. 11. the Lord, that I turne backe, for thou oughtest not to doe the thing that hee hateth. But Saint Iames answereth all these cavils, saying, Let no man say, when hee is tempted, that hee is tempted of God, for God cannot bee tempted with evill, neither tempteth hee any man, but every man is tempted, when hee is drawne away by his owne concupiscence, Iam. 1. 13. and is entised.
In this question wee have to doe with foure kinds of Hogges, or Dogges rather: Pelagians, Manichaeans, Anabaptists, Epicures.
All these barke as the Dogges of Corybant, who tore in sunder Neanthes the sonne of Pittacus. To all which I answere, that the perdition of the wicked so dependeth on predestination, as that the cause and matter of predestination is found in themselves. Adam fell (God so ordaining it) yet hee fell by his owne fault: For God made all things good, therefore Adams sinne was not Gen. 1. 31. by creation, but it was the malice and corruption of his will: it being as a wheele flexible to either side, but the hand of the turner comming unto it, it turned it to the left hand, not to the right: God made man right.
But say some, This doctrine destroyeth all care of well doing: Eccles. 7. 29. for what need wee doe well, if God hath elected us; or shunne vice, if God hath reprobated us? But this presupposeth things impossible: for God elects none to salvation, but whom hee first chuseth in Christ unto an holy and blamelesse life, Ephes. 1. 4. Neither doth hee reprobate any but for sinne, but upon their refusall of Christ Iesus offered to them in the preaching of the Gospell: for men are not vessels of wrath, till considered as sinners, Eph. 2. 3. nor ordained to destruction, but upon refusall of the means of Grace, Ezek. 24. 13. 2 Chron. 36. 15, 16. Wherfore if one man onely were to bee damned in all the whole world, every man should Lament. 3. 22. feare, lest it should be he, and walke carefully, For blessed is the man Prov. 28. 14.

that feareth alway. And if one man onely were to bee saved in the whole world, every man should hope that it is he, and so rest on The action in sinne is from God, the prarity from mans corruption. Gods mercie, walke carefully: Dum spiro, spero, quoth a Father, whilest I breathe, I hope; and above all to take the shield of Faith, wherewith we may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.
To proceede orderly in this point: there bee three opinions, the first, of the Libertines: the second, of them that deny Gods Aug. Providence, by granting a bare permission, as that he suffereth all things, but not that hee willeth all things: the third opinion is of them that grant God to doe all, but so, that all actions, as they proceed from God, are just, but as they are done of us, to be unjust.
For the first; the Libertines make God the author of sin, and say of all thefts, murders, whoredomes, that not man, but God did them, they call all these sinnes, mens vocations, and that doing them, we do but walke in our vocations; they say, Omnia licent: all things are lawfull: Ergo licet scortari, furari, occidere, therefore lawfull 1 Cor. 10. to whore, steale, kill; so reasoned Quintinus the Libertine with Calvin, saying, Omnia munda mundis: all things are cleane to the Tit. ^. 15. cleane: Stuprum ergo, furtum, homicidium esse munda: therfore whoredome, theft, murder to be cleane. But we make not God the Author of sin; For his soule hateth and abhorreth sin, his Law curseth and condemneth sin. And whereas it is said, There is no evill in the City, but the Lord doth it himselfe, the words are to be understood, Non quatenus sunt mala, sed quatenus sunt malorum poenae: not as they are evill, but as they are the punishment of evill. Againe, every action, so far forth as it is an action, is good, and of God: For in him we live, and move, and have our being. As for example, one man Act. 17. 28. killeth another; the very moving of the body in doing this villany, is of God, but the evill of the action is from Man and the Divell: as one saith finely, Actio est a Deo, nequitia vero actionis ab Bez^. homine: the action is from God, the lewdnes of the action from man. Another useth this co^parison, That as the Sun in Summer draweth stench from a Carrion which smelt not before, and yet Calvin. the beames of the Sunne pure, and no cause of the stench of the Carrion: so Gods Providence draweth evill out of men, and yet no cause of that evill. Another useth this Simile, That as in cutting with a bad knife, the cutting is of my selfe, but the evill cutting is of the knife; So the action is of God, but the evill of the action is of our selves. Augustine affirmeth, Deum per malos agere: Lipsius. August. in Enchiridion ad Laurentium. that God worketh by evill men: Deus enim, inquit ille, jussit Shemei Davidimaledicere: for God (saith he) commanded Shemei to curse David. Againe, he saith, In peccato peccatoris nihil esse positivum, sed privativum: In the sin of a sinner, nothing is positive, but privative. So God is said to make blind whom he inlightneth not, to harden whom he softeneth not, and to reprobate whom he calleth not effectually. But I will conclude this point with the

saying of two worthy men, Augustine, and Fulgentius. Augustine The causes of Reprobation are hidden, but iust. saith thus, Deus operatur in cordibus hominum, ad inclinandas voluntates eorum quocunque vult, sive ad bona pro sua misericordia, sive ad mala pro ipsorum meritis; God worketh in the hearts of men, to incline their wils to whatsoever hee will, either to good things by his mercy, or to evill by their deserts. And Fulgentius saith thus, Deus licet author non sit malarum cogitationum, ordinator est tamen malarum voluntatum, and de malo opere cujuslibet mali, non desinit ipse bonum operari: Although God be not the Author of evill cogitations, yet is hee the orderer of evill wils, and of the evill worke of every evill man, hee ceaseth not to worke a good worke.
Beza hath three Aphorismes against Castellio; Primum, causas reprobationis esse a nobis absconditas, sed tamen justas, alioquin judicium esset penes lutum, non penes figulum: First, the causes of reprobation are hid from us, yet they bee just, otherwise the judgement were in the power of Clay, not of the Potter.
Secondly, Deum non simpliciter creare quenquam ad exitium, that God not simply hath created any to destruction, but the causes 1 Hosca 13. 2 Pet. 2. of destruction are of himselfe: Perditio tua ex te, O Israel, thy destruction is of thy selfe, O Israel; and the Apostle saith, that the wicked perish through their owne corruption.
Thirdly, Deum non spectare reproborum exitium, ut ultimum finem, sed gloriam suam, quae in eorum justa condemnatione lucet, that God beholdeth not the destruction of the wicked, as the last end: but his glory, which shineth most brightly in their condemnation. As Salomon saith, The Lord hath made all things for his glory, even the wicked for the day of evill. So that the justice of God shall appeare to his glory, even in the destruction of the wicked.
The second opinion is of them. Qui dicunt Deum omnia permittere, sed non velle; which say, that God permits and suffers all things, but hee willeth not all things: but God saith that it is his will, and that nothing is done without his will. Our God (saith Psal. 115. 3. Psal. 135. 6. David) is in heaven, hee doth whatsoever hee will. No impediment can let his worke, but hee useth even the impediments to serve his will. And whatsoever hee willeth, that doth hee in Heaven, and in Earth, in the Sea, and in all deepe places. That appeareth in the affliction of Iob, Satan envied Iob; and the Chaldees robbed him; Iob 1. 1 Reg. 22. yet Iob said, Dominus dedit, dominus abstulit, the Lord hath given, and the Lord hath taken away. In the deceiving of Achab, the Divell is sent of God to bee a lying spirit in the mouthes of the foure hundred Prophets, Si ista execatio est Dei, nudum permissionis figmentum evanescit; If this execation bee the judgement of God, this bare and naked figment of permission must vanish as smoke, and as the untimely fruit of a woman. An earthen pitcher shall drive away the Madianites; Trumpets of Rammes

hornes shall blow downe the wals of Iericho; a peble stone shall God worketh by evill men, and not in them. overthrow the great Goliah; that is, the scripture shall overthrow the conceit, the imagination and fiction of bare permission. As Iael with one nayle stroke Sisera to the ground, so will I with one example beate downe the paper-wals of this opinion.
Absalom defiled his fathers bed, and committed a notable villany, yet God calleth it his worke, Verba enim Dei sunt, they are Gods owne words; Tufecisti occulte, ego vero palam, and coram 2 Sam. 16. hoc Sole, thou hast done it secretly, but I openly, and before this Sun. To strengthen this (for Vis unita fortior) The Iewes, Pilate, Herod crucified Christ; yet the Apostle said, that they did nothing but that which the hand and counsell of God had decreed. And yet againe, Act. 4. that a threefold cable may not easily bee broken, the Ier. 5 cruelty of the Chaldees in Iudaea, Ieremy calleth the worke of God. In which since Nebuchadnezzar is called Servus Dei, the servant of God; and God calleth the King of Assyria, the rod of his wrath. Esa. 10. I doe but crop some few examples of millions and infinite, that might bee alleaged. Nothing is clearer than these speeches, that God blindeth men, that he giveth them the spirit of slumber, Esa. 29. Exod. 9. Rom. 1. 28. that hee hardeneth their hearts, and so is hee said to have hardned Pharoahs heart, and to give men up into a reprobate sense. And of the inhabiters of Canaan, Moses said, that God hardneth their hearts, to fight against the Church. And Paul calleth the wisedome of God (...). These bee not matters of reason, but of faith; Et ubi fides incipit, ratio desinit, where Ios. 11. Ephes. 3. 10. Ambr. faith beginneth, reason endeth? But I answere with Calvin, that though God willeth all things, yet hee neither commandeth nor compelleth the wicked; Though God would revenge the Adultery of David, by the Incest of Absalom, yet God neither commanded nor compelled him, which freeth God.
The third opinion is of them, that say, all things come to passe by Gods providence, that our actions as they proceed from God, are just, and as they come of our selves unjust. Hereupon Beza distinguisheth thus, Deum agere in bonis and per bonos, that God worketh in good men, and by good men; Per malos vero 1 parte quaes^ionum. agere, at non in malis; and that hee worketh by evill men, but not in evill men: In his enim duntaxat agit quos spiritu suoregit, Hee worketh in them onely whom he ruleth by his spirit, In malis igitur non agit aliquid, hee worketh not therefore in evill men: Ephes. 2. 2. for Satan not God worketh in them. And Master Calvin against the Libertines produceth two exceptions, Primo, sic Deum agere periniquos and Satanam, ut ipsi etiam suas agunt partes, non per illos agit, ut per truncos, and lapides, sed ut per creaturas rationales, qui sponte ruunt; First, God so worketh by the wicked, and by Satan, as that they also play their owne parts, hee worketh not by them, as by blockes, or stones, but as by reasonable creatures, which runne headlong of their owne accord. Secundo, magnam esse differentiam

inter opus Dei and impiorum: there is great difference betweene God, Satan, and Men, concurre in the same action, but have different ends. the worke of God, and the worke of the wicked, in respect of the end of their worke: The Sunne draweth stench out of a dead carkase, Non immittit, he doth not send it in: So God worketh by the wicked, and yet so, that his justice doth not justifie them, nor their wickednesse contaminate him, as it appeareth in Iobs example; God, Satan, and the Chaldees concurre, move, Iob 1. worke, yet is God cleare, and they guilty; Inspecto fine agendi, considering the end of their worke: God did it to trie Iob, Satan to destroy Iob, and the Chaldees, to inrich themselves. So saith S. Augustine of Christ; Pater tradidit filium, filius corpus, Iudas magistrum: In hac traditione cur Deus justus and homo injustus? nisi quod in re una quam fecerunt, non est causa una ob quam fecerunt? The Father delivered the Sonne, the Son his body, Iudas his master; in this tradition or delivering, why is God just, and man unjust? because that in that one thing, which they did, there was not one cause for the which they did it; Deus, in dilectione, Christus, in obedientia, Iudas ab avaritia, Iudaei ob invidiam: God delivered him in love, Christ delivered himselfe in obedience, Iudas of covetousnesse, the Iewes of envy. Thus they all did one action, but not to one end.
And yet true is the saying of Fulgentius, Malos ad poenam, non culpam praedestinari: the wicked to be predestinate to punishment, not to sinne, non ad hoc, quod male operantur, sed ad hoc, quod juste patiuntur: not to this, that they worke evilly, but to this end, that they suffer justly: For God ordaines no man to be evil, though he hath ordained the evill unto punishme^t; for should God ordaine men unto sin, then should God be the Author of sin: he ordaines indeed the incitements and occasions of sin, to try men withall; he also orders sins committed, and does limit them; and in these regards is said as before to worke in them, and to will them: in which regards also they are in Scripture attributed unto him sometimes, as 2 Sam. 12. 11, 12. and 15. 16. But yet wee must not say (as some do) that God is the Author of sinne, or predestinates men unto it. Sed quia Dei mysteria non capimus, corripimus: because wee cannot conceive Gods mysteries, wee will cavell and carpe at them. Nunquid negandum quod verum est, quia comprehendi non potest, quod occultum est? Is that to be damned which is true, because it cannot be comprehended, for that it is secret? Eate hony, but not too much hony: so search Gods mysteries, but not too far. I say of the proud men of this age, as Chrysostome said of the Hereticks called Anomei; Hanc arborem Anomaeorum Paulus nec plantavit, Apollo non rigavit; this tree of the Anomaei neither hath Paul planted, nor Apollo watered, nor God increased: but curiosity planted it, pride watered it, and ambition increased it. Lipsius Lipsius de constantia, pag. 36. useth all these similitudes; A man rideth upon a lame horse, and stirs him, the rider is the cause of the motion, but the horse

himselfe of the halting motion; so God is the Author of every action, but not of the evill of the action. The like is in the striking All sinne from Saten or evill men, none from God. of a jarring and untuned Harpe, the fingering is thine, the jarring or discord is in the Harpe or instrument. The earth giveth fatnesse and juyce to all kind of plants, some of these plants yeeld pestilent and noysome fruits; where is the fault, in the nourishment of the ground, or in the nature of the hearbe, which by the native corruption decocteth the goodnes of the ground into venime and poyson? the goodnes and moisture is from the earth, the venime from the hearbe; the sounding from the hand, the jarring from the instrument; So the action is from God, the evill in the action from the impure fountaine of thy owne heart. I will conclude this point with the saying of the Learned, Impossibile est Deum, Confessie. qui est lux, justitia, veritas, sapientia, bonitas, vita, causam esse tenebrarum, peccati and mendacii, ignorantiae, maliciae and mortis, sed horum omnium causa Satanas and homines sunt; It is impossible that God, who is Light, Iustice, Truth, Wisedome, Goodnesse, Life, to bee the cause of Darkenesse, Sinne, Dissembling, Ignorance, Malice, and Death, but the Divell and Men are the cause of all these.



THE ELEVENTH SERMON.


VERS. V. 

I will therefore put you in remembrance, forasmuch as yee once knew this, etc.
The often inculcating the same doctrine needfull.



WEE are now come unto the third part of this Epistle, which containeth a confirmation of Iudes purpose, by divers examples.
The first, of the Israelites.
The second, of the Angels.
The third, of the Sodomites.
In the first, he noteth their Infidelitie.
In the second, their Apostasie.
In the third, their Adultery, and Buggery.
The first were destroyed of God in the wildernesse.
The second fell from Heaven.
The third were burned: and thus much for their sinnes and their punishments.
Now for the first, he saith that they Knew it, howbeit he will put them in remembrance, saying they had forgotten it. We may not thinke much to heare that which we have heard and known, were our knowledge never so great, like Salomons, who had A large heart, hee was filled with understanding as a floud, his minde compassed the Earth, hee filled it full of darke and grave sentences, yet wee 1 Reg. 4. Ecclus. 47. 14, 15

may be remembred of it againe. Paul was not ashamed to write The memorie must be often admonished. one thing often: For so hee saith to the Philippians, It grieveth me not to write, the same thing unto you viz. that which yee have often heard of me; for unto you it is a sure thing: and we are not ashamed to preach one thing often, it leaveth a surer print, and a deeper Phil. 3. 1. stampe in our minds; doctrine delivered, is as a nayle driven; but doctrine repeated, is as a nayle rivetted, then it sticketh sure. Such a Simile Salomon useth, saying; The words of the wise are like goods, and like nayles fastened by the masters of the assemblies, (that is, Eccles. 12. 11. Ezech. 36. Ier. 23. Iohn 6. 27. Iohn 6. the Ministers) which are given by our Pastour (that is, God:) the word of God is the water of life, the more it is waved, the fresher it runneth; it is the fire of Gods glory, the more it is blowen, the clearer it burneth; it is the bread of heaven, the more it is broken, the more remaineth; as it did in the five loaves and two fishes, wherewith Christ fed five thousand men in the wildernes; the more it is repeated, the more knowledge it breedeth, the more faith it begetteth, the more consolation it affordeth. Therfore Paul rubbeth the memories of the Corinths in the things 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. 9. 19. that they knew; doe yee not know that the Saints shall iudge the world? know yee not that we shall iudge the Angells? know yee not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdome of God? know yee not that your bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost? As if he should say, yee know these things, yet I helpe your memories, otherwise yee may forget even that yee know. This order Paul, as a carefull master, prescribeth to Timothie, a painefull Scholler, saying; If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shalt be a good minister 1 Tim. 4. 6. of Iesus Christ, etc. The Ephesians, where Paul had preached three yeares, day and night, knew much, yet Paul would have them put in remembrance; and thereupon he chargeth them to Watch, and Act. 20. 31. to remember that by the space of three yeares he ceased not to warne every one of them: So said S. Peter of the Iewes, seeing his race was at an end, his life short, and his tabernacle ready to be laid downe: I will not (saith he) be negligent to put you alwayes in remembrance of 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13. these things; though that yee have knowledge, and be established in the present truth: For I thinke it meete so long as I am in this tabernacle, to stirre you up, by putting you in remembrance. Gutta cavat lapidem, non vi, sed saepe cadendo; Sic homo fit fidelis, non vi, sed saepe audiendo; As the drops of water make a hole in the stone, not by force, but by often falling; so man becommeth faithfull, not by force, but by often hearing; Et idem audiendo, in hearing the same: we are like flint or marble, that is not easily pierced; like sieves, which in the water are full, but out of it are empty: So in the Church our eares are full of doctrine, but it is scattered in the Church-yard, by and by wee are emptie, Ne apicem tenemus, we carry not a tittle home. But as to eate meate, and not to keep it in the stomacke, is a signe of the death of the body; so to heare, and not to remember, that argueth the death of the soule; For whosoever transgresseth,

and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God; but hee Variety delighteth, but the same thing repeated profiteth. that continueth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son. Remember then how thou hast received, and heard, and hold fast, and repent.
Let no man say, I wil not come to the Sermon, I know the man, I know his gifts, I know what hee will say: though wee doe, 2 Iohn. 9. Apoc 3. 3. yet may we be remembred. The incarnation of Christ was revealed to Marie by an Angell, and yet afterwards it was revealed by the shepheards; If Marie had beene curious, shee would have said, Dic quod nescio, tell me that I know not, I have heard this Luk. 1. Luk. 2. already, why tell you me it againe? here is Cooleworts twice sodden; Crambe bis posita mors est; tis as bad as death, to heare a thing twice repeated: Wee cannot abide to heare one doctrine twice; wee surfet of preaching, as Israel did of Manna; Numb. 11. 2 Tim. 4. 3. we have itching eares: many cannot abide wholesome doctrine, but after their owne lusts, get them an heape of teachers. Wee come to the Church as the Athenians did ad forum Iulium, to heare newes; like Perillus, that would not heare one sound of musicke Act. 17. twice; like Heliogabalus, that fed of nightingales tongues, provided that he might not eat twice of one meate; like Xerxes, which propounded great rewards to them that could devise new pleasures: and therefore wee crie out unjustly of vaine repetitions, idle Anaphoraes and Tautologie. We come to the preacher as men come to a minstrell, to have our eares tickled; So saith God to his Prophet, They come unto thee, as people use to come; and my people sit before thee, and heare thy Words, but they will not doe them: Ezech. 33. 31. For with their mouthes they make jests, and their heart goeth after their covetousnesse. It is no Sermon, except there bee some new and strange thing in it, that wee never heard before, that may bring us into a wonderment of that we understand not: Then the preacher hath with Esay a learned tongue; with Peter, a fiery cloven tongue, and with Apollo, a fine eloquent tongue; or else hee is Esa. 50. Act. 2. Act. 18. but a plaine man, an English Doctor, a Dunce, etc. But wee say with Paul, That we have cast from us the cloakes of shame, and walke not in craftinesse, neither handle we the word of God decetfully. The oft preaching of the word serveth to put us in remembrance of all things that concerne God, and our dutie to him, otherwise wee soone forget all: as the Israelites did, Who made a Calfe in Horeb, Psal. 106. 19, 20, 21. and worshipped the molten Image; thus they turned their glorie into the similitude of a bullocke, that eateth grasse, and forgat God their Saviour. The Israelites in forty dayes forgat God; so bee you forty dayes absent from a Sermon, and you will forget God: Come therefore, to be put in remembrance.
A number say, Sermons are too oft, wee heare too many, Communia sordent, Common things waxe vile; they must come as strawberries once a yeare; Rara praeclara, seldome things are excellent things. But I wonder that any blasphemous mouth dare

say that there is too much preaching! once a quarter, or once a The preaching of the Word alwayes necessary. moneth is enough: but this is not (...), to preach in season, and out of season: Paul did not so; Hee, night and day, for the space of three yeares, ceased not to warne every one: Moses was but forty dayes absent, and the people that had tasted 2 Tim. 4. 2. Act. 20. 31. Exod. 32. so lately and miraculously of Gods goodnesse, fell to Idolatrie.
To prosecute this point: If men could indent with the Divell, to tempt but once in a moneth, or once in a quarter; preaching once in a Moneth were sufficient; but if hee tempt continually, wee must preach continually, and you must heare continually, and wee all must be sober and watch, so long as our adversary the Divell goeth about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom to devoure. 1 Pet. 5. 8. The dragon with his tayle drew the third part of the starres out of heaven, and cast them to the ground; and the dragon is ready to devoure us, as soone as wee bee brought forth: but wee must resist him* Resist the Divell, and he will flie from you. So long as Ioas 1 Pet. 4. had Iehojada at his elbow, he did well, he walked uprightly in the sight of the Lord. So long as Vzziah had Zechariah to teach him, he sought God, and he understood the visions of God, and God 2 Chron. 24. 2. 2 Chron. 26. 5. made him prosper; but they being taken away, Satan prevailed both with the one, and with the other.
Therefore the Word is compared to showres; so saith Moses, My doctrine shall drop as the raine, and my speech shall still as doth the dew, as the showre upon the hearbs, and as the great raine upon the grasse. Deut. 32. 2. The Word is compared to an hammer: Is not my Word like a fire (saith the Lord) and like an hammer that breaketh a stone. And it is compared to Wind; I saw (saith S. Iohn) an Angell standing on the Ier. 23. 29. Apoc. 7. 1. Iohn 6. 27. foure corners of the earth holding the foure windes of the earth, that the windes should not blow on the earth. And the word is compared to Food; hereupon saith our Saviour, Labour not for the meate that perisheth, but for that which will indure to eternall life: Grasse groweth not greene with one showre of raigne; knottie wood is not riven with one stroke; a ship saileth not with one blast; a Child groweth not to a man with one meale; and wee goe not to heaven with one sermon; but with precept upon precept, precept upon precept, Esa. 28. 10. line unto line; line unto line; that is, with doctrine upon doctrine, and wee must have one thing oft told. This meeteth with those preachers and auditors, that make strawberries of the Word, to have it once in a yeare, or once in a quarter; but it is Food, and every one must have his portion of meate in due season, it is not strawberries. It is also food, for that we must heare it often, it must be familiar unto us. There is a waste in the body by reason of the heate in the stomacke and the liver, and therefore must be repaired with a fresh supply of meate; So there is a waste in the soule, which must bee repaired with a supply of intellectuall meate, that is, the word. Sometime there is a waste in the understanding,

which is darkened; sometime in the will and affections' Meditation and recordation meanes to enrich the soule. which are unruly; sometime in the memory, which is brittle sometime in our faith, which is weake; or in our love which is small; or in our zeale, which may be cold; or in the minde which is earthly; or in the whole man which is lumpish, heavy, unfit for Coll. 1. Coll. 3. Hebr. 12. Luk. 17. Phil. 3. 19. any good thing.
Come therefore still unto the Word, heare it still, heare it to learne, and learne to remember it, and remember to follow it, and follow, to continue it; that I may say to this towne of Wallsham, as Christ said to Zacheus house; This day is salvation come unto your towne. But as Lords and Barons never put on their Luk. 19. 9. Parliament robes, till they goe to the Parliament house: So wee put not on Religion till we goe to the Church, and there wee leave it till the next Sunday. We remember little and practise lesse, like Cambridge Schollers, that leave their Logicke in Sophisters hills till they returne againe. But wee must heare to bee put in remembrance; and though many bee soone wearie, yet must not wee. Be not weary of well doing (saith the Apostle) be not Gal. 6. wearie of hearing. I see many, that if they have a preacher in their towne on the Sunday, refuse to heare any other on the weeke day, as though they could heare too much: Let the Word of God dwell in you plenteously; not as a guest for an houre, but as Col. 3. 16. an owner continually, which cannot be except we be put oft in remembrance, and heare often.
But in saying, I will put you in remembrance, he insinuateth that they had forgotten these following examples: for wee are like the Ostrich, that forgetteth her eggs in the dust, like Partriches, Iob 29. Jer. 17. which gather the yong that be not theirs; like the bird Fulica, that forgetteth her nest, and hatcheth strange birds; like the Philosopher that forgat his owne name: we had need therefore be put in remembrance, and often thinke, and meditate of the doctrines we have heard. Christians must be like the cleane-beasts that parted the hoofe and chewed the cud; so we must ruminate, and chaw that at home, and concoct that which we have heard in the Church. Marie laid up the words of the Shepheard, In her heart; we must learne of her: For the heart is Thesaurus, the Luk. 2. 17. treasure-house to store up all doctrines of life, and of salvation; the memorie is as a chest or coffer, if wee had never so great Iewells, yet if they be not safely kept, as well as truely gotten, all is lost: not they that eate, but they that digest most, are the most healthfull; not they that get most, but they that keep most, are richest: So, not they that heare most, but they that remember most, are most edified. Our memories are like Bankrouts purses, and like Danaides tunne, the one can hold no money, the other no liquor, and our memories can hold no doctrine. But let us strive to remember, and as the Apostle speaketh, Whatsoever things are Phil. 4. 8. true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are iust, whatsoever

things are pure, whatsoever things pertaine to love, whatsoever things God offereth mercy before hee inflicts iudgement. are of good report, if there be any vertue, if there be any praise, thinke on these things, which yee have both received and heard, etc.
But what are the things that Iude would remember them of? Three notable examples of Gods wrath he calleth to their remembrance: The first, of the Israelites: and therein observe with me three things.
Gods mercy in delivering them, the first.
His iustice in destroying them, the second.
Their sinne, the Cause of Gods iustice, the whetstone unto it, the third and last.
But first, let us looke upon Gods mercy in their deliverance: for God beginneth with mercy, that is the first act, mercy is Alpha, Iustice is Omega, so David placeth it; For speaking of Gods attribute, he placeth mercy in the foreward, Iustice in the rereward, saying, My song shall be of mercy and judgement. God is patient and Psal. 110. 1. Rom. 2. 4. full of mercy. Paul calleth it (...), the riches of Gods mercy; God never useth Iustice, but when his mercy is despised; like a Prince, that sendeth not his army against rebells, before he hath sent his pardon, and proclaimed it by an Herauld of armes: like Tamberlaine, who the first day set up his white tents, and received all that came; the next day, blacke, betokening the death of the rulers; the third day, red, betokening the bloodshed of all; So the Lord hath his white tents of mercy, his blacke and red of iustice and iudgement, if the one bee despised, the other shal be felt: hereupon saith Paul, But thou after thy hardnesse, Rom. 2. 5. and heart which cannot repent, treasurest up unto thy selfe wrath against the day of wrath, and declaration of the iust iudgement of God; who will reward every man according to his works. More particularly, God delivered this people mercifully, yea miraculously, their shoulders from burdens, and their fingers from making of bricke, hee drew them out of a fiery oven, like the three children, he put off their sacke-cloth, and girded them with gladnesse, and compassed them about with songs of deliverance; hee carried them on the Wings of Eagles: He brought a vine out of Aegypt, hee cast out the Heathen, and planted them in. Thou madest roome for it, and diddest Dan. 2. Exod. 19. Psal. 80. 9, 10, 11. cause it to take roote, and it filled the land: She stretched out her branches unto the sea, and her boughs unto the river. God separated them from all the Sonnes of Adam: For the most high God, who divided to the nations their inheritance, kept them as the apple of his eye, And as an Eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her birds, stretcheth out her wings, taketh them, and beareth them on her wings; So the Deut. 32. 8. 11, 12. Lord alone led Israel. But for orders sake, I will divide the mercies of God into three severall sections or times:
Their deliverance in Aegypt, the first.
Their comming out of Aegypt, the second.
Their delivera^ce after they were come out, the third and the last. For

First, for their deliverance in Aegypt: first, it was much, that Gods judgements upon the Aegyptians God should love them, being come of the Amorites and Hitites, wallowing in their blood, that he should love them, and choose them for his people; as Moses said, The Lord your God did not set his love upon you, nor chose you, because yee were moe in number than Ezech. 16. 3. 6. Deut. 7, 8, 9. any people, for yee were the fewest of all people, but because the Lord loved you. There was nothing in them, why God should choose them, for they were no more righteous than others; and therefore saith Moses againe unto them; Speake not thou in thy heart, saying, For my Cap. 9. 4, 5. Cap. 32. 9, 10, 11, 12. Exod. 1. righteousnesse hath the Lord brought me in to possesse this Land, etc. For thou shalt inherit this land, not for thy righteousnesse, or for thy upright heart, but for the wickednesse of those nations, etc. Israel was Gods portion, Iacob the lot of his inheritance, hee found him in the land of the wildernesse, in a wast and roring wildernesse, he led him about, he taught him, and kept him, as the apple of his eye. As an Eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her birds, stretcheth out her wings, taketh them, and beareth them on her wings; So the Lord alone led him, and there was no strange God with him. God multiplied them, not by meanes, but by miracle: For from seventy soules, they grew in few yeares to 600000. and which is more, the more that they were kept down, the more they prospered, like to Camomill, the more it is troden, the more it groweth; or to a Palme-tree, the more it is pressed, the further it spreadeth, or to fire, the more it is raked, the more it burneth. God gave them Moses, and Aaron, and Miriam, Mich. 6. Psal. 78. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50. and God plagued the Aegyptians for their sake, and did marvelous things in the land of Aegypt, even in the field of Zoan. He turned their rivers into blood, and their flouds, that they could not drinke; hee sent a swarme of flies among them, which devoured them, and frogges which destroyed them; hee gave also their fruits unto the Caterpiller, and their labour unto the grashopper, he destroyed their vines with haile, and their wild figgetrees with the hailestone, he gave their cattell also to the haile, and their flockes unto the thunderbolts; hee cast upon them the furiousnesse of his anger, indignation, and wrath, and vexation, by the sending of evill Angels; he made a way to his anger, hee spared not their soule from death, hee Act. 12. Exod. 8. 17. gave their life to the pestilence. If it were much to eate up one man with lice, what is it to eate up a whole land? If it was much to Iohn 2. Exod. 7. 19. Gen. 19. 2 Reg. 6. turne water-pots into wine, what was it to turne all the waters of Aegypt into blood? If it was a great thing to smite a few Sodomites and Aramites with blindnesse, what was it to smite a whole land with darkenesse? that no man could rise for three dayes. So much for the benefits bestowed upon them in Aegypt.
Now let us see, what he did for them in their deliverance out Exod. 10. Exod. 12. Gen. 50. 3. Ier. 31. 17. of Aegypt: In their deliverance he smote al the first borne in Aegypt, the chiefe of their strength and passed by Israel; And wheras there was a great cry in Aegypt, like that for Iacob, for whom was made a great and an exceeding sore lamentation; and like that of Rachel, who weeping for her children, would not be comforted, because they were not;

there was joy in the land of Goshen; hee inclined the hearts of the Gods mercy to Israel after their deliverance out of Aegypt. Aegyptians to doe them good, and they received of them Iewels of silver, and Iewels of gold; hee strengthened them so, that there was not one feeble person among them; Aegypt was glad at their departing, for the feare of them had fallen upon them. All the Idolls of Aegypt fell downe at their departure: even as all the oracles Psal. 105. 38. of the world ceased at the comming of Christ, even that at Delphos, Dodo, Delos. God brought them as a vine out of Aegypt, God did cast out the Heathen, and planted them, hee made Psal. 80. 8, 9. a roome for them, and caused them to take roote, and they filled the land.
3. After their deliverance; when the red sea was before them, the Aegyptians behind them, the mountaines on each side of them; God made a ready passage for them, And caused the sea to runne Exod. 14 21, 22. backe by a strong East winde all the night, and made the Sea dry land; for the waters were divided, and the children of Israel went thorough the middest of the Sea, upon the dry ground: but the Aegyptians pursuing them, Psal 105. 39. Exod. 15. Cap. 16. Num. 20. Deut. 8. Num. 21. were drowned. He spread a cloud to be a covering, and fire to give light in the night; for God went before them in a cloudy pillar by day, and a fiery by night: he made the bitter waters sweet, for their sakes, and fed them with Angels food. Hee turned the rocke into a river, and the flint stone into a springing well: their foote swelled not, and their cloathes waxed not old in forty yeares travell, and when they were bitten with fiery serpents, he cured them with a brasen serpent, a figure of Psal. 136. 19, 20, 21. Christ. Hee slew great Kings for their sakes; as Sehon King of the Amorites, and Og the King of Bashan, and gave their land for an heritage, even an heritage to Israel his servant; hee dried up Iordan, that they might passe thorough it. Whereupon the Psalmist useth a most elegant Prosopopopeia, Psal. 114. 5, 6. saying, What ayleth thee, o thou Sea, that thou fieddest, and thou Iordan that thou wert driven backe? Yee mountaines, why leaped yee like rammes, and yee hils as Lambes? God gave them Canaan, a land that flowed with milke and hony, as Iacob prophecied of Gen. 49. 11, 12, 13. Iuda, saying, Hee shall bind his Asse foale to the vine, and his Asses colt unto the best vine; Hee shall wash his garment in wine, and his cloake in the blood of grapes; his eyes shal be red with wine, and his teeth white with milke. For the land of Iudah, of all lands it was the fruitfullest. Moses calleth it, A good land; and the goodnesse of it, afterwards hee describeth at large, and saith? A land in which are rivers of Deut. 8. 7, 8, 9, 10. waters, and fountaines, and depths, that spring out of vallies and mountaines; a land of wheat, and barly, of vineyards, and figge-trees, and pomegranats; a land of oyle olive and honie; a land wherein thou shlat eate bread without scarcenesse, neither shalt thou lacke any thing therein: A land whose stones are iron, and out of whose mountaines thou shalt digge brasse. But especially God gave them his Law, to convert their soules, and his testimonies, which gave wisdome unto the simple; Psal. 19. 7, 8, 9. his statutes that rejoyce the heart, and his Commandments that give light to the eyes, his feare which indureth for ever, and his iudgments

which be righteous altogether; great in one word was their preferment; Gods bounty to England. For to them were committed the Oracles of God. To them also appertained, The adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises, of whom are Rom. 3. 20. Cap. 9. 4, 5, 6. the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all blessed for ever. What should I speake of Iosuahs trumpets, Ios. 6. Iudg. 7. Iudg. 3. Cap. 15. 2 Sam. 1. which blew downe Iericho? of Gedeons pitchards that discomfited the Madianites? Of Shamgars oxe-goad, which slew heapes upon heapes? Of Sampsons iaw-bone, that killed a whole army of Philistines? Of Ionathans bow, and Sauls sword, that never returned emptie?
Let us apply all this to our selves, whom God hath laded with blessings, so that we have cause to say with the Israelites, Praysed be the Lord, even the God of our salvation, which ladeth us daily with benefits: For God hath turned the captivity of our English Sion as Psal. 68. 19. Psal. 126. 1. the rivers of the South. As after a Nero, God gave a Vespasian, after Commodus a Severus, after a Sisera a Debora, after a Saul a David, after an Ahaz an Ezechias, and after a Domitian a Trajane, and a Nerva; So after a Marie, an Elizabeth, a princely Iames, under whose governments we have sate safely these many yeares, under our figge-trees and vine-trees from Dan to Beersheba, from the one end of the land unto the other, his eyes have beene over us, as over the land of Chanaan, from the beginning of the yeare to the end of it. Hee hath troden downe the Northerne rebells, with Parrie, Somervile, Ardington, Lopas, Hacket, Madder, Burney, hee hath put their life downe to the ground, and laid their honour in the dust; he hath made them a portion for the Foxes, they are passed, as water, molten, etc. Psal. 58.
Of late Balak of Spaine had devised our destruction, Balaam of Rome had cursed us; at his commandement subtle Achitophel had conspired abroad, unnaturall Absalom rose up at home, and aspiring Adonia would have the Shunamite to wife; but from all these God hath delivered us. We have seene France massacred, Flanders with civill warres distressed; Germanie grieved; Scotland divided; onely we stand still as an oake of Bashan. Pray, that God stretch not over us the line of Samaria, as 2 Reg. 21. 13. God hath blessed us above many others; his wise mercy is in our Parliaments Reg. 21. 13. and governments, as in Israel, Deut. 4. His learned mercie in our Schooles and Vniversities, as in Naioth, 2 Reg. 2. His strong mercies in our Castles and bulwarks, as in Iuda, Soph. 1. His peaceable mercies in our Townes and Cities, as was said of Ierusalem; Mich. 4. 3, 4. Zaeb. 8. 4. 5. They shall breake their swords into mattockes, and their speares into scithes, nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learne to fight any more: But old men and old Women shall dwell in the streets of Ierusalem, and every man his staffe in his hand for very age, and the streetes of the Citie shalbe full of boyes and girles playing in the middest thereof. His rich mercies in our fields and granaries; for he

maketh our vallies so thicke with corne, that men doe laugh and Contemners of Gods mercy grievously punished. sing; he crowneth the yeare with his goodnesse, and the clouds drop fatnesse; they drop upon the pastures of the wildernesse, and the hills shall be compassed with gladnesse. Would God, wee were halfe thankefull for so great blessings, that every one of us could say with David, Psal. 65. 11. Praise the Lord, o my soule, and all that is within me praise his holy name: Praise the Lord, o my soule, and forget not all his benefits. Psal. 103. 1, 2.
Yee heard before of Gods mercy in delivering the people, now are we come to Gods iustice in destroying them (yee once know this, that after the Lord had delivered the people out of Aegypt, he destroyed them.) First, God shooteth paper, secondly bullet, if men yeeld not, primum ubera, deinde, verbera ostendit; first, he openeth his brests, after shewes us his rods: first, by his Ministers, as by heraulds, he proclaimeth pardon, after he sendeth an army to destroy. The Lord (saith the Prophet) is slow to anger, but he is great in power, and will not surely cleere the wicked; the Lord hath his way in the whirlewind, Nahum 1. 3, 4, 5, 6. and in the storme, and the clouds are the dust of his feet: Hee rebuketh the Sea and drieth it, and he drieth up all the rivers. The mountaines tremble for him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burnt at his sight; yea the world, and all that dwell therein: who can stand before his wrath? if his wrath be kindled, yea, but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him. God telleth the Idumaeans, Though thou exalt thy selfe like an Eagle, and make thy nest among the starres, thence will I bring thee downe, saith Obadiah vers. 4. the Lord. Paul applieth the example of Gods justice on Israel to the Church of Corinth, and all Churches; I would not have you ignorant (quoth he) that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed thorough the Sea, etc. but with many of them God was not pleased; for 1 Cor. 10. 1. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. they were overthrowne in the wildernesse. Now these are examples to us, to the intent that wee should not lust after evill things as they lusted; neither be yee idolaters, as were some of them; As it is written, the people sate downe to eate and drinke, and rose up to play. Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed fornication, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand, neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted him, and were destroyed of serpents; neither murmure yee, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. Now all these things came unto them for examples; and were written to admonish us, upon whom the ends of the world are come. The continuance of Gods mercy for a long time, doth not assure us of perpetuall safety, but of greater destruction if we beleeve not: Quanto gradus altior, tanto casus gravior, the higher we are in dignity the more grievous our fall and misery; as was said of the whore of Babylon, Inasmuch as shee glorified herselfe, and lived in pleasure, so much give yee to Apoc. 18. 7. Mat. 11. 23. Ier. 18, 18. 21. her torment and sorrow. And so Capernaum that was lift up to heaven, was threatned to bee throwne downe to hell. The Iewes thought that the dignity of their Priesthood should have continued for ever, and therefore they said, The law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsell from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet. Therfore

saith God, deliver up their children to famine, and let them drop away The higher exalted the lower dejected if impious. by force of the sword, and let their wives be robbed of their children, and be widdowes, and let their husbands be put to death, and let the yong men be slaine with the sword in the battell. They bragged of Moses, that he was their teacher, they boasted of Abraham and a succession from Abraham; but Iohn answereth them, saying, Say not to your selves, wee have Abraham to our father: For God is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham, of them came the Fathers, of them came Luk. 3. 8. Christ, yet were they not all Israel that came of Israel, neither are they all children because they are the seed of Abraham.
This augmented the punishment of Israel, that God had beene so good unto them; for every blessing is as good, as a bill of enditement preferred against us, at the great Assise-day: for listen what God himselfe saith, O my people, what have I done unto thee, Michea 6. 3. 14, 15. or wherin have I grieved thee? testify against me; surely I brought thee up out of the land of Aegypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants; I have sent before thee, Moses, Aaron, Miriam. And thus the Lord goeth on, intimating unto them, that hee never hurt them, but bestowed infinite blessings and benefits upon them; but because they misused them, God threatneth them, That they shall eate and not be satisfied, and thy casting downe shall be in the middest of thee; meaning, that they shall be consumed with inward griefe and evill; and further he threatneth them, saying, Thou shalt sow, but not reape; thou shalt tread the Olives, but thou shalt not annoint thee with oyle; and make sweet wine, but shalt not drinke wine. This also augmented the punishment of Eli's house, that whereas God did chuse him out of all the tribes of Israel to bee his Priest, and to offer upon Gods Altar, and to burne Incense, and to weare an Ephod before God, yet because he honoured his children more than God, God 1 Sam. 2. 28. 31. threatned to cut off his arme, and the arme of his Fathers house, and that there should not be an old man in his house for ever. Esay and Michah prophesied unto Iuda sixty yeares; Hosea and Amos in Israel seventy yeares, yet God sealed neither the one nor the other an obligation of perpetuall mercy; The one was carried into Assyria, a captivity irreturnable; the other into Babylon, where they 2 Reg. 17. 6. Psal. 137. Amos. 8. 10. could not sing the Lords songs in a strange land; God turned their songs into mournings, and their feasts into lamentations. The Papists speake of our overthrowes in Ireland, as the Syrians said that God was the God of Israel in the mountaines, but not in the vallies: So they say, he is our God in England but not in Ireland; they say, that hee was a God in the beginning of the Queenes raigne, but not now, Zidkia of Rome (the Iesuites) have made them hornes of iron, as 1 Reg. 22. 11. saying, that they will push England; Herod of Rome hath sent us word of our destruction; but if wee repent, we may answere him, as Christ did Herod, Goe yee Luk. 13. 32. Mat. 9. 15. and tell the Foxe, etc. Wee are the children of the wedding, and therefore cannot mourne yet. The arrow of our deliverance is as

yet in the Kings hands against the Aramites, the Papists: If wee Where God spareth long he punisheth more if impenitent. repent, all our enemies shall be but the Thistles of Lebanon; but if we bring not forth the fruits of the Gospell, wee may rather weepe with Elisha, to thinke what evill Hazael (the Papists) will doe to the Church of God. Surely God will do to us as to Israel; God bare long with them, but afterwards he destroyed them. 2 Reg. 14. 9. 2 Reg. 8. 11, 12. God hath hands of iron, and feere of lead, hee commeth slowly but when he commeth, he payeth surely: Deus tardus est ad iram, sed tarditatem gravitate poenae compensat; God is slow to anger, but he recompenseth his slownesse, with grievousnesse of punishment. Hereupon saith Paul, But thou after thy hardnesse, and heart that cannot repent, heape unto thy selfe wrath against the day of Rom. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. wrath, and declaration of the iust iudgement of God, who will reward every man according to his works: To them which by continuance in wel-doing, seeke glory and honour and immortality, eternall life; but unto them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousnesse, shall be indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish shal be upon the soule of every man that doth evill. Looke not to the beginning of sinne, but the end of it, the roote of it is a carelesse hard heart: and therefore we are commanded to exhort one another daily, while it is called Hebr. 3. 13. to day, lest we be hardened with the deceitfulnesse of sinne: the flower of it is sweet for a time, and therefore called by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrewes, The pleasures of sinne: the sight of it is like Heva her apple, which was faire and pleasant to the eye; the taste of Hebr. 11. 25. Gen. 3. 6. 1 Sam. 14. 17. Luk. 3. 7. it is like Ionathans hony combe, which cleered his eyes, which before were dimme for wearinesse and hunger; the committing of it, is like the birth of a viper, which eateth out the belly of her damme; the sting of it as the sting of an Aspe, pleasant at the Rom. 3. Cap. 6. 21. 23. first, and brings a man asleepe, but the fruit of it, is shame in this life. And therefore (saith the Apostle) what fruit had yee of those things, whereof yee are now ashamed? meaning their sinnes: and the end of it in the life to come is hell fire, For the wages of sinne is death. For sinne is as a Tyrant which raigneth by force, and at last rewardeth his servants with death and damnation. Thus the root, the flower, the sight, the tast, the sting, the fruit, the end of sinne, all is damnable.
Behold this monster, this Aesops snake, the uglinesse of sinne, in Nabuchadenezzar, transformed from a man to a beast; The terror Dan. 4. 1 Sam. 15. of it, in Agag the Amalekite; The folly of it, in Salomons young man; whom Salomon derideth notably, saying, Rejoyce thou yong man, in thy youth, and walke in the wayes of thine heart, and in the sight of thine Eccles. 11. 9. eyes, but know, that for all these things God will will bring thee to iudgement; The bitternesse of it, in the rich men named by Iames; Goe to, yee rich men, weepe and howle for your miseries that shall come upon Iam. 5. 1, 2, 3. you, your riches are corrupt, your garments moat-heaten, your gold and silver is canckred, and the rust of it shal be a witnesse against you, and it shall eate your flesh, as it were fire; The unstablenesse of it, in the Amalekites,

now dauncing, now dead; The reward of it, in the fooles named God punisheth not the reprobate till sinne be at the fall. by Salomon; The end of it, in the rich glutton, who for his sinne lieth frying in hell in torments. The life of the godly is as a Comedie, dolefull at the first, but joyfull at the last. So saith David, They that sow in teares shall reape in ioy; they went weeping, and carried precious seed, but they shall returne with 1 Sam. 30. VVisd. 5. Luk. 16. Psal. 126. 5. 6. ioy, and bring their sheaves. But the life of the wicked is cleane contrary; that is as a Tragedie, dolefull at the last: so saith our Saviour; Woe be to you, that laugh, for yee shall wayle and weepe: and Luk. 6. 25. Pro. 22. 8. Salomon affirmeth, That hee that soweth iniquity, shall reape affliction: and the rod of his anger shall faile: that is, his authority whereby hee did oppresse others, shall bee taken from him: and Paul saith, That they which sow in the flesh, shall of the flesh reape corruption (afterwards:) this afterwards marres all; after all pleasure commeth paine and destruction. So said Abraham, to Dives; Sonne, remember Luk. 16. 25. that thou in thy life time receivedst thy pleasure, contrarily, Lazarus paine; now is he comforted, and thou art punished. The pride of Adam was turned into labour and sorrow; The stoutnesse of Nimrod into confusion; The beauty of Absalom into hanging; The strength of Goliah into shame; The envie of Caine into desolatition, Gen. 3. Cap. 10. 2 Sam. 16. 1 Sam. 17. hee wandred like a Rogue; Nec in caeteris est contrarium videre; and we may behold the same in the rest, when they have added drunkennesse to thirst, afterwards commeth God and destroyeth them, he wayteth for the ripenesse of our sinnes, before he plucke us off the tree, or cut us off the earth, he tarieth till we be dry, before hee burneth us: till wee be fat, before hee slay us; till wee bee withered, before hee hew us downe. Therefore is it said, that the earth was full of cruelty, that the sinne of Sodome was Gen. 6. Gen. 18. Amos 8. great, that the sinnes of Israel were as ripe apples: and when our sinnes be once ripe, God will cut us downe, with the scithe of his wrath, and hacke us downe with the axe of his vengeance.
And yet we see God to punish some speedily, to crop them in their beginning: True, sometime God killeth the Cockatrice in the egge, before it bee a serpent; sometime hee plucketh the fruit from the tree, before it bee ripe; hee rooteth out the pricke, before it be a thorne; what then? differt tamen non aufert; God doth deferre, but yet hee doth not auferre the punishment of the wicked: like Polypheme, that would eate Vlysses last, but yet eate him, though it were long. Vt creditor qui debitum ab uno statim exigit, alium in diem reponit, sed cum foenore solvendum; As a Creditor, that requireth his debt of one man presently, to another hee giveth day and respite; yet to be paid with usury. God tooke away Caligula in the beginning of his tyrannie, but hee suffered Nero to tyrannize longer; but Tiberius raged, and made havocke of the Church longer than they; yet in the end God met with him, and freed the earth of so vile a burden. God killed Omri in two yeares, he suffred Manasses to wallow in blood fifty yeares. Tempora mutantur, 1 Reg. 16. 2 Reg. 21.

and nos mutamur in illis; the times are changed, and we are Infidelity the cause of Israels destruction. changed in them. Dionysius having a prosperous wind, said, that God favoured Pirats: The Athenians said, that Harpalus gave a lively testimony against the Gods, for that hee escaped so long unpunished: But so long goeth the pot to the water, that at last it cometh broken home. God met with these two afterwards: Looke not on men as they are here in this world, here they prosper and flourish like a greene Bay-tree; but looke to their end, and then they wither like trees that cast their leaves in winter; then they wish, they had never beene borne: what good hath our pride done us? what profit hath the pompe of riches brought us? Thou seest Dionysius spoiling Syracusa many yeares; looke againe, Wisd. 5. 8. and thou shalt see him a poore Schoolemaster in Corinth, Asceptro adferulam devolutum; devolved, fallen from the scepter to the ferula: Thou seest Caesar triumphing in fifty two set battells; looke againe, and thou shalt see him to receive fifty two wounds in the Senate, and every one of them mortall: Thou seest Sennacherib glorying at the gates of Ierusalem, that hee would dry up the rivers with his horses feet, that men should eate their ordure, and 2 Reg. 19. drinke their owne pisse; but looke againe, and thou shalt see him slaine in the temple by his owne Sonnes, Adramelech, and Sharezar: Looke on Manasses, and thou shalt see him triumphing in 2 Chro. 33. 11. blood; looke againe, and thou shalt see him a poore distressed prisoner: Looke on Herod, and thou shalt see him in his royall Act. 12. apparell, assuming to himselfe the title of a God; looke againe, and thou shalt see him stroken of Gods Angell, and eaten up of wormes. Thou seest Cardinall Woolsie, with his silver pillars, and pollaxes writing, Ego and Rex meus, I and my King; but looke againe, and thou shalt see him dead at Leicester with stench and infamie. The wicked are like the coggs of a wheele, now up, now downe; like a Player, that now playeth the King, and when the play is ended, he is but a begger; like a counter, now a pound, now a penny, now nothing: Deus, ut apis, habet mel and aculeum; God, as a Bee, hath hony and a sting; As he is unmeasurable in mercy, so is he exceeding great in justice, very ready in pardoning, and very ready in punishing: vengeance is his, and he will reward. Rom. 12.



THE TWELFTH SERMON.


VERS. V. 

Which beleeved not.
Infidelity the root of all other sinnes.



BVT to come unto the sinne it selfe that was their destruction; and that was their infidelity; They beleeved not. Of this the Prophet spake, saying, They spake against God, saying, Can God prepare a table in the Psal. 78. 19, 20, 21, 22. Wildernesse? behold, he smote the rocke, that the water gushed out, and the streames overflowed. Can hee give bread also? or prepare flesh for the people? Therefore the Lord heard and was angry, and the fire was kindled in Iacob, and also wrath came upon Israel, because they beleeved not in God, nor trusted in his helpe. Moses reckoneth up their infidelity in order, and he saith, Remember Deut. 9. 7, 8. 22, 23, 24. and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord to anger in the Wildernesse, since the day that thou diddest depart out of the land of Aegypt, untill yee came to this place; yee have rebelled against the Lord. Also in Horeb yee provoked the Lord to anger, so that the Lord was wroth with you to destroy you. Also in Taberah, and in Massah, and in Kibroth-hattaavah yee provoked the Lord to anger; likewise when the Lord sent you from Kadeshbarnea, saying, Goe up and possesse the Land, that I have given you, then yee rebelled against the Commandement of the Lord your God, and beleeved him not, nor harkened to his voyce: yee have beene rebellious ever since I knew you: you were never good, egge nor bird, first nor last. The Apostle urgeth this sinne in Israel, and insisteth in it above Hebr. 3 19. Cap. 4. 2. all others, saying, They could not enter in because of unbeleefe. And againe, The word that they heard did not profit them, because it was not

mixed with faith in those that heard it: For hee that will heare and Infidelity reprooved as the roote of all other sinnes. understand with profit, must temper and mixe the word with faith; that is, he must beleeve it. No doubt this people had many sinnes: For they were a rebellious people; but the capitall arch-sinne was unbeleefe, the roote and well-spring of all other their sinnes. Paul nameth five sinnes to have beene in Israel: 1. Lusting, 2. Idolatry, 3. Fornication, 4. Tempting of God, 5. murmuring: 1 Cor. 10. 6. but yet the originall of them all was unbeleefe; and all these were the fruits of this corrupt tree, unbeleefe. So Paul ascribed all his evills to this sinne of unbeleefe: I was (saith he) a blasphemer, and 1 Tim. 1. 13. a persecutour, and an oppressour; but I was received into mercy; for I did it ignorantly through unbeleefe. Christ reproved his disciples bitterly for this sinne, his words were as thunderbolts; Be not (saith he) carefull for your lives, what yee shall eate or drinke, or for your bodies, Mat. 6. 25. 30. what rayment yee shall put on: Is not the life more worth than meate? and the body more of value than rayment? If God cloath the grasse of the field, which is to day, and to morrow is cast into the fornace, shall hee not doe much more to you, o yee of little faith? and againe, o fooles, and slow of heart, to beleeve all that the Prophets have spoken. And after his resurrection, appearing unto the eleven, he reproved them of their Luk. 24. 25. unbeleefe and hardnesse of heart: and for this sinne he did chide Peter; Wherefore doest thou doubt, o thou of little faith? And for this sinne hee made Thomas ashamed, saying thus unto him; Put thy Mar. 16. 14. Mat. 14. 31. Iohn 20. 27. finger here, and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithlesse, but faithfull.
And here by the way, let me answer a slaunder of the Papists, who raile of the Gospell, and aske where bee the fruits of it; as Osorius, Allen, Bristow. As Christ said, shew me the tribute mony; Mat. 22. 19. Mar. 11. 1. Reg. 3. so say they, shew us the fruits of their profession: they call us the cursed figge-tree, that had leaves, but no fruit; and barren Rachel, which had no child; and Salomons harlot with the dead child.
But wee answere, that if there be any fault, it is in our lives, not in the Gospell. For it worketh in them that beleeve; but all beleeve 1 Thes. 2. 13. not, therefore all worke not: whom doth the Gospell save? only them that beleeve; For seeing the world by wisdome knew not Ged, 1 Cor. 1. 20. it pleased God by the foolishnesse of preaching to save them that beleeve. To whom is it the power of God? surely to them that beleeve. The Gospell is the power of God to salvation, to every one that beleeveth. Rom. 1. 16.
Now this faith is Gods gift, and cannot be commanded. For though Christ had done many miracles, and preached many heavenly Sermons unto the Iewes: yet they beleeved not, That the saying of Esayas the Prophet might be fulfilled, that hee said, Lord, Iohn 12. 37, 38, 39, 40. who beleeved our report? and to whom is the arme of the Lord revealed? Therefore could they not beleeve, because Esayas saith againe, He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, and should bee converted, and I should heale them. Therefore is it said, that so many

received the word As beleeved. Faith is an anchor, but God must Faith the gift of God. fasten it, otherwise it will not be sure and stedfast. It is a sheild, but God must frame it, and strengthen it. So that the slaunder of the Papists redoundeth to God not to us. But I may say to Act. 13. 48. Hebr. 6. 19. Ephes, 6. 17. 2 Thess. 2. 11, 12. you, as Paul said to the Thessalonians; God shall send them strong delusion, that they should beleeve lyes, that all they might be damned, which beleeved not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousnesse. God hath fed them with lyes, because they received not the truth, they beleeve not. But to leave this, and to returne againe to these Israelites.
These Israelites wanted faith, and so all the parts of a Christian: as the root giveth sappe to all the branches, the Sunne light to all the Planets, the earth nourishment to all plants, the water life to all fishes; So faith giveth life and allowance to all our actions: For without it, splendida opera sunt splendida peccata, our glistering works are but glistering sinnes: therefore is it said, that by faith Abel offered unto God a greater sacrifice than Caine, etc. by faith Hebr. 11. 4, 5. 7, 8. Enoch was taken away, that he should not see death: By faith Noah being warned of God, and moved with reverence, prepared the Arke: By faith Abraham, when he was called obeyed God, etc. Faith is the eye, wherewith we see God, it is the mouth, wherby we speake to God, the hand whereby wee touch him, the foote whereby wee goe unto him, saith Ambrose. Thus Stephen, the ring leader of Martyrs, saw Ambros. Act. 6. Luk. 18. Luk, 2. Iohn 1. him with the eyes of faith; The Publicane spake to him with the mouth of faith; Simeon embraced him with the armes of faith: Thus Andrew walked to Christ with the foote of a lively faith; Thus all must come to Christ, not with the legges of their body, but of faith; We must draw neere with a true heart in assurance of faith, Hebr. 10. 22. being sprinkled in our hearts from an evill conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water.
But the Infidells, like Polypheme the Giant, want eyes; like the (...), at the river Ganges, they want mouthes; like the Cripple in the third of the Acts, they want legges: For by faith Christ dwelleth in us, by faith we eate him, by faith we put him on, by Ephes. 3. Iohn 6. Gal. 3. Gal. 2. 20. faith we live in him: therefore wanting faith, we want all. Many therefore want all the parts of Christianity; for few beleeve, but are Cyphers in the Church of God, and shall be Cyphers in the Kingdome of God. But to cut up the veines and arteries of this vice, and make an Anatomie of it, we can all say, I beleeve in God the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost; yet few beleeve and are perswaded of the love and power of God, but rest in the creature, not in the Creator, if they see not meanes. If God give us friends, wee make Idols of them, and trust in them, as the Iewes did in Esay. 31. Psal. 52. 7. Ier. 5. 2 Chro. 16. the Aegyptians; if money, we thinke never to want, as it is said of Doeg, hee trusted in the multitude of his riches, and strengthened himselfe in his malice; if armour, we trust in them, as the Iewes did; if Physitians, wee trust in them as Asa did; if wisdome, wee

thinke to smooth all causes, and to wade thorough all bad matters, Want of faith the cause of al sinne and misery. as the false Prophets. These are our treasures, and our hearts are upon them, as Mat. 6. We make flesh our arme. Thus what for friends, money, munition, physicke, cunning, God is not regarded; the helpelesse trust in friends, the poore in money, the souldier Ier. 18. Jer. 17. in armour, the sicke in Physitians, the cunning in their wisdome, like Achitophel. But of all others, our infidelity appeareth in our running to witches; wherein I say with Elisha, Is it not because there is no King in England? as 2 Reg. 1. Here I could wish my voice as a trumpet, or as the voice of Stentor, who had the voice of fifty men: Satan is a deceiver, and shall we trust in him? A lyer, and shall we beleeve him? an enemy, and shall wee crave ayde of him? Absit; God forbid.
Most men beleeve not; For our faith hath a triple foundation: First, that Christ is true God, and therefore can help; 1 Tim. 2. Secondly, true Man, and therefore will helpe; Hebr. 4. Thirdly, that he is one Person, not by confusion of substance, but by the union of natures: for God and man make but one Christ, and Mat. 11. 11. Psal. 30. will help us: for if a Father will helpe his Sonne in his wants, how much more will hee helpe us? Let us therefore put off our sackecloath, and girde us with gladnesse, let us rejoice for ever; For now is salvation in Heaven and strength, and the Kingdome of our Apoc. 12. 10. God, and the power of his Christ, for the accuser of our brethren is throwne downe, etc.
Hence commeth all mischiefe, that wee beleeve not God, which appeareth in our life. If a sicke man should have two Physitians, the one prescribing a present remedy, the other a present poison, if he should follow the latter, would wee not conclude, that either he would not be healed, or else that hee beleeved not the other: so standeth the case betwixt God and us, either wee would not bee saved, or else wee doe not beleeve God.
This is manifest in two men, Adam and Abraham; the one the father of all men, the other of the faithfull: Now Adam eate of Gen. 3. the tree which God forbad, and why? because he beleeved not Act. 7. God but Satan; and so doe most men: But Abraham, when God commanded him to leave his Countrey and kindred, he did so; Gen. 22. when God commanded him to offer his Sonne, he did it. For he Esa. 1. beleeved God, and so doe few men. But let us not listen to Satan and our owne flesh, but to God, promising happinesse, if we obey him.
Thou hast here two counsellors, the flesh, and the spirit. The flesh bids thee follow thy lustes, but the spirit saith, if thou doest so, thou shalt perish: For he that soweth in the flesh shall of the flesh reape corruption, but hee that soweth in the spirit shall of the spirit Gal. 6. 8. reape life everlasting: now whether of these wilt thou beleeve?
Yet in all this, I doe not speake of the justifying faith, but that the wicked have not, no not so much as the Historicall

faith to beleeve the Scriptures: Nam Faith a chiefe instrumentall cause of salvation.

Fidestriplex; Iustificans. Miraculosa. Historica.

For faith is threefold, There is a lively justifying Faith, a miraculous, and an historicall faith; but the former is most rare, like a blacke swanne, or Phoenix in Arabia. In all the old world there were but eight beleevers; but two Iosua and Caleb; and in Christs time, we read but of an hundred and twenty beleevers. As Aegypt was full of lice, Nilus full of Crocodyles, Golgotha full of dead mens skulls; so is the world full of Infidells.
He destroyed them that beleeved not; And hence commeth it to passe that so many are damned, even because they want faith; Perditio tua ex te, o Israel; thy destruction commeth of thy selfe, o Israel. Ex nobis quod damnamur; It is of our selves that wee bee damned, blame not God, but thine owne infidelity; For all things Hos. 13. Man. 5. are possible to them that doe beleeve. And therefore Hemingius in his Enchiridion distinguisheth of the word, that There is:

Duplex verbum,--Damnans and Salvans.

That there is a double word, a Damning, and a Saving word: The damning word is the Law, the saving word is the Gospell. The Law offereth grace to them that doe it; Yee shall keepe therefore Deut. 2. 27. Gen. 3. 5. Levit. 18. 5. Rom. 10. 4. 9. my statutes and my iudgements, which if a man doe, he shall live in them. But the Gospell offereth grace to the beleevers; For Christ is the end of the Law unto every one that beleeve. For if thou shalt confesse with thy mouth the Lord Iesus, and beleeve in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. Faith is ever a chiefe doer in matters of salvation: and therefore said Hemingius in his Enchiridion, that Causa imperans salutis est pater, the Iohn 3. 16. commanding cause of our salvation is God. For God so loved the world, that hee gave his only begotten Sonne to save the world: Causa obsequens est filius, the obedient pliant cause is the Psal. 40. 7. Sonne; In the volume of thy booke it is written of me, that I should doe thy will, I am content to doe it, thy Law is written in my heart. Causa consummans est Spiritus Sanctus; the consummating cause is the holy Ghost: so saith the Apostle, But yee are washed, but yee are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6. 11. but yee are iustified by the grace of the Lord Iesus, and by the spirit of God.
The instrumentall cause is double Exhibens. Recipiens. Rom. 1. 18.
The exhibiting Cause is the word; the receiving cause, Faith; as therefore a Smith worketh not in cold iron, so a preacher worketh not on an Infidell. There is no life of God in us, till we beleeve: Ephes. 4. 18. till then our cogitation is darkened, and we are strangers from the life of God. He that beleeveth in him, shall not be condemned, but hee that Iohn 3. 18.

beleeveth not is condemned already, because he beleeveth not in the name of the only begotten Sonne of God. A tree liveth not without moisture, Without faith no accesse to God. nor a bird without aire, nor a fish without water, nor a Salamander without fire: So the soule liveth not without faith, The just doth live by his faith: this is the spirit and soule of the inward man; we Hab. 2. have a name to live, yet are we dead if we want faith. I live by faith in the Sonne of God (saith Paul) who loved me, and gave himselfe for Gal. 2. 20. me. Infidels therefore are dead men.
What is the cause, that wee profit no more by the word? wee beleeve not the preacher: that may bee verified of our people, which God said to Ezechiel concerning the Iewes; They come unto Ezech. 33. 31, 32. thee (saith God) as people useth to come, and my people sit before thee, and he are thy words, but they will not doe them: For with their mouthes they make jests, and their heart goeth after their covetousnesse, and loe thou art unto them as a jesting song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can sing well: for they heare thy words, but doe them not: So we come to the Sermon, heare the preacher, but we doe not heare him with such zeale and affection as we should; wee beleeve not, but abuse the word to our owne condemnation; why care wee no more for heaven, but are so worldly? truely we beleeve not God: what is the cause that wee live in sinne, seeing it is damnable; For the wayes of it is death? wee beleeve not the Scriptures: what is the Rom. 6. 23. 2 Cor. 4. 4. cause of all disorder? even infidelity; The God of this world hath blinded their eyes: our eares are open to heare, but not our hearts to beleeve, Satan stealeth away the word, lest we should beleeve, and so be saved. But let us make much of the word, that wee may Mat. 13. 19. have faith to beleeve. For faith, nay one dramme of faith is of more worth than all the treasure in the world. This that good merchant well knew, that sold all to buy it. For hee that beleeveth shall not be condemned: for every beleevers cause is removed Mat. 13. 24. from the Court of Gods justice, into the Court of Gods mercy, where hee that beleeveth, is not condemned: Therefore our care must be with S. Paul, that we may be found, having the righteousnesse of Christ by faith: For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Phil. 3. 9. Rom. 1. Iesus, as all beleevers are; and untill thou beest a beleever, thou belongest not to God: For as the Eagle refuseth her birds till they can mount, and soare to the Sunne; and as the Raven acknowledgeth not her young ones, till they be blacke; So God rejecteth the infidels, and receiveth none till they beleeve. None are the Sonnes of God, but the faithfull, the rest are bastards: I confesse there be degrees in faith: The first is a rudiment or entrance, Gal. 3. Mat. 12. 20. Rom. 14. 1. Hebr. 10. 22. Rom. 4. 18. which Christ calleth Smoking flaxe: The second is a weake faith; Him that is weake in faith (saith Paul) receive unto you. The third is (...), assurance of Faith: Such a faith was in Abraham, who above hope beleeved, under hope. But no faith is abominable, and may easily be discerned from a weake faith. As a sicke man is knowne from a dead man: So a weake faith from no faith.

Even a desire of Faith is a token of faith: For Gods spirit worketh God giues grace according to the measure of Faith. that; but no faith is accursed: For he that beleeveth not is condemned already. There be degrees in faith, three examples we have: The first of the Ruler of the Synagogue, who beleeved that his daughter should revive, if Christ would but touch her. But the Iohn 3. 18. Iohn 4. woman with the bloody issue beleeved, that she should be whole if she touched but the hemme of his vesture: But the Centurion beleeved, that his servant should doe well, if Christ spake but the Luk. 8. Mat. 8. word; here is Gradus positivus, the positive degree, the comparative, and the superlative, and all good: Accedens ad flumen, tantum haurit, quantum urna capere potest; A man comming unto the river, or fountaine, he draweth as much as his vessell will hold, the defect or want is not in the flood or fountaine, but in the vessell: so draw from Christ, from his word and Sacraments, as Rebecca out of the well of Iacob; there is no defect in Christ, or in the word and Sacraments, but in the vessell, the heart that doth not beleeve. Accede aegrotus and sanaberis, debilis and confortaberis, famelicus and satiaberis: Come thou sicke man and thou shalt bee healed, Esa. 55. thou weake one and thou shalt be strengthened, thou hungry one, and thou shalt be satisfyed. But come, Non pedibus corporis, sed cordis, not with the feet of thy body, but of thy heart: Non ambulando, sed credendo, not in walking, but in beleeving.
Faith is Illuminatio mentis, the light of the minde: Infidells are blind, and shall not see heaven; they are filii irae, children of Luk 15. Act. 15. wrath, and they that beleeve not cannot be saved. Faith is Gods gate, whereby God enters into our soule; the light that found the lost groate; the purifier of our heart; the conqueror in the race; the pole-starre for the sayler; the life of the soule* and by Faith Christ dwells in our hearts. O help us Lord, wee beleeve, o help our unbeleefe; he must beleeve that comes to God: and as is our faith, so is our blessing; faith is the victory that overcometh the world. O Lord increase our faith.
The second example used for Confirmation of his former proposition; That we must strive for faith: is taken from Gods vengeance upon the Angels, who because they kept not their estate, but left their habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chaines of darkenesse, to the Iudgement of the great day. So that here in these Angels, Observe;
First, Their sinne.
Secondly, Their punishment.
Thy sinne of these Angels I will not precisely discusse; their sinne, (like Adams sinne) was not alone, but many.
First, there was pride in them, as it appeareth by Pauls words to Timothie; where handling the office of a Minister, among other 2 Tim. 3. 6. things, he would not have him to bee a young scholler, Lest hee being puffed up, fall into the condemnation of the Divell; that is, lest being proud of his degree, hee bee likewise condemned as the

Divell was, for lifting up himselfe by pride: so that it is manifest, What was the Angels sinne. that pride was the sinne of the Angels.
But besides pride, there were many other sinnes in them, as Infidelity, Ingratitude, Envy, and Rebellion; Denique, quid non? to conclude, what not? not one vice, but many, even a troope, an armie of sinnes: For sinnes are like Pismires in a moll-hill, like Bees in an hive, like Motes in the Sunne, there are many ever together, not one sinne alone, they grow like clusters of grapes: sinne is like the linke of a chaine, take hold of one linke, and draw the whole chaine: so take hold of one sinne, and draw a number.
Other things concerning Angels, as their names, their number, their orders, I dare not define: (...), Let us bee Rom. 12. 3. Iob 4. 18. 1 Tim. 3. 6. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Psal. 78. 49. Iohn 8. 44. Wisd. 2. 24. wise unto sobriety: Iob nameth folly or pravity in the Angels, as if that were their sinne: Paul nameth pride: Peter onely calleth it their sinne: Asaph calleth them evill, but noteth not the kindes of of their evill, what the evill or sinne was which they committed: Christ nameth murther to be their sinne, and saith, That the Divell was a murtherer from the beginning: The Wise man nameth envie; Iude here nameth Apostasie: but the time, the manner, and the circumstance of their fall is not plainely expressed in the Scripture: and in that they are not, it teacheth us Sapere ad sabrietatem, not to presume to understand above that which is meete to understand, but Rom. 12. 3. Pro. 25. 27. Ro. 11. 33. Col. 1. 18. that we understand according to sobriety. Too much honie is not good: who hath knowne the minde of the Lord? Many are puffed up with a fleshly minde, as though with Moses, God had revealed to them the Creation of the world: as though with Stephen, they had seene Gen. 1. Act. 6. 2 Cor. 12. Apoc. 1. Ezra. 4. the heavens open: as though with Paul, they had beene lifted up to the third Paradise: as if the Angell had talked with them, as he did with Iohn in Pathmos; and with Ezras in Ierusalem: Such are Holcot, Briccot, Dionysius Areopagita, whom they call, Aquilam, seu volucrem Coeli, the Eagle, or bird of heaven; and make nine orders of Angels: but no man hath so tasted Ionathans honie combe, but he may see, and oversee many things in this, and in all other questions.
If any man aske, what Angels be? I say, that they be spirits of essence, but having neither body, nor soule: For they differ from bodies, in that they have no flesh, and from soules, in perspicuity; understanding what the soule cannot: Indeed they sometimes take bodies unto them as the Angell that appeared to Abraham, Mat. 22. 30. Gen. 18. Iudg. 13. Mat. 26. and to Manoahs wife, and to Marie. So that in respect of their essence, they are called spirits: and as the Apostle speaketh, Ministring spirits: but in respect of their office, they are called Angels. Wherupon David, He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keepe thee in all thy wayes. Angell is a name of office, not of nature. Some make them of a fiery nature, as Hemingius in his Enchiridion. I see no soundnesse in it: For sometime they have their denomination

from heat, as the Seraphins; sometime for knowledge and brightnesse, The Apostacy of the Angels irrecoverable. as the Cherubins; sometime they have appeared in a firy nature, so they appeared to Elisha and his servant; for the mountaine was full of Chariots and horses of fire, that is, Angels to defend them from the Syrians. And so againe, while Elias and Elisha Esay 6. 2 Reg. 6. 17. 2 Reg. 2. 11. Psal. 114. went walking and talking together, Behold, there appeared a Chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and did separate them twaine. And David saith, He maketh his spirits his Messengers, and a flaming fire his Ministers. And as they have appeared in these formes, so have they appeared in other formes also, as pleaseth the Creator: but to leave this.
The sinne of Angels is notorious, and their punishment is as famous; they are falne from light to darkenesse, from Heaven to hell, from felicity to misery; Valerian fell from a golden chaire to a cage of iron; Dionysius fell from a King to a Schoolemaster; Alexander the third fell from being Pope to be a Gardener in Venice; Nabuchadnezzar fell from a man to a beast: but the celestiall Dan. 4. spirits fell from Angels to Divels. For their sinne of Apostacy was great, it cryed to God for vengeance. The Lord Iesus noteth this Apostacy in them, to shew, that their sinne was not by creation, but by wilfull corruption. Hereupon saith our Saviour to the Iewes, You are of your father the divell, and the lusts of your father doe yee; he abode not in the truth. It followeth then, that Iohn 8 44. he was once in the truth, and that he was not created evill. This Apostacy, in some case, joyned with wilfulnesse and malice, is not to be prayed for. So saith Saint Iohn, the Disciple whom Iesus loved; If any man see his brother sin a sinne, that is not unto death; let him aske, and he shall give life for them that sinne not to death: There 1 Iohn 5. 16. is a sinne unto death, I say not that thou shouldst pray for it. Some Apostacies cannot be renewed: For it is impossible, that they which have been once lightned, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of God, and of the powers of the world to come; If they fall away, should be renewed by repentance, seeing they crucifie againe to themselves, the Sonne of God, and make a mocke of him. For certainely, they that are Apostataes, and sinne against the Holy Ghost, hate Christ, crucifie and mocke him, but to their owne destruction; and therefore fall into desperation, and cannot repent. Indeed there is no sin but by repentance may be forgiven, but they that sinne against the Holy Ghost, which some affirme to be Apostasia aut negatio Christi, Apostacy, or the denying of Christ, it shall not be forgiven; ^^^lla in Luc. 12. 10. Quia directe obviant principio, per quod fit remissio peccatorum, because they are directly and plainely opposite and contrary to that whereby remission of sinnes is obtained; that is, unto repentance. And this is the cause, saith Augustine, why God hath redeemed men, and not Angels; for that they sinned (...) from within and of themselves, maliciously and rebelliously: man

sinned (...), from without and by provocation. And this is Christs death saves only men not Angels. the cause (saith Augustine) why Moses wrote nothing of the fall of Angels; he named not their wound, because he would not name their medicine; Sed hominis vulnus and medicinam narravit, but he hath shewed man his wound and medicine also, for that Aug. lib. de mirab. Script. cap. 2. God would restore him againe. Humanam ergo naturam, non Angelicam, sumpsit Christus (quoth Athanasius) therefore he tooke the nature of man, not the nature of Angels; according to that of Athanasius. the Apostle, He in no sort tooke the Angels, but hee tooke the seed of Abraham; Quia Angeli per se defecerunt a Deo, because the Angels of themselves fell from God. Therefore the promise of the Messiah was made onely to man, not to Angels. The grace of GOD, that Tit. 2. 11. bringeth salvation to all men, hath appeared: Grace saveth men, not Angels. For these Angels that fell, have no benefit by Christs death, he came not to save them, for their sinnes are not pardonable. But the cause of mercy I leave to God onely, the father of mercies: These are but conjectures of Augustine and Athanasius. In the meane time Dorbels reasons are too weake to prove, that men shall bee punished in hell more deeply than these Angels that fell. His first reason is, Quia Deus nunquam pro illis passus est, ut pro nobis; that God never suffered so much for them, as for us: His second reason is, Quia Angeli pro uno tantum peccato puniuntur, nos saepe deliquimus; the Angels fell by one sinne only, man by many sinnes hee offendeth oft. His third reason is, Quia daemones sunt spiritus tantum, nos autem corpore and anima peccamus; that the bad Angels, the Divels, be spirits onely, but men have both bodies and spirits. But these reasons are vanishing, as the untimely dew, unsavoury as the white of an egge, brittle as the webbe of a spider. Hee spake as Phormio spake before Hannibal, Rem magis delirantem nunquam legi, I never read a more doating thing.
But to proceed; my meaning is not, that all Apostacy is sinne against the Holy Ghost: for every Apostacy is not uncurable, every fall of man is not damnable, as the fall of Angels; yet it is dangerous: for he that settetb his hand to the plough, and looketh back, Luke 9. 62. is not fit for the Kingdome of God. And Christ said to the sicke man, Behold, thou art made whole, sinne no more, lest a worse thing happen unto Iohn 5. 14. thee. Thus all Apostacy is dangerous, though not damnable: for if damnable, what shall become of the godly themselves? for they often fall from the Lord, slide backe, and decrease in the graces of God: They keepe not their first estate; which was the sinne of the Angels. Ephesus lost her first love, but I would our Church were like it; for Ephesus hated the evil, wee hate the good; Apoc. 2. 4. they examined the false Apostles, wee examine none; they suffered Luke 12. 45. persecution, we persecute others; we smite our fellow servants. Iulian the Christian is become Iulian the Apostata, and Simon Peter is become Simon Magus, Ioseph is become Pharoah, grapes are turned

into thornes, figs into thistles, Lambes into Lions, and Doves There must be a perpetuall growth in grace and goodnesse. into Serpents. We are fallen from our first love, every day lesse and lesse zealous, lesse and lesse loving, lesse and lesse religious, than heretofore we have been. Memento Anglia, memento Norfolcia unde excideris; Remember England, remember Norfolke whence thou art fallen. Revertere, revertere, Returne, returne, saith the Lord, Ier. 3. 14. for I am your Lord and will bring you to Sion. Let us follow the counsell of the Wise man, In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening Eccles. 11. 6. let not thine hand rest: that is, increase in goodnesse, doe good in Gal. 6. 6. thy youth, doe good in thine age, yea doe good at all times; be not weary of sowing, be not weary of working, the seed-time is nothing, the harvest is all in all. To doe good in youth is nothing, to doe well in middle age is nothing, but to continue in old age, to the last gaspe, is piety indeed. When a righteous man (saith the Prophet) turneth away from his righteousnesse, and committeth Ezech. 18. 26. iniquity, he shall even dye for the same, hee shall even die for his iniquity that he hath committed: aswell may we drowne in the Havens mouth, as in the middest of the boisterous Sea; aswell may wee fall through the* peevishnesse of age, as through the lusts and concupiscence of youth. Of many it may be said, as Bernard said, Caput canum, and cor vanum, a gray head, and a greene wit; gray haires and greene lusts; but we must goe forward, and not fall from the state of grace: Take heed that no man fall away from the Heb. 12. 15. state of grace, saith the Apostle. Christianity, and progresse in religion is compared to a building; in a building men must goe forward, and to the foundation adde the roofe: And it is compared to a race; in a race men run on till they come to the goale: Iude 20. and it is compared to the growth of trees; Trees grow bigger and 1 Cor. 9. 24. 2 Pet. 3. 28. Ephes. 4. 14. taller: And it is compared to the ages of men; the ages of men grow still, and they bee elder to day than they were yesterday: And it is compared to the morning light, and to the Sunne; which Prov. 4. 18. commeth forth as a Bridegroome out of his Chamber, and rejoyceth as a Giant to run his course. The morning light waxeth brighter and Psal. 19. brighter, the Sun shineth more and more unto the noone day: Even so good men must wax better and better. The Church is Gods vineyard, his people are his plants, the plants must grow, and the Christians increase: Terra Domini est ecclesia ejus, ipse rigat, ipsam colit ipse agricola pater; Gods ground is his Church, he tills, dungs, Aug. in Psa. 36. waters, himselfe is the Husbandman; and we must bring forth fruit, and grow in grace and in the knowledge of the Lord Iesus. Paul prayeth for the Philippians, that they may abound in grace more and Phil. 1. 9. more. And for the Colossians, To increase in knowledge: Let vs grow up (therefore) into full holinesse in the feare of God; in grace 1 Cor. 7. 1. there is no stand, but either a progresse, or a regresse; non oportet Chrysost. Homil. 14. exordia sola habere clara, sed clariorem finem; A good beginning must have a better end. The runner must continue to the goale, and the Champion to the victory: The Orator will shine most in

the end. Vt cum plausibus discedat, that hee may depart with credit: The wicked grow worse and worse. He that puts his hand to the plough, must not looke backe: hee shall have the crowne of victory, that continueth unto death, and hee be saved, that growes better to the end. Non progredi, est regredi, not Luke 9. Mat. 12. Bern. to goe forward, is to goe backeward: We must not be like Ioshua his Sunne, which stood still, nor like Ezekiahs Sunne, which went backeward; but like Davids Sunne, which alway goeth forward; As well was hee punished, that hid his talent, as he that spent his Mat. 25. Luke 16. masters goods riotously.
The Divines hold two principles in divinity: That good men goe forward; their ditch becommeth a flood, and their flood a Sea, they looke forth as the morning, as faire as the Moone, Eccles. 24. 35. Cant. 6. 9. Iohn 15. 2. pure as the Sunne, terrible as an army with Banners: they beare fruit, and Christ purgeth them, That they may bring forth more fruit; they flourish like a Palme tree, and grow as a Cedar of Lebanon; they are planted in the house of the Lord, and will flourish in the Courts of our God; they shall still bring forth fruit in their age, they Psal. 92. 13. 14. shall be fat and flourishing.
Another principle in Divinity is, that bad men decrease; they grow from Lovers, to Lechers; from Liars, to Swearers; from Quarrellers, to Killers. They are ever learning (as Paul said of the 2 Tim. 3. 7. Hypocrites) and never come to the knowledge of the truth: they are plants not planted by Christ, therefore to be rooted up, for they be Ier. 9. 2. 3. Adulterers, and an assembly of rebels: They bend their tongues like their bowes, for lies, but they haue no courage for the truth upon the earth, for they proceede from evill to worse, and they have not knowne mee, saith the Lord. They have seven sinnes more, and seven Devils moe enter, and their plague shall bee seven times greater. Mat. 12. But let us Crescere de virtute in virtutem, grow from vertue to vertue: and let our workes bee more at the last, than at the first; and let us try our selves every day, whether wee goe forward, or Apoc. backward in Religion. A wise occupier will at the yeeres end, see whether he hath gained or lost, and a wise Christian will examine himselfe, whether hee bee increased or decreasing in Religion, in Faith, in Zeale, in Knowledge, and Godlinesse: For there bee more Bankrupts in Religion, than in any Trade besides in the whole World. Salomon lost his ships, Laban his sheepe, Esau his lands, and birth-right, the Prodigall sonne his patrimonie, 1 Reg. 10. Gen. 30. Heb. 12. Luke 15. Iob 1 1* Tim. 1. 19. Iob his cattell; but most men lose faith, love, piety, and a good conscience, they are poorer to God this yeere, than the last: For as touching Faith, Religion, Love, Zeale, etc. they have made shipwracke. The Wicked are like Nebuchadnezzars Image, whose head was all of gold, whose shoulders were all of silver, whose belly was all of brasse, whose legges, were all of iron, and feete of clay, they are worst at last, they live not to amend, but to fulfill the measure of their iniquity. The first yeere wee are Angels, the second Mat. 23. 32. yeere Men, the third yeere devills; like the Taxus of India,

which the first yeelded fruit, the second yeere leaves, the Perseverance brings the Crowne. third yeere poyson. But hast thou left Sodome? Looke not back againe with Lots wife, lest thou bee turned into a pillar of Salt: Hast thou marched toward the heavenly Canaan? turne not Gen. 19. Act. 7. 1 Cor. 9. backe againe in thine heart, like the Israelites: Hast thou begun to runne in the wayes of God like the Corinths? Sic curre ut comprehendas, so runne that thou mayst obtaine: hast thou begunne in the spirit? make not an end in the flesh like the Galathians: Gal. 3. 2 Cor. 12. pray thrice, as Paul did; yea pray seven times, as Elias did; yea, pray without ceasing, that thou mayst goe forward in Religion. Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri. Adam 1 Reg. 18. fell from Paradise, Iudas from the schoole of our Saviour, the Angels from Heaven; yea, the whole world falleth: Scarce one of a hundred, of a thousand, hold fast the profession of their hope Heb. 10 32. without wavering.
But to proceed: Iude saith of these Angels, That they left their habitation: Where Gods justice is discharged of all blot and staine; for willingly, wilfully they fell from God, that God might be just when he speaketh, and pure when hee judgeth. The Scripture therefore distinguisheth the times of their state: The first time is their creation, in which they were made all alike, in all fulnesse of light and glory, immortall spirits, glorious creatures: The Angels being chiefe of all creatures, as the Sunne among Planets; as the Eagle among Fowles, and the Lion among Beasts, and the Whale among Fishes. Angels are the first, and Men Psal. 8. 5. Mat. 22. 30. are next in glory; Hee made Man a little lower than the Angels; and Christ saith, that wee shall bee like them in the last day; like them, being exempted from the infirmities of this present life.
The second time is the constancy of the good, and the fall of the bad Angels: from this time there hath beene diversitie among them: The good abide in their first estate of Innocency, serving God day and night, according to that of Daniel, A thousand Dan. 7. 10. Heb. 1. 14. Mat. 18. Psa. 34. 1 Pet. 1. 12. 2 Pet. 2. 4. thousand minister unto him. And the Apostle calleth them, ministring spirits: They see the face of their heavenly Father. They keepe good men, as David saith, The Angels of the Lord pitch their tents round about them that feare him; they rejoyce in the Church meetings. On the contrary, the evill Angels suffer paines, they are cast downe from their state, and are thrust downe into Hell, and are tyed in chaines of darkenesse, to be kept unto damnation; they are deprived of the sight of God, and of Christ, and if at any time, they Iob 1. 2 Cor. 18. stand and appeare before God, they stand and appeare before an angry Iudge, not a milde and merciful Father. And thirdly, they are sent about sordid and foule workes, as to hurt and destroy the Vessels of wrath. Whereupon saith David, He cast upon them the furiousnesse Psal. 78. 49. of his wrath, and vexation, by sending out of evill Angels; and his captives hee detaineth in their malice so that they cannot come

out of the snare of the Devil, but are holden of him at his wil; and Divers appellations of Angels. they hinder the good what they can, as they hindred Pauls journy to Rome. Fourthly, they are obdurate, so hardned as they have no hope of instauration or repairing; and those gifts which they had 2 Tim. 2. 26. Rom. 1. 13. by nature they doe abuse, to the dishonour of God; and hurt of man, seeking continually to devour him.
The third time is of the last Iudgement: For then the joy of 1 Pet. 3. 8. the good shall bee more full, for the glorie of Christ unto whom all things shall be subject; and the judgement of the evill Hos. 13. Luke 4. 34. more grievous, and therefore the devils cried out in the Gospel, Art thou come to torment us before our time?
These times doe agree and accord to us: The first time of the Angels agreeth to Mans nativity: the second time to Mans Iustification: the third to his Glorification.
And note here, that Angels were not evill by creation, but by transgression, and therefore there are many names given them in the Scripture, to shew and declare their depravation, their corruption: they are called (...), accusers, for their calumnies and Ephes. 6. Mat. 6. 1 Thes. 3. 1 Pet. 5. Apoc. 12. slanders; and (...), evill ones, for their malice; Tempters, for their suggestion; Lions for their ferity in devouring; Dragons, for their cruelty. Some say they were called Devils, A scientia, from their knowledge and understanding: Others say, they were so called, ob naturae excellentiam, for the excellency of their nature. The Maniches, and Priscillianists, An. Dom. 200. and Anno 209. did very strongly maintaine, that the Devils were created of an evill God: but Christ confuteth them, when hee said unto the Iewes, You are of your father the Devill; and the Iohn 8. 44. Workes of your father will ye doe; he hath been a murtherer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. Fuit in veritate, sed non fletit in ea, hee was in the truth, but hee abode not in it. As for their names, Iude calleth them Angels: The countrey men call them Satyres: The women call them fairies: The Poets call them Dryades, and Hamadryades: The nobles call them familiars: The Phylosophers call them (...): but all these names note but one thing. By their fall they are Devils, full of malice.
This state, that Iude here nameth, is the state of Grace: by grace they stood, from grace they fell. They kept not their first estate. By the way observe with mee, that the good Angels are not said to bee justified or reconciled unto God, because they sinne not: but they are called Elect Angels; I charge thee before God, 1 Tim. 5. 21. and the Lord Iesus Christ, and the elect Angels, saith Paul to Timothy. Now election is by grace, because that by the grace of God they are, which they are. The place therefore in the Epistle of Paul to the Colossians, where hee saith, For it pleased the father that in him, (that is, Christ) all fulnesse should dwell; and by him to reconcile Col. 1. 19, 20. all things unto himselfe; and to set at peace through the blood

of his Crosse both the things on earth, and the things in heaven. Bona cum Christ is not the Redeemer of Angels, but their head. Calvini pace; by master Calvins good leave, is not referred to the Angels, but to the soules of the Saints, which then were in heaven: Christ is said to be the head of the Angels, but not the Redeemer of them, nor the husband of them. To speake properly; The marriage in the Revelation is betwixt Christ and man, not Apoc. 19. betweene CHRIST and Angels, for hee tooke not their nature; neither can it be said of Christ and Angels, that they are two in one flesh: Yet are they one with Christ in another respect: for hee is the head of Angels; and Christ giveth unto them life, Heb. 2. 16. Ephes. 1. 22. grace, and wisdome, as to all the faithful; and so are Membra Christi and ecclesiae nobiscum. Yet Calvin thinketh otherwise of the aforenamed place to the Colossians, using these two reasons: Angeli (inquit) non erant extra periculum lapsus; The Angels (saith he) Col. 1. 20. were not without danger of falling. And furthermore he saith, that the justice of Angels was not answerable to the justice of God to satisfie it fully. Behold (saith Iob) he found no stedfastnesse in Iob 4. 18. his servants, and laid folly upon his angels. But to expound this place of the divell (saith he) frigidum est; it hath so cold a sent, that it cannot be perceived.
As for the time of the fall of these Angels, as I will not bee curious, so it is like, that they fell betwixt the creation of the second day, and the seventh day; (quoth Fenner) their fall could not be long after the creation, because Heva espied not the serpents Fenner method. in methodum Theolog. lib. 3. cap. 73. tongue to have a further skill than of himselfe: howsoever it must needs be, that their fall was before the fall of man; for otherwise, this Homicida, this murtherer could not have been so ready in the Angell to bring man to confusion. Hereupon Gen. 3. Christ said, Est homicida, hee is a murtherer. The Scripture speaketh Iohn 8. 44. of his fall; Christ saith, I saw Satan like lightning fall downe Luke 10. 18. from heaven. It is enough, that he fell, though we know not the day, the yeere, the houre of his fall.
But this is ridiculous, that of the Angels that fell, some make some to be better and truer than others: as those that fell in the ayre and fire, to be purer than those that fell in the earth and water: for they make them to have falne at the first into all the foure elements; but these bee toyes, for they bee all Lyers. Iohn 8. 44.
Againe, they fell not by weight, as a solid substance to sticke in a place; but their fall consisteth in quality, that they fell from the grace, wherein they were created, their fall was not locall being Spirits.
Againe, Paul speaketh as hardly of them in the ayre, as Christ doth of them in the earth: For the Apostle saith of them in the Ephes. 2. 2. ayre, That they worke in the children of disobedience: As Christ saith of them in the earth, He walketh (saith Christ) through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none. And then he saith, I will returne to my Mat. 11.

house, whence I came out, and when he commeth, hee findeth it swept and Divels many in number, yet one head among them. garnished, then taketh hee seven other spirits worse than himselfe, and entreth in and dwelleth there, and the end of that man is worse than the beginning.
Againe, note here, that Iude nameth Angels plurally, where observe with me, that the Scripture speaketh sometime plurally, as here, The Angels also which kept not their first estate. And so Paul speaketh plurally, We wrastle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, Ephes. 6. 12. against powers, against worldly governours, princes of the darkenesse of this world: And sometime singularly, for Paul speaking of these evill Angels, he calleth him, The prince that ruleth in the ayre, the spirit that worketh in the children of disobedience: As if Ephes. 2. 2. there were but one spirit in the ayre. And this it doth, partly because there is a chiefty among the evill Angels, one is principall, and the rest are called his angels. The Scripture therefore speaketh singularly, as if there were but one divell. So doth Saint Peter, Your adversary the divell goeth about like a roaring Lion. The Scripture nameth Beelzebub, the prince of divels, and Abaddon, 1 Pet. 5. 8. king of locusts, the Angel of the bottomelesse pit, and the great red Dragon that fought with Michael, and Asmodaeus who slew seven men in seven nights. The Apostle nameth him the God of the world, and the prince that ruleth in the ayre: and in respect of this chiefty he is said to have a kingdome: as God hath his Kingdome, so the divell hath his: witnesse our Saviour, If Satan be divided against Satan, how can his Kingdome endure. I speake not of it, as if Mar. 2. there were but one divell; for there are infinite; one man had both a deafe and dumbe divell; Mary had seven divels; the man Luke 7. Mat. 8. in the Gospell had a Legion.
That which is said of Lucifer, How art thou falne from heaven, o Lucifer, sonne of the morning, etc? is utterly mistaken. For surely Esa. 14. 12. there are infinite divels, as many as men on the earth; infinite Angels fell, as infinite now stand. Hence commeth the world Dan. 7. to be so full of mischiefe: Art thou prone to any sin? thou shalt not want a divell to helpe thee forward: If David bee proud of his people, Satan will provoke him to number them, that hee 2 Sam. 24. may be prouder: If Ahabs Prophets be given to flatter, the divel straightway will become a lying spirit in the mouths of foure 1 Reg. 22. hundred of them: If Mary Magdalen be whorish, and unchast, seven divels of lechery will enter into her, and make her become at last a mecenary drab: If Iudas will bee a Traytor, Satan will Luke 7. quickly enter into his heart, and make him sell his Master: If Ananias will be covetous, and lye for advantage, Satan will fill Iohn 13. 2. his heart, and he will bend his tongue like a bow to speake lies. Acts 5. Doth Absalom want a counsellor to advise him in mischiefe? 2 Reg. 15. why here is Achitophel to supply his wants: Doth Ahab want a comforter to rid him of his griefe, for the not possessing of Naboths 1 Reg. 21. vineyard? here is Iezabel to comfort him, and advise him,

which way to effect his purpose: will Achitophel hang himselfe? Though the divels bee malitious spirits yet they agree in evill. Go thy way (saith the Divell) here is an halter. Is Iudas desperate, will hee needs be his owne hangman, and hang till he burst too? here is a rope (saith the Divell.) The Divell waiteth as a Spaniell to raise the game, to increase sinne in all men: hee hath an oare in every boat, a hand in everie sinne in the World.
If yee aske, how the Divell is in the wicked, seeing that hee hath no Locall dimensions?
I answer; that hee is in us, as the soule is in us; Intellectuall Mar. 9. Mar. 2. not sensible. And hee is in us two wayes: by his essence, as in the Child, and in the deafe man: or by his Working and operation, not bodily, but spiritually in the minde; by suggesting evill things to us; so he was in Ananias, he spake not vocally, but by Act. 5. inspiration. For so are the words of Saint Iohn to be expounded, when as hee saith, There was given unto him a mouth that spake great things and blasphemies, etc. Hee spake by the mouth of a greater beast than himselfe (quoth Iohn) yet hee speaketh not vocally, for he wanteth the nine instruments of nature, Duo labia, the two lips, quatuor dentes, foure teeth, and guttur, the throat, etc. Seven Luke 7. Divels were in Magdalen by their essence, so seven and seven are in us, though not by essence, yet by operation and working. For as the spirit of God is not in us by his essence, (for then we were Gods) but by his graces; So the evil spirit is not in all the wicked by his essence, but by operation. Hee worketh in the Children of disobedience.
Once againe I say, that sometime Divels are named in the plurall number, sometime but one to note a Chiefety, and to note that they all joyne together to uphold one kingdome: For though they cannot love one another in deed, yet the hatred they beare against God is as a fagot-bond, that doth tie them together, that these all agree in one to worke mischiefe. They have Seven heads and tenne hornes: Here in the wicked his members, are Apoc. 12. like to their Head; for howsoever they hate one another in private quarrels, yet agree they in the maine point against God, and good men. Ephraim against Manasses; Manasses against Ephraim, Esa. 9. yet both against Iuda: The Pharises against the Saduces, the Saduces against the Pharises, and yet both against Christ: The Iewes Mat. 22. against the Gentiles, the Gentiles against the Iews, and yet both against Paul: The Canonists against the Schoolemen, and the Acts 19 9. Schoolemen against the Canonists for auricular Confession, yet both against the Gospell: Parish against Parish, one against another, yet all against the Minister.
This may be a good lesson to us, that wee may learne all to joyne together against the common enemy. If wee will not learne of God and good men to love one another, and to cling and cleave together as one man, for shame let us learne of Divels, for they cleave together like burres: Howsoever wee differ

in private matters, yet let us all agree together against the adversarie Division the cause of Confusion. the Papists, and other Hell-hounds of division, that remaine within and without the Land. Division in Christendome opened a way to the Turke to get Constantinople, Buda, Belgrade, Strigonium, and all Hungaria almost: The division in Italy Inter Guelfos and Gibelinos, brought all into the hands of that man of Rome. The division in England brought in the Spanish Navy hither, Anno 1588. Sub spe vincendi, In hope to have conquered us, and that the Papists would have revolted to them. But let not the Papists thinke, that the Spaniards would have spared them; all had beene fish that had come to net: All had bin Huguenotes. So was it in the massacre of Paris by the Guise. So was it in the conquest of Antwerpe, by Parma. Therefore, that Papist that hath an English heart left in his breast to knocke upon, let him pray for our Soveraigne and State now, and God blesse both the one and the other, and make Gods and our foes, his and our foot-stoole.



THE THIRTEENTH SERMON.


VERS. 6. 

Hee hath reserved in everlasting chaines under darknesse.
The Angels that fell are reserved in eternall slaverie.



HAving already spoken of the sinne of the Angels, wee are now come to handle their punishment; their fall was great, so was their punishment: Quanto gradus altior, tanto casus gravior, the higher their state and condition, the grievouser their fall. Sin and punishment goe together like Ionathan and his harnesse-bearer; Sin goeth before, and punishment follows after. If it was much for Caine Gen. 4. Gen. 3. to be a vagabond, and Adam to be driven out of Paradise, and Ismael out of his Father Abraham his house? how much more for the Angels to bee driven out of heaven: and not to returne like Noahs Dove to the Arke: but to live in darkenesse for ever? Let the earth tremble, let the Sea make a noyse, let the Ayre bee darke, let all hearts melt, and all faces gather blackenesse at the hearing of this Iudgement. The Lords face is burning, his lips are full of indignation, Esa. 30. 27, 28. and his tongue is as a devouring fire, his spirit is as a river that over-floweth up to the necke, etc. And when hee is kindled, The rivers shall bee turned to pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the Cap. 34. 9, 19. 11. land thereof shall be burning pitch, it shall not be quenched, night nor day, the smoke thereof shall goe up ever, it shall be desolate from generation to generation: none shall passe through it for ever: but the Pelicane and the Hedgehog shall possesse it: the great Owle and the Raven shall dwell in it, and hee shall stretch out upon it, the line of vanity, and the stones

of emptinesse. The Angels now are Divels, reserved in chaines. If The Divels malice infinite, but his power iimited. you aske mee where? I say in the earth, as it appeareth by the words of our Saviour, When the uncleane spirit is driven out of a man, hee walketh through drie places, seeking rest and findeth none. etc. And not in the earth onely, but in the ayre; For hee is a Prince that ruleth Mat. 12. 43. Apoc. 20. 1, 2, 3. in the ayre: and not in the earth and ayre onely, but in the deepe also: For saith Saint Iohn, I saw an Angel come downe from Heaven, having the key of the bottomelesse pit and a great chaine in his hand, and hee tooke the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Divel and Satan, and hee bound him a thousand yeeres, and cast him into the bottomelesse pit, and shut him up, and sealed the doore upon him, that hee should deceive the people no more.
But in that God hath reserved them in chaines, it is a thing of singular comfort, as was Davids harpe to Saul in his melancholly, and the Dove to Noah in the deluge. Like the news brought unto the shepheards, whiles they were watching their flockes in the Gen. 8. Luk. 2. night.
Here therefore wee learne, that they cannot passe their linckes and bounds, they are under God, Pendent exillius nutu; they depend on his becke. For God useth Satan to serve his justice (yet Satan knoweth it not) hee is Gods ban-dogge let slip at wandering sheepe, and lawlesse swine; he is Gods hangman, or executioner to punish the reprobate; yet can he goe no further, than God will; For he hath him in chaines, as Clemens had Dandalus the Duke of Venice; as Sapor had Valerian the Emperour. Heereupon saith, Gregory, Diaboli semper iniqua voluntas, nunqua^ injusta est potestas, the Greg. will of the Divell is alwayes wicked, but his power never unjust; and he giveth the reason: Voluntatem habet a se, potestatem vero a domino, he hath his will of himselfe but his power from God. The spirit therefore that vexed Saul, is called the evill spirit of the 1 Sam. 18. Lord: evill in regard of his will; the spirit of God, in regard of the power given him of God. Isodore saith Adversaria potestas non habet Isodore. vim cogendi, sed perswadendi, the Divell hath no power to compell but to perswade: For then he would not leave one man alive. He is like the Libberd, who is so hatefull to man that if he see but his Luk. 8. picture, he will teare it in peeces. The Divell could not enter into the swine, but by licence. An euill spirit vexed Saul: but it is added, That God sent him. An evill spirit deceived Ahab: but it is added, that God put him into the mouths of the Prophets: Satan 1 Sam. 16. 1 Reg. 22. Iob. 1. Exod. 11. could not touch Iob but as God permitted him: Moses was a figure of Christ, Pharaoh of the Divell, now as Pharoah could not hold Israel in Aegypt; So Satan cannot hold us in bondage longer than God will. Satan is the strong man, but Christ is stronger than he. As the water-spaniell watcheth the shot, to fetch the fowle, that is striken; as the Iaylors watch at the judgement seats, and the hangman for the dayes of execution: So Satan; and his Angels waite on Gods Majestie to bee set aworke, but of themselves can doe

nothing, therefore are they said to be delivered into chaines, and reserved How Satan is said to be loosed yet ever bound. in everlasting chaines. As in my text: For the Lord dealeth with Divels, as men use to do with curst bandogs, which will flie at the throate of every one, whom they met; they tye and chain them up 2 Pet. 2. 4. for feare of doing hurt: For proofe whereof note what God said to the Divel under the serpent, Thou shalt bruise his heele. By which Gen. 3. 15. phrase is implied a restraint, namely that hee should not come so high as the Saints head, to crush it, he should onely snarle at the heele, and bite it: that is, he should not be able utterly to destroy their soules.
I but Satan is now losed, and the thousand yeares, wherein hee Apoc. 20. 7. was chained, are expired: and therefore now he hath liberty to do what he can.
But brethren, ye shal understand, that this is spoken Comparative, comparatively, in regard of former restraint, as when a dogge hath beene somtime tyed up very close, and afterward his chaine is let further, he may be said to be loosed.
But the Lord limiteth this his libertie, he can goe no further, than God will give him leave. For if it were not limited, the Divell should soone devoure all mankind, if hee were not restrained no creature could resist him, and stand before him: As the Sea, if it 1 Pet. 5. 8. had not bounds, would soone overwhelme the whole world. So would the Divel soone turne all topsi-turvy, and bring all to the very depth of Hell, where he himselfe is. Therefore saith the Apostle, Iam 4. Rom. 16. 20. Resist the Divell and he shall flie from you. And Paul telleth the Romanes, that The God of peace shall tread Satan under their feet shortly. And in that Christ calleth him, the Strong man, Luke 11.
And the holy Ghost, the Prince of the World, Iohn 12.
The God of the World, 2 Cor. 4.
The Spirit that ruleth in the Ayre, Ephes. 2.
A Roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
A Flying Dragon, Apoc. 12.
The Angel of the bottomelesse pit, Apoc. 20.

Powers dominations, etc. Ephes.

This is not to feare us, or to make us dread him too much, but to awake us. As Saint Peter saith, Be sober and watch, not to 1. Pet. 5. 8. bee faint hearted, not to despaire: He may sorely assault us, but hee shall never prevaile against us; He may winnow us as hee did Peter, but hee shall not finally overthrow us. Our Faith shal Ephes. 17. quench all his firie darts, though he let them flie at us, as thicke as haile stones, as he did at Iob, being deprived of Goods, Cattel Children, and all that he had; yet these darts we shall keepe off by faith: Hellgates shall not prevaile against us. Saint Augustine Mat. 16. 18. compareth the Divels to Mastives, Qui latrant, non mordent, which bark, but bite not: to Serpents which hisse, but sting not: Permitti^ illos Deus saevire, aut ut probet fidem electorum, aut ut Aug. corrigat mores malorum; God suffereth, them to rage either to

prove the faith of his Elect, or otherwise, to correct the manners The Divell as yet punished in part. of the evill.
Well, God hath reserved them in everlasting chaines under darknes, they are punished already, but their full punishment is not before the day of judgement. As yet they are, but as prisoners in fetters and irons: the great Assises, the day of execution is yet to come. For neither are the wicked, nor yet the Divell punished as they shal be. The wicked departed are now punished in Hell, in soule; For it is appointed for all men once to dye, and then commeth the judgement: but they shal be more tormented, Hebr. 9. 27. when soule and body shall be united together: For now they Eccles. 12. 7. smarte but in one part, that is, in soule; so the full torment of the Divels is not untill the last day; For as the joyes of the elect shall then be fuller, and the paines of the damned grievouser; So the glory of the good Angels, and the torments of the bad the fuller, rivers of brimstone shall be powred out upon them. So the Divell said to Christ that he tormented them before their time: For it is torment to the Divell here to want, the presence Luk. 5. of Christ; but it shal be greater after the Iudgement day, when 2 Thess. 1. the hope of killing mo soules shal be frustrate: then shal be fletus and stridor dentium, weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 22.
Note these two Aphorismes; that the joyes of the elect and blessed Angels shal be greater; and that the torment of the Divels, and the damned shal be heavier, than their double punishment shall be more grievous, than ever it was: that is poena damni, and poena sensus their paine of losse, and paine of sense. Wherof Divines make mention: For the elect shal be more nearely united unto God, than now they are, and the damned shal be more further removed from him, than now they be.
The captivitie of Hell is like the captivitie of Israel in Assyria? that is, irreturnable: the joyes of the elect shal be so great as no tongue can utter them: and the paines of the damned shal be so extreme, as no eare can heare them, no heart conceive them. Christ having reckoned up many plagues, as how that Nation shall rise up against nation, and kingdome against kingdome, and great earthquakes Luk. 2 1. 10. 11. shal be in divers places, and hunger, and pestilence, and fearefull things etc. At last concludeth, Initium autem dolorum haec; these are but the beginnings of sorrow. As if he had said, All these things are but smoke in respect of a terrible fire ensuing: As a mustering of souldiers before the said battell: What will then the end be, if the beginning be so grievous. The damned, quoth Gregorie, suffer an end without end, a death without death, a decay without decay. For their death ever liveth, their end ever beginneth, their decay never ceaseth; they are ever healed to be new wounded, and alwayes repaired to be new devoured; they are ever dying and never dead; eternally broiled, but never burnt up; ever roring in the pangs of death, and never rid of those

pangs. For these evill Angels, with all the wicked, shall have The wicked shall be punished in hell in those parts they sinned. punishment without pity, miserie without mercie, sorow without succour, crying without comfort, mischief without measure, torment without ease; Where the worme dieth not, and the fire is never quenched; Where the wrath of God shall seaze upon body and soule, as the flame of fire doth on pitch and brimstone. Oh who can expresse the paines of fire and brimstone, stinch and darknesse? Without hope of release and comfort. Men and Angels cannot doe it, if that they should summon a Parliament together, for the same end and purpose. For as S. Iohn said of the 1 Iohn. 3. 2. elect, It doth not appeare what we shal be, so say I of these evill Angels, and of all the rable of the reprobats, it doth not appeare what they shal be. Iudas, Herod, Pilate have been many hundred yeares in fire already, but yet the greatest is to come.
Then shall thy lascivious eyes be afflicted with the sight of ghastly spirits; thy curious eares affrighted with the hideous howling of damned Divels and reprobates; thy dainty nose, shal be cloyed with noysome stinch of Sulphur; thy delicate tast, pained with intollerable hunger; thy drunken throate shal be parched with intollerable thirst; thy mind tormented to thinke, how foolish thou wert for earthly pleasures, to lose heavens joyes and incurre hellish paynes: thy conscience shall ever sting thee like an Adder and thou shalt weepe more teares, than there is water in the Sea. For the water of the sea is finite, but the weeping of a reprobate shall be infinite.
If any man will aske, how it can stand with Gods justice to punish a finite sinne, with an infinite punishment. S. Gregorie Greg: lib 4. Moral. cap 12. answereth two manner of wayes: First, he saith Corda non facta pensat deus, God pondereth our hearts not our deeds: peccant cum fine qui vivunt cum fine, their sinne hath an end because their life hath an end; but if they could have lived without end, they would have sinned without end. Aequum ergo est, ut nunquam careat supplicio, qui nunquam voluit carere peccato, ut nullus daretur illi terminus ultioni, qui noluit ponere terminum crimini: It is right and just that he should never want punishment, which never would want sinne; that no end should be given to him of revenge, which would make no end of sinning.
Secondly, he answereth thus; Quanto major est persona eo major est injuria in illum commissa. The greater the person is, so much the greater is the trespasse and injurie done unto him. An injurie, a trespasse done to a meane man, a common person: that person can bring but his action upon the case against him, but a trespas done against a noble man, is scandalum magnatum; against thy prince and Sovereigne, it is death: for it is Crimen lesae Majestatis. Seing then God is infinite the punishment of the trespasse done against him must be infinite also.
An other objection is made; quomodo paenae inferni perpetuae esse

possunt; how the paines of hell can be everlasting? and how bodies How the pains of hell are eternall. can live in those everlasting fires. Augustine answereth that the Salamander liveth in the fire, and is not consumed in the fire, and we have certaine creatures called Crickets, that live in hot Aug. de Civitat. Dei lib. 21. cap. 2. 4, 5. Ovens and Chimnies; take them out of those hot places, and they dye. And further he saith, that the ashes of Iuniper being raked up in the coles of Iuniper keepe fire all the yeere an end. And againe (saith he) Take me a Peacocke, and dresse it, and it will not putrifie, but abide sweet all the yeere an end. Take me snow and wrap it up in chaffe, and it preserves it; but take fruit and lay them in chaffe, it melloweth and rotteth them: Take unslaked lyme, and bring it into the Sunne, it is cold: and throw it into the water, and it burneth: The adamant is not broken, but with the blood of a goat, and who can give a reason of this? Apud Garamantas there is a fountain so cold in the day, that a man cannot drink of the water thereof, and so hot in the night, that a man cannot touch it for scalding. There is a fountaine in Epirus if ye bring torches that burne unto it, it puts them out, but if ye bring torches that be out, it kindleth them. There is a stone in Arcadia called Asbestos, which being once kindled, can never be quenched. And there is a stone in Thracia, that burneth in the water, but put out with oyle. The horses of Cappadocia conceive with the wind. Thus God dealeth strangely with his creatures, why not with the fire of hell, these evill Angels, and all the damned besides, Semper comburentur, nunquam consumentur, they shall alwayes be burning but never consumed.
Thirdly, it is demanded, how the evill Angels and mens bodies Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 21. cap. 10. can be tormented in the same fire? Augustine answereth, as the soule of the Epulo was tormented in this fire, when his body was in hell.
Lastly, note; that the day wherein the Angels shall be judged, is called a great day; He hath reserved in everlasting chaines under darkenesse, unto the iudgement of the great day. It is called a great day, and it is so called in three respects; Great in respect of the Iudge, who is thus described by Daniel; I beheld till the thrones were Dan. 7. 9, 10. set up and the ancient of dayes did sit. Whose garments was white as snow, and the hayre of his head like the pure wooll, his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheeles as burning fire. A firy streame issued and came forth from before him, etc. And he is described by Saint Iohn thus; Apoc. 20. 11, 12. And I saw a great white throne, and one sitting thereupon, from whose face fled heaven and earth, and I saw the dead both small and great stand before the throne, and the bookes were opened, and there was another book opened, which was the booke of life, and the dead were judged after those things which were written in those bookes. And againe the same beloved Disciple describeth him thus; I saw heaven open, and behold a Apoc. 19. 11, 12 16. white horse, and he that sate upon him, was called faithfull and true, and he judgeth and fighteth righteously, and his eyes were as a flame of fire, and

on his head were many crownes; and he had a name written, which no man The day of the last judgemenr why called the great day. knew but himselfe, and hee hath upon his garment, and upon his thigh a name written; The King of Kings and Lord of Lords. Thus yee see the greatnesse of the Iudge, and in respect of him, this day is called a great day.
Secondly, it is called great, in respect of the Assistants the Angels: Dan. 7. 10. For Thousand thousands shall minister unto him, and tenne thousand thousands shall stand before him. And hee shall come to judgement; Mat. 25. In the glory of his Father, with all his holy Angels.
Thirdly, great, in respect of the prisoners that shall be arraigned For when he shall come in the clouds of heaven; every eye shall see him, even those that peirced him; and all the kindreds of the earth shall wayle Apoc. 1. 7. before him: Nay then, The Kings of the earth and great men, and rich Apoc. 6. 15. men, and the chiefe Captaines, and the mighty men, and every bond man, and every free man shall be arraigned. And therefore it may well be called a great day; for if the particular day of the destruction of Ierusalem was so grievous that the Prophet cryed out, The great Zeph. 1. 14, 15, 16 day of the Lord is neer, it is neer, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord: the strong man shall cry there bitterly. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heavinesse, a day of destruction and desolation, a day of obscurity and darkenesse, a day of clouds and blacknesse, a day of I^^l 2. 10. 11. the trumpet and alarum against the strong Cities, etc. And againe, the earth shall tremble before him, the heavens shall shake, the Sunne and Moone shall be darke, and the starres shall withdraw their shining; and the Lord shall utter his voyce before his host, for his host is very great: For he is strong that doth his work: For the day of the Lord is great, and very terrible, and who can abide it. What shall be the generall day of the destruction of the whole world? when the Elements shall melt with 2 Pet. 3. heat, the heavens shall passe away with a noyse, the earth shall reele and stagger like a drunken man, and the world shall burne. Good Lord! what a great day will this be? when all the Saints out of heaven, all the damned out of hell, all the dead bodies out of the earth must appeare: Not an Angell spared, not a divell respited, not a Saint or sinner rescued, but all must be summoned to give their attendance, and to make their appearances. Once the world was destroyed with water, but now it shal be consumed with fire: For the Lord Iesus shall shew himselfe from heaven with his mighty Angels 1 Thes. 1. 7, 8. in flaming fire rendring vengeance unto them which know not God, and which obey not the Gospell of our Lord Iesus Christ. Let thy heart dwell seriously in this meditation; but a little imagine that thou sawest the world on fire, the Iudge sitting, the dead standing before him, the sinnes of all men revealed, the divels accusing Eccles. 7, 38. them: it would beat downe many sinnes in thee, Remember the end and thou shalt never doe amisse. Christ speaking of that day, saith, That there shall be signs in the Sun and in the Moon and in the Stars, and Luke 21. 25, 26 upon the earth; trouble among Nations with perplexity, the Sea and the waters shall rore, and mens hearts shall faile them for feare, and for looking

after those things that shall come on the world, for the powers of heaven Iudgement terrible to all but especially to the wicked: shall be shaken. Others Sessions and assizes be fearefull to malefactors, what shall Gods assizes bee, when the Ancient of dayes shall sit, whose garments are white as snow, and the haire of his head is like pure wooll, and his throne like a firy flame: Then Dan. 7. 9. fulminabit dominus e Caelo, the Lord shall thunder from heaven, and the highest will give his voyce: And if the thunder and ratling of a cloud be so terrible: what terrour shall there bee when he shall thunder that sits above the clouds? For then Terra tremet, Mare mugiet, the earth shall quake, the Sea rore, the ayre ring, the World burne: and if Tota terra, the whole pillars of the earth must move, how should this move man, who is but a cold of earth? If virtutes Coeli, the powers of heaven must tremble, what will befall those mindes of mudde and earth, that have never a thought of heaven? If the Angels of God shall stand then at a gaze, how agast will the wicked be whose portion is with the Divell and his Angels? If the Heavens must cleave, and the Elements bee rent asunder, how will earthly hearts faile and breake? If the righteous shall scarce be saved; Vbi impius, Where shall the wicked, and the sinner appeare? If S. Ciprian is said so Ciprian. much to feare diem Iudicii the day of Iudgement, that he cleane forgot diem martyrii the day of Martyrdome and earthly torment: and no marvell, Nam timor mortis nihil ad timorem Iudicis, the feare of temporall death is nothing to the feare of him that hath power of eternall life and death. And if they be in such amaze, Ad quos judex; For whose glorie and good the Iudge shall come, how shall they stand amazed, Contra quos Index, against Apoc. 20. whom and for whose eternall shame and paine the Iudge shall 1 Co^. 1. 25. come? If Heaven and earth shall flie before him, Quomodo stabimus, ante potentissimum, quem nemo potest vincere? how shall we be 1 Tim 1. 17. able to stand before the most mightie, whom none can vanquish? For the weakenes of God is stronger than men: Ante prudentissimum, quem nemo potest fallere, before the most wise, whom no man can deceive: For he is God only Wise, and in him are hid all the treasures of wisdome, knowledge and understanding: Ante piissimum, quem nemo potest corrumpere; before the most just, whom no man can corrupt: His judgement will be Rectum judicium, a right and a true judgement; he cannot faile, either Ignorantia legis, as not knowing the Law; For he gave the Law and he will judge according to the Law: nor yet ignorantia facti, As not seeing the fact; For his eyes goe thorow the World: Ye may interprete them if ye will 7. thousand thousand eyes, For he is Totus oculus, All eye. Aug.
The consideration of this should stirre us up to be carefull and circumspect in all our wayes, that we never treade our shooe awry, nor offend this Iudge in any thing, that at this great day we may find him a gentle and a loving Lambe, and not a Lion of Iuda. For as to the wicked the Iudge is terrible, so to the

godly, friendly; and as to the wicked, this great day is a day How can the wicked stand before the uncorrupt Iudge. of redemption.
But to proceed a little further; this day is called a day, (...) by an excellencie: For never day was like unto it: In the day of Israel, when he went out of Aegypt, The Sea fledde, Iordan was driven backe, the mountaines skipped like Rammes and the little hills like yong Sheepe. In the day of Iosua, the Sunne stood still in Psal. 114. Heaven from morning to noone, and from noone unto night. In the day Ios. 10. of Ezechia, the Sunne went tenne degrees backward. In the day of Christs passion, the Sunne waxed darke, and the Moone lost her light, the 1 Reg. 20. earth quaked, the graves opened, the stones brake, the dead rose: but in the day of Christ, there shal be no Sunne, no Moone, no Heaven, no earth: For the Heavens shall passe away in manner of a tempest, the Element shall melt for fervent heat, the 2 Pet. 3. earth and all that is therupon shall burne, and yet this burning shall not be a consuming of the substance, but only a purging of the creatures from the drosse of those alterable qualities, wherunto they are now subject. And therfore finely to this purpose saith venerable Bede, Per imaginem transeunt, per essentiam subsistunt; praeterit figura hujus mundi, non substantia; their image Beda. faileth, their essence remaineth, the figure of this world passeth away, not the substance: For if the day of Christs humiliation was so glorious, what shal be the day of his glorification? Where then will appeare those that make the world, and the things of the world their stay, when the world and all the wealth and substance of the world must passe away? And wher ewill the penny-father and covetous person appeare, who like the serpent is ever licking up the dust of the earth, and scraping up gold and silver that red and white earth; when silver and gold and earth shal be no more? Where will the proud ones appeare that fold themselves in silkes, and loade themselves with pearles and Iewels, when Iewels and pearles shal be no more? Where then shall appeare the greedie oppressour whose throate hath beene an open sepulcher. When he shal not find a man to oppresse any more? Where shall the whoremonger appeare, whose body hath beene as the Oven of a Baker, when he shall find none to defile any more? Where shall the slanderer appeare, whose tongue hath cut like a sharpe rasor when he shall not finde any to slander any more? where will the drunkard appeare, that hath washed his soule with wine and strong drinke, when there shal be no liquor any more. Where will these magnificent and stately builders appeare, when building and state shall fall all to the ground? Where shall the usurer appeare, who is worse than Hell, for Hell torments only the bad, but the usurer crusheth and oppresseth both good and bad: I say, where shall he appeare? seeing his house here is the banke of the Divell and his purse Os diaboli, the mouth of the Divell. Surely he with

the Divell must abide in Hell and torments; surely all these and The fearfull estate of all sinners at the last judgment all other that have sowen in sinne shall reape miserie; for these that have plowed wickednesse shall reape iniquitie; Vanitie was their traffique and griefe will be their gaine; Detestable was their life and damnable shall be their death: For as they have sowen Hos. 10. 13. so shall they reape, they have sowen in the flesh, and of the flesh they Gal. 6. 8. shall reape corruption: Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soule of every one of them, when this great day shall be. Let us pray therfore that in this great day Christ his wisdome may answere for ourfollie, his humilitie for our pride, his meekenesse for our crueltie, his righteousnesse for our sinnes; that this Lambe that was without spot may answere for us, who like Iacobs Lambes are full of spots: Ostende patri latus and vulnera, Shew the father thy side and wounds, that thy side and wounds may heale us from these sinnes, that like the blood of Abel crie against us. Amen.



THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON.


VERS. VII. 

As Sodom and Gomorah; and the Cities about them, which in like manner as they did, etc.
Sodomesfinne all kind of uncleanesse.



WEE are come to the third example of Sodome and Gomorah:
Wherin also he noteth their Sinne. punishment.
Their sinne was uncleanesse, Fornication, whordome, Incest. Buggerie; their punishment hell fire, the second death, the burning lake, fletus and stridor dentium, the horrour of conscience, torments unspeakeable. Now for their sinne, it appeareth how filthy it is, seeing that Paul would not have vs eate with whoremongers; If any 1. Cor. 5. 11. (saith he) that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, With such see yee eate not. And in another place, he would have us to be so far from this sinne. that he would not have it to be once named amongst us, much lesse committed: For so runne his words; But fornication and all uncleannesse, or covetousnesse, let it not be once named amongst you. Ephes. 5. 3. The name as it were darkeneth the Ayre and polluteth the earth, the Lord Iesus condemneth the very intent of the heart even lusting after a woman though the act be not done: you have heard Mat. 5. 27. 28. (saith he) that it was said unto them of the old time, thou shalt not commit adulterie, but I say unto you, whosoever looketh upon a woman to lust after her hath committed adulterie with her alreadie in his heart. Whordome is one of the manifest workes of the flesh: For the

Apostle reckoning up the workes of the flesh, nameth adulterie Sodoms sinne all kind of uncleanesse. first, and placeth is as Vrias in the forefront of the battell: The workes of the flesh (saith he) are manifest; adultery, fornication, uncleanesse, wantonnesse, etc. Yea, this sinne brings with it horrible dishonour: If a theefe (saith Salomon) steale to satisfy his soule, because Gal. 5. 9. he is hungry, men doe not so despise him: but he that committeth adultery with a woman is destitute of understanding, he shall find a wound Pro. 23. 27. and a dishonour, that shall never be put away: for a whore is a deepe ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow pit. Yea, this sinne will make a man make shipwracke of innocency and honesty. A man may aswell Pro. 6. 27. take fire in his bosome, and not be burnt, or goe upon coales, and his feet not be burnt, as goe into his neighbours wife, and be innocent. Pro. 23. 28. The strange woman increaseth the transgressors among men, so that it is impossible to be incontinent and honest. It is a sinne Hos. 4. 11. Pro. 9. 18. Pro. 18. Pro. 6. 26. of which a man or a woman can hardly repent; For whordome and wine (as the Prophet notes) take away the heart. The Guests of a strange woman art most of them in Hell. For the wiseman further avoucheth, Surely her house tendeth to death, and her pathes unto the dead. This sinne will bring Gods curse upon a mans estate, many a man by it is brought to a morsell of bread: For fornication is a fire that will devour to destruction, and roote out all a mans increase, and bring him quickly into our Ladies bands, and make him sinke by beggerie. The Apostle Paul useth many reasons against it, able to move an heart of flint, if there be any droppe of grace in him, if he pertaine to Gods election, if he be not vas irae, a vessell of wrarh, a reprobate, a firebrand in Hell, 1 Cor. 6. 13, 14, a member of the Divell, His first reasons is, that The body was made for the Lord a swell as the soule: his second, That the body shall 15, 16, 18, 19. be raised up at the last day to an incorruptible estate: His third, That our bodies are the members of Christ: His fourth, He that coupleth himselfe with an harlot is one body with an harlot: the fifth, This is sinne (in a speciall sense) against our owne bodies: the sixth, The body is the temple of the holy Ghost: finally, The body is bought with a price: and therfore is not our owne. These are the reasons, that the Apostle useth against this sinne, to make all men to deny it and defye it.
But to proceede; the wrath of God against this sinne of whordome is as the fire of Aetna, not only to burne the whrne and the whoremonger, but their seed: as one said, the bastard shall be a faggot, a firebrand in Hell to burne the parents; For the children of adulterers shall not be partakers of the holy things, and the seed of the wicked bed shall be rooted out; and though they Wisd 3. 16, 17, 18, 19. live long, yet shall they be nothing regarded, and their last age shall be without honor, if they dye hastily, they have no hope, neither comfort in the day of triall. For horrible is the end of the wicked generation. And againe, the bastard-plants shall VVisd. 4. 3, 4. take no deep root nor lay any fast foundation: For though they bud forth in the branches for a time yet, they shal be shaken

with the wind, for they stand not fast they shal be rooted out. As The divell prevailes most by uncleannesse. one said of the theefe on Christs right hand, that Luke nameth, one theefe, to let us see, that all theeves are not damned, and yet but one theefe, to let us see, that all theeves are not saved: So say Luke 23. I of Iephta, that God, nameth one bastard to let vs see, that all Iudg. 11. 1. are not rejected of God, and yet but one, to let us see, that all are not accepted of God. I exclude them not from the Covenant of life. I abridge not the mercies of God. I clip not the wings of his compassion towards them: For it is as great a sinne to abridge the mercies of God to the penitent, as to dilate it, and prostitute it to the reprobate; For the Lord is stronge; mercifull, Exod. 34. 6, 7. and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in mercy and truth; reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sinne. And againe, Hee is gracious and slow to anger; and of great kindnesse, Ioel. 2. 13. and repenteth him of the evill. But this is it that I insist upon, and take in hand to prove, that God punisheth the uncleane, and incontinent persons even in their seed, aswell as in their bodies, goods and name, and let all men that take pleasure in this sinne assure themselves, that the end will be bitter as worme-wood, Prov. 5. 4. and sharpe as a two-edged sword; For hee that followeth a strange woman, is as an Oxe that goeth to the slaughter, and as a foole that goeth Prov. 7. 22. to the stockes for correction, till a dart strike thorow his liver; as a bird hasteth to the snare; not knowing that she is in danger: For they that goe to a strange woman seldome returne againe, neither take they hold of the Prov. 2. 18. way of life. If they reply, that David did commit adultery, and yet did returne: I answer, it is true, of many thousand adulterers, one David did returne, but thou hast cause rather to feare to perish wirh the multitude, than to returne with David.
But before I prosecute this point further, note the mercy and wisdome of God in the decalogue. In the first precept he provideth for our callings, that no man contemne us, but honour us; in the sixth, for our bodies, that no man kill them; in the eighth, for our goods, that no man steale them; in the seventh for our wives, that no man abuse them, that none violate their chastity: and therefore severely hath God revenged this sinne, he hath punished it in the great ones, hee hath set a marke, a brand of vengeance upon them, as upon Pharoah in Egypt, and Abimilech Gen. 12. Psal. 160. 30. in Gerar, and yet they touched not Sara, but onely intended it: So Phinees ranne thorow a Lord and Lady: Moses Numb. 25. hanged the heads and Princes of the people. And if God hath not spared the high cedars of lebanon, looke not that he will spare the low shrubs; Potentes potenter punientur, the mighty shall Wisd 6. 6. Acts 10. 34. be mightily punished, and meane men shall bee punished also. Deus non est (...), God is no accepter of persons. Eusebius Cremonensis reporteth of Ierome, that on his death-bed, he used these words unto his Disciples; Ensis diaboli est luxuria, o quot illa romphaea inter fecit? lechery is the sword of the divell, o how many

hath this sword slaine? Est rete diaboli, o quot illud rete inescavit? Many of the Saints have beene overtaken by adultery. it is the net of the divell, O how many hath it deceived? Est esca diaboli, it is the bait of the divell, O how many hath this baite entrapped. There is no sinne in the second table wherein the divell hath more prevailed, and gone away a greater conquerer, than in this sin of Whoredome, and therefore it is noted, that in Mary Magdalen there were seven divels. For this sinne wee read Luke 7. Gen. 6. that it repented God, that ever he made man: and indeed the mischiefes that come of this sinne be manifold: Nam luxuria corpus debilitat, memoriam hebitat, cor aufert, oculos caecat, famam denigrat, marsupium evacuat, furta, homicidia infert, iram Dei provocat: for lechery weakneth the body, infeebleth the minde, dulleth the memory, taketh away the heart, blindeth the eyes, hurteth the good name, emptieth the purse; causeth thefts murders, and all other sinnes, kndleth Gods wrath. For this sinne God brought a floud of water upon the old world; and for this sinne, the Lord reigned fire and brimstone from the Lord out of heaven, and destroyed Gen. 6. Sodome: Yea, for this sinne, God slew foure and twenty thousand. Cave vinum, cave mulieres; take heed of wine, take heed of women, he that useth wine carryeth fire in his bosome, and a woman is sagitta diaboli, the arrow of the divell: Homo and mulier sunt ignis and palea, man and woman are as fire and stubble: diabolus sufflare non cessat, ut accendatur, the divell never leaveth blowing, till it be kindled: For the lips of a strange woman drop as an hony-combe, and her mouth is more soft than oyle, but the end of her is as bitter as Wormewood, and sharpe as a two-edged sword, her feet goe downe Pro. 5. 3, 4, 5. to death, and her steps take hold of hell. All her doings lead to destruction: Si sanctus es, non tamen securus es; if thou be sanctified yet be not secure; For He hath overcome the wisest, as Salomon; the strongest, as Sampson; the fairest, as Absalom; the holiest, as 1 Reg 11. Iudg. 15. 1 Sam. 16. 1 Sam. 16. 2 Sam. 12. Gen. 2. Iob. 31 9. David; the faithfullest, as Abraham; and surely thou art a happy man, if thou hast not fallen downe at any time, under this sinne; if thou canst protest with Iob, If my heart hath been deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait at the doore of my Neighbour; let my wife grinde unto another man, and let other men bow down upon, for this is a wickednesse and an iniquity to be condemned.
The wrath of God hath smoked against this sinne, above all other sinnes of the last table: David for whoredome was driven out of his Countrey; but what should I name one man? the whole City of Sichem was put to the sword for it. But what should I name one towne? foure Cities were consumed with fire and brimstone for it, and the stinking lake of Asphaltes neere to Sodome is left as a perpetuall monument of that plague, killing all fish that swimmeth in it, and fowles that flye over it. But what are five Cities to twelve tribes? for the twelve Princes of the tribes were hanged up against the Sunne, and twenty foure thousand slaine for it, and many wounded in Israel, and

Beniamin, for the defiling of one Levites wife: And yet behold a Many like the Corinthians thinke fornication indifferent. greater plague than that; For, for Idolatry, Oppression, and Adultry, was the whole nation of the Iewes carried to Babylon; And yet behold a greater plague; For seven nations of the Canaanites were destroyed for it: And yet behold a greater plague, not one Iud. 20. Ier. 229. man as David; nor one City, as Sichem, nor many Cities as Sodome, Gomorrah, Zeboiim, Admah; nor many kingdmes, as these of Canaan, but the whole world destroyed for it. Will God then spare this Levit. 18. 24. Gen 6. sinnefull; wanton, whorish, polluted kingdome of England? Ierusalem justified Sodome, and wee have justified Ierusalem. England is become Sodome, most townes are full of bastardy, most men are like stoned horses, neighing after another mans wife. So saith the Prophet, They rise early in the morning, like fed horses, every one neighed after his neighbours wife: like the oven of a baker, so saith Ezech. 16. the Prophet, They are all Adulterers, and as a verie oven heated by Ier. 5. 8, 9. the baker. For as that is never cooled, so these mens lusts are never satisfied. The daughters of England are like the daughters of Sion, haughty, and Walkewith stretched out neckes. Walking and minsing as they goe and make a tinckling with their feete. As Ephraim was full of Hos 7. 4. Esa. 3. 16. Esa. 26. Mich. 7. Tit. 1. Act. 17. Esa. 30. 27, 28. Nah. 13. 4, 5, 6. drunkards; Ierusalem full of oppressors; Crete full of liars; Athens full of idolaters; so England is full of adulterers. The Lords face is therefore burning, his lips are full of indignation, and his toogue is as a devouring fire, and his spirit is as a river that overfloweth up to the necke: Hee hath way in the whirlewind, and in the storme, and the clouds are the dust of his feet: Hee rebuketh the Sea and it dryeth, and he drieth up all the Rivers: Bashan is wasted, and Carmel the flower of Lebanon is wasted; the mountaines trembled for him, and the earth is burnt at his sight; yea the world, and all that dwell therein: who can stand before his wrath? or who can abide the fiercenesse of his wrath? his wrath is powred out like fire, and the rockes are broken by him.
We are almost of the minde of the Corinths, that it is indifferent, to whom, Paul said, The body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. Of that minde were the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 6. 13. as it appeareth by the Apostles determination to the Churches, where it was decreed that they should Abstaine from filthinesse of Idols, and fornication, etc. For the Heathen thought this no vice Act. 15. 20. but made it a common custome, and were wont to pray, Dii angeant numerum meretricum, the Gods increase the number of Harlots. But it is a vile sinne, and God hateth it extremely: note his speech. How should I spare thee for this? thy children have forsaken mee, and sworne by them that are no Gods. Though I fed them to the Ier. 5. 7. 9. full, yet they committed adultery, and assembled themselves by companies in harlots houses. Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord: shall not my soule bee avenged on such a nation as this? Though hee winked at many of our sinnes, yet will he not spare this; God will Prov. 10. Wi^d. 3. bee revenged of the whoremonger in his name; Nam nomen eius putrescet, his name shall rot in his posterity; Non enim radices agent,

they shall haue no rooting in his body; for it shall bee full of The Adulterer punished many wayes. ulcers, as the Poxe and the disease called Morbus Neapolitanus. In his soule; for it shall fry in Hell: For though adulterers escape all maner of judgement from men, yet it is certaine, That the whoremongers Hebr. 13. 4. Psal. 50. 21, 22. and adulterers God will iudge. Because God for a time holdeth his tongue, therefore they thinke that God is like unto them, but certainely the time hasteth, when the Lord will set all their filthinesse in order before them, and if they consider it not, he will seise upon them, when no man shall deliver them: especially they are assured to lose the Kingdome of Heaven, and to feele the smart Apoc. 22. 8. of Gods eternall wrath in the Lake, that burneth with fire and brimestone.
Bet to strip this strumpet: Whoredome and uncleanesse, ouerthrow the state of mankind, while no man knoweth his owne wife no wife her husband; no father his children: For whoredome confounds the World, and utterly overthroweth the state of marriage. Affinitates enim totius mundi sunt compagines, Affinities and consanguinities are the joynts and sinewes of the Word; Lose these and lose all: Totus mundus ruit, all the World goeth to wracke. Now what affinities or consanguinities can there be when there is nothing but confusion of bloud? The sonne knoweth not his father, nor the father the sonne; Sed promiscuus est concubitus, there is such a promiscuous companying, Then are wee as beasts; The Turtle knoweth her mate, but men doe not. Therefore Lady Vertue of all plants in her garden hath watered Continencie: lest the World should bee confounded, saith a learned man.
But because many abuse the example of Noah, David, Salomon, etc. saying, were they not Adulteres? first, I say Vivimus praeceptis, non factis,; We live by precepts, not by examples: For saith God, Deutr. 12. 32. 2 Sam. 12. 10. Whatsoever I command you, that shall yee doe, Thou shalt put nothing thereto, nor take ought there from; Secondly, I say that God plagued it in these men, their sweet meat had soure sawce. Thirdly, David command it neuer but but once, thefore saith the holy Ghost, David did that which was upright in the sight of the Lord; and turned from 1 Reg. 15. 5. nothing, that hee commanded him all the daies of his life, save onely in the matter of Vriah the Hittite. But our men will fall with David, but not rise with David, they will sinne with him, but not repent with him. Thus like Eeles, they bee ever in the mudde: like Dogges, they wallow in carrion; like Munkies, they feed on venome; like Spiders, they sucke poyson from sweete flowers, and abuse all examples.
If any alledge the Poligamy of the Fathers: I say, that they were Mala tolerata, abnitio non fuit sic, tolerated evils, from the beginning Mat 19. 8. Mal. 2. 1 Tim. 3, 2. it was not so: For as the Prophet affirmeth, Hee made one, he made man and woman as one flesh, not many. And a man must be the husband of one wife, not of many wives: but of one. And againe, For

the avoyding of fornication (saith the Apostle) let every man have Polygamie of the Fathers not lawfull originaliy yet tollerated. his wife, and every woman her husband; one man, one wife. Into Noabs Arke there entred Noah and his wife, his sonnes, and their wives, and of beasts both cleane and uncleane, the male and the female. This coupling of creatures both reasonable and unreasonable, sheweth, that Nature in her Seminary condemnes Poligamie; 1 Cor. 7. 2. Gen. 7. 7, 8. furthermore, there be two Axiomes or Maximes in Nature.
The first; Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri nefeceris; doe not that to another which thou wouldst not have done unto thy selfe.
The second, Ne quod alterius est, invito eripiatur; let nothing which belongs to another man, bee taken from him against his will: How then can the man, without offering manifest wrong unto his Wife, bestow his body upon another woman. Thus by the Law of God and Nature; Poligamie is condemned.
I, but how came it to passe, that the Fathers had many wives? It is answered diversly: First, this came to passe by Gods dispensation; for God according to the state of those times dispensed with the Patriarks for the Law, which hee made in the beginning, and this is evident by the examples of Abraham, Jacob, and Elc^nah, and other godly Fathers, who were not reproved by any Prophet, for their multiplicity of wives: Nay, which is more, God gave Sauls wives (as Nathan saith) into the bosome of 1 Sam. 12. 8. David. Now if God gave David wives, notwithstanding his first institution to the contrary, we may conclude, that hee dispenseth with his owne law, and gave the Patriarchs liberty for Polygamie.
The reason of this dispensation, was this: God in those times had chosen the seed of Abraham to be his people, in whose linage the true worship of the Deity was preserved; for all other people were given to idolatry, and went a whoring after strange Gods. Now to that intent, that that people, whom God had chosen, namely Israel, might be many in number, Poligamie was permitted.
Againe, though the Fathers had many wives, yet they were not hereunto led by lust, but by a chast desire to augment and multiply Gods family.
From this Polygamie of the Fathers, some have concluded that Polygamie is lawfull unto us; let such Opinionists know, that a generall canon cannot bee infringed by a particular example. If we can claime the same dispensation the Patriarchs had, then I grant a man may have many wives; for now there is no Nation more peculiarly Gods people than another; But in every Nation Act. 10. 35. hee that feareth him, and worketh righttousnesse is accepted with him.
Furthermore, our Saviour hath cancelled this dispensation when hee said concerning the husband and the wife, They twaine Mat. 19. 5.

shall be one flesh: Not onely now the Law of God is against Polygamie, Polygamie not lawfull, dispensed with. but it seemeth also, that the Law of Nature, which one calleth a permanent and firme Edict of God. And by Saint Paul, The Law written in our members, caused the Romane Emperours, Socrates Rom. being infidels, to make decrees against Polygamie, branding such with infamy as had more wives than one. And when as Valentinian a Christian Emperour to cover his owne filthinesse having besides his legitimate wife Severa, taken to wife also a young maid called Iustina, made a law, that every man might Cod. lib. 3. de incestis and inutilibus nuptiis. lawfully have two wives: but this law was rejectd and condemned as contrary to the Law of Nature; and therefore I conclude this point with Clemens Alexandrinus, saying, that Polygamie, which was granted to the fathers, is not lawfull unto us, and Clemens Alexan. in Str^m. lib. 4. therefore he that hath two wives, is like to wicked Lamech, and his second wife like unto Sela; which by interpretation is, umbra ejus, his shadow; because she is rather to be esteemed the shadow of a wife than a wife indeed.

And followed strange flesh.

The word in the originall is (...), strange flesh, for uncleannesse hath many branches, furnication, adultery, incest, buggery, beastiality. Fornication is betwixt single persons, as it was betwixt Zimri and Cosbi; adultery betwixt the married, as betweene David and Bathsheba; incest, is in the degrees prohibited; Numb. 25. 2 Sam. 11. 4. Levit. 18. Rom. 1. Levit. 20. 16. buggery is in the contrary sexe; beastialitie is with beasts. Solon would make no lawes for Parricide, lest he should name that which afterwards might bee done: So I wish that there were no cause to name these sinnes, much lesse to punish them. But iniquity doth abound; Pietas friget, Piety waxeth cold; Veni Domine Iesu, veni cito, Come Lord Iesus, come quickly: Psal. 4. 9. And crush them with a scepter of iron, and breake them in peices like a Potters vessell. Yea Lord, Let thy hand finde out out all thy enemies, and thy right hand them that hate thee, make them like a firy Oven in Psal. 2. 8, 9. the time of thy wrath, and let the fire consume them; if they will not repent and turne from their filthinesse.
If you aske how Sodome came to this uncleannesse, the Prophet Ezechiel answereth you; for he nameth the sinnes, that as hands pulled downe this uncleannesse upon them; that like Load-stones drew it violently unto them; that like stickes kindled the fire; that is, idlenesse, pride, fulnesse of bread. And these Ezech. 16. being amongst us, can wee doubt of the fruit, which is whoredome; idlenesse, is the Anvill whereon Satan worketh it; Salomon noteth the Harlot to be idle, not to busie her selfe in any good trade of life. She sitteth at the doore of her house on a seat, in the Prov. 9. 14, 15. high places of the City, to call them that passe by the way, etc. her feet cannot abide in her house; now she is without now in the streets, and lyeth in wait at every corner. Prov. 7. 10. 11.
Apelles painted Venus in a snailes shell, to note that women

must stay at home, not bee gadders like Dina: shee fell not till The causes of Sodomes uncleannesse many first idlenes then, and then she plaid the whore, and not before, when came David to adultry, but when he gave over his warres, and was idle:
O tia si tollas periere Cupidinis arcus,Gen. 34. 2 Sam. 11. 2, 4.
saith the Poet; Take away idlenesse, and Cupids bow will soone be broken.
Quaeritur Aegysthus quomodo sit factus adulter.Ovid.
Inpromptu causa est, de sidiosus erat; If it bee demanded how Aegystus became an adulterer, the cause may quickly be rendred, hee was slothfull, idle; unchast folly, for the most part, is begot of an idle braine, hatched in a lazy body. Paul noteth it in Ephesus, that the women there were idle, and went about from house to house; 1 Tim. 5. 13. and not onely idle, but pratlers also, a^d busie-bodies, speaking things that are not comely. Salomon describeth a vertuous woman, and saith, Shee seeketh Wooll and Flaxe, and laboureth cheerefully with her hands; she is like the ships of Merchants, shee bringeth her food from far, Prov. 31. 13. etc. and she riseth while it is yet night, and giveth her portion to her houshold, and the ordinary to her maids; shee considereth a field and getteth it, and with the fruit of her hands; shee planteth a Vineyard, shee putteth her hands to the wherne, and her hands handle the spindle; shee maketh her selfe carpets, fine linnen and purple is her garment: Such have no leisure to be unchast. If therefore wee will not be overtaken with uncleannesse, let us abandon idlenesse, and vse diligence in our calling, for that is a notable helpe to keepe out inordinate desires, and unchast thoughts.
Another hand to pull this sinne upon us, is pride. The daughters of Sion falling to pride, fell to adultery; they had their slippers and their calles, and their round attires, their sweet balls, Esa. 3. 16. etc. their bracelets and their bonnets, the tyres of their head, and their muffler and their head-bands, and their tablets, and their eare-rings, and their rings and nose-jewels, their costly apparell, and their veyles, and their wimples, and their crisping pins, their glasses, and their fine linnen, their hoods and their lawnes. But God threatned them, That in stead of a sweet savour their should bee a stincke, and in stead of a girdle a rent, in stead of dressing the haire, baldnesse, and in stead of a stomacher a girding of sackecloth, and burning instead of beauty. This was one whetstone to set an edge upon them to uncleannesse. God giveth a precept of apparell, saying, Thou shalt not weare a garment of divers sorts, as of wollen and linnen together. Deut. 22. 11. A precept, not ceremonial but morall; to this end, that al men and woman might walk soberly and chastly, not beastly or heathenishly, but to abstain from fornication and possesse their vessels in holines and honour, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as doe the heathen. Womens 1 Thes. 4. 3, 4. 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4. parell must not be outward, with broided haire, and gold put about, but the inner man must be cloathed. I say of apparell, as Paul said of meat; meats are orda^ned for the belly, and the helly for 1 Cor. 6. 13.

meats: So it is for the backe, and the backe for it, but the Lord Gluttonie, Drunkennesse and evill company, the third and fourth causes of Sodomes uncleannesse. shall destroy both it and them. But the inward apparell shall last for ever. Saint Ambrose calleth pride the banner of whoredome, the net of lechery and filthinesse. And pretily said Aesop to a Ruffian strangely attired, that if he did it to pleasure men, hee was but a foole, for no wise man will account the better of him; and if he did it to please women, he was but a knave, and meant unchastly. In one word, men now goe like women, and women like men: Ambr.
Optat ephippia bos, optat arare, Caballus;
the Oxe wisheth to carry the saddle, the Horse to draw the Plough. We have forgotten that Adam and Heva wore leathern Gen. 3. 1 Sam. 28. 2 Reg. 1. Mat. 3. 1 Tim. 2. 9. Mat. 26. coats; that Samuel had a simple mantell; that Elisha wore hairecloth; that Iohn Baptist had on him a Cammels skin; that the women of Ephesus were arrayed with modesty, not with silke, nor gold, nor pearle, or stollen haire; that the Lord Iesus had a woven coat without seame. Some Thamars cover themselves Gen. 38. with veyles and maskes; some Potiphars wife allureth Ioseph; some daughters of Sion perfume themselves with muske-balls: At mulieres bene olent cum nihil olent, women smell well when they smell nothing at all: Some Iezabels paint their faces. But I say Ier. 4. with a Father, that mulier quae aliter se pingit, quam Deus fingit, verendum ne Creator in die judicii creaturam suam minime recognoscat: Hierome. 2 Reg. 9. the woman that painteth her selfe otherwise than GOD hath made her, it is to be feared, that the Creator in the day of judgement, Cypr. will not acknowledge her for his creature; and that they Qui crines fulvos, etc. which paint their haire red and yellow, prognosticate afore-hand of what collour their heads shall bee in hell.
The third hand to pull this sinne on Sodome, was gluttony; Lot in his drunkennesse committed incest, and begat two cursed nations Ammon and Moab: oftentimes did Israel beginne in eating Ezech. 16. Gen. 19. 1 Cor, 10. 7. and end in whoring: Sine cerere and baccho friget Venus, without meats and drinks lecherous lust waxeth cold. Lady Venus dwels at the signe of the Ivie bush, where there is cleannesse of teeth, usually there is no filthinesse of body, but if we stuffe our corps like cloke-bags, making our mouths as tunnels, our throats as Vid. Boys, 15. Sunday post Trin. the Crabfish, etc. wine-pipes, our bellies as barrels, if wee fill them full of strong drink and new wine, there must follow some vent some uncleannesse of filthinesse.
A fourth hand to pull this sinne on them, might be evill company; and therefore the Holy Ghost gives this rule to those that would not bee ensnared with the strange woman; Walke thou in the way of good men, and keep the way of the righteous. Prov. 3. 29.
A fifth hand to pull downe this sinne upon them, might bee their high estimation of earthly things, and their too great liking of them; for this love brings in lust. This the Apostle affirmeth,

That the love of money (and riches) breeds noysome lusts, which in short Sodomes sins abound in England. time drawne men in perdition. And thus yee see the meanes how Sodome came to this uncleanenesse and Hell full of uncleane persons, For if yee could see into Hell, ye should find it so full of 1 Tim. 6. 9. whoremongers, adulterers, fornicators, that scarce there is any roome left for idolaters, blasphemers, cursed Sabath breakers, damnable mocke-preachers, biting usurers, cruell murderers, etc. Many are of the Corinthians minde, that whordome is a thing indifferent and of the Gentiles opinion, which maintayned the same thing that the Corinthians did. But contrariewise, 1 Cor. 7. Act. 15. the Counsell of Gangra affirmed, that the Church admired virginitie, honored mariage, praised widowe-hood, and condemned fornication. And so must we, For every man must keepe his vessell in holynesse, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as doe the heathen: our bodies are The temples of the holy Ghost; If the materiall temple must 1 Thess. 4. 1 Cor. 6. 19. be kept cleane, much more the mysticall. Finely saith a Father, Quia templum dei sumus, etc. because we are the temple of God, and the chiefe chaplaine of this temple is chastitie, we must not Tertull. suffer any uncleane or unworthy thing to be brought thither, lest God who dwelleth there, taking displeasure to see his mansion defiled should forsake it.
Well Sodome was destroyed, and the Cities about it; it was the Metropoliticall Citie, and the little townes about it, learned of it: but God destroyed them both. Wee see therefore those to bee most vile Cities, which are most large and great, and most subject to ruine, as Babylon, Ninive, Ierusalem, Carthage, Constantinople, Corinth, Athens, Rome: under Tiberius the Emperor, thirteene Cities of Asia fell downe with an earth-quake, and six under Trajan, and twelve under Constantine, in Campania, Ferraria: In Italy Anno 1569. in the space of forty houres, by reason of an earth-quake, many palaces, temples, and houses were overthrown, Fardentius in hunc locum. with the losse of many a man, amounting to forty hundred thousand pounds. Burdeaux, was mightily shaken with an earth-quake, which reached to Spaine and marveilously shooke the Pyrenean hils,
What a mighty earth-quake was in the yeere 1171. that the City Tripolis, and a great part of Damascus in Antiochia, and Hulcipre, the chiefe City in the kingdome of Loradin, and other cities of the Saracens, either perished utterly, or were wonderfully defaced: At Venice, Florence, and divers other places, there were great earth-quakes in the yeere 1539. and did much harme: When Arrius heresie was entertained at Antioch, God punished it with earth-quakes. I passe over with silence Paris, Antwerpe, Gant, Magline, etc. all which Cities, and many others God hath punished for their sinnes. Little townes of the Countrey learne of the greater, and shall perish together with them: and therefore the Prophet having denounced Gods judgements against

some Countries and Cities, he maketh this demand: What is the The greatest Cities as most sinfull so most punished. wickednesse of Iacob? is not Samaria? and which are the high places of Iuda? is not Ierusalem? meaning that Samaria and Ierusalem which should have beene an example to all Israell, of true repentance, holinesse, was the puddle and stewes of all idolatry Malach. 5, 6. and corruption, Therefore will I make Samaria (saith God) as an heape of the field, and for the planting of a vineyard, and I will cause the stones thereof to tumble downe into the Vallie; and will discover the foundations thereof. And as the Prophet saith, What is the sinne of Iacob? is not Samaria? and what is the sinne of Iuda? is not Ierusalem? So say I, What is the sinne of Norffolke? is not Norwich? and what is the sinne of England? is not London? For men are led by example, more than by doctrines. But let not our little townes follow our great Cities, in evill, lest God come in judgement against them as hee did against Sodome, and the Cities about it, Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum, Happy is hee, whom other mens harmes make to beware.



THE FIFTEENTH SERMON.


VERS. VII. 

Are set forth for example, and suffer the vengeance of eternall fire.
Sodomes punishment an example to all uncleane persons.



THE Apostle having laid fourth the sinne of Sodome, which was uncleannesse; for They followed strange flesh, and most horrible pollutions: hee commeth now to the second part of this verse, which containeth Sodomes punishment, and Gods judgements upon the Cities round about. But before he commeth to Sodomes punishment, he setteth downe unto us the end thereof, and saith, They are set forth for an example. For howsoever every example is not our imitation, yet every example is our instruction. It teacheth whoremongers to take heed of whoredome, and all men of turpitude and filthinesse. Gods judgements Esa. 26. 9. are in the earth, to teach the inhabitants of the world to learn righteousnesse: to learne them to feare God, and to sinne no more. Paul applyed every example of Israel to the Corinthians, saying, These are ensamples for us, that we should not lust after evill things, as 1 Cor. 10, 11. etc they lusted; neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written, The people sat downe to eat and drinke, and rose up to play: Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them have committed fornication, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand; neither let us tempt Christ as some of them have tempted him, and were destroyed of Serpents; neither

murmure yee, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of All examples are lor instructions and cautions. the destroyer, now all these things came upon them for ensamples, and were written to admonish us, upon whom the latter ends of the world are come, that he will plague us, as he punished them, if we be subject to the like vices. Thus Daniel aggravated the sinne of Balthasar, by this, that he profited not by the example of his father. For Daniel told him, that his fathers heart was puffed up, and his mind hardened in pride, whereupon he was deposed of his Kingdome, and honour, and he was driven from the Sonnes of men, and his heart was made like the beasts, his dwelling was with the wilde Asses; he was fed with grasse like an Oxe, and his body was wet with the dewe of heaven, etc. But (saith he) Thou hast not humbled thy heart, though thou knew est all these things, but hast lift up thy Dan. 5. 2. 22. selfe against the Lord of heaven, etc. And so a number that see the judgement of God upon their fathers and friends, and yet they come not their owne hearts, and say with David, It is I that have sinned, and my fathers house, and what have these sheepe done? let thy 2 Sam. 24. 17. hand be upon mee, and my fathers house, and not upon this people. The fall of Adam was the juster, in that he tooke no heed, by the fall of Angels. The sinne of the old world was the greater, they saw Gen. 8. and heard both of the fall of Angels, and of the fall of Adam, and yet these examples could not make them beware. Thus Paul reasoned with the Romanes, for that they learned not by the example of the Iewes, he calleth them to a second view of it: Behold (saith hee) the bountifulnesse and the severity of God; towards them which have fallen, severity: but towards thee, bountifulnesse; if Rom. 11. 22. thou continue in this bountifulnesse, or else thou shalt be cut off. This is the end of all Scripture, to apply examples and doctrines to us; for the increase of knowledge and conscience. Thus Absalom is an example to all rebels, how they lay their hands on the Lords 2 Sam. 17. 2 Sam. 15, Acts 5. 2 Pet. 2. 2 Reg. 9. annointed; Achitophel to all bad counsellors, Ananias to all lyers, Herod to all persecutors, Balaam to all greedy wretches, Iez^bel to all proud women. Therefore Moses upbraideth Israel, that they seeing the examples of them, that worshipped Baalpeor, yet runne into the same sin, he maketh them stocks, blocks, beasts without eyes, saying, The Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and eares to heare unto this day. Deut. 29. 4.
To apply this: Hath France been plagued, so that their channels have overflowed with blood, not with water? Hath God plagued Flanders; that their children be fatherlesse, their wives widdowes, their houses turned over unto strangers, their lands to aliens? hath Germany been grieved? Scotland distressed, and we regard it not, we are blinder than Pharoah, and more beasts than Nebuchadnezzar. To tame a Lion they use to beat a little dogge before him; So to tame us of a Lion-like nature, God hathbeaten France, Flanders, Germany, etc.
Tune tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet.

O England looke unto thy selfe, end let thy neighbours fire, make Examples not regarded aggravate punishment. thee take heede of approching flames. As God said of Babell, Come downe, and sit in the dust so virgin daughter Babel etc. So say I, Come downe, and sit in the duste, o virgin, daughter England. There is no throne o daughter of the Chaldeans. For thou shalt no more be Esa. 47. 1. called tender and delicate. Take the milstones and grinde meale, lose thy locks, make bare thy feete, uncover thy legges, and passe thorow the flouds. Thy filthynes is discovered, and thy shame shal beseen. Thou shalt no more be called the mother of kingdomes. Lay thy hand therfore O virgin daughter England upon thy heart repent of thy sinnes, and God will repent of his plagues, turne away from thy sinnes and God wil turne his face from thy sinnes, and blot out all thy misdeeds.
And thus much being spoken as touching the end of Sodomes punishment; I come now unto the punishment it selfe, and that is double.
First fire
Secondly, Eternall fire.
But first, fire: For among the judgements of God, fire ever hath beene a principall. We use to say that fire and water have no mercy; and it is so: therefore when God would punish notorious sinnes he plagued them with fire. When the uncleane lusts of Sodome cried up to heaven; The Lord rained, fire and brimstone from Gen. 19. the Lord out of Heaven upon them, and destroied them. When Israell lusted after flesh, God sent fire into the host, which burnt amongst Numb. 11. 1. them, and consumed the utmost part of the Host. When the Captaines of Ahaziah came prowdly against Elisha the man of God, they, 2 Reg. 1. and their Fifties were consumed with fire. The two notable whoremongers of Iuda were burnt with fire, in so much as it Luk. 9. grew to a proverbe in Iuda, The Lord make thee like Zedekiah and Gen. 6. like Abab, whom the King of Babell burnt in the fire. The Samaritans refusing to lodg the Lord Iesus, the Apostles would have prayed 2 Pet. 3. for fire to come from heaven to destroy them. When Christ Iesus will come to judgement, he will come in fire: Once the world was drowned and then it shal be burned. For The heavens shall passe in manner of a tempest, the Elementes shall melt for servent heat the earth Mat. 25. 41. and all that is therupon shall burne. And when he will judge the 2 Thess. 1. 8. world to a certaine set punishment, it is to fire; Goe yee cursed into everlasting fire. This is the punishment of the damned. For when the Lord shall shew himselfe from heaven, with his mighty Angels In flaming fire, they shal be throwen into a burning Lake.
The paines of hell are described many wayes, they are called? Vermis conscientiae, a worme of Conscience; Tenebrae exteriores, utter Mar. 9. 4. Mat. 22. 13: Apoc. 20. Luk. 6. 25. Mat. 25. 41. 2 Thes. 1. 8. Esa. 30. Apoc. 19. darkenesse; Secunda mors, the second death; fletus and stridor dentium, weepings and gnashing of teeth; the place of Divels, losse of Gods presence, want of his countenance: Tophet, and the vallie of mourning; but chiefly fire, and the burning lake. O what an horror is it ever to feele a gnawing worme, ever to lie in darknesse, to see

death, ever to weepe and gnash our teeth, to be among Divels, to fry in fire. But as the Poet unable to se out the sorrowes of Niobe; Fire fearefull; hell fire more fearefull. was driven to wrappe up her heade in a cloud: so words fayle me, you cannot heare it, my tongue cannot expresse it, all our hearts cannot comprehend it, the paines of hell are unspeakeable, as the joyes of heaven are incomprehensible. As the one cannot be 1 Cor. 2. 8. perceived by the eye, nor received by the eare, nor conceived by the heart; no more can the other. If a man were in the fire an hower. He would give a hundred thousand pound to come out of it, and yet our fire is no more to hell fire, than a painted fire is to our fire. Horresco referens, I tremble, I quake rehearsing it. Tremble, o tremble yee blaspemers, that tosse Gods name like to a tennis balle. The flying booke of Gods vengeance, which is Zach. 5. 1. 2. 3. twenty cubites long, and tenne cubites broad, wherein is written Ier. 5. 8. 9. the curse, that goeth forth oyer the whole earth, will seize upon them, and cut them of, on this side and on that.
Tremble yee whoremongers, which like stoned horses neigh after your neighbours wives; For God will visite for these things, and his soule wil be avenged on you. Tremble you greedy men, that sell the poore for shoes, and the needy for silver; For God will not forget any of your workes, he hath sworne it by the excellencie Amos. 8. 6. 7. of Iacob the land shall tremble for this, and every one mourne that dwelleth therein. Tremble ye contemners of Gods 2 Po^. 3. word, that deride his preachers as the old world did Noah: The Lord himselfe will have you now in derision. And let all sinners tremble; Let them beware by Dives that cries for a spoonefull of water to coole his tongue tormented in the flames, with more rivers of teares, than ever Esau did for the blessing, and yet cannot have it. But if they will not beleeve hell fire they shall feele it before Luk. 16. 27. they beleeve it. They shall lie in Hell like sheepe; death shall devoure them. There lie many jollie fellowes that would give tenne Psal. 49. 14. thousand worlds to come out, if they had them. The very Poets by some flash of Gods spirit intimate Hell, in naming Caron, Phlegeton, Archeron, Erebus, with Tantalus his apples, and Ixions wheele, and Titius his liver, and Sysiphus his stone: we Christians speake of Gods judgement seate, and they name Minos, Rhadamanthus, Aeacus, Triptoleme: we have heaven; they name Camp^s Tert. in Apologetico adversus Gemes. Elysios; we speake of God, they speake of Dis, Pluto, Proserpina. For as Tertullian said, potaverunt poetae de Prophetarum fonte, The Poets dranke of the fountaines of the Prophets, Inde Philosophi sitim ingenii sui rigaverunt: There the Philosophers refreshed the thirst of their wits: Antiquior enim omnibus est veritas, Truth is more ancient than all, omnia adversus veritatem de veritate constructa sunt, All things against the truth, were heaped togither, and made of the truth.
But to returne to our matter. The Schoolemen distinguish of fire; that there is Ignis ardoris, faetoris, and terroris; Fire of heate,

of stench, and of terrour. Of heate, as in Mount Aetna; of stench, they the have heaven here must have hell hereafter. as in mount Heda, of terrour and feare, as Ignis fulguris, the fire of lightening in America: All those fires, say they, are in Hell. But omitting the Schoolemen, the holy Ghost noteth this fire to be most terrible even to Kings; therefore to meane men: Tophet (that is to say, Hell, where the wicked are tormented) is prepared Esai 30. 33. of old, it is even prepared for the King (so that their estate and degree cannot exempt them, if they be wicked) It is made deepe and large; the burning thereof is fire, and much Wood, the breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone doth kindle it. Multi in hac vita quaerunt suavia potius quam gravia, varia quam sana, delicacia quamutilia, amara ergo gustabunt in inferno: Many in this world seeke more after sweet, than grave things; more after vaine than sound things, more after daintie, then profitable things; therfore shall they tast of bitter things in Hell. As Abraham said to the rich man, Sonne, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy pleasure; and Luk. 16. 25. contrarywise, Lazarus received paine, but now is be comforted, and thou tormented. Nemo potesthic and illic voluptate frui; no man can enjoy pleasure in this life and in the life to come also: For twise happy, men cannot be, but the way to heaven is to saile by Hell. For by many tribulations we must entre into the kingdome off heaven.
A Schooleman that wrote sermones disciple, maketh five differents Act. 4. betwene our fire and Hell fire: First, in regard of heate; For our fire being compared to Hell fire is like a fire painted upon a wall; and therfore called, a lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast Apot. 20. 10. and false prophet shal be tormented day and night Secondly, our fire burneth the body alone, it tormenteth not the soule; but the fire of Hell tormented and burneth body and soule: Hereupon saith our Saviour, Feare not him that can hurt the body, and have no power over the soule but feare him, that is able to send both body and soule into Mat. 13. 28. Hell.
Thirdly, our fire where it burneth, there it shineth, there it lighteneth; but the fire of Hell burneth but giveth no light at all: Therfore Christ calleth it utter darknesse. Mat. 23. 13.
Fourthly, our fire wasteth and consumeth whatsoever is cast into it: but the fire of Hell consumeth nothing: For as the Salamander liveth in the fire; so shall the wicked live in the fire of Hell; they shall seeke for death, but they shall not find it: Semper cumburentur, nunquam consumentur, they shall alwaies be burned, Aug. but never consumed.
Fourthly, one fire may be quenched, but the fire of Hell cannot, and therefore called unquenchable, vna scintilla ignis Gehennae Mar. 4. 44. plus laedit impium, quam si mulier in partu mille annis perseveraret; one sparke of Hell fire doth more torment the wicked, than if a woman should continue in her travell a thousand yeares. Bern:
Another Schooleman nameth these paines in Hell first, heat; and therfore called a Luke of fire. Apoc. 19. 20.

Secondly, stinch; and therfore called a Lake, that burneth with Hell terrible to all, but especially to the wicked. fire and brimstone; which stinketh horribly.
3. Bands, Take and bind him hand and foot.
4. Darkenesse, Cast him into utter darkenesse.
5. Visions of divels, Goe ye cursed into hell fire prepared for the divell Mat. 22. 13. Ibidem. Mat. 25. and his Angels.
6. The howling of the damned; and therefore it is said, that all the kindreds of the earth shall waile before him. Apoc. 1. 7.
7. Separation from God; for they shall be punished with eternall perdition, from the presence of God, and from the glory of his power. And 2 Thes. 1. 8. this Gregory calleth Paena damni, the paine of losse. Finely said Bernard, Paveo Gehennam, and Iudicis vultum, contremisco ab ira potentis, a facie furoris ejus, a fragore ruentis mundi, a conflagratione elementorum, Bern. Ser. 26. in Cant. a voce Archangeli, a daemonibus rugientibus paratis ad escam; I feare Hell and the countenance of the Iudge, I tremble for the wrath of the Almighty, for the face of his fury, for the noyse of the falling world, for the burning of the elements, for the voyce of the Archangell, and for the roaring Divels prepared to devoure.
But if Bernard feared, what may the wicked doe, whose hearts tell them, that they have done little or no good in the world. The Glutton, whose faith is his kitchin, and whose God is his belly. The Whoremonger, who hath eyes full of adult^ry. The Oppressor, Phil. 3: 17 2 Pet. 2. 14. Esa. 1. 15. whose hands are full of blood. The Drunkard, whose body is as the swill-tub: the irreligious person, that seldome prayeth, seldome giveth thankes, or heareth Gods Word. Quaeres quae spes, quoad animi solatium hisce? What hope of heaven, and happinesse, can these men have? how thinke they to escape this fire of hell? Scientes, prudentes, vivi, videntesque pereunt, knowing, understanding, alive, and seeing they shall perish. GOD shall raine upon them snares, fire, brimstone, this shall bee their portion to Psal. 11. drinke. So much for the first punishment of the reprobate; Fire.
The second punishment of the reprobate is, eternall fire; fire and eternity of fire. All paines here have an end, but the paines of hell have no end: Whereupon Augustine, Miseris erit mors fine morte, finis sine fine, defectus sine defectu, etc. To these miserable Aug. lib. de Spiritu and anima cap. 56. wretches, there shall be a death without death, an end without end, a decay without decay, because their death shall ever live, and their end shall ever begin, and their decay knoweth not how to decay; death shall presse them, but not extinguish them; sorrow shall torment them, and not drive away their feare; the fire shall burne them, and not consume them, nor yet dispell their darkenesse; for in this fire is obscuritie, darkenesse, and in this obscurity and darkenesse, feare and trembling; and in this combustion and burning, sorrow: they shall alwaies suffer torment, and alwayes shall feare, because they shall be tormented

without hope of pardon. If after so many thousand yeeres, as Eternity of torments in hell aggravate misery. they have haires on their heads, they might have an end of their torment, there were some hope, and they might indure those torments more quietly, but because they have no hope, that ever their paines shall be either eased or ended, desperatione deficiunt, they faile, they faint, and quaile thorow despaire; Et ad tormenta non sufficiunt, and they are no way able to indure those torments. Ibi erit tortor semper caedens, there shall be a tormentor ever beating them; Et vermis semper corrodens, and a worme alwayes gnawing them; Etignis semper comburens, a fire alwayes burning them; For their worme shall not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched, sinnes shall bee detected, and the sinnes shall be punished, Esa. 66. 24. and that for ever, they shall see divels, but not God; Quod est omnium meseriarum miserrimum, which of all miseries is most miserable. For if Absalom tooke it so grievously, that hee 2 Sam. 14. 32. was banished his Fathers presence, and could not see his face? how grievously shall the Reprobate be afflicted, to be banished Gods presence, and not to see his face? for they shall be punished with eternall perdition, from the presence of God, and glory 2 Thes. 1. 9. of his power.
But to follow this point a little further; all men in misery comfort themselves with hope of an end; the prisoner with hope of a gaole-delivery, the mariner with hope of arrivall, the souldier with hope of victory, the prentise with hope of liberty the gally-slave with hope of ransome; onely the poore caitiffe in hell hath no hope; he shall have end without end, death without death, night without day, morning without mirth, sorrow without solace, bondage without liberty.
Let fire and eternall fire move us; common fire is quenched with water, wilde fire with milke and vinegar, but hell fire is not quenched, their worme dyeth not, and the fire never goeth out. And Mar. 9. 44. why should not wee beleeve this? seeing that their is a certaine stone in Arcadia, called Asbestos, which being once kindled, never goeth out, never can be quenched. If this be in a stone, how much more in the power of God? This earthly fire, except it be nourished with wood and other combustible matter will out but the fire of hell never goeth out, it alwaies burneth and never ceaseth. The reason is because our fire is not, In loco proprio, in his proper place, sed violenta, but in a violent. The fire of hell is in his proper place, for the breath of the Lord kindleth it. We Greg in moralib^^. see Aetna to burne alwayes, for it hath burnt from the beginning of the world, and still doth burne: why should not then hell fire burne alwayes? and why should not we beleeve that men shall alwayes live in the fire of hell? seeing wee see and know the Salamander to live in the fire. If this may be by the power of nature, why may not that by the power of God. The paines of hell be such, that all the Arithmetitians in the world,

cannot number them, nor all the Geometritians measure them, The terrours of hell should deterre from sinne. nor all the Rhetoritians expresse them, Quid hora ad diem, etc. saith one, what is an houre to a day, a day to a month, a month to a yeere, a yeere to a thousand yeeres, and a thousand yeeres to eternity. Mathuselah lived almost a thousand yeeres, but the yeeres that are past, are nothing, we have nothing of time, but that which is present. The Pigmaeans lived onely seven yeeres, never reached unto eight yeeres: And their be certaine creatures bred and borne at the river Hispanis, that live but a day, in the morning they are bred and brought forth, at noone they are at their full strength, at night they make their end, and are gone: compare our yeeres with eternity, and wee are in the same state and condition.
The reason of this endlesse punishment is the infinite Majesty of God, words against common persons beare but common actions, against noble men they be Scandala magnatum; against Princes, they be treason; so the person of God aggravateth the sinne. If any aske then how Christs death could satisfie the justice of God, seeing it was not eternall. I answer, that he did it thorow the excellency of his Person, and the perfection of his merits.
The remembrance of these paines in hell, will drive away the remembrance of sinne, as the Adamant is contrary to the Loadstone, and suffereth it to draw no iron to it; behold the weight of hell paines in Christ: How sweat he? how cryed he, Deus meus, deus meus, quare dereliquisti me? My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? How did teares of blood trickle from him? If hell paines were so grievous unto him? what will they be to us? Onely this difference is betwixt Christ and us, that hee sustained all mens sinnes, wee but our owne sinnes, our paine therefore not so great as his; but yet of greater and longer continuance, his was but temporall, ours eternall, if we repent not, We must suffer the vengeance of eternall fire.
The remembrance of fire, and eternall fire, swalloweth up all our cogitations: How can our hearts endure, or how can our hands be strong in that day, When the Lord shall have to doe with us, the earth Ezech. 22. 14. shall tremble before him, All faces shall gather blackenesse, the earth shall tremble before him, the heavens shall shake, the Sun and the Moone Ioel 2. 6. 10. shall be darkned, and the starres shall withdraw their shining. If a Barne were full of Corne, having tenne thousand quarters of wheate in it, and a bird should every yeere carry away one kirnel in her neb, it would have an end at last: If a Mountaine were twenty miles high, and but one shovell full of earth in a yeere taken from it, in time it would deminish, and come to nothing: but hell deminisheth not, there is no end of it. When the wicked have beene frying in hell so many hundred yeeres as there be piles of grasse growing upon the face of the earth, nay, so

many thousand yeeres, as there be sands, or drops of water in God usually proportions punishment to sinne. the Sea, nay so many million of yeeres, as there be creatures in heaven and in earth; yet are they as farre from being delivered out of the captivity of hell, as they were the first day of their entrance. I say therefore of Gods judgements, as Paul said of Gods wisedome; O alitudo; O the depth of the riches, both of the wisedome and knowledge of God! O the depth of the justice and judgements of God, how unsearchable are his judgements, and his wayes past finding out. Now the very Papists make foure places of torment: 1. Infernum, Hell: 2. Purgatorium, Purgatory: 3. Limbum puerorum non baptizatorum, A place where were children that dye without baptisme; and 4. Limbum patrum, A place where the Fathers were. Now saw they, Christ never descended into Hell, to deliver any from thence, but he brought the Fathers, E limbo patrum, in his passion; for in hell there is no redemption. Sermones discipuli Ser. 156.
By the way note, that as the Sodomites burned in the fire of uncleane lust; so God burned them with the fire of his vengeance. Poena saepe peccato respondet, the punishment is oftentrmes answerable to the sinne committed, and done; God punisheth men Aug. according to the quality of their sinnes. The Philistines adored 1 Sam. 5. Mice and rattes, so they were plagued with mice and rattes. And as they drew the arke out of his boundes: so God drew their intrales out of their course: And as Ieroboam overthrew Gods worship in one Altar erected at Ierusalem; So God overthrew his 1 Reg. 13. Altar at Bethel. And as he restrayned the hands of Israel to offer to the true God, but to his golden Calves; so his hand dried up. God punisheth drunkards with dropsies, and then, Woe to the Crowne of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim. And he punisheth the Esa. 28. 1. covetous men with theeves, who spoise them, as they have spoiled. Cap. 30. And he punisheth the adulterers with pox and such like evills. For the Adulterer many tymes carieth a body to the grave full of maladies and a soule to hell, to eternall fire full of iniquities: and he punisheth Tyrants by men as bloody as themselves, and thus he punished Adonizedeck, For he had cut off the fingers and toes of many kings, at last his owne fingers and toes were Iudg. 1. cut off: For With what measure we mete to others the same shall be measured to us againe. The howse of valois having druncke blood voided blood, and of English persecuters died many strangely: oh then let us take heed, how we offend; For God will come in judgement he will be a swift witnesse, and a sharpe Iudge against vs, as here against the Sodomites; who were not only destroied with fire and brimstone from Heaven temporally, but also suffer the vengeance of eternall fire.
And this example of Gods vengeance, is so famous that it is recorded by most writers both prophane and divine. Among prophane, Solinus, Cornelius Tacitus, Strabo, Stephanus, Pliny, Aristotle

have written of it. Among divine, Moses, Deut 29. and Esay cap 1. Sodome not punished alone, but those that partooke with her. and 13. Ieremy also cap. 23. and 44. Ezekiel in like manner writeth of it as it appeareth cap. 16. Amos in his fourth chapter. Sophany, in his second chapter; and the Lord Iesus in the 16. of Mathew mentioneth it; and so also doth S. Paul, Rom. 9. and S. Peter in his second Epistle and second chapter; and S. Iohn in the 11. of the Apocalips. Let us therfore make profit and Clense our selves 2 Cor. 7. 1. of all filthynes of the flesh and spirit, lest we also suffer The vengeance of eternall fire.
And further observe with me that not only Sodome was destroied, and suffered the vengeance of eternall fire; but many Cities besides. Moses. Deut. 29. and the Prophet Hosea. cap 11. besides Sodome nameth 3. Citties more: Gomorra, Zeboim, Admah: and unto these some other writers ad Phagor: so that five Cities suffred the vengeance of eternall fire. Egesippus and Stephanus say that 10. Cities were destroied: and some say 13. Iosephus, Tertullian Augustine and others write, that the aire there is so infectious, that if a bird flieth over it, it dieth presently; and that no creature can live there, and the apples, and other fruite that grow there howsoever they seeme pleasant unto the eye, yet if you do but touch them, they fall to Cinder and ashes. The summe of all is to admonish us not to follow strang flesh, as they did. But to keep our vessels in holynesse and not in the lust of concupiscence. As Sodome and Gomor. 1 Thess. 4. And the Cities about them did, lest God destroy vs with fire, as hee did them, and lest we suffer, The vengeance of eternall fire as they doe.
And now brethren, you looke that I should say some thing as touching the fearefull accident of fire, that since my last being in this chaire of Moses have happened among you, and hath burnt up, and consumed, not an house or two, but almost your whole towne, and that no small towne, but the chiefest and the greatest in these parts, being the chiefest mart towne in all the hundred, as the Lord hath come to Dereham and Aylisham, Beckles, and other neighbour townes: so now at the last hee is come to you: your sinnes have brought downe this judgement of God upon you therefore Washe you, make you Esa. 1. 16. 17. cleane, put away your evill intents, from before God, cease from doing evill, learne to doe well; otherwise the Lords hand wil be Amo^. 3. stretched out still against you; and doe not thincke, that this fire came by chance. For There is no evill done in the City, but the Lord doth it himselfe. And note the providence of God, that the Psal. 118. Lament. 2. 1. doctrine of burning of Sodome should be now handled, when this fearefull judgement of fire fell upon you: This is the Lord doing and it is marveilous in our eyes, As David speaketh in another case. As The Lord darkened the daughter of Sion in his Wrath, (that is brought her from prosperity to adversity) so hath

he darkened Northwalsham. And as The Lord cast downe from Heaven Outward afflictions make way to repentance and mercy. unto the earth the beauty of Israel (that is, hath given her a most sore fall) so hath hee cast from Heaven to earth the beauty of Northewalsham. And as the Lord destroyed the habitations of Iacob: so hath hee your habitations, and laid wast your dwelling places. In the Lowe-Countryes, when, we see Cities burnt, men slaine, Churches ruinated. Corne-fields, Gardens, and Orchards destroyed; we say then, the Spanyards have beene here: So whosoever shall see Northwalsham burnt and consumed with fire, as it is, hee will say. The Lord hath beene here. The Lord hath done Lament. 2. 17. that which he purposed, hee hath throwne downe, and not spared.
But Brethren comfort your selves, God will receive you if yee will turne, For hee is gracious and mercifull, longsuffering, Psal. 103. and of great goodnesse: hee will not alway bee chiding, neither keepeth hee his wrath for ever: Pray therefore with the Prophes Comfort us againe, after the time that thou hast plagued, Psal. 90. 15. us and for the yeares wherein we have suffered aduersity, and GOD will restore your losses. It is as easye a matter for him to restore them, as at the first to give them. Thus Iob bare his losses patiently, The Lord (saith hee) gave, Iob. 1. 21. and the Lord hath taken away; as it pleased the Lord, so it is come to passe; blessed bee the name of the Lord. Cyrill said of the Cyril. Eunomians, that they had taken away his goods from him, but not Christ from him. Augustine said, that if GOD should give him all things, that were not enough, except GOD gave himselfe also to him, and then hee had enough: Weepe not Agar, a well shall spring up in the wildernesse: Feare not Sampson; a jawe-bone shall slay a Aug. Gen. 21. 15. Iudg. 15. 1 Reg. 12. 1 Reg. 17. whose army of Philistines: Die not Elias. The Ravens shall bring thee flesh and bread: Bee not discomforted widowe of Sarepta; the meale in the barrell, and the oyle in the cruse, shall not waste: Faynt not Iewes; Five loaves shall Iohn. 6. feede five thousand: Feare not Daniel; Abacucke shall bring thee meate from Iewry: Feare not yee men of wallsham, Dan. Exod. Ezra. 4. God can encline the hearts of all the Countrey to doe you good, as hee did the hearts of the Aegyptians to lende to Israell; hee can reedifye your Towne, as hee did Ierusalem by Nehemiahs, Hee can restore your losses, as hee did the losses of Iob, that you shall be richer at the last than at the first. Hee that commanded the whale to cast Ionas on the dry land after three daies; hee that turned the rocke into a river, and the Flint stone into a springing well: Mat. 12. Nomb. 20. he that saved Paul in the depth of the Sea; can save you, and your goods; and will, if you rest upon him; only rely on Act. 27. the Lord. My brethren, know, that his eye is not dimme, his Esa. 39.

eare is not heavy his arme is not shortened, his heart is not diminished God preserves them that rely on him. if we turne to him: Hee is rich to all that call upon him: be not wanting to thy selfe in faith, and God will not be wanting unto thee in help; beleeve and throwe not your selves downe so Rom. 10. much, The earth is the Lords and all that therein is, the compasse of the world and they that dwell therein. He made you rich when yee were Psal. 24. poore, and being poore, he can make you rich againe. Seeke his kingdome, and the righteousnes thereof, and all these earthly things shall be Mat. 6. 33. cast unto you.



THE SIXTEENTH SERMON.


VERS. VIII. 

Likewise notwithstanding these sleepers also defile the flesh and despise goverment.
Where reprehension doth not amend, execration follows.



SAint Iude in these 8, 9, 10. and 11. Verses noteth three things.
First, A description of the wicked.
Secondly, A confutation.
Thirdly, An execration.
For hee ariseth by degrees, as the Eagle mounteth in her flight, higher and higher: So Inde from Description to Confutation, from Confutation to Execration. Hee proceedeth in the zeale of God, as Iehu marched in his chariot, valiantly, like the fire that first smoaketh, and then flameth, like the Sunne that warmeth in the morning, and burneth at noone tide; so at last hee accurseth them, woe to them (quoth Iude) Let them be written among the fooles, let them be put out of the Booke of life, neither let them be written with the righteous: Let their table bee made a snare before them. And their prosperitie their ruine: let their eyes bee blinded, that they see not, and make their Psal. 69. 22, 23, 24, 25, 27. Ioynes alwayes tremble: powre out thy anger upon them, and let thy wrathfull displeasure take them. Let their habitation be voyd, and none

dwell in their tents; lay iniquity upon their iniquity, and let them not Three kindes of sleepers mentioned in Scripture. come in thy righteousnesse. Hee prayeth God with Ieremy to powre out his wrath upon them; he desireth God with David, to arise and scatter them, to drive them away as smoke, and as waxe melteth before the fire; so they might perish, and that God would Ier. 10. 25. Psal. 69. 1, 2. Psal. 74. 11. withdraw his hand, even his right hand out of his bosome, and consume them.
Now for the description, he painteth them out, as Zeuxis did the Grapes that deceived the birds, as Parrhasius did the sheete that deceived Zeuxis.
And first he calleth them sleepers.
Secondly, defilers of the flesh.
Thirdly, despisers of Government.
Fourthly, Raylers, speaking evill of them that are in authority.
Fifthly, he noteth them to be envious, like Caine.
Gen. 4. Sixthly, Rebellious, like Corah.
Seventhly, Covetous, like Balaam. Numh. 16. Cap. 16. 9.
Thus, as the Leopard hath many spots, so had they many sins; as Iosephs coat had many colours, so had they many wickednesses Ier. 5. A vertice ad calcem non erat sanitas, from toppe to toe there was no soundnesse, but wounds and swellings, and sores full of corruptions, Esa. 1. 4. they were a monstrous people. A man may say of them, as Virgil spake of Polipheme, that one-eyed Gyant, Monstrum horendum, informe, ingens, cui lumen ademptum, An huge shapelesse horrid monster without an eye. For they had a monstrous body, having a drowsie head, a lecherous flesh, a railing tongue, a blasphemous ignorant mouth, an envious eye, a rebellious hand, a covetous heart; like Virgils Alecto, ^ui nomina mille, mille no^^^di artes, that a thousand names, a thousand wayes to doe mischiefe, a strange body compact of vile members, the head of an Asse, the flesh of a Goat, the tongue of a Serpent, the eye of a Basiliske, the hand of a Monkey, the heart of a Dragon, that is, never satisfied. So that Iude might say as Ieremy said, My heretage Ier. 12. 8, 9. is unto me, as a Lion in the forrest; it cryeth out against me, therefore have I hated it. Shall my heretage be unto me as a bird of divers colours, etc. Thus much generally for the Text.
And now to the particular handling of the things therein contained; and first, he calleth them sleepers. He speaketh not of any naturall sleepe, but the sleepe, that he meaneth, is security, negligence; and in affirming them to be sleepers, he meaneth that they were drowsie, blockish, negligent. As Paul said to Titus of the Cretians, That they were lyers, evill beasts, slow bellies; so Tit. 1. 12. these were secure and sleepy.
Sleepe in the Scripture hath three significations, sometime it signifieth naturall rest, so the Apostles slept: So the Evangelist witnesseth that Christ, Came unto his disciples, and found them asleepe. Secondly, it signifieth death, and so Lazarus slept, and Mat. 26. 40.

Stephen slept, and the Corinthians slept: Brethren we shall not all sleep, The living in sinne and security like lying asleepe. that is, we shall not all dye. Thirdly, it signifieth dulnesse of spirit, and the Romanes slept, but Paul telleth them, that, Considering the season, it is high time for them to awake from sleepe; he meaneth sinne, security, carelesnesse, continuance in sinne. For there is a lethergie Iohn 11. Acts 7. Rom. 13. 11. of the minde, as there is of the body, that men dye sleeping, and many are overtaken with it, they are as men asleepe, like the mice of the Alpes, that sleep all winter; like Endimion, that could not be awaked; like Saul and Abner, that could not be stirred with Davids shouting. Many labour of the lethergy of 1 Sam. 26. 14. the mind, they see not the glory of God, they heare not his voice they smell not the sweet promises of God in Christ Iesus; they taste not how good God is unto them, they handle not the Book 1 Pet. 2. 3. of life. As a man asleep seeth not, heareth not, walketh not, but is without sense, or motion of life for the time (for sleepe is a band and an imprisonment of all the senses) so is a sinner without remorse; he perceiveth not, he regardeth not the things that are of God. As Christ said to Peter, Come behind me Satan, thou Mat. 16. 23. savourest not the things that are of God. Many wake to the world; They rise early, they goe late to bed; they eate the bread of carefullnesse, Psal. 127. they are asleepe in all the matters of God. A man may say to them, as the Prophet Esay said unto the Iewes; Know ye nothing? Esa. 40. 21. have ye not heard it? hath it not been told you from the beginning? have ye not understood it, by the foundations of the earth he sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabiters thereof are as Grashoppers; he stretcheth out the Heavens as a Curtaine and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in. Their soule it asleepe, if not dead; for the trumpet of Gods Word hath not awaked them this forty, fifty yeeres: Sed tempus est surgeudi, it is high time for us to awake out of sleepe. I will therefore say unto you, as Christ said to the Church of Sardis, Awake and strengthen the things that remaine. Gods Minsters Rom. 13. 11. Apoc. 3. 2. they are as Trumpets to awake the drowsie Souldier, and to prepare him to the battell; and therefore they are willed to Crie aloud Esa. 58. 1. and not to spare, to lift up their voyces like trumpets, that so they may awake men out of their sleepe of sinne. Gods Ministers, they are as Cockes, to crow, and to awaken all to receive the Word; for as the body hath
Foure powers
Appetitive the First,Retentive. the Second,Digestive. the Third,Expulsive. the Fourth,
So hath the soule, it must desire the word; and as the Hart brayeth Psal. 42. 1. for the rivers of waters; so must our soules pant after God and his Word, and not onely desire it, but keepe it, for Blessed are they Luke 11. 28. that heare the Word and keepe it; and not onely desire and keepe it, but also digest it into good manners, that so, our conversation may be such as becommeth the Gospell of Christ, and not only Phil. 1. 27.

desire it, keepe it, and disgest it: but also expell whatsoever is contrary The sleepe of sinne most dangerous. unto it; Laying aside all maliciousnesse, and all guile, and dissimulation and envy, and all evill speaking: but this cannot bee without crying, for all men bee in a slumber. The Apostle saith, awake thou 1 Pet. 2. 1. Ephes. 5. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 14. that sleepest, stand up from death: And he explaineth the phrase in his Epistle to the Corinthians, saying, Awake to live righteously; and sinne not, so that to sleepe, is to live sinnefully, and securely: to awake is to live carefully, righteously, Esay calleth it a Spirit of slumber: The Lord (saith hee) hath covered you with a spirit of slumber Esai. 29. 10. and shut up your eyes. Salomon saith to the drunkard, that hee sleepeth upon the top of a mast: and this is true of all sinnes. Christ Pro. 23. 34. at his farewell, and Vltimum vale, cried, Vigilate and orate, watch and Mat. 26. pray: he said not Iejunate and virginitatem servate, Fast and keepe virginity; but vigilate watch. Christ said to his Apostles, Vigilate, Mar. 13. watch. Paul bad the Thessalonians, watch; Let us not sleepe, as doe 1 Thess. 5, 6. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Apoc. 3. 2. other, but let us watch and bee sober. Saint Peter bad the Iewes watch, Be sober and watch: Iohn bad the Church watch, be awake and strengthen the things that remaine. Esay bad Ierusalem watch, Awake O Esa. 40. 1. Ierusalem, bee bright, for thy light is come. As the Turtle hath but one note, so the Godly have but one song, Vigilate, surgite a somno, watch and arise from sleepe. It is said of Martinus that hee never passed houre of the day without prayer or reading or meditation; Semper aliquid boni agebat, hee did alwayes some good, and it is true, that Nostra bona opera sunt flagella diaboli, that our good works are whips for the Divell, Daimonomastyx, if wee be vigilant, and diligent in them. Wherefore Saint Peters exhortation, Give all diligence to joyne vertue with your faith, and with vertue knowledge, and 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. with knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience godlinesse, and with godlinesse brotherly kindnesse, and with brotherly kindnesse love. Mariners, saith Tertullian, are neuer devoured of the Syrenes but when they are asleepe. The Leopard is never taken Tertull. in Apologetico. Cant. 5. of the Dragon but then. When lost the Church her husband? but when she slept; when lost Saul his pot and his speare, when came the bridegroom? but when the virgins slept: when were teares sowen? 1. Sam. 26. Mat. 25. Mat. 13. Iudg. 4. cap. 16. Ier. 1. Act. 20. Mat. 26. but when men slept. Shall Sisera sleep then in Iaels tent? shall Sampson snort in Dalilahs lap? shall Ionas sleepe under the hatches? shall Eutichus sleepe in the middest of doctrine? shall Iames and Iohn nod, when Iudas is so busie about a mischiefe? For shame rise, else Sysera may have a naile in the temples of his head: Sampson may have his lockes shaven; Ionas may bee hurled over the hatches, etc. and Satan may surprise us all. Nicephorus telleth us of seven boyes of Bethel, that slept nine-score yeeres, but I am sure that some of us have slept forty, fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty, yeeres. I thinke that many are such sleepers, as they will never awake, till the last blast of the Archangell that shall awake all: For the Lord will discend from Heaven with a showt, and with the voyce of the Archangel, and 1 Thess. 4. 16. trumpe of God, and then they shall sleepe no longer but awake; whether

they will or no. Many sleepe all their life, and dye sleeping The Divell cannot hurt if we be watchfull. too, but this trumpe will awake them, but then it will bee too late.
As many are of a drousie constitution, like unto the disciples, to whom Christ came the first, and the second time, and found them asleepe: For their eyes were heavy. So is it with many in regard of their soules, Languido sunt ingenio, they are of a dull, and drousie disposition, and the Divell hath so besprinckled their temples Mat. 26. 43. with spirituall Opium of evill motions and suggestions, that they are fallen into a lethargy irrecoverable, and it may bee said of them, as of Saul and his troupes, A dead sleepe of God was upon them 1 Sam. 26. 12. and they could not awake.
A man that hath an enemy that watcheth all opportunity to do 1 Pet. 5. 8. him hurt, will watch to prevent him. Now the Divell watching day and night to devoure our soules, wee should watch to save them: Debilis est hostis Diabolus, qui non vincit nisi volentem and torpentem; the Divell is a weake enemy, hee vanquisheth none, but Greg. him that is willing and sleepy: Ille suggerit mala, tuum est repellere; he suggesteth evill, but it is thy duty to repell and put backe the evil: Latrare potest, non mordere, si caveamus, He may barke, but hee cannot Bern. bite, if we be circumspect, and take heed to our selves: As a charmed Adder, he can hisse but he cannot sting. Quoties resistimus caute, toties diabolum superamus, Angelos laetificamus animas a salvamus, Deum honoramus, As often as we resist warily, so often we overcome the Divell, rejoyce the Angels, save our soules, and honor God. At homo sine circumspectione, but a man without circumspection, and diligent regard of himselfe, is as a City without a wall, as an house without a doore, as an hoast of men without a Sentinell: our danger is great, therefore saith Christ, If thou wilt not watch, I will come on Apoc. 3. 3. thee as a theefe, and thou shalt not know what houre I will come upon thee. And againe, Behold, I come as a theefe, blessed is hee that watcheth, and keepeth his garments; (of righteousnesse and holinesse wherewith cap. 16. 13. wee are clad, through Iesus Christ) Lest hee walke naked, and men see his filthinesse. Early and betimes we ought to awake from sleepe, as the little birds, which chirpe and sing, and praise God earely. Ambr. Indecens est, solem invenire Christianum in lecto, It is unseemely and unfit, that the Sunne should find a Christian in his bed, Homo somno lentus est imago mortis, a sleepy sluggish man is deaths image: Aug. Et mors ab inferis venisse fingitur: and the Poet feineth death to come from Hell. Let us learne from the base creatures; The Bern. Nightingale keepeth her egges from the Serpent, and passeth the night not sleeping, but singing. Looke upon the Bees, they are neither sleepy nor sluggish, for some warre, some search diligently the flowers, some make Waxe, some gather Hony, some build cels, some keepe watch and ward, not a Bee idle. The little Conies watch, two keep Sentinell every night, and with a pat with their foote give notice to the rest to returne home: Let Christians

learne from all these, to be more carefull and watchfull, and not A Christian must alwayes watch. to be of the number of these sleepers. Sinne is this sleepe, and sinners are these sleepers, let us not sleepe as others sleepe, but Awake to righteousnesse and sinne not: and being awaked, let us 1 Thes. 5. 6. watch; watch we cannot till we be awaked, and when we are once awaked, we must ever watch, Nam vigilare lene est, peruigilare grave, to awake it is nothing, but to watch; Hic labor, hoc opus Martial. lib. 9. cap. 70. est, there is the worke indeed. Vigilandum est semper, multae insidiae sunt bonis, watch we must continually, because our enemy continually lies in wait for us: A thing rather to be regarded, because it is not here, as in a worldly watch, where some watch for the rest, and the rest sleepe while they wake: wee cannot watch here by a Deputy, no man can watch for us, but every one must watch for himselfe. Other may watch over us, as the Ministers, who in the Word are called Watchmen; but none can watch for us, every one in person must ever watch for himselfe. Let us Ezech. 3. 17. not sleepe therefore as other men, but let us watch and bee sober: but we watch not, but sleepe out our lives.
Tullie telleth us of men, whom he calleth (...), Qui nunquam vident Solem orientem aut occidentem, which never saw the Sunne Libro 2. de finibus. rising nor setting; at the rising of the Sunne they are in their beds, at the Sunne setting they are drunken in the Tavernes. So many of us watch no time; but lose all time, we spend few houres in prayer, fewer in hearing and reading, fewest in meditation and thanksgiving. The generall sinne of this age is security, we are sleepers, and sleepe in all good things, we are carelesse. I appeale to your consciences this day, if it be not so. I call heaven and earth to witnesse against you, that if ye sleep still, and wil not awake and watch, God will arise against you, like a Giant refreshed with wine, and raine upon you snares, fire and brimstone; this shall bee your portion to drinke. Psal. 11.
Secondly, he calleth them defilers of the flesh, carnall, wantons, uncleane, who keepe not their bodies in holinesse; but in the lust of concupiscence: as Paul said of the Gentiles. This sinne of uncleannesse is so much the greater, in as much as God so carefully keepeth all our members: Custodit omnia ossa, he keepeth all our bones; abstergit lachrymas ab oculis, hee wipeth the teares from our eyes; docet manus praeliari, he teacheth our hands Psal. 34. Psal. 116. Psal. 144. 1. to warre, and our fingers to fight; dirigit gressus nostros in via pacis, he directeth our going in the way of peace; totum denique corpus custodit, to conclude he keepeth the whole body. For the Lord (saith David) is thy keeper, the Lord is the shadow at the right hand. Ought we not then, to give our eyes, our hands, our feet, and the Psal. 121. 5. whole body unto his service, that as we have given our members servants to uncleannesse, and to iniquity to commit iniquity: So now to give over our members servants unto righteousnesse in holinesse, for being freed from sinne, and made the servants of God, our fruit

must be in holinesse, and our end shall be life eternall. Againe, God punisheth uncleannesse many waies. our members are the members of Christ, shall we take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Againe, they are the Temples of the Holy Ghost; If any man defile 1 Cor. 6. 2 Cor. 3. the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. A Noble man will not lodge in a hoggs coat, nor Gods Spirit in a filthy, uncleane, unchast body, Quid luci cum tenebris, what communion hath light 2 Cor. 6. 14. with darkenesse? what concord hath Christ with Belial? what part hath the beleever with the unbeleever? or what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? Againe, our members shall be glorified in heaven: Let them therefore glorifie God in this life, for as no uncleane beast might tarry upon the Lords Mountaine, so no polluted person shall passe thorow the gates Apoc. 221 of the new Ierusalem.
God punisheth this sinne many wayes: First, with beggery, for he that feedeth harlots shall never bee rich, for indeed it is a sinne Prov. 29. 3. against nature, for whereas other men sowe for an Harvest, these defilers of the flesh, which plough with othermens heifers sowe that which they dare not reape.
Secondly, he punisheth defilers of the flesh with infamy: for their reproach shall never be done away. Prov. 6. 33.
Thirdly, with lothsome diseases, for the most righteous God hath appointed, that they which will taste of the sweet of sinne, shall be filled with the gall of punishment, it bringeth corruption of the blood, dissolution of the sinewes, rottennesse of the marrow, aches in the joynts, crudities in the stomacke, paines in the head, gowtes and palsies, heavinesse in the heart, and stinging of the conscience.
Fourthly, Yea, and after all these, it shall be punished with hell fire: For it is written, for fornication, uncleannesse, inordinate Col. 3. 6. affection; etc. the wrath of God remaineth on such. And againe, whoremongers Heb. 13. 4. and adulterers God will judge: for is stabunt moechi, without shall be dogges, and inchanters, and whoremongers, etc. onely Apoc. 22. 15. such as be Virgins follow the Lambe. Know ye therefore, yee Apoc. 14. Gal. 4. Numb. 5. Deut. 23. 3. defilers of the flesh, there is no place for you in heaven, you must rest and dwell in the tenement in hell. The Bastard Ismael hath no place in Abrahams house: the unclean Canaanite hath no room in the host of Israel: The misbegotten Ammonite hath no accesse into Gods Tabernacle. As the whoremongers and defilers of the flesh, have neither foot, nor furrow, nor inch of roome in Gods Kingdome. Sunt in felle nequitiae, they are in the gall of Acts 8. 21. bitternesse, as Simon Peter said of Simon Magus. The holy Ghost joyneth a whore and a dogge together: Thou shalt not bring the Deut. 23. 18. hire of an whore, nor the price of a dogge into the house of God. And Ieremy compareth these adulterous beasts unto neighing horses, and Ier. 5. 8. the Wise man likens them to an Oxe going to the slaughter, and cals Prov. 7. 22. the whore a deepe ditch, and a narrow pit, And they that enter into her Prov. 2. 19.

hardly returne againe to take hold of the way of life. The guests and Whoredome and all uncleannesse odious. companions of harlots are in Hell, nay in the depth of Hell. Heaven will not receive them. O that men could-see into Hell, they should see as many defilers of the flesh, as many whoremongers, as of any sin against the second table!
Many make little reckoning of this sin of whoredome, which the Apostle meaneth by defiling of the flesh: but if the punishment provided for it, already spoken of, cannot let you see the grievousnesse of this sinne, then listen to that, which now I shall say unto you: First, it taketh away the heart of a man: so saith the Prophet, Whoredome and wine, and new wine take away the heart. As Hos. 4. 11. Nabuchadnezzar had the heart of a beast; so these defilers of the flesh have beastly hearts. Et praestat bestiam esse, quam bestialiter Seneca. vivere, A man had better be a beast, than live beastly.
Secondly, This sinne is so much the greater, because it hath a lawfull remedy. To avoid fornication, saith the Apostle, let every 1 Cor. 7. 2. man have his wife, and every wife her husband. And againe, They that cannot abstaine, let them marry. A poore theefe is pittied, that stealeth to satisfie hunger, but he that stealeth, and hath enough of his owne, his sinne is the greater, and the more to be punished Prov. 6. 33. so hee that hath a lawfull remedy, and such a remedy as God hath ordained, and yet runnes a whoring, his sinne is the more abominable, and deserveth greater punishment. Such was Davids sinne, hee had many wives and concubines, and yet hee 2 Sam. 11. 5. etc. tooke another mans Wife; and therefore his sinne was horrible.
Thirdly, by this sinne of whoredome, Satan gaineth two soules at once; a theefe may steale alone, the drunkard may be drunken alone, the murtherer, blasphemer, idolater, usurer, etc. may sinne alone, but the whoremonger killeth two soules at one clap. If the blood of Abel cryed for vengeance, how much more shall those soules cry for vengeance, whom these defilers of the flesh have brought to destruction: yet these defilers care not how many they abuse, and whores and harlots care not how many they lead to the divell, they open their quiver against every arrow. Eccles. 26. 22.
Fourthly, Defilers of the flesh, whoremongers are the Divels factors; Satan is a tempter; so are they, and therefore when they goe about to defile any, they should answere them as Christ answered Mat. 4. 1. Peter, when hee counselled him to save himselfe, Come behind mee Satan, thou art an offence unto mee. I reade of a certaine Matron Mat. 16. 23. that being intised by a desire of the flesh, an incontinent person, to incontinency, shee denied, but not relinquishing his suit at last shee calleth for a panne of coales, and desireth him for her sake, to hold his hand in that panne of coales one houre? hee answered it was an unreasonable request. She replied, Is my request unreasonable to have you hold your hand in this panne of coales one

houre? how vnreasonable is yours? which would have have mee Why our Lusts are by Saint Paul called members. to yeeld to that which will burne body and soule in Hell flames for ever. And so she sent him away packing, and so must all chast bodies answere these defilers.
Besides all this, this sinne of whoredome is an abominable sinne, because God forbids it, and all good men abhorre it. Ioseph chused rather to indanger his life, than to defile himselfe with his filthy Mistrisse; Susanna, before shee would suffer the filthy Iudges Gen. 39. 12. to defile her, adventured her bodie to the fire, and burned had she beene, had not God delivered her: but in this sinnefull age many will adventure their lives to doe it, and are so farre from Iosephs, Dan. 13. 45. and Susannaes affection, from flying filthinesse, that like Reuben they cannot rest day nor night till they be of the number of these defilers of the flesh.
Anger and lust are so such raging affections in man, that they can hardly be resisted: but be they as deere unto us, as our hands and our eyes, yet they must be plucked out and cut off. Paul compareth Mat. 18. 8, 9. lust unto a member: first, because actuall sinnes, in relation to originall sinne, are so many members, as grow from. Secondly, by a Metonymie of the subjects, lust may bee called a member, because it is brought to action, by the helpe and service of the members. And thirdly, because many men delight, and take pleasure in their turpitude, and filthinesse, as in their members. But howsoever it bee a member, yet it must bee mortified; so saith the Apostle, Mortifie Col. 3. 5, 6. Gal. 5. 24. your earthly members, Fornication, Vncleanenesse, unnaturall Lust, etc. and it must bee crucified also; For they that are Christs have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. Qui ergo sordescit, sordescat Act. 8. 20. ad huc: Let him that is filthy, bee filthy still. Et pereat secum voluptas, let his voluptuousnessy perish with him: as Simon Peter said to Simon Magus, in another sense, Saint Ierome cryeth out against Hierome. this sinne, after this manner, O ignis infernalis luxuria, cujus materia, gula, etc. O thou infernall fire of letchery, and whoredome; whose matter and nourishment, are gluttony and drunkennesse, the flame is, Fervor concupiscentiae; The heate of concupiscence; the sparkes are corrupt speeches, and filthy communication; the smoke, infamy and disgrace; the acts adultery, fornication, uncleanenesse; and the end Helltorments.
But to proceed, Saint Peter speaketh of men that have eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease to sinne, beguiling unstable soules. 2 Pet. 2. 14. Many have eares full of slander: as Doeg, and Saules parasites. Many have mouths full of blasphemy, as Goliah, who railed upon the hoast of the living God. Many have throats full of gluttony, as the Philippians, whose God was their belly, and glory their shame. Many have their hands full of bribery, as the Pharisees, which made 1 Sam. 22. 1 Sam. 17. 3, 6. Phil. 3. 17. Mat. 23. 25. Gen. 21. 47. cleane the utter side of the cup and platter, but within were full of briberie and excesse. And many have their hearts full of rancor and malice, as Esau who (...) ^^cob because of the blessing, and purposed

to slay Iacob. But most men have eyes full of adultery: but such uncleane Adultery a sin very common in Italy. eyes shall never see God, to their comfort. Ieremy said of that time, that they were all adulterers, And assembled themselves by companies in harlots houses, they rose up in the morning like fed-horses, Ier. 5. 7, 8, 9. every man neighed after his neighbours wife, shall I not visit for these things saith the Lord? shall not my soule be avenged of such a nation as this? Hosea said of Israel that they were all as the Oven of a Baker, for as the Bakers Oven, is seldome cooled, so their lust is seldome Hos. 7. 4. satisfied. CHRIST called the Pharisees, An adulterous generation; as if they all had beene Whoremongers. Mat. 16. 4. And Paul said of most men, that they bee (...) potius quam (...), Lovers of pleasures more than lovers of godlinesse. But take 2 Tim. 3. away your fornication out of GODS sight, and your adulteries from betweene your brests, lest God strip you naked, and discover your filthinesse Hos. 2. 2, 3. to your confusion.
One writeth of Genna in Italy, that all of them bee either Lovers or Lechers: As the Moabite walloweth in his vomit, as the dogge tumbleth in carion, as the Eeles lye in mud, as the Beetles sing in dung, so the Italians boast of lechery, all are either Lovers or Lechers.
Master Askam said of Venice, that whoredome was as indifferent as a shooe or a pantofle. Bishop Iewell said of Rome, that in the yeere, 1564. after a reformation there, there were found eight and twenty thousand Curtesans. Harding justified the stewes, and Iasin Pratensis hath written a booke, de ratione gignendi liberos, and de mille modis concubandi: and Iohannes Atlassa, an Archbishop, hath written a booke in praise of Sodomitry. And most Papists hold this with Pighius, and them of Colon: Sinon caste, tamen caute, if not chastly, yet warily; yet condemne they marriage. For as Severus the Hereticke, held a woman to be the workemanship of the Divell, and a man also from the Navell downeward: So Innocent the eighth, and Pope Siricius condemned marriage, alledging the words of the Apostle, that They which are in the flesh cannot please God. Thus like the second Rom. 8. 8. Nicene Councell under Irene, they racke all Scripture, perverting them to their owne destruction; like Foxes they spoile 2 Pet. 3. 16. Cant. 2. Psal. 80. the Lords Grapes; like Wilde-Boares they roote up all the Vineyard. Whoredome was wont to bee the sinne of Naples, afterwards the sinne of France, and now the sinne of England.
Saint Hierome saith, that it is no wisedome to sleepe neere a Serpent, it may bee, that hee biteth thee not, but it is forty to Hierome libr^ de regula monachorum cap. 9. one but that it stingeth thee. A vino and muliere (inquit) fuge, flee from wine and women (saith hee) ne te capiat ejus oculus, lest her eye catch thee. The lips of a strange woman drop as an hony combe, and her mouth is more soft than oyle, but the end of her is bitter as Wormewood, and sharpe as a two-edged Sword: her geete goe downe Prov. 5. 3, 4.

to death, and her steps tooke hold of Hell. And Chrysostome saith, Vncleanenes harply eschew ed, wee have so many motives to it. Quid moecharis? quid semen jaces in aquas? unde nihil es messurus, aut si metes ad ignominiam futures est fructus, Ex adulterio enim nascitur Nothus, qui te vivo carebit honore, and te mortuo extabit ad ignominiam monumentum: Why doest thou commit adultery? Why doest thou cast thy seed upon the waters? where nothing is to bee reaped, Serm. de non sectando concupiscentias carnis. or if thou reapest any thing, the fruit will turne to thy ignominy and dishonour? A Bastard is borne of Adultery; who as long as thou livest will deprive thee of honour: and being dead, hee shall be as a monument erected to thy reproach and infamy. And (as some say) it shall bee a fire brand in Hel, to burne the parents; Quot nothi, tot taedae ardentes in inferno ad comburendum parentes; How many Bastards, so many burning torches to burne the parents in Hell. Bernard goeth further, Qui scortum osculatur pulsat (inquit) inferni januam; Hee that Bern. kisseth or imbraceth an harlot rappeth and knocketh at Hell gates to bee let in: For her feet goe downe to death, and her steps Prov. 5. 5. take hold of Hell: Moechus, Vt Sus, plus amat lutum quam lectum Eburnium, The Adulterer loveth to wallow in the dirt and clay, more than in a bedde of Ivorie, hee burneth Apoc. 21. 8. in the fire of Leachery, and hee shall burne in Hell fire.
Now, because this temptation of uncleanenesse is one of the strongest in the world, and most hardly resisted under Heaven, the enemy that wee carry in our bosome being so strong, that is, Lust, and our flesh so weake to resist it: Mat. 26. 41. Gen. 3. Chrysostome cryeth out against all Adulterous Women, and saith that the adulterous Woman is Acutum telum diaboli, the sharpe dart of the Divell: Per mulierem Adamus foelicissimus 2 Sam. 11. 1 Reg. 11. Iudg. 15. Mat. 14. perdidit Paradisum: per mulierem, David piissimus homicidium perpetravit: per mulierem Salomon prudentissimus in idolatriam incidit: per eam fortissimus Sampson vinctus est: and per eam mundi lucerna Iohannes Baptista decollatur: By a Woman Adam the happiest, lost Paradise: by a Woman, David the holiest, perpetrated Murder: by a Woman, Salomon the wisest, fell to Idolatry: by a Woman, Sampson the strongest, was fettered and bound: and by a Woman, the light of the World John the Baptist was decollated, beheaded. I speake onely against wicked Women: For good Women, shall bee Heires with men of the grace of life and shall see thee goodnesse of the Lord in the Land of the Living.
To conclude this point: let us learne to keepe our vessels in holinesse, and not to bee of the number of the defilers of 1 Tim. 2. 15. the flesh, as bee Whoremongers, Adulterers, Fornicators, Wantons, etc. and let us shunne the occasion of this sinne, which is surfetting and drunkennesse. For Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus, without Corne and Wine Venus starveth: and

where Ceres and Bacchus is, there Venus reigneth. And take idlenesse Surfeting and drunkennesse, occasion of Whoredome. away, and Cupids bow will soone decay. Let us make a Covenant with our eyes, as Iob did; Let us meditate upon the Word of God, which is a forcible meane against this sinne: It shall keepe us from the bad Woman. which flattereth Iob. 31. Prov. 6. 22. 24. with her lips, forsaketh the husband of her youth, and breaketh the Covenant of thy God.



THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON.


VERS. VIII. 

And despise government, and speake evill of them that are in authoritie.
The Divell the first rebell and author of all rebellion



THis is the third vice objected against the wicked, They despise government: A vice objected to the like men by Saint Peter, who seemeth to have drawne his water from this fountaine, and his words from this Apostle, hee saith, The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptation, 2 Pet. 2. 9, 10. and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgement, to bee punished, and chiefely them that walke after the flesh in the lusts of uncleanenesse, and despise governement, These men as they rebell against God like the old Giants (...): So they resist man, ordained of God: Gen. 11. Luke 8. they are like the unrighteous Iudge, that neither cared for God nor man. And no marvell; For the Divell their master-head Captaine and father rose against God, and cast off his obedience whereupon Paul calleth pride, the sinne of the Divell, noting both (...) and (...) Reatum and condemnationem, The guilt and the 1 Tim. 36. punishment. Thus hee set upon Christ: For being come unto him, he said, If thou bee the Sonne of God, command these stones to bee made bread. Thus hee warred with Michael and his Angels; I saw

(saith Iohn) a great battell in Heaven, Michael and his Angels fought Christ and his Apostles taught and preached obedience to heathenish Princes. with the Dragon, and the Dragon and his Angels fought; and prevailed not. He is the Dragon that opened his mouth, To blaspheme against God, to blaspheme his name, and his Tabernacle, and they that dwell in heaven: He is the beast that shall goe out, To deceive the people, which are in the foure quarters of the earth, even Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battell, whose number is as the sand of the Apoc. 12. 7 Apoc. 13. 6. Cap. 28. 8. Iohn 8. 44. Sea. As Christ said of the Pharisees, that they were like their father the divell in lying. So say I, of the wicked that they are like their father in rebellion; hee inspired them with the spirit of pride and rebellion: For he worketh in them. It was well said of Samuel, Hath the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offrings and sacrifice as when the voyce of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, Ephes. 2. 2. 1 Sam. 15. 22. 23. and to hearken is better than the fat of rammes, but rebellion is as the sinne of witchcraft, and transgression is wickednesse and idolatry: which words may extend aswell to the civill as celestiall government. I know that obedience to God, is obedience to man, and on the contrary; disobedience to God, disobedience to man: haec tamen conjungi magis quam confundi velim, (quoth Calvin) I had rather conjoyne these, than confound them. Calvin.
The Lord Iesus performed all obedience to Rulers, even then when they were heathen, and knew not God; note his precept; note his practise; note both; his precept was, Da Caesari, give to Caesar the things that are Caesars, and unto God the things that are Mat. 22. 21. Gods: his practise was, that he paid to Caesar tribute, and to that end willed Peter to goe to the Sea, and to cast in an angle, and take the first fish that commeth up, and in his mouth he should finde a piece of twenty pence, that take and give unto them for thee and me. And Paul willeth the Ephesians to pray for them, even Mat. 17. 27. then, when like Manasses, they powred out blood like water, and 1 Tim. 2. 1. made Townes and Cities swimme with blood, as he did Ierusalem: when like the Chaldees they gave the dead bodies of Gods 2 Reg. 21. servants unto the fowles of the ayre, and the flesh of his Saints unto the beasts of the field. When like Antiochus they burnt all Psal. 79. 2. Libraries, and consumed the dayes of the Christians like smoke Psal. 102. 3. 6. 9. and their bones burnt, like an hearth; when they were like Pelicans in the wildernesse, and like Owles in the desarts; when they did eate ashes like bread, and mingled their drinke with weeping. And to shew the constant practise of this, not to goe backe, like the shadow of Ezechias his dyall, to the time of the Law; that the Iewes are commanded to pray for Nabuchadnezzar and the peace of Babylon; yet Babylon was as the destruction of God in Sodome and Gomorah: the Arabian did not pitch his tent there; Ier. 29. but Ziim lodged there, their houses were full of O him; Ostritches dwelt there, and Iim did cry in their palaces, and Dragons in their pleasant palaces. Esa. 13. 20, 21, 22. As for Nabuchadnezzar, as he was a man, he deserved not the name of a man, but of a beast; yet as hee was a King, hee is Dan. 4.

called Theservant of the highest God; and in his peace, they have Rebellion is against nature. peace.
Tertullian sheweth, what affection and love the former Christians carryed to the Magistrate, they were so farre from despising In Apologetico. governement, that they said, Oramus pro Imperatoribus, ut det Deus illis vitam prolixam; imperium tutum, aulam securam, exercitus fortes, orbem pacatum, Senatum sidelem, etc. we pray for the Emperours, that God would give them a long life, a safe government, a sure dwelling, valiant Souldiers; a peaceable world, a faithfull councell, etc. And yet the Christians then were as sheepe appointed unto the slaughter; the rivers were dyde red with blood, the Rom. 2. hangman weary with killing, their swords were blunt, caedebantur, ligabantur, torquebantur, they were beaten, bound, tormented, alii Aug. de Civitat. dei 22. cap. 6. ferro perempti, alii flammis exusti, alii flagris verberati, alii vectibus perforati, alii cruciati patibulo, alii vivi decoriati, alii vinculis mancipati, Rubanus. alii linguis privati, alii lapidibus obruti, alii frigore afflicti, alii fame cruciati, alii truncatis manibus, aliisue caesis membris spectaculum contumeliae, nudi propter nomen Domini pottantes, etc. that is, some were slaine with the sword, some burnt with fire, some with whips scourged, some stabbed with forkes of iron, some fastned to the crosse or gibbet, some drowned in the Sea, some their skinnes pluckt off, some their tongues cut out, some stoned to death, some killed with cold, some starved with hunger, some their hands cut off, or otherwise dismembred, have been so left naked to the open shame of the world, etc. yet still they were obedient to government. So Ambrose and the Catholikes of Millane, resisted not Valentinian, and Iustinian in the rage of the Arrians; but cryed, Rogamus Auguste, non pugnamus; hic, hic, occidito, si placet, arma nostra sunt preces and lachrymae; we pray Augustus, we fight not; here, here, kill us if thou please, our weapons are prayers and teares. So said Hermogenes, when the Emperour would have had him to worship an image, Da mihi veniam Imperator, minaris tucarcerem, Deus Gehennam, etc. Pardon me, o Emperour, thou threatnest prison; but GOD, hell; thou, the confiscation of my goods, but God the damnation of my soule; Obedirem tibi, nisi quod obediam Domino, I would obey thee, but I must first obey GOD: our lives, our liberty, our goods are subject to the Magistrate, wee must not then Despise Governement, but obey.
Rebellion of all sinnes sheweth the corruptions of our nature yea rebellion, and contempt of governement is unnaturall: for God hath madea chiefty in all things, and every thing keepeth his place. Among the Angels there be Cherubins, and Seraphins: Esa. 6. among the Planets, the Sunne is the chiefe, and the rest borrow their light from him: among the fowles, the Eagle: aamong the beasts, the Lion: among the Serpents, the Basiliske: among the Fishes, the Whale: among the VVethers there is Iob 38.

a leader, a Bell-wether; among the Cranes, there is one as a Rebellion is a resisting of Gods ordinance. Captaine, that goeth before the rest: In a flocke, there is dux gregis, a leader: in an hive of Bees, there is a master-Bee: the very Pismyres have their Governour; and the Grashopers goe forth by bands. And hath not God made a chiefe, a Ruler among men? Absit, God forbid, therefore that we should despise govenment. Prov. 30. 27. Therefore to three things that order well their going, Salomon addeth a fourth, that is, to a Lion, which is strong among beasts, and turneth not at the sight of any: to a lusty Grey-hound and a Goat he addeth a King, against whom there is no rising up: Per deum Reges regnant, By God Kings reigne; Princes decree justice, by him Princes rule, and the Nobles and all the Iudges of the earth. Promotion and honour commeth neither from the East, nor from the VVest, nor from the North nor from the South, but it is God that lifteth up one, and pulleth downe another: There is no power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God: Whosoever therefore resisteth Rom. 13. 1. 2. the power, resisteth the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves judgement. Not onely the punishment of the Governours, but also the vengeance of God. And God hath Numb. 16. famously revenged this sinne, as ever any: As upon Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, they lifted not up their hands, but their mouths against Moses, and the earth opened, and swallowed them quicke to Hell. Absalom rebelled against his father, but Gods vengeance followed him, and overtooke him, for he was hanged, betwixt heaven and ear^h, the earth vomited him out, and the heavens would not receive him. And it was finely said of Iezabel, 2 Sam. 18. 9. though otherwise a vile creature; Had Zimri peace that slew his master Of late time Ralph Duke of Suevia confessed, that he had lost that 2. Reg. 9. 31. hand in battell, that had sworne obedience to Henry the fourth, his master: (...), Anarchy and Disorder, have ever beene the bane of all Kingdomes and Common-wealths; (...), confusion, bringeth (...) misery, but (...) good order is (...) prosperity, then Kingdomes flourish. All the villanies and iniquities of Israel are imputed to this, Non erat Rex, there was no King Iudg. 19. 21. in Israel. Magistrates have a sparke of Gods Majesty in them, or rather a reflexion of a sparke of Gods power, and so extensive are called Gods; I have said that ye are Gods, and that ye all are the children Psal. 82. 1. of the most highest. They be Gods; 1. by Analogie: 2. By Deputation: 3. By Participation.
First, by Analogie; for as God hath his seate of judgement in Heaven, so these, their tribunals, and judiciall thrones, wherein to judge the actions of men; Tanquam in hoc Deum imitantes, as Theodor. in Psal. 81. it were imitating God in this, and their authority though it be not transcendent, yet without controll of any, save of the Rex Regum, the King of Kings.
Secondly, they be Gods by deputation; Ye judge not for men, but for the Lord, saith Iehosaphat: The judgement is Gods, saith Moses. 2 Chro. 19. 8.

Magistrates are his mouthes to pronounce, and his hands to Anabaptists and Papists enemies to magistrat^y. execute it.
Thirdly, Gods by Participation, because God dealeth with them as Kings and Princes doe with their children, to whom they communicate some part of their glory. Participando sunt Aug. dii, they bee Gods, in participating with God, As Starres participate their light from the Sunne, the primum lucidum: So these their authoritie from the supreame Majestie.
God hath two hands, by the one he governeth in the commonwealth; the other in the Church; by the one he reacheth good things unto the body, by the other, to the soules, that is, by magistrates and ministers. By some magistrates he reacheth peace, by some wealth, by some order, by some Iustice, by some Mercy: For the magistrate is like the frog, called Borexo, which hath two Livers, one for poyson, the other for treacle: So the magistrates hath two hands; one for justice, the other for mercy: his song is of mercy and judgement, habet poenam and proemium, Vt apis habet mel and Psal. 101. 1. aculeum. He hath punishment and reward, as the Bee hath both hony and a sting.
But to speake properly, magistrates are fingers of that great hand, that ruleth the World, yet some thinke the magistracy began in Lucifer, for which they quote, Esai. 14. Esa. 14.
And that it was seconded by the Giants in Gen. 6. and continued by Nimrod that mighty Hunter; and inlarged by the Gen. 6. cap. 10. 11. (...) Fighters against God, that builded the tower of Babel. But it is evident to all the World that it came from God, who governed his owne people, sometimes by Prophets, as by Moses and Aaron; For hee led his people like sheepe by the hands of Moses and Aaron: Sometime by Iudges, and that foure hundred and thirty Psal. 77. 20. yeeres together; sometime by Kings; sometime by Princes, Act. 13. 1 Sam. 1. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Rom. 13. 1. as after the captivity. And Saint Peter saith, Honour all men, love brotherly fellowship, feare God, and honour the King: For the powers that are, are ordered and ordained of God, and There is no power but of God, sive jubente, sive sinente, quoth Augustine, by Aug. contra ^au^^um ma^^^haeum libro cap. 7. Gods either commission or permission, the persons sometime are intruders, as in case of Vsurpation; somtime abusers of their authoritie, as when they Tyrannize, but the powers themselves have God for their Author. Saint Peter, indeed cals them, Humane ordinances; but he speaketh of the severall formes, not of the substance of governement. 1 Pet. 2. 13. But to let all this goe here I am to deale with two sorts of men, that be enemies to magistrates, and as I may say, Despise governement the one the Anabaptist; the other the Papists; For these two hell-hounds joyne together against the Magistrate: like Sampsons Foxes, that were tyed by the tailes, and burnt up the corne of the Philistines: Like the two shee-beares that came out of the wood and devoured the children of Bethel

like Ephraim and Manasses against Iuda: like Herod and Pilate against Christ. And no marvaile. For these two like the Edomites, The manifold benefits that come to the Church by magistracy. and Babylonions, shake hands in many sinnes. The Anabaptist despise the Word, flying to Revelations: The Papist condemne it, as insufficient, sending us to Tradition; For the Iewes had their Thalmud, the Turkes their Alcoran, the Anabaptist Iudg. 15. 2 Reg. 2. Esa 9 Mat. 26. 2 Tim. 3. 16. Revelations, the Papist Traditions; the Protestants Scripture. The Anabaptist rejecteth Baptisme utterly: the Papist defileth it with Grease, Creame, Oyle: the Anabaptist, denieth the whole supper of the Lord, the Papist mingleth it, giving but the halfe onely unto the people. The Anabaptist denieth all Magistracy: the Papist subjecteth it to the Pope. The Anabaptist object that the Kings of Iuda were figures of Christ, and therefore now ceased. Which is true in part, for in part they were shadows and figures but yet they were more than figures: For the Levitical Priest-hood took Hebr. 9. an end, but the Political government hath no end. For the office of Kings is established: Honor the King (saith the Apostle) and Paul reckoning 1 Pet. 2. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 28. up the gifts of God for the right ordering of the Church in the New Testament, mentioneth Governmentes; that is, gifts of government. Rom. 13. 4. The title of Magistrates is to be Ministers of God, their end and use the good of the Church, Pauls counsel is to pray for Kings and those in authority, that they may bee converted? Withall he intimates the good uses flowing from their conversion: Peace, Honesty, Godlinesse to the people of God, their governement therefore is not to be despised.
To conclude this point, it is promised as a blessing to the Church of the New Testament, that shee should have Kings, her nursing fathers and Queenes, her nursing mothers. And at the conuersion of Constantine to Christianity, this promise was accomplished, and never before, except to sucke the bloud of the Church, were to bee nurses unto the Church. It remaines then, that magistracy hath Gods ordinance to commend it, to the perpetuall use of the Church, and Common-wealth, unto the end of the World.
But to proceed still with these Anabaptists, they condemne the sword utterly, and thinke Excommunication to be the last punishment that can be in a Christian Church: Which is true in respect of God, and the soule, but not in respect of men, and their bodies; 1 Cor. 5. 5. Esra 10. For one man was punished both by losse of goods civilly, and by separation from the congregation: Which was spirituall.
The Magistrate may punish him, who despiseth the censure of the 1 Pet. 2. 14. Rom. 13. 4. Church; For they are appointed for the punishment of evildoers. And he is the minister of God To take vengeance, of them that doe evil. Even so they deny all use of weapon and all warre, Nam arma nostra, (inquiunt illi) sunt praeces and lachrimae, our weapons are prayers and teares. They alleadged the words of our Saviour, By your patience Luk. 21. 19 possesse your soules. And the words of Paul, Bee not overcome of evill

but overcome evill with goodnesse. And againe, they alledged the The Pope depose some, rayle on others, and despise all Magistrates. words of the Prophet of God Esay, They shall breake their swords into mattockes, and their speares into Sithes, Nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learne to fight any more. At Magistratus gerit gladium, saith Paul; the Magistrate beareth the sword; And Saint Iohn biddeth not souldiers deponere gladios, to lay away Rom. 12. 21. Esa. 2. 4. Rom. 13. 4. Luk. 3. 14. Acts 10. their swords, but to doe violence to no man, neither to accuse any falsely, and to be content with their wages. Neither did Peter bid Cornelius leave his warring. Other vile heresies they have, they deem it to be a Church without excommunication, they deny all use of an oath; which heresies first spread by Coppine and Quintinus in France, and Persevallus and Pocquinus in Germany; have infected many, as Monsieur Iohannes Lidencis Kinperdoline; who raised wars wherein perished 100000. men in Germany.
Secondly, the Papists clip the wings of all Magistracy, subjecting them to the Italian Priest, making him the Ministeriall head of the Church calling him Deum terrenum, an earthly God; Harding. Qui ligat Regis in catenis, which bindeth Kings in chaines, and Nobles in linkes of iron, as it is in the Psalme 149. 8. Who justifieth the dealing of Innocentius the third, against King Iohn; and that of Alexander the third, against Fredricke the second; and that of Clemens the seventh, against Henry the eighth; and that of Pius Quintus against our Queene. Now Allen compareth the Priesthood to the Sunne, the Princedome to the Moone, that receiveth light from the Sunne; the Priesthood to the soule, the other to the body, which is quickned of the soule; the one to gold the other to lead, a course metall. Pighius dat principibus potestatem facti, non juris, power to see Lawes executed, not to make them. All late Papists have railed on the Queene in the spirit of Shemei, their tongues cut like rasors, their words are as the coales of Iuniper; for Bristowe in his sixth motive calleth the Queene a Schismaticke, her Nobles Heretickes, her peo^^e Apostataes; Sanders saith, that, Haeretica princeps, non est ^^^nceps, Libro 2. cap. 4. de visibili monarchia. an Hereticall Prince, is no Prince; to which he addeth ^^e Minor, that the Queene is hereticall; now then ye can ^^t to the Conclusion. Marke the feature of this Cub, looke upon the face of this Babe, and tell me who is his Syre; did ever any Protestant hold the like? Rebellion is not a fruit of the Gospell (as saith Staphilus) but a whelpe of that popish litter, an egge of that Cockatrices nest; the most treasons and rebellions have sprung from Papists, upon this ground, that the Pope may depose Princes, ad placitum, at his pleasure.
Thus Henry the second was made a private man, and restored to the Crowne by the Popes Legat Pandulphus: King Iohn was deposed and at the last poysoned: Cardinall Poole stirred up the Emperour and French King against Henry the eighth: Anselme ^he Archbishop of Canturbury set himselfe against King William:

Thomas Arundell Archbishop set himselfe against Henry the second; Popish Bishops have deposed Princes. Richard Scroope Archbishop of Yorke was in field against Henry the fourth; Stephen Lancton Archbishop of Canturbury interdicted the whole Land, and made the King become the Popes tenant. I need not to speake of Parrie, Somervile, Ardington, Babington. No treason in this Queenes dayes, but hath issued from Popery, as from the Trojane horse. Let the Prince of Orange speake; let Condie speake; let Henry the third, the French King speake, murdered of a Iacobine; let Henry the fourth speake, murdered by Raviliacke: let all the world speake, and they will say, that all these late troubles for five hundred yeeres past, since the dayes of Hildebrand, may be ascribed to Popes and Papists. All Graecia yet rueth it; all Africa the mother of Martyrs feeleth it; the Germane Emperours with foule treading upon their neckes, may not forget it, the Kings of France felt it, till pragmatica sanctio was made; the States of Italy have bin shaken with it; the Kings of England have been poysoned, whipped, murdered; did Gardiner Tonstall, Bonner, who forswore the Pope in Henry 8. dayes, shew any truth in Queene Maries dayes? Remember the massacre in France, and the late murders in Cleveland and Germany, and the Low-Countries, since Gregory the 13. daies. This Axiom is holden, Da mihi cor tuum, fili, give me thy heart my son; and the Papists reserved for a further mischiefe. Yet Stapleton is not ashamed to charge Luther, that he said, That a good Prince was Rara avis, a seldome bird, that most of them are either principall fooles, or the most wicked knaves on the earth; but this is proper to Papists to speake thus.
But it is worth your noting, that Iude saith not, they deny authority and government, as the Anabaptists doe, as you have heard but they despise it, they shal put it out of his place, and they shall (...), take away even government it selfe, challenging it to themselves. And hath not the man of sinne, and sonne of (...) done thus? Gregory the 7. excommunicated Henry the 4. ^^imated his Subjects to rebellion, and when as by these meanes ^e could not prevaile, he went about secretly to murder him, and ^o that end hired one, to let a stone fall from the top of the Church upon the Emperours head, as he was a praying; but God prevented the practice, by punishing the murderer, who was crushed in pieces with the same stone. Paschalis the 2. raged in the same manner, against the said Emperour, and in the end, caused his owne sonne to rebell against him. Clemens the 5. excommunicated Francis Dandalus, Duke of Venice, and tied him like a dog about the neck with a coller to gather crums under his table: Vrbane the 4. dispossessed Conrade sonne to Conrade the Emperour of the Kingdome of Sicilia, and gave it to Charles Earle of Anjou: Boniface the 8. (of whom it is said, Intravit ut vulpes, regnavit ut Leo, mortuus est ut Canis, that he entred like a Fox, reigned

like a Lion, and dyed like a dog) offered the French King Philips Where no government is there is confusion. kingdome to Albertus the Emperour: Zachary deposed Childerick the French King, and placed Pipine: Celestine crowned the Emperour Henry the 6. with his foot, and with his foot pusht it off againe: Hildebrand caused Henry the 4. to stand three dayes at his gates bare-footed and bare-legged, before hee would open his gates unto him. Thus have they tossed government up and downe, and have put them out of their places, Chrysostome and Tertullian call them, the chiefe men of the earth, and next to God, and Saint Peter (...) the most excellent. Our latter Papists 1 Pet. 2. 13. call civill Magistrates, carnall Lords; humane creatures; and is not this to take away (...), soveraigne and supreme authority from them that ought to have it? which Iesus Christ denyed to his Ministers and servants, saying, The Kings of the Gentiles Luke 22. 25. beare rule over them, and they that beare rule over them, are called gratious Lords, but you shall not so.
Let us therefore Brethren, be subject to the higher power and never despise government; Let us subject our selves to every ordinance of Ro^. 13. 1. man for the Lords sake: For by them we reape much good; for governours are appointed of God, For the punishment of evill doers, but 1 Tim. 2. for the laud of them that doe well, under them we lead, a quiet and a godly life; and where as there is no government, there is no order; and whereas there is no order, Ibi ruinae ostium patet, the doore is open to ruine and destruction. Hereupon saith a Father, Malum quidem est, ubi est nullus principatus, etc. It is a passing evill, whereas there is no government; for take from the Quier the Chanter, and the Song will neither be in good tune, nor in good order; take from the Souldiers the Captaine, and the same cannot march on, either in due number, or decent manner; take from the Ship the Pilote, and it must needs miscarry; take from the flocke the Shepheard, and they must needs be scattered, and so take from the people Governours, and they must come to destruction, ye see therefore the good of Government.
And to disobey, oras Iude speaketh, To despise Government, it is dangerous: Paul saith, They that resist shall receive to themselves Rom. 13. damnation. And he reckoneth up disobedient persons among those, that shall not come into the Kingdome of God. I will conclude Gal. 5. with the admonition of Salomon, My sonne feare the Lord, and the King, and meddle not (on any pretence) with them that are seditious; Prov. 24. 21. and despise not government; If Governours be impious, pray for their piety; if tyrannous, pray to God to inspire them with clemency: Pray for Kings (saith Paul,) yea though they were such as Gentiliter vixerunt, lived Heathenishly, saith Optatus Milenitanus.



THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON.


VERS. IX. 

Yet Michael the Archangel, when hee strove against the Divell, and disputed about the body of Moses, durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but said, the Lord rebuke thee.
Raylers confuted by Michael the archangels example.



THese words containe the confutation of those heady and unruly spirits that despise government; and hee confuteth them two waies: first, Michaell the Archangell would not raile in a dispute, betweene him and Satan, how dare then these pesants, base and vile men, take upon them to speake evill; for there is no comparison betweene men and Angels; for God hath made men lower than the Angels; indeed in the last day, our Psal. 8. 5. Mat. 22. honour shall be like unto them, but not till then.
Secondly, Michael and the Angels durst not rayle on the Divell, that cursed creature, how dare then these chips, and draine of the people, and skum of the world, raile on Rulers and dignities, ordained of God.
Or, the reason may thus be contracted: An Archangell would not give judgement, these men judge and censure all estates; an Archangell dispute, these condemne, hearing no cause; an Archangell durst not raile, these dare speake all evill; for Pride is a chaine unto them, and cruelty covereth them as a garment. They are Ps. 73. 6. 8, 9.

licentious, and speake wickedly, they talke presumptuously. They set No Scripture lost that is necessary for salvation. their mouth against Heaven, and their tongue walketh thorow the earth.
This History, Totidem syllabis, is not recorded in the Bible, and yet we must not thinke that Iude fained it, but rather, that there is much Scripture lost, which we have not, seeing that Antiochus in the Law, and Dioclesian in the Primitive Church, burned the Scriptures, and all Libraries, we want the Booke of the battels of the Lord, mentioned by Moses; the Booke of the righteous, Numb. 21. 14. cited by Iosua; and we want much of the Chronicles of Israel Ios. 10. 13. 2 Reg. 16. and Iuda, we have not the Bookes of Shemaiah the Prophet, and Iddo the Seer, the Booke of Nathan the Prophet, and the Booke 2 Chron. 12. 15. of the Prophecie of Ahiah, wee want many of Salomons Bookes, who wrote of beasts, stones, herbes, trees, from the Cedar of Lebanon to the Hysope on the wall, as you may read, 1 Reg. 4. Origen 1 Reg. 4. Origine lib. ^ de principiis. saith that this Text was taken from a Booke called (...) the Ascention of Moses, so say Clemens Alexandrinus, Didimus and Athanasius: For, so say they, Paul alledged Epimenides, Aratus, and Menander; why might he not then quote this saying. Others saw that it was delivered by tradition from hand to hand; Tit. 1. 12. Act. 17. 29. 1 Cor. 15. 23. 2 Tim. 3. 8. So Iannes and Iambres are named, and that speech uttered by the Apostle, Remember the words of the Lord Iesus, how that he said, It is a blessed thing to give, rather than to receive; It is not orderly so written in any place of Scripture, yet it is gathered by divers places Acts. 20. 35. in effect.
Papists here cry out that Iude alledged some prophane Author or some tradition; ergo, non solum haerendum est Scripturis, therefore we must not onely cleave unto the Scriptures. I confesse, Paul cited some things from prophane Writers, but it was not to confirme any dogmaticall conclusion concerning faith and beleefe; for as touching these things they cited only the Scriptures; but when they came to intreat of manners, then they borrowed some things of the Ethnicke and Heathen, and that to this end to shame Christians. But Christ said, Scriptum est, it is written, non traditum est, not is it a tradition. Thus Sadnele answered Turrianus; and so I in this cause answer Stapleton, Staphilus, and the Iesuites.
Michael is here named, who is also named by Daniel, and by Dan. 12. 2. Apoc. 12. 7. Saint Iohn; this Michael is here called an Archangell; but I will first speake concisely of Angels, then of Archangels. In the Scripture five good Angels are onely named: The first is Michael, as here in this my Text, and also by the Prophet Daniel; the Dan. 10. 13. Dan. 8. 16. Luk. 1. Esdr. 4. second was Gabriel, named also by the Phrophet Daniel, and by the Evangelist S. Luke, as it appeareth in his Gospel; the third is Raphael, of whom ye may read in the history of Tobias; the fourth was Vriel, mentioned in Esdras 4. the fifth was Ieremiel recorded in the 4. of Esdras 5. yet there bee infinite good Angels; For

Thousand thousands minister unto him, and tenne hundred thousand stand Divers Angels named, their office and order. before him. These Angels pitch their tents round about us, they keepe in our wayes, they rejoyce at the conversion of sinners, they behold the face of our heavenly father; they carry our soules into Abrahams bosome: they be ministring spirits, sent forth for their Dan. 7. 10. Psal. 34. Psal. 91. Luke 15. Mat. 16. 22. Hebr. 1. 14. sakes, that bee heires of salvation: though wee see not these Angels, for they be spirituall and intellectuall substances, yet they attend upon us, they ride, and journey with us.
As there be Angels, so there be Archangels; as Michaell here is called an Archangell. How hee came to be an Archangell, there bee differences in opinion, but I will passe that over with silence. Some learned men thinke, that by the Archangell is meant Christ, and that there is no other Archangell but hee; but others, thinke that one and the same spirit may have both the name of an Angell and an Archangell, by reason of a greater or lesser worke of God committed to him of God: so saith Basill, a celestiall spirit is called Basil lib. 3. adversus Eunomium. an Archangell, when being accompanied with other Angels in the worke of the Lord, hee is a guide and Leader to them, Nam inter Angelos est ordo, there is an order among Angels. So wee read Esa. 6. Pro. 25. 27. of Cherubins and Seraphins. But I will not be curious, where God hath kept secret; Hony is good, but too much hony is not good, Praestat dubitare de occultis, quam litigare de incertis; It is better to doubt of secret things, than braugle about incertaine.
As for this disputation betwixt Michael and Satan, it was not feigned but true and reall, not corporall, but spirituall, they have not Vocem articulatam an articulate voyce, they bee spirits, and Gen. 18. have neither flesh nor bones as wee have, and so consequently neither tongue nor mouth to speake, or dispute with; yet God giveth them speech, and so they spake to Abraham.
As men fight with swords, speares, and staves, so the spirits good and bad contend with spirituall weapons, as with will, understanding, and memory. Wee read of foure notable contentions, betweene the good and bad Angels; the first in Heaven, for saith Saint Iohn, I saw a great battell in Heaven, Michaell and his Angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon and his Angels fought Apoc. 12. 7. and prevailed not. The second, in the Kingdome of the Persians, when as the Angell of the Persians resisted Gabriel one and Dan. 10. 13. twenty dayes. The third, in the house of Raguel, where Asmodaeus Tob. 6. was vanquished by Raphael. The fourth and last, in mount Nebo, upon the top of Pisgah and of this battel speaketh Iude in this present Deut. 34. 1. place.
The matter of this strife was, that the Divell tooke upon him to reveale the Sepulchre of Moses, whom God buried secretly, lest the Israelites should commit idolatrie with it, as they did with the Numb. 21* brasen Serpent which cured the stings of the fierie Serpents. So Ierome speaketh of the grave of Hilarion how sixteene blind men received Ier: sight there. Eusebius of Spiridions daughter, how shee rose from Euseb.

the dead, to tell of things lost. So Ambrose speaketh of the tombe Satan desire to deceive with false apparicions. of Saint Agnes, and of Gervasius and Prothisius, how that their bodies were full of bloud, and their bones full of marrow, a hundred yeares after their buriall: And there is no end of this madnesse, Ambr. God seeing this, hid Moses body lest the people should worship it: and Satan laboured to reveale it, that thereby he might bring the people to idolatry: For Satan will move every stone to set up idolatry, yea even Moses body.
But concerning Moses body, we learne first, that it is said, That Deut. 34 6. the Lord buried him: and therefore to bury the dead is no contemptible worke, it is a worke fit for Gods Minister. Againe, it should seeme, that no man knew the grave of Moses, yet the Divell knew where it was: and therefore because Moses was one, whom the Iewes being alive did greatly reverence. For he was a Preacher, Mighty in word, and in deed, the Divell would have made an Idoll of his bodie, and have the people worship it, being dead. So then wee may learne that if God would not have Moses body worshipped, much lesse the image of Moses, or any Saint.
Againe, if the Divell would have had Moses body, to beguile the people, the which he could not have, then no doubt, that which hee can have, hee will not omit; that is, to take upon him Moses shape, or the shape of a Saint, or an Angell to beguile us withall. Therefore let every good man say with Paul; Wee are not ignorant of Satans wiles: wee know his fetches, his devices, he tooke upon him 2 Cor. 2. 11. the shape of Samuel, the shape of an Angel, therefore I will beleeve 1 Sam. ^8. 14 no apparisions no revelations: I will onely rest upon the Word, wherein is contained all things nessarie to salvation.
But in that Satan durst contend with Michael an Archangell, see his boldnesse and cruelty; hee laboureth to seduce men and Angels, For Hee was a murtherer from the beginning: so that he is like Iohn 8. 44. an old hangman flesht in bloud and cruelty; Christ calleth him the Envious man, and Saint Peter calleth him, a roaring Lion hee roareth in Court, in Countrey, in Cities, in Cloysters, in Shops, Mat. ^3. 1 Pet. 5. 8. and Ware-houses, in Schooles and Vniversities, Vbique praedam quaerit, every where hee seeketh for his prey, Iohn calleth him the red Dragon, which had seven heads, and tenne hornes, and he nameth him Appollyon and Abaddon. So it is said that the beast spake by the Apoc. 12. Apoc. 9. Apoc. 13. Iob 1. mouth of a greater beast, meaning the Divell. Thus we read, that hee did set upon Iob, onely for that hee feared God: after the returne from Babylon, presently hee set upon Iehosua, but the Lord reproved him, even the Lord that hath chosen Ierusalem. But this is most strange, that he durst encounter with Christ. Hee came unto him, and said, If thou be the Sonne of God command these stones be made zach. 3. 1, 2. Mat. 4 3. Ephes. 6. 12. bread, etc. Paul saith that wee Wrastle not with flesh and bloud, but against principalities and powers, against worldly governors, against the governors of the darkenesse of this world, etc. All this I speake to

arme us against Satan; For we must enter into a battell with him, Railers are the divels agents. hee that spared not an Angell, yea an Archangell, will not spare men. Tentat diabolus, sed aliud est intus regnare, aliud extra oppugnare; fortis hostis munitissimam civitatem oppugnat, sed non expugnat; August. Tract. 52. in Iohn. omnes potest diabolus ad malum invitare, non tamen trahere delectationem infert, non potestatem; consilium ingerit non conflictum. The Divell (saith Augustine) tempteth, but it is one thing to raigne within, and another to assanlt without: this strong enemy oppugneth the most defenced Citie, but hee cannot expugne it, conquer it: The Divell may invite and allure all men to evill, but not draw them; hee may inferre delight, not power; hee may counsell us, not inforce us. Satan may dispute, raile, curse, and blaspheme, but hee shall bee answered, Debilis est hostis qui non vincit, nisi volentem, hee is but a weake enemy, hee can vanquish none but such as are willing to be vanquished. Ille suggerit, tuum est repellere, hee suggesteth, but it is thy part and dutie to withstand all his suggestions. Ille disceptat, tuum est respondere, he disputeth, and thou must answere him; and Bernard Bern. saith, Diabolus est ut canis catena ligatus, latrare potest, non mordere. Quoties illi restiteris, toties coronaberis, The Divell is like a dogge tyed, hee may barke, but he cannot bite; as often as thou resistest him, so often shalt thou bee crowned. It is reported of Satan that hee should say thus of a learned man; Tu me semper vincis, thou doest alway overcome mee; Cum enim te volo exaltare, tuteipsum deprimis in humilitate, when I would exalt and promote thee, thou keepest thy selfe in humility, Et cum volo te de primere, and when I would throw thee downe, Tute erigis, (...): Heb. 10. 22. thou liftest up thy selfe in assurance of faith.
But here note the modestie of Michaell; hee would not raile, revile, nor curse the Divell. It is probable, that the Divell raged, railed, used bad words, for that is his nature; for he hath a mouth full of blasphemies; And hee openeth his mouth unto blasphemy against God, to blaspeme his name and his tabernacle, and them that Apoc. 13. 7. dwell in Heaven. And in this respect, Goliah was a figure of the World, as the host of Israel was a figure of the Church, and David that delivered it a figure of Christ; and in this sense the Divell is called, Calumniator fratrum, the accuser of our brethren, Apoc. 12. 10. spiritus blasphemiae, the spirit of blasphemie, and he is called diabolus, by reason of his foule mouth in railing, reviling, and misusing of Gods seruants: therefore it is said, that the three uncleane spirits, like frogges came out of the mouth of the Dragon, for they are ever croking, belching and railing upon the Mat. 4. 2. Apoc. 16. 13. Saints and Servants of the Almighty, but Michaell did not, Par pari referre, returne like for like, he gave not the Divell a railing sentence.
This teacheth us moderation, patience, to lead men to God, ducere homines, non trahere; to lead men, and not to draw them so

much as we may. To this end Saint Peter propoundeth Christs We must learn meekenesse of Christ who taught it. example; for Christ (saith he) suffered for us, leaving us an example, that yee should follow his steps, who did no sinne, neither was there guile found in his mouth, Who when he was reviled, reviled not againe: 1 Pet. 2. 21. When he suffered, he threatned not, but committed it to him, that iudgeth righteously. Erat ut agnus coram tondente, he was as a Lambe before Esa^ 53. the shearer, and opened not his mouth. Learne this mildnesse of Christ; learne not of him to create a new world, to walke upon the Sea, to seed thousands of men, with a few loaves and fishes, to cure creples, to cleanse leapers, to give sight to the blind and limbes to the lame, to restore the deafe to their hearing, and the dumbe unto their speaking, to calme Seas, cease winds, expell Divels, open graves, raise the dead, as he did Lazarus; but learne to be mild, Learne of me, for I am meeke and lowly in heart, and Mat. 11. 29. ye shall find rest unto your soules. The Poets propound unto themselves, Homer, Hesiode, Demosthenes, Tully, Isocrates: The Philosophers propound Plato, Aristotle, Porphyrie: and let Christians for mildnesse, propound to them Christ Iesus.
One by-word, is but a wry-word, Better a shrew than a sheepe; but Christ was a sheepe, a Lambe, a Lambe that taketh away the sinnes of the world: So we must be Lambes, and not Lions; Iohn. 1. sheepe, and not wolves; doves, and not dogs: For if we barke at one another, We shall be devoured one of another. Saint Peter would have men to lay aside all maliciousnesse, and all guile, and dissimulation, Gal. 5. 15. and envy, and all evill speaking. As a Serpent vomiteth up his poyson, when he goeth to drinke in a cleare fountaine; so should a 2 Pet. 2. 1. Christian vomit up his malice, and all evill speaking; a rayling sentence must not come from him. Among all those dignities, that were offered Christ, none touched him more neerely, than their raylings; his body was stretched out at length upon the Crosse, his hands and feet were peirced with nayles, his head crowned with thornes, his flesh rent and torne with whips, his side opened with a speare, yet they that rayled on him, and bad him come downe from the crosse, grieved him more than all the aforenamed tortures,
But we must not raile, but blesse rather; for we are called to be heires of blessing, and therefore must not render evill for evill, 1 Pet. 8, 9. or rebuke for rebuke; If any long after life, and to see good dayes; let him refraine his tongue from evill, and his lips that they speake no guile: though others raile, yet must not we; nay, if we be railed upon, for the name of Christ, blessed are we; For the spirit of God, and of 1 Pet. 4. 14. glory resteth upon you (saith the Apostle.) And our Saviour Christ to disswade us from railing, useth sundry reasons, Love your enemies (saith he) blesse them that curse you, doe good to them that hate you, and pray for them that hurt you and persecute you, that yee may bee the Mat. 5. 44, 45. children of your father which is in heaven; which maketh his sunne to arise on the evill and on the good, and sendeth raine on the just and unjust.

Let them take heed, that use cursed speaking, railing and reviling, Wee must moderate and keepe our tongues from cursed speaking. they are Satans children, he is (...), that is, a slanderer: he was a murtherer from the beginning; a murderer in hand, a lyer in tongue, if not in himselfe, yet in his members; As hee was against Moses, by Corah, Dathan and Abiram; David, by Doeg, Ieremy, by the men of Anathoth; Paul, by Tertullus; Iohn Baptist, by Apoc. 12. 10. Iohn 8. 44. Numb. 16. Psal. 52. the Scribes; yea, Christ by the Pharisees; but Dathan and his company perished in an earth-quake; Doeg was rooted out; the men of Anathoth were captivated; the Scribes were confuted; the Pharisees put to silence. Maledicere est adeo illicitum, ut peccatuin est maledicere diabolo, to speake evill, or to rayle is so unlawfull that it is a sinne to curse or banne the Divell. Michael would not rayle, no more ought we to rayle or revile one another, when as difference shall chance to arise amongst us, He that calleth his brother foole (contemptuously or opprobriously) is in danger of Hell Mat. 5. 22. fire. And Saint Paul saith, Let all sowernesse or bitternesse, or wrath or anger, and out-cryes, and blasphemies be quite taken from among you; with all maliciousnesse; be courteous one to another, and pittifull, forgiving Ephes. 4. 31. one another, even as Christ forgave you. And in another place, Let your patient minde be knowne to all men; The Lord is even at hand. As though he should say, will ye be malitious, spitefull, reviling Phil. 4. 5. your brethren, and the Lord is at hand; will yee be falling out one with another, and his comming so neere? And yet as Ephraim, was full of drunkards; Crete full of lyers; Ephesus full of Idolaters; so the world is full of raylers: of whom it may be said, as Hierome said of Ioviman, Tacere nesciunt quia nunquam didicerunt bene loqui, they know not to be silent, because they never learned Hierome. to speake well. Erasmus speaking of this rayling age, saith, that there be three things to keepe the tongue in: First, it hath many strings, these strings should curbe it in: Secondly, there is a double ditch of teeth: and thirdly, two walls of lips; yet all will not hold in the tongue. Dimidiam partem vitiorum in mundo sibi vendicat lingua, the tongue challengeth halfe the vices in the Gregor. Naziau. world, for what vice almost floweth not from the tongue, rayling reviling, lying, swearing, blasphemie, perjury, slander, etc. all these be the vices of the tongue.
Hermophilus offending with his tongue, perpetuum silentium sibi indixit, in joyned his tongue perpetuall silence. And Pambo in three months would not speake, till he had learned the first verse of the 39. Psalme, which runneth thus, I said I will take heed unto my wayes, that I offend not in my tongue. Et melius est certe nil loqui, Psal. 39. 1. quam male loqui, It is much better to be silent, and to speake nothing, than to speake evill: therefore saith the Apostle, As elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy, kindnesse, humblenesse of Col. 3. 12, 13. mind, meeknesse, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another. Of all victories it is the greatest to forbeare, being provoked. Michael would not revile the divell, and wilt thou revile

thy brother? yet many passe not what they say, what speeches Mildnesse a meanes to stay a rayling tongue. they give it, if they be offended. The Schollers of Pithagoras kept silence for five yeeres; it were to be wished, that these might be enjoyned silence alway, except they could speak better. Epictetus reduced all vertues into two heads, (...), abstaine, sustaine; and he reduceth all vices into two heads, Impatiency, and Incontinency; when injuries are not borne, nor pleasures eschewed. Spirtus Dei neque mordax, the spirit of God, is neither a lyer, nor a biter, a rayler, let us then give courteous speeches, Not rendring evill for evill, nor rebuke for rebuke. 1 Pet. 3. 9.
Againe, hard words, rayling, cursed speaking, hurt our selves and doe no good to the adversaries. Mollis sermo frangit iram, a soft answer putteth downe displeasure; for as a Canon-shot is Prov, 15. 1. repelled with wooll, not with brasse; as wild-fire is quenched with milke, not with water; as the Adamant is broken with the blood of a Goat, and not with an hammer; as the wrath of an Elephant is appeased not with swords, but with Mulberries: So malice is an adversary, in a rayler, is quenched with lenity, not with reviling, like a Lion that is mitigated with the humblenesse of a beast unto him. Hereupon saith Paul, If thine enemy Rom. 12. 20. hunger, feed him, if he thirst give him drinke, for in so doing; thou shalt heape coales of fire on his head, that is, thou shalt win him: Therefore saith Ambrose to Calligonus, Ego patior, and audiam, quod est Episcopi; I will suffer and heare, which is the part of a Bishop. Tu ages and loqueris quae sunt carnificis, thou doest, and speakest, which belongeth to a murtherer and cruell person. Regium est audire mala, a quibus laudare esset pudor, it is a princely thing to heare evill of them, of whom it is a shame to be commended. Leave them to God; Dominos illos increpabit, the Lord shall rebuke them; yea, The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaketh proud Psal. 12. 3, 4. things. Which have said with our tongues, we will prevaile, wee are they that that ought to speake, Who is Lord over us? Shemei shall not ever 2 Sam. 16. 5. Dan. 14. Dan. 6. raile on David; the Iudges shall not ever accuse Susanna; the idolaters shall not ever speake evill of Daniel; Doeg shall not ever slander Abimelech; the Arrians shall not alway defame Athanasius, 2 Sam. 22. as they did for Arsenius; God will make their innocency as Psal. 37. 6. the light, and their judgement as the noone-day.
Here a question may be moved, whither a Christian may at any time curse, and speak hardly to the wicked, and rebuke them. Some object, Levit. 19. Non maledices surdo, Thou shalt not curse the Levit. 19. 14. deafe, nor put a stumbling blocke before the blind. They say that wee may not say Racha, or foole to our brother, much lesse may wee Mat. 5. use hard words, rayling sentences: they quote Paul to the Romanes; Blesse them that persecute you, blesse I say, and curse not, Cum Rom. 12. 14. maledico, edere non licet, we may not eate with a rayler. They alledge the example of Christ: Who when he was reviled, reviled not 1 Cor. 5. 11.

againe. And that of Paul, Wee are reviled, and yet wee blesse; Wee Lawfull to curse sinne though not sinners. are persecuted and suffer it, Wee are evill spoken of and yet wee pray.
To all these I answere in two words, that in all speeches wee must regard two things: The goodnesse of the cause, and cleerenesse 1 Cor. 4. 12. 13. of our minde: that wee speake not of spleene, of affection, of revenge, but to draw the party to remembrance. And so there is place left in the Church, as well for Cursing as Blessing: for rough as for milde speech, so that Gods glory bee sought in the suppression of sinne, Vt omne os obstruatur, that every mouth may be stopped, and that all glory may bee given to God. Thus we Gen. 3. cap. 9. Deut. 27. read, that God cursed the Serpent, that Noah cursed Cham, of the twelve tribes, sixe of them stood on Mount Garazim to blesse, and sixe on mount Hebal to curse, and all the people to say Amen. Iacob uttered a dire imprecation, upon Simeon and Levie, saying, Curbe Gen. 49. 7. Mat. 23. Mat. 13. their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was cruell. And lest any should restraine this to time of the Law, Note that Christ pronounceth many woes against the Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites in one Chapter. And hee cried, woe to the impenitent, saying, Woe be to him, by whom offences come. And againe, Woe bee Mat. 11. Mat. 26. to thee Corazim, Woe bee to thee Bethsaida, etc. And againe, Woe to that man by whom the Sonne of man is betraied, it were good for that man if 8 Cor. 16. hee had not beene borne. And againe, Woe to the World, because of offences. And Simon Peter cursed Simon Magus, saying, Thy money perish 2 Tim. 4. 14. with thee. And Paul cried, Maranatha Anathema, to them that love not the Lord Iesus? And hee cursed Alexander the Coppersmith. Act. 13. 10. Gen. 49. He hath done mee (saith Paul) much evill; the Lord reward him according to his workes. And so hee cursed Elimas the sorcerer and called him the Child of the divell, an enemy to all righteousnesse. But yet wee must curse the sinnes, not the party. So Iacob cursed Apoc. 2* the rage of his Sonnes, not themselves: So God hated the deeds of the Nicholaitans, not the men. Yea sometimes both sinnes and men may be cursed, if they give signes of reprobation; So the Church prayed against Iulian, not for him. And Saint Iohn 1 Iohn 5. 16. tels us, that there is a sinne unto death; I say not that thou shouldest pray for it.
But to leave all this: Michael striving with the Divell, durst not give him a railing sentence, but saith, The Lord rebuke thee. Let us learne this lesson of Michael: in all reproaches and bitter speeches of our brethren, to say unto them, The Lord reprove thee, for passion must not overmaster us: But these railers wee must answere, sometime with silence: for unto many natures, to answere againe, is to put fuell to the fire: for anger is fire, and words are fuell: But if silence will not serve the turne then it is good to give place unto it, I meane to goe away from Rem. 12. 19. a railing person, till his anger be over, and if that will not serve the turne, then answere him: as Michael did here the Divell.

The Lord reprove thee. And in any wise take heed you prouoke We must give account of idle, much more of evill words. not anger, for the forcing of Wrath bringeth forth strife, as the churming of milke bringeth forth butter, and wringing the nose bringeth forth bloud. Let us therefore avoyd the customary sinnes of passions, and not answere evill for evill, or rebuke for rebuke, but say with Michael, The Lord rebuke thee, And with David, Iudge me o God, and Prov. 30. 33. Psal. 43. 1. defend my cause against the unmercifull people, (that is, the cruell company of mine adversaries) deliver me from the deceitfull and wicked man.
The Lord rebuke thee, This teacheth us as to avoyd all railing, so to study carefully and diligently the government of the tongue and to beware of rotten speeches. The mouth is the messenger of the heart, and from the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh. A filthy tongue argueth a filthy heart, an unbridled tongue a licencious heart; A poisoned tongue, that belcheth out nothing but banning, and cursing, railing, and reviling speeches, doth manifest a cursed and corrupt heart. Our Saviour saith. A Mat. 12. 13* good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth goodthings and an evill man, out of the evill treasure of his heart bringeth forth evill things: but I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall speake, they shall give account thereof at the day of judgement. If then at the end of the end of the world, and day of judgement, wee must reckon and account for idle words? How much more for our railing, reviling speeches? Let us therefore hearken unto the counsell of the Apostle, Let not corrupt communion, proceed out of your mouths, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that may Ephes. 4. 29. minister grace unto the hearers. Wee should be of a patient nature and follow the example of Michael, who striving with the Divell, durst not give him a railing sentence, but say, The Lord rebuke thee, If an Archangell abstaine from all railing, having to doe with the Divell, the greatest enemie of God and his people, wee that have to do with bad men, must not take liberty to our selves to use reviling speeches. We must commit revenge unto God who hath said, Vengeance is mine, I will repay.



THE NINETEENTH SERMON.


VERS. X.

But these speake evill of those things they know not, etc.
Malice turnes men into dogs.



THis is the fourth note that he giveth unto the wicked you shall know them by their evill speaking: they are like unto blacke-mouthed Rabshakeh, they rayle on God and good men. He calleth them first sleepers; secondly, defilers of the flesh; thirdly, despisers of government, and here, raylers; they speake evill of all things. As fire lyeth not long in the stubble or in the flaxe, but the flame breaketh out; so hatred lyeth not long in these mens hearts, but breaketh out in evill speeches, and many times, They will speake evill of things they know not. Munster writeth of men in India, Qui non loquuntur sed latrant, which speaketh not like men, but barke like dogs; so these barke like dogs against the Moone. Gorgon turned men into stones, and Circe changed them into swine, and malice turneth these men into doggs: like Hecuba at the siege of Troy, for their rayling. David saith, The wicked speake evil from their mothers wombe, even from their belly have they erred, and speake lyes, their poyson is even as the poyson of Psal. 58. 3, 4. a serpent, like the deafe Adder that stoppeth her eare, that is, they passe in malice and subtilty the crafty Serpent: the first thing they doe, is to speake evill; it is Alpha and Omega, first and last with

them. As the serpent vomiteth up her poyson, before she drinketh Malice in the heart ^he cause of rayling in the tongue. of a cleare fountaine; so this is the sinne that must bee avoided before we drinke of the water of life, the Word of God, Lay aside (saith the Apostle) all maliciousnesse, and all guile, and dissimulation and envy, and all evil speaking; as new borne 2 Pet. 2. 1. Babes desire the sincere milke of the Word, that yee may growe thereby.
Among all the indignities that were offered unto Christ, this was not the least, they nipped his cheekes, they buffeted his face they blinded his eyes, they nayled his hands, they peirced his feet, they lanced his heart, but especially they rayled on him, saying, He saved others, let him also save himselfe, if he be the Christ, the Luke 23. 35, 36. chosen of God. The Souldiers also mocked him, and came and offered him vynegar (mixt with myrh and gal to hasten his death) and said, if thou be the King of the Iewes save thy selfe: Therefore wee are willed to thinke upon him that endured such speaking against of sinners. Heb. 12. 3. As an image is not seene in water that is troubled, no more is truth in a mind that is malitious, but it sendeth forth with violence all manner of evill speakings. A soule mouthed, an evill tongued man, is worse than the divell; not simply but in respect; For a man may avoid the divell; Resist the divell and hee Jam. 4. 7. will flye from you, but we cannot resist a slanderer, a rayler. And albeit the Apostles charge is, Speake not evill one of another, brethren; he that speaketh evill of his brother, or he that condemneth his brother, Iam. 4. 11. speaketh evill of the Law, and condemneth the Law. Yet the world is as full of evill speakers, as Nilus of Crokadyles, as Sodome of Sulphur, and Egypt of Lice. In conviviis rodunt, in circulis vellicant, maledico dente omnia carpunt. It is salt to their meat to rayle on men in feasts and bankets. A good name is a pretious oyntment, and woe to them that bereave a man of it: many mens tongues walke at randome, and speake evill of the things they know not. Can the wound be cured, so long as the iron remaine in it? Can the iron be cold, so long as it is in the Smiths forge? Can the River cease running, so long as the Fountaine floweth? And can the tongue refraine from evill speaking, so long as hatred boileth in the heart; Of the abundance of the heart, the mouth Luke 6. 45. speaketh: And as the water turneth the wheele, so the heart the tongue. Boetius saith, Si ira, fremis Leo es: si fraude inniteris, Vulpes es: si inconstans, Camaeleon es, si luxuriaris, porcus es, si convitiaris, Canis es; if thou beest greatly moved with anger, thou art a Lion; if thou delightest in fraud, thou art a Fox; if thou beest unconstant, thou art a Camaeleon; if lecherous, a Hog; if foule-mouthed, or evill-tongued, a dogge, and Beware of dogges (saith the Phil. 3. 2. Apostle) they are alwayes barking and biting, and snarling. One resembleth a foule-mouthed man, an evill speaker to the Basiliske; for as the Basiliske killeth the Bird that flyeth in the ayre with his breath: so doth the evil speaker kil men with his tongue. I will

say of these foule-mouthed men, as Hierom sometime said Brownists raile on our Church doctrin and Ministery. of Iovinian; Tacere nesciunt, maledicere non cessant, nunquam enim bene loqui dedicerunt: they cannot hold their peace, they cannot cease from evill speaking, they never yet learned to speake well. There is an art in speaking as well as in writing; for there is (...), Right speaking, as well as (...), Right writing, and both necessary.
Iudge now of what spirit our Brownists be; as Christ said of his disciples, that would have fire come downe from Heaven and Luke 9. 35. destroy Samaria, Yee know not of what spirit yee are: So they know not of what spirits they be of; for all their eloquence standeth in biting speeches, that our Church is Babylon, Sodome, as Apoc. 11. 8. that our ministers, have the marke of the beast, as Apoc. 13. 16. that our people, are swine, and dogges, as Mat. 7. 6. that our Communion cup, is Calix diaboli, the cup of the Divell; that Mensa Christi, is Mensa diaboli, the table of Christ is the table of the Divell, as 1. Cor. 10. 20. our pulpits, bee tubs, our Geneva Psalmes, Gehenna Psalmes. But I will say to them, as one said, Hoc genus hominum ridere soleo, non odisse: I am wont to laugh at these kind of men, not to hate them: they thinke much to be touched in doctrine, but I will answere them, as Erasmus answered, Longolius; deponant gladios, nos scuta abiiciemus; removeant venena, nos antidoto uti cessabimus cessent maledicere, nos non regeremus; in hoc illis consentire non possumus, ut pareamus schismaticis: Let them lay away their swords, and wee will throw away our shields, Let them remove their poyson and wee will cease to use any Antidote; Let them refraine from evill speaking, and we will not taunt againe: In this wee cannot consent unto them in their schismes. I but say they, wee are willed, To come out from Babylon, yea, and To separate our selves, and to touch no uncleane thing. I 2 Cor. 6. 14. confesse, Schismatikes interpret this discession locally, but the Fathers understand it mentally and morally. The Prophets and Apostles proclaimed. Touch no uncleane thing, but how? Contactu cordis, non corporis. Doth hee that commit sinne, displease thee? thou touchest no uncleane thing. Hast thou charitably rebuked him? thou art come out from him: yet they cry out we have no Ministers, no Sacraments, no Church at all. What is their reason? our lives are not answerable to the doctrine of the Gospell. Be it so, yet this is no reason, why they should make discession from us. How corrupt was Ierusalem? so corrupt that Esay compareth her to Sodome and Gomorah, yet hee erected Esa. 1. not new Altars, whereupon to offer sacrifice apart, but entred into the same Temples, and celebrated the same Sacraments with them, while Moses received the Law, in the mount the people made a Golden Calfe below in the valley, God shewed Exod. 32. their idolatry to Moses, making an offer to destroy them, and to multiply him to a greater and better nation. Had not Moses

now a faire occasion of departing from them, lest hee should No men perfectly pure, no state totally corrupt. touch any uncleane thing, yet he leaves them not, but goeth unto them, reproveth them, and maketh intercession to God for them. How desperate was the impiety of the Pharisees in the dayes of our Saviour? Yet for all that, Christ our Saviour frequented their Temple, and would not forbeare their religious exercises. The Church of Corinth was defiled with many sinnes, and horrible out-rages, both in life and Doctrine, they were deriders, sectaries, incestuous, prophaners of the Lords supper, denyers of the most essentiall Article of the Resurrection; yet so long as the Ministery of the Word and Sacraments was not utterly rejected, Paul acknowledgeth them a glorious Church. Certainely tares and uncleane vessels are in the Church, yet let us endeavour our selves to be good corne, and not goe out of the Churh, but follow the counsell of Augustine, Corripiat homo, quod potest, quod non potest, patienter ferat, let a man reprove what he can (without danger of Schisme) and what he cannot, let him patiently suffer, but let him never make separation. For first, in the Church, there be many more that feare God, and worke righteousnesse, than the outward eye can discerne; this deceived Elias, but the foundation of God standeth firme, God knoweth who are his. Secondly, 2 Tim. 2. 19. even of them that are vile and naught, some of them are touched with griefe of conscience for their sinnes, and hunger and thrist after righteousnesse. Thirdly, a man is not to be condemned for some particular fact; for the brightest fire hath some smoke, the clearest water some mud, the face of Venus a Molle; and the most heavenly affection, some infection of earth; In multis peccavimus Iam. 3. 2. omnes; In many things we offend all. But I may fitly apply that to our Brownists and Separatists, which the religious Emperour said to one of that humour, Si tam sanctus sis, etc. If you bee so holy, that you will not communicate in the Word and Sacraments with us, your even fellow Christians set a ladder to the clouds, and clime up to heaven alone. In this point the Donatists were ridiculous, who meeting in an assembly with the Catholikes for the allaying of some controversies, and being intreated by the Tribune to sit downe with the rest; answered, they stood of purpose, because it is written; Cum sceleratis non sedebo, I will not sit downe with the wicked. To whom Saint Augustine wittily and effectually replyed; Cur ergo ad nos intrare vobis non fuit religio, etc. why then make you no conscience to enter the same place with us; seeing it is written also in the precedent words, Ad mulignos non ingrediar, I will not goe unto the wicked, and with the ungodly I will not sit downe. But let the Brownists and all of the Separation leave their evill speaking; let them returne home to their mother the Church of England, for doubtlesse The eye that mocketh his father, and despiseth the governement Prov. 13. 17. of his Mother, the Ravens of the Vallies shall picke it out, and the

young Eagles eate it, and so to leave our evill-speaking Separists. An evill speaker is a murtherer with his tongue.
By the way observe, that if men will doe evill, they must heare evill; it is no rayling to rebuke him sharpely, that doth wickedly. Some finding fault with Saint Augustine for his tartnesse and sharpenesse in reproving, answered wittily; Emendate vitam, ego emendabo verba, mend you your wayes, and I shall mend my words. Cessate perverse agere, cease you from doing evill, and I shall cease to reprove and rebuke. For where sinne is ranke and red. Boanarges the sonne of thunder, is more necessary, than Barnabas the sonne of consolation.

They speake evill.

An evill speaker is a murtherer; Et gladium portat in lingua non in vagina, and the sword that murthereth with all, he carryeth in his tongue, not in his scabbard. A man may say to these evill speakers, as Christ said to Peter, Pone gladium in vagina, put up thy sword into thy sheath. These are like Cockes fed with garlicke that overcome others with ranknesse of breath, not with strength of body; Vincunt clamore, non veritate, they overcome with clamours and out-cryes, not with verity and truth. But if at the day of Iudgement they must give an account for every idle word, Mat. 12. 36. what for their evill words? And if the wrath of God is wont to fall on the children of unbeleefe, it must needs fall upon these evill speakers, for they are altogether wrapped in unbeleefe. If Sodome and Gomorah were destroyed from heaven, for sinning against nature? what vengeance remaines for these evill speakers, that offend the God of nature? If then Thou longest after life, and wouldest see good dayes, refraine thy tongue from evill, and thy Psal. 34. 12, 13. lips that they speake no guile. Pambo, a man utterly unlearned in the Scriptures, on a time came to Saint Hierome to be taught some Scripture without booke, he turned him to the first verse of the 39. Psalme, I said I will take heed unto my wayes, that I offend not in my tongue. A lesson, that our evill speakers will not learne, for they offend more in the tongue, than in hand, foot, eare, eye, or any member besides; their tongues are like unto the sting of Adders to a sword, yea a sharpe sword, to a razor and to arrowes; their tongues are fire, yea a world of wickednesse, being set on fire of Hell.

They speake evill of those things which they know not, etc.

They rayle in their ignorance on things, which they know not: Scientia non habet inimicum, praeter ignorantem, the birds have no such enemy as the Owle; nor the Passenger no such enemy as the blind worme; nor the Mariner, no such enemy as the Mermaid; so the learned, no such enemy as the ignorant. Saint Peter speaking of the Epicures and Atheists of the world, saith, They knew not, and that willingly. And Paul said of the Gentiles, that they walked, In mentis vanitate, in the vanity of their mind, having 2 Pet. 3. 5.

their cogitation darkned, and being strangers from the life of God, thorow Divers kindes of ignorance. the ignorance that is in them. The like he said of the Idolaters, That they were vaine in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of darknesse, and when they professed themselves to be wise, they became Ephes. 4. 17. Rom. 1. 21, 22. Esa. 40. 21. fooles, etc. So Esay said of the Iewes, Know ye nothing? have ye not heard it? hath it not beene told you from the beginning? have yee not understood it, by the foundation of the earth. Thus Christ said of the Pharisees for denying the resurrection; Yee erre, not knowing the Scriptures, neither the power of God. Paul imputed all his malice Mat. 22. 29. and his blasphemy to his ignorance; I was (saith he) a blasphemer a persecutour, an oppressor; but I was received into mercy, for that I did it ignorantly, through unbeleefe. As there be degrees in sinne, so is 1 Tim. 1. 13. there a gradation in ignorance. It is a sinne to be ignorant in that we should know, but a greater to be ignorant in that wee are bound to know.


There is Ignorantia
Simplex and Affectata.Simple and affected Ignorance.
Or there is Ignorantia
Ideotarum, of IdolsSophistarum, of crafty men.
Or as some
Invincibilis, inconquerable.Vincibilis, conquerable.
Or as others
Voluntaria, willing.Involuntaria, unwilling.
Or as others
Negativa, negative.Privativa, privative.


There is an ignorance, not sinnefull, as in Adam, not to know his nakednesse, nor the serpents subtilty; in the Angels and Christ Gen. 3. as man, not to know the latter day; Quia proprium est humanae naturae Mar. 13. 32. futura ignorare, because it is the property of Humanity to be ignorant of future things; and this is Ignorantia justa, lawfull ignorance; but there is an ignorance utterly unlawfull, for it is sinne, and the cause of sinne, and companion of the same. The Iewes crucified Christ thorow ignorance, For if they had knowne, Acts 3. 17. they would never have crucified the Lord of glory. Why did the Samaritans so rayle on the Iewes? Alas, they knew nothing: why Iohn 4. 22. 1 Cor. 2. 7. rayled the Princes on Christ? they knew him not: why did the Galathians revile the Christians, in the point of Law? for that they knew it not: why doe the Brownists and Papists rayle on us? Nesciunt Scripturas, they know not the Scriptures. I say to them as Paul to the Galathians, Tell me ye that be under the Law Gal. 4. 21. doe ye not heare of the Law, etc. So tell me ye that will under Antichrist, doe ye not know Popery? yee doe not: why doe the earth-wormes rayle on us in fayres, markets, tavernes, Nil sciunt, they know nothing. They may say with Socrates, Hoc scio; quod nihil scio, this one thing I know, that I know nothing. Hence came Anabaptisme from Rotman, Quintinus, Pocquinus, Persevallus, being Ostlers, Chamberlaines, Tapsters, Coblers, etc. Lucinus

wished that his writings might not be read, either of men too Meanes to come to true knowledge. learned, or utterly unlearned; Quod alteri nihil intelligunt, alteri plus fortasse quam ipse de se, because the one sort understood nothing, the other understood perhaps more, than hee understood of himselfe: So we would preach to neither, Sed si optio daretur, If I might have my wish, wee had rather preach to the learned than to the ignorant, for we had rather be reprehended, than not to be understood. Well is he, that preacheth to an eare of understanding, and not as Actaeon did to his dogges: Rebuke not a scorner, lest he hate thee, but rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee; give Prov. 9. 8, 9. admonition to the wise, and hee will be the wiser, teach a righteous man, and he will increase in learning. And indeed how should wee have knowledge? we read nothing; wee search not the Scriptures; we attend not to reading, to exhortation and doctrine: All our Iohn 5. 29. knowledge must come from hearing; which being so, our knowledge can bee but small, for wee heare not a Sermon from one moneth to another, nor handle a Booke from one Sunday to another; and then our knowledge must needs be small; for our eares are like a reedle or sieve, that can hold no water, or an Vnthrifts purse, that can hold no money. Saint Augustine commendeth unto us foure things, to bring us unto knowledge.

1. Reading.
2. Meditating.
3. Praying.
4. Contemplating.

Reading is an assiduous perusing of the holy Scriptures, joyned with the attentive hearing of the Word preached. The Eunuch was a diligent reader of the Prophet Esay: The Disciples Acts 8. 27. of Troas heard Paul preach untill midnight; The Nobles of Berea received the Word with readinesse: But these men heare little, Act. 17. 11. read lesse.
Meditating is an earnest imployment of the minde, a thing straightly commanded and commended; Let not the Booke of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night. For Ios. 1. 8. blessed is the man that doth delight in the Law of the Lord, and in that Psal. 1. Law doth meditate day and night. But our meditations are not setled upon the Law and Ordinances of the Almighty.
Prayer is a lifting up of the minde to God craving his blessings, and praising him for his mercies, reading enquireth, meditation findeth, prayer requesteth, but contemplation tasteth how sweet and gracious the Lord is. Yee know, that it is the Commandement of the Lord, Seeke, and yee shall finde; knock Mat. 7. and it shall bee opened unto you: If wee seeke by reading, wee shall finde by meditating, if wee knocke by praying, it shall be opened unto us by contemplating: but these neither seeke by reading, nor find by meditating, nor knocke by praying; they are as

horse and mule; in whom there is no understanding: For they Motives to stirre up to use the means to get knowledge. Speake evill of things they know not. Luther said, if there bee a Paradise in this earth, it is in Churches of preaching, or schooles of learning, so that wee have grace to learne in them. They were wont to say, give a man learning and turne him loose; but that Proverbe was bred in another age, when learning was more esteemed, Quando erat rarior, and carior, when it was more rare and deare: but this is a time of ignorance, whetein men raile on all the workes of God, for want of knowledge: but this is a desperate disease, and for mee let it grow till it be rottennesse in their bones. I speake not in hope of amendment, but to beare witnesse of their sinne, against the day of the Lord. Is there no Balme in Gilead? Is there no Knowledge in England? A man without Knowledge, is as a workeman without his hands, as a Ier. 8. 22. Painter without his eyes, as a Traveller without his legges, Imago mortis, vivi hominis sepultura, The image of death, Lazarus sepulcher, no true man. Nemo potest jure dici homo, nisi qui sapiens est; Seneca. only the wise man is a right man; and the man of understanding is onely wise. The Heathens tooke paines for naturall knowledge and built Libraries by their Temples; and the Romans, by their Capitoll. In Athens, were Vniversities, and the Students called Philosophers. In Persia, Magi. In India, Gymnosophistes; and in England, Druides. Ierusalem had more than foure hundred schooles: Samuel taught at Rama, Elizeus at Ierico, Iohn at Ephesus, Marke at Alexandria, and Paul at Rome. Charles erected universities at Paris, Tolouse, Papia, Padua, and Prague: Pithagoras travelled many Countries for knowledge: Apollonius compassed ninty Regions, and Plato was sold in his travailes: Simonides studied seventy yeares: Anaxagoras seventy two; Thales seventy eight: Socrates eighty foure: Milesius ninty seven: Livie wrote an hundred and forty bookes: and Pliny threescore* and fifteene. All men desire knowledge, and the reason is; Cupiditas discendi optima ratio vivendi, desire of learning is the best way of living. Philip rejoyced, that Alexander was borne in the daies of Aristotle; and blesse thou God that thou livest in these daies of knowledge: Blessed are the eyes which see, that ye see: For I tell you, that many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things that yee see, and have not seene them, and to heare those things, which yee heare, and have not heard them. Luke 10. 23, 24.
But to proceed, if it bee a sinne to raile in ignorance; how execrable is it, when it is in knowledge? then it is a double sinne, as in Iulian the Apostata; who said of the Scriptures, (...). He knew the Scriptures, hee had read the Scriptures, but he despised them; and therfore the Church never pray'd for him, but against him. So Chrysostome speaking of certain Hereticks called Anomaies, saith, Hanc arborem haereseos, nec Paulus plantavit, nec Apollo rigavit, nec Deus auxit, neither have Paul Chrys. planted this tree of heresie, nor Apollo watered it, nor God encreased

it, sed plantavit superbia, rigavit invidia, but Pride planted it, A shame for a Christian to bee ignorant of Christianity. and Envy watered it; they sinned in knowledge, not in ignorance: they said, that they knew God as well as God knew himselfe. And as these Anomaies went to farre one way, so did the Sceptickes, another way; they doubted of all things, Num Chrisippus homo esset, an formica; whether Chrisippus were a man or a pismire, whether snow is white, or blacke: For Satan is ever in his contraries. All Arrianisme came from pride in knowledge, not ignorance alone. Arrius seeing Alexander preferred before him, denied (...) Christ; the consubstantiality, against his own conscience; and his end was accordingly; for as he was a disputing, being provoked to the stoole, in exonerating nature, hee poured out all his bowels, and so hee dyed. These men had need say, Pone ostium labiis, set a doore before my lips. The Pharisees also knew Christ, yet railed on him, they called him Fabri filium: the Carpenters Sonne, a man of new learning (...), Psal. 141. a drunkard, a worker by the Divell, a deceiver: therefore they were farre from mercy, and many sinned, In spiritum sauctum, against the holy Ghost. Lastly, the Divell sinned thus: for it could not be ignorance, they being by creation Angels of light, Mat. 13. Mar. 2. Mat. 12. Iohn 7. he fell upon mere envy, in knowledge,: whereupon Billius in his Anthologia maketh the comparison, betweene him and Christ: Ille voluit esse supra Angelum, Hee would be above an Angell, Sed hic infra hominem, but Christ beneath a man, and therefore he became a scorne of men, yea, the very outcast of all people: Ille coelum dedignatus est, he disdained Heaven, but Christ disdained not to walke on the earth: Ille omnibus hominibus invidit, hee envied all men, and would have them to perish, but Christ Loved 1 Tim. 2. 4. all, and would have all to be saved: but this malice of Satan could not be in ignorance, but in knowledge.
But to returne: most men raile in ignorance; they are like unto Herpasta Socrates shee foole, that having lost her eyes, did not beleeve that shee was blind, but thought the house to be darke: So we are blind, and yet will not see it: it is nothing to name the tenne Commandements, the Lords prayer, the twelve Articles of faith, the two Sacraments, but to understand them. We raile on Catechising, for that wee understood it not. Acts 8. 30. I say to thee, as Philip said to the Eunuch, when he heard him read the Prophecie of Esaias, Vnderstandest thou what thou readest? Even so understandest thou what thou prayest, beleevest, receivest? Christianus sine scientia, est sicut navis sine remis; A Christian without knowledge, is like a ship withovt sailes, rudder, ancker, cable, etc. or like a bird without wings; or like a tree without Iohn 3. 19: rootes, or a purse without mony, This is the condemnation of the World, that men love darkenesse more than light, (and why so?) their deedes are evill. They shall one day cry out in Hell, Wee have erred from the way of truth, the light of righteousnesse hath not shined unto us,

the Sunne of understanding rose not up upon us, Wee have wearied our Ignorance the cause of distruction. selves in the way of wickednesse and destruction, and wee have gone through dangerous wayes, but wee have not knowne the way of the Lord. Men are not ignorant for want of teaching, but for want of learning; Wisd. 5. 6, 7. 13. wee will not learne, there wee shall say, Assoone as we were borne, wee beganne to draw an end, and have shewed no token of Vertue, but are consumed in our owne wickednesse, If wee should live so long as Methnsalah, who lived nine hundred sixty nine yeeres: it may be we would have more knowledge for the World, but no more for God, we have sold our selves with Ahab to doe wickedly, the dayes will come that we shall say as Iacob said, Surely Gen. 5. ca. 28. 16 the Lord was in this place, and I was not aware: The Lord was here but I was not aware of it, hee spake to me, and I heard him not, hee offered his grace to me and I regarded it not; his Sunne shined, and I beheld it not. And now it is night, and I cannot walke, death commeth, and I cannot worke; their bones shall lie downe in the graves full of ignorance, blindnesse, poperie: Iohn 12. Qualis enim vita, finis ita, For as thy life is: so is thy death. Thy bones are full of the sinne of thy youth, and it shall lie downe with thee in the Dust. And Paul is peremptory, namely, That God will render Iob 20. 11. 2 Thess. 1. 8. vengeance unto them, that doe not know him. The wicked seeing the elect in Heaven, shall say to God, as Esau said to Isaac, Hast thou but one blessing my Father? blesse me, even me also my Father: But it will be too late, their blessing, shall be turned into a cursing.
Nay Iude chargeth them further, that they abused themselves, in that they knew not; like the Doctors of Ephesus, of whom Paul reporteth thus: They would be Doctors of the Law, and yet understand 1 Tim. 1. 7. not what they speake, neither whereof they affirme. And also in that they knew, For saith, Iude, Whatsoever things they know naturally, as beasts, which are without reason, in those things, they corrupt themselves: so that every way they are vile and miserable, as Apoc. 3. 17. Some things they knew naturally, as beasts that know sweet, from sowre; good, from evill, meat, from poyson. The wicked know (...), the formall things, but not (...) 1 Cor. 2. 7. (...), the mysteries in Christ, Hereupon saith Paul, We speake the Wisedome of God in a mysterie, even the hid Wisedome; whereof 1 Cor. 2. 14. the wicked have no saving understanding. The naturall man perceiveth not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnesse unto him, neither can hee know them, because they are not spiritually discerned: They savor not the things that are of God, as Christ said to Peter. Come behind me Satan, thou art on offence unto me, because thou understandest not the things that are of God, but of Men. Where let mee distinguish Mat. 16. of knowledge, that there is a naturall knowledge and a spirituall knowledge: the first of these, the Apostle calleth the Wisedome of the flesh, the second, the Wisedome of the spirit: the Rom. 8. 6. end of the first is death, the end of the second life and peace. The reason hee setteth downe also; saying, The Wisedome of the flesh,

is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God neither indeed The naturall man come short of beasts in use of his knowledge. can bee, etc. Many know naturally like beasts, and no more, like horses and mules that have no understanding. The naturall knowledge saith, par pari referto, offer like to like, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth: but spirituall knowledge, Mat. 5. 38. Rom. 12. saith, Bonum malo rependite, Recompence good for evill. So did the Apostles, 2. Cor. 4. Naturall knowledge saith, Enjoy the pleasures that are present; as said the gallant of the World, Wisd. 2. the other saith, flye from the lusts of youth, as Paul 2 Tim. 2. charged his Scholer Timothy. Naturall knowledge saith, give us that which is present, let God alone with that which is to come: as the Epicures said, A living Dogge is better than a dead Lion, the other saith, Give mee the things that are above, where ^^cl. 9. 4. Col. 3. 2. Christ sitteth at the right hand of God. The one saith, that it is good sleeping in a whole skinne, as Peter said, Master favour thy Mat. 16. Mat. 5. 10. selfe, the other saith, Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur, Blessed are they that suffer persecution, etc.
Yea naturall men know not oftentimes so much as beasts: Beasts know them that give them meat, as doe Oxen and Asses, but men doe not. So saith the Prophet, The Oxe knoweth his owner, Esa. 1. 3. and the Asse his masters cribbe, but Israel hath not knowne, my people hath no understanding. Beasts know how to provide, for themselves, as doe pismyres, For in the plentie of Sommer Prov. 6. Luke 15. they provide for the dearth of Winter. Men doe not, but spend all like (...), the prodigall Sonne. Beasts know the time of their trouble, as the Crane, the Storke, and the Turtle, so saith Ieremy, The Storke in the ayre knoweth her appointed times, the Turtle Ier. 8. 7. Luke ^9. 42. and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their comming. Men doe not; as is said of Ierusalem, that shee knew not the time of her visitation. Beasts feare their proper adversary, and that will hurt them; as the Sheepe, the Wolfe; the Lion, the Fire; the Ambr. Elephant, the Mouse; the serpent, the Iron; the Faulkon, the Eagle. Men doe not, but joyne with Satan, and will not know the truth, That they may come to amendment, out of the snare of the Divell, which are taken of him at his will. Beasts know their evils, and their remedies: 2 Tim. 2. 26. the Adder being sicke, seeketh serpentine grasse; the Dogge, being sicke seekth trifolie; the Swallow, caelidine; the Hart, dictanie; the Beare, pismyres: the Ape, moaths: But men seeke for nothing that may doe them good in this life, and in the World to come. Christ said that Ninive and the Queene of the South should rise in judgement and condemne the Iewes: but I say Mat. 12. that beasts shall condemne us, in the day of judgement; For they know more by the instinct of nature, than wee by doctrine: O miseri, O miserable men that wee are, that beasts shall condemne us, like Balaams Asse, his master. And could they speake now as Ascanius his Popenjaie, and Augustus Parat spake, Numb. 22. they would speake against us.

And yet all spirituall knowledge is not profitable: For the Beastly minded men like beasts. learned distinguish it into a knowledge of judgement, and knowledge of election and choyce.
A knowledge of judgement is a bare knowledge of good from evill; as in the idolaters, Who when they knew God, glorified him not as Rom. 1. 21. cap. 2. 23. God. In the Iewes, Which knew the Law, and gloried in the Law, and yet through breaking of the Law dishonoured God. In the Cretians, They did professe, they knew God, but by their workes they did deny him, being abbominable, disobedient, and unto every good worke reprovable. Tit. 1. 16.
A knowledge of choyce is to doe good: the one is Scientia; the other is Conscientia. When the Gospell, the word of truth is fruitfull from the day we heard of it, and when our conversation is such, as becommeth the Gospell of Christ Iesus. It is Col. 1. 6. Mat. 23. 3. one thing to know, another thing to know truely, Praedicant multi de virtute, and non habent; Many preach of Vertue, and have it not; praise it, and love it not. For with the Pharisees they say, but doe not.
Lastly, he compareth them to beasts: for in many things the wicked are as beasts, if not worse, by creation little inferiour to the Angels, by convesation much inferiour to bruit beasts. For the Oxe doth know his owner, the Asse his masters cribbe, but Israel Psal. 8. 4. Esa. 13. Mat. 7. 6. Luk. 13. hath not knowne, my people (saith God) hath no understanding.
Christ compareth carelesse men to Swine, hee called Herod a Foxe.
Paul calleth false teachers, Woolves.
Peter calleth adulterers, Dogs, that returne to their vomit. Act. 20. 9. 2 Pet. 2. Luke 3. 7. Ier. 2. 2. Soph. 3. Psal. 5. 8.
Iohn calleth the Pharisees, Vipers.
Ieremy compareth the Iewes to Dromedaries, and wild Asses.
Sophonie calleth Tyrants, Lions.
David compareth the contemners of his word, to Adders. Man should beare the Image of God, therefore saith the Apostle, Put on the new man, which after God is shapen in righteousnesse Ephes, 4. 24. and true holinesse. In deed we ough to put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of the Almighty, but most men doe not.
Well therefore said a learned man, that the proud beare the image of a Lion, the greedy, of a Woolfe; the subtile, of a Foxe; the ignorant, of a horse and mule; the voluptuous, of a Dromadary or wilde Asse; the Apostata, of a Dogge.
Esay hath a notable Prophecie, insinuating, that many men by nature are beasts, but by grace they are cured, tamed, and made good. Where note by the way, that there be divers kinds Esa. 11. 6. of wicked men, though all agree in evill, and meete in one place, that is Hell: yet they differ in the kinds of evill, all are not alike, yet all hurtfull. Some are stout as Lions, some greedy as Woolves, some cruell as Beares, some spightfull as Aspes, some

ravenous as Leopards; some hurt by pricking; some by stinking, Worse to be beastly, than to be a beast. some by breathing, some by poyson, some by worrowing: So is it among the wicked, some hurt as beasts one way, some another. If hee be not an usurer, yet is he an oppressor, if not a Papist, yet a prophane man; if not covetous, yet prodigall, if not voluptuous, yet superstitious; if not a Lion, yet an Aspe. But let us put off our beastly affections, Nam pejus est bestialiter vivere quam bestiam esse, hoc fuit a natura illud a Diabolo. It is worser Seneca. to live beastly, than to be a beast, the one is of nature, the other of the Divell. Let us then no longer live beastly, lest we perish with the beast, but live Christianly, that so we may see the goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the living.



THE TWENTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XI. 

Woe be unto them, they have followed the way of Caine.
Execrable sinners may be execrated.



FRom the description and confuration of the wicked, hee commeth to execration; hee riseth by degrees, as the Eagle mounteth in her flight, like fire that first smoaketh, and then flameth, he casteth them out of the savour of God and state of salvation; Woe be unto them (saith he) Psal. 69. 22, 23. etc. let their table be made a snare before them, and their prosperity their ruine, let their eyes be blinded, that they see not, and make their loynes alway to tremble. Powre out thine anger upon them, and let thy wrathfull displeasure take them; let their habitation be void, and let none dwell in their Tents. Lay iniquity upon their iniquity, and let them not come into thy righteousnesse; let them be put out of the Booke of life, and let them not be written with the righteous. Thus with Esay he lifteth up his voyce like Esa. 58. 1. Mich. 3. 2 Cor. 4. Ier. 5. 24. a trumpet; with Micah he is full of power and judgement; hee commeth to them, as Paul to the Corinthians, with a rod; with Ieremy his words are as fire, and the people as wood and straw to be devoured of this fire. Saint Iude had hitherto tempred his stile, but now comming to their arch-metropolitan sinnes, hee cannot forbeare, but breaketh out into these words, Woe bee unto them: with Iames and Iohn he is become Boanarges, the Sonne of

thunder, he telleth them of nothing but destruction; that God Ministers must not in their owne cause be rigorous, but in Gods. hath bent his bow and made his arrowes ready, that God will arise, and his enemies shall bee scattered; that God will meet them, as a shee Beare robbed of her whelps. There is no doubt but the Apostle would have spoken mildly unto them, would have blessed them as Aaron did the tribes, if there had beene any Psal. 7. Psal. 68. 8. Hos. 13. 8. Numb. 6. goodnesse in them; but seeing their sinnes execrable, he commeth to execration, and saith, Woe be unto them. Hee dealeth here with them as Christ did with Corazin and Bethsaida; Woe to thee Corazin, Woe to thee Bethsaida. And as Christ did with the Mat. 23. Pharisees, Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees and Hypocrites; and as Paul did with the Corinthians, when he said, Maranatha Anathema be unto them, that love not the Lord Iesus. Men are unwilling to 1 Cor. 16. heare execrations and woes, they would have pillowes sowne under their elbowes; with the men of Anathoth they love to be soothed in their sinnes; with Achab, they cannot abide that Micah should prophesie otherwise unto them, than they would have him, they would not have the Lords sword drawne against them, nor no woe denounced upon them; but woe, woe, and woe againe to them, that cause us to sharpen our stile, and to cry, Woe be unto them.
And note here, that no private revenge, no sinister affection carried him to this execration; but being moved by the Spirit of God, he was inforced to lay the Axe of Gods vengeance to the rootes of their trees, and to cry, Woe be unto them. The Prophets and Apostles, in their owne causes, are like doves, Sine felle, without gall or bitternesse; but in Gods cause they rowse themselves like Giants: Moses prayed for Aaron and Myriam, the cause was his; Stephen prayed for his persecutors, the cause was his; but when he commeth to handle the cause of God, he calleth them Acts 7. hard-hearted, and stiffe necked Iewes. So Christ in his owne cause was meeke as a Lambe; but in his Fathers cause he rowsed himself like a Lion; for he that prayed for his enemies, thundred many woes against his Fathers adversaries, as the Scribes, Mat. 23. Pharisees and Hypocrites.
Well, the Apostle having thus denounced Gods judgement against them, saying, Woe be unto them, he commeth to set downe the cause of this execration, the first whereof was envy, malice, First, he calleth them malicious, envious, like Caine, whose sinne the Apostle noteth, and dehorteth men not to be, As Caine, which was of the wicked one, and slew his brother: and wherefore slew he him? because his owne workes were evill, and his brothers good. A miserable 1 Iohn 3. 12. thing not to hate the man, but the vertue of the man, the goodnesse of the man; this is (...), to fight against God, like the old Giants; we should love good men; Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle (saith David) who shall rest upon thy holy hill? God Psal. 15. answereth him, In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honoureth

them that feare the Lord: All Davids delight was upon Envy ever ascendeth maligne vertue and glory. them; for so he protesteth in the Psalme, All my delight is upon the Saints, that are on the earth, and upon such as excell in vertue. We should doe so, even Hate the evill, and love the good, and establish Psal. 16. 3. A^os 5. 15. judgment in the gate: but we have inverted that order, and good men are in most detestation with us. As there is no Sunne beame without motes, no Tree without barke, no garment without mothes, no fruit without Catterpillers; so no vertue, no honour without envy. Theres no Iacob, whom Esau will not perfecute; no David, whom Saul will not maligne; no Isaak, whom Ismael Gen. 27. will not revile; and no good man upon the earth, whom the envious will not bite, teare, and devoure. For this cause one resembleth envy to certaine Flies, called Cantharides; for as they light specially upon the fairest wheat, and most blowne Roses; so envy commonly opposeth herselfe against the best men; Invidia virtutis Comes, envy is the companion of vertue. One resembleth envy unto fire, for as fire coveteth the highest places; so envy aimeth at the worthiest men. As for example, Themistocles when he had conquered the navy of Xerxes, which in number was most infinite, through envy was forced to leave his Country, and to live in miserable banishment. Aristides, which for his vertues was called the just, yet through envy, as an unprofitable member, was cut from the body of his Country. This envy is compared, in some respect, by some learned men, unto the Sunne: for as the nature of the Sunne is to obscure and darken things, which be cleare and manifest, and likewise to lighten, and to illustrate that which is obscure: so envy endeavoureth to obscure the glory of those which are famous, and in the gifts and graces of the spirit excell others: for none are more subject to envy than those which for vertue and religion are renowned: but let them envy the good, and maligne them to the uttermost, Rumpanturilia Codro, yet let us lay aside all maliciousnesse, and all guile, and dissimulation, and all envy.
The eye of envy lookes ever upward, who is above, who riseth, who prospereth, who is well spoken of, well thought of, or favoured of God, and asmuch grieved is an envious man, at the good of another, as at the harme of himselfe, which Diogenes noted when he saw a knowne envious knave, looke sad; no man can tell (quoth he) whither harme hath happened to this fellow or good unto his neighbour, for both vexe him alike.
Envy was the first venome, which the Divell powred forth against mankind: Hinc periit primus, and perdidit, by this the first Cypr. man perished himselfe and destroyed others: what was the cause that Caine slew his brother, his onely comfort in that new borne world? was it not envy, when he saw the gift of his brother accepted of God, and his owne rejected, he was very wrath, And his countenance fel down, as not able to endure the sight of his brother. Gen.

What was the cause, why the Patriarkes sold Ioseph to the Ismalites Envie theroot of all mischiefe. and then came and told their Father, That a wicked beast had devoured him? Surely it was because they envied him for his dreames. Gen. 37.
Because the women sang in the streets, Saul hath slaine his thousand, and David his ten thousand: therefore was Saul exceeding 1 Sam. 18. wroth, and had envy to David ever after. It was (saith the King of Preachers) a venimous mischievous eye, such as the burning eyes of Witches, or the Basiliske, or Gorgon, that he cast towards him. The elder brother when he understood of the entertainement, that his father gave to his prodigall brother, and with what joy and rejoycing he was entertained, Hee was angry at the matter, and would not goe in, he envied it. Examine the reason, why Innocencie it selfe was hunted and followed unto death, with Crucisie him, crucifie him, hee is not worthy to live; Was it not Mat. 27. envy? Let Pilat be judge, He knew that for envy they had dilivered him. Doe wee looke that envy, should favour the honour and welfare of men, when it favoureth not the life of a man? No, not the life of the Lord himselfe? Poyson they say, is life to the Serpent, death to a man; and that which is life to a man, his spittle and naturall humidity, is death to a Serpent. I have read it thus applied: Vertue and Felicity, which is life to a good man, is death to the envious: and that which the envious live by, is the misery and death of a good man: for envy endevoreth either that men may not live at all, or that they may live miserably. And therefore amongst other fruits of a reprobate minde, these two are joyned together, Envy and Murther; and likewise Rom. 1. Gal. 5. amongst the workes of the flesh, they are in the same combination, as if they were twinnes growing in one body, and could not be separated.
Envy is the roote of all mischiefe in the World: this is that Troiane horse, that Pandora's boxe, full of all deadly poyson, that Hydra, not with seven heads, but with seven hundred heads of mischiefe. We marvell that there is so much evill in the world, but cease to marvel at it, seeing there is so much envious pride in the World. For envy commeth from this master sinne, Pride, which is as a master-pock, and cannot be healed. Pride, is a liking of our selves, and envie is the hatred of another mans felicity; where the first is, there is the second, Superbia est metropolis omnium vitiorum, Pride is the chiefe or mother sin of all sins; Minores despicit, majoribus invidet, ab aequalibus dissentit: She scorneth her inferiors, envieth her betters, and dissenteth from all equals: as was said of Caesar and Pompey, the one could not abide a superiour, the other, an equall. Two things be in the Lord, Glory and justice; the proud man robbeth God of the one, as Herod, who would not give the glory to God: and the malitious envious of Act. 12. the other: For he revengeth, whereas all men should give roome

to vengeance, for it is written, Vengeance is mine, and I will reward The etymology of envie it implying to be in the eye. saith the Lord. Envy is as the dung of swallowes, which put out the eyes of Father Tobias: our pride and envie is infinite, wee would be Kings, nay, wee would bee Gods. The Bactrians said of Alexander, that if his body were answerable to his heart, Rom. 12. 19. He would touch the East with one hand, and the West with another; hee would set one foote in the Land, and the other in the Sea: the same may be said of many of us, for truely wee envie the Aire, Fire, Water, to others, If wee could stop the Sunne, or inclose the waters into one fist, or draw up all the Ayre into one mouth, we would doe it to hinder others.
The Poet describeth envy thus;
First, with a pale face without bloud.
Secondly, with a leane body, without any juyce in it.
Thirdly, with squint eyes.
Fourthly, with blacke teeth.
Fiftly, with an heart full of gall.
Sixtly, with a tongue tipped with poison.
And last of all, with a countenance never laughing, but when others weepe; never sleeping, because he studieth, and thinketh continually upon mischiefe, Invidia dicitur, quiavel non videt, Cypr. vel nimis intuetur, It is c^lled Envy, either because it will not see at all, that which in the blessings of God is to bee seene, or because it prieth too deepe.
Envious men are like Mermaides, which never sing, but in a tempest, and mourne in a calme; so they rejoyce at the hurt of their neighbours, and sorrow at their welfare. The housholder said to his servant that murmured at his bounty to others, is thine eye evill because I am good? enviest thou me because of my liberality? Even so, is thy eye evill, because thy neighbour is wealthier than thou, his wit sharper than thine, his learning more than thine, his credit greater than thine? we would have no man fare well, but our selves: Like Nero, who when he died, wished that all the world might dye with him, Me mortuo Coelum and terra misceatur, Ier. 6. 10. Psal. 120. 3. Psal. 14. Esa. 1. 5. Phil. 3. 17. Esa. 59. 2 Pet. 2. said Nero. Divers sinners have divers properties: The contemner of the Word, hath an evill and an uncircumcised eare; the slanderer, hath an evill, a railing tongue; the covetous man, hath a devouring throat, like a sepulchre; the murtherer hath a bloudy hand; the glutton hath an evill bellie; the voluptuous man hath an evill, a vaine foot; like Hazael, who ran like a wilde Roe; the adulterer hath an evill, a whorish uncleane heart: but the envious man hath a Divellish eye. But such eares shall have no mercy, such tongues shall burne in Hell, such throats shall be filled with gravell; such hands shall wyther, as did Ieroboams; such eyes, shall be darkened. The Divell is the Father of envy; hee envied Gods glory at the first, and he envieth mans felicitie at the last.
Hemmingius divideth all affections into Corporall, and Animall. The poyson of envy make the heart unfit for grace.
The Mother of all corporall affections is (...), the love of a mans selfe; now Primogenita her first borne daughter is Superbia, pride, her second daughter is Invidia, Envy; her third is (...), covetousnesse; all come from (...), which now reigneth in the world, and like another Alexander hath conquered the same; for men are lovers of their owne selves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. As Demosthenes being asked what was the first part of an orator, what the second, what the third: Answered, Action: so if you aske me what is the first, the second, the third part of a vile man, I must say, Envy.
What is the cause of quarrels?
What raiseth slanders?
What multiplyeth suits?
Envy.
Invidia est arcus diaboli, Envy is the bow of the divell, detraction is the arrow, she shooteth out of this bow, envy is a fire raked up in the heart; detraction is as the flame. Wee all complaine of envy, and say, Anger is cruell, wrath is raging, but who can stand before envy? and yet we are as Caine, envious.
A mad dogge infuseth his venome into him whom he biteth so doth envy by the tongue; it is the string and pulse of the soule we marvell, why men are so vile; why, they are tainted with a mad dogge, and what wisdome is in them? If ye have bitter enoiing, and strife in your hearts, rejoyce not, for this wisdome doth not descend Iam. 3. 14. from above, but is earthly, sensuall, and divellish, saith the Apostle.
Chrysostome exclaimeth against this envy, thus; O invidia pessima fera, per te mors intravit in mundum, tu occidisti Abelem; vendidisti Gen. 3. Iosephum in Aegyptum, fugasti Davidem, decollasti Babtistam; crucifixisti Christum, O envy, the worst of all wild beasts, through thee death entred into the world, thou hast killed Abel, sold Ioseph into Aegypt, persecuted David, beheaded the Baptist; and crucified Christ: All mischiefes flow from envy, as all light from the Sun, and all water from the Sea.
Envy is a worke of the flesh, a note of a Reprobate; Envy blindeth a man, Vt proximi bona videre non possit, that he canot see his neighbours Gal. 5. Rom. 1. good; for envy is like unto sore eyes, that are offended at the light.
Envy overthroweth all love and charity amongst men, for love envieth not. 1 Cor. 13.
Envy is contrary to God, and all proceedings; for God is so good a God, that he can draw good out of evill; but the envious they are so evill, and mischievous, that they can draw evill out of good.
But you give us but the hearing of this, and God will one day

give you but the hearing also; you shall cry, but he will not regard The envious man is his own tormentor. you. I speake boldly, for that the cause is Gods, for the manner it may exceed, but for the matter, I crave no pardon; I have as good right to speake it, as the Lord Chancellour hath to Zach. 7. carry the broad Seale of England: kill this Cockatrice therefore in the egge, before it be a serpent; kill it in the heart, before it breake out into action.
For even the wicked are not to be envied; so saith the Psalmist, Fret not thy selfe because of the wicked, neither be thou envious for Psal. 37. 1. the evill doers. Leave him to God, pray for him: we must be like fishes, which live in the salt Sea, and yet are fresh; so wee in an uncharitable world, and yet be charitable; though we be reviled, yet we blesse; though persecuted, yet we suffer; though evill 1 Cor. 4. 12, 13. spoken of, yet we pray; though envyed, and maliced, yet we love.
And yet further observe with me, that though envy is a most mischievous sin, and is the cause of all the uprores of the world, yet it is a thing of that nature, that it indamageth and hurteth him most that hath it.
For this cause envy is compared to fire, to a moth, to a Bee; for as the fire consumeth the matter that nourisheth it, and the moth the garment, thar breedeth it: So doth envy him that envieth.


Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis.


The man whom envy doth possesse,
Doth pine at others wealth and good successe.


He thinketh his Neighbours Oxe, fatter than his; his neighbours pasture, greener than his; his Neighbours Corne, better than his; his Neighbours building, stronger, and gayer than his. And as a Bee stinging a man, loseth her sting, and never can make hony after. So the envious man loseth his labour and the grace of God. Envy is to him that envieth, as the rust to the iron, as the Viper that eateth out the belly of her damme. The envious man is as Sysiphus, who rolling up a stone, it reboundeth on him with a greater force. Envy tormenteth the mind, it wasteth the body, it fretteth the heart, it shortneth our daies, and damneth our soules: it setteth a man awork to backbite and slander his Neighbour, and to deny him all duties of humanity. So then, envy, hatred, and backbiting, alwayes goe together, as three cankers, and evill sores that consume the body, hurt the good name, lessen the gifts, and repine at the good of our brethren. Basill compares envious men to Ravens, that flye over sweet Gardens, and at last seize upon a Carrion. He likeneth them to Flies, who passe over sound flesh, and light upon a sore, a galled place;

so the envious passe over all the rare graces, that be in men; but Cain prophane and grudgeth at Gods Sacrifice. if there be any imperfection in them, that they blaze abroad, and cover it not: they doe not with Sem and Iaphet, spread a garment over their Fathers nakednesse. I confesse that there is as little good to bee done on these men, as most sinners; for as a Gen. 9. Smith cannot worke but on hot Yron; so a preacher can doe but little good, but in a charitable minde.
Plutarch, to teach men to hate envy, calleth it sorcery, because that through the poyson thereof, it doth not onely fil the envious body, with a naughty and hurtfull disposition, but the infection disperseth it selfe thorow the eyes, even upon them that behold it, so that they are touched therewith, as it were by some poysonable influence.
But besides envie, there were many other sinnes in Cain; hee walked many wayes: there was in him profanenesse, contempt of God, irreligiousnesse: God rejected his sacrifice, for it was not Hebr. 11. 4, 5. offered in faith. It is like that hee offered an evill, pinching, grudging sacrifice, with an evill heart; So many of us offer the sacrifice of Cain. Wee grudge God any thing, every little is too much in his service. We build our owne houses faire; but wee thinke much to give any thing to Gods house and service; we wil rather take from the Temple with Balthazar, and rob it with Dionysius, than give to it. As in the land of Israel, looke what the Dan. 5. Palmer worme left, that the Grashopper devoured; and what the Grashopper left, that the Canker devoured; and what the Canker left, that the Caterpiller devoured. So in our Church, looke what Impropriations have left, that have Patrons deuoured, and what Patrons have left, that evill Customs have devoured, and what evill Customes have left, that have contentious and covetous parishioners, as with the teeth of a Lion, greedily gained. O that these taking hands might one day see the hand which Balthazar saw upon the wall! they would then bring every Tythe into the Lords barne, and robbe God and his Church no longer. Dan. ^. Mal. 3.
Againe, let a man have many children, if there bee but one lame, and deformed, or simple in wit, that is given to God, and the ministerie; the eldest is made a Gentleman, the rest Lawyers, but the most silly, simple, deformed, is made a Minister: he is good enough for God and his Church: this is the offering of Cain.
Againe, of duties appertaining to the Ministery, if there bee any thing worse than another, that wee give to the Minister of God. Wee give not to a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, therefore we shall not receive a Prophets reward. And though the Apostle saith, Let him that is taught in the Word, make him that taught him, partaker of all his goods; yet by their wills they shall Mat. 10. 41. Gal. 6. 6. have nothing, they would have us live of their almes, and of benevolence,

stand to their good wils and courtesies, and take what The Heathen observed the gods to be severe punishers of sacriledge. they will give. Yet saith Saint Paul, Who goeth on warfare at any time of his owne cost? Who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit of it? Who feedeth a flocke, and eateth not of the milke of it? And again, Do ye not know, that they which minister about holy things, eate of 1 Cor. 9. 7, 13, 14. the things of the Temple? and they which waite at the Altar, are parertakers of the Altar? So also hath the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospell, should live of the Gospell. This plainely sheweth, that the maintenance of the Minister, is not a voluntary and beggerly Almes; but an honourable stipend allotted of God, according to that which Christ saith, Dignus est operarius mercede, the laborer is worthy of his reward: And Paul saith, that Hee is worthy of double honour; that is, reverence and maintenance: and whosoever shall robbe him of his due, the thing so taken, will ring him such a peale to Hell, that he will wish he had never beene borne. Laqueus est hominis devorare sancta; It is a destruction to a man to Prov. 21. 20. devoure that which is sanctified. The very Heathen observed, that after such time, as the Grecians once offered violence to the Vir^il lib. 2. Ae^eid. Lactan. de origin. cap. 8. Temple of Pallas, that they never prospered. And Lactantius writeth of divers, who have beene grievously punished, for offering violence unto holy things; as namely, of Fulvius the Censor, who taking away certaine Marmoreas tegulas, tyles of Marble, out of the Temple, was within a short time after distract of his wits, and had two of his sonnes slaine; for griefe whereof he dyed also. Of Appius Claudius, who for alienating those things that were consecrated to Hercules, lost his eyes. And although Dionysius made a jest of sacriledge in taking a golden Cloake, that was upon the image of Iupiter Olympius, and putting a linsie woolsie cloake upon it, in the stead thereof, saying, That a golden cloake was too heavy in Summer, and too cold in Winter, but a linsie woolsey cloake was fit for both. Also in cutting off a golden beard, that Aesculapius did weare, saying, That it was no reason, that the son should have a beard, when as Apollo his father had none. Furthermore in taking away certaine golden cups which they held forth in their hands, saying, That it were folly not to take them, being so kindly offered: yet this went not without punishment; for at the last hee was driven out of his kingdom. So Xerxes sending foure hundred of his souldiers to Delphos, to spoile the Temple of Apollo, they were every one of them destroyed with lightening and thunder. So Marcus Crassus, for taking a great summe of money out of the Temple of Ierusalem, viz. ten thousand Talents, within a while perished miserably with his whole Army. But to let these passe; If you would be pleased to cast your eyes a little upon divine Histories, and the Histories of the Church, yee shall see this sinne horribly punished. Balthazar for prophaning and abusing the holy vessels, received presently a fearefull doome and sentence, by a hand-writing upon

a wall. Antiochus Epiphanes for taking the vessels of Gold and Silver God punished sacriledge in all ages. out of the Temple; and for destroying the Inhabitants thereof without cause, suffered most grievous paine and misery. Herod surnamed the Great, having opened Davids sepulchre to 1 Mach. 6. 12. take money out of it, as Hircanus had done before, divers of his men were consumed with a flash of fire, that brake from a secret place. Ioseph. Ant. lib. 26. cap. 11.
Looke to the age succeeding, I meane, the time of the Gospell: and yee shall see Ananias and Saphira, for with-holding secretly a part of that which they had voluntarily given to the vse of the Church, most severely punished with sudden death. Act. 5. 5. After this, when the Church was endewed with great riches and possessions by the bountifull donations of godly Emperours, and other devoute Christians, Iulian the Apostata, and Foelix his companion, for taking away the holy vessels of the Temple, and making but a jest of sacriledge, receiued both of them their just punishments; the one hauing his mouth, which was an instrument of blasphemy, made a seige, or passage to avoide his filthy excrements, which are naturally egested another way; the other having all the blood of his body, gathered to his mouth, as to a sinke, which he never left spetting and spawling out, till all was exhausted, and so died most miserably. I will not ransacke our owne Chronicles, nor report of the judgements, that haue lighted vpon divers of our owne nation for this sinne; only this I say, (...) are (...), the sufferings of others are instructions to vs to take heede how we meddle with holy and sacred things, and that we give to the Church whatsoever appertaineth unto her: for certainly if we possesse that which is Gods, we shal be dispossessed of God himselfe.
Another sinne in Caine was hypocrisy; he spake Abel faire, till he got him in the field: So many of us can flatter, to serve one owne turne.

Mel in ore, verba lactis;
Fel in corde, fraus in factis.

Honey in the mouth, faire words; Gall in the heart, deceitfull Esd. 4. deeds. The adversaries of Iuda and Benjamin would build the Temple with the Iewes. Herod desired the Wise men, that when Mat. 2. they had found Christ, to certify him of it, that he might come and worship him. Ismael did weepe to Godoliah, but the adversaries Ier. 42. of Iuda would haue pulled downe the Temple. Herod would have killed Christ, as he did the children of Bethlem. Ismael slew Godoliah: So, trust not an Hypocrite: whatsoever he saith, he meaneth it not, his heart is not with thee, though he speake thee faire: he is a Christian only in name, a brother only in shew. Of these Hypocrites S. Bernard speakes thus; Multi suut oves habitu, vulpes actu, crudelitate lupi, many are sheepe in shew, foxes in deed, and woolves in cruelty: For an Hypocrite hath vulpem in

cerebro, milvum in manu, and lupum in corde; a Fox in his braine, Desperation limits the mercy of God, and destroyes the soule, and sometime the body. a Kyte in his hand, and a Woolfe in his heart: And therefore our Saviour Christ saith, Beware of false prophets, which come to you in Sheepes cloathing, but inwardly are ravening Woolves: which in painted boxes hide deadly poyson; in beautifull Sepulchres, rotten bones; and under Iezabels painted Mat. 7. 16, 17. face, a whores behaviour. And therefore our Saviour calleth them Serpents, and Viperous Serpents, O yee viperous Serpents, yee generation of Vipers, how shall yee escape the damnation to come? And to shew the certaintie of their damnation, Mat. 23. 33. besides the manifold woes which Christ denounceth against them, it is said, that The wicked shall have their portion Mat. 24. 51. with hypocrites, to shew that the condemnation of hypocrites is most certainely sealed. Let me therefore use the counsell of Gregory, Hypocrita, aut esto quod appares, aut appare quod es; Either bee as thou seemest, or appeare as thou art; For Simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquitas, counterfeit piety is double impiety; first, because it is impiety, and then because it is counterfeit, making truth falshood, and God a Lier.
Thirdly, there was in Cain Desperation: Maius est peccatum quam remitti potest (quoth he:) my sinne is greater than it can bee Gen. 4. forgiven. To whom Augustine answereth, Mentiris Caine, mentiris in gutture: misericordia Dei major peccato tuo, major orbe: thou liest Cain, thou liest in thy throat: Gods mercy is greater than thy Psal. 103. 11, 12, 13. sinne, greater than the World: yea as great as himselfe: For as high as the Heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that feare him: and as farre as the East is from the West, so farre hath hee removed our sinnes from us: and as a Father hath compassion on his Children, so hath the LORD compassion on them that feare him. Desperation it is, Insanabilis plaga, a wound that cannot bee cured and healed. It is like the beast mentioned in Daniel, that had no name. There bee foure beasts mentioned there, the first, is said to bee a Lion; the second, a Beare; the third, a Leopard; the fourth, is not distinguished by any name at all; but it was a fierce and a cruell beast, having teeth of Iron, and Clawes of Brasse: other sinnes they are as Lions, Beares, and Leopards to spoile, and to undoe the soule of Man; but the finall destruction of the soule indeede, so long as there doeth remaine a seate of Iustice in Heaven, is Desperation. Yet Desperation is now common, and men kill themselves; but never did any Patriarke; Prophet, or Apostle lay bloudy hands on himselfe: None have done it but Reprobates, 1 Sam. 31. 4. Act. 1. 2 Sam. 17. 23. such as Saul and Iudas, who burst asunder in the middest: and Achitophel, who ended his life in an halter. Nero provided swords of Silver, to sticke himselfe, ropes of Silke,

to hang himselfe, ponds of Rosewater to drowne himselfe in: Desperation a great sinne. but if it bee damnable to murther another, what is it to murther thy selfe? as the Gaoler in the Acts would have done, had not Paul and Sylas stayed him in that fury. Augustine maketh desperation, Deut. 5. the greatest sinne, next to the sinne against the holy Act. 16. 30. Ghost: For hee that despaireth of mercy (saith he) maketh God a Lier.



THE ONE AND TVVENTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XI. 

And are cast away by the deceit of Balaams wages.
Covetousnes the roote of evill, the ruine of good.



THe next sinne is the Covetousnesse of Balaam, whose story is, Numb. 23. This sinne is the roote of all evill, the spawne of all sinnes, a common factour for most villanies of the World; the East-wind, that blasteth all the trees of vertue; it hindreth all goodnesse; when thou shouldest give, covetousnesse saith it is too much; when thou shouldest receive, covetousnesse saith it is too little; when thou shouldest remit, covetousnesse saith, it is too great; when thou shouldest heare, covetousnesse saith, it is too farre; when thou shouldest repent, covetousnes saith, it is too soone. Thus as Alecto, Cui nomina mille, mille nocendi artes* it hurteth every way: They that will be rich, fall into 1 Tim. 6. 9, 10. divers temptations, and snares of the Divel, and into noysome lusts, which drowne men in perdition and destruction. For the desire of money is the roote of all evill, which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and pierced themselves thorow with many sorrowes. A covetous man is like a dog in the shambles, which will neither gnaw the bone

himselfe, nor suffer any other curre to gnaw it: He is worse than Many woes denounced against covetousnesse* Iudas, he sold his Master for thirty pence; but the covetous carle will sell him for an halfepenny; Iudas but once, the never contented covetous man continually, and every day. He eateth the flesh, and drinketh the blood of his brother; for hee that hindreth a poore mans living, hindreth his life; therefore these men are said, To have their handsfull of blood. There is not a sinne Esa. 1. 15. in the second Table, against which so many woes are denounced as against covetousnesse, as Esay 5. 8. Woe be to them, that joyne Esa. 5. 8. to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may bee placed by their selves in the middest of the earth. And againe, Esay 30. 1. Woe to the rebellious children, saith the Lord, that take councell, and Esa. 30. 1. not at mee, and cover with a covering, but not by my Spirit, etc. And Habakuk 2. 9. Woe be to him, that coveteth an evill covetousnesse to his Hab. 2. 9. house, that he may set his nest on high, and escape from the power of evill. And Amos 6. 1. Woe to them that are at ease in Sion, and trust in the mountaine of Samaria. And Luke 6. 24. Woe bee to you that are Amos 6. rich, for yee have received your consolation. And Saint Iames saith, Luke 6. 24. Iam. 5. 1, 2, 3. Plorate divites, Goe to now ye rich men, weepe and howle for the miseries that shall come upon you, your riches are corrupt, your garments motheaten, your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witnesse against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. And no marvell though so many woes are threatned against this sinne of covetousnesse; for it is the originall of all sinne, committed against God or man.
Against God, the covetous man maketh gold his hope, and saith to the wedge of Gold, Thou art my confidence. His Oxen his wealth, his Iob 31. 24. riches is his creator, redeemer, and sanctifier, his God the Father, his God the Sonne, his God the Holy Ghost.
His Creator, for when he gets abundance of riches, he thinks himselfe made, but when by some accident he loseth a yoake of Oxen, or some other temporall thing; hee thinkes himselfe undone.
The Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, is not his Creator, he sings that old song, Sol, re, me, fa; sola res me facit, only his wealth makes him.
God the Sonne is not his Redeemer, his money delivers him from evill. Hath he escaped any danger? He thankes not God, he thankes his gold: Is he like to fall into any mischiefe? hee puts his trust in his uncertaine riches; Soule, thou hast much goods in store, take thy rest. Luke 12.
The Holy Ghost is none of his Sanctifier; Ille sanctior qui ditior, he is best that hath most, he is good enough, that hath gold enough, goods enough.
And as covetousnesse is hatefull to God, so is it to men; Avarus nemini bonus, sibi vero pessimus, hee is good to none, but worst to himselfe; for covetousnesse exposeth the heatt to all manner

of lothsome sinnes; for the divell hath the covetous alwayes upon Covetousnesse makes uncapable of all the eight beatitudes. the hip, as we speak, that is, ever at such advantage, that he will be sure to overthrow him: for whatsoever sinne hee will have him to commit, let him but hollow, and cast up the lure of commodity, he stoopes presently, and falls upon it. Would ye have him lye? promise him but profit, and he will tippe his tongue with lyes. Will ye have him forsweare himselfe? shew him but a commodity, use silver perswasions, he will pollute the name of God with a thousand othes. Would ye have him murther, shead blood? the glistring shew of gold will make him wade up to the chin in a streame of blood. This mercinary souldier doth never thinke himselfe too good for any service the Divell will command him: Covetousnesse is the Divels great Ordnance, wherewith he hath battered the wals of mens consciences, as it is most pittifull to consider: yea, and farther, a man may fall into other sinnes, and repent for them, but this sinne of covetousnesse is like the harlot, a deepe and a narrow ditch, and like the wicked woman, Prov. 23. 27. Prov. 5. that Salomon calls more bitter than death, whose heart is as nets, and snares, and her hands as bands, to keepe a man fast in the ward and prison of the divell: For whosoever is overtaken with this sin, cannot set one step to heauen; his couetous desires are as lead to pull him downe. Yee know that our Saviour hath Mat. 5. 3, 4, etc. eight beatitudes.
The first, to be poore in spirit.
The second, to mourne inwardly.
The third, to be meeke.
The fourth, to hunger and thirst after righteousnesse.
The fifth, to be mercifull.
The sixth, to be pure in heart.
The seventh, to be a peace maker.
The eighth, to suffer persecution for righteousnesse sake.
These are the steps and stayres to bring men to Heaven, and and therefore so long as men be covetous, it is impossible for them to come there.
First, poore in spirit, he cannot be; for he so feareth purse-poverty, that he feeles not the misery, into which the fall of Adam, and his owne sinnes have cast him.
Secondly, he cannot mourne for his sinnes; for worldly sorrow and vexation doe turne the streame of weeping quite another way.
Thirdly, he cannot be meeke in spirit; for the Spirit of God calls him a trouble-house, saying, Hee that is greedy of gaine, troubleth Prov. 15. 27. his owne house: and it is impossible that his heart should bee m^eke and quiet, when hee cannot suffer his owne house so to bee.
Fourthly, for hungring and thirsting after righteousnesse, it cannot be, that his appetite should stand that way, for the dogs-hunger,

and the dropsie-thirst of wealth doth so gnaw and torment his The covetous subiect to all the curses contrary to the eight beatitudes. soule, that hee makes no account of CHRISTS righteousnesse.
Fifthly, to bee mercifull, stands not in any sort with his profession, to open his heart to pitty, and his purse to relieve a poore man, he thinkes will undoe him: a piece of money goes from him, as a drop of blood from him heart, with griefe and sorrow enough.
Sixthly, Pure in heart, hee cannot be; for he that hath the root of all evill in his heart, cannot have a pure heart.
Seventhly, he is no peacemaker: crosse him in his penny, and he will trouble all the world; for all the world can tell, that covetousnesse is the father, mother, and nurse of most debates and strifes that are in the world; covetousnesse wil not lose a penny, he will give the Lawyer a pound first.
Eighthly, the covetous man will never suffer persecution for righteousnesse sake; his goods are his god, and if he come to those termes, that he must either leave riches or righteousnesse, 'tis righteousnesse that hee will forsake before riches; the world is his Mistresse, hee must embrace her, then farewell righteousnesse.
So that now a man may very truely turne the speech of our Saviour against the covetous man, and say, Cursed be the covetous; for he is not poore in spirit, and therefore the kingdome of Hell is his.
Cursed be the covetous, for he cannot mourne for his sinnes, but for his losses onely, therefore hee shall never bee comforted.
Cursed be the covetous, for he is not meeke, but froward in heart, and therefore he shall not inherit the earth, which hee so much wisheth.
Cursed be the covetous, for he doth not long after righteousnesse, but after riches; and therefore hee shall never be satisfied.
Cursed bee the covetous, for he is not mercifull, but hardhearted, therefore he shall finde no mercy.
Cursed be the covetous, for he is no peace-maker, but a makebate, and therefore he shall be called the child of the divell.
Cursed be the covetous, for he is not pure, but filthy in heart, and therefore he shall never see God.
Cursed be the covetous, for he cannot suffer the losse of his wealth for righteousnesse sake, and therefore the Kingdome of Hell is his.
And is it thus? is covetousnesse the occasion of so much evill? Let us take heed and beware of covetousnesse; and let us have our conversation Luke 12. 15. farre from covetousnesse; for it is Gods owne saying, I will never forsake thee, nor leave thee: so that thou maist boldly say, Heb. 13. 5, 6.

The Lord is my helper. Let us not bee like Moles, which make Covetousnesse excludes out of heaven. many holes, and digge many dens in the earth, and yet are not satisfied, but still labour and digge; Let us not build many houses, digge many cellers, fill many barnes, and yet bee unsatiable and unthankefull, and in all abundance and plenty will not say, Blessed bee the name of the Lord; which Iob did in his greatest Iob 1, 21. poverty. The covetous Cormorant, when his barnes were full, and his houses furnished, was satisfied, saying, as it were, Soule, thou hast sufficient: Eate, drinke, and take thine ease: but many having ynough and more than ynough, are not satisfied: but as the Luke 12. 19. Beare seeketh after hony, and the Hart chased, for the soile, and the Eagle for the carkasse, and the Woolfe for bloud; so the covetous man for gold, for gaine. Vbi hoc cadaver, ibi hae aquilae; Where this carkasse is, there be these Eagles: Their feet run to evill, and make haste to shead bloud; such are the wayes of every one, that is Prov. 1. 16, 19. greedie of gaine: hee would take away the life of the owners thereof.
As Vultures smell a dead carkasse, a great way off: As Eagles flying aloft in the Ayre, behold the little fishes swimming below in the waters, and deuoure them; Sic avari lucrum longe Aug. odorantur: so the covetous smell their gaine afarre off, they say with Vespatian, who tooke a tribute of the peoples urine, Suavis odor lucri ex re qualibet, the savour of gaine is sweet from every thing; according to that of Salomon, The bread of deceit is sweet Prov. 20. 17. to a man, but afterward his mouth shall bee filled with gravell. Iosephs golden cup was found in Beniamins sacke; and if God rifle us, and search us, and our sackes, I feare, that much evill gaine will bee found amongst us Protestants, That as a Cage is full of birds, Ier. 5. 27, 29. so our houses are full of deceit; whereby many are become great and waxen rich. Shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord? or shall not my soule be avenged on such a people as this is?
These covetous men have no part with God, no portion in Christ, no fellowship with the Saints. As there be no Serpents in Ireland, no Owles in Crete, no wild beasts in Lebanon: so there be no covetous men in Heaven; For without shall be dogges and inchanters, and whoremongers, and murtherers and Idolaters; but covetous Apoc. 22. 15. men are Idolaters, therefore not in Heaven: Yea, and moreover they lose both Heaven and earth, like Aesops dogge, that lost both the shadow and the beefe. Therefore Salendine the Emperour of the East, dying, caused a man to carry a sheete in Damascus, on the end of a speare, and to say, Ecce trophaea Imperatoris; Behold, the King of the East carryeth nothing with him, but a winding sheet. And surely, As wee brought nothing into the world, so we may carry nothing out. Great men have their Porters, to 1 Tim, 6, 7. see that men carry no more out, than they brought in; and if he chance to spie a silver spoone, or a piece of plate in a mans bosome; Soft, sirrah (saith he) whither carry yee this plate? you brought it not in; you must not carry it out. Now death is

Gods Porter, and performeth this, O terra and cinis, O dust and ashes; Earthly minds uncapable of heavenly things. why art thou greedy? and yet men are most greedy of the world, and then too, when they are ready to leave the world; as old men, which is monstrous in them; Membra frigescunt, cupiditas autem calescit, their members grow cold, but their desire still waxeth warme: Caro senescit, at affectus i^venescunt, the flesh waxeth old, but their affections grow yong; gray heads, but greene affections: Finis vitae non imponit finem avaritiae, the end of their life makes no end of their covetousnesse, but still he loadeth himselfe with thicke clay: for gold is but red clay, and silver white clay. Hab. 2. 6. These men are like the dogs snowt, that is ever cold; like Tantalus, that standeth in the water, and yet is ever dry. Hee hath enlarged his desire as Hell, and is as death, that cannot bee satisfied. As Hab. 2. 5. the Raven feedeth not her yong, till they be blacke; as the Eagle acknowledgeth not her birds, till they can soare to the Sun: So God acknowledgeth not them that are drowned in the world, and are carryed away by the deceit of Balaams wages, that is, covetousnesse. If yee be risen with Christ, seeke the things that are above, Col. 3: 1, 2. where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God; set your affections upon heavenly things, and not upon worldly. These bastard Eagles, they cannot mount; like Noah's Raven they seize upon carrion. As dust cast into the eyes hindreth sight, so covetousnesse hindreth our sight, that we looke not to heaven: it is like the Swallowes dung, that put out the eyes of Tobias: Wee see not the powers of the Heb. 6. 5. 2 P^^. 2. 14. world to come. Our hearts are brawned and exercised with covetousnesse; they thinke on nothing else from Munday to Sunday, from Ianuary to December.
The Wise man saith, that there is not a viler thing than to love ^^ney. Money doth all now in the world. Give Balaam money, and Eccles. 10. 9. he will curse the people of God, whom before he blessed: Give 2 Pet. 2. Iehoakin money, and he will spoile the poore, rob the fatherlesse, undoe the widdow, pervert all justice: Give Achan money, and Ier. 22. Ios. 7. he will steale the execrable thing, the Babylonian garment, and the wedge of gold: give Iudas mony, and he will sell his Master, betray Christ Iesus; give the Souldiers money, and they will Mat. ^6. ^ap. 28. lye, cog, sweare, resweare, forsweare Christs Resurrection; and say, that he is stollen out of his grave: give Silvester the second, money and the Popedome, and he will give himselfe to the divell body and soule: give Alexander Borgia money, and hee will bid the Divell take all; Da mihi divitias, inquit, caetera tolle tibi; Take all, all. Oh money, money doth all in this world: wee are like the Lawyer, that heard the poore man, but felt him not: we have golden eares, golden fingers, we savour nothing but mony; We savour not the things that are of God. Many say, Amor vincit omnia, Love overcommeth all things; for love is as strong as death: Mat. 16. 2^. for as all things yeeld to death, so to love. But we may say, Mentiris, inquit pecunia, thou lyest (saith money.)
Atalanta will stoope to golden Apples: yee know the story, The covetous minde never satisfied* Atalanta daughter of Caeneus, King of Scirus, contended in running with them that came to woo her, and when shee had vanquished and put many to death (for that was the wager, or else to have her) at last a noble Yong-man, called Hippomanes (whiles they were running) threw at sundry times three Apples of gold from him; in taking up whereof, shee was tarryed, and so overcome. O! these golden Apples have overcome many, and hindred them in their race to Heaven. It was a shrewd policy of Simon Magus, to offer Peter mony, he thought that this key would Acts 8. 20. open any locke, that if the Holy Ghost might be had, he might be had for mony, or not at all. But let us answer these moneymates, as Saint Peter did Magus; Thy mony perish with thee; thou and thy mony goe to the divell together. This was the third and last temptation of Satan, to offer Christ the world: he would either Mat. 4. 10. Prov. 30. win the horse or lose the saddle. These men are like Horseleeches, which sucke blood till they burst; so these men will never be full of mony, till their mouthes be full of earth. Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit; the love of mony encreaseth, as much as the mony it selfe doth encrease. The Parthians powred molten gold into the mouth of Crassus, saying, Satura te auro: Satisfie thy selfe with gold: but men will not be satisfied; from skores they will arise to hundreds; from hundreds, to thousands; from thousands, to millions; from millions, to infinite; they are as hell, as the grave, and as the barren wombe of a woman, unsatiable.
It hath beene observed by some; that the most flourishing Common-wealths have been those, that never received money into them, but dealt by exchange and bartring, as did the Cretians, and the Lacedemonians; whereupon Erasmus noteth, that Sparta no sooner received mony into it, but it was overthrowne by bribery, usury, oppression, extortion, etc. The Prophet speaking of the Land of Behest; saith, That what the canker-worme left, the catterpiller Ioel 1. consumed: So, that which the greedy Lawyer leaveth at the Terme at London, that doth the Vsurer eat up at home; hee loveth no man, but by whom he may gaine: As the dogge loveth the bone, so long as there is flesh on it; and the Flye the pot, so long as there is broth in it; and the Swallow the chimney, so long as there is heat. He playeth with men, as the Spider doth with the Flye, first wrappeth her in her webbe, and then sucketh her blood; so they get men in bonds, and then confiscate their goods. And as the Prophet speaketh, Hee lieth in wait Psal. 10: 9. secretly, even as a Lion in his denne. He lyeth in wait to spoile the poore: he doth spoile the poore, when hee draweth him into his net. O bone Deus (saith Augustine) quae est ista cupiditas, cum ipsae belluae modum habeant! Aug. Ser. 15. de verbis Domini. tunc rapiunt, cum esuriunt, parcunt, cum satiantur, etc. O good God, what a desire is this? when as the very beasts keepe measure!

for then they raven and devoure, when they are hungry, Riches uncertaine, not to be relyed upon. but spare when they are satisfied; onely covetousnesse is unsatiable; it neither feareth GOD, nor reverenceth men; nor spareth Father, nor knoweth mother, nor loveth brother, nor keepeth touch with friend; but oppresseth the Widdow, invadeth the fatherlesse, and bringeth free men into bondage: what madnesse is this, Acquirere mundum, and perdere Coelum, to gaine and get the world, and to lose Heaven? as Christ saith, What shall it profit a man to winne the whole world, and to lose his owne Mat. 16. 26. soule?
And verily, if men would but consider three things: First, how uncertaine. Secondly, how unprofitable. Thirdly, how hurtfull these earthly things are, which we so covet, our desire after them will be soone quenched.
First, the things that we so much covet, are uncertaine; for so the Apostle calleth them, when he willed Timothy to charge rich men that they be not high-minded, nor put their trust in uncertaine riches. 1 Tim. 6. 17. They are like bad servants, whose shooes are made of running leather, and will never tarrie long with one master: as a bird hoppeth from Tree to Tree, so doth wealth from man to man.
Therefore the Holy Ghost hath compared wealth to a wilde fowle, most swift in wing, and strong in flight; saying, Riches takes her to her wings and flyes away: not like a Cock or an Henne, Prov. 23. 5. or some tame house-bird, that a man may follow and catch againe; nor like an Hawke, that will shew where she is by her Bells, and bee called againe by a lure; but like an Eagle that mounts aloft past sight, and is carryed away with so much haste, as nothing will recall her.
Let Iob and Nabuchadnezzer testifie this truth, who fell both from great wealth, to great want. Paulus Aemilius tels of a great man, that boasting of his prosperity, as if nothing could shake him, was admonished by his Friend, Solum iram Numinis procul abesse a tam secundis rebus non posse, Gods anger could not long forbeare so great prosperity; and shortly after fell into that woefull misery, that greater hath not been heard of.
The most renowned Fredericke lost all, and sued to be made but Sexton of the Church.
How many great Merchants have suddenly lost all? how many Noble men have spent all? The wealth therfore of this world is compared to a tree that casteth her leaves, and is soone blown downe; or to grasse that soone withereth; yea to grasse on the Psal. 37. 35. Psal. 129. 6. house tops withering, that the Mower cannot take his handfull; yea to nothing. Wilt thou cast thine eyes upon that which is nothing? In the Prophesie of Ionas wee may read of a Gourd, or as some translate it, an Ivie: how that in a night it sprang up, and was an Arbour for Ionas to sit under, and suddenly went

away againe: Wealth and riches is this Ivie, the growing Riches unprofitable, if in superfluity. and increasing of it, the growing and increasing of wealth; the leaves of it, your children, tenants, and followers; the shadow, your repose and contentment that you take in your wealth; the worme that biteth this Ivie, is Death: the fading of this Ivie, is the decay of your estate; the wind that smote Ionas his head, is the misfortune that may blow upon you: No man can promise himselfe to bee wealthy till night, one coale of fire, one unadvised word, two false oathes of two false villaines, may make thee a Begger and a Prisoner all at once: or if not so, yet thy wealth may goe from thee in a moment, as it did from that rich man, of whom Christ speakes in the Gospell, saying, Thou foole, this night shall they fetch thy soule from thee: For as wee came naked out of our mothers Luk. 12. Wombe, so naked shall wee returne thither againe. If Riches therefore Iob 1. 2. increase, let us not set our hearts upon them, nor be carryed away by the deceit of Balaams wages.
As riches are uncertaine, so secondly are they unprofitable, if it bee more than for things necessary, and maintenance competent. And therefore the Scripture cals gold and silver, lands and livings, riches and possessions, a shadow; Man walketh Psal. 39. 6. in a vaine shadow, hee disquieteth himselfe in vaine, hee heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them. Againe, the Scripture calleth them a flower; All flesh is grasse, and all the glorie as the flower of grasse. Againe, the Scripture calleth them 1 Pet. 1. 24. Liers; The chiefe men are Liers. And further, the Scripture calleth Psal. 62. 9. them vanity, All is vanity. And lastly, nothing: Wilt thou set thine eyes uponit, and it is not? it hath no being. Indeed Eccles. 1. wealth, if it bee for more than things necessarie, and maintenance competent, is unprofitable, for it will doe no good, either to soule, or body, or name, or state. For first, what is good for the Soule, but Faith, Repentance, the Spirit of God, Prayer, Pardon of sinnes, and eternall Life? But riches and wealth can purchase none of these things: neither gold, no^ precious stones can buy Repentance, the holy Ghost, the Spirit, Pardon of sinnes, and eternall Life: therefore riches are unprofitable for the foule.
Againe, riches are unprofitable for the Body: for can riches buy health, purchase ease, or a good nights rest, or an houres sleepe, or a good stomake? No, no: and what is the body the better for it then?
Againe, riches profit not a mans Name: For they can not win him any credit. For what is credit? to have a cap or knee, or a few complements given him? to be crowched unto, as a little curre to a mastiffe dogge? to bee soothed up, and to bee sprinkled

with a little Court holy-water? No, no, but credit is, to bee Wealth cannot preserve from temporall or spirituall evils. well esteemed of in the hearts of men, to find reverence in their soules, and to bee placed in a good roome of their affections: but wealth cannot doe this, but grace and vertue: A poore man, that lives vertuously, shall be more respected in the soules and consciences of men, than the richest man under Heaven, wanting these things: as for example, Iohn had more reverence in Herods heart, than Herod among all his Courtiers. Mat. 14.
Lastly, wealth wil not profit a mans Estate; For it cannot free us from evill, nor procure us any good; it cannot free us from evill: For all evils are either spirituall or temporall, ghostly or bodily. The ghostly evils are our sinnes, as superstition, and idolatry, swearing, and blasphemy, profaning of the Sabbath, and neglecting of the Word, contempt of lawfull authorities, murthers and cruell hatred, chambering and wantonnesse, etc. And will a golden plaister heale these diseases? No, no. A man shall not leave his sinnes the sooner, for that hee is rich, and hath his purse full with Dives, his coffers full with Croesus, his grounds full of cattell with Iob, his barnes full of corne with the Epulo: it is not wealth that wil make him leave his sins, but weeping, mourning, praying, and crying to God for mercy; this is the plaister that must heale the soule.
And as wealth cannot preserve us from Ghostly, no more can it from temporall evils, for can it drive away the gout, the stone, the collicke, the feaver, the plague, the head-ach, the tooth-ach, yea a fellon or a white-loe, or any greater, or lesser disease whatsoever? No, no, the frogges of Egypt entered into the rich Exod. 9. mens houses of Egypt, as well as the poore: so diseases and other evils into rich mens bodies, as soone as into poore mens carkasses.
Nay, I will adde one thing more which perhaps you will thinke strange, wealth cannot keepe a man from poverty; because I know yee will deny this; I will bring in seventy Kings at a time, to take their oathes upon it. Looke into the booke of the Iudges, and yee shall find seventy Kings, with their fingers and toes cut off, glad like whelpes to licke up crummes under another Kings table. And then a little while after, yee shal Iudg. 1. 6. see that the same King, that made all of them so poore, is used in the same sort himselfe. What beggers brat could come to more need? Now deny if yee can, but that a rich man may dye a begger, as well as hee that is so borne. I have knowne many that from great wealth have come to a morsell of bread; whose youth swimming in dainties, in old age were glad to snap at a crust.
Againe, for inward troubles, riches cannot free us of them: Nay, as cobwebs breed sooner in Wainescot, and faire hangings,

than upon a plaine wall: so those that are rich, are more clogged Riches hurtfull to the outward and inward man. with these things, than the poore. When a rich man lyes sicke of any disease, hath he one pang the lesse? or is hee able to beare one fit more patiently, because hee can make a greater inventory than his neighbour? No, rather it makes his crosse heavyer. Yee see then, wealth connot profit a mans estate; Why should wee then gape after it, as Ravens for heate, and bee carried away, with the deceit of Balaams wages?
Last of all, wealth is hurtfull and dangerous, and yet the hurt proceeds not from the nature of wealth, but from the corruption of men: as cold drinke in it selfe, is good, but to him that hath an Ague, hurtfull, and as bad as poyson. Wealth is like an Hartichoake, a little picking meate there is, not so wholesome as delicious, and nothing to that it shewes for, more than the tenth part is unprofitable leaves, and besides there is a coare in the middest of it that will strangle you, if yee take not heed: such a thing is wealth, that men so covetously desire, it is like some kind of fishes so full of bones and unseene, that no man can eate of it without great danger, except he take great heed. But wherein is wealth so dangerous? I answer, that it is very troublesome to the outward man: the rich mans plenty will not suffer him to sleepe: his wealth is like a long garment, too side, that a man treads upon it often, and catcheth a fall: So wealth maketh him many times to fall into many maladies, and makes him obnoxious to envy, and so subject to malice, that none are more. But to the soule, the desire of wealth is most pernicious: For first, it makes the soule vainely confident. The rich mans riches, is a strong tower in his imagination; Hee thinkes himselfe by them walled, Prov. 10. 5. and moated about, though indeed, hee is as open to danger, as other men. Hee thinkes himselfe safe, if he have Balaams wages, wealth; and puts his trust in his uncertaine riches. The Prophet sayes, they Sacrifice to their Nets, and burne Incense to their Yarne; the meaning is, that the same 1 Tim. 6. Abac. 1. 16. confidence, which by Sacrifice and incense wee protest to God, they put in their wealth. And it is noted, to bee a passion of the covetous, to delight in wealth: to flatter themselves in their abundance, as if gold were their Sun by day, and silver their Moone by night. The wise man saith, Gold and silver fasten the feet, that is, the covetous man Eccles. 40. 25. he thinkes he stands firme on no ground, but on that which is paved with gold.
But there is yet more evill in wealth; it maketh men proud; Charge rich men (saith the Apostle) that they bee 1 Tim. 6. 17. not high-minded: and Bernard saith, that pride is the rich mans Cousin. It is the nature of wealth, when it falleth

into vile mens hands, to blow up the heart, as a bladder Pride blowes up the heart. is blowne with a quill. And therefore Paul saith, The rich fall into lusts and temptations. To conclude, from wealth growes security, as a dead sleepe from drunkennesse: Let us then beware of this sinne, that wee never bee carryed away with the deceit of Balaams wages, that wee be not covetous as hee was.



THE TWO AND TVVENTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XI. 

And perish in the gaine-saying of Core.
After Mercy followes Iudgement.



I Am come to the third sin, which is the Rebellion of Core; whose story is recited by Moses, in the Booke of Numbers; where is registred and set downe unto us, how they rebelled Numb. 16. against Moses in the Commonwealth, and Aaron in the Church; and how the earth opened and swallowed them up; for as it can hardly beare any sinnes, so most hardly a Rebell; the Sunne would give him no light, the Ayre would give him no breath, the fire no heat, the water no cleansing, the earth no place, but that God for a time disposeth of these creatures, to draw men to repentance. So saith the Apostle, The Lord is not slacke, but is patient towards us, and would have no man to perish, but 2 Pet. 3. 9. would all men come to repentance. The Idolaters were slaine with Exod. 32. the sword, but the Rebels were swallowed up of the earth: as was Iericho and Hierapolis in the primitive Church, and twelve Numb. 16. Cities of Campania, in the dayes of Constantine, and many Cities Ios. 7. in Greece, in the raigne of Tiberius. The Minister in the 2 Thes. 2. 8. Church is Gods mouth, and the Magistrate in the Commonwealth is Gods hand: If Aarons Vrim and Thummim would have served, Moses Rod and his staffe should not have needed; but when the tongue could not perswade, the Rod and the Staffe Exod. 32. compelled.

After a shepheards whistle commeth a dogge, after Doctrine God the Author of Government. commeth justice: GOD led his people like sheepe, by the hands of Moses and Aaron: the one is to governe the soules, the other, the bodies of men in good order. The Magistrate must kill sin Psal. 80. with the Sword; the Minister must destroy it with the Word. The Magistrate must carefully protect and defend the Sacraments of grace; the Minister must faithfully dispence and deliver the Word of truth: The Magistrate must behold the outward person; the Minister must regard the inward man: the Magistrate must punish sinne; the Minister reprove iniquity: the Magistrate must respect the publicke peace of the Commonwealth; the Minister the inward peace of the conscience: the Magistrate must correct the body; the Minister reforme the soule: the Magistrate must prohibit outward wickednesse; the Minister forbid the inward corruption of the heart: the Magistrate must subdue with his hand; the Minister reprove with his tongue: the Magistrate must force with violence; the Minister teach with patience: and when Magistrate and Minister, the Sword and the Word, goe thus hand in hand together, then Kingdomes prosper like the Apple Tree of Persia, that beareth fruit monthly; for then, Are there thrones set for judgement, even the Psal. 122. 5. thrones of the house of David: And therefore Ieremy lamented the overrhrow of the Kingdome, and of the Priest, as the decay of Ierusalem, the Eclipse of all their light. God governed his people Exod. 12. Acts 13. of Israel first with a Prophet; then with Iudges foure hundred and thirty yeeres. Thirdly, with Kings, as 1 Sam. 8. Fourthly, with Dukes and Nobles after the captivity: but what the superiour be, Hag. 1. it skilleth not, so there be a superiour; Nam malum quidem est, ubi nullus est principatus, it is passing evill, whereas there is no government: For when as there was no King in Israel, every man did that which seemed good in his owne eyes.
The learned make three kindes of Government, and all to bee obeyed.
As first, a Monarchie.
Secondly, an Aristocracie.
Thirdly, a Democratie.
To the which they oppose Tyrannidem, Oligarchiam, Anarchiam.
Our regiment is a Monarchy; that of the Germanes and Switzers, seemeth to be an Aristocracie; that of the Low-countries, a Democratie: which of these three is the best, is not agreed upon among the learned. Some doe advance the government of many; because many are not so soone corrupted as one may be; even as a great quantity of water will not so soone putrifie, as will a small portion. But these must on the other side consider,

that it is a great deale more hard to find many good than one: Reasons why Monarchy is the best forme of government. and it is most likely, that such an one will prove best, whom the Nobility of Royall bloud, and Princely examples of predecessors doe invite unto vertue.
Others doe advance the government of one, because it is first, most agreeable to nature: as Ierome doth witnesse, saying, In apibus principes sunt; grues unum sequuntur ordine literato: Imperator unus; Dux unus provinciae, in navi unus gubernator, in domo unus dominus, etc. Bees have their chiefe governour; the Cranes doe follow one another in an exquisite order: there is one chiefe commander, one chiefe Iudge of a Province, one governour of all in the Ship, one master in an house, in an army, be it never so great, the Ensigne of one is specially regarded, and attended on. In the body of Man, though the Lims, and parts thereof be many, yet they all obey one head.
Secondly, most fit for cutting off seditions and rebellions: and therefore the Romanes in all their greatest dangers, had recourse unto this; Tanquam ad anchoram sacram, as to their shot-anchor, as to their best and last refuge; as Livie witnesseth; for when Hannibal pressed the Romanes, Ad Dictatorem dicendum, Remedium jam diu desideratum Civitas confugit, The City went to the pronouncing of a Dictator, which was the remedy they long expected, because (as in another place he writeth) Dictatoris edictum pro numine semper observatum est; the proclamation of the Dictator was esteemed to be the voyce of God.
Thirdly, The government of one doth seeme to resemble most lively the image of Gods Power and Majestie. For as in the Firmament, the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, doe as it were represent some image of the glory of the eternall Majestie: So the rule of Monarchs in their severall Kingdomes upon the earth, doe call to our considerations, the government and rule of the Almighty.
But whether the government of one, or many, be best, I dare not define: but this I say, that it is a most singular token of the mighty Power and Providence of God, that so many severall Nations over the face of the World, are upholden and maintained by so many severall sorts of government, that Quemadmodum non nisi in aequali temperatura elementa inter se cohaerent: Ita hae Regiones sua quadam in aequalitate optime continentur: As in bodily essences, the foure Elements doe cleaue together by unequall temperatures, as it were by a certaine inequality, all the several Countries are holden together: Nay, which of all these governments is the best, Otiosum est disputare, it is a very idle thing to dispute; but most yeeld to this, that a Monarchy is the most perfect, and the blessing of God seene in that chiefly: Perme Reges regnant: By me Kings raigne, and Noble men beare rule, saith Wisedome: He therefore that resisteth, Resisteth not man, but God

also. True it is, that man was made to rule, not to serve: he was Rebellion brings destructio^ to Rebels themselves. made to rule over fowles, fishes, cattell, but not men. At the first, men were pecorum pastores, potius quam Reges hominum; feeders of cattell, than rulers over men; that we might discerne the order of creation, from the merit of sinne. So we reade not of any servant Gen. 1. 20. Gen. 9. Gen. 3. before Cham, saith Augustine; For as sinne brought in the first death, the first sorow, the first nakednesse, the first flood: So it brought in the first service. If man had not sinned, Moses had not needed in the kingdome, nor Aaron in the Church; the one to rule the bodies, the other the soules of men.
Rebellion of all sins is unnaturall: for what can be more unnaturall, then the child to rebell against the father, the wife against the husband, the servant against the Master? and no lesse unnaturall is it, for the subject to rebell against his Soveraigne. Rebellion God never prospered: hereupon saith Salomon, My sonne, feare God and the King, and keepe no companie with the seditious, for their destruction shall Pro. 24. 21, 22. arise suddenly, etc. The seditious Israelites were destroyed, somtime with fire from Heaven, sometime with fiery serpents, somtime by Numb. 21. the earth. For the earth hath opened and swallowed them quicke to Hell. Seditious Miriam was strooken with leprosy; seditious Absalon Numb. 12. was hanged by the haire of the head on an oke, as one spewed out of heaven, and vomited out of the earth; seditious Achitophel, for want of an hangman, a convenient servitour for such a Rebell, went and hanged himselfe; seditious Sheba was arrested by a woman, Sam. 20. 22. who cut off his head, and sent it to Ioab; seditious Zimri burnt himselfe, in the kings house, which he had set on fire. Hereupon 1. Reg. 16. 9. said Iezabel, Had Zimri peace that slew his Master? seditious Shallum 2 Reg. 15. 16. perished in Samaria, being slaine by Menahem, the sonne of Gadi. Never Rebell went unpunished, For though God oftentimes doth prosper just and lawfull enemies, (which be no subjects) against forraine enemies, yet did he never prosper Rebels, who have taken armes against their Prince, were they never so great in authority, or many in number. In Genesis we reade, that five kings, with their armies could not prevaile against Chodorlaomer, unto whom they Gen. 14. promised loyalty, and obedience, but they were all overthrown and taken prisoners by him: but Abraham with his family and kinsfolkes, an handfull of men in respect, owing no subjection to Chedorlaomer, overthrew him and his hoast in battell. Thus God prospereth in battell some few against many thousands: but he never prospered Rebels against their owne Prince, were they never so great or noble, so stout, so politick, but alwayes they were overthrowne, and came to most shamefull ends.
And to instance but upon a few: One Brennus captaine of the Gaules besieging Ephesus, had the City betraied into his hands by a treacherous woman, for the greedy desire of a Iewell, that a Captaine wore: but when she had plaied this tteasonable part, he overwhelmed her with gold. A certaine traytour offred Fabritius the

Romane, to poison his enemy Pyrrhus; but worthy Fabritius sent God hath confounded Rebels in all ages. the traytour bound to Pyrrhus, who was enemy to the Romane Empire.
In Anno 1381. in Rich the 2. his tyme, sixty thousand rebelled, whose Captaines were Wat Tiler, Iack Strawe: but they were overthrowne and brought to nought.
In Anno 1275. Lewellin prince of Wales rebelled against Edward the first: but he prospered not, but was overthrowne, and his head strooken off and set on London bridge.
In the raigne of Henry the 4. divers noble men and kings rebelled, and came every one of them to a miserable end.
The persidious and treacherous part of Bannister servant to the Duke of Buckingham, is most odious; the Duke had brought him up of nought, but fleeing from the face of usurping Richard, to Bannister for succour, this wicked man, for hope of one thousand pounds, betrayed his Master, the Duke, but never had one penny. For said usurping Richard, he that will betray so good a Master, will betray any other: and in his old age the wretch was accused of Murther.
In the raigne of Queene Elizabeth, were many treasons conspired, but God ever delivered his worthy Servant, but executed his just judgements upon those trayterous conspirators. All men know the miserable ends of the Earles of Northumberland and Westmerland; the one beheaded at Yorke; the other fled the land, and left his house to destruction. Many of their followers were hanged, and it were overlong to speake at large of Iohn, and Francis Throgmorton, Brooke, Redman, Parry, Babington, Arden, with divers others, who received according to their deserts. Let every soule therfore learne to Rom. 13. 1. submit himselfe to the higher powers, and never to resist. For we must suffer the Princes will to be done, aut a nobis, aut de nobis: either of us, or on us: of us, when he commands for truth; on us, when he commands against truth; either we must be patients, or agents: Agents, when he is good and godly: Patients, when he is tyrannous and wicked: If we resist, our end will be damnation, either temporall: for The wrath of a King is as the roring of a lion; he that prouoketh him to Pro. 20. ^. anger, sinneth against his owne soule: or eternall, as is manifest in Chore, who went downe quicke to Hell. If murther be a crying sinne, then treason may well be called a roring sinne, and calles for speedy judgement. But for as much as I have spoken before of this point, I will proceed no further with it.




VERSE XII.

Metaphors very vsefull in teaching.
These are spots in your feasts of charity; when they feast with you without all feare, feeding themselves, etc.



IN this Text are contained two things.
A detection of their sinnes, and
A denouncing of Iudgement.
The sinnes here are three.
The first is Epicurisme, in that they eate and drinke without feare, feeding themselves.
The second is Pride, in that they are like the waves of the Sea, swelling on high.
The third is Hypocrisie, in that they are as clouds promising raine, and yet have nothing but drynesse in them; empty clouds, in that they are as Trees, which promise fruit, and yet have nothing but leaves; corrupt trees; in that they are as starres, which promise light, and yet have nothing but darknesse in them, wandring starres.
Their Iudgement is to be reserved to blacke darknesse, that is, Hell fire hell paines; and there hee amplifieth it, by setting out Gods Iudgement, how hee shall come with thousands of Angels, and that he shall judge all men, namely, them Dan. 7. that speake against him. Lastly, that he shall judge them for every evill worke and word, so fearefull shall it be.
But first for the manner, and then for the matter. The manner of handling is plaine, he teacheth them by plain things, as spots, waves, clouds, trees, starres, things sensible, and objected to our eyes, because he had a desire to profit them: So Christs similitudes are fetched from light, salt, fannes, corne, chaffe, trees, Mat. 3. 5. 10. 13. 6. sheepe, wolves, seed, pearles: So Pauls Metaphors, and borrowed speeches are taken from planting, watering, building, tilling, running, fighting, leaven, sweet dough. 1 Cor. 3. 1 Cor. 5. and 9. c.
Who had better gifts than Paul, more learning, more Philosophy, more tongues? he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, he was not inferiour to the very chiefe Apostles; for though hee Act. 22. was rude in speaking, that is, though he used no worldly eloquence, yet for knowledge and understanding hee did exceed, and spake with tongues more than they all: his Epistles are as the shop of an Apothecary; 1 Cor. 11. 5, 6. a man cannot read them, but he shall carry away the smell ofexcellent learning; yet came he not in the wisdome of words, 1 Cor. 1. 1, 2. for hee regarded not to know any thing, save Iesus Christ, and him crucified. We come to the Word in the pride of our heart, and have our eares tickled, not our hearts edified; to heare some

strange thing that may bring us into a wonderment of things, Gods Word hath its elegancy and eloquence. we know not, and God in his justice suffereth us to depart empty; yea worse than we came. If the Preacher fil not the Pulpit full of fine words, trim Phrases, Fathers, Doctors, Councels, Poetrie, Philosophy; if hee doe not aucupari syllabas, hunt after syllables, to please itching eares, wee crie out that hee was unlearned, and a plaine homely teacher, and English Doctor.
But wee must desire wholesome, not tooth-some meat: For as we must teach wholesome Doctrine, For if any man teach otherwise, 1 Tim. 6. 3, 4. and consenteth not to the wholesome words of the Lord Iesus Christ, and to the Doctrine, which is according to Godlinesse, hee is pust up and knoweth nothing; so yee must heare wholesome doctrine; and not be like unto those of whom Paul prophesied, saying, The time will come, when they will not suffer wholesom doctrine, but having their eares 2 Tim. 4. 3, 4. itching, shall after their own lusts get them an he ape of teachers, and shall turne their eares from the truth, and shall be given to fables: to false and unprofitable doctrine. We must speake, and you must heare, as the words of God. All Doctors, Councels, Poets, Philosophers, are but darkenesse: the Word is light onely; so saith David, 1 Pet. 4. 11. Thy word is a Lanthorne to my feet, and a light to my pathes. The Word must sit on the Bench, when all these shal stand at the bar: Psal. 119. those that bom-baste their Sermons, that fill the Pulpit full of these Authors, either they deliver little doctrine, or else unprofitable doctrine: not as Paul did, Hee kept backe nothing that was profitable, but shewed and taught openly, and through every house, Act. 20. 20, 21. witnessing both to the Iewes, and to the Grecians, the repentance towards God, and faith towards our Lord Iesus Christ. Such builders either have no mortar, or else untempered mortar; like the false prophets. Such Cookes either have no salt, or unsavoury salt; Ezech. 13. 10. Mat. 5. 13. such nurses either have no milke; or else corrupt milke that hath taken wind; the Word is sincere milke; and yet I deny not but Gods Spirit hath his eloquence, and no writings more eloquent 1 Pet. 2. 2. than they.
To give you a little taste; speaking of Iuda and Ierusalems punishment for their idolatry; hee saith, I will stretch over Ierusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab: and I will wipe Ierusalem as a man wipeth a dish, which hee wipeth and turneth upside-downe. And David speaking of the Sunne-rising, and wherrying about the Heavens, hee saith, that hee commeth forth, as a bridegroome out of his chamber, and rejoyceth as a mighty man to run Psal. 19. 5. Esa. 5. his race. So the Prophet Esay speaking of the sinne of the people, he saith, that they did draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sinne with cart-ropes. And speaking of Gods power, hee setteth it out with such eloquent words, as the like have not beene heard; for marke his phrases; Who hath measured the Waters in his fist? and counted Heaven with his spanne? and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure? and weighed the mountaines in a waight, and the hils in a Esa. ^0. 12.

ballance? For Esay was a noble Courtier, and had a courtly stile; Ministers may use all helpes of humane learning. but Amos had but an homely stile, for he was but an heard-man. Paul used a plaine kinde of teaching, and as he himselfe confessed, he was Rude in speaking. Apollos was eloquent; Qui dedit Petrum piscatorem, dedit Cyprianum Rhetorem; he that made Peter a Fisher-man, made Cyprian a Rhetorician; yet plaine teaching if it edifie, is not to be rejected. Quid prodest clavis aurea, si non aperiat ostium? and quid obest ferrea, si modo aperiat? What good doth a golden key, if it open not the doore? and what hurt doth a key of iron, if it open the same? and so, Quid prodest eloquentia non aedificans? what doth eloquence profit, if it edifie not? and what doth simple and plaine teaching hinder, if it edifie? Let all things (saith the Apostle) be done to edifying. 1 Cor. 14. 26.
Againe, in that Iude here teacheth us by spots, clouds, trees, etc. we have to observe the liberty of the Ministers of the Gospell, not onely nakedly to deliver unto the people, the whole Councell of God, but also to use helpes of wit, invention and art, as similitudes, allusions, applications, comparisons, proverbs, and parables, to illustrate the Doctrine delivered. Thus did Christ even by similitudes drawne from this and that thing, instruct the people: So hee taught the Astronomers of the East by a starre; and Fishermen by a draught of fish. The Woman of Samaria, Mat. 2. 10. Luke 5. 6. Iohn 4. 14. that came to draw water at Iacobs Well, hee taught her by that corruptible water, the water of Life. To Mary in the Garden, he appeared as a Gardiner; to his travelling Disciples, he appeared as a traveller: so also frequently in the Gospell he teacheth by many exemplary similitudes: the rich man, by the rich mans Luke 24. care and greedy gathering; the Vine-dresser, by the Vine-dressers digging and hedging, and dressing; the Labourer, by the Labourers hire, and working; the Builder, by the Builders laying a good foundation; the Husband-man, by the Husbandmans sowing; the Fisher-man, by the Fisher-mans casting nets and drawing: as here Saint Iude, by spots, clouds, trees, waves, starres, etc. And as Christ himselfe, so all his Prophets and Apostles have used parables, similitudes and other helpes, whereby their Doctrine might have a deeper impression in the hearts of their hearers. Thus did profound Austen in his questions, learned Ierome in his expositions, patheticall Chrysostome in his amplifications, mellifluent Bernard in his meditations, pithy Cyprian in his perswasions, sweet Ambrose in his allusions, eloquent Nazianzen in moving affections, doe make great use of these similitudes; and so may Ministers doe.
Lastly, in that Iude teacheth us by spots, clouds, trees, starres, etc. this teacheth us, that of all the creatures of God, there is a double use: one naturall, the other spirituall. As a spot naturally defileth the garment of the body, so besides this naturall signification, it serves to put us in mind, that sinne spiritually defileth

the soule. And as a tree in nature signifieth such plants Every creature afford some profitable meditation. of the earth, as bring forth fruit: so besides this naturall signification, it serves to put us in mind, that wee ought to bee fruitfull Trees in the Lords Orchard, lest that wee prove fuell for the fire; for Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, shall bee hewne Mat. 3. downe and cast into the fire: and as cloudes naturally powre downe raine: so spiritually it teacheth us to raine downe righteousnesse, and to water and refresh the thirstie, as the cloudes doe the earth: and as starres naturally yeeld light, so spiritually should wee, Our light must so shine before men, that others may see our good workes, and glorifie our Father in Heaven. So by sowing of corne into the ground to maintaine mans life, our Saviour leads us to consider of another thing, that as the Sower Mat. 15. casteth his seed abroad into sundry sorts of ground, and they according to their nature, bring forth fruit accordingly: Even so the Minister of the Word scatters and sowes the Seed of Gods Word into the ground of mens hearts, and as they bee prepared, so they bring forth fruit. So by a Weavers shuttle, wee see the shortnesse of mans life gone in a moment. Doest thou see, how Iob 7. the Wind drives the chaffe, and dust of the Earth about, giving it no rest till it bee dispersed? Oh consider how the curse of Psal. 1. God shall dogge the wicked, and never let their soules bee at rest, till it consume them. Doest thou lye downe in thy bed every night? O remember that ere it be long, thou must lye down in thy grave, and bee covered in dust, and therefore prepare to dye in the Lord. Doest thou see the beautifull grasse and herbes of the earth cut downe and wither away? O remember, that All Esa. 40. flesh is grasse; and that it must fade and perish. Doest thou put on thy clothes to cover thy nakednesse? Labour to put on the Lord Iesus, and the robes of his righteousnesse, that thy filthy nakednesse Rom. 13. Apoc. 3. 18. doe not appeare. Doest thou take a Booke into thy hand, and open it leafe by leafe? O consider that the time will come, when the bookes of thy Conscience shall bee opened, wherein all thy sinnes are recorded, and thou must receive according Apoc. 20. to thy workes. And thus wee see, of all the creatures of God there is a double use to bee made of them, the one naturall, the other spirituall. So much for the manner.
Now for the matter. Their first sinne is their Epicurisme, in eating, drinking, etc. That which Salomon saith of Princes, may bee verified of all private men; Woe to thee, O thou Land, when thy Eccles. 10. 16. King is a child, and thy Princes eate in the morning: Blessed art thou, O land, when thy King is the sonne of Nobles, and thy Princes eate in time, for strength, and not for drunkennesse. So, blessed is that place, that towne, where sober-men are, as was Selge in Pisidia, voyd of drunkennesse. This sinne never goeth alone, it hath many other sinnes to wait and attend upon it; it is as the nave of the wheele, which turning about, all the spoakes turne with it, there goe

with it, idlenesse, fighting, quarrelling, whoring, stealing, it is Drunkards incorrigible, gluttons insatiable. the anvile whereupon the other sinnes are wrought: Hereupon saith Salomon; To whom is woe? to whom is sorrow? to whom is strife? to whom is murmuring? to whom are wounds without cause? and to whom is the rednesse of the eyes? Even to him that tarrieth long at the wine, Pro. 23. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. to them that goe, and seeke mixt wine. Looke not thou on the wine when it is red, and when it sheweth his colour in the cup, or goeth downe pleasantly: in the end thereof, it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice. Thine eyes shall looke upon strange Women, and thy heart shall speake lewde things, etc. Fulnesse of bread, that is, Epicurisme, was one of the sinnes of Sodom; and no doubt it was a hand to pull uncleanenesse the sooner upon them. Raine engendreth Ezech. 16. Snow: so Epicurisme engendreth whoredom. Paul exhorting to a Christian life, beginneth with sobriety, as the first staffe of the Tit. 2. 12. ladder; for hee that liveth not soberly to himselfe, will not live righteously with men, nor holily with God. Saint Peter speaking of the last day, beginneth with sobriety, as an helpe to prayer, and to all Christian vertues. This hee learned of his 1 Pet. 4. 7. Master, who gave this covenant to all; To take heede to your selves, Luke 21. 34. lest at any time your hearts bee not overcome with surfeiting and drunkennesse. Paul reckoneth drunkennesse among the workes of the flesh, which exclude us out of the Kingdome of Heaven. As no Gal. 5. 20. Numb. 5. Iudg. 12. Iudg. 7. Deut. 23. Aug. 1 Tim. 5. Leper might bee in the campe of Israel; as no Gileadite might passe over Iordan; as no fearefull man might enter into the warres of Madian; as no bastard might enter into the Sanctuarie: so no Drunkard, no Epicure, shall enter into Heaven. A Drunkard, an Epicure, is Dead being alive; (as Paul said of the wanton Widowes;) a voluntary divell, and uncurable disease, a breach unrepairable, a common opprobrie of mankinde: of all sinners, wee see fewest drunkards reformed: the Adulterer may become chaste, a thiefe, a true man, the swearer, have a sanctified tongue: but these come seldome to Repentance.
Wee should eate, to live, and live, to praise the Lord: but wee live, to eate and drinke. Sardanapalus his Epitaph might bee graven on our tombes, Haec habeo quae edi, quaeque exaturata libido hausit, etc. for our belly, is our God; our kitchen, our Religion, Phil. 3. 18. our altar, our dresser; our Minister, our Cooke; our whole felicitie in eating and drinking: most mens bodies are as spunges to receive all liquor, their throats open sepulchres, their bellies graves, to burie all Gods creatures: there is not that bird that flyeth, that fish that swimmeth, that beast that moveth, that is not buried in their bodies; the earth is weary of such unprofitable burdens, the creatures by them abused will bee a witnesse against them, as Saint Iames speaketh in another case: from the French, the Spaniards, and Turke wee have Iam. 5. 1, 2. Soph. 1. 9. learned strange attire; from the Italians wee have learned pride, and Atheisme and wantonnesse; from the Dutch wee have learned

to drinke; we never learne from any nation any good thing. Nature teacheth sobriety and temperance. And it is a wonder, that wee should bee such Epicures; for among all the creatures, God hath given to none, so little a mouth as he doth to man, according to his proportion; which argueth that man should be more temperate in meat and drinke, than other creatures, and not to be spots in feasts.
Well noteth Augustine, that God hath not given to man talons Aug. and clawes to rent and teare in pieces, as to Beares, and Leopards; nor hornes to push, as to Bulls, and Vnicornes; nor a sting to pricke, as to Waspes, and Bees, and Serpents; nor a bill to strike, as to Eagles and Ostriches; nor a wide mouth to devoure, as to Dogges and Lions. Againe, the mouth of man is not bent to the earth, as the mouth of other creatures; os homini sublime dedit, to note that he must not eate and drinke, as other Ovid. creatures. I say of meate, as Paul said of fornication, Meat for the belly, and the belly for meat, but God shall destroy both it and them. 1 Cor. 6. 13. Fire is to warme us, not to burne us; water is to wash us, not to drowne us; weapons are to defend us, not to kill us: so meats and drinkes are to refresh us, not to oppresse the body and vitall spirits. If ever Satan hath the vantage of us, it is in our fulnesse; for then eyes, eares, tongue, heart, and all members are out of frame; then we forget God, Christ, Heaven, Hell, and all. This is the Caveat that God gave his people; When thou hast eaten and filled thy selfe, thou shalt blesse the Lord thy God for the good land, which Deut. 8. 10, 11, 12. he hath given thee; lest when thou hast eaten and filled thy selfe; thou forget the Lord, etc. Israel sate downe to eate and to drinke, and rose up to 1 Cor. 10. 7. play: So we at our feasts handle nothing but cards, dice, bowles, etc. The false witnesses are noted to be Sonnes of Belial, such are 1 Reg. 21. meetest for villany: Gods Spirit and drinke are set as opposite by the Apostle; Be not drunken with wine (saith he) wherein is excesse, Ephes. 5. 18. but bee filled with the Spirit. When wine is in, wit is out: and where drinke is in, Gods Spirit is out: we cannot be full of them both at one time; and if Gods Spirit be not in us, the uncleane spirit is in us. God will have the hand of the Father, to be first Deut. 21. 21. on the riotous child. O that we had the Spirit of zeale! O that one Epicurish drunkard were so served! O that the streets of this Towne were sanctified, that all England might heare it and tremble at it. It was a good argument in the Primitive Church against drunkards, that it was but the third houre of the day, that is, Act. 2. 15. nine of the clocke: but it is not so now; for our men beginne at Sun-rising, and continue to Sun-setting, and often call for a candle, because the day is too little for them. The Idolaters served god Bel in the day, and god Belly in the night; we serve god Dan. 14. Belly day and night.
The Holy Ghost maketh mention of a great cup; belike great Iudg. 5. 25. men drunke in great cups; Amos reproveth them for drinking in bowles: but we, I thinke, shall drinke in Troughes, and eate in Amos 6. 6.

Chargers, not in platters. It may be said of many, that was said God punisheth drunkennesse and gluttony. of Bonosus the Emperour, that wee are borne, not to live, but to eate and drinke, to feast and banquet: wee strive to match with Heliogabalus, who at one supper was served with sixe hundred Ostriches: and to match Vitellius, who had at one feast two thousand fishes, and seven thousand birds. This Epicurisme of ours God will punish, and hath, punished it with three yeeres dearth; when did God smite the Amalekites? he did it in the middest of 1 Sam. 30. 16, 17. their glossing, as in a time, wherein their sinne was ripe. When came God to Balthazar? but in his cups and banquets? and when did God strike downe the chosen men of Israel, but then? for Dan. 5. while the meat was yet in their mouthes, the heavy wrath of God came upon Psal. 78. 30, 31. them, and slew the strongest of them, and smote downe the chosen men of Israel. This made Iob to offer sacrifice for his children; hee Io^ 1. 4, 5. knew how many falls are in belly-cheare. Men eate and drinke away their Christ; yea they eate and drinke away their soules; nay, they eate and drinke away their salvation: the fruit of the flesh is found more among the poore than the rich; which is a double sinne.
Chrysostome in this respect preferreth brute beasts befor us, for they goe from belly to labour; we go from belly, to bed, if not to worse: we eate till we surfeit, and drinke till we be drunken: we eate while we sleepe, and sleepe till we be hungry againe: wee sleepe compasse from eight to eight of the clocke.
And note, that he saith, that they fed themselves onely: where observe two things.
First, that they did not glorifie GOD in their meats and drinkes.
Secondly, That they relieved not others, but fed themselves.
All our eating and drinking, every morsell of bread or drop of drinke that we put into our mouthes, should be to the glory of God; (so saith the Apostle) Whether yee eat or drinke, or whatsoever 1 Cor. 10. 31. yee doe, doe all to the glory of God: but we like the Israelites, sit downe to eate and drinke, and rise up to play; these are the effects of 1 Cor. 10. 7. our Feasts.
Alas, we eate and drinke daily, and yet not one among an hundred, nay, scarce one among a thousand can tell, how to eate and drinke, to please God in it; namely; that wee may bee the stronger, and apter to walke in our generall calling of Christianity, and in our particular callings, to Gods glory, and the good of the Church, in discharge of our duties. Wee read not that Dives surfeited, yet feeding him selfe, not doing any good, hee Luke 16. 19. is condemned: This is that which God spake by Zachary, When ye fasted and mourned the fifth and seventh month, even these seventy Zach. 7. 5, 6. yeeres, did ye fast unto me? doe I approve it? and when yee did eate, and when yee did drinke; did yee not eate for your selves, and drinke for your selves.

Secondly, they fed and lived, but not to any bodies good, but Wee must not be like Nabal, providing only to feed our selves. to pamper themselves; this was the sinne of Israel; not that they had the calves of the stall, that they lay on beds of Ivorie, that they warbled to the tune of the Vyoll, etc. but that they neglected the poore amongst them. Wee are borne for others, the Heathen Amos 6. 6, 8. could say, Ortus nostri partem patria vendicat; our Country challengeth part of our birth, our friends part, our kinsfolkes part; for none of us liveth to himselfe; Nemo igitur sua quaerat, Let no man Rom. 14. 7. seeke his owne things, his owne profit, health or wealth, but his Neighbours. Ye know the life and end of churlish Nabal; at his sheepe-shearing he kept a feast, as it had been a King, and David sending unto him for some victuals; hee answered Davids servants, 1 Sam. 25. Who is David? and who is the sonne of Ishai? there bee many servants now adayes that breake from their masters; shall I then take my bread and my water, and my flesh, that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know not whence they be? This was the sinne of the shepheards of Israel, they fed themselves, They did eate the fat, and cloathed themselves with the wooll, yea they did kill them that Ezech. 34. ^, 3. were fed, but fed not the sheepe. If we eate onely to satisfie hunger, the Horse and the Hog eate with as good a conscience as wee doe; for as every creature of God is good, so it ought to be received 1 Tim. 4. 4. of us with thanksgiving.
And observe, that Iude noteth this as a great fault in the godly, that they suffered the wicked to eate among them, to staine their meetings, these spots, were as the menstruous cloth of a Esa. 64. woman; as the spots of a Leopard, all the water in the Sea cannot Ier. 13. wash them away; all Niter and Borith cannot cleanse them; they are as drops of blood in Lawne, or Camericke; they did Ier. 2. not onely defile their feasts, but them also that feasted with them; they were like menstrusie to staine them, and pollute them. If any that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an 1 Cor. 5. 11. Idolator, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one eate not; if ye eate or company with them, they will defile you. Origen would not pray with an Hereticke; Martian would have saluted Polycarpe, and taken him by the hand. No, saith hee, Agnosco te primogenitum diaboli, I know thou art the first borne of the divell. Iohn the Evangelist would not wash in the bath, wherin Cerinthus an enemy to GODS trueth bathed himselfe.
Every one that will avoid evill, must avoid the company of the evill; for he shall dwell in Gods Tabernacle, and rest upon his holy Mountaine, In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but hee Psal. 15. 4. honoureth them that feare the Lord: therefore Iude taxeth the godly, for conversing with Epicures, for feeding with them; and telleth them, that they are spots in their feasts. With this also God charged the two Churches of Ephesus and Pergamus, they had many good things in them, yet had God this against Ephesus, that

Shee had them, that maintained the doctrine of the Nicholaitanes, which The Godly have ever abandoned the wicked. were as spots to staine them. And against Pergamus, that Shee had them, that maintained the doctrine of Balaam. These spots should bee wiped out of the Lords glasse; these Lepers should bee Apoc. 2, 6, 14. banished the hoast of Israel; these goats should not come into the Lords field; these tares should not come into the Lords barne.
Doest thou love God, and the Gospel of God? then love the friends of God, and hate his enemies, as David did, Doe not I Psal. 139. 21, 22 hate them that hate thee; and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them right sore, as if they were my enemies. There is no man, but hee may doe some thing to discountenance sinne and sinners: no Flie so little, but hath his spleene; no Pismier, but hath his choller; no Hare so little, but hath his shadow; and no man so meane, but hee may reprove the Wicked: therefore let thy countenance to such be as the North-wind, and never entertaine Iudas with Iohn; nor Simon Magus, with Simon Peter. As the sweet river Hippanus is made bitter when it passeth the Pole Exanthe; like the bitter water spoken of in the booke of Numbers. So are men made worse by bad company: such as are continually in the Sunne, must needes be Sunne-burnt; such as walke in the myst, must needs bee berayed; such as touch pitch, cannot bee but defiled: so such as abide in bad company, cannot bee but spotted. Ioseph living in the Court of Pharaoh, had quickly learned, to sweare by the life of Pharaoh; and Peter being among lyers and swearers, had quickly learned to lye and sweare. Therefore saith Ierome, It is no wisedome to sleepe neere a Serpent, it may bee it will sting thee, it may be, it will not: so it may be that thou conversing with a wicked man, maiest convert him; but it may be, he will pervert, spot, and defile thee. David durst not meddle with these spots and spotted companions. I have not haunted with vaine persons, neither kept company with Psal. 26. 4, 5. the dissemblers, I have hated the assembly of the evill, and have not companied with the wicked: and surely hee that loveth the Lord, hee will love those that love him, and hate those that hate him; not his person, but his manners: Pacem cum hominibus, bellum cum Aug. vitiis; we must have peace with men, but war with their vices. But let men bee as blinde in minde as Bartimaeus, who followed Mat. 20. Christ by the noyse; let them bee as deafe, as the Adder; as filthy in soule, as Lazarus in body; as blacke as the blacke horse Psal. 58. Apoc. 6. in the Apoc. yet if wee gaine by him, if hee be for our honour, or profit, or pleasure, wee countenance him, he is an honest man, a good fellow. But hee that iustifieth the wicked, is as hee that condemneth the just; both are abomination to the Lord. Hee that saith Prov. 17. 25. Cap. 24. 24. to the wicked, Thou art righteous; him shall the people curse, and the multitude abhorre. Let us not then give any countenance to the wicked, but bee at defiance with them; as was David, when

hee cryed, Away from mee, yee wicked, I will keepe the commandements Love-feasts abused, were after abolished. of God.
But some will say, Is it a sinne simply to eate with the wicked? No, there bee cases of necessity, and cases voluntary, wherein it is no sinne to eate with them. David partaked with the Philistines, Psal. 119. 2 Sam. 23. in the water of Bethlem.
The Apostles ate meate in Athens consecrated to Minerva, Act. 17. cap. 17. with the Idolaters. Paul went in a ship dedicated to Castor and Pollux: and wee now may eate meat in a common Inne, with bad men. Againe, in cases voluntary it is not ever a sin to eate with the wicked; so that wee doe it to exhort them, to reprove them, and gaine them to God. Note the Antithesis, the caution, the Apostle useth; Have no fellowship with the unfruitfull workes of Ephes. 5. 11. darkenesse, but even reprove them rather. So, to reprove them, is not to have fellowship with them.
These are Spots in your feasts. These feasts were love-feasts, and these love-feasts were used before the communion, as appeareth 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21, etc. by the words of the Apostle, and in Tertullians Apologeticon, to note this, as many members make but one body; many strings make but one sound; many graines, but one loafe; many grapes, but one cup of wine: So many Christians make but one Church. So saith the Apostle, Now yee are the bodie of Christ, and members for your part: for all Churches dispersed thorow the World, 1 Cor. 12. 27. are members of one body, of one Church; for albeit in the evill state there be differences of callings, yet in the spirituall, there is Neither Iew, nor Grecian; there is neither bond, nor free; there is neither male, nor female; yee are all one in Christ Iesus; all as Gal. 3. 28. one man.
But these love-feasts being well begun, were afterwards corrupted: for from feasts of charitie, they were turned into feasts of 1 Cor. 11. drunkennesse: for men would be drunken; and so became spots and staines to these feasts; and therefore were these feasts after abolished, as all ceremonies ought to bee, if they edifie not.
Ezeehias brake the brazen Serpent, a figure of Christ, and called 2 Reg. 18. it, Nehushtan. Nectarius, a learned and a godly Bishop of Constantinople, abrogated auricular confession, when it was used to hypocrisie. So that Pedum lotio, washing of feet, fetched Iohn 13. from Christs example; when it was made a part of baptisme, was abolished by Augustine. The judiciall observation of Easter, raising contention betweene the Latine and the Greeke Church, was by Irenaeus and other Fathers removed. Paul circumcised Timothy, not Titus. Legales Ceremoniae, ante Christum erant pars cultus Christi, the legall ceremonies before Christ, were a part of Christs worship; Post Christi adventum, res erant adiaphorae, after his comming, they were things indifferent: Post templum eversum, quum corrumpebantur, erant sublatae, ut res impiae;

after the destruction of the Temple, they were abolished, as Ceremonies abused, are to be abolished. things impious. But to leave this.
If any man will aske mee, when and by whom these love-feasts were taken away; I answer, by the Antisiodorensian Councell, then were they abolished. In these feasts at the first was great sobriety, as Tertullian affirmeth; but after, many used riot and excesse, In Apologetico, 39. they that should have beene ornaments, were spots and staines; they that should have beene Lights, were scandals to these feasts: and therefore were they abolished.




THE THREE AND TVVENTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XII. 

Clouds they are without water, etc.
Pride occasioned many wayes, ever odious to God.



THis was the second sin of this people; viz. Pride: they swelled like waves of the sea, and lifted up them selves against God and good men. Of such swelling proud men, spake Peter, calling them (presumptuous) and saith, That they stand in their own 2 Pet. 2. 10, 18. conceit, speaking swelling words of vanity: for it seemeth that Peter tooke these words from Iude, or Iude from Peter rather: they spake swelling words, words of a foot and a halfe long; glorious words, like Thraso in the Comedy. Such were the Quintinists and Libertines in Germany, who boasted of a celestiall perfection: such were one Henry Nicolitanes, who spake in the clouds highly, mystically, that we are co-deified with God, and God co-homonified with us: such are our Papists, whose doctrine savours nothing but of pride; as their doctrine of free will, justification by workes, workes of supererogation; which they call the treasure of the Church; works of preparation, etc. thus they speake words of the wind, and fill their belly with the East wind: For what is pride, but wind? A wind to fill, and a wind to torment: Men may be spiritually swelled both in life and opinion; there is a swelling for abundance of riches: there is a swelling behaviour in mens courses, there is a swelling in sinne, a

swelling in opinion. Oh that we could learne to abhorre pride, Pride hath been in all places, in all sorts, even in the godly. and swelling, by considering how much the Lord abhorreth it, as many Scriptures shew; Salomon saith, that, The feare of the Lord is to hate evill, as Pride and arrogancie, etc. And againe hee saith, All that are proud in heart, are an abomination to the Lord. And Prov. 8. 13. Cap. 16. 5. 19. againe he saith, He that exalteth his gate, seeketh destruction. And againe the Holy Ghost affirmeth, that the Lord beholdeth every one that is proud, and abaseth him. For certainely when the Lord shall Iob 40. 6. come to judgement, that day of his comming shall burne like an Oven; and all the proud, yea and all that doe wickedly, shall bee as stubble, and Mal. 4. 1. the day that commeth, shall burne them up, and shall leave them neither root nor branch: therefore let us not be high-minded, proud and swelling as many are; for it is a thing most vaine. 1 Tim. 64.
First, in respect of God, for he resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble; he putteth downe the mighty from their seat, and exalteth Luke 1. 51. the humble and meeke.
Secondly, in respect of men, who will not regard it; When pride commeth (saith the Wise man) then commeth shame; for when men Prov. 11. ^. will be exalted above their vocation, then God bringeth them to confusion.
Thirdly, in respect of themselves, who inherit nothing by it but folly; for The foolish (that is, the proud) inherit folly: yet, Cap. 14. 18. this sin of Pride hath troubled all places, yea, the whole world; it troubled Paradise, for Adam was proud, and would be like unto Gen. 3. Aug. God; Sed dum rapere voluit Divinitatem, amisit foelicitatem, but whilest he endeavoured to snatch the Divinity, he lost his felicity. It troubled the Israeliticall Church, they would be as good as Moses in the Kingdome, and as Aaron in the Priest-hood: it troubled the Apostles, for they strove for superiority; yea, it Numb. 16. Mat. 18. 2. Pet. 2. 4. troubled heaven it selfe; for pride was the sinne of the Angels. Let all men therefore beware of this sinne: for first it is naturall; for every one hath some sparkes of pride in him. Againe, whereas all other sinnes are occupied about evill subjects, or about indifferent things, as drunkennesse about wine, whoredome about women, covetousnesse about wealth, gluttony about meat, only pride is to be feared in well doing; and therfore the better that a man doth, the more jelous let him be of himselfe; to look to himselfe, that this sinne of pride overtake him not; for what hast thou, that thou hast not received? Nay, Paul beganne to be proud through the abundance of his revelations, but lest he should be exalted above 1 Cor. 4. 7. measure, there was given unto him a pricke in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him, because he should not be exalted above measure. Augustine 2 Cor. 12. 7. having overcome many sinnes, yet overcame not the sinne of pride, it did dog him like a blood-hound. Luther strove more with this sinne, than any sinne; doe what hee could, like a sea it came upon him. This stained all the workes of the Pharisees, they fasted, but then they disfigured their faces; they prayed, Mat. 6.

but it was in the Market-place; they gave almes, but yet they Pride expressed many wayes in things that pertaine to God and man. blew the trumpet. Habet quisque naevos superbiae; every man hath staines and markes of pride in him; secundum plus aut minus, either more or lesse: the most godly have it: but some are all pride, as Erasmus said of the Fryer, that hee was all belly.
Generally, pride is expressed either in things concerning God; Ierome. or in things appertaining to men.
In the things that concerne God, there is the pride of the Atheist, whereby he striveth to remove the sense of the being of God; and the pride of the heretike, when he assaults the attributes of God, or his persons; and the pride of the Papist, who will scale the high Fort of heaven by the broken ladder of his owne merits; and the pride of the curious, who will search into things not revealed; and the pride of the persecutor, who will pursue by slaunders or violence, the power of Gods ordinances; and the pride of the impenitent; who dare live and dye in his sinnes, without care of Gods threatnings. Againe, pride is expressed against God, as first when a man imagineth himselfe to be God, and would bee so conceited of men, as Caligula, who (being an open mocker of all religion) at length fell to thinke, that there was no other God but himselfe.
Secondly, when men imagine, that what they have, they have it of themselves, and so sacrifice to their nets, as the Prophet speaketh.
Thirdly, when in their hearts they say, He shall not raigne over us. Who shall controle us? and so contemne the ordinances of God, his Word, his Sacraments, their worke, their power.
Fourthly, when a man shall thinke he is perfect and breakes not the Law, and that they can by their owne strength runne the way of Gods Commandements. Psal. 119.
Fifthly, when in heart they say, We will do this and this: who shall let us? we will go thither and thither, who shall hinder us?
Sixthly, when men will disobey the will of God; breake his yoke, and burst his bonds asunder. Thus is pride against God shewed manywayes.
Pride against man discovereth it selfe sundry wayes also,
As by oppugning the fame of the best men:
By bragging and boasting.
By striving for offices and highest places.
By costly apparell, of purpose to be counted better men then they be.
By painting of the face, to be thought a beautifull creature, not being so.
By envying the good of another, as if he deemed himselfe either only worthy, or else the most worthy.
The proud man will acknowledge no superiour nor equall by his good will: hee useth his equals as inferiours, his inferiours, as servants, his servants, as slaves, his slaves, as

beasts: and when he is climed up on high, he pluckes up the ladder Vsually the basest are proudest. after him (if he can) that no man shall come up after, or but such as he pleaseth. Thus pride is expressed both to God and man. David was farre from this pride, Lord (saith he) I am not Psal. 113. 1. high-minded, I have no proud lookes: I do not exercise my selfe in matters, that are too high for me, etc. But few are like David: many men forget themselves to be men, they take to them the name of God, Act. 12. Esa. 14. 13. as Herod did; they will make their nests in the starres, as Nabuchadnezer did. The Bactrians said of Alexander, that his pride was such, that if his body had been answerable to his heart, he would set one foot on the land, and the other on the sea: For our pride is infinite.
But it is not so much in the rich, as in the poore; the poorest, the basest are many times the proudest; prettie is the parable of Iotham; the best trees refused to be the King, but the bramble affected it, and did sperare and aspirare, hope and aspire, as did the bastard Abimelech. Iudg. 9. 15. Such a fine parable is also in the book of the Kings, of the Thistle; the parable runneth thus; The thistle that is in Lebanon, sent to the Cedar that is in Lebano^, saying, Give thy daughter to my sonne, to wife. The thistle, 2 Reg. 14. 9. the begger is proud, none worse. The Cumane Asse jetteth up and downe with his long eares in a Lions skin. Aesops Crow craketh in the feathers of other birds: Among fowles, the Peacocke for pride challength the soveraignty. Hagar the kitchen maide will be proud, Gen. 23. Mat. 20. and insult over her mistrisse Sara. The poore Sonnes of Zebede would sit at Christs right hand, and at his left; and they that Iob would not set over the dogges of his sheep: yet were so proud, as they contemned him. None prouder then the basest and the meanest: If they haue but a little mucke, or a few cloddes, to commend them, a little land, they looke aloft, and a King must not be their Cousin.
It is said of them that liue under the North Pole, that no plant groweth in Summer, for the great heate there, nor none in Winter for the extreme cold: So no vertue can grow in our Climate; not in rich, for they are proud, nor in the poore, for they are prouder.
We all co^plaine of the envy, the quarrelling, the strife, the suites, the troubles of this age: but where is the roote of all these, but pride? Only by pride doth man make contention: For where every man contendeth to have preeminence, and none wil give place to other, there can Pro. 13. 10. be no peace. We haue the heart of Caesar, and the stomake of Pompey, the one could not indure an equal, nor the other a superiour. Quisque gerit regnum in pectore; every man carryes a King within him. When we follow a dead corps to be buried, or walke among the graves, we can condemne our vanity and insolency; every man can be a preacher against pride, and cry out, Why should men be proud, who are but earth and ashes, a bubble, a vapour, a shadow, whose breath is in his nostrilles; to day a man, to morow none; to day a Prince, to morow a dead carion? Quid superbis cinis and pulvis? Why art thou Psal. 39. 5, 6. Eccles. 10. 9. Mat. 23. 5. proud, dust and ashes? but wee forget all, and like the Pharises love

the chiefe places: but it is certaine, where pride is in the saddle, God hateth pride, and resisteth it. shame is in the crooper, for he that exalteth himselfe, shal be brought low: for glory is like a shadow, if a man follow it, it goeth from him, if he goeth from it, it followeth him. Before destruction the heart of man is hautie, proud; these proud men please none; not God, for Prov. 18. 12. he resisteth them; nor their betters, for they envy them; nor themselves, 1 Pet. 5. 5. for they are not so proud, as they would be. Whom do they please then? Certenly the Divell; who of a beautifull Angell, is made an uncleane ougly spirit: humilitas autem hominem Angelo similem Aug. facit, and superbia Angelum daemonem reddit: humility maketh a man like an Angell, and pride maketh an Angell, a Divell; and therefore Paul would not have a Bishop to bee a young man, lest he 1 Tim. 3. 6. being puft up, fall into the condemnation of the Divell. The which words may be taken either actively, or passively; actively, lest the Divell condemne us: or passively, lest we by our pride be condemned of the Divell, or with the Divell.
Many swell in pride, but let them take heed, they swell not as Aesops toade did; who seeing the Oxe feeding by her, envied him, and swelled her selfe so big, that she swelled her selfe out of her skinne, she burst withall: yea indeed the proud man is as he that transgresseth by wine: he is as a drunkard, without reason and sense; Hab. 2. 5. whom God will punish and make a laughing stock to all the world: for God opposeth himselfe against the proud; and who then can stand for them? Pride is one of the sinnes that God hateth; he hateth 1 Pet. 5. 5. all sinnes, but this (...): so saith Salomon; These six things doth the Lord hate, yea his soule abhorreth seven: the hauty eyes, a lying Pro. 6. 16. tongue, etc. See how he placeth pride in the fore-front, in the vauntgarde, like Vrias. The sinne of this age, is pride, and the pride of this age is monstrous. Christ set a little Child among his Apostles: Mat. 18. but it had need be a sucking child, (...), an infant, not (...), a child, a boy, for even children are proud, like the saucie boyes of Bethel. 2 Reg. 2. 23. Esa. 3. 5. Children presume against the ancient, and the vile against the honorable: servants ride, and masters go on foot. Paul prophecied of this age, Eccles 10, 6. Know (saith he) that in the last dayes shall come perillous times, men shal be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. 2 Tim. 3. 1, 2
There is a pride in the Church, and Commonwealth; hic and ubique, here and every where. In the Church all would be Apostles, and Prophets, and teachers, and every man as good as his fellow, as Paul 1 Cor. 12. said of the Corinthians; docent antequam discunt, they teach before they have learned, quoth a father of that age; so is it now; and all Hier. the troubles of the Church come from pride: the people thinke, they have as much knowledge, as the Pastor: Arrius the hereticke, who sprang up An. Dom. 358. to maintaine his heresy, that no sinne were it never so great, should be reputed to him, that had faith, said, that God revealed that to him, which he concealed from the Apostles. Montanus called himselfe Paracletum, the Holy Ghost; and his two trulles, Prisca, and Maximilla, he named

Prophetesses. Arrius fell into his heresy, for that he could not be Pride the cause of heresy in the Church, and disorder in the commonwealth. a Bishop. The Anomaei said, that they knew God, as he knew himselfe: most heresies have come from pride; Si ergo vana gloria te titillaverit, dic ei, ut Christus, Magdalenae: Noli me tangere, nondum ascendi ad Patrem: if therefore pride, or vaine glory shall tickle thee, say unto it, as Christ did unto Magdalen, Touch me not, I have not yet ascended to my Father. Chrysost. Bern.
In the Commonwealth there is pride; for the foot striveth to equall the head; the servant would be as the Master, the peasant, as the Prince: the cobler, as the Counsellour. Corrus sequitur Curiam, the cart will follow the Court: and as the Preacher saith, Folly is set in great excellency, and the rich set in the low place. I have seene servants on horses, and Princes walking as servants, on the ground. As Eccles. 10. 6, 7. the Academicks said, they knew nothing, and the Anomies, all things: so some are too base, but most are too proud, like the Fly, that sitting in the Charriot, said, Heu, quantum pulverem excitavi? What a dust have I raised? The poore Fly was proud: and so most men swell in pride, like the Aegyptian Asse, that carried the Goddesse Isis; thinking the honour done to the Goddesse, to be done to her, pricking up her cares, till he that drave her, lashed her for her folly, saying, Non tibi, sed deae (stulte Asine) datur hie honos; O foolish Asse, this honour is not done to thee, but to the Goddesse: like Caius Caligula, who was so proud, that hee would have his horse called Velocissimus, and to bee fed with barely Dion. histo. sua. in vessels of gold, and to drinke wine in Caldrons of gold, and resolved to make his horse, Consul of Rome: like Sapor King of Persia, who was so proud, that he wrote himselfe, King of Kings, brother to the Sunne and Moone, partner with the starres: like Haman, who was so proud, that none must ride upon the Kings horse, but he.
To most me^ pride is as a chaine: they wil lose their goods, yea their lives, before they will lose their will. Let there bee a proud Psal. 73. 6. man in a town, and he must dominiere over all, to die for it, he must rule and have his will; but be jealous over thy soule, suspect thy selfe of pride, while thou livest; it creepeth on us in most of our actions, chiefely when wee doe best: therefore Pascentius niger was a rare man, who being praised of an Orator for an excellent act, answered thus, Write the praises of Marius, Iugurth and Hannibal, but praise not mee, till I bee dead, for that (quoth hee) is but flattery: A most grave saying, to shame us Christians. And surely, as Demosthenes said, that the first, the second, and third vertue in an Orator, was Action; so Augustine said well, that the first, second, and third vertue of a Christian, is humility: for that is the Congregation of all vertues: without which, the gathering together of all vertues is nothing else, but a scattering of them: Give honour (saith the Apostle) and goe one before another. Give honour, take it not, strive not for the

highest pew in the Church, the highest roome at a Feast, bee Pride brings confusion. lowest, not highest. If Paul had said, In taking honour, goe one before another; hee had had five thousand disciples. Let not these words be heard among you, I am as good as hee, I am as well borne as hee; hee shall not have my necke under his gyrdle, for these speeches savour of pride, and pride of all other sinnes doth most discredit and disgrace a Christian, as it did Tarquinius Superbus; who being a traitour, an whoremonger, yet was not called Tarquinius the Traitor, or Tarquinius the Adulterer; but Tarquinius the proud; to teach us, that pride doth more disgrace a man than any other sinne.
Let us not therefore swell like waves, be lifted up with pride, the end will be shame; and therefore hee saith, these waves doe but fome out their owne shame: For God will confound them, throw them from their Pinnaces, shake them with his whirle-windes, strike them with his lightenings, beate them with his thunder-claps; for pride must have a fall, and great pride a great fall. Herod fell from a throne of gold, to a bed of dust, to bee Act. 12. 23. Dan. 4. 29. eaten of wormes; and yet behold a greater fall; Nabuchodonozer fell from the glory of a King, to the state of a beast, to eate grasse like an Oxe, to bee wet with the dew of Heaven, his nailes to grow like the talons of an Eagle, and yet behold a greater fall; Adam fell from innocency, to mortality, to bee exiled Gen. 3. 24. out of Paradise, and kept out with a shaking sword, and yet to make up the mease, the up-shot, behold a greater fall: The Angels fell from Heaven to Hell, from felicity, to all misery, and are now reserved in everlasting chaines. In the Primitive Church, Simon Magus did abuse the Ascension of Christ our Saviour, Iude vers. 6. and made him selfe wings, and pretended and offered to flye up to Heaven: but Peter prayed, and he fell downe like lead, and crushed his members grievously: Ante pervenit justa petitio, quam iniqua praesumptio: A just prayer came up before an unjust presumption: Euseb. such were the Giants in the old World, that would lay Pelion upon Ossa, and both upon Olympus, and pull Iupiter out of Heaven; but their language was confounded. What should I speake of Haman, who by pride brake his necke; of Holofernes, Iudith 13. who by pride lost his head; of Sennacherib, who for his pride had killed in one night an hundred fourescore and five thousand of his men, and not long after, his own Sons Adramelech and Sharezer Esa. 37. 38. slew him, as he was in the Temple worshipping Nisroch his god; Of Antiochus, who for his pride had his head and hand cut off, and hanged up upon the gates of Ierusalem; Of Pharao, who for his 2 Mach. 1. 15. Exod. 12. pride against God, and his people, was drowned in the red sea; of Apris a King of Aegypt, who for his pride, and glorying that neither God nor man could put him from his Kingdome, was strangled; Of Caphaneus, who for his pride was overthrowne with lightning; For he said, he would overthrow Thebes, invito Deo,

whether God would, or no; Of Domitian, who for his pride (for Examples of the fall of divers proud men. he would be called a God, and worshipped) was slaine of his servants with daggers in his privy Chamber, his body was buried without honor, his memory cursed, and his trophies defaced; Of Queene Venda, daughter to the famous King of Poland, who out of the pride of her heart refused to be married, shee thought none good enough for her, but at last she was drowned in the river Vestula. And many wayes doth the Lord meet with proud men; sometimes giving them up to hardnes, and impenitence of heart; sometime bringing them to disgrace, and open shame; sometime suffering them to fall into other sinnes, whereby the Lawes of men take hold of them, either to deprive them of their lives or of their honors: One way or other he doth usually punish them in this life; to say nothing of those punishments prepared for them in the life to come. Yet all these iudgements cannot keep us from swelling, from pride, but still men will be like the raging waves of the Sea, foming out their owne shame; and though there be nothing more foolish, nothing more base, nothing more inhumane, nothing more impious then pride, yet there is no end of this humour, men are proud in death, and life, yea, and beyond death, like Abimelech, who bade his Page kill him, that it might not be said, that he died by the hand of a woman; yet a Iudg. 9. 55. woman gave him his deadly wound. This made men to call their houses, and their townes after their owne names; that they might live in spight of God, if not in themselves, yet in their posterity; but they are notably travised by the Spirit of God, when he saith, Wise men dye aswell as fooles, and leave their riches for Psal. 49. 10, 11, 12. others, yet they thinke that their houses and habitations shall continue for ever, and call their Lands after their owne names: but man shall not continue in honour, but is like the beasts that perish. Many desire to live, if it be but in an Epitaph, in an Inscription on their grave, yet names are rotten many times before their carkases. Sir Thomas More sent unto Erasmus, for verses to be ingraven upon his tombe: At patibulum erat illi pro sepulchro, the blocke was to him for a sepulcher, quoth Calvin: who compareth him to Shebna, unto whom God said, What hast thou to do here, that thou shouldest here hew thee out a sepulcher, as he that heweth out his sepulcher in an high place, or that graveth an habitation for himselfe in a rocke? for whereas Shebna thought to make his name immortall, by his famous sepulcher, he dyed most miserably among the Assyrians. So Sir Thomas More thought to make his name immortall by his tombe, and epitaph there written, he perished as a traitour. Stately tombes and epitaphs are nothing, every passenger censureth and saith, Thy pompe is brought downe to the grave, the worme is spred under thee, and Esa. 14. 11: the wormes cover thee. Thou saidst, I will ascend up to heaven, and exalt my throne above, besides the starres of God, but thou shalt be brought down to the grave, to the sides of the pit. So Caesar an heathen derided the

pride of Cyrus for his sepulcher, and said, Coelo tegitur, qui non habet True zeale burnes out by degrees, till it come to full flame. urnam; superbiain coelo nata est, sed velut immemor qua via inde cecidit, illuc ideo redire non potuit: Pride (as one prettily speaketh) was bred in heaven, but having (as it were) forgotten which way it fell from thence, it could never afterwards finde the way thither againe. Hugo lib. de anima. Let us therefore abandon this sinne of pride, and hate it as the Divell himselfe, nay more then the Divell; For the Divell cannot hurt thee, till pride hath possessed thee.
And there be two things that make a man proud:
Scientia and Divitiae. and Knowledge and Riches.
Scientiainflat, saith Paul, Knowledge puffeth up: and Divitiae inflant, Riches also puffe up: therefore saith Paul to Timothy, Charge 1 Cor. 8. 1. 1 Tim. 6. 17. rich men, that they bee not high-minded; As hee that drinkes wine, shall feele it fume into his head, though he be never so sober: so wealth is a cup of fuming wine, which the best man that lives shall feele fuming in his heart; and some are made starke drunk withall: They are drunke, but not with wine: and as wormes breed Esa. 29. 9. Aug. in the hearts of trees, so pride, the Worme of wealth (for so a Father cals it) commonly breedeth in the hearts of rich men. And this pride God hateth, let us hate it also; For it is Radix cuncti mali, and Regina omnium vitiorum: It is the roote of all evill, and the Greg. in M^. Queene of all vice.
The third vice that hee chargeth them with, it is hypocrisie, in that they being in malice, like Cain, in covetousnesse, like Balaam; in rebellion, like Chore; yet eate and feast with the godly, Clouds without raine, waves without water, trees without fruit, starres without light.
And here is to be observed the greae zeale of the Apostle, which as fire kindling by little and little, is now come to his height and heate: he cannot forbeare them any longer, but must needs paint them out in their colours. Iames and Iohn were Mar. 3. filii tonitrui, sonnes of thunder. And surely wee had need thunder in this age, men are so asleepe; By these degrees did the zeale of Paul grow to this height: Yee cannot drinke of the cup of the Lord and the cup of Divels: yee cannot bee partaker of the Lords table, 1 Cor. 10. 21, 22. and of the table of Divels: doe wee provoke the Lord to anger? are wee stronger than hee? as if he should say, God will either breake thee, or bend thee, there is no striving against him. David speaking of Idols, at last bursteth out, They that make them, are like unto Psal. 135. 18. them, and so are all they that put their trust in them, and God will binde them both in one bundle, and cast them into the fire. So Debcra having spoken of the wickednesse of Sisera, concludeth with an execration against all the wicked, rising ab Hypothesi ad Thesim, saying, They fought from Heaven, even the Searres in their courses Iudg. 5. 20, 21, 26, 31. fought against Sisera. The river Kison swept them away, the ancient river, the river Kishon. Shee put her hand to the naile, and her right

hand to the Workmans hammer: with the hammer smote shee Sisera, shee God loveth sincerity, and detesteth hypocrisie. smote off his head, after she had wounded and pearced his temples. So let all thine enemies perish, o Lord, etc.
But to leave this, and to come to the sinne here condemned, which is hypocrisie. In speaking whereof he clappeth on all his sayles, and goeth with full wind: For he compareth hypocrites to clouds which promise raine, and yet they be dry clouds: they deceive the husbandman, they bring no raine at all. Hee compareth them to trees, which blossome and flourish, but bring forth no fruit; and unto starres, which promise light, and yet do but deceive the poore traveller, for they be wandring stars. The Lord detesteth nothing more, then for men to make his religion a cloake to their wickednesse, and to thinke the bare profession of his name inough. God requireth truth in the inward parts. And in another Psal. 51. 6. Psalme, he bringeth in the Lord thus reasoning against hypocrites, and counterfets, which pretend, but not intend. Why doest thou take my Covenant in thy mouth, and hatest to be reformed, etc? Psal. 50. 16. For this sinne God destroyed Shilo, and removed his Arke from it: the Arke had remained in Shilo about three hundred yeeres, but after, it was taken, the Priests slaine, and the people miserably discomfited. Hereupon saith God, Will yee steale, murder, and commit adultery, and sweare falsely, and burne incense unto Baal, and Ier. 7. 7, 8, 9. 1 Sam. 4. 11. Ier. 7. 9, 10, 11, 12. walke after other gods whom yee know not; and come and stand before me in this house whereupon my name is called, and say, We are delivered, though we have done all these abominations? Is this house become a denne of theeves, wherupon my name is called before your eyes? Behold, even I see it, saith the Lord. But goe yee now unto my place which is in Shilo, where I set my name at the beginning, and behold what I did to it, for the wickednesse of my people Israel. Thus for hypocrisie was Shilo destroyed: they halted with God. Dicunt sed non faciunt, they said, but they did not. He is not a Iew, that is one outward, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Iew that is one within, and Rom. 2. 28, 29. the Circumcision is of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter: whose praise is not of men, but of God. So we are Protestants in the Letter, not in the Spirit; professors outward, none inward; Christians in the 1 Pet. 3. 21. flesh, none in the heart; baptized in the body, not in the conscience.
It is said of Epicurus, that he did put on but the bare name of Cicero 5. Tuscul. a Philosopher, and was not a Philosopher in truth. It may as truly be spoken, that many in this age put on but the naked shape of Christians, and are not Christians indeed, and that many colour their wickednesse by outward pretence of Religion, and by bearing Bibles in their hands, and the Word in their mouth, though it be never settled in their hearts; being like the Carbuncle, that hath a fiery shew, yet never flames, and like those that use muske, and pommanders, to conceale their unsavory and stinking breath. But such God hateth with a dooble hatred, and will be

revenged of them. It were better, that we had no eares to heare, Hypocrisie the counterfeit of religion. nor tongues in our head to talke of God; rather then by talking and hearing, to cover our notorious wickednesse; For we shall perish, and we shall have neither part nor fellowship in the number of the faithfull. God above all things commended sincerity in Iehosaphat: Act. 8. 21. 2 Chro. 19. 3. For he had prepared his heart to seeke God: hee had some sap, but hee had the heart of an Oke also, and was sincere: so was Eleazar, hee 2 Mac. 6. 23. could not be drawne to play the hypocrite, by no flatteries, nor allurements, no, not to save his life thereby, and to avoid most grievous torments. And Nazianzen could say of his Father, that he chastised pride, and loved humility: not fainedly, or colourably, but sincerely, truly, and that he reposed humility in his soule, and not in his garments, or bowing downe of his head, or low speech, or a thicke and long beard, or coloured haire, or grave pace in going: For these things (saith he) are easely devised, yet quickly reproved; for no counterfeit thing can be durable. Such men there were once; but where are they now to be found? and how rare are they? Most men are like the Church of Sardis, they have a name to live, and yet are dead, they seeme to live, but with God they are dead, their faith is dead, their zeale dead: men live, when they bring forth fruite, else they be dead. Tullies sonne brought from Atheus, not only nomen, but rem, not the name of learning only; but learning it selfe; So wee should bring and carry away from Christ not his name only, but his vertues and so be followers of God as deare Children; otherwise if we be Christians Ephes. 5. 1. in name, and not in truth; if we draw neere unto God with our mouthes, and have our hearts farre from him, we shall perish; for Can a rush grow without mire? or can grasse grow without water? so are Iob. 8. 11, 13, 14. the paths of all that forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall perish: his confidence shall be cut off, and his trust shall be as in the house of a spider. And againe, it is said of the hypocrite, that his ioy is but a moment, and though his excellency mount up to Heaven, and his head reach unto Cap. 20. 5, 6. the clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like his dung, etc. Let us then, as we love our soules, shunne hypocrisie, and use sincerity; this shall comfort us at the last, as it did Ezechias: for being upon his deathbed, this was his comfort, that he had served God (not in shew) but Esa. 38. 3: in truth: but we are cloven-footed, and cloven-hearted with God: In animis hominum multae sunt latebrae multique recessus, In mens hearts there be many dennes, and lurking places, and many windings and turnings. But let me say to the hypocrite, as Chrysostome said; Hypocrita, aut esto, quod appares, aut appare quod es, Hypocrite, eyther be as thou seemest, or appeare as thou art: for simulata sanctitas est Aug. duplexiniquitas, counterfeite piety is double impiety. First, because it is impiety, and then because it is counterfeite, making truth falshood, and God a lier. But as it is said, Non auditores, sed factores legis, Not the hearers, but the doers of the Law shal be iustified; so of religion, Non eandem profitentes, sed eidem obedientes, Rom. 2.

not professors, but performers shall bee glorified. Let us not Sincerity is by God required, hypocrisie reproved. then bee like the Figge tree, which our Saviour cursed, that had leaves in abundance, but no fruit at all: For it is not the lifting up of our eyes, or the knocking of our brests, nor the holding up of our hands, which shall stand us in stead at the last day: but Mat. 21. the wounded soule, the sincerity of the heart, the contrite spirit, joyned with outward observance and obedience, which shall administer true joy in the latter end. Therefore let us, as elect of God, holy and beloved, let us, I say, professe with our mouthes, and practise with our lives; let us sing in voyce, and with the spirit also; let us repent in life, and sow in teares; let us cleanse the flesh, that wee may bee mortified, and cleanse our spirit, so shall wee be glorified; let us never be as cloudes without water, as trees without fruit, as the raging waves of the sea, as starres without light; I meane hypocrites. For hypocrites are as clouds without water, as trees without fruit, as starres without light. Thus Iude painteth them out, and that finely; and so doth our Saviour: for speaking of hypocrites, he saith, They binde heavie burdens and grievous to bee borne, but they themselves will Mat. 23. not move them with one of their fingers: and hee saith, that They doe all their workes to bee seene of men: that they straine at a gnat, and swallow downe a Cammell; that they tithe Mint, Annise and Cummin, but leave the weightier matters of the law, as judgement and mercie; that they make cleane the out-side of the cup and platter, but inwardly are full of briberie and excesse. One saith, that hypocrisie is the Greg. l. 8. moral. cloaking of a secret vice under the shew of vertue, and that the life of an hypocrite is nothing else, but Quaedam visi^ phantasmatis, the shew of an imaginary matter, which appeares some thing, and is nothing; and compares the hypocrite, to Simon of Cyrene, that bare Christs Crosse, but dyed not with Christ; so every hypocrite professeth to live to Christ, but will not dye to sinne and the world: and Saint Chrysostome likens the hypocrite to Herod, Super Mat. 12. that promised devotion, and performed persecution; and he saith, that a sincere man is like to a faire woman, that needs no external ornaments, but hath naturall beauty; but the hypocrite is like Hom. 57. a filthy deformed harlot, which useth many meretricious colourings, that cannot cover her filthinesse, but the neerer any drawes vnto her, the more hee mislikes her. And againe hee saith, that an hypocrite is like a Woolfe clothed in a sheeps skin, Super Mat. 7. but that he is found out by his voyce and by his doing; for the sheepe bleats, and lookes toward the earth, and eateth grasse, which is a signe of humility: but the Woolfe howles and looks towards heaven, which is a signe of pride and cruelty: the hypocrite hath Iacobs voyce, but the hands of Esau, that is, hee talketh religiously and zealously, but hee walkes impiously and prophanely; the hypocrite is like the statues of Mercury, that were wont to be set in high wayes to direct travellers to some

Citie or Towne, but did not travell nor move themselves: the Hypocrisie hath many woes denounced against it, hypocrite is like the Stage-player, that when he cried, O heaven! he pointed with his finger to the earth, when he cryed, O earth! hee pointed with his finger to Heaven; and therefore the wise Polemon gave him no reward, being Iudge of the Actors, saying, Hic manu Solaecismum fecit, he hath spoken false Language, and committed an errour with his hand. And to conclude, the hypocrite is like a deafe and hollow Nut, which hath no kernell within, but is wasted with the worme, and fit for nothing but the fire.
Heereupon it came to passe, that Christ dealt not so hardly with any sinners, no not with Atheists that denied the Resurrection, and Gods power; nor with Temporizers, that are alwayes of the same Religion that the company is: that can blow hot and cold with one breath, as with hypocrites: for having to deale with Sadduces, he shaketh them off, as damned creatures, as vessels of destruction, children of wrath, whose judgement was just, and their damnation slept not: hee telleth them, that they erred; Ye erre (saith hee) not knowing the Scriptures, neither Mat. 22. 29. the power of God: but when hee hath to doe with Pharisees, with Hypocrites, he doubleth and redoubleth, and tripleth, and multiplieth woes and curses; hee thundereth like Iames and Iohn; his zeale stayeth not with a little. O woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, yee Hypocrites, and so the second, the third, the fourth, the fift, the sixt time, Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, yee Hypocrites: as though all the woes and curses in this life, and in the life to come, were not ynough for them.
And it is not to bee forgotten, that God calleth it blasphemie, to speake one thing, and to doe another; with man, it is hypocrisie, but to doe so with God, it is blasphemy; the sinne increaseth, as the dignity of the person increaseth: as for example; speake a word against a common person, and hee hath but his action of the Case against thee, speake against a noble man, it is Scandalum Magnatum; against the Prince, it is death; against God, it is damnation of body and soule: double and dissemble with men, it is hypocrisie; halt with God, counterfeit with him, it is blasphemy. Therefore saith Christ to the Church of Smyrna, I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Apoc. 2. 19. Iewes, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan.
And it is further to be observed, that Christ speaketh of hypocrites, as if Hell were onely prepared for them: for intreating of the evill servant, that said in his heart, My master will defer his Mat. 24. 51. comming; he saith, that he will cut that servant in pieces, and give him his portion with hypocrites, there shall bee weeping and gnashing of teeth. And Christ our Saviour asketh them, how they shall escape Hell? O yee Serpents and generation of Vipers, how shall yee escape Mat. 23. 33. the damnation to come? And to shew the certainty of their damnation

(besides this interrogation, how shall yee escape the damnation to come? As if he should say, It cannot bee, but yee must Hypocrites make a shew of Religion, being irreligious. be damned: For the interrogation implieth an affirmation.) He saith of the wicked, that They shall have their portion with Hypocrites: to shew, that the condemnation of hypocrites is most surely sealed. And this aggravated the sinne of Corazin, and Bethsaida, and Mat. 24. 51. Capernaum; that they pretended Religion, but in painted boxes they did hide deadly poysons, in beautifull sepulchers, rotten bones; and under Iezabels painted face, a whores behaviour. Woe (therfore) to thee, Corazin, woe to thee, Bethsaida: for if so be, the miracles, Mat. 11. 21, 23. that had beene done in thee, had beene done in Tyre and Sidon, they bad repented long agoe in sackloth and ashes. And thou Capernaum which art lifted up on high, shalt be brought dowue to hell. And verily of all sinners, the hypocrite is the worst; he is ovis habitis, vulpis actu, crudelitatelupus; Eern. a sheep in shew, a fox in deed, and a wolfe in cruelty, for an hypocrite hath vulpem in cerebro, a Fox in his braine, milvum in manu, a kyte in his hand, and lupum in corde, and a woolfe in his heart: a fox in his braine, subtill and crafty to insnare; hee hath a kyte in his fist, to hold fast; and when hee hath caught hold, he hath a wolfe in his heart to devoure: and therefore saith our Saviour Christ, Beware of false prophets which come to Mat. 7. 16. you in sheeps cloathing, but inwardly they are ravening woolves: beware of them, they are like Swannes, that have white feathers, and black flesh; and one thinkes, the Swanne was forbidden to be eaten of the Iewes, to shew, that God abhorres all hypocrisie. But in that he compareth hypocrites to clouds, that have no raine in them; to trees, that have no fruite; to starres, that have no light: and some others doe compare them to the raine-bow, that hath many colours, and yet never a colour; to broken glasses, that have many faces, and yet never a face; to Copper, that resembleth gold, and is nothing lesse. We have to note, that none make greater shewes of sanctity, and holinesse, then hypocrites: as drie clouds make shewes of raine, corrupt trees, a shew of fruite, wandring starres, of light: so they of religion. They have a shew of holinesse (saith the Apostle) but inwardly they denie the power of it: outwardly 2 Tim. 3. 5. they professe to know God, but inwardly in their workes they doe deny him, being abominable, disobedient, and unto every good Tit. 1. 16. Mat. 7. 21. worke reprobate: They cry, Lord, Lord, but they doe not the will of the Lord; they say, The Lord liveth, yet they sweare to deceive.
Herod will make a great bragge of loving and worshipping of Christ; Goe your wayes, and search diligently for the Child, and when yee Mat. 2. have found him, bring me word that I may come and worship him. Iezabel will proclaime a solemne feast; the Herodians will speake 1 Reg. 21. 9. Christ faire, Good master, thou art true, and teachest the way of God truly. The adversaries of Iudah and Benjamin will pretend to worship God: wee will build with you; wee will sacrifice with you: Simon Mat. 22.

Magus will offer money to the Apostles, that on whomsoever he God will reward the hypocrite as hee is, not as hee sheweth. lay his hands, hee may receive the Holy Ghost; and Saul will say, that he hath done all that God commandeth; and Iudas will come to Christ with a kisse, and say, Haile Master. But Herods purpose was to kill Christ; Iezabels, to get away Naboths Act. 8. 1 Sam. 13. Mat. 26. vineyard; the Herodians drift was to tempt and intrappe Christ; the adversaries of Iuda and Benjamin, to hinder the worke of God, to spie out their libertie; Simon Magus, to make gaine of the Holy Ghost; Iudas to betray Christ: for none will weep faster then the Crocodile, and as did Ismael; none will give a fairer Ier. 41. 6. 2. Cor. 11. kisse, then a Iudas; and no Divell is so dangerous as the white Divell, as hee that changeth himselfe into an Angell of light: but such trees without fruit, such welles without water, such clouds without raine, such lampes without oyle, such starres without light, such eares without corne, such lampes without oyle, as they live not the life of the righteous, so shall they not dye the death of the righteous.
Therefore, brethren, let us not bee like silver, white in shew, and yet makes blacke strikes and lines; nor like the Vintner, that delivers good wine to his guests, and drinkes the lees himselfe: For though wee can talke holily and speake religiously, yet Not Mat. 7. 21. every one that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdome of Heaven, but he that doth the will of God which is in Heaven. It was wittily observed of one, that God in forming man, first frames the heart, but the Painter in portraying a man, first deciphers the face: so the hypocrite, he is all in shew, nothing in heart, his heart is with Venus or Bacchus, or Mammon; his face, his countenance only with God. It is written of the foxe, that hee faines himselfe dead, when hee comes among birds or poultery; but when hee sees them come neere unto him, hee suddenly preyes on them: So the hypocrite as one dead unto the world, and a man mortified, converseth amongst the harmelesse, untill he getteth some occasion of calumniating, biting, and devouring: this is Iohn Baptists generation of Vipers, that inwardly nourish poison, Mat. 3. 7. but outwardly hisse forth a kind of zeale. Salomon speaketh of a generation that is pure in their owne eyes, and yet are not washed Pro. 30. 12. from their filthines: these are the generation of hypocrites, they professe well, and make a shew of religion, but expresse it not: like the figge-tree, that bare leaves, but no fruite. The profession Mar. 11. of many is as the travell of the mountaines; we have two faces with Ianus; one to looke forward, another to looke backward: we have two hands with Ioab; one to embrace withall, another 2 Sam. 3. to stabbe withall: we have two tongues with Iudas, one to salute Christ, another to betray Christ: we have two hearts with Israel; Mat. 25. Psal. 78. one for God, another for the world. The frogge Borax hath two livers; one for meate, another for poison. The Arrians had

two faiths; one for the truth and Nicene Councell, another for the Many Christians in shew, few in deed and truth. time; they had fidem annuam, ac fidem menstruam, a yeerely faith and a monethly faith. The Israelites cried, Haile King Salomo^, haile King Adonia. Apuleius Parret said, Ave Auguste Imperator; Ave Antoni; haile Augustus the Emperor, haile Anthony. And many hypocrites 1 Reg. 1. have said, Haile Mary, and Haile Elizabeth: and to gaine the world, we would say, Ave Papa, Haile Pope, Ave Turca, Haile Turke, haile Divell. We make profession of any religion under heaven: In Aegypt all the dust was turned into lice, all the waters into blood; and in England not all, but most religion is turned into Exod. 7. hypocrisy. Wee can say, The Lord liveth, yet we sweare to deceive. Coelum aedificamus voce, vita autem Infernum, We build heaven with our voice, but hell with our life; wee are Angels in words, but Divels in deeds: like the Peacocke, we are Angels for our feathers, Divels for our feet, and Hell for our voice.
Augustine would not have the Churches of Africa excommunicated for drunkenesse, for then no professor had beene left in Africa: and if all hypocrites, temporizers, and formalists in England were excommunicated, few, or no Professors would be left in England. The good man, the sincere professor should then have iust cause to cry out with the Prophet, Woe is mee, for I am as the summer gathering, and as the grapes of the vintage, there is no cluster to eate, Mich. 7. 1. my soule desired the first ripe fruits. There bee many starres in heaven, but few give light as the Sunne and Moone doe; many many birds in the ayre, but few Phoenix's as in Arabia; many stones in the earth, but few precious stones as the Diamond; many trees in a forrest, yet few Cedars as in Libanus; many Israelites, but few true Israelites like Nathaniel, who had no guile. Rara avis in terris, nigro que simillima Cygno, A rare bird, and comparable to a blacke Iohn 1. 47. Swan. Hypocrisy in a Christian, is as rottennesse in an apple; For as rottennesse beginnes at the heart of the apple, so doth hypocrisie beginne at the heart of a Christian; and as rottennesse corrupteth the favour, the odour, the colour, the vigour of the whole apple; so doth hypocrisie the soule of a man; it taketh from it the dignity of grace, the odour of a good name, and all goodnesse whatsoever: For as rottennesse marres the apple, so doth hypocrisie the Christian. Foris Cato, intus Nero; a Cato without, and a Nero within, is monstrous. One saith, Canis mortuus minus faetet in naribus hominum, quam anima dissimulans coram Deo and Angelis, A dead dogge sauoureth lesse in our noses, then a dissembling soule, an hypocrite doth in Gods; and therefore Let death seaze upon them, let them goe downe quicke into the grave, for wickednesse is in Psal. 55. 15. their dwellings, even in the middest of them.
But in that he compareth us to trees, it is to teach us, that God will come, and take an account of our fruit. A grievous day it will be, when he shall say to these hypocriticall professors, Where is prayer, knowledge, godly conference, meditation, instruction

of your families, education of your children, love of religion, The greater part of Christians hypocrites. zeale of my glory? When hee shall say, Why stand these vineyards, and yeeld no grapes? why hangeth this ivy-bush here, and there is no wine? why stand these trees, and yeeld no fruit? what doe these starres in heaven, and yeeld no light? why doe these husband-men occupie my farme, and pay no rent? He will command the clouds to raine no raine upon these vineyards; he will Esa. 5. 7. Luk. 13. cut downe these trees and burne them; he will destroy these husband-men, and let out his vineyard to other husband-men; which shall deliver him the fruits in their seasons. When God shall aske for fruits, we may say, as the woman said of her accusers, Lord they are gone; either wee never had any, or else they are lost; Mat. 21. 41. either our brests never had milke, or else like dry nurses we have lost our milke; either our candles never had light, or else are out; Iohn. 8. 1 Pet. 2. Hebr. 12. either we never had any birth-right, or else with Esau wee have sold our birth-right; either we never had zeale, or else it is quenched, like the fire on the Altar in the Babylonicall captivity. We heare the word, we communicate: but where is private praier? private conference? private meditation? private instruction of our families? We professe Religion, we come to the Church, we heare the Word for shew only, for fashion only, of custome, not of conscience. Dagon of the Philistines, and the Arke of God is all one to us; the temple of Salomon, and the temple of Rimmon is all one; the service of God, and the worship of Diana is all one. Sion and Samaria, Ierusalem, and Ierico: the Gospeland the Masse, to us are both alike.
Satan may say to us, as he did unto the Monke who had his portise in one hand, and his harlot in the other, Parum refert, atraque enim via ducit ad interitum; it is no matter, both wayes lead to hell, and to destruction: so it is not matter whether we professe the Gospell, or not, so long as wee professe it so coldly, and so carnally; so hypocritically, and so dissemblingly; both are naught, both damnable: Our carnall gospelling, first tooke King Edward from us; then Queene Elizabeth from us; then King Iames; I pray God, at the last it take not the Gospell from us, and our Soveraigne from us.
It is monstrous for trees to stand seven and seven yeeres, yea forty, fifty, nay sixty yeeres and more, and to yeeld no fruit. For us to live long in the Church, and to doe no good. Devide the world into an hundred parts, scarce one is Christendome: and that one devide into tenne, and scarce one is sincere, voide of hypocrisie. Oh remember that yee are washed with the water of Baptisme, that yee have God for your Father, the Church for your mother; that yee have beene fedde with the milke of the Gospell, instructed in the Word of God, fed with the bread of Angels, with sacramentall bread, and will yee yet live like Ethnicks, like Pagans, like Turkes, like infidels; and like hypocrites?

yet most men so live: For what forbidden fruit will they not eate Iudgements denounced against hypocrisie. with Adam? What Babylonish garment will they not take with Achan? What usury with Zacheus? and what Naboths vineyard will they not covet with Ahab? what sinne is there, which they can commit, but they have committed? they bee trees indeed, but bad trees, without fruit; and therfore two things hath God prepared for them, a sharp axe, and a quicke fire: For every tree Mat. 3. that bringeth not forth good fruit, shall be hewne downe and cast into the fire.
And Saint Iude tells us, that these trees be twice dead, and plucked up by the rootes: dead in worke and deed, and inword; dead tam in ramis bonorum operum, aswell in the boughes of good workes, quam in radicibus fidei, as in the rootes of faith, twice dead, because according to the flesh they be most corrupt, and according to the soule most perverse, twice dead, dead to God, dead unto the world; both in this world, and in the world to come. Augustine maketh three deaths; the death of the soule, the death of the body, the death of both body and soule, called the second death: the first death is here meant.
But to draw unto a Conclusion: If hypocrisie be a sinne so odious, and seeing that hypocrites be as clouds without raine, as starres without light, as trees without fruit, and shal be sharply Apoc. 20. 1. punished, and pulled up by the rootes: Let us stedfastly cleave unto the Lord with full purpose of heart, and let us abandon hypocrisie, that we may please the Lord, and let us reject dissimulation, that we may be blessed, and let us not presume to carry the name of Christ without sincerity and godlinesse of conversation.



THE FOVRE AND TVVENTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XIII. 

To whom is reserved, blacknesse of darkenesse for ever.
Hell torments set out by divers names.



YEE heard before of their sinnes, as namely of their Epicurisme, in that they did eate and drinke without feare, feeding themselves; then of their pride, in that they were like the waves of the sea, swelling high; lastly, of their hypocrisie, in that they were as cloudes, that promise raine, and had nothing but drynesse in them; in that they were as trees that promise fruit, and yet they had nothing but leaves.
And now in these words hee commeth to their punishment, and their punishment is, that blacknesse of darkenesse is reserved for them for evermote. Whereby hee meaneth Hell fire, Hell paines: For there the Sunne never shineth, the Moone and Starres never give light.
Hell is diversly called by the holy Ghost, who taketh great paines in this matter, and all to drive us from sin and wickednes. He calleth Hell:

A place for divels.
Mat. 25. Mat. 18. 8. Mark 9. 2 Thes. 1. 8. Psal. 11.




Vnquenchable fire.


A worme that ever gnaweth.


Flaming fire.


Fire and brimstone.



A river of hot brimstone.


All sufferings here but shadowes, and beginning of sorrowes.
A Lake that burneth with fire and brimstone.


A second death.


The wine-presse of Gods wrath.


Damnation of body and soule.


Esa. 30. Apoc. 19. 20. Apoc. 20. Apoc. 14. 19. Mat. 10. 2. 9. Cap. 22. 13.
Vtter darkenesse.



And here in this my text, Blacknesse of darknesse for evermore: yet all these doe but shadow out the matter, they cannot paint it lively: Tophte and Gehinnon shadowed out hell, there they sacrificed their children to Moloch, in hot brasse, and had a noise of instruments to darken the cry of their children. Christ alludeth unto it in the word, Gehenna. Ier. 19. 4, 5. Mat. 5. 2.
But as all the ioyes of the elect heere are but earnest pennies, and first-fruits of heaven; for here is but the seed-time, there is the harvest; There is fulnesse of ioy and pleasure for evermore: so all Psal. 16. 11. the paines and torments that the wicked suffer here, they are but moll-hilles to mountaines, as a sparke, to the fire, as a drop of water, to the maine Ocean, nothing in respect of that which they shall feele there: all the paines of Achitophel, Saul, Iudas, Francis Spira, are nothing to their paines now.
Christ having reckoned up many plagues; as how that nation shall rise up against nation, and Kingdome against Kingdome, Luke 21. 10, 11, 25, 26. and great earth quaks shall be in divers places, and hunger, and pestilence, and fearefull things; and great signes shall there bee from heaven in the Sunne, and in the Moone, and in the Starres, and upon the earth, trouble among the nations with perplexity: For mens hearts shall faile them for feare, and for looking after those things, that shall come on the world: at last, he addeth: Initium dolorum haec; these are but the beginnings of sorrow: as if he should have said, All these things are but smoake in respect of the terrible fire ensuing; as a muster of souldiers, before the terrible bloody battel. What will the end be, if the beginning be so grievous? If his little finger be so heavy, what will be the weight of his loines? He beateth us on earth with whips, but he will beate us in hell with Scorpions, as Rehoboam said of the ten tribes. The torments invented by tyrants, and inflicted upon the Saints and servants of God, have beene most hideous and fearfull; as the teeth of wild beasts, hot glowing Ovens and Furnaces, caldrons of boyling oyle, fiery brazen bulles, powning to death in morters, rowling in barrelles of nayles, rosting upon spits, boaring with angers, parting the nayles, and fingers ends with Needles, nipping the flesh with pinsers, racking and rending asunder the joynts with wilde horses; no pitty, no remorse taken, whilest there was either flesh or blood, or synew, or bone: but the torments of Hell are greater, the mourning of Hannah, the griefe of Iob, the sorrow of David, the lamentations of Ieremie, the bitter smart of Ierusalem were great, as much

as mortality could beare, yet all nothing to the mournings, grief, The torments of Hell opposed to the ioyes of Heaven. sorrowes, and lamentations of the wicked in Hell. If all griefes and woes, and as many besides as ever wrung and wrested the spirit and heart of man, since the breath of life was breathed into him, were put together, to part the torments of Hell among them part after part, as if they would empty the storehouses, and breake the streame of it, yet hath the hand of Hell an unmeasurable portion behinde, to distribute to her children, an endlesse patrimony of how ling and wringing and gnashing; which all the foreprized griefes and torments of this life, have scarce beene shadowes and counterfeits of: all the paines in the World are nothing to the paines of Hell: therefore saith our Saviour, If thy hand and thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life halt and maimed, than having two hands, and two feete, to bee cast into everlasting fire, Mat. 18. 8.
Againe, as two contraries set together, the one doth set out the other, as blacke being set by white, seemeth the blacker, and gall set by honey, seemeth the bitterer; for contrariorum contraria est ratio; therefore whatsoever can bee said of the joyes of Heaven, may bee said of the paines of Hell. Well of the one Paul saith, The eye hath not seene, the eare hath not heard, the heart of man cannot comprehend nor containe the great joyes of Heaven, 1. Cor. 2. 9. then of the other side it may be said of the paines of Hell, that the eye hath not seene, the eare hath not heard, nor the heart cannot conceive the paines of Hell. O brethren, if all the trees and plants in the World were pennes, all the Earth paper, all the water of the Sea Inke, and all creatures in Heaven and Earth, Pen-men, yet are they not able to set out the paines of Hell: No, if a man had the learning of Moses, the understanding of Esay, the zeale of Elias, the thundering tongue of Iames and Iohn, the eloquence of Apollo, yet they cannot give thee a shadow of the torments of Hell.
Againe, as touching Heaven, it is said of the faithfull, But ye Heb. 12. 22. 23. are come to Mount Sion, to the City of the living God, to the colestiall Ierusalem, to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the Congregation of the first borne, which are written in Heaven; and to God, the Iudge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men: but the wicked come to mount Ebal, where the sixe Tribes cursed; to the valley of Achor, they come not to the celestiall, but the infernall Ierusalem, etc. not to the company of innumerable Angels, but to a company of innumerable Divels; not to the spirits of perfect and just men, but to the damned spirits of wicked and vile men; not to Iesus the Mediator of the New testament, but unto Belzebub, the Prince of darkenesse.
Againe, as touching the elect, Augustine saith, they shall have joy every way; joy within, and joy without, joy beneath, and joy above,

and joy round about them: Ioy within, for they shall have The damned tormented in all parts in hell. peace of conscience; joy without, for they shall have the fellowship of God and Angels; joy above, from the sight of God; joy beneath, from the beautie of the World: For there shall be a new Heaven, and a new Earth wherein shall dwell righteousnesse: and joy round about them, for they shall see all the delights that may be. God shall be a glasse to their eyes; musicke to their eares; a Iubilee to their hearts: yea God shall bee unto them all in all, as 1. Cor. 15. Is it thus with Gods elect? then the damned shall have sorrow within, and sorrow without, sorrow above, and sorrow benath, and sorrow round about them, sorrow within, from the worme of their conscience; sorrow without, by meanes of the accusation of the Divels; sorrow above, for the angry Iudge; sorrow beneath, for the gaping gulfe of hell, fire ready to swallow them up; and sorrow round about them, for the world burning: For a dextris erunt peccata accusantia; a sinistris, infinita daemonia; subtus, horrendum Chaos inferni; desuper, Iudex iratus: foris, mundus ardens; intus, conscientia urens: Anselmus. Thinke thou seest all this: goe a little out of thy selfe, and meditate a little of these sorrowes: thinke upon Cain, Achitophel, Iudas, etc. thinke thou seest their eyes distill like fountaines, their teeth clatter like armed men, their mindes contemplating endlesse misery, their memories recounting their damnable iniquities, their eyes beholding Legions of uncleane spirits, their eares hearing the roarings of fiends; their noses smelling Sulphur and brimstone, their hands catching nothing but flames of fire; thinke a little of this: nay thinke continually of this: For so Chrysostome would have us, in all our meetings to speake of nothing but of hell, of this blacknesse of darkenesse: that so by a Christian course of life, we may avoid it: for the paine of the damned is so great, as a man would not undergoe it an houre, for ten thousand worlds, and the damned would give ten thousand worlds, if it were in them for to give, for one houres release of these torments.
But to follow this a little further; If Christ suffering for the sinnes of the world, felt such an extremity of torment, that hee was like water powred out, that all his bones were out of ioynt, that his heart was as melting waxe, that his strength was dried up like a potsherd, and that his tongue did cleave to his iawes, Psal. 22. 14, 15.
Againe, if his torment was such, as that hee did not sweate water only, but water and bloud, and was in such an Agony, that an Angell from heaven was sent to comfort him, Luk. 23. If his teares and sorrowes were such, that there was but one word betweene him and desperation, crying, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Mat. 27. 46. then what are the paines of the damned? O brethren, the paines of hell are the whole weight of Gods wrath: If the weight of Gods finger bee so great when he

striketh us with collicks, with gowtes, with plurisies, with Apoplexies, There be all torments in hell, of all sorts of all partes. etc. O what is the weight of his whole hand? If his wrath be kindled, yea but a little, it taketh on like the fire, and maketh the hard rocks cleave asunder at the sound of it: what will it doe then, when it is kindled totally? There bee many plagues and torments in this life, which make a man to wish with Iob, that his mothers wombe had been his grave, Iob. 3. Now if a litle griefe be so great in this life, what shall bee their griefe, when the streames of Gods wrath shall fall upon them?
How fearefull have Gods iudgements beene against sinne in this life? How grievous was the burning of Sodom? Gen. 19. how fearefull the swallowing up of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram? Numb. 16. how lamentable the destruction of Ierusalem? What a grievous sight was the burning of this towne? How fearfull are those plagues, that God menaceth, Levit. 26. Deuter. 28. If Gods iudgements against sinne in this life be so grievous, how grievous will his iudgements bee in the life and world to come; when the wicked shall lie in hell like sheep, and death shall devoure them? Againe, to see the Iustice of God against Apoc. 9. sinne, gather it by this argument: as men that use to take the length of one arme by another, looke how great the mercy of God is, so is his iustice, great in pardoning, great in punishing. If in this life the punishment of God be so grievous, what will they be in the life to come? For here, iustice is mixed with mercy; what shall it bee, when there shall be iudgement without mercy? Iam. 3.
The Schoolemen affirme, that in hell there is Ignis ardoris, foetoris and terroris: ardoris, as in mount Aetna; foetoris, as in mount Egla; terroris, as in America, and in India: and certainly all those are in hell: Tophet is prepared of old, it is prepared for the King, it is made large and deep, the burning thereof is fire and much wood, and the breath of Esa. 30. 33. the Lord is a river of brimstone to kindle it.
Another Schooleman speaking of these torments, saith, that there is first bonds, Take him, (saith the Gospell) bind him hand and foot, Luk. 12. Secondly, there is darkenesse, cast him into utter darkenesse, Mat. 22. Thirdly, intollerable heate, and stinch, and therefore it is called a lake burning with fire and brimstone, Apoc. 19. Fourthly, sequestration from Gods presence, Goe yee cursed into everlasting hell fire, Mat. 25. Fifthly, Thirst, Father Abraham, send Lazarus, that he may dippe the tip of his finger in water to coole, etc. Luk. 16. Sixthly, vision of Divels, Mat. 25. Seventhly, the howling of the damned. Eighthly, deprivation of all heavenly ioyes: and at last he concludeth, that there be all torments in hell. For as the Painter being vnable to set out the sorrowes of Niobe, was enforced to wrap up her head in a cloute; So this Schooleman being unable to set out the torments of hell; he is faine to wrap up his speech with all torments: There be all torments in hell.

Other Schoolemen doe distinguish the paines of Hell; and Paines in hell double, Poena damni, poena sensus. they say there is Poena sensus, and poena damni, of this paine of sense, Gregorie speaketh thus; Vae illis, quibus paratus est ignis inextinguibilis, dolor intolerabilis, foetor incomparabilis, timor horribilis; ubi nil audietur, nisi fletus and luctus, nil videbitur, nisi animae damnatae, and daemones; nil odorabitur, nisi sulphur and foetor, nil sentietur, nisi ardor and ignis: habebunt damnati in oculis lachrymas; in auribus rugitus, in dentibus stridorem, in naribus, foetorem; in ore eiulatum, in corde dolerem ineffabilem in omnibus membris, ignis ardorem: Woe unto them for whom is prepared unquenchable fire, paine intolerable, stinch incomparable, and horrible feare: where nothing shall bee heard but weeping and wailing: nothing shall be seene but damned soules and Divels; nothing shall be smelt but a sulphurous stench, nothing shall bee felt but burning and fire: the damned shall have teares in their eyes, roaring in their eares, gnashing in their teeth, stench in their nostrils, howlings in their mouthes, unspeakable griefe in their hearts, in all their members the burning of fire: this is the paine of sense, that the damned shal feele: The pain of losse is, they shal never see the face of God; but they shall be punished with eternall perdition, from the presence of God, and from the glory of his power, 2. Thess. 1. 9. If Absalom thought it such a griefe to want his fathers presence, and not to see his face, 2. Sam. 14. what griefe will it be to the wicked, to want the presence of God, and not to see his face, in the sight of whom, is the knowledge of all things 1 Cor. 13. Augustine saith, Mala inferni dicere, aut cogitare, ut sint, nemo potest, priora sunt quippt, quam cogitentur. No man can tell or imagine the miseries of hell as they, for they are worser than may bee conceived. O brethren, let us therefore feare hell, before wee feele hell: For hell is a lake without bottome; broad without measure; deep without sounding; full of incomparable burning; intolerable stinch, and unspeakable sorrow, quoth Hugo. If the theefe feare the Assise day, and moment any paines, how ought we to feare eternall torments, so exactly noted by Christ? Ter uno oris halitu, thrice with one breath, saying, If thy hand cause thee to offend, cut it off; it is better Mar. 9. 43, 44, 45. for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands, to goe into Hell: into the fire that never shall bee quenched, where the worme dyeth not, and the fire goeth not out. Likewise if thy foote cause thee to offend, cut it off: it is better for thee to goe halt into life, than having two feete, to be cast into hell; into the fire, that never shall be quenched, where the worme dyeth not, and the fire never goeth out. If thy eye cause thee to offend, plucke it out, it is better for thee to goe into the kingdome of God with one eye, than having two eyes, to bee cast into Hell fire: where the worme dyeth not, and the fire goeth not out. Common fire is quenched with water; wilde fire with vineger and milke: Hell fire cannot be quenched.
Let us therefore feare hell, before we feele hell. All creatures

feare that which may hurt them, Elephas timet murem, Leo ignem, Feare of hell torments should worke repentance. Lupus lapidem, ceruus canem; columb a accipitrem, canis baculum; ovis lupum, avis laqueum, piscis hamum, latro patibulum; An Elephant feares the mouse, a Lion fire, the Wolfe a stone, the Hart a dogge, the Pigeon an Hawke, the Dogge a cudgell, the Sheep a Wolfe, a Bird the net, a Fish the hooke, a theefe the Gallowes: and shall not we feare hell? but many neither feare nor beleeve there is a hell.

Heu viuunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur,
Et velut infernus, fabula vana foret.

Men live now as though no death should follow, and hell were but a tale. We lie downe in sinne, wee sleep in sinne, wee rest in sinne, we live in sinne, and we dye in sinne: for what sinne is there, that we could have committed, but we have committed? What Bethsabe have we not defiled with David? what forbidden fruit have wee not eaten with Adam? What Babylonish garment have we not stollen with Achan? what usury have we not taken with Zachee? what vineyard have we not coveted with Ahab? If a man were at a table of dainties, and his friend, his deare friend should say unto him, Eate nothing, Touch nothing, Meddle with nothing, there is poison in these delicates: he would not taste, nor touch them, nor meddle with them; yet in sinne there is poison, there is mors in olla; and yet we will venture upon it. Hell and damnation, and blacknesse of darkenesse, which is the reward of sinne, cannot make us leave sinne, and clense our selves from all filthinesse of the flesh and spirit. And though we heare, that the paines of hell be intolerable, and that a man may say of them, as Aeneas said in another case; Non mihi si linguae centum sint, or aque centum, etc. Had I an hundred tongues, and mouthes to hold them, and a mouth of iron, yet can I not uphold them. We heare this all of us, but we know not how long we shall heare it. Many that heard this since this day twelve-moneth, yea since this day moneth, are gone to give an account of their life, either to God, or to the Divell, where their state is unchangeable. We use to say, that he that dieth this yeere, is excused for the next. But away with this vile proverbe; for he that dieth this yeere, and not in the Lord, is excused never, but dieth for ever: for there is a second death. Death is foure-fold; there is a death in sinne; a death unto sinne; a death of the body; and a death of body and soule. As the Iudge telleth the prisoner, You shall goe from hence to the place of execution, and there hang till you be dead: So God saith unto the wicked, You shall goe from hence to the place from whence yee came: that is, to the earth, and from thence to the place of execution in hell, and there thou shalt hang in torments intolerable and perpetuall, prepared for the Divell and his angels. Feare and terrour shall bee dealt for thy dole, and the curses of the people shall follow thee to thy grave;

and brimstone shal be scattered upon thy habitations, thy roote Nothing so hard as the impenitent heart. shal be dried up beneath, and above, thy branch shall bee cut downe; thy remembrante shall perish from the earth, and thou shalt have no name in the streets, etc. Thou shalt not depart out of this place of hell; till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing, that is, thou shalt never bee Iob 18. 14, 15. Mat. 5. 25. delivered from thence. O brethren, marke this doctrine, and feare hell, that I may say of this towne, as Christ said to Zachees house, Salvation is happened unto it. For hell is as the Lions denne, O mnia adversum spectantia, nulla retrorsum, there is an ingresse, but no egresse. Facilis est descensus Averni, the descent into hell is easy; we goe to hell as a boule runneth downe the hill. What hearts have we then of flesh, or of flint, of folly, or of madnesse, that this moveth us not? O caeci ad videndum propriam miseriam! o ignari, ad intelligendum proprium damnum! o corda Adamante duriora, quae non contremiscunt audire haec! O blind men, that cannot see their owne misery! o ignorant men, that cannot understand their owne danger! o hearts, harder then the Adamant, that cannot tremble to heare these things!
Granatensis said, Nil tam durum, quam cor hominis, nothing so hard as a mans heart: Omnia dura metalla igne liquescunt, all hard metals are softned with fire; the iron is dissolved in the furnace; the Adamant broken with the blood of a Goate; the congealed ice and snow molten with the Sunne; the hard marble pearced with droppes, the hard rocks rent asunder with strokes: At cor humanum durius petra, durius ferro; durius Adamante: but the heart of man is harder than the rocke, harder than the iron, harder than the Adamant: nec amor Deite mollat, neither can the love of God mollify thee, nec sanguis Christi te frangat, nor the blood of Christ breake thee; nec ignis inferni te moveat, nor the fire of hell move thee: For vile men savour nothing, either of the ioyes of heaven, or paines of hell: they are as men without taste, whose palates are corrupted with humours, that they are not able to discerne betweene hony and gall; they neither savour Gods threatnings of wrath, nor promises of grace; they will still draw iniquity with cordes of vanity, and sinne like cartropes.
But to follow this matter of hell and of the torments thereof a little more fully: As the paines of hell be vnvtterable: For all the tortures and torments of the world are but flea-bitings to the torments of hell: so are they everlasting, they abide not for a day, a weeke, a moneth, a yeere, but for ever. Hell is like the stone in Arcadia, called Abestos, which being set on fire, never goeth out; facilis est descensus adinfernum, difficile revertere gradum; It is an easy matter to descend into hell, but not easy to returne backe.
To all men in misery, there is hope, that once they shall have an end; the mariner comforteth himselfe with arrivall; the souldier, with hope of victory; the prisoner, with a gaole-delivery; the prentice with freedome; but in hell, nulla res, nulla spes, there

is no end of that misery: the captivity of Hell is not like the Hell torments everlasting. captivity of Israel in Aegypt, which lasted foure hundred and thirty yeeres, Exod. 12. 40. nor like the captivity of Babylon, which continued seventy yeeres, but the captivity of Hell is like the captivity of Israel in Syria; they never returned againe: So in hell there is no redemption. The greatest crosse that can bee laid upon man in this life, is to bee cast into perpetuall prison, to lose lands and goods, and want the company of our wives and children, and other our friends that love us; but yet in this case wee alwayes live in hope of liberty, and release of our punishment; or if our hope bee vaine, yet God will stirre up the hearts of strangers to visit us, to pittie us, to comfort and releeve us, some with meate, some with money, some with cloth, some with counsell; every man as hee is able, and hath compassion and feeling of our estate: but out of hell there is no redemption, no hope of paines to bee ever ended or eased, no frineds to pitty us, to see us, to speake with us, or to comfort us. If a barne were full of corne, and a bird once every yeere should carry away one kernell thereof, at last it would bee all gone; If a mountaine twenty miles about had taken from it once every yeere a shovell full, at last it would bee all consumed; but it would be long first, yet at last there would be an end; but in hell there is no end: those torments are everlasting; the dayes of the hellish torments of the damned shall never weare out, nor their yeeres come to an end: the longer they continue, the lesse hope they have; when as many yeeres are expired, as there bee men in the world, and starres in the heavens; when as many thousand yeeres are ended as there bee stones, and sands by the sea-shore, yet still there bee tenne hundred thousand times so many moe to come; the miseries of the wicked shall last as long as God shall live, and that is ever. For he is Alpha and Omega, Apoc. 1. The covenant of the day and night shall one day bee changed, the starres shall finish their race, the Elements melt with heate, heaven and earth bee renewed, summer and winter have an end, but the plagues of the prisoners in hell shall never be released. For in hell, as Gregory saith, there is Mors sine morte, finis sine fine, an end not ending, a death not dying, unquenchable fire, yet a darkenesse therewithall to accompany it, more palpable than the frogges of Aegypt, and blacker then blacknesse it selfe; everlasting, burning, but not consuming: For the damned, quoth Greg. suffer an end without an end, a death without a death, a decay without a decay: for their death ever liveth, their end alwayes beginneth, their decay never ceaseth; they are ever healed, to bee new wounded; and are alwayes repaired, to bee new deuoured: they are ever dying, and never dead, eternally broiled, and never burnt up. For the fire of Hell differeth from our fire in many properties: First, in Heate, for our fire compared to hell

fire, is but as fire painted upon a wall, yet is it a painefull thing Hell fire compared with elementary and ordinary fire. for a man to hold his finger in the fire an houre, the smart is so grievous, but it is more painefull to hold his hand in the fire an houre, and yet more painfull to hold his whole arme; but yet more painefull to hold his whole body: O how great will it be, to have our bodies and soules tormented in the flames of Hell fire? all the tongues of men and Angels cannot expresse the griefe and smart thereof.
Secondly, the fire of Hell differeth from our fire, in continuance: for our fire may bee quenched, hell-fire cannot: For the breath of the Lord is as a river of brimstone to kindle it. And therefore so long as the Lord breatheth, that is, liveth, so long that fire burneth, and that is ever: therefore it is called everlasting hellfire, Mat. 25. If any man aske, how that fire can be everlasting, cum sit corruptibile elementum; yee shall understand, that this fire is not nourished and continued with wood, and other matter, sed sola Dei voluntate, it is the will of God, that it should ever burne: and therefore it burneth everlastingly. Aug. lib. 21. de Civitate Dei, proveth it by the examples of the mountaines of Sicilia, which have ever burned since the beginning of the world, and yet doe burne, and are not consumed.
Finely saith a Schooleman, Lacus inferni tali igne repletus est, ut si totum mare in eo influeret, non extingueretur: infoelix anima, quae tanto and tam diuturno igne cruciatur: The infernall lake is filled with such fire, that if the whole sea should overflow it, it would not put it out: unhappy soule, the which is tormented with such and so lasting fire.
Thirdly, the fire of hell differeth from our fire in light; for our fire yeeldeth light, hell fire nothing but darkenesse, and therfore hell is called darkenesse; Blacknesse of darknesse; and blacknesse of darknesse for evermore. Take him, saith the Gospell, bind him hand and foote, Mat. 22. What? no more but so? I lictor, liga manus, Goe Sergeant, bind his hands? yes; cast him into utter darkenesse; outward to those inward, wherein they delighted before, blindnesse of mind and understanding; outward because the whole man, body and soule, shall bee folded and comprehended therein; outward, because in extremity without any limits, and borders of any favour of God, to bee extended; where neither the light of Sunne, Moone, and Starres, and much lesse the sight of Gods glorious face shall ever shine. Isidore saith, Ignis Gehennae lucebit miseris, ad miseriae augmentum, ut videant unde doleant; non ad consolationem, ut videant, unde gaudeant: Hell fire gives light to the damned soule, to increase their misery, that they may see wherefore to grieve; not for their comfort, that they might see any cause to rejoice for.
Fourthly, our fire differeth from hell fire in consuming: for our fire consumeth all that is put into it, but hell fire consumeth

nothing. Semper comburentur, nunquam consumentur, they shall Hel fire burne, but not consume. alwayes bee burning, never be consumed. If any aske, How this can bee, that a man shall alway burne in hell, and never be consumed? I answere, that it is the nature of this fire alwayes to burne the bodies and soules of the damned, and yet never to consume or make an end of them. Augustine saith, that God worketh strangely in his creatures; as for example, the Salamander liveth in the fire; take him out of the fire and hee dieth. And there bee certaine creatures, that live in hot ovens and chimneies, as the crickets. Take the coales of Iuniper, and rake them up in the ashes of it, and they will keep fire a yeere. Take a Peacocke, and kill it, and the flesh thereof (as Augustine saith) will remaine sweet and continue without putrefaction a yeere. Take Chaffe, and it preserveth snow, that is wrapped up in it, and melloweth fruit. Take lime, and bring it to the Sunne, and it is cold, cast it into the water, and it burneth. Againe, the Adamant is not broken, but by the blood of a Goate: and who can give a reason for it? There is a fountaine in Epyrus, which will put out a candle if it burne, and light a candle if it be out. The horses of Cappadocia conceive with the wind. God thus worketh strangely in his creatures: why not in the fire of hell?
Last of all, our fire differeth from hell fire in this; our fire but burnes and torments the body; but hell fire torments both body and soule. Hereupon saith Christ, Feare not him that is able to kill the body, and hath no power over the soule; but feare him that is able to send both body and soule into everlasting hell fire, Mat. 10. These are the differences betweene our fire and hell fire: the thought of this should make our bodyes to tremble, and our hearts to melt, and the haire of our head to stand upright, and to desire God to deliver us from this Lions denne: For when a man is once in, there is no getting out; the gates of hell are kept from egresse, as the gates of Paradise were warded from entrance, not by Cherubins, with the blade of a sword, but by the angels of Satan, with all the instruments of death.
Iudas and Cain, that have been so many thousand yeeres in this torment, their paines are as great now, as they were at the first. The accursed glutton in the Gospell, who could speake by experience of his unspeakable discrutiations, as Aeneas could of the troubles of Troy, he would have a warning given to all his brethren in the flesh, to make men take heed of hell, and of the torments of that place; the flames and fervour wherof were such, that he craved with more streames of teares, the^ ever Esau sought his blessing, but one droppe of water to coole his tongue with, and could not obtaine it, Luk. 16. This made Bernard to crie; Paveo gehennam, paveo Iudicis vultum, etc. I dread Hell, I dread the Iudges contenance. If Bernard thus trembled, what shall we doe? Augustine, libro de anima, etc. cap. 56. saith, Omnino miseris

erit mors, sine morte, defectus, sine defectu, semper tolerabunt, semper timebunt. Iudgement necessary to be denounced in time of sin. To the damned shall be alwayes a death without death, and a decay without decay; they shall alwayes bee in paine, and alwayes be in feare. For they shall alwayes bee in paine, and alwayes be in feare. For they shall be tormented without hope of pardon: Videbunt daemones, and Deum non videbunt, they shall see the Divels, and not God. There shall be the hangman alway tormenting, and the worme alway gnawing.
Anger not therefore, offend not this Lion of the tribe of Iudah, lest hee anger you, and cast you into the Divels dungeon; Vbi progredi intolerabile, regredi impossibile: Where to goe forward is intolerable, to goe backward impossible.
I have stood so much the longer upon the paines of hell, because I would awake you from the Lethargy of your sinnes; For I see, the world is come unto the stay, that it was in Esayes dayes, Let mercy be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learne righteousnesse, Esay. 26. Preach honour, and glory, and peace, a garland of righteousnesse, an uncorruptible crowne, fruit of the tree of life, sight of the face of God, following the Lambe, fellowship with Angels and Saints, and the congregation of the first borne; new names, and white garments, pleasures at the right hand of God, and fulnesse of ioy in his presence for evermore, unto the wicked; yet are they obstinately bent, and unmoveably settled against the blessings of God, as Daniel against the hire of Balthazar, Keep thy reward to thy selfe, and give thy gifts to another, Dan. 5. And therefore because the blessing of the six Levits upon mount Gerizim, will not moove them, I have made them to heare the cursing of six others upon mount Ebal: they take no pleasure in the beauty of Sion, and therefore I have feared them with the thundrings and lightnings of Sinai, and fed them with the bread of iudgement, as Ezechiel calleth it. I pray God it may worke effectually with them, and make them to shake off the burthen of their sinnes, and turne unto God with unfained conversion.
One other thing can I not conceale from you, as touching the wicked in hell, and that is, as they have sinned, so their paines shall be multiplied. Vpon the ungodly, God shall raine snares, fire, brimstone, storme and tempest, this shall bee their portion to drinke, Psal. 11. 7. The Prophet useth many words, wherof e^ery one seemeth more grievous then other, to teach us, that so much the greater shall be the iudgement of the damned, by how much the greater and more their sinnes be. For as they treasure up their sinnes, so God doth treasure up his wrath, Rom. 2. Not that there bee many hells, or many fires in hell, but that the iustice of God requireth, to measure out the grievousnesse of their punishment, according to the grievousnesse of their sinnes. Vt and ignem non dissimilem habeant, and tamen eosdem singulos dissimiliter exurat, that not having a divers fire, yet every one to be torme^ted diversly in the same fire. Greg. Even as wee feele in our bodies, when many stand together

in the Sunne, the Sunne hath power of them all alike, yet doe The more sin the damned committed, the more torment in hell. they not feele the like heate, but some feele it hotter then other some, every man according to the complexion and constitution of his body: Even so according to the quality of his sinnes, shall every man receive his punishment; therefore abate your sinnes, that God may abate your punishment. Nay, cast away all your workes of darkenesse, that yee may never come into the place of darkenesse, the Divels dungeon; where the worme dyeth not, where the fire goeth not out, but continuall weeping and gnashing of teeth, howling; yelling, and crying without ease of paine, or comfort of mind: that is, such endlesse misery, as the griefe thereof can neither be conceived of us, nor expressed of them that feele it.



THE FIVE AND TVVENTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XIV. XV. 

And Enoch, the seventh also from Adam, prophesied of such saying, Behold, the Lord commeth, etc.
Antiquity with Verity bring Authority to Doctrine.



HEre hee describeth the judgement of God at large* which is ready to hasten, nay to full upon these Epicures, and Hypocrites, and all proud swelling men, yea, and upon all ungodly persons whatsoever. For as the power of the Lord had her day in the creation of the World, and the mercy of God, her day in redemption of man, the little World, so the justice of God must have her day in the just punishment of the unjust and wicked of the world.
This text of judgement devides it selfe into foure branches.

1 That there shall bee a judgement.
2 That the Lord shall be the Iudge.
3 The manner of the judgement.
4 The end of it. To condemne all the ungodly of their evill deedes, and cruell speakings against God.

But first, he citeth his Author, and saith, that Enoch the seventh prophesied of such men, that is, of such Epicures, of such proud

swelling persons, and of such hypocrites. Enoch is named the seventh Though some Scripture bee lost, yet it is supplied in others, and is perfect from Adam: for Adam, Seth, Enos, Kenan, Mahalaleel, Iared lived before him, and dyed; onely he was taken up alive into Heaven, as was Elias in a firie chariot, Tanquam candidati resurrectionis, as the forerunners of the resurrection.
So that note here the antiquitie of the Prophesie of Enoch, which Iude citeth, to purchase authority unto the doctrine; antiquity joyned with verity is of great force: Quod primum, illud verum, quod posterius, illud falsum, whatsoever is first, that is true; what is later, that is false. Ieremy sendeth men to the old wayes, Stand in the way, saith he, and behold; aske for the old way, and walke Ier. 6. 16. therein, and ye shall finde rest unto your soules. Christ debating a question, sendeth them to Antiquity, saying, Ab initio non fuit sic, from Mat. 19. 8. the beginning it was not so: Ab initio non Papae, non Cardinales, etc. from the beginning no Popes, no Cardinals, no Patriarches, etc. therefore shall they not continue for ever, sed eradicabuntur, but shall be rooted out. So reasoned the Wise man for idols, saying; Wisd. 14. 12. cap. The inventing of Idols was the beginning of whoredom, and the finding of them, is the corruption of life: for they were not from the beginning, neither shall they continue for ever: Sed vetusta consuetudo sine veritate, vetustus Cypr. error: an old custome without truth, is but an old error.
The Papists, to warrant their traditions and unwritten verities, mightily urge the Prophesie of Enoch; but this prophesie is not counterfeit or (...), inscriptum quiddam, but wee must know, that much Scripture is lost, which we have not; which might bee when Antiochus and Maximine caused the bookes of the Law to bee burnt. We lacke many of Salomons workes, who wrote of all things, from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hysop on the 1 Reg 4. wall. In that God hath not given us the bookes of Nathan, of 1 Chro. 29. 2 Chro. 9. Gad, of Iado, of Shemaia, of Athia the Shilonite, of Iohn the sonne of Hanani, etc. It is not for that the Scriptures are unperfect, and to bee supplied with unwritten verities, but for some other causes best knowne to God. They say the Scriptures are unperfect, and therefore have added their unwritten traditions, which they call Apostolicall, unto the Scriptures, to make the totall rule of Faith, the Scriptures making but one part thereof, and their traditions another; as it appeareth by the late Trident Councell, and of Bellarmines exposition thereof. The Councell saith, Omnes libros veteris and novi Testamenti, necnon traditiones ipsas, Sess. 4. decret. 1. tum ad fidem, tum ad mores pertinentes, tanquam vel ore tenus a Christo, vel a Spiritu Sancto dictatas, and continua successione in Ecclesia Catholica conservatas, pari pietatis affectu and reverentia suscipit, ac veneratur Tridentina Synodus, that is, All the bookes of the old and new Testament, as also the traditions themselves, pertaining both to Faith and manners, as being either pronounced by the mouth of Christ, or delivered by the holy Ghost, and by continuall succession preserved in the Catholike Church, the Councell of Trent,

receiueth and honoreth with like, and equall affection of pietie The Papists hold the Scriptures insufficient without traditions. and reverence.
And Cardinall Bellarmine writeth thus; Asserimus in Scripturis non contineri expresse, totam doctrinam necessariam, sive de fide, sive de moribus, and proinde praeter Verbum Dei scriptum requiri, etiam Verbum Dei non scriptum, idest, divinas and Apostolicas traditiones; that is, Libro de verbo Dei non Script. cap. 3. We affirme, that in the Scripture is not contained expressely, all necessary doctrine, whether of faith or manners, and therefore beside the written Word of God, is required also the unwritten word of God, namely divine and Apostolicall traditions. And againe he saith, Scripturae sine traditionibus nec fuer unt simpliciter necessariae, necsufficientes, The Scriptures without traditions, were Ibid. cap. 4. neither simply necessary, nor yet sufficient. And againe, Dico Scripturam, etsi non sit facta praecipue, ut sit regula fidei, esse tamen regulam Ibid. cap. 12. fidei, non totalem, sed partialem; totalis enim regula fidei est Verbum Dei, sive revelatio Dei Ecclesiaefacta, quae dividitur in duas regulas partiales, scripturam; and traditiones; I say, that the Scripture, though it were not made especially, to be the rule of faith, yet it is the rule of faith, not in whole, but in part: For the whole rule of faith, is the Word of God, or the revelatio^ of God made unto the Church; which is devided into two partie-rules, Scripture, and traditions. Besides, they further alledge that the Church was 2249. yeeres before the Word written; but how shall that appeare that the Church then had not the written Word? Why, Moses citeth a booke called The warres of the Lord; and in Iosua, the booke of the iust is cited; and it may bee, that Noah, Abraham, Numb. ^. Ios. 10. and Isaac wrote those things, that did belong to those times. Iude also in this Epistle eiteth the booke of Enoch. Papists alledge that which is written in Ieremie, I will put my Lawes in their minds, and in their hearts will I write them: And they alledge the saying of Ier. 51. Paul, Yee are our Epistle, written not with inke, but with the Spirit of the living God. Nay, they say further, that the Apostles went beyond 2 Cor. 3. yond their Commission, when they did write the Scriptures, for they were commanded to preach, not to write. But the Apostle Mat. 28. 19. to the Hebrewes, while he doth write the doctrine of the new Covenant, alledgeth the forenamed sentence of Ieremy; and Paul had already written two Epistles to the Thessalonians, and the former Epistle also to the Corinthians; when as hee said, Tee are our Epistle witten, not with inke, etc. But as Carpocrates, Cerdo, Manes rejected the bookes of the Law, and Cerinthus all the Gospell, except Mathew; and Severianus, and Paulinus, the Epistles and Actes of the Apostles; so Papists doe accuse the whole Scripture of imperfection and ambiguity.
Paul being ready to finish his course, and to bid a farewell to the world, as appeareth in his second Epistle to Timothie, when as already the bookes of the New Testament were written, saith thus unto Timothie; The whole Scripture is given by inspiration, and is 2 Tim. 3. 16.

profitable to teach, to improve; to correct and instruct in righteousnesse: All things necessary to salvation contained in Scripture. where hee bringeth the whole Scripture unto foure heads; doctrine, redargution, correction, instruction: doctrine is occupied about the chiefe points of faith and religion; Redargution confuteth errours in faith and religion; instruction comprehendeth information of manners; correction is occupied in reproving and punishing delinquents. If the Word of God be a twoedged sword to wound the Divell: If it bee the hatchet to cut off the head of all hereticks: If the Word be mighty in operation, and entreth thorow even to the dividing asunder of the soule, and of the spirit, of the ioints, and of the marrow: If it bee a lanterne unto our fee^* and a light unto our paths: If Christ used no other weapon to repell the Divell, but the Word, saying; It is written: If Apollo confuted the Iewes openly, proving by the Scriptures Iesus to be Christ: If Christs proofes were, Scriptum est, and his demands, Quomodo legis? How read you? and his Apologies, Scrutamini Scripturas, search the Scriptures: certainly in the Scriptures is contained alone all things necessary to salvation. I will therefore conclude this point with the saying of Augustine; Neither will I alledge the Councell of Nice, neither shalt thou August. lib. 3. cap. 14. aduers. Maxim. alledge the Councell of Arimine against me, by the authority of the Scriptures: Let us weigh matter with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason.
There is no cause therfore why Papists should take the wings of the morning, and fly from the written Word unto unwritten verities; that the fathers of Colen should call the Scriptures A nose of waxe; that Pighius should tearme it, The Leaden rule of the Lesbian building; that other Papists should tearme it, A shipmans-hoase, A black Gospell, Inken divinity. If any will adde or Apoc. 22. detract from it, let the curse be pronounced upon him, and let all the people say, Amen. It is false, that we have the Baptisme of infants, the celebration of the Sunday, the distinction of the persons in the Trinity, the number of the bookes of the Scripture, by tradition, not by the written Word; God hath kept his law in the Arke, and all Popish Philistines could not keep the Arke 1 Sam. 5. Iohn 20. from us. These things are written, that yee may beleeve. Traditions are gathered of an evill egge: digge the Papists never so deep, they shall not find the myne nor spring of them in the Primitive Church; they labour to put life into a dead carcasse of them; but it will not be. Avant therefore, yee Anabaptists, with your revelations: Avant, yee Montanists, with your new comforter: Avant, yee Iewes, with your Cabal and Talmud: Avant, Trent Councell, and Papists, with your Traditions: our salvation is Christ; for There is no other name given unto men, whereby they shall be saved, save only by the name of Iesus: The way to salvation, is faith, the guide Act. 4. 12. to this way, is the Scripture. Hereupon saith Paul, Yee are no longer forenners and strangers, but Citizens with the Saints, and of the

houshold of God, and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and There is a foure-fold iudgement. Prophets, Iesus Christ himselfe being the chiefe corner stone. So much for the Author cited. Enoch the seventh from Adam.
Now to the thing prophesied, which is judgement, and therein, Ephes. 2. 19, 20. first we have to observe, that there shall be a iudgement. There is a fourefold judgement.
The first judgement was that, that was accomplished, of man and Angels at their first fall. The Angels that fell, were judged and throwne out of Heaven: Adam that fell, was judged and throwne out of Paradise. Gen. 3.
Secondly, There is a middle judgement, and so God judgeth the wicked, and the godly every day, Visiting ^^eir sinnes with Psal. the rod, and their offences with the scourge.
There is a third, a particular judgement, in the day of every mans death; of Lazarus, and good men to Heaven; of Dives, and bad men to Hell; and of this particular judgement, the Author Luk. 16. of the Epistle to the Hebrewes speaketh thus: It is appoynted for all men once to dye, and then commeth the Iudgement. Hebr. 9. 27.
Fourthly, there is generall judgement, of quicke and of dead, whereof Enoch prophesied here, saying, The Lord will come with thousands of his Saints, to give iudgement, etc. But some will say, Why should God judge man after death, since hee hath his judgement at his death? I answere, that in death wee have a particular judgement, but God will also have his generall Aug. judgement.
Secondly, In death we have the judgement of the soule: But God will judge both body and soule.
Thirdly, In death wee have a secret Doome: But God will have an open Assise, a publike Sessions, and a manifest Iudgement.
Concerning which generall Iudgement, I could produce a cloud of Scriptures to avouch it, both out of the old and new Testament: Ezechiel saith, An end is come, an end is come, it is looked for: Behold it is come. Moses also prophesied of this Iudgement, Deut. 32. and David, Psal. 50. and Salomon, Eccles. 11. 9. and Daniel, Cap. 7. 13. and Ioel, Cap. 3. and Malachy Cap. 4. So did Christ himselfe, Mat. 24. and Paul the Apostle of us Gentiles, 2. Thes. 5. and Peter 2. Pet. 3. and Iohn 9. Apoc. 20. Neither is this assurance of the judgement to come, warranted by the words of Gods servants onely, but the Lord hath left many workes of his own, to teach us, that hee will once at length for all, judge the whole World for sinne. The drowning of the old World, the burning of Sodom, the destruction of Ierusalem, were assured tokens that the Lord would not put up the infinite iniquities of the World, but will judge it, and punishit; the pleading of the Conscience foretelleth a judgement to come; the sentence of of death pronounced

in Paradise, and renewed with such terrour on mount The Lord Iesus Christ shall iudge. Sinai, did evidently assure us, that God meant to call men to judgement; the lesser judgements in this life are fore-runners to this great and last judgement; the dragging of men out of the World by death, is nothing else, but an Alarum to judgement. God hath promised that there shall be a judgement: I will contend with thee in iudgement, saith God. The nations shall see my iudgements, saith God. I will sit and iudge the people, saith God. Now all the promises of God, are Yea and Amen, so firmely ratified, that Heaven and Earth shall passe away, but his Word and promise shall not passe. The day and the night may faile in their courses; the Sunne and Moone may faile in their motions; the Earth may faile and totter upon her props; the Sea and Rivers may faile, and bee emptied of their waters, but the promises of God shall not faile. God promised a floud, and it came: Et qui verus erat in diluvio, cur non in iudicio? He that performed it in the one, why should he not performe it in the other?
The Iustice of God requireth that there shall be a judgement, Hic optimi pessime agunt; Here the best men are the worst used, and most wronged: Here Iezabel sits braving in a window, whilest Ieremy lies sticking in the mud. Here Dives sits in his palace, cloathed richly, faring daintily, while Lazarus lies at his gates naked and hungry: Here Herod will please Herodias, though it be with the head of Iohn the Baptist (Nonne visitabit haec?) shall not God visit and come to iudgement for these things? Certainly iudgement will come, and then downe go the wicked, and up the godly: horrour, hell and death shall be the doome of the wicked; heaven, ioy and life shall be the lot of the righteous. Thus yee see there shall be a Iudgement.
I will passe on to the next, Who shall be the Iudge in this Iudgement? The Lord, The Lord? saith Enoch, commeth with thousands of his Saints, to give iudgement, etc. And in that the Lord shall be our Iudge, there will be first, rectum iudicium, a right and true iudgement: for the Lord is true, and cannot faile either: Ignorantia legis, as not knowing the Law: For he gave the Law, and will iudge according to the Law: nor yet Ignorantia facti, as not seeing the fact; for his seven eyes goe thorow the World. Yee may interpret them, if yee will, seven thousand thousand eyes. Zach. 4.
Againe, if the Lord bee the Iudge, there will bee aequum iudicium, his Iudgement will be righteous and good; for Necerrat ipse, nec sustinet errantem, He can neither sinne himselfe, nor yet indure a wilfull sinner: wee cannot corrupt him, he hath no need of our goods.
But when he saith, The Lord shall be the Iudge and come to iudgement; yee shall understand, that this word Lord is taken sometime essentially; and then it signifieth all the three persons in the Trinity: and so it is taken in the Psalme, The Lord, even the most

mighty hath spoken, and called the round World, etc. And indeed in Christ shall iudge in his humanity. respect of authority, the whole Trinity shall be the Iudge: but sometime this word Lord is taken personally, and then it signifieth, the second person in the Trinity, as here in this my Text, The Lord shall come to Iudgement. For in respect of the execution of this iudgement, Christ alone shall iudge. And why Christ? And not the Father, and the Holy Ghost? First, because Saint Iohn tells us; The Father hath given all iudgement to the Sonne: Iohn 5. And as Saint Bernard expounds the words: non ut Filius suus, sed ut Filius Hominis: not as hee is the Sonne of God, but as hee is the Sonne of the blessed Virgin, borne in the world.
2. The Sonne iudgeth, and not the Father, because it best befitteth a King to iudge his owne subiects; and we are now the immediate subiects of the Sonne. Indeed in our creation wee were absolutely the subjects of God, but by rebelling against God, we became the slaves and vassals of the Divell, and not the subjects of God: yet now being redeemed from death, and from him that hath the power of death, the Divell: by the precious bloud of the Sonne of God, we are become the subjects of the Sonne, not that this is to be understood, Exclusive, as excluding from the worke of our redemption, the Father, and the Holy Ghost, sed Appretiative^, as the Schoolemen speake, but because the price of our redemption was paid by the Sonne, and not by the person of the Father, or Holy Ghost; and in that the Sonne did sustinere poenas, undergoe our punishment, et procurare praemia, purchase our reward; hee must dispensare praemia and poenas, both dispose of our punishment and reward.
But forasmuch as there be two natures in Christ; the Divine, and humane; it may be questioned in what forme or Nature hee shall iudge? Saint Augustine answereth, Eadem forma iudicabit te, qua sub Iudice s^etit pro te; In the same nature he shall iudge thee, wherein he stood before the Iudge for thee; he shall iudge us not as God, but as man; according to that in the Gospell, Yee shall see the Sonne of Man (not of God, but of Man) comming in the clouds of Heaven with power and great glory. Veniet qui Deus, non qua Deus, he that shall iudge us, is God, but he shall not iudge us, as he is God. Vrsinus in his Catechisme pag. 451. giveth three reasons of this; Quia per eum Mediatorem glorificanda est Ecclesia, per quem iustificata est; because the Church is to bee glorified by that Mediator, by which she was iustified. Secundo^, ob consolationem nostram, dum scimus illum fore Iudicem, qui redimit nos; est enim frater noster, and caro nostra. Secondly, for our comfort, to give us to understand that he shall bee our Iudge, which redeemed vs, and is our brother and our flesh. Tertio, propter iustitiam Dei, quia filium hominis contumelia affecerunt. Thirdly, for the Iustice of God, because the Sonne of Man hath beene much reproched with many contumelies

and slanders. If any man will object, that Christ saith, That Though Christ shall come in humanity, yet with power and great glory. he came not to iudge the World, but to save the World: I answere, that these words are not to be understood of his second, but of his first comming into the World: then indeed he came to save the World, but now to iudge the World; and he shall not iudge it as God, because that as Esay saith, Tollatur impius; The wicked must be taken away, that he may never see the glory of God; but Iohn 12. 47. as man, Vt homines videant, that men might see the Iudge of men. August. saith, Quamvis non recedat pater a filio, unum enim sunt, tamen ad iudicium veniet filius, non Pater: although the Father departeth not from the Sonne, (for they are one) yet the Sonne shall come to iudgement, and not the Father: Quia ibi nec Deitas Filij, nec Patris videbitur, for there neither the Deity of the Father, nor of the Sonne shall be seene.
The third thing to bee handled, is the manner of his comming to iudgement; it will be a most fearefull, yet a glorious comming; he will come with thousands of his Saints: For if other Benches be furnished with Iustices of Peace, Gods Bench shall bee furnished with Angels: Thousand thousands shall minister unto him, and tenne thousand thousand shall stand before him, and when hee shall thus come in his glory, fulminabit e Coelo, the Lord will thunder from Heauen; and the highest will give his voyce. Now if the thunder and and crackling of a cloud be so terrible; what terror shall there be, when hee shall thunder, that sitteth above the clouds? The thunder doth but demolish Mountaines, and roote up trees; but when God shall thunder out his judgements, hee will crush and cast downe King, Prince, and People, that have not made him their fortresse, and their tower. The thunder doth but shake the clouds, and make them to flye up and downe; as birds in the ayre: but when God shall thunder out his judgements, hee will shake and astonish the heart and conscience. Yet shall there bee then a great difference betwixt a good and a guilty conscience; for a good conscience shall bee moved, sed ut folium, but as a leafe, with a little winde and breath of Gods displeasure, but the guilty shall bee removed, as the foundations of the Earth are shaken with the full rigour of Gods wrath: For then, as Saint Ierome hath it, Terra tremet, mare mugiet, the Earth shall quake, the Sea roare, the Ayre ring, the World burne; And all this all becommeth as a fire-brand or burning coale.
O miserable sinner, how wilt thou tremble; when the Lord shall come with thousands of his Saints to judgement! and if the just and upright man Iob was afraid of this judgement, and therefore cryed out and said, Quid agam? quo me convertam, cum veniet Dominus ad iudicum? What shall I doe? or whither shall I turne Iob 31. 14. me, when the Lord commeth to judgement? If Blessed Hillary, who from the fourteenth yeere of his age, served the Lord in

feare, and rejoyced before him with trembling, as David did By the terror of particular iudgements, we may gather the generall. who was affraid of this day, as it appeareth by his speech upon his death-bed, Egredere anima, egredere, quid dubitas? quid times? Goe forth, O soule, go forth, why art thou afraid? why doubtest thou? thou hast served God these seventy yeeres, and art thou Psal. 14. afraid now to depart? If these holy men were afraid of this day, how oughtest thou, O sinner, which hast drunke iniquity like water, and hast not served thy God one day, as thou oughtest to doe? I say, how oughtest thou to quake and to tremble? If the iust shall scarce be saved, where shall the poore wretch appeare? then thou wilt cry to the Mountaines, Fallon us, and to the Hils, Cover us, hide us from the presence of the Lord, and from the wrath of the Lambe. For the great day of the Lords wrath is come, and who can abide it? but all will be in vaine.
If Zephanie spake so tragically, of the particular judgement of God by Nebuchadnezar, saying, The great day of the Lord, Zeph. 1. 14, 15. is come, a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heavinesse, a day of destruction and desolation, a day of obscurity and darkenesse, a day of cloudes and blackenesse, a day of the trumpet and alarme. If Ieremy spake sorrowfully, and lamentably of the particular judgement of God upon Ierusalem, saying, How is the gold become dimme? the most fine gold is changed, and the stones of the Sanctuary are scattered in the corner of Lament. 4. 1. 2, 4, 5, 10, 11. every streete. The noble men of Sion comparable to fine gold; how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers? the tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roofe of his mouth for thirst, and the young children aske bread, and no man breaketh unto them. They that did feed dilicately, perish in the streets, and they that were brought up in scarlet, imbrace the dung. The hands of the pittifull women have sodden their Children, which were their meate in the destruction of the daughter of my people. The Lord hath accomplished his indignation, he hath powred out his fierce wrath, he hath kindled a fire in Sion, which hath devoured the foundations thereof: what may be said of the generall judgement, when not one Citie, but all Cities shall bee destroyed? The reprobates shall see above them an angry Iudge, beneath them Hell fire, on the right hand their Sinnes accusing them, on the left hand the Divels tormenting them; within them, their gnawing conscience, without them, the damned spirits bewayling; on every side, the World burning: Vbi regredi impossibile, progredi intolerabile, where to goe backeward, it is impossible, and to goe forward intolerable.
The glorious manner of Christs comming is described by the Apostle; The Lord (saith hee) shall descend from Heaven with a shout, and with the voyce of the Archangell, and with the trumpet of God: then hee shall come, not with twelve poore Apostles, but with twelve thousand thousand Angels. Wel, the Lord shall come with thousands of his Angels: where note, that his second comming shal

not be like his first; At the first he came in poverty, now shall he In Christs humility, his glory appeared. come in glory; at the first he came in humility; now shall hee come in Majestie; at the first he came with the tongues of men, now shall he come with the voice of an Archangell and trumpe of God; At the first he came in misery, now shall he come in Mat. 24. Luk. 9. 58. Majesty; at the first he came with Glory be to God on high, now shall he come with vae, vae, vae, with a threefold woe upon them that dwell upon the face of the earth; At the first he came with tidings of great joy, that shall come upon all people, now shall he come with feare and trembling upon all the nations of the earth; At the first he came 1 Tim. 1. 17. Apoc. 1. 7. Apoc. 5. as a servant, now shall he come as a King; At the first he came as a prisoner, betweene two theeves, now shall he come as a Iudge. At the first he came as a Lambe, now shall he come as a Lion: Venit tunc salvare, nunc iudicare, he came then to save us, now he shall come to judge us.
And yet to speake fully, his first comming was not without glory; two contraries were conjoyned, Summa humilitas, and summa sublimitas, the deepest humility, and the highest sublimity: Aug. he lay among the beasts, yet praised of Angels which sung, Gloria in excelsis, Glory bee to God on high. What is hee; Luk 2. that is so base, and so glorious, so little, and so great: so poore, and so rich? poore in the flesh, poore in the manger, poore in the stable; but great, and rich, and glorious in heaven, whom the starres obey; great and glorious in the aire, Mat. 2. where the Angels sing; great and glorious in earth, for Herod and all Ierusalem were moved at the tidings of him. It is the greatest basenesse Luk 2. for God to bee conceived, and the greatest glory to bee conceived by the Holy Ghost; the greatest basenesse to be borne Esay 7. of a Woman, and the greatest glory to be borne of a Virgin; the greatest basenesse to be borne in a stable, and the greatest glory to shine in the Heavens; the greatest basenesse to deplore among beasts, and the greatest glory to be sung of Angels; the greatest basenesse, to be baptized among sinners, and the greatest glory to have the heavens open, the spirit to descend, and to heare the Father of heaven speaking from heaven, This is my beloved Sonne Mat. 3. 16. in whom I am well pleased: It is the greatest basenesse to suffer death upon the Crosse, and the greatest glory to rise againe from the dead: formosus erat in Coelis, formosus erat in terra, he was faire and beautifull in heaven, faire and beautifull in earth, faire and beautifull in his throne of glory, faire and beautifull in the manger, faire and beautifull among the Angels, faire and beautifull among the beasts: Quid facitis, o Magi, puerum ne adoratis? What doe yee, o yee Wise-men, doe yee worship the child? Is he not therefore a King? I but where is the Kings Court? Where is his Throne? Where the continuall resort and haunt of this Court? Is not his Court, the stable? his Throne, the Manger? They that resort and haunt this Court, the Oxe and the Asse?

Yet vndique formosus est, on every side he was faire and glorious. The Lords two Courts, one of Mercy, the other of Iustice. For when he spake, the sea was calme; when he commanded, the windes were whist; when he called, the dead did rise; and when he died, the Sunne was eclipsed; when he rose, the earth trembled; when he ascended, the heavens opened; so farre Augustine. Thus his first comming was not without glory, but his second shall be glorious indeed, He shall come in the glory of his Father, with Mat. 24. all the holy Angels.
One speaking of this comming of Christ to iudgement, saith, Posterior Christi adventus non erit mitis, sed terribilis, Christs latter comming shall not bee gentle, but terrible and fearefull: For measure me the greatnesse of one arme, by the quantity of another, the Iustice of God, by the mercy of God: If he was so mercifull in his first comming, as to take our flesh, and to suffer death upon the Crosse for us; and how iust? how severe will hee bee in his second comming to all those, that have either contemned or abused his mercy? Quam facilis fuit in primo adventu, Looke how facile, gentle and propice he was in his first comming; tam difficilis erit in secundo adventu, so hard, so uneasy to bee intreated will he be in his second comming: infinit in mercy, infinit in Iustice; ready to pardon, and ready to punish, God shall arise, and his enemies shall be scattered, they also that hate him, shall fly before him. As Psal. 88. 1, 2. the smoke vanisheth, so shalt thou drive them away, and as Wax melteth before the fire, so shall the wicked perish at the presence of God: And as the Prophet saith, God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, even the Lord of anger, the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth Nahum 1. 1, 2. wrath for his enemies: the Lord is slow to anger, but great in power, and will not surely cleere the wicked. As we treasure up our sinnes, so hee treasureth up his wrath; Indies crescunt peccata, indies crescit ira, our sinnes increase daily, and his wrath daily.
Bernard saith, that the Lord hath two Courts, the one of mercy, the other of iustice; the one in this life, the other in the life to come: when he shall come with thousands of his Saints to judgement. Here is forum miscricordiae, the Court of mercy: there shall be forum Iustitiae, the Court of Iustice, for there he will reward every man according to his Works. Augustine bringeth in Christ thus Rom. 2. 6. speaking at the last day; Ecce fabri Filium, quem irrisistis; Behold the Carpenters Sonne whom yee have derided: Ecce eum in quem non credidistis, Behold him, in whom yee have not beleeved; behold the wounds which yee have made in my hands and feet, behold the side which yee have pierced, behold the face which you have beraide with your spittle: Behold the glory that shall presse and overwhelme you, and the Majesty that shall breake and bruise you.
For our Iudge will iudge righteously and iustly; Hee will reward every man according to his worke: that is, to them, which by continuance Rom. 2. 6, 7. in well doing, seeke glory and honour, and immortality, eternall

life; but unto them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey Wee must meditate as well on the Iustice of God, as on his mercy. unrighteousnesse, shall be indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soule of every man that doth evill. And here note the blindnesse of the World, All men prate of mercy, but few talke of Iustice; like the Benjamites, we cast stones with one hand; like Iudg. 19. Mat. 26. Polipheme, we see but with one eye; with Malchus, wee heare but with one eare; like the Vnicorne we defend our selves with one horne from God; like the Amazones, many brethren give sucke to the Church, with one pap; delivering but one doctrine, namely that of mercy. But let me speake familiarly: If a fellon will not trust only on the mercy of the Iudge, at the Assise; Let us not deceive our selves against that great Assise day: Whatsoever Gal. 6, 7, 8. a man soweth, that shall he reape: for he that soweth to the flesh, shall of the flesh reape corruption; but he that soweth to the spirit, shall of the spirit reape life everlasting: In quo statu novissimus vitae dies relinquet, in eo resurrectionis primus dies inveniet: qualis in isto die quisque moritur, talis in die illo iudicabitur: In what estate or condition the last day shall leave thee, in the same, the first day of thy resurrection Augustine Hesichio Epistola 80. shall find thee: As every one dieth this day, so shall he be iudged in that day. And againe he saith, Potentia Dei est insuperabilis, Aug. lib. 4. de Symbolo. 1 Cor. 1. 25. Heb. 4. the power of God is insuperable; For the weakenesse of God is stronger then men: Eius scientia est infallibilis; his knowledge is infallible: For all things are naked, and before him: Eius iracundia est implacabilis, his anger is implacable; If his wrath be kindled, yea, but a little, Psal. 2. 12. blessed are all they that put their trust in him: Ejus justitia est inflexibilis, his Iustice is inflexible; For he is a God of Gods, and Lord of Lords; a great God, mighty and terrible, and regardeth no mans person: Contra ejus potentiam nil valebit tyrannorum crudelicas, against his power, the cruelty of tyrants shall nothing prevaile: neither against his knowledge shall the subtilty of Advocates prevaile; nor against his wrath shall simplicity of words prevaile, nor against his Iustice shall abundance of money prevaile: Nec gratia praeventura; nec misericordia flectetur, nec poenitentia mitigabitur; nec pecunia corrumpetur; he will neither be prevented by grace, nor moved with mercy, nor mitigated with repentance, nor corrupted with money.
Againe, how soever men flatter themselves now in this or that thing, that which we esteeme a vertue now, will be then in Gods sight an abomination; our wayes and judgements are not Gods ^udgements: Luk. 16. 15. Esay 55. 8. Pro. 1. 31. to follow our owne hearts, is with God a kind of whoredome. The very Heathen Orator could say, that similem lacte nutricis errorem suximus, we sucked in with our mothers milke alike error. Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire; The Ammonites burnt their children to Moloch; The Cananites sacrificed their children to Idols, Baal and Astaroth; every Vzziah will play the Levite; every Gedeon will have his Ephod; every Saul will have his sacrifice; Peter will plead to Christ his good meaning;

The Iacobites in Aethiopia circumcise their yong ones; The Indians All must come to Iudgement. worship Zemes, that are Divels: but when it commeth to the judgement of God, it is reversed: there is a writ of errour sued: Nadab perished, with fire from heaven; The Ammonites Levit. 10. cap. 20. Psal. 106. 2 Sam. 6. Iudg. 8. 1 Sam. 15. Mat. 16. 23. were accursed; The Cananites, were destroyed; Vzziah was striken; Gedeons posterity was plagued; Saul was deposed; Peter was called Divell; The Aethiopians foolish; The Indians blasphemers: wee have not our Quietus est, till God hath iudged us.
Againe, howsoever we slaunder the iudgements of God: yet are they just; Iudicia Dei saepe occulta, nunquam iniusta; Gods judgements are many times secret and hid, but never unjust: I say with Aug. Augustine; Cave praecipitium, take heed of a break-necke; The Iudgements of God are fite, come not too neere them, lest they burne thee; they are Abyssus, a bottomlesse pit, swimme not in them, lest they drowne thee; they are as a steep and high mountaine, clime not too high, lest thou come downe againe headlong: Paul durst not wade too farre in the cause of Election, Vis Rom. 11. 32, 33. disputare mecum? mirare mecum, o altitudo! Petrus negat, Latro credit, o altitudo: Wilt thou dispute with me? wonder with me, o depth! Peter denieth, the theese beleeveth, o depth! Secreta Dei sunt adoranda, non scrutanda; Gods secrets are to bee adored, not searched. Aug. Doe yee know these things? Happy are yee if yee doe them.
The end of his comming to iudgement is the next thing to bee considered; and that is, to judge all men; the mighty, the honorable, shall not escape in that day, neither shall they be able to defend thee; that in obeying them, thou hast desobeyed God: For let me see, if any Ruler, King or Keisar, shall come forth in that day, and say, I bad thee doe this; I gave thee my warrant to doe it. No, no, he shall be iudged himselfe. We shall all appeare before the Iudgement seate of Christ, that every man may receive the 2 Cor. 5. 10. things, that he hath done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or evill. No man can redeeme another mans soule. Let no Psal. 47. 7. man thinke to hide himselfe; yee know what counsell the wise man giveth you, Say not, I will hide my selfe from the Lord: for Eccles. 16. 17, 18. who will thinke upon me from above? I shall not be knowne in so great an heape of people: for what is my soule among such an infinite number of creatures? Behold, the heaven, and the heaven of heavens are for God: the depth, and the earth, and all that therein is shall bee moved when hee commeth to iudge. Thou shalt no more hide thy selfe, and go away without thy iudgement, than the guest at the wedding could go Mat. 22. Soph. 1. 14. unespied. The strong man shall then cry bitterly; many that now sit at the Bench, shall then stand at the barre, he is the Lord-Chiefe-Iustice of Heaven.
For every worke and word shall come to judgement: so saith Salomon, God will bring every worke unto iudgement, with every Eccles. 12. 14.

secret thing, whether it be good or evill. Nothing so secret, but shall God knoweth every sinne, therfore none can escape iudgement. be disclosed, neither hid, that shall not be known: for whatsoever hath been spoken in darknesse, it shall be heard in light, and that which yee have spoken in the eare, in secret places, shall bee preached on the houses openly, that all men may heare. Of every idle word wee must give an account. God is greater than our Luke 12. 2. 3. Mat. 12. 36. 1 Iohn 3. 20. hearts; hee beginneth where wee leave; hee remembreth that which wee have forgotten; his memorie is as himselfe is, infinite; he will set downe our sinnes in order and say, In such and such a place, and such a time, and upon such an occasion, hast thou committed this or that sinne. Vnto the wicked saith God, Why dost Psal. 50. 16, 18, 19, 20, 21. thou take my Covenant within thy mouth, and hatest to bee reformed? when thou sawest a theefe, thou consentedst unto him, and hast beene partaker with the adulterers, thou givest thy mouth to evill, and with thy tongue thou forgest deceit, thou sittest and speakest against thy brother, and slanderest thy mothers sonne. These things hast thou done, and I held my tongue, therefore thou thoughtest that I was like thee, but I will reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou hast done.
He calleth all the Starres by their name.
He numbreth our steps. Iob 26. 6. Iob 14. 16. Mat. 10. Mat. 10. 29. Psal. 56. 8. Psal. 50. Psal. 139.
He telleth the Sparrowes of the Ayre.
He counteth all the haires of our head.
Hee putteth all the teares of the afflicted into his bottle.
Hee knoweth the cattell upon a thousand mountaines.
All our members were written in his booke before we were borne.
Now if hee call the starres by their names, if hee number our steps, if hee tell the sparrowes, if hee count the haires of our head, if hee register the teares of the afflicted, if hee know all the cattell on the mountaines, if he wrote our members in his booke, long before wee were borne; then surely hee hath written all our sinnes in his booke, as is said by Ieremy, The sinne of Ier. 17. 1. Iudah is written with a penne of ^ron, and with a point of a Diamond graven upon the table of his heart.
Infinite are the sinnes of one yeere, of one moneth, of one weeke, yea of one day; how many vaine thoughts, idle words, ungodly workes passe from us in one day? David said, they passed the haires of his head: hee said, that hee could not number them. Job said, that wee drinke iniquity like water. Esay said, Wee draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sinne like cart ropes. Salomon saith, that the mouth of the wicked swalloweth iniquity. A thousand idle words, yea oaths wee utter in one day. Septi es in die cadit justus, the righteous sinneth seven times a day, that is, many times in a day: what by committing of evill, what by omitting of good: how often then in our whole life? and yet not one sin doth escape God. What is done in earth, is registred in heaven; in one moment, it is in Gods debt-booke. And herein is Gods omniscience,

herein differeth the knowledge of God, from that of Thoughts and words shall be iudged as well as workes. men and divels. Deus scit praesentia, praeterita and futura, God knoweth things past, present, and future; they know not things future: God onely knoweth the thoughts of our hearts, they onely our words and workes, not our thoughts.
Yea, every thought also shall bee judged. We say, Thought is free: but God shall arrest it, indite it, arraigne it, it shall hold up the hand at the barre of God; for the Law is spirituall, and bindeth as well the spirit as the body; so saith the Apostle, We know that the Law is spirituall, (so that it can judge the affections of Rom. 7. 14. Psal. 44. 21. the heart:) God knoweth the secrets of the heart. A true hand, and a true heart, a chast body, and a chast minde must goe together, else all is lost. O Ierusalem, wash thy heart from thy wickednesse, Ier. 4. 14. that thou maiest be saved: how long shall thy wicked thoughts remaine within thee? Not deedes, but thoughts must bee washed and cleansed.
As our deeds and thoughts, so our words shall be judged.
All the cruell speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken against God, shall come to iudgement, It will bee said here, that none are so mad as to speake against God. Yes, and men speake against God two wayes.
First, when they speake against any ordinance of God. 1
Secondly, when we speake against the servants of God. 2
Against the ordinance of God, as thus, Stephen charged the Iewes, that they resisted the holy Ghost; yet resisted they but his Act. 7. 51. 1 Cor. 10. 21. word. The Corinthians were said to provoke God for being present at Idols feasts. The Apostle charged the Iewes to rise up against the Lord Iesus, for that they resisted the preaching the doctrine of Act. 4. 27. Iesus.
Againe, men speake against God, when they speake against the servants of God, as thus, Christ codemneth Paul for persecuting Act. 9. 4. him, yet persecuted he but the Saints of Ierusalem. The people, in contemning Samuel, cast God away: So God told Samuel, 1 Sam. 8. 7. They have not cast thee away, but mee away. And well said said Gamaleel; that to strive against the Apostles, had beene to strive Act. 5. 39. against God. So Moses told Israel, Your murmurings are not against Exod. 16. 7, 8. us, but against the Lord.
But among all that speake against God, our swearers are the chiefe: The Prophet said, Hee was a man of polluted lips: but no Esay 6. lip more polluted than the swearers, they spue out their venim against God, spit him in the teeth, justle with him for his chaire, throw him into the channel, trample upon him with their filthy feet, making his name a tennise ball, a page, and waiting-man to their choller. Because of oaths the land shall mourne: and mens mouthes now are dyed red with oaths; they make no conscience to speake against God; many mens hearts be all earth, their stomakes all water, their braines all ayre, and their tongues all fire,

being set on fire of hell. Saint Ambrose telleth us of a dogge, that pulled Swearing and falshood came into the world together. out the throate of him that murdered his master. Shall a dogge doe this for him that giveth him a crust of bread; and shall not our wrath kindle against them, that have killed the Iam. 3. 6. Ambr. libr. 6. Hexam. Lord Iesus? Mens sinnes, mens oathes, mens blasphemies and perjuries have pierced him, and nailed him, and let out his heart blood: These were the nailes and speare that lanced him. Iudas, Pilate, Herod, could have done nothing unto him, if these our sinnes had not given them strength. One saith, that three members of the body are hardly governed; the heart, the reines, the Vinaldus libr. de cont. tongue. In the heart is vanity, in the reines is pleasure, in the tongue is falshood, perjury, blasphemy: He that can rule these three, is a persect man: So saith the Apostle, If a man sinne not in Iam. 3. 2, 3, 4. word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle all the body: behold, wee put bittes into the horses monthes, that they should obey us, and wee turne about all their body: behold also the ships, that though they be great, and are driven of sierce winds, yet are they turned about with avery small rudeer, wheresoever the governour listeth: Even so the tongue is a little member, and boasteth of great things; Behold how great a thing, a little fire kindleth: and the tongue is a fire, yea a World of wickednesse, etc. Better it is, that men should never speake, then to sweare and blaspheme, and so speake against God. Vita and mors est in potestate linguae, life and death is in the power of the tongue. Metalls are iudged by the sound, whether they be gold or brasse: A man is iudged by his speech, whether he be good or evill, if his words be brazen, his heart cannot be golden. Chrysostome noteth, that swearing came into the world, when all untrueth entred into the World, and all villany. In the first age men were beleeved on their word, but in the ages following they were scarce beleeved on their oath: lying brought swearing, swearing brought per jury into the world; Ex multis i^ramentis perventum est ^andem in pe^iu^ia, in multil^quio non deest, peceatum: From many oathes men Chrysost. came at last to perjury; and in much speaking there is sinne with much water there goeth some gravell; with much fire, some smoke; and with many words, some lies; as among many wounds, some skarres. Aquinas saith, that we must use an oath, as we use physicke; which is not used, but in necessity, in diseases: So an oath is to be used in necessity, when the trueth otherwise cannot appeare: Parce utenda medicina, parce iur amentum: A medicine Aquin. is to be used sparingly, and an oath sparingly: yet a number cannot talke, but they must sweare. As the girle said of Peter, Thou art of Galilee, for thy speech bewrayeth thee: So these Mat. 26. swearers, that thus speake against God, are of the Divell. By thy barking I know thee to bee a dog: by thy hissing, to bee a serpent; and by thy swearing, to bee a vile man. Shall I call that a sweet fountaine, that sendeth out nothing but brine, salt water and sulphurous? Shall I call that good earth, that yeldeth

nothing, but briers and brambles? And shall I call him a Christian, The generall Iudgement most certaine. that cannot speake five words, but one shall bee against God; one shall be an oath, by God, and by God? As she said; Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara: So call not these Christians; but beasts, monsters, Divels, as Christ called Iudas. These men Iohn 6. 70. (as S. Iohn said) have the hornes of the Lambe, but they speake like the dragon; they have a shew of religion, but they sweare like reprobates; they speake by the mouth of a greater beast, Apoc. 13. then themselves; These men are like belles, that hang in the steeple, but they are not seene, but heard: so these men though they be nor seene, they may be heard in the Ale houses and Tavernes; as men passe by, there they roare, and sweare, and speake against God, and count it a gentlemenly quality. In times past, Gentlemen were knowne by three properties, Learning, Armes, and Gentlenesse: but now by swearing, wantonnesse and taking of Tobacco. I speake not of all, God hath his number: Lord, how are men degenerated from that they have beene? What a Metamorphosis is in the world? Have men drunke of Circes cup, or are they changed with Hecuba, for railing at the siedge of Troy into dogges, that they barke thus against God? Well, they shall come to Iudgement one day, for this: Christ will come, and we expect it, To give iudgement against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds, that they have committed, and of all their cruell speakings, which ungodly sinners have spoken against. And Come Lord Iesus, come quickly. Apoc. 22.
One thing further let me observe unto you, that he saith, Behold, the Lord commeth with thousand of his Saints; to give iudgement against all men, etc. That hee speaketh in the present tense, not in the future tense; to note the certainty of his comming. So Esay Esay 9. said of Christ, Vnto us a Child is borne, yet was he not then borne, but five hundred yeeres at the least after. So Iohn spake; Ecce, venit Apoc. 1. 7. in nubibus, Behold, he commeth in the clouds; and yet hee is not come: but to note the trueth of his comming, he affirmeth that he commeth. The Apostle saith, That Faith overcommeth the World: and yet we are striving with the world, as yet wee are in the 1 Iohn 5. 1. mayne battell; as yet the plowers plough long furrowes on our backs; as yet we strive unto bloud; and yet he saith, We have overcome the world; because wee shall overcome it. The Shepheards said, that the words of the Angell were come to passe, yet had they Luk 2. 15. Rom. 3. Numb. 23. 19. not been a Bethelem: Let God be true, and all men liers: He is not a man that hee should lye, neither as the Sonne of man, that hee should repent: hath be said, and shall he not doe it? and hath he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? Heaven and earth shall passe, before one iot or tittle of his Luk 16, 17. Word shall passe. As for him that thinkes, that the Lord will never come to iudgement, nor that this body shall rise againe: Let him remember, that he who bringeth the Sunne out of his Chamber daily, who reneweth the dead hornes of the Moone, Psal. 19. Psal. 104.

every moneth, who dried up the sea in one night, who caused None so vile but sometime feareth iudgeme^t inwardly. Aarons withered rod in one night to beare ripe Almonds; who quickened Sara her dead wombe; who revived the dead corne in the ground, can raise againe this body; and howsoever the Exod. 14. Gen. 18. 1 Cor. 15. wicked seare up their consciences with a hot iron, yet I am perswaded, there is none so wicked, but sometime trembleth at the iudgement: That the Lord shall come with thousand of his Saints, to give Iudgement on all flesh, etc. None so riotous but sometime he saith, Esca ventri, and venter escis, Meate for the belly, and the belly, for 1 Cor. 6. 13. meate, but God shall destroy both it and them. None so covetous, but sometime saith, The rust of these things will be a witnesse against me. None so blasphemous, but at one time, or other, Iam. 5. 3. saith, The plague departeth not from the house of the swearer. None so adulterous, but saith, I may not make the Ecclus. 23. 12. members of Christ, the members of an harlot. I may not make the 1 Cor. 6. temple of God, the stable for the Divell. And to conclude, none so past all feare of God, but sometimes saith, This geare will not last alway; what shall become of me: when I stand before Gods iudgement seate? Foelix trembled, when he heard Paul preach of Iudgement; and Adrian the Emperour said at his death, Animula Act. 24. vagula, blandula, quo nunc vagaris? O my little wandring, tender soule, whither doest thou now goe? Thou wouldest not have the conscience of a damned creature, to gaine tenne thousand worlds, and to bee the Monarch of them for so many thousand yeers. Well, yee see, there shall be a Iudgement, yee see the person, that shall be our Iudge; The Lord; he shall come in his owne person to iudge us, and what a comfort will this be, that hee shall come for us, that went up to send the Comforter unto us?
Yee see the manner of his comming, with thousand of his Saints. The end of it, to rebuke all the ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all the cruell speakings that wicked sinners have spoken against.
And now to make some use of all this, that hath been spoken concerning this Iudgement: The use of it is triple.

1. For terrour.
2. For comfort.
3. For Instruction.

But first it serveth for terrour; it is a wonderfull terrible doctrine to the wicked: for how can it be, but terrible, when the Lord shall come with thousand of his Saints, to give iudgement against all men, and to rebuke, etc? their hearts shall faile them for feare. Luk 21. Apoc. 9. 6 They shall seeke death in those dayes; and shall not find it. This hath been their day, wherein so farre as they could, they have done their will: The next is the Lords day, wherein they must suffer his will; how can it be but terrible, when they shall see the Sonne of man in the clouds above, to condemne them? beneath, hell

mouth open ready to devoure them; before, the Divels haling No way for the wicked to escape Iudgement. them; behind them, the Saints, and all their dearest friends forsaking them; on their left hand their sinnes accusing them; on the right, Iustice threatning them; on all sides the world made a bone-fire, terrifying them; how can it be but terrible, when the hilles cannot hide them, nor the Mountaines cover them, from the presence of the Iudge? For hee is here, and there, and every where: If they mount and soare up to heaven, he is there; if they goe into hell, he is there too: So that pati intolerabile, latere impossibile, it is not possible to indure, nor possible to avoid the iudgement. How can it be but terrible, when God shall raine upon them, fire and brimstone, storme and tempest? This shall be their portion to drinke; when God shall powre even the vials of his wrath upon them, and they shall feele the masse of his displeasure. Here the wicked are iudged, that they may bee amended; but there their iudgement shall be, that they may be confounded; For there will be no place for repentance. If Foelix trembled, to heare tell of iudgement? What will poore Foelix doe, when he must feele Iudgement both in the sentence and execution? If Iohn and Daniel at the sight of a mild Angell, fell upon the earth as dead, Dan. 4. 8. Apoc. 1. 17. How shalt thou miserable sinner indure the presence of the terrible Iudge? If Haman could not abide the angry countenance of Assuerus, Hest. 7. 9. how shalt thou, o wicked man, iudure the angry countenance of this frowning Iudge? If Adam for the commission of one sinne, ranne from God in great feare, and hidde himselfe among the trees that were in the garden, Gen. 3. 8. whither shalt thou runne, o sinnefull Adamite, that hast committed as many sinnes, as starres in the sky, or sands by the sea? Imo horum numerus numero non clauditur ullo; Yea the number of them is not to be numbred. Whither, I say, wilt thou run, or where shalt thou hide thy selfe from this terrible Iudge? If the drowning of the old World, the burning of Sodom, the opening of the earth to swallow up Corah, etc. and such like the Iudgements have such horrour in them; who can expresse the horrour of this day? when many millions of wicked shall be turned into hell, with all the people that forget God? If it be such a shame to doe penance for one fault in one congregation, where men will pray for the offendour, what a shame will it be, when all our faults shall bee discovered before all the whole world, without all hope of pitty and help, and all workers of iniquity shall be cast alive into that lake, that burneth with fire and brimstone? Looke therefore to your selves, yee generation of Vipers, and wash your hands, and clense your hearts: For certainly the Iudge of all the world will doe right.
2. This doctrine of Iudgement serveth for comfort to all penitent Christians, they may lift up their heads, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious: For the Lord shall then come, and be glorified 2 Thess. 1. 10.

in his Saints, and made marvailous on them that beleeve. Hereupon The consideration of the general iudgement should instruct us. saith Augustine, Quare non gaudes, cum venerit iudicare te, qui venit iudicari propter te? Why dost thou not rejoyce, when he shall come to judge thee, that came to be judged for thee? hee hath beene thy advocate to pleade thy suites to God his Father, and certenly when hee comes to judgement, hee will not goe against his owne pleading? He is thy brother, and carries a most brotherly affection unto thee: and will he condemne his owne brother? He is thy head, and hath performed all the offices of an head unto thee: and can he then faile thee, when thou hast most need of him? hee died for us, to redeeme us, a people peculiar unto himselfe; and will he faile us in the last act of our redemption? Oh no, no, lift up your heads then, and in patience possesse your soules: What though hee bee terrible to the wicked? to thee hee will bee kind and mercifull: thou shalt not bee wronged by false witnesses, neither shalt thou bee iudged by common fame, or outward appearance. The Iudge will not be transported either by passion or spleene, nor will condemne thee, to satisfy the people, as Pilate did Iesus: and besides, nothing shall be remembred, but what good thou hast wrought and done; thy sinnes shall be cleane blotted out of remembrance; they shall bee buried in the heart of the earth, and drowned in the bottome of the sea; they shall never rise up to Iudgement against thee. Rejoice therefore, poore penitent, thou shalt find Christ a friend, no foe; a Iesus, no Iudge; a Saviour, no confounder: thou shalt find Heaven, and not Hell; Angels, not Divels; Gods right hand, not his left hand; everlasting life, and not everlasting death.
3. This doctrine of judgement serveth for instruction: First, it should restraine uncharitable censuring, and judging one another: Who art thou that judgest another mans servant? hee standeth or falleth to his master. Christ is the Lord of quicke and dead: Iudge therefore nothing before the time. If wee could consider, that we should every one give accompt to God himselfe, as Rom. 14. 12. wee should find worke enough, to looke to our owne score, and little leasure to forestall God in this matter of judging.
2. Are there matters of difference among us? Let the Saints judge them, and end them. God will bee contented to put his cause to them at the last day; For we know that the Saints shall judge 1 Cor. 6. 2. the World: and therefore why should we refuse their arbitrement?
3. It should order and moderate our sorrowes for our dead friends; We should not sorrow, as people without hope, seeing we beleeve, that all that sleepe in Iesus, God will bring with him, 1. Thess. 4. 13, 14, 17, 18. we shall meet together againe in that day, and ever live together with the Lord; and therefore wee should comfort one another with these words.
4. This summons to judgement gives a dreadfull warning, and

admonition to the world, even to all men every where to repent; We should prevent iudgement, by iudging our selves. in so much as God hath appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world with righteousnesse, by that Man whom he hath appointed: Act. 17. 31. Woe will bee unto us, if that day come upon us unawares, before we have made our peace, and humbled our selves before God, and by true repentance turne from sinne, to sanctity. It is an unspeable favour, that God shewes us, when he offers us this mercy, that if we judge our selves, we shall not be judged of the Lord in that day, 1 Cor. 11. 34. And it will on the other side kindle his wrath extremely, when having such grace offered, wee neglect it, and death, and judgement find our sinnes unremitted on Gods part, and unrepented of ours.
5. Seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, it should stirre us up to an holy conversation: So reasoneth S. Peter, Seeing that all those things must be dissolved, what manner persons ought we to be in holy conversation and godlinesse, looking for and hasting to the comming of the day of God, etc? 2. Pet. 3. 11, 12. We are Gods stewards, let us arme our selves, as they that must give accounts of their stewardship, and let us jmploy such talents, as God hath lent us, to Gods glory, and our neighbours good.
Lastly, since the day of Iudgement is the day of our full and finall Redemption; and since hee shall come as a theefe in the night, even the houre that we thinke not; Let us therefore watch and be ready, alwayes carefull and diligent, sighing and groning, longing and praying, hasting to, and looking for this glorious comming of our Lord and Saviour Christ to judgement.



THE SIXE AND TVVENTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XVI. 

These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their owne lusts, etc.
Many discontented with Gods dealing with them.



HEE proceedeth to describe the wicked, and that foure wayes.

1 By their Impatiencie.
2 By their Lusts.
3 By their Pride.
4 By their Flattery.

For they yeeld many sinnes, as Nilus yeeldeth many Crocodiles, and the Scorpion, many Serpents at one birth:
This impatiencie is two-fold, Against God, and against man.
And first for God, many are never content, but if they have one thing, they would have another, like the daughter of Caleb, when wee have pasture ground, wee must have arable, and when wee have that, we must have wood ground for fewell, and parkes for pleasure; like some Clergy men, that must have one benefice for corne ground, another for glebe land; like Aesops Lion, they must have the first, second, and third part; and except God give them the fourth part also, they will fall out with him, they will murmur, and as the Prophet speaketh, In the evening they will Psal. 59. 15. goe to and fro, and barke like dogs, and grinne, if they be not satisfied. Paul noteth this sinne in Israel, and applieth it to Corinth, and in them to all Churches, saying, Neither murmure ye, as some of them

murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer: but to see it plainly, Murmuring, the sinne of the Israelites. read Exod. 16. and there yee shall finde, that the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, in the wildernesse, and said, Oh that we had dyed by 1 Cor. 10. 10. Exod. 16. 2, 3, 4, 5. the hand of the Lord in the land of Aegypt, when we sate by the flesh-pots; when wee ate bread our bellies full! But Moses told them, That God heard their grudgings against them; and further said, At even shall the Lord give you flesh to eate, and in the morning your fill of bread; for the Lord (saith hee) hath heard the murmurings that yee murmure against him, etc. and so at even quailes came and covered the ground, and in the morning he rained Manna upon them.
Againe, God having given them bread and flesh, no sooner wanted they water, but they were as vile: Wherefore the people contended with Moses and said, Give us water, that wee may drinke; and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Wherefore hast thou brought us out of Aegypt, to kill us, and our children, and our cattell with thirst? Thus like dogges, except their mouthes were filled, they barked continually, like the Gangrene or the disease called the Woolfe, which gnaweth ever except it be fed: For no sooner had God delivered them out of Aegypt, but except he would deliver them from Pharaoh also, they would raile. Hereupon they said unto Moses: Hast thou brought us to dye in the Wildernesse, because there were no graves in Aegypt? Wherfore hast thou served us thus, to carry us out Exod. 14. 11, 12. of Aegypt? did not we tell thee this thing in Aegypt, saying, Let us bee at rest, that wee may serve the Aegyptians? for it had bin better for us to have served the Aegyptians, then that wee should dye in the wildernesse.
Thus they dealt with God for water at another time: Why have yee brought the Congregation of the Lord into this Wildernesse, Numb. 20. 4. 5. that both wee and our cattell should dye there? Wherefore now have yee made us to come up from Aegypt, to bring us to this miserable place, which is no place of seede, nor figges, nor vines, nor pomegranats? neither is there any water to drinke? Cyrill noteth upon the 6. of Iohn, Vers. 52. that this sinne of murmuring is hereditary to the Iewes; it was morbus haereditarius (like the stone) the Fathers conveyed it ever to their children, and this sinne like the heads of Hydra, drew many other sinnes after it, as disobedience, ingratitude, impatience, distrust, tempting of God, blasphemy; it was never alone.
The whole course of the sacred Scriptures crieth out against this sin, specially in men professing God, Do all things (saith the Apostle) Phil. 2. 14. without murmuring or reasoning: and Saint Peter, Be yee harborous one to another without murmuring: and Wisedome bids us, Beware 1 Pet. 4, 9. Sap. 1. 10. Gen. 4. 14. of murmuring. Cain murmured, and the Scripture noteth it as his sinne.
The Israelites were grievous murmurers.
Sometimes for their Labour.
Sometimes, for Drinke.
Exod. 5. 21. Cap. 16. 25. Cap. 17. 3. Sometimes, for Flesh, as ye heard before.

Sometimes in distrust, to obtaine the City so strongly The punishment of murmurers. walled.
Sometimes for feare to be killed of their enemies.
Sometimes for want of dainties, as figges, pomegranats, Num. 13. 3. Num. 14. 2. Cap. 16. 42. Cap. 20. 3. vines, etc.
Sometimes for that they were over-layed with Manna.
And for other like causes, upon which the holy Ghost setteth a brand of dislike, and so by their sinnes admonisheth us to beware. For this sinne never went unpunished.
There is murmuring for good done on the Sabbath day: For not washing before meate, for the oyntment that was powred upon Christ, and not rather sold, and given unto the poore; that widowes were neglected; that Mary did not helpe Martha, but sate and heard Christs words. But still observe, that all these were sinnefull and grievous unto God.
Miriam, Moses Sister, for murmuring was punished with Leprosie; and shee became a Leper white as snow. The labourers in Num. 12. 10. the vineyard, which came at the first houre, and bare the burthen and heat of the day, murmured at the master of the vineyard: because they received no more wages, tha^ they that came at the last houre; but ye know his answere, Friend, I doe thee no wrong: didst thou not agree Mat. 20. 13, 14, 15. with me for a penny? take that which is thine owne, and goe thy way. I will give to this last as much as to thee. Is it not lawfull for me to doe as I will with mine owne? Is thine eye evill, because I am good? etc. So the Pharises murmured against Christ, because hee did eate with Publicans, but hee reproved them. And in these last times the Gnostickes, Valentinians, Menander, Cerinthus, Elion, Marcion, and some others cease not to vomit out their poyson against the Sonne of God. But Ismael shall not alway grudge at Isaac; the Babylonians shall not alway repine at the songs of Sion; Arrius shall not ever barke at the Sonne of God; Macedonius shall not ever murmur against the holy Ghost; Ismael shall bee Gen. 21. Psal. 137. hurled out; the Babylonians dashed in pieces; Arrius voided his guts in secessu, in the common Iakes; Macedonius rotted in the earth. Such a plague Iohn noteth, saying, And the fourth Angell powred out his viall on the Sun, and it was given unto him to torment Apoc. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11. men with heat of fire, and men boyled in great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which hath power over these plagues; and they repented not, to give him glory. And the fifth Angell powred out his viall upon the throne of the beast, and his kingdome waxed darke, and they did gnaw their tongues for sorrow, and blasphemed the God of Heaven for their paines, and their sores, and repented not of their workes. Finely therefore answered Iob his wife, What, shall we receive good things at the hands of God, and not receive evill? Wee must say with Paul, Iob 2. 10. Novi saturari, novi esurire, I know to be full, and I know to hunger: Phil. 2. 12. for he that cannot beare all states, can beare no state; hee that cannot hunger without fainting, can hardly bee full, without

surfeting; hee that cannot beare adversity without murmuring, That is best that God allots, we ought therewith to be content. cannot beare prosperity without pride, and arrogancy; hee that is ashamed of a freese coate, will bee proud of a veluet coate; he that cannot beare a private life, if he were a ruler, would bee a Tyrant; he that cannot indure sicknesse, if hee had health, would bee a wanton. An ancient Father calleth murmurers, or a diaboli, the Divels mouth: but wee must doe all Irenaeus Phil. things without murmuring: we must be like ground that can indure all weather, raine, and drought; like shippes that can saile at all times, in a storme, and in a calme; like the stone in Thracia, that neither burneth in the fire, nor sinketh in the water. Felicity consisteth not in the things of this life; therefore we should not murmure for the want of them. Iob blesseth the name of God in his greatest afflictions, and murmureth not. Of the godly is often said, That the praises of God are ever in their mouthes: then not murmuring: Psal. 135. 21. Murmurers want Davids staffe so comfortable unto him, therefore we should avoid it. Seneca saith, Optimum est pati Psal. 23. 4. quod emendare non potes, and Deum, quo authore cuncta proveniunt, sine murmur atione comitare; It is best to suffer what thou canst not amend, and to follow God, (from whom) as from a fountaine, all things do come without murmuring. Some will have faire weather, some foule, some wet, some drie; if they have it not, they repine and murmure. Holcot commentarying upon the booke of Wisdome, hath many prety histories; and among many, he telleth us a tale of a Hermite, that having sowne pot-hearbes in his garden, desired faire weather, and foule weather, as he iudged to be best for his hearbes: and so had still granted of God, according to his request: but not one hearbe came up: whereupon hee thought, that there was a generall failing of hearbes in all places: till on a time walking to another Hermite, not farre off, hee saw with him a very excellent crop. Then he told him, what hee had begged, and obtained touching the weather, and what effect it had. Whereunto the other Hermite answered, Putabas tesapientiorem Deo, and ipse ostendit tibi fatuitatem tuam, etc. Thou diddest thinke thy selfe wiser then God, and hee hath shewed thee thy folly. I for my part never asked any other weather, then God should please to send. I would this old Hermite might teach many in these dayes, ever to rely upon God, and to take all things which he sendeth, thankefully without murmuring.
And the only way to represse this murmuring and repining against God; is first to consider the providence of God, ruling all things in heaven and in earth, and overswaying all creatures, that nothing falleth out without his will and pleasure, as our Saviour teacheth; Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of Mat. 10. 29, 30. them shall not fall on the ground without your Father? Feare yee not therefore, yee are of more valew then many sparrowes. For who giveth us our bodies? who cloatheth the Lillies, that Salomon in all his

glory was not like one of them? Who feedeth the yong Ravens, Earthly things will not discontent, it affection bee heavenly. that cry unto him? Who sustaineth the wicked, that are his enemies? Who provideth all things for man in the beginning, before he was made, and created? Is it not the Lord, whose all the beasts of the forrest are, and the cattell upon a thousand mountaines? Let us then never murmure, but rest upon Gods providence, and he will feed us, and cloath us, and care for us.
A second remedy to represse this murmuring, is to roote out all distrustfull cares, and to bee content with such things as wee Hebr. 13. have already, and to beare with patience, whatsoever the Lord sendeth. This mind was in Iacob, in his journey he did not desire silver and gold, house, or lands, but only a competent and a convenient living: If God will be with me, and keep me in my journey which I goe, and will give me bread to eate, and cloathes to put on, then shall the Gen. 28. 20. Lord be my God. So the Apostle teacheth; Godlinesse is great gaine, if a man be content with that he hath. And againe, I have learned in 1 Tim. 6. 6. Phil. 4. 11. whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content.
The last remedy to keep us from murmuring, is, to set our affections upon Heavenly things, and not upon earthly. If wee doe beleeve that God doth forbeare, and forgive us our sinnes, and not deale with us according to our deservings; if he sanctify us with his spirit, and make our bodies, temples of the Holy Ghost; if he turne us unto himselfe, working our conversion, which is as great a worke, as at the first to create us; we may bee well assured, that he will deliver our soules from death, and preserve us from famine: For if he spared not his owne Sonne, but hath given him Psal. 33. 19. Rom. 8. 32. Luk. 12. 32. for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us all things also? Murmure not then, for the want of outward things, which perish with their use: For it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdome. This is the way to represse murmuring; Yet men many times are murmurers; yea Gods children themselves sometime fall into this sinne: but this is to let us see our infirmity, and Gods mercy, not to excuse this sinne. True it is that Iob did passe the bounds Iob 3. 3, 4, 5. 11, 12. of patience, saying, Let the day perish, wherein I was borne, and the night wherein it was said, that a man child is conceived; let the day bee darkenesse: Let not God regard it from above, (that is, let it be put out of the number of dayes.) Neither let the light shine upon it, but let darkenesse and the shadow of death sustaine it, and let the clouds remaine upon it. Let them make it fearefull as a bitter day. Why died I not in the byrth? and why died I not, when I came out of the wombe? Why did the knees prevent me? and why did I sucke the brests? And so Ieremy, Cursed be the day wherein I was borne, and let not the day wherein my Ier. 20. 14, 15, 16. mother bare me, be blessed. Cursed be the man that shewed my father, saying, A man child is borne unto thee, and comforted him: and let that man be as the Cities, which the Lord hath overturned, and repented not, and let them he are the cry in the morning, and the shouting at noone day. The Ion. 4. 8. like may be said of Ionas; who wished in his heart to die; and said, It is

better to die then to live. And the same may also be said of Elias, It God never failes the faithfull. is enough, Lord, take away my life; I am no better then my Fathers. These are examples to make us beware, not to bee followed. In multis peccavimus omnes, in many things we sinne all, when the water is Iam. 3. troubled, it is not cleare, nor good to drinke of. When mens minds are troubled, their speeches are passionate and grievous; but God shall strengthen them, if they pertaine to him: premimur, sed non opprimimur, We are pressed, but not oppressed: wee 2 Cor. 4. 8. fall, but we rise againe. Let us chide our soules, as David did, Why art thou so heavy, o my soule? why art thou so disquieted within me? Waite Psal. 42. 14. on God; relent not, murmure not, though troubles bee long and great; dic animae tuae, Quid tumultuaris? say unto thy soule, Why doest thou make tumult? why doest thou fret and storme? Art thou hungry? God will feed thee, as he did Elias by Ravens, that brought him meate morning and evening. Art thou weake? God will strengthen thee, as he did Shamgar, with his Oxe goad. Art thou shut up close in prison? God will deliver thee, as hee did Peter; the brazen gates of their own accord shall open unto thee. Pharao may pursue Israel, but he shall be drowned in the red Sea; Ieroboam may stretch out his hand, but it shall wither: Abraham may lift up his hand, to smite Isaac, but Gods Angell shall stay him, and a ramme in a bush shall be present to bee sacrificed in the roome and stead of him: The Arrians may lie in waite for Ambrose, but he shall passe thorow the middest of them without hurt: A lion shall feed Macarius: A Hart shall bring meate to Aegidius: A wild Asse shall carry Haebaenus over the sea: A whale shall receive Ionas safely: The Duke of Savoy may besiege Geneva, sed providebit Deus (quoth Beza) God shall provide. Ne desis Deo in fide, and non deerit tibi in ope, Be not wanting to God in faith, and hee will not bee wanting unto thee in help. Trust thou in the Lord, and doe good, dwell in the land, and thou shalt bee fed assuredly, Psal. 137. 3, 4, 5. and delight thy selfe in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts desire: Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to passe. Sed hoc facile dictu, sed arduum factis: This is soone spoken, but not so soone done; few will in patience possesse their soules, scarce one of a thousand will beare his Crosse patiently without murmuring. Let us but want any corporall food, by and by wee breake out, What, meanes the Lord to kil us with famine? What greater sinners are we, then such, and such, that have the world at will? Would God hee would either amend these things, or make an end of us: who can endure such an hard time? better to dye any way, then to dye of Famine. But away with this murmuring; and let us rely upon God, and say with Iob, Though hee killme, yet will I put my trust in him.
There is murmuring also against man, grudging either at their wealth, or at their love and favour, or at the credit and preferment, wherein they goe before other men. So the Pharises

murmured against Iesus, and against his Disciples, because the One man repines ordinarily against another. people followed them: and thus the Grecians murmured against the Disciples of Christ, because their widowes were neglected in their daily ministring; a fault whether more bad, or common Act. 6. 1. among us, it is hard to say: For what more ordinary among men than murmuring? If he be our superiour in wealth, or in honour, or in credit, wee murmure against him, as too great to dwell so neere us; and if he bee our equall, wee grudge that hee should thrive and prosper aswell as wee; if he be our inferiour, wee disdaine him. Thus among all sorts there is murmuring: so that whereas all things should bee done without murmuring, nothing is done without murmuring: one man repines against another: We say, as Peter said, Lord, what shall this man doe? We grudge like the men of the vineyard: Nemo sua sorte contentus: Iohn 21, 21. Mat. 21. No man resteth contented with his lot. It was wont to be a proverbe, Homo homini Deus, One man is a God unto another; but now, Homo homini Daemon, One man is a Divell to another; to repine, disdaine and hurt another: yet are wee commanded to bee patient, and to settle our hearts, not to grudge one against another, Iam. 5. 8, 9. lest we be condemned. The people murmure against their teachers, as Israel did; For they gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron, saying, Yee take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation Numb. 6. 16, 3, 13, 14, 32. is holy, every one of them: and the Lord is among them, wherefore doe yee lift up your selves above the congregation of the Lord? Is it a small thing, that thou hast brought us out of a land that floweth with milke and honey, to kill us in the Wildernesse, except thou make thy selfe Lord and ruler over us also? Also thou hast not brought us into a land, that floweth with milke and hony, neither given us inheritance of fields and vineyards, etc. But yet know their end, The earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, with their families, and all the men that were with Corah. Against these kindes of murmurers Saint Gregory hath a good saying, in his moralls, Qui contra suprapositam fibi potestatem Murmurat, liquet, quod illum redarguit qui eandem potestatem dedit; Who so murmureth against authority set over him; it is manifest he reproveth him, that gave him the same authority: and upon the seventh Psalme, murmurantes dicuntur intrare in judicium cum Deo, Murmurers are said to enter into judgement with God. They are like, saith another, to a filthy swine, who whether he wake, or sleep, is alwayes grunting: Murmur atores similes sunt versantibus in gyrum, donec capite and sensibus perturbati, caetera omnia perturbari putant: Murmurers are such as turne round about, till their heads and senses being turned, they imagine all Pythag. things to turne round. Sed noli versus quenquam murmurare, est enim abjectorum, be not thou a murmurer against any man, for it is a base thing, and a quality of a base person; yet men will be murmuring against Governours, as Corah against Moses: but let his fearefull punishment make us to fly murmuring, as a sinne odious to God and man.

Many againe that are Governours, repine at the people, calling Our mutuall wants should make us not repine. them cursed men, rude men, as the Pharisees did. So Harding calleth them swine, that treade pearles under their feete. Staphilus calleth them dogges, unto whom we must not give holy things. Hosius calleth them bestiam multorum capitum, a beast of Iohn 7. 49. Mat. 7. many heads, who are not to meddle with sacred things.
The Subjects repine against their Rulers, and call them Tyrants, Oppressours; as the tenne Tribes did: the rulers make small accompt of their people, and use them as vassals, and peasants, 1 Reg. 12. 16. as Rehoboam did. The poore envy the rich, and say, These Churles eate up all, they have all, no man can have an acre of 1 Reg, 12. 10. land for them: their throats are never full. Thus beganne the rebellion in Kent in the dayes of Richard the second, and Henry the sixth: When under Wat Tyler, and Iacke Cade, they beheaded all Lawyers, and learned men: they fired the Savoy, they beheaded the Archbishop of Canterbury, and put the King in great danger at Mile-end Greene. Thus beganne the rebellion of Ket in Norff. in casting downe inclosures. The rich on the other side, call the poore, Mice, Snakes, Vermine, unprofitable men; as Hatto Bishop of Mentz did, who burned a barne full of poore folke, calling them Mice, and afterward was eaten of Rats in a towne built on the Sea, called to this day Rats Tower. To conclude, all men for the most part are malecontented, as Nazianzene said, Miles dux erit, the souldier will be a Captaine, Ovis pastoris mu^^s vendicat, the sheepe challengeth the sheap-heards office; Pes caput fieri contendit, the foot striveth to be the head, Optat Ephippiam bos, optat arare Caballus, the Oxe wisheth to beare the saddle, and the Horse to goe to plough; the Merchant repineth against the Lawyer, and the Lawyer against the Merchant; the Till-man against the Souldier, and the Souldier against the Tilman. But if all were Merchants, where were Lawyers? if all were an eye, where were the hearing? one have need of another, the rich of the poore, and the poore of the rich; they of the 1 Cor. 12. 19. poore in respect of their worke, and the poore have need of them, in respect of their money: How should the rich doe their worke, if there were no poore? and how should the poore be releeved, if there were no rich? Pretty is the Fable of the Lion, delivered out of the snare by the gnawing of the Mouse: For the greatest needeth the helpe of the basest, and the rich of the poorest. Away therefore with murmuring, and all evill speaking, for a man is knowne by his speech, as metall is by his sound; and no glasse sheweth more plainely the spots of the face, than the tongue will shew the spots of the heart.
Secondly, Hee describeth the wicked by their lusts: They walke after their owne lusts: sunt carnis mancipia and servi voluptatum, they are the slaves of the' flesh, and servants of pleasures; they walke at randome, neither fearing God, nor reverencing man,

like the unrighteous Iudge: they doe not, as they are injoyned The flesh must be subiect to the Spirit. by the Apostle, Put on the Lord Iesus, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it: but they are all for the flesh, nothing for the Spirit; explent libidinem, they deny the flesh nothing that it would have. Here beginneth all mischiefe, that we leave the Luk. 18. Rom. 13, 14. ordinance of God, and are ruled by our lusts; the Word of God, not our owne will should rule us: Wherewith shall a yong man redresse his way? Bytaking heed thereto, according to thy Word. We must Psal. 119. 9. frame our lives to Gods Word, and not walke after our owne lusts. It is true in yong and old, and in all men; Verbum, ut Sara: voluntas, Gen. 21. ut Hagar; the word must be as Sara, the will like Hagar: if Hagar be disobedient, froward, stubborne, sullen, selfe-willed; Let Sara correct and chastice her, that the handmaid may not bee proud, and of a lofty and hawty stomacke against her mistrisse. So the flesh, if it rebell against the Spirit; snibbe her, punish her, chastice and tame her. And for the taming of the flesh, God hath taken divers excellent courses: first, he hath laid a necessity of mortality upon it; All flesh is grasse. Secondly, he hath enacted terrible decrees against such as walke after the flesh. Thirdly, hee hath placed the spirit within us, to lust against the flesh. Lastly, he hath delivered us many rules, wherby wee may subdue the flesh, as when he telleth us; First, that we must be sober: sober in our diet, sober in our apparell, sober in our recreations. Secondly, that wee must mortify the flesh by godly sorrow: And thirdly, We must put no confidence in the flesh. The flesh is one of the three great enemies of God, and mans salvation, it is a treacherous, domesticall enemy, and not only so, but also a tyrannicall enemy; it will not be pleased except it raigne; a most secret enemy, for she sits at the fountaine, and poy soneth all; she lets in the Divell, and suffers him to set up his holds and fortifications in us, and is never quiet, till it bring the soule into actuall high treason against God; snibbe her, punish her, chastise her, tame her; therefore lead all thy thoughts into captivity, and bring them to the obedience of Christ. The Iewes would not listen to the Prophets, but walked after their owne fleshly 2 Cor. 10. lusts; and therefore saith God unto his Prophet, Speake thou now unto the men of Iudah, and to the Inhabitants of Ierusalem, saying; Ier. 18. 11, 12. Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I prepare a plague for you, and purpose a thing against you, returne you therefore every one from his evill way, and make your wayes and your works good. But they said desperately, (as men that had no remorse, but were altogether bent to rebellion, and to walke after their fleshly lusts) Surely we will walke after our owne imaginations, and doe every man after the stubbornesse of his own wicked heart. This is our case, thus wee say; Let them teach, let them preach their bellies full, it is but one Doctours opinion. The Iewes for all Ezechiel, followed their covetousnesse; They come unto you (saith God) as a people useth to come; and my people sit before

thee, and heare thy words; but they will not doe them: for with their Bad thoughts must be banished. mouthes they make iests, and their heart goeth after their covetousnesse: and lo, thou art unto them as a iesting song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can sing well: for they heare thy words, but do them not. This English people, in the like sort giveth us the hearing, but not the doing: they are covetous still, bribers, oppressours, usurers, and still they follow their lusts, etc. Quid odit Deus nisi propriam voluntatem? What doth God hate, but our owne proper will? What doth God punish, but our will? Let thy will cease, and Hell shall cease; Non erit tibi infernus, Thou shalt feele no hell: for if thou turne away thy foote from the Sabbath, from doing thy will, refraine from wicked workes, and honour thy God, not doing thine owne wayes, nor seeking thine owne will, nor speaking a vaine word, I will cause thee to mount upon th^ high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Iacob, etc.
The heart is warily to be kept from two things, A vanis cogitationibus, and inordinatis affectibus, from vaine cogitations and inordinate affections, or wandr^ng lusts: From these two let thy heart bee free, wherein the Spirit dwelleth. As Painters use to blanch, and make white their tables, wherein they doe paint, and to draw out the shape and forme of any thing: so make thou cleane, and expunge the tables of thy soule, thy understanding and will, as touching thy desires and lusts; that is, as touching thy thoughts and cogitations; that the finger of God, that is, the Holy Ghost may paint good things in thy heart. The heart of the evill is as an high-way continually trampled upon, worne with their affections, by the instigation of Satan: For what affection doe the wicked represse? What lust doe they resist? What did they ever deny the flesh that it longed for, or desired? God may now complaine of us, as hee did of his owne people; Wherefore is this people of Ierusalem turned backe with a perpetuall rebellion? they gave themselves to deceit, and would not returne: I harkened Ier. 8. 5, 6. and heard, but none spake aright, none repented him of his wickednesse, saying, What have I done? every one turned to his race, as the horse rusheth into the battell, drawing iniquity with cordes of vanity, and sinne like Esay. 5. 18. cart-ropes; they use allurements, occasions, and excuses to harden their hearts in sinne: and as the Apostle speaketh, They are past feeling, and have given themselves to wantonnesse, to worke all uncleannesse Ephes. 4. 19. with greedinesse. The malicious pursue their revenge, the drunkard his cups; the whoremonger his pleasures, the covetous their gaine: Sed aequum est, ut qui nunquam voluit carere vitio, nunquam careret supplicio; It is meete and right, that he that would never want sinne, should never want punishment, but that God should raine upon them snares, and fire, and brimstone, storme, and tempest evermore. To these men it shall be said, as unto Babylon, Reward her, even as she rewarded you, and give her double, according Psal. 11. Apoc. 18. 8. to her workes: and in the c^p that shee hath filled to you, fill her

the double, in asmuch as she glorified her selfe, and lived in pleasure, so The Word of God the chiefest meanes to restraine lusts. much give you to her torment and sorrow. Cor vero bonorum est ut hortus conclusus, the heart of good men, is as a garden shut up, and as a fountain sealed, whereof no man must taste, no man must drinke Cant. 3. 7. but God; as the bed of Salomon, that had threescore strong men round about it, of the valiant men of Israel; but the heart of the wicked is as a vessell withour a cover, ad accipiendam omnem spurcitiem, to receave all filthinesse, all uncleannesse, as Paul speaketh of the Gentiles; They kept not their vessels in holinesse, but in the lust of concupiscence; 1 Thess. 4. 5. It intertaineth any sin whatsoever. Againe, Let thy heart be free and at liberty from affections: there is nothing that troubleth and disquieteth the heart so much as our naturall affections and passions; as are love, and hatred; joy, and sorrow; hope, and feare; anger, and desire, etc. These are the winds which vehemently tosse and trouble this sea; these are the clouds which darken this Heaven; these are the weights, which doe depresse the spirit: Let us therefore cast away every thing that presseth downe, Hebr. 12. 1. and the sinne that hangeth on so fast. As our bodily eyes cannot behold the Sunne, and the starres in cloudy and darke weather: so our spirituall eyes, the eyes of our soule cannot see God, nor heaven the seate of God, when they are obscured and darkened with the clouds of lusts and passions. As in a cleere and pure water, all things are seene, even unto the least sand, which in a troubled foule water cannot bee: so the soule is blind and seeth not, when passions and lusts obscure her. Beware therefore, lest the two wings of thy soule, understanding and will, bee not defiled with the bird-lime of earthly things, that is to say, wicked affections: Rule therefore thine affections by the Word of God; Let this Word be a lanterne unto thy feet, and a light unto thy pathes: For Psal. 119. 105. of our selves we are but darkenesse, and cannot see, except we bee lightened with Gods Word: Refraena naturam in his, quae verbo Dei prohibentur, Bridle, and restraine nature in those things that are forbidden in the Word. O Ierusalem (saith God) wash thy heart from wickednesse, that thou maiest be saved: how long shall thy wicked Ier. 4. 14. thoughts remaine within thee? A naturall man through sinne is like the man that travelled from Ierusalem to Iericho, and fell among theeves, and was robbed of his rayment, wounded, etc. So the Luk. 10. naturall man is spoyled of all his goods of grace, wounded in all the goods of nature; his understanding is blinded, his will is weake, his memory wandring, his imagination restlesse, his appetite rebellious, his senses curious, his flesh inclined to all filthinesse. What good is to be expected of an Infant, sitting upon an untamed horse, holding weake reines in his hand in an hilly way full of breaknecks? In the same state and condition abideth man, destitute of the grace of the Spirit, and of the Word of God; his appetite is as an untamed horse; his reason, which should rule his appetite is weake, and the world is full of breake-necks

and snares: how miserable therfore is our nature, which is carried Lust stirreth to all sinnes. head long into wrath, envy, pride, covetousnes, whoredome, and all uncleannesse? Our owne will doth oppugne and fight against God, spoileth Paradise, enricheth hell, evacuateth the blood of Christ, subjects the world unto the Divell; in this part of the soule is the shop of sinne, out of which Satan draweth all his sorce, and armour to wound us: this is the vineyard in which we ought to labour; in this garden, let us alwayes walke, having the hooke in our hand, whereby we may cut off all these noisome Mat. 20. plants, if they happen to increase and grow: Thy will saith, Vlciscere, invide, extolle teipsum: Revenge, envy, extoll thy selfe: noli pacem quaerere, seeke not peace, iura, periura, ede, bibe, lude, sweare, forsweare, eate, drinke, play. But let the Word of God rule thee: Put off the old man which is corrupt, with his deceiuable lusts, and put Ephes. 4. 23. on the new man, which after God is shapen in righteousnesse and true holynesse. Mortify your earthly members, fornication, uncleanesse, unnaturall lusts and covetousnesse, which is Idolatry: crucify the flesh with the affections Col. 3. 3. Gal. 5. 24. and lusts; The Fowler knoweth with what lure to take hawkes; the fisher knoweth with what baite to catch the fishes; and the Divell knoweth to what sinnes and vices we incline, and leane unto; and thither he carrieth us headlong, whither our lusts carry us. Vince ergo libidinem, and vicisti diabolum: Vanquish thy lusts, and thou hast vanquished the Divell. Herupon saith Iohn, I write unto you yong men, because yee are strong, and the Word of God 1 Iohn 2. 14. abideth in you, and yee have overcome the wicked. Such yong men God send us many; they shall be like little David to overthrow Goliah; like the three Worthies, that brake thorow the hoast of the Philistines; like Gedeons pitcher, that drave backe the Madianites. Fraena libidinem, aliter ingratus es: Bridle thy lusts, otherwise thou art unthankefull to God, which hath given thee so many weapons; dedit legem per quam vivis, hee hath given thee his Law, by which thou livest; he hath given grace, to performe it; he hath given Doctours to instruct us; he hath given Sacraments to increase our faith; hee hath given inspirations by his Spirit. Doe not therefore quench them; he hath given us himselfe: give then therefore thy selfe, and offer thy body and soule a quicke, an holy, and acceptable sacrifice unto him; and walke not after thine owne lusts; For lust is the mother of all wickednesse, if it bee not betimes killed in the conception. The Apostle shewes, that lust will bee quickly enticed; and being inticed, it will conceive; and being conceived, it will bring forth the birth of some notable evill action; and when it is gone so farre, like an impudent beldame, it will egge on still to the finishing of sinne, that so it may bring us to death and destruction.
But it will be said, that the best men have their lusts, and sometimes follow them. It is true: so the brightest fire hath some smoake, the soundest oake his sap; the purest gold, his

drosse; the fairest body, his fleame, choller, and excrements: yet is Lust brings* forth sinne, and sinne destruction. there difference between all smoake, and some smoake: all drosse, and some drosse; all evill, and some evill: the evill are notably evill; For as they regard not to know God, even so God delivereth them up to a reprobate minde, to doe those things which are not convenient; being Rom. 1. 28, 29. full of all unrighteousnes, fornication, wickednesse, covetousnesse, maliciousnesse, full of envy, of murther, of debate, of deceit, etc. but good men, they are evill onely in part, the spirit of Sanctification is sometimes interrupted in the regenerate, but never quite abolished; while lusts beare sway in the heart, it is hindred, but not extinguished: For the seede of God abideth in them: even as madnesse 1 Iohn 3. interrupteth reason, (sunt enim lucida intervalla) as drunkennesse doth not take away the minde it selfe, but the use of the minde for a time: so doth our lusts; yet wee returne, as David 1 Sam. 12. Iohn 21. to his chastity, as Peter to the confession of Christ; for he which thrice together denied him, thrice together did confesse him; as he fell, he rose, he fell thrice together, and thrice together rose againe. The Iebusite did dwell in Ierusalem, but he did not dominiere, nor rule in Ierusalme; So lust dwelleth in the godly, but it raigneth not in them. He that wanteth all affections, is either Rom. 6* a God, or a stone; and hee that obeyeth all, is either damned, or a Divell: cut them off therefore: though they be as an eye, or an hand unto thee, yet plucke out that eye, smite off that hand, Mat. 18. that thou mayest enter into Heaven: come unto Christ, that hee may ease thee of the burthen of thine affections. Mundus clamat, Ego deficiam te, the World cryeth, I will faile thee, For the World passeth away, and the lusts thereof: Caro clamat, Ego inficiam 1 Iohn 2. 17. te: the flesh cryeth, I will infect thee: Fulfill not therefore the lusts of the flesh: diabolus clamat, Ego decipiam te, the Divell cryeth, I will Gal. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 5. deceive thee: For hee goeth about like a roaring Lion, seeking not onely to deceive, but to devoure: At Christus clamat, Ego reficiam te, but Christ cryeth, I will refresh thee; Come to mee, all that travell, Mat. 11. 29. and are heavy loden, and I will refresh you. Vtrum sequi sequi vis? Whether of these wilt thou follow? the World failing, the flesh infecting, or the Divell deceiving, or Christ refreshing? Satan requireth no more of thee, but to follow thy lusts: Sequere carnem, and ducet te adinteritum: Follow the flesh, and it will lead thee to destruction: For if yee live after the flesh, yee shall dye. Now to live Rom. 8. 13. after the flesh, is to commit the workes of the flesh, and the Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. workes of the flesh are, first, Adultery; secondly, Fornication; thirdly, Vncleanenesse; fourthly, Wantonnesse; fifthly, Idolatrie; sixthly, Witch-craft; seventhly, Hatred; eighthly, Debate; ninthly, Emulations; tenthly, Wrath; eleventhly, Contentions; twelfthly, Seditions; thirteenthly, Here sies; fourteenthly, Envy; fifteenthly, Murders; sixteenthly, Drunkennesse; last of all, Gluttony; and they that doe these things, shall not inherit the Kingdome of God. Divide the World into an

hundred parts, and scarce one is Christian; and among a hundred Lust promiseth pleasure, but brings damnation. that are called Christians, scarce one can say with Paul, Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sinne? The flesh speaketh guilefully to the Spirit, that hath left her with her lusts, as Laban did to Iacob, to cause him to retire, and goe Rom. 7. 24. home againe with him; so saith the flesh to the spirit, and body, I would have filled thine eyes with goodly sights, thine eares with sweete musicke, thy palat with dainty dishes, thy appetite with all lusts and pleasures. So Augustine bringeth in his affections, lusts, and concupiscences thus speaking unto him and crying, Dimittes ne nos nunc? Wilt thou leave us now, and shall we not be with thee for ever? The flesh fighteth against the spirit; herein it resembleth Eva, alluring Adam to the forbidden fruit; like Gal. 5. 16. Gen. 3. Gen. 39. Iudg. 4. Iudg. 16. Putiphars wife, solliciting Ioseph to all filthinesse; like Iael, who slew Sisera, under the shew of love; like Dalila, who delivered Samson sleeping in her lap, into the hands of the Philistians: Sed opera carnis damnabilia, the workes of the flesh are damnable. Gal. 5. ^2. If wee live after the flesh, wee shall dye. Seneca, a Gentile could say, Major sum, and ad majora natus; quam ut carnis mancipium fiam, I am greater, and borne to greater things, than to bee a slave unto the flesh. So must a Christian say, I am borne to greater things, than to serve the flesh, which yeeldeth nothing but corruption: For hee that soweth in the flesh, shall of the flesh reape corruption. I Gal. 6. 8. Gen. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Ephes. 4. 1 Cor. 10. 3. Phil. 3. 21. am created after Gods image, redeemed with his Bloud, sanctified by his Spirit, instructed by his Word, fed by his Sacraments, appointed to be glorified, that I may live to God here, and in Heaven hereafter. What man having two servants, the one wise, the other foolish, wold have the foole to over-rule the wiseman? So we let the flesh over-ruel the Spirit. Our lusts are as fire unquenchable, as a devouring beast that is not satisfied: as the horse-leech, which sucketh till she burst: Quod solatiu^ habere potest pater? What co^fort or joy can a Father have, that having 10 or 12 hungry sons ready to starve for want, and heare them cry out for food and succor, and hath not wherwith to feed and still them? So what quiet can a man have, whose appetites and desires cry out, and yet ca^not satisfie nor suffice the^? Clamat luxuria. Leachery crieth; Give me women, and yet thy strength ca^not performe that thou lustest after. Clamat superbia, Pride cryeth, Be liberall and a good companion: Tuae tamen facultates hoc negant: Thy wealth denyeth this. Clamat invidia, Envy cryeth, Revenge thy selfe of such and such injury, and yet thy weakenesse will not suffer thee to bee revenged. Clamat voluptas, Pleasure cryeth, Ede, bibe, Eate, drinke, fish, fowle, hunt, hawke, rush, ride: reclamat tamen senectus, but old age cryeth againe, Desunt vires: Strength is wanting to performe these things, hee must sit coughing in his chaire, and grunting in his bed, his will is good to follow these delights, but (poore man) he wanteth strenght: Misere torquentur isti libidinosi, nunquam explentur: these libidinous

men are miserably tormented, but never filled: like the horseleech daughters, they are never satiate; quot sensus, tot arma, so Lust poysons all the powers of the soule. many senses, so many weapons: our words blow, our works wound, our eyes and eares open gates for the Divell, to send loads of sinne into our mind, our taste and senses, and feeling, are Prov. 30. 15. Rom: 6. 1 Cor. 6. tinder and fewell to feed the fire of our concupiscence; our bodies, which should have beene Templum Spiritus Sancti, the Temple of the Holy Ghost, a haunt of Divels, and a sepulcher of a corrupted soule, the soule betrothed to Christ in Baptisme, a 1 Cor. 2. 14. riotous, disloyall losell, our understanding darkened, our will, with her affections a common Curtisan, lusting after every offer Ephes. 2. 3. of the flesh; in so much as one Father bringeth in the Divel speaking thus to Christ, I have more right to this man than thou. Iudge him to be mine. I never loved him, and yet he served me; I never did him good, yet hath he obeyed me; what I suggested, he performed; what I proffered, he imbraced: Meus est per naturam, tuus est per gratiam, he is mine by nature, he should have been thine by grace; mine he is by transgression, but thine he should have been by redemption, but he gave himselfe to lust, and lust being conceived, brought forth sin, and therefore he is mine, mine, mine. An elegant Prosopopeia; without us are our affections to seduce us, within, our conscience to accuse us, above us, Gods justice, beneath us, hell fire: Let us not therefore lust after evill things, but crucify the flesh, with the affections and lusts.
Where lust is, there is no mortification, and where no mortification is, there is no rising againe with Christ, and where there is no rising againe with Christ, there is no salvation: For Peter Martyr devided mortification into two members; patience in bearing aduersity, and temperancy in brideling the lusts of the flesh. Now measure our Christianity by this, and Lord, how little would be found in the world? as one said, Call on houses and chambers under which thou hast lived, aske the fields and gardens where thou hast walked, summon seates whereon thou hast sitten; examine thy pillowes, upon which thy head hath rested, and all these will cry with one mouth, that we have walked after our lusts, that we have lived at randon, that wee have followed our pleasures, that we have lived in gluttony, in chambring, and wantonnesse, that we take no thought but for the flesh, To fulfill the lusts of it: this is not to walke honestly, as in the day time. The Image of God is not restored in us, till our lusts be subdued, and we cease to walke after our lusts. Imaginis Dei duae sunt partes, sanctitas intellectus, and sanctitas voluntatis in fraenandis libidinibus. Of the Image of God there be two parts, sancity of understanding the one, and sanctity of will the other in brideling lusts: and this the Apostle calleth The new man, which after God (that is, the image of God) is shapen in righteousnesse, and true holinesse: Loosen the reines to thy lusts, and there is no image of God in thee; but of Ephes. 4. 24.

the Divell which seduceth thee, and therefore reserved to the The Godly man, though lust be in, yet it raignes not over him. day of Iudgement to be punished, because thou walkest after the flesh, in the lust of uncleannesse. Seneca telleth us of one Sextius, qui nocte animum suum semper interrogabat, quod malum hodie sanasti? which nightly would aske his owne soule, What evill hast thou 2 Pet. 2. 10. healed to day? What vice hast thou resisted? In what part art thou better to day then thou wert yesterday? O, if thou a Christian couldest doe this, thou wert a blessed man! O happy golden day in which thou hast tamed one lust, one sinne! thou maiest then say with Paul, I have fought a good fight, etc. Sapientis est animus, 2 Tim. 4. 6. ut status mundi supra lunam; a wise mans mind, is as the state of the world above the Moone: Nec nubes, nec fulgur, nec turbines ibi sunt, There be neither clouds, nor lightning, nor whirlewinds, but all things bright, and shining, calme and quiet: Sic nulla ira, nulla libido, nulla perturbatio cadit in animum sapientis: So no anger, no Seneca. lust, no perturbation commeth into a wise mans mind: but I will not say none, but not so much as in other men, libido inest, sed non praeest; lust is in him, not over him: habitat, sed non regnat; Rom. 6. 12. it dwelleth in him, but raigneth not: bellat, sed non debellat, it warres in him, but it winnes not: we are not like the Heathen, 1 Thess. 4. 5. which keep their vessels in the lust of concupiscence. Satanas duobus armis nos oppugnat, voluptate and timore, Satan oppugneth us with two weapons, voluptuousnesse, and feare; with voluptuousnesse he taketh us, and with feare he breaketh us: against the one let us arme our hearts with godly affections; and against the other with faith and confidence; let us take the shield of faith, wherewith we may quench the fiery darts of lust, and concupiscence.



THE SEVEN AND TVVENTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XVI. 

Whose mouth speaketh proud things, having mens persons in admiration, etc.
The tongue the discoverer of the heart.



HAving formerly described the wicked by their impatiencie, and by their lusts, hee commeth now thirdly, to describe them by their pride, and he saith, that their mouth speaketh proud things. These words seeme to be drawne from Saint Peter, where speaking of the wicked, hee saith that they utter swelling words of vanitie, they beguile with wantonnesse thorough 2 Pet. 2. 18. the lusts of the flesh, them that were cleane escaped from them, which are wrapped in errour: For Iude wrote later than the other Apostles.
Where note first, that hee proceedeth from their walking, to their speaking; from their heart, to their mouth; from the fountaine, to the channell: for commonly if the heart be humble, the speeches are lowly, but if it be proud, the speeches are lofty: For of the aboundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh: Lingua penna, Luke 6. seu nuntius cordis: the tongue is the penne or messenger of the heart. Hercules body was knowne by the length of his foot; and the heart is knowne by the speech of his mouth: good men speake well, for their heart is good: so saith the Prophet, The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisedome, and his tongue will talke Psal. 37. 30, 31. of judgement: For the Law of God is in his heart, and bad men speake

vilely; for their heart is naught. For no constancie is in their mouth: within A proud heart sheweth it selfe by proud speeches. they are very corruptions, their throat is an open sepulchre, and they flatter with their tongue. Ex putredine quid nisi putridum prodeat? From rottennesse and corruption, what can proceed, but that which is corruptible and rotten? What shall a man expect from a bitter Psal. 5. 9. fountaine, but bitter waters? What from the egge of a Cockatrice, but a Serpent? What from a Spider, but poyson? What from the lake Asphaltis, but stinch and corruption? The Apostle telleth us, That unto the pure, all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled, and unbeleeving, is nothing pure, but even their minds and Tit. 1. 15. consciences are defiled.
It seemeth that Iude here alludeth unto David; For hee ever bringeth in the wicked on the stage, speaking presumptuously like Thraso, loquuntur ampullas, their words are bombasted; heare them from morning till night, and all their speech (like Goliah) is bragging, all their talke tendeth to the commendation of themselves: they are in love with themselves, as Narcissus with his shadow; their mouth as a trumpet soundeth out their owne praise; they reckon up all their vertues, but they passe over all their vices; like captaines, who number their souldiers, but marke not how many are of the side of the enemy to encounter them, and therefore lose the field oftentimes. The nature of the wicked is to boast; so David speaketh of the enemies of the Church, They are inclosed in their owne fat (that is, they are post up with pride, as the stomacke that is choked with fat) and their Psal. 17. 10, 11. mouth speaketh proud things, they have compassed us now in our steps, they have set their eyes to bring us downe to the ground. They say, With our tongue will wee prevaile, our lips are our owne. Who is Lord over us? Psal. 12. 4. These proud tongues are never quiet from prittle prattle, from skanning this neighbours wealth, that neighbours wit, this mans doings, that mans sayings, coursing over the whole Countrey, till all men have beene within the compasse of their tongues, drawne out by them (peradventure) by the power of a pot too much, or such like influence. For their mouth is unnaturally bigger than their hand; what they want in doing, they supply in talking; though they cannot worke it, yet they can word it: Linguis, si non factis, praevalebunt, they will prevaile with their tongues, if not with their deeds: Os ponunt in Coelos, they set their mouth against Heaven, and their tongue walketh thorow the Psal. 73. 9. Earth; they are licencious, and speake proudly, and talke presumptuously: Portant gladium non in vagina, sed in ore, they carry a sword, not in their sheath, but in their mouth: Their teeth are speares and arrowes, and their tongue a sharpe sword. Thus boasted Psal. 57. 5. railing Rabshakeh, with most insolent words, and haughty pride, and said to Hezechiah, that he would make his men eate their owne dung, and drinke their owne pisse: and thus boasted the Kings and 2 Reg. 18. 27. Rulers of the Earth against the Lord, and against his Anoynted,

Let us breake their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us: Happy is hee that can see his owne vilenesse. but it followeth well there; Hee that dwelleth in Heaven, shall laugh them to scorne, the Lord shall have them in derision: Let not the wiseman glory in his wisdome, nor the strong man in his strength: Psal. 2. 3. but he that will glory, let him glory in the Lord, and make his boast of his praise.
The Pharises boasted much of their doings, they delivered their almes with the sound of trumpets, but they muttered their sinnes in the eares of their fellowes: they spake softly (quoth Epiphanius) like the peacocke that croweth when he looketh at his wings, but is mute, when hee looketh at his feet, which are foule and ugly. This sinne of pride is naturall, or universall, and therefore the more to be eschewed of the children of God. Habet quisque naevos superbiae, not droppes, but rivers, blottes, staines of Ierome. pride, spotted like a Leopard; wee drew it from the loines of Adam, and sucked it out of the brests of Heva; for they were proud, and would be like unto God; Sed dum rapere voluerunt divinitatem, August. amiserunt foelicitatem, whiles they would have caught the divinity, they lost their felicity: yea the Angels that sinned before man, fell through pride, (though not only pride.) Paul 1 Tim. 3. calleth it, The condemnation of the Divell. Not long after the destruction of the old world, and the reparation of the new, the builders of Babel fell this way, saying proudly, Faciamus turrim extensam in coelos, Let us build a City and a tower whose top may reach Gen. 11. unto the heaven. But God plagued their pride with the confusion of tongues, and divided them into seventy three tongues, which before, spake all but one tongue. It is naturall to us to thinke proudly of our selves, to speake proud things, to deale arrogantly, and to boast outragiously. We are like the Ciclopians, and like Poliphemus, see but with one eye; we see our vertues, not our vices, which are tenne to one, as the Leopard hath tenne blacke spots to one white: but he is an happy man that can see his vilenesse, his sinne, and can accuse himselfe, not praise himselfe, as Paul did, when he said, God forbid, that I should rejoice in anything, but in the Crosse of our Lord Iesus, whereby the world is crucified Gal. 6. 14. unto me, and I unto the world. Paul was a great Apostle, circumcised the eighth day, of the kindred of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, an Phil. 3, 4, 6, 8. Hebrew of the Hebrewes, by the Law a Pharisee, concerning zeale, wonderfull, touching the righteousnesse which is in the Law, unrebukeable; Yet hee was not proud of any of these things; but counted all things losse, and did iudge them to bee dung, that he might winne Christ: and writing to the Corinthians he saith thus, Who is weake, and I am not weake? Who is offended, and I burne not? If I must needs reioice, I will 2 Cor. 11. 30, 31. reioice in mine infirmities, as imprisonments, beating, hunger, thirst, and such like: which things the adversaries did condemne as infirme in him. And againe he said, I know nothing by my selfe, yet am I not thereby iustified; he knew no oathes, no lies, no rancour, no

whoredome, by himselfe, no Capitall sinne, for the Child of Iesting base fruit of wit. God may say, with Christ in some respect, Which of you can reprove me of sinne? yet would not he boast, for he had peccata occulta, secret Iohn 10. sinnes. There be some that apply their wit and understanding to nothing else, but to frumpes, and jests, to disgrace others, to move laughter, if they can nippe, or by a girding scoffe, disgrace another, honester then themselves; we call them merry Greeks, pleasant companions, good fellowes: but this is the least harvest, the least fruit of their wit. Iocis utuntur qui currum poties quam Curiam decent, as one saith, they use jests and sportes which become rather the Cart, then the Court: Quique vomitum citius quam risum moveant, and which will sooner move vomit than sport; and then they triumph, but in truth without victory. These are dogs, not men: For of evill men there be two kindes, alij sunt Canes, alij porci, some are dogges, some are hogges; Fooles are hogs, which neglect the truth, secure, and refuse the Word, but some are dogges, which slander, and deride the professors of the truth: beware of these dogges; these dogges shall not goe to Phil. 3. 2. Apoc. 22. 14. Heaven; as Seneca said of Sylla, that he left killing, when none were left to be killed; so these proud tongues will leave scoffing, when there are no honest men to be plaied upon.
Good men strive to debase themselves, they stop their eares at their praises, as Mariners doe at the song of the Meremaid: As Adders doe at the voice of the Charmer: they say with David, Peccatum meum semper coram me: My sinne is ever before me: they Psal. 51. are vile, and will be more vile: as David said to Michol; who taunted him, nay despised him in her heart, when shee saw him dancing before the Arke. O how glorious (quoth she) was the King 2 Sam. 6. 20, 21, 22. of Israel this day, which was uncovered to d^y in the eyes of the maidens of his servants, as a foole uncovereth himself! But he answered her, That which he did, was for noworldly affection, but only for the zeale he bare to God, and to his glory, and I will (quoth hee) bee yet more vile then thus, and I will bee low in mine owne sight, etc. So Gods Children, they are vile, and low in their owne sight; they can say with David, Lord, I am not high-minded, I have no proud lookes, I Psal. 131. 1, 2. doe not exercise my selfe in matters that are too high for me, etc. But many are proud and hauty, boasting and bragging of their works, as of their prayers, almes, readings, fastings, etc. But doest thou glory in thy prayers? O foole, where thou praiest one prayer, others pray a thousand: The Eutiches prayed continually, Iames had his knees horne-hoofed with prayer; Christ prayed a whole night, which thou never diddest. Doest thou glory of thy Almes? O foole, where thou givest a penny, thou receivest a pound at the hands of God, and in all that, thou art but a steward, and thou must reddere rationem, give an accompt of thy stewardship. Zachee would give halfe his good to the poore: thou, not the hundred, not the thousand part, yet hee boasted not. Doest thou

glory in thy reading? Where thou readest a line, others read a We must so live, that our conscience may comfort us. volume. Alphonsus King of Naples read over the Bible forty times; thou not twice, not once, yet boastest that thou art a Christian. Doest thou glory in thy workes? O foole, es seruus invtilis, thou art an unprofitable servant. And what deserveth hee, but stripes and blowes? And yet obiter, by the way, to them that insult Luk. 17. over us, as if we were Metropolitan, or Captaine sinners, we say, as Paul said, As touching me, I passe very little to be judged of you, or of mans judgement, no, I iudge not mine owne selfe. And againe, We give 1 Cor. 4. 3. 2 Cor. 6. 3, 4. none occasion of offence in any thing that our ministery should not bee reprehended, but in all things, we approue our selves as the Ministers of God. So said Ambrose; Non it a vixi, ut me vixissepudeat, nec mori timeo, quia bonum habemus Dominum; I have not so lived, as that I am a shamed to live, neither am I afraid to dye, because we have a good Lord. If we have to doe with God, we say, O Lord, righteousnesse belongeth unto thee, and unto us open shame. O Lord, to us appertaineth open shame, Dan. 9. 7, 8. to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our Fathers, because wee have sinned against thee. But if with men, that slander us, we say with Ieremy, Ier. 15. 10, 15. woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me a contentious man, and a man that striveth with the whole earth: I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent to me on usury, yet every one doth curse me. O Lord, thou knowest, remember me and visit me, and revenge me of my persecutors: take me not away in the continuance of thy anger: know, that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke. Iudges may say with Samuel, Whose oxe have I taken? Or whom have I done wrong to? Or whom have I hurt? Or of 1 Sam. 12. 3. whose hands have I received any bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith, and I will restore it you? Ministers must say, We have cast from us the clokes of shame, and walke not in craftinesse, neither handle we the Word of God 2 Cor. 4. 2. deceitfully; but in declaration of the truth, we approove our selves to every mans conscience in the sight of God. And every Christian must say with Iob, My witnesse is in Heaven, and my record is on high. And againe, he must say with Paul, Our rejoycing is this, the testimony of Iob 16. 19. 2 Cor. 1. 12. our conscience, that in simplicity and godly purenesse, and not in fleshly Wisdome, but by the grace of God, wee have had our conuersation in the world, etc.
They speake proud things.] To speake things, hath beene a frequent sinne from the beginning of the primitive Church, to this day; like Noahs deluge, it hath overflowed, and like another Alexander conquered: it was in the Gnosticks, the roote of their heresy; For Simon Magus, their Prince, as saith Irenaeus, called himselfe the Sonne of God, the power of God, and under Claudius the Emperour his Image was set up, and worshipped as God; after him came Menander, and spake proud things, affirming, that he was sent a Saviour from invisible things, for the salvation of the world. After him, Apelles, Montanus, Manes, which affirmed that they were sent by the Holy Ghost: such in our time were Act. 8. the Quintinists and Libertines in Germany, which call themselves

meere spirituall: such are the Henry Nicolaitans, who say, that they It is ordinary to them that are vile, to speake ill. are codeified with God, and God cohominified with them; such was the traitour Hacket, Anno. 1591. who blasphemed God, and called for fire to consume the world that beleeved not in him.
Thus men now swell in pride, in opinion, in words, in deeds, in all things. Hagar waxeth proud against her dame Sara. Aesops crow jetteth in the plumes and feathers of other birds; and the Cumane Asse walketh up and downe with his long eares, in a Lions skinne: For commonly none are prouder, then the unworthiest: As the Holy Ghost noteth of the bramble; who would be King over the trees, when as the figge-tree, the olive-tree, and the vine-tree refused it; For the figge-tree would not leave his sweetnesse, nor the olive-tree her fatnesse, nor the vine her wine, wherewith shee did cheare the heart both of God and man, to rule over the trees: only the scratching bramble, he was so proud, that he would. Pan will compare with Apollo; Arachne, with Minerva; Silenus with Mercury, Phaeton will manage his fathers teame; Icarus will mount up with his wings of waxe; the Fly Farsalla will sport with the candle; the Pharise will say, there is no sinner like the Publican. The Laodicians will boast of their wealth, knowledge, and all graces. The yong man will say that he hath kept all the precepts of God; Naminania dolia acutissime resonant, the emptiest tubbes make the greatest sound. The Apothecaries boxes, which have nothing in them, are best painted; but the bramble was burned, Phaeton spoiled the frame of the world; Icarus wings melted; the Fly is burnt in the flame; the Pharise went home unjustified; the Laodicians were throwne downe to hell, the yong man went away sorrowfull. God will humble the proud; Let every man therefore thinke better of another, then of himselfe. But we forget, that sequitur superbos ultor e tergo Deus, that God followeth the proud man at the heeles, to plague him and punish him; nay, wee forget, that we are men, and weake men, and so our pride groweth to be infinite. Iulius the second would make no water, but in silver basons; Heliogabalus would avoid no excrements, but in vessels of gold; Sardanapalus would eate no meate, but Nightingales tongues; Sapor, the King of Persia, would use no footstoole, but the necke of the Emperour Valerian; in Arabia foelix, the Nobles would kindle no fire, but of Cinamon; the grand Cham of Tartaria will not be drawne of horses, but of Elephants: our pride is infinit, our words, our deeds, our thoughts Majesticall. Sed quid superbis terra and cinis? Why art thou proud, dust and ashes? And yet this proud man catcheth nothing but smoke, and gaineth nothing but smoke. We marvell at the Emperour, who passed all his festivall daies in killing of flies; but how much more may we marvell at him, who passeth all his dayes in catching of smoke, and the blast of

mens mouthes. A certaine King therefore appointed this punishment Flatterers applaud others, to enrich the^selves. for proud men, that they should bee suffocated, and choaked with smoke, saying, that it was right and meet, that they should perish in smoke, which have spent their whole life in catching the smoke of vanity and vaine-glory.
The end of all this clawing, is gaine: men speake for advantage, they have sugred tongues, oyled mouthes, dulced words: but suspect them, for they speake for gaine; like Aesops-Foxe, that telleth the Crow, that she was the fairest bird in the heavens, if she could sing: and therewithall she opened her mouth to sing, but she lost her meate by it. Thus the flatterer aimeth at advantage, at gaine, at profit; he maketh a shew he is thy friend, and wisheth thee well; but he is but a verball friend, a friend from teeth outward, a flattering friend, a friend in shew, but not in deed; like Aristotles fallacions; and falling starres, which seeme to be, and are not, a friend only in name, one that will give thee his hand, but not the heart; for he hath a tongue to commend thee, but yet no longer, then it is for his advantage; like Hiena, he hath a faire face, but a false heart, like Iael, to Sisera. We read in Theognis this saying, Seeme with thy tongue to flatter all, but in thy deeds love none at all. O these flatterers, they are lucritam cupidi, so greedy of gaine, that they have animam venalem, a soule to sell: for quid non mortalia pectora cogit auri sacra fames? What doth not the cursed hunger of gold drive men to doe? This sets them aworke to flatter, lie, sweare, and forsweare, and what not? Salomon saith of the harlot, that she will not leave a man worth a morsell of bread; no more will these flatterers, they will soake, and sucke men, as the Ivie doth the Oake, and bring them at last into our Ladies bands, and make them sing by beggery. Chrysostome saith, Sicut finis oratoris est, dilectione persuasisse; and medici, medicina curasse; sic adulatoris est, suavi loquio se ditasse; As the end of an Oratour is to perswade in loue, and the end of a Physician, to cure by medicine; so the end of the flatterer is, with his sweethony-sugar-candy speeches to inrich himselfe and begger thee, and the end of his clawing is gaine, advantage. I will conclude with the saying of Augustine, Melius est a quolibet reprehendi, quam ab adulante laudari, It is better to bee blamed of any, then praised of a flatterer.
Augustine being asked, What was the first, second, and third part of a good man, of a Christian? answered, Humility: so if I were asked, What were the first, second, and third part of a vile man? I will answere, Pride: and he hath pride, whose mouth speaketh proud things. And of all mouthes, let the Popish mouthes goe in the quintessence of pride and bragging: they speake of merits, workes of Iustification, and supererogation, enough for themselves and their neighbours, wherein they injure both the Iustice and Mercy of God; for his Iustice cannot be perfect, if he take for

satisfaction, either all, or part of that which proceedeth from a The Popes and their flatterers the proudest vaunters. sinner; they injure his mercies; For it is not perfect, absolute; if he forgive not all the debt, but receiveth part of us; But his bloud clenseth us from all sinne; originall, and actuall sinnes, secret, and open sinnes; sinnes of omission, sinnes of commission; his bloud clenseth all, purgeth all, doth away all. But to proceed; 1 Iohn 1. 7. the Canonists say, that Papa potest dispensare contra jus divinum, jus naturae, contra Apostolos, contra omnia praecepta Dei: The Pope can dispense against the Law Divine, the Law of Nature, against the Apostles, against all the Commandements of God. Let God, men, and Angels judge, what mouth now speaketh proudly. The great Cham of Tartaria, after he hath dined, soundeth a trumpet, and giveth leave to all Christian Princes to goe to dinner, and by this prety conceit maketh himselfe head over Kings and Emperours: because Peter said, Ecce, hic sunt duo gladij, Behold, here are two swords. Thus this Italian Priest is not ashamed to be called, Dominus Deus noster Papa, our Lord God the Pope; to be kneeled unto, with these words: Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis: Lambe of God, that takest away the sinnes of the world, have mercy upon us. As was Martin the fifth. Harding calleth us Goliah; and themselves litle David; but forasmuch as they have neither Davids sling in their hands, nor Davids stones in their scrip, they must not looke, that the wise Ladies of Israel will with their lutes and timbrels, sing before them, that David hath slaine his ten thousand: but he is Goliah, that 1 Sam. 18. crieth, I cannot erre: Habeo omnes leges in scrinio pectoris, I have all lawes in the closet of my brest; I am above Councels, I judge all, no man judgeth me; Sum rex regum, I am King of Kings, I can doe whatsoever Christ could doe, All power is given unto me. But let us deale with the Papists, as Agesilaus did with his enemies: Mat. 28. hee pulled off their bombasted coats, and shewed their apish wearish bodies to his souldiers, saying, Ecce ingentia corpora; Ecce magna illorum ossa; behold their mighty bodies, behold their bigge bones. The Pope calleth himselfe, servum servorum, the servant of servants: but can hee, that is carried on Noble mens shoulders, that caused the French King to trotte by his bridle, as Zacharie did Childericke the Emperour to hold his stirrop, Noble men to kisse his feet, bee servus servorum? the servant of servants? I need not name Hildebrands usage to Henry the fourth at Canusia, nor that of Clemens the fifth to Francis Dandalus, nor that of Alexander the third, to Fredericke the Emperour: nor that of Innocentius the third, to King Iohn of England, nor of Pius Quintus, to the Queene.
But to leave the man of sinne himselfe, and to come to the frogges that creep out of his mouth; what a croking doe they make? How doe their mouthes exceed in pride? Staphilus calleth our people, hogges, dogges; Harding calleth our Bishops

and Ministers, Cumane Asses; Martin calleth them; novos Oratores, Popish Priests and Iesuites, notorious railers: new Orators, Stultos adolescentes, Foolish yong men; non tam disertos in errore, quam desertos a veritate, not so cunning in errour, as ignorant of the truth. Bellarmine calleth our writers, Pecudes, Gigantes, Monstra, Beasts, Giants, Monsters; and saith, that they give no honour to Christ, nor Angels, nor Saints. Thus they disgrace us in words, and their mouthes speake proud, swelling things; when they cannot confute us, they raile on us, and deale with us, as Nero dealt with the Christians, who hurled them to dogs to be devoured; and when the mastives would not touch them, he clad the Christians in Beares skinnes, to kindle the fury of the dogs, that they might take them to bee beasts, and not men: so they impute all lewdnesse to us, to make men thinke that we are that which we are not: they are like the beast Bonosus, mentioned by Aristotle, who having his hornes reflexed, not being able to defend himselfe with them, three or foure furlongs off poysoneth the dogges with his dung; which is so hot, as it burneth off all their haire. So, when they cannot hurt us with truth, they defile us with the durt and dung of their calumnies: this veine of railing cleaveth unto them, as Naamans Ieprosie did to Gehezi, and his seed for ever: they are of the mind of Medius, parasiteto Alexander, who willed his Schollers ever to slander their enemies; Nam si vulnus (inquit) sanaverint, manet tamen cicatrix; for although they have healed the wound, the scarre of the slander abideth still. So, some will beleeve them, they leave still a sting behind them, they thinke much, that we should say thus much, and therefore call our Apologies, railings. Thus the Guisians accused the Protestants to have Loricas ferri, non fidei, Brest-plates of iron, not of faith; when as they klled three thousand in one Church at Vesse in the time of doctrine. So the theeves of Sicilia, accused the merchants and travellers, that they rode cruelly armed, when as they had all engines to rob men. So Fimbria sued Scevola, for that he received not his weapon deep enough. Must their mouthes bee open to offend, and not ours to defend? O tempora! o mores! What a world is this? May they say all evill on their Ale-benches, and we not defend our innocency? The Lord cut off those lips. Psal. 12.
That which I say of Papists, I say of Atheists also. Nam facti sumus speculum, We are become a spectacle to men and Angels: 1 Cor. 4. but let men and Angels, and Divels, Papists and Atheists, say what they can, so that they say truly.
The fourth and last sinne, is Flattery, in admiring mens persons: they lift up, and throw downe, praise and dispraise; they wonder at men, as if they were Angels; Illorum enim lingua venabilis, their tongue is saleable, they will say any thing for gaine, make the Crow white, and the Snow blacke: but if wee give titles, our Maker will destroy us: Now to give titles, is to change Iob. 22. 22.

the name, as to call a foole, a wiseman; to cloke the truth, to flatter Flatterers worthily rewarded. men; For woe unto them that speake good of evill, and evill of good, which put darkenesse for light, and light for darkenesse, put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sowre. God blesseth plaine speaking. Hee Esa. 5. 20. Pro. 28. 23. that rebuketh a man, shall finde more favour at length, than he that flattereth with his tongue: he that pertaineth to God, will love such. Salomon preferreth the wounds of a friend, to the kisses of an enemy; Open rebuke (saith he) is better then secret love: the wounds of a lover are Pro. 27. 5, 6. faithfull, and the kisses of an enemy are pleasant, that is, they are flattering, and seeme friendly. David prayed God to cut off all flattering lips, saying, The Lord cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaketh proud things; which have said, With our tongue will wee Psal. 12. 3. 4. prevaile, our lips are our owne, who is Lord over us: And wee see this punishment verified in two notable rare examples; the one, in the Amalekite, who came upon Saul and slew him, and tooke the 2 Sam. 1. 8, 10, 15. crowne that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arme, and brought it unto David; because hee would currie favour with him, and flatter him, expecting hereby some preferment at his hands: but David commanded one of his young men to fall upon him, who smote him that hee dyed. The other in Baanah and Rechab, who slew Isboseth, the sonne of Saul, and brought his head unto David, to Hebron: and said unto the King, Behold 2 Sam. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. the head of Isboseth, Sauls sonne thine enemie, who sought after thy life, and the Lord hath avenged the Lord my King this day of Saul, and of his seed. Thus they went about to flatter him, and hoping for some preferment, for that they did. But David said unto them, As the Lord liveth, who hath delivered my soule from all adversitie, when one told mee, that Saul was dead (thinking that hee had brought good tydings) I tooke him and slew him: how much more, when wicked men have slaine a righteous person in his owne house, and upon his bed; shall I not now therefore require his bloud at your hands, and take you from the Earth? And David commanded his young men, and they slew them, and hanged them up over the poole in Hebron. Let all flatterers speed so, let all Sycophants eate the fruit of their hands, and bee filled with their owne inventions. Liquescant ut limax, let them melt away like a snaile; Let them be powred out like water, that runneth apace, and bee like the untimely fruit of a woman, and let them not see the Sunne, and or ever their pots bee made hot with thornes, so let indignation vexe them, as a thing that is raw. God punisheth flatterers, yea and them that heare them also, and listen to them. Thus Ahab lost the victory at Ramoth Gilead; thus Rehoboam lost his Kingdome; thus Herod lost his life. This should 1 Reg. 22. 2 Chro. 10. 10. Act. 12. make all men give God the glory, lest wee bee proud of those things that are not ours. Are wee praised for Learning, for Wisedome, Patience, Liberality, House-keeping? Give God the glory: say as Paul said, who hath separated thee? (to wit, from 1 Cor. 4. 7. other men, and preferred thee) and what hast thou, that thou hast

not received? and if thou hast received it, why rejoycest thou as though Flattery, a base and slavish sinne. thou haddest not received it? Consider that the purpose of these flatterers is their profit: it is an old proverbe, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere; hee that knoweth not how to dissemble, knoweth not how to live: but change the letter e into o and it is true: Qui nescit dissimulare, adulari, mentiri, noscit vivere, he that knoweth not to dissemble, flatter, lye, hee knoweth how to live. Coggers, Psal. 55. 23. Foysters, Flatterers, shall not prosper. These Flatterers are worse than Crowes, for they prey upon the dead, these upon the living. The child of God must speake as God speaketh, God speaketh to the heart, he lanceth the conscience, and woundeth the spirit: he speaketh plainely, to draw men to Repentance; but a Flatterer is a weather-cocke, his tongue is set to sale, his heart is at the will of others; Aiunt, aijt; negant, negat: if they affirme any thing, he affirmeth it too; if they deny any thing, hee denieth it also: Aliud stans, aliud sedens loquitur, hee speaketh one thing, and another thing sitting: as Tully said of Catiline, they study to please men, not God: they cannot say with Paul, Wee speake not as they that please men, but God, which trieth our hearts: they have their reward. 1 Thess. 2. 4. How often have we being in company, heard religion railed on, Popery extolled, vertue condemned, vice commended, the good defamed, and yet either held our tongues, or yeelded to that, for feare to offend the great ones? But we must not please men, for then wee cannot please God. If I should please men (saith the Gal. 1. 10. Apostle) I am not the servant of God. Now chuse whether thou wilt serve God or men: we must learne of the Lord Iesus. His enemies could say, though temptingly, That he was true, and taught the way of Mat. 22. 16. God truly, neither cared for any man, for he considered not the person of men. As touching the outward quality, as whether a man be rich or poore, some workes of Christ are our instruction, as his miracles; some are our imitation, as his deeds and vertues. Learne not therefore of Christ to rebuke the Wind, to still the Sea, to turne Mar. 5. Iohn 2. Luke 7. Iohn 9. Water into Wine, to raise the Dead, to open the eyes of the Blind; for these thou canst not doe: all these are thy instruction: but learne to speake truely, this thou mayest doe, and this is thy imitation: speake truth, and that truely; for God liketh better of Adverbes, than of Nounes. Christ spake without regard of men; let us learne to speake so. The word flatterer in Greeke signifieth servility, or slavishnesse, (...). For he is a Page, a Servant, a Slave to other mens affections; and there is no difference betweene a Gally-slave and him, but that the one is fettered in body, the other in minde; the one serveth the Turke, the other the Divell; the one chained for a time, the other for ever: For the Flatterer is in the snare of the Divel, and is taken of him at his will. Tot vincula habemus, quot peccata; we have so many bands, as we have sinnes. I would, that there were not 2 Tim. 2. 26. of these Flatterers amongst the Church-men; who should

rather rebuke, then flatter. Surely the vulgar people delight to Soothing Preachers the most base flatterers. be flattered; and would not by their willes heare the Law of the Lord: and hence is it, That they say to the seers, See not, and to the Prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, but speake flattering things unto us: Prophesy errours. But such flattering prophets, the Holy Ghost Esay 30. 10. calleth the taile, and saith, The Lord will cut off from Israel, head and taile, branch and rush in one day: the ancient, and the honorable man, hee Esay 9. 14, 15. is the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the taile. But as touching these flattering prophets, that will sow pillowes under mens elbowes, and sooth them up in their sins; God will punish them: He will feed them with Wormewood, and make them drinke the water of gall. The Holy Ghost compareth them to bad surgeons, Ier. 23. 15. that bring toothsome, but not wholesome medicines: They have Ier. 8. 11. healed the hurt of the daughter of my people with sweet words, (saith God) saying, Peace, peace; when there was no peace. Hence grew the ruine of Ierusalem; hence is the ruine of England, that we are not playne with our people; we monish them not; the complaint of God against the false prophets, may bee taken up against many of us; Thy prophets have looked out vaine and foolish things for thee, and they have not discovered thine iniquity to turne away thy captivity, but Lament. 2. 14. looked out for thee false prophesies, etc. Ministers are called, The salt Mat. 5. Ier. 8. of the earth, the light of the World, Physicians, Surgeons. Salt must needs be sharp to a rotten wound; light is painefull to a sore eye; a good Physician must trouble his patient, ere hee heale him; A Surgeon must lance a festred wound. God will have Esay crie aloud, Esay 58. 1. lift up his voice, like a trumpet, shew the people their offences, and the house of Iacob their sinnes. Ieremy must speake all that God commandeth, He must not be afraid of mens faces. Esay would not flatter Princes, but told them, that they were rebellious, and companions of Ier. 1. 8. Esay 1. 23. theeves, that they loved gifts, and followed after rewards, that they iudged not the fatherlesse, and the Widowes complaints came not before them. He that shall deale so with the Nobles of England, shall have small thankes; yet are they men, and not God; flesh, and not spirit; sinnefull, aswell as they of Iuda. Iames and Iohn were Boanarges, sonnes of thunder: we had need thunder and lighten, as Pericles did Mar. 3. in Greece; speaking will do little good: we must not sow pillowes under Ezech. 13. 10. Gal. 4. 16. mens elbowes: We say, as Paul said to the Galatians, Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Better you hate us, then God; For they that flatter you, serve not the Lord Iesus Christ, but their owne bellies, and with faire speeches and flattering deceive the hearts Rom. 16. 18. of the simple.
Flattery is a sinne, but we are the cause of it, the fault is in our selves. No man can be flattered, but he first flattereth himselfe; no vermine breedeth, where hee findeth no warmth; no flies swarme, where they see no flesh; no Eagles light, where they see no carcasse; no man claweth, but where he seeth pride in the partie to worke upon. These men are as brasse-pots, which, be they

never so huge, yet a man can carry them by the eares, where hee Reproofe profits more then flattery. will; so may these men bee carried by the eares; and yet it is to their owne hurt: For flatterers are like wormes, and mothes, which eate wooll and garments; but it cannot be seene, till the knop be off; so proud men see not their sinnes till it bee too late. Si fueris Thraso, non deerit tibi Gnato; If thou wilt be a boasting, bragging Thraso, thou shalt never want a flattring parasitical Gnato. Thus by these flatterers many Gentlemen be co^sumed, before they be aware, their flattering followers undoe them. There be two kindes of persecutions; Manus persequentis, and Lingua adulantis, the hand of the Tyrant, and the tongue of the flatterer; the latter is the worser; as it is most pernicious to the soule, it doth the soule good to be reprooved, it driveth away sin, as the Northwind doth the raine. Multi culpa^t amicos, Many blame their friends, but those accusations are but like water in a Smithes-forge to kindle, not to quench the fire. Let us blame and rebuke men, not to make them worse, but better; not viler, but warier. David prayed, Corripiat me justus: Let the righteous smite me: For that is a benefit; Psal. 41. 5. Let him reprove me, and it shall be a precious oyle, that shall not breake my August. ser. 59. de verbis Domini. head. Well said Augustine, Non omnis qui parcit, est amicus, nec omnis qui ferit, est inimicus: Not every one that spareth us, is a Friend, nor every one that striketh us, is an enemy. Melius cum sinceritate diligere, quam cum levitate decipere, better to love with sincerity, then to deceive with levity. Qui phreneticum ligat, and Lethargicum excitat, ambobus molestus, ambobus tamen utilis: Hee that bindeth a franticke man, vexed with a frensie, and he that awaketh a drowsie man, possessed with a Lethargie; hee is troublesome to them both, and yet profitable to them both. Let charity therefore go on to bind the one, and to awake the other, and to love both: Ama fratrem, sed noli adulari: Love thy brother, but flatter him not: Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit: Flattery getteth friendship, and truth hatred; yet Veritas temporis filia: Truth is the daughter of time, and in fine will save it selfe. Answere flatterers, as Antigonus did his clawbacks, Mentiris, thou liest, (quoth hee, to one of them) Mentiris in gutture, thou liest in thy throate: Hae virtures non, latent in me, These vertues that thou speakest of, I have not, but I am like a Leopard, that have tenne blacke spottes to one white.
Augustus Caesar, and Tiberius Caesar, were deadly enemies to these oyle-mouthed flatterers, in somuch that they would not indure to be called Lords, by their owne Children. If they living in darkenesse, did thus detest this sweet poyson, how ought wee to abhorre it, which are the children of light? Finely said one: If thy friend praise thee to thy face, give no countenance to his words, lest of a friend hee become a dissembler: and if a common parasite commend thee, reject and contemne his praises, because he is a flatterer. If this Counsell were well followed, Satan

would cease to transforme himselfe into an Angell of light; and Such as delight to be flattered, are vaine and unconstant. his Orators, who (as Diogenes affirmeth) are worse than Crowes, should in stead of living men, bee compelled to prey upon Carrion; the fittest food for such flattering Harpies, and greedy fowles. One cals flattery, the food of folly, and the spurre of vaineglory, wherewith when the eare is infected, the soule is soone perverted. Another cals flattery the Divels praise, who as he is a lier from the beginning, so his praise is ever fained and adulterate.
The Athenians so grossely flattered Demetrius, that they decreed, Vt quod Demetrius iuberet, apud deos sanctum, and apud homines iustum esset, That, that which Demetrius commanded, should be accounted holy among the gods, and iust among men: For they thought him like the gods; as Herod tooke himselfe for a God. Act. 12. Mens tongues are chained to great mens affections, as Praxaspes, a Noble man of Persia, said to Cambyses, for he having admonished the King, to drinke more sparingly; the King, to deliver himselfe from that suspicion, shot with an arrow at the heart of Praxaspes his child, and left the arrow in his heart, asking Praxaspes, whether he had shot well? To whom he answered, Apollo certius mittere non potuit, Apollo himselfe could not have shot more certenly: Dij illum hominem male perdant, animo magis quam conditione Seneca. mancipium, adulare regem, non amare didicit, The gods punish such a man, a slave rather in mind, then in condition, that learned to flatter the King, not to love him. Wee should stop our eares against these flatterers, as Vlysses did against the Sirenes.
Bernard compareth them that love praises, to wind-milles: For they are carried with the blast of me^s mouthes; and to the Moone, which because it hath borrowed light, sometime shee waxeth, sometime she waneth, and sometime she is not seene at all: So they that depend upon other mens lips, sometime are of great account, sometime of little account, sometime of no account: but he that with the Sunne carrieth his light within him, may say as Paul said; Gloria mea testimonium conscientiae, My glory is the testimony of my conscience. Vertue requires no scaffold, but a good 2 Cor. 1. 12. conscience. As for the wicked, they have a borrowed light, a borrowed fame, a borrowed praise, and therefore it lasteth not. Thus when Caesar triumphed in other mens blood, his parasites said, that he was Semideus: when Caligula spake like a foole in the Senate; Domitius gave him the price of eloquence, and Vitellus affirmed that he had beene with the Meeni. The Sicilians soothed up Dionysius his cruelty, by the name of Iustice. The parasites make of Molehilles, mountaines; if thou beest blacke, they say thou art manly; if faire, that thou art heavenly; when thou runnest, thou art Pegasus; when thou wrastlest, thou art Samson, or Hercules; when thou speakest, thou art Mercury. Thus the Iewes told Herod, that his voice was vox Dei, The voice of God, and not of man:

but you know his end. Many will say any thing for advantage, Flatterers sooth men in their sinnes, and applaud them as vertuous. so they may gaine by it; like Harpalus, who said, Quod Regi placet, mihi placet: That which pleaseth the King, pleaseth me: when Astyages set his owne Sonne before him, to feed upon him. But we must say, Quod Deo placet, mihi placet: That which pleaseth God, pleaseth me. Our tongues may not be tyed to other mens humours. For we must speake, not as they that please men, but God, which trieth the hearts. Answer these flatterers, as Alexander Magnus did, who being hit with an arrow in the siege of an Indian City, which would not heale, told his parasites, Vos me dixistis Iovis filium, vulnus autem istud clamat me esse hominem; You say, that I am Iupiters sonne, but this wound cries, that I am but a man. So say thou to thy flatterers, which without shame, or blushing, heape upon us many praises; you say that I am wise; but I see, I am not so wise as I should be; you say I excell in many vertues: but I see and know, that in me, that is, in my flesh, there dwelleth no goodnesse: away, away, I will not believe you.



THE EIGHT AND TVVENTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XVII. 

But yee beloved, remember the words, which were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Iesus Christ.
The godly and the wicked opposed.



THese words containe a comparison betwixt the faithfull and the unfaithfull, the sonnes of light and the sonnes of darkenesse, lambes and goats, Doves and Serpents, Vessels of wrath and Vessels of Mercy; the end of the one, and the destruction of the other: for the opposition holdeth in all points. The Godly remember the words of God, they goe forward in faith, a fide in fidem, from faith to faith; they pray in the Spirit, they continue in love, they looke for mercy; lastly, their end is eternall life. On the contrary, the Wicked forget all words of God, they flout at Religion, they live at randome, they walke after their lusts, they are naturall, they are Sectaries, renting asunder Christs coat without seame, they keepe not the vnity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Ephes. 4. 3.
First there is a dependance of these words from the former; hee putteth not a narrow river, but a maine sea, betwixt the godly and the ungodly: The Emphasis is in the conjunction (Autem) as if he had said, Thou must not be like the wicked, they murmure, complaine, speake proudly, flatter for gaine, but thou

must not doe so, but thou must turne over another leafe, learne Christians must not live like Heathen Infidels. a new lesson. But yee beloved, this teacheth all Christians to love like Christians, to walke worthy of their calling, not to bee like the Pagans, the Heathen: For what hath light to doe with darknesse, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. or righteousnesse with unrighteousnesse? What concord hath Christ with Belial? And what part hath the beleever with the Infidel? Come out therefore from among them, and separate your selves, saith the Lord; and touch no uncleane thing, and I will receive you. Christ will not have his Apostles be like the Heathen: When ye pray, use no vain Mat. 6. 7, 8. repetitions like the Heathen, be not like to them. And he would not have us to bee like the Pharises: For all the workes that they doe, is Cap. 23, 6, 7, 8. to be seen of men; they love greeting in the market, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi, but be yee not called Rabbi: for the godly, and the ungodly have two diverse fathers, God and the Divell; yee are of Iohn 8. 44. your father the Divell, and the workes of the Divell doe yee: two diverse mothers, the Church and the Synagogue of Satan: two diverse Schoolemasters, the Flesh and the Spirit: two diverse Rom. 6. 8. Esa. 30. Countries, the Heavenly Ierusalem and Tophet: therefore their life must be diverse. So reasoneth Christ: Take no thought, saying, What shall we eate, or what shall we drinke, or wherewith shall wee bee cloathed? After all these things seeke the Gentiles: for your heavenly Father knoweth, that ye have need of all these things. Thus Paul Mat. 6. 32. maketh an Antithesis betweene the Gentiles and the Christians: This I say therefore, and testifie in the Lord, that yee hence forth walke not Ephes. 4. 17, 18, 19, 20. as other Gentiles walke, in vanity of their minde, having their cogitations darkned, and being strangers from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardnesse of their heart, which being past feeling, have given themselves to wantonnesse, to worke all uncleanenesse with greedinesse: but yee have not so learned Christ. Againe, having spoken of the enemies of the Crosse: he maketh the comparison betweene them and the Apostles, the friends of Christ, saying, Brethren, bee yee followers of mee, and looke on Phil. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20. them which walke so, as ye have have us for an ensample: for many walke, of whom I told you before, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the Crosse of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, whose glorie is their shame, which minde earthly things. But our conversation is in Heaven, from whence also wee looke for a Saviour, even the Lord Iesus. Let others live as they list, but wee will remember the words of the Lord. So Iosuah said, Let others serve Idols, Ios. 24. 15. I and my houshold will serve the Lord: Let other perish; their life is no rule to us: Vivimus praeceptis, non factis, Wee live by precepts, not by deeds: Legibus D^i, non exemplis hominum, by the Lawes of God, not by the examples of men. Foolishly therefore said Radbode the King of Phrisia: for, comming to the Font, to be baptized, hee asked, What was become of his Ancestours? And answere being made, that they died in a fearefull state unchristned, replyed, that hee would rather perish with the multitude,

than goe to heaven with a few. So Constantius said, that Athanasius, Gods Word doth stay from running on with the wicked. with his few, troubled the whole world. But he answered him againe, Wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth ^o destruction, and many there be, which goe in thereat: strait is the gate, and the way narrow that leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. If but eight Mat. 7. 13, 14. men in all the world should be saved, as in Noahs flood, labour thou to be of these eight. Many reason thus; Others do it, most men doe it, therefore will I doe so. These be the drunken arguments of the world, but we must not follow a multitude; Major pars saepe vincit meliorem, the greater part ofte^ times overcommeth Exod. 23. 2. the better. The Nicene Councell had erred, but for Paphnutius; but eight onely were saved in Noahs Arke: but two Israelites of Gen. 8. Num. 14. Act. 1. Ezech. 9. Apoc. 3. 4. 600000. entred into Canaan, but an hundred and twenty beleevers were found in the primitive Church, but few in Ierusalem were marked with the letter Tau, but few in Sardis walked with God in white.
To conclude, The whole world is set on wickednesse. Good men are as blacke swannes, wee must shine as lights in the middest of a 1 Iohn 5. 19. Phil. 2. 15. crooked nation. If other be dogges, let us be Lambes; if other be crowes, let us be doves, if other bee tares, let us bee wheate: let others live as they list, let us live in the Lord, let us say with the Saints, Come, let us go up into the Mountaine of the Lord, and to the Mich. 4. 2, 5. house of the God of Iacob, and he will teach us his waies, and we will walke in his pathes: yea let us walke in the name of our God for ever and ever. Let others murmure, complaine, walke after their owne lusts, speake proudly and flatter men, because of advantage. Let us remember the words of the Lord: Let us build on in our most holy faith, let us pray in the spirit; and clense our selves from all filthinesse of the flesh and spirit; and grow up in full holines, 2 Cor. 7. 1. in the feare of God. Let not us looke at the multitude, to goe to hell with them for company: Non enim minor erit gloria, si fueris foelix cum paucis; nec minor erit poena, si miser erit cum multis: For thy glory shall not be the lesser, if with few thou beest happy; nor thy paine the lesser, if with many thou be miserable; every man shall have paine enough in hell, not the lesser for the multitude, but the greater: For as the Saints in heaven have joy each one from another; so the damned in Hell have the more griefe, each one from another. Mat. 22, 13.
Now more particularly, hee biddeth them remember the words of the Apostles, to stay up and to comfort them in the middest of murmurers, complainers, proud men, flatterers, sectaries, mockers; and sendeth them to the Scriptures, to the words of the Apostles: But I will arise ab Hypothesi, ad Thesin: from the supposition to the position. And here wee learne to whom the Scriptures are profitable, and comfortable, even to them that remember them. Wee must not bee forgetfull readers, nor forgetfull hearers; For, He that is not a forgetfull hearer, but a doer of Iam. 1. 25.

the Word, is blessed in his deed. There be two points of husbandry, to We heare the Word, but remember it not. get, and to hold fast; and there bee two points of Christianity, to learne, and to remember that wee have learned: many have this first, few the latter. Christ speaking of the future state of the Church, biddeth them remember; Remember the Words (saith Iohn 15. 20. Christ) that I said unto you, The servant, is not greater then the Master, etc. The Apostle speaking to the Hebrewes, chargeth them with forgetfulnesse; And yee have forgotten (saith he) the consolation Hebr. 12. 5. that speaketh to you as children. The Lord Iesus writing to the Church of Sardis, biddeth it remember; Remember how thou hast Apoc. 3. 3. received, and heard, and hold fast and repent. When Paul commeth to this, his zeale breaketh out in great measure, he doth not sound out words, but a trumpet like Esay: he doth not speake, but thunder, Esa. 58. 1. Mar. 3. like Iames and Iohn: he crieth out like a Giant, and as a strong ma^ refreshed with wine, his zeale breaketh out, as the Sun thorow a cloud, Furthermore brethren, whatsoever things ar true, whatsoever Phil. 3. 8. things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertaine to Love, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any vertue, or any praise; thinke on these things. At the newes of Christs birth many heard, many wondred, some mocked; but Mary kept it in her heart, and the words of the Shepheards also she kept, and would neither forgoe them nor forget them. Many good lessons in a yeere doe we heare, but wee profit but a little, because we remember not; if it be an evill word, that we will remember, or a promise of debt that we looke to profit by, our memory is of brasse; but Lord, how forgetfull in the best things? Which of us is there, that having a portion left us, by the will and testament of our Father, will not remember? What hearts have wee of flesh, or of flint, or folly, or of madnesse, that wee cannot remember a better inheritance, left to us in the Word of the Lord? That is our Coppy, or free Deed rather: for thereby we hold Heaven. Hereupon Paul commended the elders of Ephesus; first, to God, secondly, to the Word of his grace: which is able to build further, (that is, to increase them with more graces) and to Act. 20. 32. give them an inheritance, among all them that are sanctified. The Word remembred worketh faith, faith apprehendeth Christ, Christ uniteth us to God, and giveth salvation; For salvation is of the Psal. 3. 8. Lord, and his blessing is upon the people; and our Saviour and Redeemer is the mighty one of Iacob: and God would have his Word so Esa. 60. 16. remembred, that he chargeth his people Israel, saying, Yee shall Deut. 11. 18. lay up these my Words in your heart, and in your soule, and bind them for a signe upon your hand, that they bee as a frontlet betweene your eyes; that yee may ever remember them. David did it; I have hid thy Word Psal. 119. 11. within my heart, that I might not sinne against thee: And thus he describeth a good man, The Law of his God is in his heart; and his goings shall not slide. The Apostle crieth out to the Corinthians, to receive Psal. 37. 31. the Word of God fruitfully; Wee beseech you (saith he) that

yee receive not the grace of God in vaine. But alas, how often have we The neglect of the Word, will bring a famine of it. received it in vaine? How often have we come to Gods Schoole, and have taken out never a lesson? How often have wee received the food of our soules, and never digested it? How many Sermons have we heard in vaine? How often hath the sower sowed 2 Cor. 6. 1. his seed in vaine; Either in the high-way, or among stones, and thornes? If in the time to come wee profit no more than in the times past, I assure you, our graves will meet with us in the way, and it will bee too late to learne, when wee are fallen into the pit of silence, and into the land where all things are Psal. ^^. 12. forgotten. Not hee that eateth most, but hee that digesteth most, is most healthfull; not hee that heareth most, but he that remembreth most, is most edified, and most comforted by it: hearing is as chewing, Christus auditu devorandus, Christ is to be devoured by hearing: and remembrance is unto the soule, Bern. as digestion is to the stomacke: meate is nothing without digestion; the Word is nothing without remembrance of it: by it we are saved, if we keep it in memory; that is it, that maketh or marreth all. In this plenty, but not of bread, in this abundance, 1 Cor. 15. 2. but not of water, we shall, I feare me, for our negligence and forgetfulnesse, we shall have a famine, not of bread, a thirst, but not of water: I feare me the dayes will come, that the Word of God will be rare, as in the dayes of Heli, that a good Minister will be 1 Sam. 3. Amos 8. 11. 2 Chro. 15. 10. precious in our eyes; as in the dayes of Amos, when m^n ran from sea to sea, to heare, and could not heare; as in the dayes of Asa, who was wroth with Hanani the Seer, and put him in prison. Except the time of the Prophets and the Primitive Church, wherein they spake with fierie tongues and cloven tongues, there was never, I am Act. 2. 3. perswaded, such a time as this is, such excellency and variety of Gods gifts; For surely for doctrine, for exhortation, for prayer, arguing, utterance, and perswasion, men in these dayes have rare gifts, and the contempt of such precious gifts cannot but bring some rare and great plague upon this age; yea the plague that Amos threatned; The prudenr shall keep silence in that time, For it is an evill time; and no marvell, we regard not the Word, but sit gaping for sleep in the Church, as Ravens upon the housetop for heat in the Summer time. Magnes ferrum rubiginosum ad se non trahit, The Load-stone draweth not to it selfe rusty Iron, but iron that is pure; and Iet draweth not unto it selfe straw that is soule, but that which is cleane: Sic Verbum reprobos non ad se trahit, nisi fuerint Spiritu Dei sanctificati: So the Word doth not draw unto it the Reprobates, except they bee sanctified by the Spirit of God; it worketh not upon incredulous sluggish Auditors, which are not touched with any care of the Word; but upon attentive and diligent hearers, such as bring with them before they come to heare,

1. A desire to heare. Who are profitable hearers of the Word.
2. A preparation to heare.
3. A purpose to obey.
And such as in hearing bring 1. Attention. 2. Circumspection. 3. Application.
And such as when they have heard the Word, use 1. Meditation. 2. Action. 3. Continuation.
To these the Word is a savour of life unto life; but unto those that regard not these things, it is a savour of death unto death. I have read of many florishing memories; Seneca writeth of himselfe, that he was able to recite by heart 2000. names in the same order, wherein they were spoken: Portius Latro had such a memory, that yee could not name that martiall man, but hee would runne thorow his acts presently; and Cyneas, the next day hee came to Rome, could salute all the Senators of Rome in order, and all the people that stood round about him, whom he never saw, nor knew before: and Tully, for memory commendeth Hortentius, and Lucullus; Lucullus for matter, the other for words.
Now the excellentest matter of all others, either for the memory to account, or for any part of the soule to conceive, is the Word of God: therefore saith Iude, Remember the words which were spoken, etc. Memory is as the verticle of the soule, and the habitacle of the Word; as the meate in the stomacke, so the Word in the memory. The belly is the bodies storehouse, and the memory the soules treasury, Thesaurus and custos omnium: In this storehouse, Esdras is reported to store up the Bible; and Mary, the sayings of our Saviour: in this, Carindes did lay up volumes, Aug. prologo in lib. 1. de doctrina Christi. and Cyrus of Persia 300000. Souldiers: and Antony the unlearned Eremite of Aegypt by hearing remembred, and by remembring, came to understand the Scriptures.
The beasts that chew not the cud, were holde for uncleane; the mind that remembers not the Word, is unpure, uncleane: there is Memoria and reminiscentia, the habituall and actuall memory, the present and recalling remembrance; which some resemble to a booke and the reading in the booke, unseparable twinnes in matters of Divinity, lest our memory unpractised, bee turned like Pharoes butler, to forgetfulnesse, is well compared to a game at tennise, which so long indures, quam diu pila inter eos proijciatur, as the ball is tossing; and the Scriptures so long profit, as they are remembred. Sicut nullum momentum est, quo homo non utetur vel fruatur Dei bonitate; Ita nullum debet esse momentum, quo Verbum in Hugo. de anima. memoria non habeat; The Word of God ought to be so frequent in out memories, as Gods blessings are to our ordinary senses: the one is ever present, the other ought never to bee forgotten: but ourmemory, as touching this Word of God, it is as an unthrifts

purse, that holdeth no mony: like a riven dish, that holdeth We are dull to heare, careless to remember Gods Word. no water; ut Danaidum dolium, which runneth out so soone as it is filled; our eares are like a riddle, or five which letteth go cleane water, and keepeth gravell and stones still; but they must be like a glasse window, that shutteth out a tempest, and admitteth the light; they must be stopped at vaine things, and opened to good things: yee must not be like them of whom Paul prophesied, Which will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but having their eares itching, 2 Tim. 4. 3. shall after their owne lusts get to themselves an heape of teachers.
Men are so dull, deafe, carelesse; that God sometime is enforced to speake to the Heavens, saying, Heare ob Heavens, and harken oh Earth, for the Lord hath spoken. Sometimes to the Earth, O Earth, Earth, Earth, heare the Word of the Lord: sometime to the Esa. 1. Ier. 22. 29. Mountaines, Heare O yee Mountaines, the Lords quarrell, and yee mighty foundations of the Earth, for the Lord hath a controversie with his people: sometime to the trees: so he may speake to the pillars, roofe, and glasse windowes, for wee will not heare him, or if we heare him, wee remember it not. Aristotle saith, that the Thracians doe not count above five, they cannot remember to five, but wee can remember five hundred things of the World, but not five things of Gods doctrine. Can a maid forget her ornament, or a bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten mee dayes without number: Ier. ^. 32. we neither remember the text, nor any doctrine, nor any exhortation delivered from it: like the Philosopher that remembred not his owne name; like the Ostrich, that remembreth not her egges left in the dust: but wee must heare to learne, and learne to remember, to follow it, and follow it to continue in that good, that wee have heard; then are wee blessed: so saith our Saviour, Blessed are they that heare the Word of God and keepe it: that is, that keepe it in his life, and keepe it in his memory, that wee Luk. 11. 28. may say of our Sundayes, as Titus Vespasian said of his dayes, wherein he gave not an Almes: Hoc Sabbatum perdidi, I have lost the Sabbath. Yea a thousand, yea tenne thousand Sabbaths have we lost: we are no whit the better for comming unto Church, as Peter said to Christ, Master, wee have laboured all night, and have catched nothing: so may we say, We have come to the Church, and have heard the Word of Life and Salvation, but we have learned nothing, we can remember nothing, we are now hit the better for comming to the Church: Frustra Dei gratiam accipimus, wee have received the Word of God in vaine. Memorie is as a chest. If a ^ Cor. 16. 1. man have all the gold of Ophir, and the silver of Tharsis, and the treasures of Ganges, it is nothing, except he hath a place to keepe them in: if a man heare tenne thousand sermons: it is nothing, except hee remember them; they are gotten in the Church, and forgotten and scattred in the Churchyard; like Hannibal, that could get the victory, but could not keepe it.

Tell mee, O tell me; what day in the weeke doe we give so evill The doctrine of Christ and his Apostles the foundation of the Church. example, of sitting and lulling in our beds as on the Sabbath? either we come not to Church, or if we come, wee heare not, or if we heare, we remember it not. O filthy favour that ariseth out of this loathsome channell! I spare to speake, I shame to see, I rue to know what I fully know against our soules in this respect: how can we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Hebr. 2. 2. Sinnes past be gone, and the Lord forgive us; some be to come, and the Lord strengthen us: lye wee may not, the Lord beeing judge; cleere our selves, wee cannot, our consciences bearing witnesse of so many negligences, and our great forgetfulnesse. How great might our knowledge have beene? How strong our faith? How ardent our love? How fierie our zeale? How reformed our lives, if we had heard with any conscience? Tertullian telleth of a water in Paphlagonia called Salmacis, of the which they that drinke, either fall into a phrensie, or into a lethargie: so, are wee not either mad, or fallen into a dead sleepe, to heare God so often, and remember him so little? Shame appertaineth unto us, and confusion may cover us as a cloake. O deafe eares, dumbe Dan. 9. tongues, dead hearts, dull soules: How long shall Wisedome crie? How Prov. 1. 20, 21, 22. long shall shee utter her voyce in the streetes? shee calleth in the highstreete among the prease in the entring of the gates, and uttereth her words in the City, saying, O yee foolish, how long will yee love foolishnesse, and the scornefull take their pleasure inscorning, and the fooles hate knowledge? But let us leave this sinne, and learne to remember more, and keepe more, else the more shall be our judgement.
But what must we remember? we must reme^ber the words of the Apostles, not of the Rabbines, Fathers, Doctors of the Church: therefore it is noted of the three thousand, that they continued in the Act. 2. 42. Apostles doctrine: It is Basis Ecclesiae, so saith Paul, Yee are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Iesus Christ himselfe being Ephes. 2. 20. the chiefe corner stone. Peter calleth it a most sure word: We have 1 Pet. 1. 19. (saith hee) a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which yee doe well, that yee take heede, as unto a light that shineth in a darke place, etc. Esay sendeth all men to the Law, To the Law, to the testimonie (saith the Prophet) If they speake not according to this Word, it is because Esa. 8. 20. there is no light in them. Ieremy calleth all mens traditions, dreames, chaffe: How long doe the Prophets delight to prophesie lyes? Ier. 23. 26, 27, 28, 29. Even prophecying the deceit of their owne heart. Thinke they to cause my people to forget my name by their dreames, which they tell every man unto his neighbour, as their fore-fathers have forgotten my Name for Baal? The Prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that hath my Word, let him speake my Word faithfully: what is the Chaffe to the Wheat, saith the Lord? Is not my word even like a fire, saith the Lord, and like a hammer that breaketh the stone? These Saint Peter calleth deceivable fables: Wee followed not (quoth he) deceivable fables, when wee opened 2 Pet. 1. 16. unto you the power and comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. What

neede we to run to the channell, when wee may drinke of the The Scripture the rule of faith, the touch stone to trie Scripture. fountaine? or to feed of Acornes, when we may have the pure Wheat? Or to see with a Candle, when we may have the Sun light? All mens writings they are as puddles and cesternes, that can hold no water, they are Labruscae, sowre grapes. I looked (saith the Lord) that my vineyard should have brought forth good grapes, Ier. 2. Esa. 5. 3. and it brought forth wild and sowre grapes. Now by these sowre grapes hee meaneth errors in doctrine, as well as in life: The Zuingsius. Word of God must sit on the Bench: when Fathers, Councels, Doctors, Rabbines, Poets, Philosophers must stand at the barre. Paul discussing the question of Iustification, he saith not, What saith reason? What say the Rabbines? The Thalmud? The Caball? What say the Bishops? Doctors of Ierusalem? But, What saith the Scripture? So Peter proveth all from the Scripture. Wherefore it is contained in the Scripture: Behold, I put a stone in Sion, Rom. 4. 3. etc. This is to build on the Rocke: but a most miserable state it is, when a man buildeth on the sand: The house must needs fall, when the Church goeth from the doctrine Apostolicall, to Luk. 6. the doctrines of men; then is the Sunne as sackecloth, the Moon turned into bloud, the starres have lost their light; then the three Apoc. 6. uncleane Frogges be come out of the mouth of the Dragon, when Popes, Cardinals, Schoolemen rule the Church: Removeantur Chartae Apoc. 13. 16. Aug. Donato. nostrae, procedat in medium Codex Dei, Let our writings be taken away, let Gods Booke bee produced and brought in the place: Let us take away our deceitfull ballance, and let Gods ballance weigh and sway the truth of our cause.
Martin refused Scripture, and fled to traditions, and therefore Tertullian calleth him Apostaticall, and not Apostolicall. He calleth the Marcionites Owles, and Lucifrigas scripturarum: and saith that Tertull. lib. 4. contra Marcionitas. the Waspes make nests aswell as the Bees; and that the Marcionites erect Churches aswell as Christians: but in their nests is no hony, and in the Churches of the Marcionites is no Truth, no Scripture: they teach for doctrine, precepts of men: they are like unto Ravens, which conceive not with seed, but with wind; their Mat. 15. doctrine, is the doctrine of the wind, and the speech of the East-wind: Wee are borne againe, not of mortall, but of immortall seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. even by the Word of God, which liveth and indureth for ever, that is the true seed. The Papists are like the Marcionites, and the Valentinians, qui prius persuadent, quam docent, which first perswade, and after teach; but Christians doe first teach, and after perswade, and teach too, out of the Scriptures, as Apollo did, He proved by the Scriptures Iesus to be Christ: for he was a man, eloquent and Act. 18. 24, 28. 1 Thess. 4. 15. mighty in the Scriptures. Thus Paul taught, This say we unto you by the Word of the Lord: thus must wee say, for every point of Doctrine.
Againe, in that Iude bids them, Remember the Words which were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Iesus Christ; some gather from

these words, that this Epistle is not Canonicall, not written by The Saints of God are meek and gentie. Iude the Apostle. But I answere, that Iude naming other Apostles, excludeth not himselfe, but rather useth the authority of others, then of himselfe. So Iohn calleth himselfe Iohn at every word, not an Apostle; yet avoucheth his calling against Cerinthus Apoc. 1. 4, 9. and Ebion, saying, that the Lord Iesus commanded him to write. Apoc. 1. So Paul modestly and humbly, having to do with God, renounceth his titles, and saith; that he was not worthy to be called an Apostle: hee saith that he was among them, in much weakenesse, that 1 Cor. 15. 8. 1 Cor. 2. 3. he persecuted and wasted the Church of God, that he preached in infirmity, that he was mad in his Iudaisme: but having to do with the false apostles, and Pharises, hee avoucheth his calling, and rowzeth himselfe like a Lion; I certify you brethren, that Gal. 1. 13. Act. 26. 11. Gal. 1. 12. 1 Cor. 9. 1. 1 Cor. 13. 10. Gal. 2. 8, 9, 11. the Gospell, which was preached of me, was not after man, for neither received I it of man, neither was I taught it but by the revelation of Iesus Christ: he calleth himselfe, an Apostle; hee saith that hee laboured more then they all, that God was as mighty in him as in Peter, and how that Iames and Cephas, and Iohn, that were counted pillars, gave unto him the right hands of fellowship, and that hee withstood Peter to his face: he holdeth up his head with the best, comparing with them; I suppose that I was not (quoth he) inferiour to the very chiefe 2 Cor. 11. 5, 22. Apostles; they are Hebrewes, so am I; they are Israelites, so am I; they are of the seed of Abraham, so am I, they are the Ministers of Christ (I speake as a foole) I am more.
Againe: For the phrase of Iude, it is loving, mild; but yee beloved, Spiritus enim Dei nec mendax, nec mordax est; the Spirit of God is neither a lier, nor a biter: and Iude here like Paul will 1 Cor. 4. 21. not come with a rod, but in love, and in the Spirit of meeknesse: Nam facilius penetrant mollia quam aspera verba; Mild and gentle words do more pierce and perswade, then rough and rigorous speeches. Paul intreateth the Ephesians, that they would walke worthy the vocation Ephes. 4. 1, 2. whereunto they are called, with all humblenesse of mind, and meekenesse, with long suffring, supporting one another through love: and so he taught Timothy; The servant of God (quoth he) must be gentle towards all men, instructing them with meekenesse: so S. Iohn was mild in his 2 Tim. 2. 24, 25. 1 Iohn. 2. 12, 14, 18, 28. doctrine, calling them sometime little children, sometime Babes; hereby declaring his love and affection toward them: and in all the servants of God yee shall see a mild spirit, not spirantem flammas, not breathing threatnings as Saul did, and yet menaces and Act. 9. 1. Iude ver. 22. roughnesse must bee used. Wee must have compassion of some, and other some we must save with feare, pulling them out of the fire, and it is the Apostles charge; Admonish the unraly, comfort the feeble minded, beare 1 Thess. 2. 14. with the weake, be patient towards all men. The Samaritan had both oyle to mollify, and wine to search: He powred wine and oyle into the wound. The Chirurgeon hath both Balme and Cauterium; Luk. 10. the shepheard both a whistle and a dog; all sinners are not to be reproved alike, because all offend not alike* Nobilis equus umbra

virgae regitur, whereas indomitus nec calcaribus incitari potest, a rod In reprooving, due circumstances must be observed. will checke a free-horse, and a twigge command a gentle nag; whereas the spur cannot stiree the stubborne Iade, nor the whip skare an untamed Colt.
In reproving these circumstances, are to bee considered The Persons. The Place. The Time, and the Offence.
For the first, all sinners are to be rebuked, yet with wisdome and discretion; Qui mittit in altum lapidem, recidet in caput ejus, lest he deale like a man that throweth up a stone rashly in his humour, and it fall downe againe upon his owne head; to teach him wisdome.
Secondly, for the place; it must bee done by our Saviour Christs forme, Secrete, com teste, coram Ecclesia, alone, betweene him and thee, with two or three witnesses, before the whole Church; and if then he wil not heare and amend, let him be as an Heathen man and a Publicane.
Thirdly, the time must bee, while physicke may doe good; Nullum medicamentum sanat, nisi quod opportune adhibueris, No salve is saving that is ministred out of season: it is too late for birds to build their nests in summer; for the husbandman to sow in harvest; for the mariner to goe to sea, when the shippe is under saile; for the gardiner to displant trees, when they be old; for a sicke man to goe to physicke, when he is a dying; for the cooke to season meate that is putrified; for the vine-dresser to gather fruit when they bee rotten; for a man to cast water, when the house is burnt; and for the groome of the stable to shut the dore when the Steed is stollen: but the bird builds her nest in the Spring, the husbandman soweth his seed in Autumne, the Mariner goeth to sea, when the shippe is in the Haven, a wise man ante languorem, before sicknesse goeth to physicke, the gardinet planteth trees when they are yong, the cooke seasoneth his meate before it bee tainted, and a wise man casteth water, when the house beginneth to smoke; and reproofes must be used, while the sinner is curable.
Lastly, the offence is either publike, or private; if publike, then coram omnibus arguere, to reprove openly; a practice not unpractised in the primitive Church, as is apparant by the Excommunication of the incestuous man of Corinth; the publike confessions 1 Cor. 5. Socrates lib. 3. Cap. 13. of Ecebolius, and many others. If private, then wee must do as the physicians doth, who if he can by any meanes cure the wound, he will not cut the member from the body: so the physician of the soule, that will cure his brothers sinne, if he may do it without farther danger, he must conserve his name, and keep his credit; if not, hee must proceed to his farther shame. For an ingenious nature wil be quickly sorry, because he hath offended:

whereas a currish spirit wil be too too angry, because he is rebuked. Malicious reprehenders condemned. Now the end of all our reprovings must be, to bring the party reproved to repentance: This was S. Peters end, in rebuking Simon Magus, and Pauls end, in excommunicating the incestuous Act. 8. 22. 1 Cor. 5. 3. person: S. Ambrose his end in reproving Theodosius; and this must be the end of all reprovings, rebukings and threatnings.
And here I am to deale with three sorts of men: our covetous, ambitious and malicious reprehenders.
Our covetous will barke with the dogge, cackle with the daw, and sing with the crow for gaine; while there is hope of a prey; but deale as the Fox did with the crow, make frustrate their covetous hope, say and do what yee will, yee shall not have aword Aesope. of them.
The second, are like Pierius ambitious daughters, that were turned into Magpies, for correcting the Muses; these will reprehend Ovid Metam. Rulers, to winne applause of the Commons; propound Christ for an example, but their end is vaineglory.
The third, with Eupoles, will correct Alcibiades through malice: 1 Sam. 16. and with Shemei, rebuke David for envy: with the malecontent powre out their malice, and with the Satyrist satisfie their anger. The Prophet compares them to barking dogges, their teeth are cruell, their tongues venymous, they do breathe Psal. 59. out speares and lances; and have swords within their lippes; their end is not to cure the sore, but to uncover the wound; not to amend their sicke brother, but to content their owne sinnefull humour. But so to reprehend is no way lawfull; wee must deale with sinners, as Samuel did with Saul; chide them for their sinne, yet pray for their soule; as Moses did with the Israelites, who corrected their iniquities; yet would be blotted out of Gods Booke for their safeties: as David did with Absalom; who detested his fault, and yet would have died for his sake; then shall wee shew our selves true physicians, that seare the sore, to preserve the person; and hate the sinne, to preserve the soule.



THE NINE AND TVVENTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XVIII. 

How that they told you, that there shall bee mockers in the last time, etc.
Scorning and mocking, the highest degree of sin.



NOw he commeth to the words, that he will have them to remember, and they be these, That there shall come in the last dayes mockers: hee calleth the wicked, mockers: for in mustering up their sinnes, hee beginneth with their flouting, as an arch sinne, a capitall sinne, hee placeth it in the forefront, as Ioab did Vrias: it is a Metropolitan sinne, as Salomons harlot 1 Reg. 3. was among women the worst of all, as the beast in the Apocalyps, Apoc. 13. which inspired the other with blasphemy: like Antiochus, who did more hurt then all the Tyrants before him. Of these mockers speaketh Peter, as though he had followed Iude verbatim, word for word, but he hath answered them so fully, that we need not go any further for their confutation: There shall (saith he) come in the last dayes mockers, which will walke after their lusts, and say, Where 1 Pet. 3, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 8, 9. is the promise of his comming? for since the Fathers died, all things continue alike, from the beginning of the creation: For this they willingly know not, that the Heavens were of old, and the earth that was of the water, and by the water, by the Word of God: wherefore the world that then was,

perished, overflowed with the water; but the Heavens and earth, which There have beene scorners in all ages. are now, are kept by the same Word in store, and reserved unto fire, against the day of Iudgement, and of the destruction of ungodly men. Dearely beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day with the Lord is as a thousand yeeres, and a thousand yeeres as one day. The Lord is not slacke concerning his promise (as some men count slacknesse) but is patient toward us, etc. Salomon had to doe with such. All things come alike to all, Eccles. 9. 2. and the same condition; is to the just, and to the wicked, to the good and to the pure, and to the polluted, and to him that sacrificeth, and him that sacrificeth not; as is the good, so is the sinner; he that sweareth, and he that feareth an oath: so they said in Chrysostomes time, (...), Give me something here, let hereafter go to others: Mat. 22. such were in Christs dayes the Sadduces, they denied the Resurrection: Paul had to doe with these beasts, which said, Let us eate, and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. But if Peter reasoned well, 1 Cor. 15. 32. 1 Pet. 47. saying, Now is the end of all things at hand, be yee therefore sober and watching in prayer: The Epicures in Pauls time reasoned vilely and beastly, nam contrariorum, contraria est ratio: for of contraries there is a contrary reason. Such skummes have beene in all ages: when Esay spake of sackloth, they spake of slaying of oxen, and Esa. 22. drinking wine: when the Apostles spake with new tongues, they spake with their old tongues and said, that they were drunken with new wine: when Paul spake of the true God, the Athenians Act. 2. 13. called him (...); a babbler, a rascall, a trifler: when Christ wrought miracles, they said, that he did them by the Divell: and Mat. 12. now that we speake of God, and the Kingdome of God, they say that we are idle, and must say something, and that our doctrine is good for those that have little to doe: they deride us as simple men that know nothing; with the Corinthians they call our preaching foolishnes; with the Aegyptians they call our resort unto the Church, idlenesse; with the Captaines, they call our Exod. 8. 2 Reg. 9. Act. 26. 1 Cor. 1. 21. Act. 26. 25. preachers madde men; with Festus, they call our zeale, plaine dotage and madnesse; and with Pliny, they call our meetings, conventicles: but wee will answere them, as Paul did the Corinths, It pleaseth God through the foolishnes of preaching to save them that beleeve. As the Apostle did Festus, Wee are not mad, but wee speake the Words of truth and sobernes. As the Christians did Plinie, Trajane, and others for their night meetings, our witnesse is above, our praise is not with men, but with God.
The Latines for mocking use a triple Synonyme, Irrisio, subsannatio, Rom. 2. illusio, arisu, ^^gatu, ludo, a laughing to skorne, a mocking, by snuffing up the nose, and a scorning, by way of jesting; the first two are open, the third more secret, when we breake a jest upon our neighbour, that tends to his disgrace.
Of these mockers there be sundry kindes:
Some that mocke God.
Some that mocke Gods man.

They that mocke God, are of two sorts; the open that deny Divers sorts of mockers both of God and men. God in word, and in deed, as Pharaoh.
And the secret, that professe in shew, but deny in truth, like the Sonne in the Gospell, who in word said, I go, father, but in truth went not at all: Multi adorantes Crucem exterius, Crucem spiritualem per contemptum conculcant, Many will beare the Crosse in their bosomes, that never imprint it in their hearts, and many fall before it in their closet, that never follow it in their lives: Irrisor, non poenitens, qui adhuc agit, quod penitet; He is a (...), Iside. no repenter, whose works are not answerable to their words. These mocke-Gods shall one day feele the hand of God. Glaucus, that scoffed at Venus, was torne in pieces with his mares; Lycurgus despising Bacchus, chopt his owne legs asunder, as hee lopt his vines; Holofernes acknowledging no God, but Nabuchodonozer, Iudith. 13. was murthered by a woman; the people that will sacrifice to the Queene of heaven, were consumed with the sword of famine; Nicanor, that derided the Lord of the Sabbath, lost his head, hand, shoulder: Phericides in derision of the God-head, bragged Ier. 44. 17. abroad, that himselfe had as much prosperity, that never did sacrifice, as they that offred an hundred Hecatombs to the gods: but was as Herod co^sumed with lice; Daphida a scoffer, in derision Act. 12. 23. of Apollos Oracle at Delphos, enquired of it, whether he should find his horse that he lost, when indeed hee had none; the Oracle made this answere: Inventurum quidem, sed ut co turbatus periret, that hee should find an horse, but lose his life: whereupon hee returning (ioyfull that hee deluded the Oracle) fell into the hands of King Attalus, whom he had abused in speeches, and was by him commanded to be throwne head-long from a Rocke called the horse, and so perished. Pope Leo, the tenth, hearing Cardinall Bembus speaking of the Gospell, broke out into this blasphemy, Quantum nobis, ac nostro caetui profuerit e^ de Christe fabula, satis est omnibus seculis; What profit and commodity hath redounded to us and our order, by that fable reported of Christ, the world can beare sufficient winesse; but hee died miserably among his cuppes, cum nec Coelum, nec infernum post hanc vitam esse crederet, beleeving neither Heaven, nor Hell after this life, but thought heaven but a mockage, and hell but a scare-crow. So Iulius the third, making his belly his God, commanded a hot Peacocke to be kept cold for supper, and being deceaved of it, began bitterly to blaspheme: a Cardinall sitting by, intreated his holinesse, not to be mooved for a trifle* Quid, (inquit) si Deus voluit usque adeo propter unum pomum irasci, etc? Not moved (quoth he?) shall God be so angry with our first parents as for an apple to deprive them of Paradise; and not I, that am his vicar, bee much more angry for a Peacock, so much better the^ an apple? But God met with him, and hee died of a gowte. These are examples for mock-Gods, to deride the Lord of hoasts no longer: for his hand

will bee heavie upon them one day. Scoffing and iesting the bafest fruit of Wit.
The second sort of mocking, is Irrisio hominum, mocking of men, but the disgrace alights on God, for as the defacing of the image is the disgrace of the Prince: so the mocking of a Christian, is the scorning of Christ. David was dishonoured in the disgrace of his servants, and Christ derided in the derision Mat. 24. of a Christian; For what is done unto them, is done unto him; yet many offend greatly in this regard, applying their wits and understanding to nothing else, but to frumps, and mockes, and jests, to disgrace others, to move laughter, if they can nip, or by a grudging scoffe, disgrace another honester than themselves; then wee call them merrie Greekes, pleasant companions, good fellowes; but this is the least harvest, the least fruit of their wit; Iocis utuntur, qui currum potius quam curiam decent, they use jests befitting rather the dung-cart, than the Court, and which will sooner procure vomit than laughter, and then they triumph, but indeed, sine victoria, without victorie. These are dogges, not men: Nam malorum duo sunt genera, there be two kindes of bad men, alii Canes, alii porci, some are dogges, some are hogges; many are hogges, their heads bee dull, their eares deafe, their eyes blinde, and the whole man so cold, as they desire not the knowledge of Gods wayes; but most are dogges, reproaching, jesting, deriding, mocking the professors of the truth: but take heed of such dogges. Of these dogges the Apostle speaketh thus, without shall be dogges and enchanters, and whoremongers, etc. these shall never have any right in the Tree of life, nor enter Phil. 3. 2. Apoc. 22. 15. into the gates of the heavenly City: and hee nameth first these Dogges, because these dogges, these mockers are in the height of sinne, and therefore he placeth them foremost, as Vrias in the fore-front of the battell. As Seneca said of Scylla, that hee left killing, when none were left to bee killed; so these men will leave scoffing, when there is no honest man left to be playd upon. But let us not sinne with an high hand; these men are furthest from mercy; For if we sinne willingly, after that wee have received Heb. 10. 26, 27. the knowledge of the Truth, there remaineth no more Sacrifice for sinne, but a fearefull looking for judgement and violent fire, which shall drowne the adversary.
These mockers are the worst sort of men. David nameth three sorts of sinners, the first are they, that walke after the counsell of the ungodly: The second are they, that stand in the way of sinners: Phil. 1. 1. And the third are they that sit in the seate of the scornefull: these last are the worst: they are set in cathedra pestilentiae, in the chaire of pestilence; for so the Septuagint translate it.
The Scripture discovers unto us a three-fold chaire or seate: First of justice; and such a one may that Throne seeme to bee which Salomon erected.
The second, is of Doctrine: as our Saviour Christ saith of 1 Reg. 10. 18.

the Pharises, They sit in Moses chaire. Divers notorious scoffing Atheists.
And thirdly, we read of the chaire of Pestilence, where these mockers sit, here they doe ease themselves, and take their delight as sometimes Babylon did, who vaunted so much that shee Mat. 23. 2. did sit like a Queene, and should see no mourning; as it were in a scorne of all that God could doe unto her. And this was the case of cursed Pharaoh, who seemed to mocke God to his face, when he sayd, I know not the Lord, neither will I let the children of Israel goe: these mockers are pestilent fellowes, their breath is Exod. 9. as the breath of a Basiliske, it infecteth the ayre: David complaineth of them, The proud, meaning the wicked which contemne Gods Word, and tread Religion under their feet, have had me exceedingly in derision; and yet flout they and mocke they never so much, no sooner doth God touch them, but they shake, and quiver like a leafe: Their heart dieth within them, like Nabal. 1 Sam. 2 5. For none feare more at the last, then these proud scorners, that jest at God and all goodnesse. Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily, contemned, derided God, finding Jupiter Olympus in a golden coate, pulled it off, and gave him a linsie-woolsie coate, warme for Winter, and light for Summer, and plucked away Aesculapius his golden beard, saying, His Father Apollo had no beard, and therefore not meete that he should be better than his Father: he tooke away the golden cups and rings from the Images, et se accipere, non auferre dicebat, hee said, hee received them, not tooke them away; because the Images held out their hands, as if they had offered him them: Having gotten a prey and having a prosperous winde, hee said, that God favoured Pirats. Such a scorner was Clearchus of Pontus, and Aristodemus of Troy: but no sooner did God touch Dionysiw, but he trembled, hee durst trust no Barbour, but caused his daughters to burne his haire with hot Walnut-shels: Clearchus of Pontus slept in a Chest: and Aristodemus of Troy had a bed in the Ayre: they feared their owne shadow. Thus Pashur was a terror to himselfe, and to all his friends: for Ieremy said unto him, The Lord hath not called thy name Pashur, but Magermissabib, that is, feare, and terror round about. It made Ier. 20. 3, 4. Balaam say, Moriatur anima mea, Let my soule dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end bee like unto his. Iulian tooke his bloud Numb. 23. 10. in his hands, being strooken with an arrow from Heaven, and threw it up into the Ayre; saying, Vicisti, Galilaee, O man of Galile, thou hast gotten the victory. Calvin writing upon the hundred and fifteenth Psalme, verse sixteene, telleth a notable story, how God suddenly shut up the mouth of a Blasphemer, and made him dumbe, who derided God, saying, Coeli coelorum Domini: The Heaven of Heavens unto the Lord, and the Earth hath he given to the children of men, as though men in Earth might live at randome. Thus Esay traverseth the scorners of Ierusalem, saying, Heare the Word of the Lord, yee scornefull men, because yee have Esa. 28. 14, 15.

said, Wee have made a covenant with Death, and with Hell are wee at an Scoffers and mockers punished. agreement; though a scourge runne over, and passe thorow, it shall not come at us: for wee have made falshood our refuge, and under vanity are wee hid. But saith God, I will lay Iudgement to the rule, and Righteousnesse to the ballance, and your covenant with Death shall bee disannulled, and your agreement with Hell shall not stand: now therefore bee no mockers, lest your bonds increase. So heare this, yee scorners of Norfolke, God will meete with you one day, Hee will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairie scalpe of him that walketh in Psal. 68. 21. Psal. 21. 8, 9. his sinnes, and his right handshall finde out all these mockers that hate him: Hee shall make them like a fiery Oven in the time of his anger. The Lord shall destroy them in his wrath, and the fire shall devoure them. These mockers shall not alwayes doe him this dishonour: but God will draw his hand, yea his right hand out of his bosome and consume them. Psal. 74. 11.
Foure notable scoffers I knew in my time, that held of one ging; the first dyed mad; the second hanged himselfe; the third is a begger, and yet was richly left; the fourth, is strooken blind. Let men take heed, if God be God, they shall not goe unpunished; for they open their mouth against Heaven. David cryeth out that hee was a worme and not a man, a shame of men, and Psal. 22. 6. 7. the out-cast of all people; that all that saw him, had him in derision, they made a mow and nod the head at him: but yet hee gathereth heart, and insulteth over these his enemies, saying, Let the wicked be put to confusion, and to silence in the grave, and let these lying lips bee made Psal. 31. 17, 18. dumbe, which cruelly, proudly, and spightfully speake against the righteous. Herod and Pilate scoffed at the Lord Iesus his simplicitie, made a May-game of him, the rascall souldiers flouted Iuke 22. him, but hee left the vengeance to his Father, who met with them all. One saith that the scoffers shall bee punished in Hell, in their tongues; quoting Luke 16. 24. for said hee, In quo membro peccamus, in codem plectemur: In what member wee sinne, in the same must wee be punished; as the Envious in their eyes, the Gluttons in their throats, the Lecherous in their bodies, the Malicious in their hearts, the Covetous in their hands, the Scoffers in their toungs: but this is but a speculation, a quiddity; for surely the damned are tormented in all parts, but yet chiefely in that part that hath offended; paena peccato respondet, the punishment is answerable to the sinne.
The World is full of these mockers; for men are come to a wonderfull height of sin, and are growne to be most notoriously wicked and ungodly: so it is said, that cursed Cham mocked his Father Noah; I smael mocked godly Isaac, because it is like, I smael Gen. 2. 22. Gen. 21. seeing godly Isaac performing some duties of Religion, Prayer, Thankesgiving, or the like, hee laughed him to scorne. The Athenians mocked Paul, What will this babbler say? So the Scribes Act. 17. Mat. 26. 68. and Pharisees mocked our Saviour, saying, Haile, King of the

Iewes. The Iewes mocked Saint Peters Sermon, saying, These Scoffing a kind of persetion. men are ful of new wine, they are possessed with the spirit of the Buttery. The children of Bethel mocked Elisha, saying, Goe up, bald pate. This was the complaint of godly Ieremy, O Lord, I am in 2 Reg. 2. 22. Ier. 20. 7. derision dayly, everie one mocketh me: and as it was, so it is still, and shall bee: the World is full of such lewd and wicked men, (as Nilus of Crocodiles;) such mockes-God, that mocke and mow at all good duties, scoffing and scorning all Religion, flowting and misusing all Gods faithfull Ministers, raile upon them, and revile them; yea, if any man feare God, and worke righteousnesse, attend to reading, exhortation and doctrine, pray evening and morning, and at noone-day, instruct their families with Abraham, and will not sweare with the swearer, drinke with the drunkard, nor runne with the prophane in all excesse of riot; this man shall bee derided, mocked, scorned, jested at, and railed upon, branded with many odious names: but let these mockers take heed, God will come in judgement, hee will bee a swift witnesse and a sharpe Iudge against them. Looke on that cursed Cham, and scoffing Ismael; behold Gods vengeance upon those fortie two boyes that mocked Elisha. What became of them that mocked and misused the Prophets of the Lord? What became of them that mocked and misused Christ Iesus our Saviour? and yee shall see, none of them escaped unpunished.
This mocking is a kinde of persecution; these mockers are persecutors; Ismael did but gybe, and fleere and flout at Isaac, yet Gen. 21. Gal. 5. 29. Mat. 27. 39. Paul calleth it persecution: those that railed on Christ, despited him as much, as they that crucified him with their hands, as those that ranne him to the heart with a speare. The wicked now persecute the Saints, and laugh, and gybe, and fleere at them to the full: but God shall laugh at them another day: hee will, yee mockers, Hee will laugh at your destruction, and mocke you, when Prou. 1. 26, 27. your feare commeth like suddaine desolation, and your destruction shall come like a whirlewind, when affliction and anguish shall come upon you, etc. The rich mans tongue burned in Hell, and could not have a spoonefull of water; and shall not these tongues fry in Hell, Luke 16. that raile, that jest, that mocke at Honesty and Religion? Who say, that they will beleeve their hound, before a Preacher, for hee will not hunt counter. God will burne one day these tongues: For if that tongue, that mocketh his earthly Father and Mother shall bee pulled out; As Agur said, The eye that mocketh Prov. 3. 17. his Father, and despiseth the instruction of his Mother, let the Ravens in the valley pick it out, and the young Eagles eateit; what shall the tongue doe, that mocketh God, his heavenly Father, the 2 Cor. 5. 20. Church, his Mother, the Saints, his fellow brethren, and members of Christs Body, the holy Ghost his Schoole-master, the Preachers, the messengers of God, the Gospell, the Word of life, the two Sacraments, the two dugges of life, the Food of our soules?

Into their secrets, let not my soule come, saith old father Iacob. Many Scoffers and railers smite with the tongue. condemne us of singularity, precisenesse, puritanisme; they would not have us so odde, but to be good fellowes, boone companions, sport and play, drinke and swill like other men, and to Gen. 49. 6. walke as the world doth. But let us answere these men, as Alexander answered Parmenio, counselling him to a thing undecent and unseemely, Facerem, si Parmenio essem, at Alexandro neutiquam licet, I would doe this, if I were Parmenio, but it is no way beseeming Alexander to doe it. So will wee answere Atheists, Papists, Worldlings, We would doe such and such things, we would drinke with the drunkard, sweare with the swaggerer, and runne into all excesse of riot, if wee were Atheists, Papists, prophane worldlings; At Protestantibus and Christianis non licet: But it is not lawfull for Christians, and Protestants, so to doe. God bee thanked, wee are free now from open persecution, the Moone is not turned into bloud, the Dragon pursueth not the woman, the daughters of Sion are not Apoc. 6. Cap. 12. Lament. 2. 1. 2 Reg. 21. darkened, the Church is not blacke, as Cant. 1. our bloud is not powred out like water; as in Ierusalem, the Preachers are not scattred abroad, as Moses in Madian, Daniel in Chaldaea, Hosea in Israel, Ieremy in Iuda, Iohn in Asia, Peter in Samaria, Philip in Alexandria, Thomas in Aethiopia, Bartholomew in India, Andrew in Scythia, Simo^ in Persia, Iudas in Mesopotamia, Marcus in Colonia, Nathanael in France, Ioseph of Aramathia in Scotland, and Paul in England: yet are we not free from all persecution, for wee are persecuted with the toung; the woolf cannot bite, yet can he barke; the wicked cannot smite with the fist, yet can he smite with the toung: these serpents cannot sting, yet can they hisse, as they said of Ieremy, Come, let Ier. 18. 18. us smite him with the tongue, and let ^^ not give heed to any of his Words: so good men shall be sure to bee smitten with the tongue. These voices are oftentimes heard; Oh these holy men, oh these Bible-men, oh these precisians, Puritans, mortified men, men of the spiritlare not others holy, and honest, and good as well as they? Oh take heed: Dathan, Corah and Abiram went to hell for as li^lle as Numb. 6. 16. that; and thither shall these go, if they repent not. The first Christians wanted not these derisions, mockings, and scoffings; Tertullian in Apologetico saith, that they in the Primitive Church were called Asinarij, Semissij, homines Crucifixi discipuli, Galilaei, Nazareni, heards of Asses, vile Fellowes, the disciples of a man crucified, Galilaeans, Nazarites, eaters of mans flesh, drinkers of mans bloud; for that they received the Sacraments. Libanus, scholler to Iulian the Apostata, scoffed at Christ, asking what the Sonne of the Carpenter did then in heaven? To whom the Schoole-master of Antioch answered, Concinnat loculos Iuliano: he was making coffins for Iulian. So he died within 3. daies (saith the Tripartite History:) The same Tripartite History telleth of one Lucius Lib. 7. cap. 12. Samasatensis, who mocking at Christianity, said, that he got

nothing by it, but the increase of his name in one syllable: For The godly usually mocked, for well doing. before he was christened, hee was called Lucius, but after that he was called Lucianu^: but he mocked, and barked so long at Christ, that in fine he was torne in pieces of dogs; one dog are another. A wicked witnesse mocketh Iudgement (saith Salomon) but judgements Prov. 19. 28, 29. 2 Sam. 6. 21, 21. are prepared for the scornefull, that is, mockers. Finely did David answere Michol, It was before the Lord, which chose me rather then thy Fathers house, etc. And I will yet bee more vile then thus, and will bee low in my owne sight, etc. So let us answere these huswifes, dames, scoffers, mockers, God hath not chosen them, nor their Fathers house, and we wil be yet more vile, seeing it is before our God. But yet howsoever Iulian flowt at Christ, Diagoras jest at religion, Dionysius scoffe at the last Iudgement, Ismael the bastard 2 Reg. 2. 19. mocke Isaac, Senacherib laugh at the virgin Sion, and nod his head at Ierusalem; yet how le they, weep they, and lament this sinne in hell. Oh brethren, hee that heard our men, how in their secret meetings they deride the Preacher, the Word, the Auditors, the Church, the assemblies, how they canvice every professour his life, and how they censure all men, how they open their mouth against heaven, and their tongues walke thorow the earth, how they talke on their Ale-bench, sparing neither Magistrate, not Minister, nor private man, would wonder, that such iniquitie should be in the world, yet are they no sooner in danger, but they tremble.
But the vilenesse of this sinne of mocking shall yet more plainely appeare; if yee marke the cause of it, it is ever lightly for doing well, and refraining evill: For this cavse Cain disdained, and hated his brother Abell, because his owne works were evil, and 1 Iohn 3. 12. his brothers good, a vile spirit, that cannot abide vertue, but so greedily thirsteth after sinne, which is of the Divell; drinke not with the drunkard, and they mocke thee; sweare not with the swearers, and they mocke thee; be not vaine in words, in apparell, in behaviour, and they mocke thee. Heare the Word, read of it, talke of it, and by and by, a yong Saint, and an old Divell, you will to Heaven, ere your bones bee cold, with a number of such mockes and divellish taunts: but Iudgements are prepared for these, Prov. 19. 29. sinne seene and sorrowed for, hath pardon promised, but sinne jested at and played withall, hath vengeacne threatened. It is the 2 Sam. 24. voice of a Christian to say, I have sinned: but it is the voice of a reprobate, to say, Tush, let them preach, I will sinne still: and Prov. 14. 9. so verifieth the saying of Salomon, The foole maketh a mocke of sinne, he doth not know the grievousnesse thereof, nor Gods judgements against the same.
It is strange that one reporteth, that in Collecke a towne in Germany, Anno. 1505. certaine vaine persons hopping and dancing in the Church-yard, being admonished by the minister to cease, and contemning it, ranne round about, till at last they

fell all downe dead. And note that these vile men shall be in the It is damnable to scoffe at the Saints. last times, they have beene at all times; For sinne is as ancient as Satan, who was a murtherer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, but now they abound, like Bees in Hibla, like Serpents in Iohn 8. 44. Sinai, like lice in Aegypt. Cornelius Agrippa derided Moses, calling him a coozener, and said, that the sea dried not up, but that hee marked the tides and course of the Moone; that hee drew no water out of the rocke, but marked the haunts of the wild beasts. The Philosophers called Christ a Magician, that hee did all by Necromancie: The Libertines contemne all the Apostles, they call Mathew an usurer, Peter an Apostata, Luke a pelting physician, Paul, vas confractum, a broken vessell, Iohn, adolescentem stolidum, a foolish yong man. The Novatians called Cyprianus, Caprianus; and the Arrians called Athanasius, Sathanasius: but all this is nothing to the contempt of these dogs. We may say now, as the Prophet said, The children shall presume against the ancient, and the vile, against Esay. 3. 3. 2 Reg. 2. the honorable. The boyes of Bethel scorned Elisha: and the sawcy boyes of England scorne at all doctrine. Veni Domine Iesu, Come Lord Iesus, come quickly. O beloved, our time is now to bee wise; To kisse the Sonne: if we do not, Mercy passeth, and Iudgement Psal. 2. commeth, and warned men must die in their sinnes, and their bloud be upon them.
Lastly, he noteth in these mockers, that they live at randon; They walke after their lusts: like beasts they fulfill their sensuall appetites, they doe what seemeth good in their owne eyes; They make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it: All their care is for Rom. 13. 14. the flesh, none for the spirit; all for the body, little or none for 2 Cor. 10. 3. the soule; all for earth, little for heaven; they walke after the flesh; and they warre after the flesh: For so doth Paul distinguish Rom. 16. 18. them; these men are the slaves of the flesh, they serve not the Lord, but their belly; they thinke themselves the only men of the world, and count their life the happiest, and promise to themselves liberty, yet are they worse then gally-slaves, and the vilest prisoners in the world: other prisoners have me^ to be their Iaylers; these have 2 Tim. 2. 26. Mat. 22. 13. divels: For they are in the snare of the Divell, and are taken of him at his will. Others have chaines of iron, these have chaines of darkenes: others are for a time, these for ever; Thou shalt not come out thence, Mat. 5. 26. till thou hast paid the utmost farthing: but that will never be; now that 2 Pet. 2. 19. they are prisoners. Note Peters reason; Of whomsoever a man is overcome, even unto the same is he in bondage; but their malice, their envy, their pride overcommeth them; therfore be they in bondage to them. Pius, etsi serviat, liber est, a godly man, though he serveth, yet is he a free man. I will walke at libertie (saith David) for I seeke thy precepts. Malus, etiamsi regnat, seruus est: a bad man although he ruleth, yet is he a servant, et tot dominorum, quot vitiorum, and that of so many masters, as he hath vices. Hereupo^ saith our Saviour, Iohn 8. 34, 35. Whosoever committeth sinne, is the servant of sinne; and the servant abideth

not in the house for ever. His leachery, envy, malice, covetousnesse The Vnderstanding and Will, the subiects of Wisedome. mastereth him: Be not (therefore) overcome of evill: but overcome evill with goodnesse: Vincimur, non vincimus: wee are not overcome, wee not overcome; Let not sinne therefore raigne in your mortall bodies, that yee should obey it in the lusts thereof: And againe, Rom. 6. 12. 21. Rom. 12. 14. Let not sinne have dominion over you. In these men all the members of their body are defiled, they bee arma injustiviae, weapons of unrighteousnesse, and all the powers of their soule are corrupted; peccati enim sedes est anima, the soule is the seate of sinne, the two powers of the soule are Vnderstanding and Will; either wee know not that which is good, or wee cannot performe it, for the weakenesse of our understanding. The naturall wise man, 1 Cor. 2. 14. (whose knowledge is not cleered by Gods Spirit) perceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishnesse unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. And further the Apostle saith, that the wisedome of the Flesh is death: and the reason hee rendreth after in the next verse, saying, Because Rom. ^. 6, 7. the wisedome of the flesh is enmity against God, for it is not subject unto the Law of God, neither can be. Naturally our cogitations are darkened, and wee strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in Ephes. 4. 18. us. Thus wee either know not that which is good, or wee doe it not, by reason of the weakenesse of our understanding: Or otherwise wee know Gods Commandements and doe them not, ob voluntatis defectum, because our wils are defective; our wils are readily carried unto lusts, to fulfill them, not to the commandements of God, to obey them, Video meliora, proboque, I see better Ovid. things, ct I allow them, quoth Medea. We fulfill the lusts of the flesh and of the minde, serving lusts and divers pleasures. Vnderstanding Ephes. 2. Tit. 33. and Will are the two subjects of true Wisedome, in the one Knowledge, in the other, Affection cleaveth and sticketh, and both are to be holpen by Grace, the Vnderstanding without the Will, is weake and profiteth not, and the Will without it, is blinde: To know God, and not to love him, is very little; and who can love him, except hee know him? Knowledge and Vnderstanding is the gate, by which things at pleasure enter, but wee must not stand in the gate, wee must goe further; for God respecteth not how much a man understandeth, but how much hee loveth; and affectus subiugat, and how much he subdueth his affections. The Vnderstanding is to be enlightned, the Will to be moved, the Vnderstanding to be instructed, the Will to be defended; the Vnderstanding to be lightned by Faith, and the Will to be inflamed with love, to trample, and tread all lust under the feete. Hee that can overcome his lusts, as Samson the Philistines, with the jaw-bone of an Asse; as David did Goliah, Iudg. 13. 1 Sam. 18. with a sling: he that can overcome this tower of Babylon, pull downe these walles of Iericho, hee shall see the goodnesse of the Lord, Psal. 27. in the land of the Living. We talke of Christianity, but it is true,

in the Land of the living: wee talke of Christianity, but it is true Mortification a signe of Iustification. Christianity, true manhood, to master thy lusts: For they that are Christs, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. This is Christianity indeed; this is to professe to know God, both in Gad. 5. 24. Tit. 1. 15. 2 Tim 3. Mar. 10. Iohn 8. Iudg. 3. Iudg 15. words and in workes; this is both to have a shew of godlinesse and the power of godlines; this is to have both leaves and fruit; this is to be a true child of Abraham. We read of the strength of Shamgar, who slew six hundred men with an Oxe goad; of Samson, who slew a whole Army of the Philistines with a jaw bone; of David, who smote down a Giant with a pibble stone; of Hercules, 1 Sam. 17. who overcame a Lion and a Beare, and threw downe the birds of Stinphalida, and put downe an Amazon, a mighty warrior, and cut off the head of Hydra; but as Lactantius said, Lib. 1. cap. 9. these are nothing: hee is a stronger man, who overcommeth his wrath, than hee that overcommeth a Lion; he that treadeth under his desires, than hee that casteth downe Birds and ravenous fowles; he that suppresseth his lust, than he that suppresseth the Amazons. Hercules for all his strength, was a slave to Omphale, and sate spinning in a womans attire at her feete, with a Rocke and a Distaffe. He that is slow to anger, is better than a mighty man: and hee that ruleth his owne minde, is better than hee that winneth a Prov. 16. 32. Citie. We are desirous to know the state of our Salvation, our Election, and Glorification: Let us then beginne where God beginneth, at the renouncing of our lusts; For the grace of God that bringeth Salvation to all men, teacheth us to deny ungodlinesse, and Tit. 2. 12. worldly lusts. None can looke for the blessed hope, but they that have denyed ungodlinesse and worldly lusts. None can say, There is layd up for mee a crowne of righteousnesse, but such as can say, I have fought a good fight, except they have striven against 2 Tim. 4. 7. their lusts. Election is a thing revealed by steps. As therefore it is madnesse to a man, that climbeth a ladder, to labour to set his foot at the first step, on the highest step of the Ladder, but to beginne at the lowest, and so goe to the highest: Paul maketh these steps, Vocation, Iustification, Sanctification, Glorification; Rom. 8. so that if I would come to Glorification the highest step, and is in Heaven with God, then must I beginne at the lowest step.
But to prosecute this worthy point farther: If I be called of God, then am I justified; if justified, then am I sanctified; if sanctified now, then shall I be glorified hereafter. Paul saith, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Iesus. Yea, but who Rom. 8. are those? Which walke not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. So then, if I would know whether I be in Christ Iesus, or no, I must looke how I walke, how I tame the flesh, and the lusts of it. If I finde that God in mercy hath wrought in me a change, a hatred of sinne, a love of vertue, a zeale to his Gospell, a care of his Glory, a quenching of my lusts and concupiscence; then is the

conclusion inferred, I am in Christ Iesus, I am elected. Thus wee If no sanctification, no assurance of glorification. make our election sure to our selves, as the Apostle counselleth us, Make your election and calling sure by good works: it is known to God before the foundations of the World were laid: but it is knowne to us, by the effect of it: so that still our rule holdeth, Rom. 8. 2. 2 Pet. 1. 10. If we will know, whether wee bee elected to live in Heaven with God, we must ever looke how we lead our lives in earth with men. Wee must give all diligence, and joyne vertue (godly manners) with our Faith; and with Vertue, Knowledge; and with Knowledge, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. Temperance; and with Temperance, Patience; and with Patience, Godlinesse; with Godlinesse, Brotherly kindnesse; and with Brotherly kindnesse, Love. For if these things be among us, and abound, they will make that wee shall not bee idle, nor unfruitfull in the knewledge of our Lord Iesus Christ. If these things bee, then are wee happy, if God hath changed us from carelesse, to careful men and women, from drinking, riot, whoredome, prophanenesse, to holinesse of life: then are wee Gods, then Heaven is ours. Now live like a Christian among men, and ever live like a Saint among the Angels of Heaven. But now live in sinne, in lusts and pleasures, follow the flesh, and then rot in the reward of it, goe to the Divell and his angels; the end of these thing is death. I pray you Rom. 6. therefore, as you love your life with God another day, and assurance of it to your soules in this world, Give your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, and fashion not your selves according Rom. 12. 1, 2. to this World: but bee yee changed by the renewing of your minde: and whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whosoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertaine to Phil. 4. 8. love, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any vertue, or if there bee any praise, thinke on these things. This desire is the fruit of our life, and there is not in the world a better portion. This we have chosen, and in this we will dwell, untill the fulnesse of time, that we shall say in our course, Nunc dimittis, Lord: now let thy servant depart in peace. These shall assure us, that we are the Lords, cared Luk. 2. for heere, and elected else-where to live with him for ever.



THE THIRTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XIX. 

These are makers of Sects, naturall men, having not the Spirit.
Sectaries cause division in the Church.



AS before in the former verse, he called them Mockers, walk^ng after their owne ungodly lusts: so here he calleth them Sectaries; not keeping the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace, not remembring that there is Ephes. 4. 3, 4. but one body, one Spirit, one faith, one God and Father over all, which is above all, and in us all. But these Sectaries set Altar against Altar, and cut in sunder Christs seamelesse coate; they divide Christ: Such were the Corinthians; one said I am Pauls, another I am Apollos, a third, I am Cephas, a fourth, I am Christs. Is Christ divided? This dividing of Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 12. is a signe, that men are carnall, unregenerate; so reasoneth the Apostle, Yee are carnall, for whereas there is among you envying and 1 Cor. 3. 3, 5. strife, and divisions; are yee not carnall and walke as men? Who is Paul? And who is Apollos? but ministers by whom yee beleeved? There was a rough Altar in Ierusalem, to note the imperfection of the law, and there was but one Altar, to note the unity of the Church. Well Exod. 27. said Ierome; Meum propositum est, antiquos legere, singula probare, tenere Iorome. quae bona sunt, and a fide Ecclesiae Catholicae non recedere: My purpose

is, to read the ancient Fathers, to prove, and trie every thing, and Sectaries seek novelties, and admire them. to hold that which is good, and not to depart from the faith of the Catholicke Church; For there is but one dove, one spouse, one body of Christ. Of this sinne the Apostle giveth the Church warning, saying; Let us consider one another, and provoke unto love, Hebr. 10. 24, 25. and unto good Workes, not forsaking the fellowship that we have among our selves, as is the manner of some. It is the manner of some, to turne with the spiders breath, the sweet iuyce of flowers into poison; to seeke knots in bulrushes: to stumble at every straw, that stoppeth the course of their eager spirit; to breake the bonds of peace; to forsake this fellowship, that wee should have among ourselves; and to single and sever themselves by themselves; they busie their braines about Pythagoras numbers, and Plato's Idea, and Aristotles commonwealth; they see not at Damascus a strange 2 Reg. 16. 10, 11 Altar with Ahaz, but they strait-way get the patterne, and Vrias the Priest must make them the like at home. But what saith Paul, concerning these Sectaries, I beseech you brethren (saith he) marke them diligently, which cause division and offences, contrary to the Rom. 16, 17, 18. doctrine which yee have learned, and avoid them; for they that are such, serve not the Lord Iesus Christ, but their owne bellies, and with faire speeches and flattering deceive the heart of the simple.
The Prophet David saith, Ierusalem (a figure of the Church, is built as a City, that is at unity in it selfe; and when the Holy Ghost Psal. 122. 3. Act. 2. 1. Act. 4. 32. Iudg. 20. 1. came downe in visible signes upon the Apo^stles, They were all with one accord in one place; and it is said, that the whole multitude of them that beleeved in the first times, had but one heart, and one Soule. It is said of Israel, that they came together, as it had beene one man, with the same mind and intent, not with as many opinions, as persons. The Iewes had but one kind of worship prescribed, and 2 Chro. 30. 12. that in one only Temple. And it is said of Iuda, that the hand of the Lord was in Iuda, so that he gave them one heart, to do the commandement of the King and of the rulers, according to the Word of the Lord: So if we will become a spirituall building unto God, if wee will receive the promise of the Holy Ghost, if we will worship God in Spirit and truth, if we will have the hand of the Lord upon us; we must be at unity and concord with our selves; we must abide with one accord and one mind in an house; wee must have one heart to doe the commandement of the King, and of the rulers; we must not leave the Temple, to follow every opinion, but we must be no makers of Sects, but must keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. S. Peter prophesied and foretold of these Sectaries, Ephes. 4. 3. which privily should bring in damnable heresies, even denying the 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. Lord, that hath bought them; and bring upon thmselves swift damnation: and that many should follow their damnable wayes: by whom the way of truth (saith he) shall be evill spoken of, and through covetousnesse shall they with fained words make marchandize of you, etc.
There is in a naturall body a quicking soule, a radicall humour,

and a naturall heate; and there is in the spirituall body Division sometime more dangerous than Idolatry. of the Church, the Holy Ghost to give life to it. Faith is the radicall humour to continue it, and charity, as the naturall heate or vitall Spirit carried throughout the Arteries, or parts of the Church: For All things must be done in love. Division and discord, 1 Cor. 10. 14. Sects, and Schismes, are the cause of all evill, of all mischiefe: this is that Pandoras boxe, that Trojane horse from whom all evill and mischiefe doe proceed. Example among many other may be the Church of Corinth; who beginning about matters of ceremonies, and policie, proceeded first to division and separation; some holding of Paul, some of Apollo, some of Cephas, and some of Christ; and so to false doctrine, denying the Resurrection; 1 Cor. 1. 12. and therefore by the Canon of the Apostle to be avoided: and Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria told Novatus, that it was Euseb. de vit. Const. 2. more grievous to breake the unity of the Church, then to commit Idolatry; For this (saith hee) was punished but with the sword, but the other, with the opening gulfe of the earth, swallowing up the Authors and confederates thereof: Et non dubitabitur sceleratius esse commissum, quod gravius erat vindicatum. And there is no doubt, but that was more haynously committed, which was more sharply and severely punished. If yee have bitter Iam. 3. 14, 16. envying and strife in your hearts (saith the Holy Ghost) reioyce not; for where envying and strife is, there is sedition, and all manner of evill wayes.
There be three Furies in Hell: Heresy. Schisme. Apostacy.
Saith a learned man, Haeresis errorem fundamentalem in side tuetur: Heresy defendeth some fundamentall error in the faith: Schisma unitatem Ecclesiae ob minuta discindit, Schisme cutteth in sunder the unity of the Church for small and trifling things: Apostasia rectam fidem and religionem penitus abdicat, Apostasie utterly rejecteth and forsaketh the right Faith and Religion of God, and turneth from the holy Commandements given of God: For heresy is occupied about dogmaticall conclusions concerning Faith and beliefe; Schisme about rites and ceremonies, and other things of no moment; For whosoever shall obstinately defend any perverse, corrupt opinion, is an Hereticke: whosoever shall divide himselfe from the Church, for manners and rites, is a Schismaticke. Againe, one and the selfe-same errour in divers men hath divers names; For a false opinion of God, is in a Iew, Infidelity; in an Ethnike, Paganisme; in a Christian, heresy; in a Turke, Ignorancy. Heresy is only in such as are baptized, even as Schisme is. Finely said Bibliander, that one sinne, according to divers effects, hath divers names: For to doe any thing against the Scriptures (saith hee) it is sinne, or rebellion rather; to thinke any thing contrary to the Scriptures, it is

foolishnesse; to contradict them, is error; to forsake them, Apostacy. Pride the cause of heresy and schisme. All these are pardonable, if they be not wilfull: we must therefore be very watchfull, that Satan possesseth not our mind, heart, or life; our mind with perverse doctrine, our heart with wicked affections, our life with evill manners. Study therefore day and night to keep the mind in purity, and in the knowledge Hemming. of the trueth, the heart with pious and holy cogitations, and thy life with chast manners, and good examples. Cyprian saith, Vnum tentat diabolus, tentat ut lupus ovem agrege: The Divell tempteth Cypri. and assaieth one thing, as a Woolfe; he tempteth the sheep from the flocke, as an hawke; hee tempteth to sever the flying Dove from her company: as a sword-player, hee proveth to divide and cut the member from the body. And so the Divell tempteth to sever and divide a Christian from the Church, than which nothing is more dangerous. Hilary saith, Periculosum est, atque etiam maxime miserabile, tot nunc fides existere, quot volunt ates, Hil. lib. ad Constan. tot nobis doctrinas esse, quot mores: and tot causas blasphemiarum pullulare, quot vitia sunt: dum aut fides scribuntur, ut volumus, aut ita ut volumus intelliguntur: It is most dangerous and very miserable, that there are so many faiths, as wills; and so many doctrines, as manners of men; and thereby so many causes of blasphemy should spring up, as there are private faults and vices in men: whilest either we set downe and penne our faith as we will, or els expound and understand it, as wee lust and like of. And indeed for Sects and Schismes we abound, Omnes volunt esse Apostolos; Cypr. lib. 1. ep. 1. All would be Apostles, all Prophets, all Doctors: Pastoris officium oves vendicant; The sheep doe vendicate and challenge the office of the shepheard; the foote contendeth to bee the head; the souldier striveth to be the Captaine; every member would usurpe anothers office, and be in others place: hinc Schismata; hence spring Schismes and Sects; et radix eorum superbia; and the Nazianz. roote of them is pride. The Sects in Christs time among the Mat. 22. 1 Cor. 1. 10. 2 Pet. 2. 1. Pharises, Sadduces, Essenes, the Sects that sprung up in Corinth; those in Rome: where of yee may read, Rom. 16. and the Sects and Schismes that are this day in our Church, rose either of pride, or of covetousnes.
As a member cut from the body dieth; as a branch cut from the vine, whithereth; as a river cut and divided into many parts, drieth up: so if we be cut and divided from the Church, wee perish utterly: For what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath the beleever with the Infidell? or what agreement hath the Temple of 2 Cor. 6. 15. God with Idols? Yet this I note withall, that these Sects hinder not the Church forever; God by them revealeth his truth. Si hostes Ecclesiam gladio persequuntur, exercent ejus patientiam; If enemies August. de civit. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 51. persecute the Church with the sword, they doe exercise her patience: sin male sentiunt, exercent ejus sapientiam; but if they imagine evill against the Church, they do exercise her wisdome

There must needs be offences, aswell in doctrine, as in manners: God turnes the malice of hereticks to the good of his Church. oportet esse haereses; there must be heresies, That they which are approved among you, might be knowne. For Gods Church, is not only subject to dissention, as touching orders and manners; but also to heresies, as touching doctrine: Per haec otium and torporem Ecclesiae discutit Deus; By these things, God shaketh off the idlenesse Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 11. 19. or slothfull heavinesse, or dulnesse of his Church, and wipeth away the rust thereof, and maketh the Church and people of God carefull and diligent to search the Scriptures; whereby all heresy and schismes might be destroied, and so avoided.
But you will say, that these hereticks and Sectaries quote Scriptures; and what shall the simple doe? I answere, that wee must deale with them, as Christ did with Satan, returne Scripture upon them: For the Divell having taken Christ into the holy City, and set him on the pinacle of the Temple, said unto him, If thou be the Sonne of God, cast thy selfe downe; For it is written, He will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands they shall Mat. 4, 5, 6, 7. lift thee up, lest at any time thou shouldest dash thy foote against a stone. But Christ our Saviour retorted Scripture upon him againe; and said, It is written, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. The Pelagians, to prove Gods grace is not sufficient without our will, alledge these words of the Almighty, If yee consent and obey, yee shall eate the good things of the land. The Anabaptists, to overthrow Esay 1. 19. Magistracie, quote the words of Paul; Standfast in the libertie, wherwith Christ hath made us free, and be not intangled againe, with the yoke Gal. 5. 1. of bondage. The Donatists, to prove a perfection, quote the saying of the Apostle, Now the God of peace sanctifio you throughout, and I Gal. 5. pray God, that your whole Spirit, soule and body may bee kept blamelesse unto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. The Anthropomorphites, to prove God like a man, quote the saying of the Psalmist, The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his eares are open to their prayers. Psal. 34. 15. The Familists, to prove that wee are co-deified with God: and God co-hominified with us, alledge the saying of the Apostle; Whosoever is borne of God, sinneth not, the seed of God abideth in him; neither 1 Iohn 3. 9. can he sinne, for he is borne of God. The Papists, to prove the primacy of the Pope, alledge, God made two lights, the greater Light to Gen. 1. 16. rule the Day, and the lesser, the Night: meaning, say they, the Pope, and the Emperour; the Pope, to rule the Clergy, and the Emperour the Laity. To prove Purgatory, they quote the 8. Psalme, Thou hast put all things under his feete; all sheep and oxen, yea, Psal. 8. 8. and the beasts of the field, the fowles of the ayre, and the fishes of the sea: per pisces animas in Purgatorio intelligunt; by fishes, they understand the soules in Purgatory; as by the birds, the Angels, and by beasts, men. The Brownists, to prove that no good can be done by a Parliament, quote these words of the Holy Ghost; Neither by an army Zacha, 4. 6. or strength, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord. To prove that Kings have no authority in the Church, they alledge this text,

To bind their Kings in chaines, and their Nobles with linkes of iron. To prove, that we have in our Church no Word preached, no Sacraments The Papists charging us with Sects, have more themselves. rightly ministred, no Minister lawfully called of God, they alledge this Scripture; How shall they preach, except they bee sent? To all which we must be able to say, Rursus scriptum est, as Christ did: we must have judgement: We must abound in knowledge Psal. 149. Rom. 10. 15. Mat. 4. 7. Phil. 1. 9. Hebr. 13. 9. 1 Cor. 14. 20. and in judgement; The heart must be established with grace; we must not be children in understanding; as concerning maliciousnesse, wee must bee children, but in understanding, we must be adulti, of ripe age. But alas, our English people want judgement, therefore all Sects bud in our age.
The Papists charge us with Sects, and variety of opinions; that we have Brownists, Barrowists, Separatists; that some will weare Cap and Surplesse, some will not; they derive twenty Sects from Luther, as Anabaptists, Adiaphorists, Sacramentaries, Zwinglians, Calvinists, etc. But we may retort it upon them: For they swarme in Staphilus. Sects, and multitude of opinions; as Nominals, Reals, Augustins, Dominicans, Franciscans, Benedictins; as Th^mists against Scotists, and Canonists against Schoolemen, and one against another, and God against them all. I might speake of Pope against Pope; as Stephanus against Formosus; one digging vp the grave of another, cutting off of their fingers, thrusting ^hem into a sack, and throwing them into Tyber: Councell against Councell, as that of Arimine against the Councell of Nice; and the two Nicene Councels under Irene, against that of Frankford; the whole Vniversity of Paris against Iohn 22. Denying the immortality of the soule; an opinion condemned there with the blast of trumpets. I might name Sir Thomas Moore, and Fisher of Rochester, striving about Purgatory, the one to prove no water in it, alledging the place of Zacharie; I have loosed the prisoners out of the pit where is no water: the other, Zach. 9. 11. to prove both fire and water in it, alledge the saying of the Psalme, We went thorow fire, and water, but thou broughtest us out, into a wealthy Psal. 66. 12. place. I might name Howlet lately condemning all our English Papists for comming to the Church; of which mind is Dowanus, a late Papist: I passe over the stirres between Cardinall Caietane, and Cardinall Turrecremata: so that if we differ in the shell, they in the kernell; if wee in the bone, they in the marrow; if wee in ceremonies, they in matters of substance; if our contentions be motes, theirs bee beames; if ours mole-hils, theirs bee mountaines. Turpe est doctori, cum culpa red arguit ipsum: it is a shame to rebuke, being guilty of the same fault. They name us Sectaries, for leaving Rome, commended so by the Apostle: Their faith was published thorowout the world: But wee have not left old Rome, but Rom. 1. 8. this new Rome, the mother of whoredomes, as the Spirit of God cals her; the denne of theeves, as the Prophet speaketh: Non Apoc. 18. 2, 3. Esay 1. 21. a civitate, sed a peste: wee are departed not from the City, but from the plague in the City; not from Rome, but from

the heresy of Rome; Daemonum paschua, quoth Bernard. Satans chiefe enemis to overthrow the Church, division and dissentiori.
But to leave this: Let not us be of the number of these wicked ones, which are makers of Sects: For a Christian must be carefull to keep three things: His heart, His minde, and conversation.
His heart from infidelity, His minde from false opinions, and his conversation from Schisme and scandall.
By Sects and divisions, the Communion of Saints, the society of Christians, the fellowship and unity that wee should have among our selves, is quite overthrowne. When God would confound their proud attempt in building Babel, He devided their language, Gen. 11. 8. and so scattered them abroad into all places of the earth. So the Divell knowing unity to be the overthrow of his Kingdome, soweth the tares of Sects, of Schismes, and Heresies amongst us; that so he may scatter the workemen, that should pull downe his kingdome, and set up the kingdome of Christ. When King Cyrus would passe over to conquer Scythia (as saith Herodotus) comming to a great and broad River which hindered his journey; his policy was this, to cut it, and divide it in many armes and sluces, and so made it passable for all his Army. This policy is most ready and common with the Divell also, who bringing his power of darkenesse, to invade us, and overrunne us, and finding his passage stopped by the flowing streames of Love and concord, hath put in execution his wonted meane and practice, to separate us, and divide us into many parts and factions: For as S. August. saith, Co^cordes nos scit, and quod sic possidere non potest, he knoweth August. ser. 16. de util. Iei^nij. that being at concord, and unity together, he canot possesse us: he cannot now divide one true God among us; he can no more inforce false gods upon us. Well, he hath yet another way, sentit vitam nostram esse charitatem, mortem dissentionem; hee seeth that love and charity is our life, and discord and diffention our death and destruction; and therefore lites immisit inter Christian^s; hee hath sent strife and debate among Christians; and because hee cannot frame us to many gods, hee laboureth to multiply and distract our opinions, and soweth tares of Sects and errors in the Lords field. Salomon inhibiteth us to meddle with these men; Prov. 24. ^1. Keep no company with the seditious. Sedition is moved either for matters Ecclesiasticall or Temporall.
When for matters Ecclesiasticall, it is called Schisme; which signifieth a rent, a division, or a cutting asunder, and thereupon comes the word Schismaticks or Sectaries, dividers, hewers, cutters asunder; For they divide the body of Christ, breake the unity of the Church, which is an haynous sinne. Hemingius saith, Qui violat Ecclesiastic ampolitiam, multis modis peccat, he that violateth

Ecclesiasticall policy, offendeth many wayes: yet some like Naturall men n either relish grace, nor discerne spirituall things. Diotrephes, because they cannot have the chiefe place in the Church, Ideirco illam scindunt, vel ab eo deficiunt, either they will cut the Church in pieces, or forsake it. These Sects, and Schismes among us, have done much hurt, as they of Athens said of their dissentions, Auximus Phillippum nostris dissentionibus: We have augmented, and strengthened Philip by our dissentions: so wee the Pope and his favourites. Remember that it is a mans honour to cease from strife, but every foole will bee meddling. Remember Prov. 20. 3. that there is but one body and one spirit, one hope of your calling, one faith, one baptisme, one God and Father over all, for his Ephes. 4. 4. bloud that died for us. Let all these ones make us one, indeavouring to our dying day to avoid these makers of sects, and to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
Thirdly, he calleth them naturall men. No marvell though they jest and mocke at all Religion with Michol; flout and fleere with the adversaries of Iude and Beniamin; deride and raile with the 2 Sam. 6. Esdr. 4. Esa. 28. scorners of Ierusalem: for why? they are meere naturall men, and such savour not the things of God, as Christ said to Peter, Come behinde me, Satan: thou savourest not the things that are of God, but the things that are of men: for their understanding is as the Mat. 16. 23. Sunne under a cloud, not lightned, and their will not rectified; Deest enim intellectus, voluntatis consiliari^s, for understanding is wanting, which is the Counseller of the soule. The naturall man perceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishnesse 1 Cor. 2. 14. unto him, neither can hee know them, because they are spiritually discerned: at spiritus non natura, sed gratia, the spirit is not of nature, but of grace. So said Christ of the whole world, O righteous Father, Iohn 17. 25. the World hath not knowne thee, but I have knowne thee, and these have knowne, etc. therefore hee prayed for his Apostles, and in them for us all; I pray not, that thou shouldest take them out of the World, but that thou keepe them from evill. And againe, Sanctifie them Iohn 17. 15, 17. with thy truth; by nature wee are the children of wrath, by grace we are Gods adopted Sonnes. Hereupon saith the Apostle, In times past we walked according to the course of the World, and after the spirit that ruleth in the Ayre, and that now worketh in the children of disobedience, among whome also wee had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh, and fulfilling the will of the flesh, and of the minde, Ephes. 2. 3, 4, 5. and were by nature the children of Wrath, nor by creation, but by Adams transgression, and so by birth, as well as others. But God which is rich in mercy, through the great love wherewith he loved us, when wee were dead by sinnes, hath quickned us together in Christ, by whose grace we are saved. There are but two things in us, either nature or grace, either flesh or spirit. Now in the state of nature al are accursed, in the state of grace we are blessed; For by grace wee beleeve, and faith Act. 18. 27. Iohn 1. 12, 13. maketh us the sonnes of God: for as many as received him, to them he gave power to be the Sonnes of God, even to them that beleeve in his

name, which are borne not of bloud, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the No true good in us by nature, till regenerate. will of man, but of God. Where he distinguisheth of two births, the one naturall, and the other spirituall; a birth from men, a birth from God; a generation by nature, a regeneration by the Spirit, as he doth againe to Nicodemus, Except a man be borne of Water and of the Spirit, hee cannot enter the Kingdome of God: and againe, Yee Cap. 3. 5, 6. Psal. 2. 7. must be borne againe, there is no naturall Sonne of God, but the Lord Iesus; we are all the adopted Sonnes of God in Christ and by Christ: by his meanes we are raised up together, and made to sit together Ephes. 2. 6. Rom. 8. 17. in Heavenly places: For saith the Apostle, If we be children, wee are also heires, even the heires of God, and heires annexed with Christ, etc. we bring nothing from our mothers wombe, but death and damnation; every one must say with David, I was shapen in wickednes, Psal. 51. 5. and in sinne hath my mother conceived me. Quis dabit mundum de immundo? Who can bring a cleane thing out of filthinesse? What Iob 14. 4. can be had from the egge of a Cockatrice, but a Serpent? From a spider but venome? from the Taxus tree in India, but poyson? from the bitter poole Exanthus, but bitter water? Wee have not Math. 7. Lambes from Woolves, no grapes from thornes, nor figges from thistles. Well said the Schooleman, Quod dona naturalia in Adamo sunt corrupta, supernaturalia ablata, ille ut radix, nos ut rami; radix est venenata, ergo and rami; Our naturall gifts in Adam were corrupt, our supernaturall taken away, he as the roote, we as the boughes; the root is poisoned, therefore the boughes like the waters of Mara, untill Moses put in the sweet wood, untill God Exod. 17. infuse grace; for by grace we are saved, and where sinne abounded, there grace abounded much more, that as sinne had raigned unto death, so Ephes. 2. 8. Rom. 5. 20, 21. might grace also raigne by righteousnesse unto eternall life. The Pelagians held, that sinne came by imitation, not by propagation; but Paul confuteth them, saying, As by one man sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne: and so death went over all men, forasmuch as Rom. 5. 12. all men have sinned, etc.
These men (quoth Iude) walke as Naturall men, that is, in all sinne and vanity: as is said of the Gentiles, That they walked in the vanity of their minde, having their cogitations darkened, being strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardnesse of their hearts. So Paul reasoned with the Corinths, Are yee not carnall? For whereas there is among you, envying, and strife, and divisions, 1 Cor. 3. 3. are yee not carnall, and walke as men? even so reason wee with you: When malice, envy, rancour, whoredome, covetousnesse, pride raigneth among us, are wee not naturall men? For God would cut downe these sinnes as a sickle: If yee live after the flesh, yee shal dye, but if yee through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the flesh, Rom. 8. 13. yee shall live: Yea many naturall men goe before us in brideling their lusts and affections. Aristides being by the unjust Law of Ostracisme in Athens banished: and being asked, what hee would to Athens? answered; Se nihil velle, quin tantam rerum prosperitatem,

ut illis nunquam in mentem veniat Aristides; hee desired nothing, We should strive to exceed naturall men. but so much prosperity to Athens, as that they might never remember Aristides. The like is said of Phocion condemned to drink hemlocke, the juce whereof through extreme cold is poison. Being asked what he would unto his Sons, said, Nothing, sed ne hujus unquam iniuriae velint meminisse; but that they should never reme^ber this injury. Socrates, by Philosophie brideled whoredome in himselfe; and Telamon by it bare the death of his sonne patiently, saying; Sciebam me genuisse mortalem; I did know, that I begat a mortall man. I take no pleasure in these prophane examples, save only to ashame us, as Paul did the Athenians by Aratus, and the Cretians by Epimenides, and the Corinths by Menander. Let our righteousnesse exceed theirs, else there is no roome for us in Gods Kingdome; our life must have all vertues in it: such a life led the Christians, they could be touched with no open crime, or notorious fault, but that they sung Psalmes to Iesus before day, as Plinius secundus writeth of them to the Emperour: our Saviour Christ told his disciples, that their justice must exceed the justice Mat. 5. 20. of the Scribes and Pharises; and so must wee tell all Christians, that they must exceed Turkes and Pagans, or else they shall never see the goodnesse of the Lord in the Land of the liuing: yet it is reported, that their truth in their dealings, their religion in swearing, their zeale in serving their false gods, far exceeds ours: But let us shake off every thing that presseth downe, and the sin that hangeth on so fast, and strive to exceed them. I must confesse that the best men have their faults, they have their lusts; the best oke hath sap, the best gold hath his drosse, the best oyle his some, and the best tree his barke; but yet there is a difference betweene an Oake that hath some sap, and some heart withall, and that which is all sap; betwixt smoking flaxe, that never flameth, and Iuniper coales which smoke, and yet burne also; betwixt men that are sicke, and men that are dead; betwixt them that have some faults, and them that yeeld to all faults: The wicked man mocketh at judgement, and the mouth of the wicked swalloweth up iniquity. There is difference betweene eating and swallowing: Prov. 19. 28. such a distinction the Apostle maketh, Neverthelesse though we walke in the flesh, yet we warre not after the flesh; though we 2 Cor. 10. 3. fall, we doe not lye by it, like the Elephant: habitat peccatum, sed non regnat, sinne dwelleth in us, but it raigneth not; bellat, sed non Rom. 6. 12. debellat, it warres, but it winnes not; all are sicke in sinne, but all are not dead in sinne; all live in the flesh, but sowe not to the Ephes. 2. 1. Gal. 6. 8. flesh; we all hold out our profession in many infirmities. Who can say, My heart is cleane? There is a difference between blasted trees, Prov. 20. and barren trees. And yet S. Iude condemneth not nature utterly, as though there were no goodnesse in it, for many excellent things are done by the light and instinct of nature, though not availeable to salvation: For as the heate of the Sunne is not ever

there, where the light is (as under the North pole) so the sanctification Naturall men were generally illuminated, though not sanctified. of the Spirit is not ever where the illumination is. Naturall men are illuminated, but not sanctified by the Spirit. Hence it commeth, that they have found out many arts and sciences, and have spoken rarely, yea above Christians. Emere and vendere instituit Bacchus: Bacchus taught men to buy and sell; Ceres to sow Corne, when as before, men were fed with acornes: the Assyrians found out letters, for before that time, men could neither write nor read: Eurialus and Hiperbius taught men to build houses, whereas before, they lodged in the dennes and caves of the earth; Socrates called philosophy from heaven, and placed it in Cities: for before that time men wandred up and downe in the wildernesse, after the manner of beasts: Cecrops taught men to build townes; for before, men lived disjoined and severed one from another; the Aegyptians found out weaving, for before, men went naked; Ericthonius of Athens found out silver; for before, there was nothing but chopping and changing; Aesculapius invented physicke; for before, men died suddenly of many diseases: yea the very beasts by nature excell many men: the Elephant seemeth to understand the mother tongue, and to have a kind of religion, to adore the Sunne-rising; a kind of humanity, as to reduce the wanderer; a kind of obedience, as to know the Prince; the very Lion is gentle to that beast that humbleth himselfe, he is gentler to women, then men, and praieth not on an infant, except in great extremity of hunger; he killeth the Lionesse having had copulation with the Leopard: Sabinus his dog held up the dead corps of his Master in Tyber; and Bucephalus ate no meate after the death of Alexander. These things are not found in al men. Oh brethren, we walke as naturall men, as carnall, worldly, fleshly men, voide of Gods Spirit: therefore the Scripture compareth good men, spirituall men, to pearles and precious stones; to signify, tantam esse horum raritatem, quanta est gemmarum, that there is as great a rarity and scarcenesse of them, as of precious stones; and that as common stones exceed in number precious stones, so naturall men exceed spirituall men. Salomon saith, Stultorum numerum Eccles. 1. 4. esse infinitum, The number of fooles to bee numberlesse: and Paul faith, All seeke their owne, and not that which appertaines to the Lord Iesus; none understandeth, from the least of them to the Phil. 3. 11. greatest of them, every one is given to covetousnesse, and from the Prophet even unto the Priest, all deale falsely, and as the Prophet speaketh, Mens hands are defiled with bloud, and their fingers Ier. 6. 12. Esay 59. 3, 4, 5. with iniquity, their lippes speake lies, and their tongues murmure forth iniquity: no man calleth for Iustice, no man contendeth for truth, they trust in vanity, and speake vaine things, they conceive mischiefe, and bring forth iniquity, they hatch Cockatrice egges, and weave the spiders webbe; hee that eateth of their egges, dieth, and that which is troden upon, breaketh out into a Serpent. The Law of God is called Deut. 5. 33.

the way of our life, and men are willed to walke in all the wayes that Love makes al things easy. God hath commanded them, that they may live; habet haec via duo in sese, difficultatem and suavitate^, saith one, in this way there be two things, hardnesse, and sweetnesse; hardnesse, by reason of our nature, and sweetnesse, by reason of grace: that which is hard by nature, is sweetned by grace: hereupon Christ saith, that his yoke Mat. 11. is sweet, eo quod jugum est, grave est, in that it is a yoke, it is grievous, but sweet by reason of grace: for as the bush burned with fire, and was not consumed with fire, because God was in the bush: so our heavy yoke is made light, because the Lord is in it, who helpeth Exod. 30. us with his grace to beare it: For grace stirreth up the love of God in our hearts, which maketh the yoke of his commandements easy: For nothing is grievous unto love, love swalloweth all difficulties. Why doe hunters, fowlers, fishers take such intolerable paines? It is because they love the sport: pernoctant venatores in nive, hunters doe watch all the night in the snow; such is their love to their game. What maketh the mother to watch many nights, to give the child sucke, with great paine, to take such toile in the washing, keeping, attending, and in the education of it, but love? Can a mother forget her child? She cannot. The Esay 49. 15. interrogation implieth a negation. What meane the beasts and fowles to spare meate from their owne mouthes, and to put it into the mouth of their young? What maketh the Pelicane to feed her yong birds with her blood, but love? So the love of God maketh the precepts of God seeme easy to us: Non est arduum orare, legere, meditare, jejunare, It is no hard matter for us to pray, to read, to meditate, to fast, because the Love of God is shedde abroad Rom. 5. 5. in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. The spies of Canaan said, that it was nothing to overcome it: and the godly Numb. 13. say, it is nothing to walke in the wayes of God, to doe the precepts of God, to read, to pray, to meditate, to fast is nothing: For saith the Apostle, I am able to doe all things through the help of Phil. 4. 13. Christ which strengtheneth me. As for a naturall man, all good things are grievous unto him; it is death to him to fast, to pray, to heare, read, meditate, etc. as they of Israel said, When will the Amos 8. 5. new moneth be gone, that we may sell corne, and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheate? So say a number of naturall men, When shall these prayers cease, and the Sermon bee at an end, that wee may goe about our businesse? For indeed they sit in the Church, as Ioseph in the Iayle; they thinke every minute a moneth, till they be gone.
All sinnes are pleasant to a naturall man: to hunt, to hawke, to eate, to drinke, to sweare, to whore, to lye, to revenge, to follow his pleasures; whereof wee have two notable examples; the one in Cyprian, who confesseth what he was by nature: the other in Augustine, who telleth Alipius how hardly his naturall sinnes left him, how they cried unto him, Dimittesne nos nunc?

What, wilt thou leave us now? Et non erimus tecum vltra in aeternum? None boast more of the Spirit, then they that are led by the spirit of errour. And shall wee not bee with thee any more for ever? What uncleannesse, and what dishonesty did they put into my minde? Avertat Dominus has sordes ab animo meo, the Lord turne these filthy thoughts out of my mind (saith hee;) clamavit, Vsquequo Domine, usque quo ^rasceris, How long, Lord, how long wilt thou bee angry? in finem, for ever? Quamdiu cras, cras and cras? How long to morrow, to morrow? Why not now doest thou not put an end unto my turpitude? And being converted by Gods Spirit, infinite thankes hee gave unto God, saying, Dirupisti vincula mea Domine, Thou hast burst my bands in sunder, o Lord, to thee will I sacrifice a sacrifice of praise, my heart shall praise thee, my tongue shall blesse thee, and all my bones shall say, Who is like unto thee? Praise the Lord, o my soule, and all that is within me, praise Psal. 103. 1, 2, 3. his holy name: praise the Lord, o my soule, forget not all his benefits, which forgiveth all thy sinne, and healeth all thy infirmities, which saveth thy soule from death, and crowneth thee with mercy and loving kindnesse. Sometime God leaveth us to meere nature; sometime hee sustaineth us with his grace, which is as the Sunne-beames: quando adest Sol, omnia illustrat, cum removetur, omnia sunt tenebrae: when the Sunne is present, it lighteneth every thing; but when it is removed, there is nothing but darkenesse: So God sometime removeth the beames of his grace, which when hee doth, there is nothing in us but darkenesse; his grace is sufficient for us. Nature is not sufficient for us, but grace: For that is the fountaine from 2 Cor. 12. 9. whence flow all blessings.
Lastly, he saith of these men, that they have not the Spirit; yet none will boast more of the Spirit then they: so did the Gnosticks, so did the Montanists; as Montanus, who carried his two trulles with him, Prisca and Maximilla: so did the Manichaeans: so did Mahomet, who teaching a Dove to picke corne at his eare, called it the Holy Ghost, and being subject to the falling sicknesse, called it a traunce, wherein hee had conference with the Angell Gabriel; and so did the late Libertines, of whom Iude here seemeth to prophesy, that is, Coppinus in Flanders, Quintinus and Claudius, Persenallus and Pocquius in France, and some few others, who of late have troubled a great part of Christendome: Quintinus being an hostler, Anthonius Pocquius a Chamberlain: the other two being utterly unlearned, led foure thousand men at the first into this errour; so strong are the delusions of Satan, to them that love not the truth of God, that they might bee saved: So unconstant 2 Thes. 2. 9. are the multitude, that whereas they should not bee as children wavering and carried about with every winde of doctrine, by the Ephes. 4. 14. deceit of men, yet are they wavering, and are of as many religions as the Raine-bow is of colours. The Apostles privative precept can take no place with them; Bee not carried away with diverse and strange doctrines, for it is a good thing, that the heart be stablished Hebr. 13. 9.

shed with grace, and not with meates, etc. These late Libertines Loose Libertines count all sins lawfull. tooke away all difference of good, and evill, they gave the bridle-reine loose to all licentiousnesse, prophesied of by Saint Peter, They speake high and swelling words of vanity, 2 Pet. 2. 19. and their words are delivered in a strange manner; as the Henry Nicolitans, to astonish the simple, put two beginnings, God and the world: if any bee of their Sect, they say, that hee was made God, and all wickednesse they did ascribe to God, under the name of vocation, or calling, they did cover all impiety, they justified theeves, murderers, adulterers, and all licentious livers: for say they, it is their calling, and let every man abide in the same vocation wherein hee is called. Thus doe they wrest and pervert Scripture, to their destruction: they alledge further, 1 Cor. 7. 20. Omnia munda mundis esse, That all things are cleane to the Tit. 1. 15. cleane; when as Paul speaketh there de adiaphoris, of things indifferent, not of sinnes: to these things they further faine and affirme, that Regeneration is a restitution of that innocency, which was in Adam, and they interprete the state of innocency to bee this, not to bee able to discerne betweene white and blacke, good and evill: and they say, that they are continually guided and governed by the Spirit; besides, they reject all Scripture; For the letter killeth, etc. But these men bee either fanatici, mad and beside themselves, which 2 Cor. 3. move such foolish questions and genealogies, or else they are prophane, which having cast off the yoke of Christ, waxe wanton.
But to leave these men (they have not the Spirit.) Note here the Antithesis betweene naturall and spirituall men: these two are opposite, where by the way, note how fondly the Papists speake, in calling their Cleargie spirituall, and the people temporall, whereas these two are not opposite, but spirituall, and carnall or naturall: so the Apostle distinguisheth them, Naturall and Spirituall; The Naturall man perceiveth not the things of God, but 1 Cor. 2. 14. the Spirituall discerneth all things: and fondly doe they call their Priests spirituall, as though the people were all damned, for so must they bee, if they savour not of Gods Spirit: For the Wisdome of the flesh is death, the Wisdome of the Spirit, is life and Rom. 8. 6, 8, 13. peace: and againe, They that are in the flesh, cannot please God; and againe, If yee live after the flesh, yee shall dye; but if yee mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, yee shall live: and againe, Whatsoever a man soweth; that shall hee reape: hee that soweth Gal. 6. 7, 8. to his flesh, shall of the flesh reape corruption, and hee that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reape life everlasting. Now temporall and eternall are opposite, The things that are seene, are temporall, but the things which are not seene, are eternall: But not 2 Cor. 4. 18. Temporall and Spirituall. But this was the policy of the Papists, to name themselves spirituall, that they might withdraw

themselves from the Magistrate, as though they pertained to God only, not to Caesar. Secondly, they called their The regenerate onely have the Spirit of God in them. lands and livings spirituall, to exempt them also from the Magistrate; and yet Paul calleth all these earthly commodities, carnall; as in his Epistle to the Corinthians, If wee have sowne unto you spirituall things, is it a great thing if wee reape 1 Cor. 9. 11. your carnall things? And againe, If the Gentiles bee made partakers Rom. 15. 27. of their spirituall things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnall things. And to the end to defeate Caesar, they set the Image of the Church upon their Coyne, not Caesars Image. Thirdly, to make the more gaine, they tooke to the punishment of Adultery, Incest, Drunkennesse, Vsury, Perjury, Simony, Sorcery, under the colour of spirituall things, and so they caught Testaments, Legacies, Marriages, Dowries. Ierome calleth the people, Secular men; but Temporall, no man calleth them, as though their hope reached but unto this life only, whereas they are to bee saved, aswell as Church-men. To whom wrote Paul, but unto the people? For whom else prayed hee? His words are plaine, Brethren, my hearts desire for Israel is, that they might bee saved.
Well, They have not the Spirit; not the Spirit of Regeneration and sanctification, but they have the Spirit of illumination, but Gods children they have Gods Spirit of regeneration, they are led by Gods Spirit: and the Spirit of God certifieth Rom. 8. 16. their Spirits, that they are the sonnes of God; and he that hath not the Spirit of God, is none of Gods: it is the Spirit of God, that worketh in us all in all: The bath of regeneration, and the renovation of the Spirit saveth us: Wee are justified, sanctified, and Tit. 3. 1 Cor. 6. Gal. 5. 22. washed by the Spirit: All good works are the fruits of the Spirit: untill Gods Spirit hath renewed us, wee are stables for the Divell: Si durus sit hic sermo, as the Disciples said, Iohn 6. Luk 11. 21. blame him that spake it. O there is No medium betwixt these two; either Gods Spirit dwelleth in us, or Satan; Know yee 1 Cor. 6. 16. not that yee are the Temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? The Spirit is the same in the Church, as the soule in the body, it is it that quickneth us, hee leadeth us into all Iohn 16. 3. truth; hee sealeth up all graces in our hearts; hee applieth all the mercies of God, all the merits of Christ Iesus unto us: hee worketh all graces, and giveth all spirituall gifts unto us. The Apostle making the comparison betweene the 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1 Cor. 13. 3. 8. Gal. 5. 2. flesh and the Spirit, resembleth it to a tree that yeeldeth all manner of good fruits, like the apple-tree of Persia, or like the Tree of life. Let us then intertaine Gods Spirit, make much of him, nourish every good motion that is wrought in us by him, and every sparke will bee a fire flaming out of us, every drop will bee a river issuing out of us, to eternall

life, if wee nourish it: but let us not quench the Spirit, All grace and goodnesse flowes from Gods Spirit. nor grieve the Spirit, lest Saint Iude his Prophesy bee verified of us, that wee are naturall men, fleshly, not having the Spirit: but let us stirre up the gift of God in us, blow at the coale, and put spurres to this horse. 1 Thess. 5. 19.



THE ONE AND THIRTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XX. 

But yee beloved, edifie your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost.
The godly and the wicked every way opposite.



STill hee proceedeth in the comparison betwixt the godly and ungodly, the elect and the reprobate, the lambes on the right hand, and the goates on the left hand of the Lord Iesus, noting that the godly remember the words of the Lord, they are peaceable, without sects, spirituall, they increase in faith, they pray in the Holy Ghost, they keepe themselves in the love of God, they looke for eternall life: but on the contrary, the wicked remember nothing, they scoffe at Religion, they be scorners, they bee unquiet, they be meere naturall men, they decrease in goodnesse, they pray not, they love not God; they cannot looke for life, but death and destruction: Tribulation and anguish shall bee upon the soules of them. Vpon Rom. 9. Psal. 11. 6, 7. them God will raine snares, fire and brimstone, storme and tempest, this shall be their portion to drinke. A Lion out of the forrest shall slay them, and a Woolfe in the wildernesse shall destroy them: a Ier. 1. 5, 6. Leopard shall watch over their Cities, every one that goeth out,

shall bee torne in pieces, because their trespasses are many, and The Church and Saints, as houses, must be edified or builded dayly. their rebellions are increased.
Sed, but yee beloved, (but) this Conjunction discretive here, is emphaticall; Sed vos autem dilecti, but you beloved; as if hee should have said, You must not be like the wicked, they be mockers, they walke after their ungodly lusts, they are makers of sects, fleshly, having not the Spirit: but you must not doe so, but you must turne over another leafe, learne a new lesson. This teacheth all Christians, to live like Christians, not as miscreants; the true Christian turnes away his eyes from vanity, as Iob; the miscreant applies his senses to folly, as Holofernes. The Iob. Iudith 10. true Christian setteth a watch before his mouth, and keepeth the doore of his lips; the miscreant gives liberty to his tongue, to speake evill and raile like Rabshakeh: the true Christian is alwayes doing good, as Abraham; the miscreant, alwayes doing 2 Reg. 18. evill, as Achab: the one loveth goodnesse, the other badnesse; the one setteth Gods judgements before his face, the other puts them from his sight; the one kils sinne in the thought, the other suffers it to raigne in the heart; the one knowes, the end of his sinne will be tristitia and pudor, confusion and punishment, but the other thinkes of nothing but his present joy and merriment.
Let others therefore live as they list; we must edifie our selves and build up our selves in our most holy Faith; let other serve Mammon, or Bacchus, or Venus; wee must serve none of them, but the Lord Iesus. But of this I have spoken before in the seventeenth Verse.
But yee beloved, edifie your selves. This word (edifie) signifieth to build; the metaphor is taken from Carpenters, from builders, who by little and little reare up their worke, until it come to a certain height and perfection: this metaphor is not improperly applied to the Saints: for building and edification is proper to houses. Now the Church and Saints of God are as houses, and therfore may be said to bee builded and edified. Saint Peter calleth the Saints, an house, saying, The time is come that iudgement must beginne at the house of God. And againe, And yee as lively stones are 1 Pet. 4. 17. 1 Pet. 2. 5. made a spirituall house. So spake Paul, Now therefore yee are no more strangers, and forreners, but Citizens with the Saints, and of the houshold Ephes. 2. 19, 20. of God, and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets Iesus Christ himselfe being the chiefe corner stone. And againe, writing to the Hebrewes, he saith, Christ is as the Sonne over his own Hebr. 3. 6: house, whose house wee are. For in obeying the Sonne, wee are made the house of God. But most plainely in his Epistle unto the the Saints at Corinth, Yee are Gods husbandry, and Gods building. 1 Cor. 3. 9.
This teacheth us two things, first, that all Christians should bee edifiers, builders, that is, should make themselves a seemely house for God to dwell in. Wee read what care David had to

build a Temple; but God would not suffer him: but now every man must build a Temple for God, even his own soule. We read The Word of God must be the square wherewith we must build. what cost Salomon bestowed upon the Temple: but now God careth not for such Temples made of stone, he will have a Temple made of lively stones: For howsoever Heaven is his seate, and the Earth his foot-stole, yet his most principall and princely palace of 1 Chro. 17. 1, 4. 1 Pet. 2. 5. pleasure is mans heart: hereupon saith a father, Quam excelsus es, Domine, and humiles corde sunt domus tuae! O how high and how Soveraigne art thou, O Lord! yet the humble-hearted are the houses wherein thou dwellest: For as the Lord loved the gates of Sion, more than all the dwellings of Iacob, so hee loveth a faithfull heart, a devout soule, more than all the pavillions of Princes.
All true Christians must bee builders; therefore saith Paul, Let all bee to edification, 1. Cor. 14. 27. but before they build, they 1 Cor. 14 27. must know how to build; and the way to come to this knowledge is the Scripture. No Carpenter will build an house without rule and square, and the rule and square of Christian building is the Word of God; by it our hearts and soules are squared, and made fit for Gods house: and therefore Saint Paul taking his leave of the Church of Ephesus, commendeth them to God and to the Act. 20. 32. Word of his grace, which is able to build further, and to give them an inheritance, with all them that are sanctified. Where withall (saith David) Psal. 1 19. shall a young man cleanse his way? Even by ruling himselfe after thy Word. Timothy knew the Scriptures from a child, his grandmother 2 Tim. 3. 15. Lois, and his mother Eunica taught him them. Without the knowledge of the Scripture, wee can no more edifie and build, than a Carpenter can build without tooles, or a Mariner saile without his compasse, or a bird flye without his feathers: it is the Word of God that is able to make the man of God perfect: it is that that will make him become a fit house, and Temple for the Lord: Of this building Saint Peter speaketh thus: Yee are come to the Lord Iesus, as a living stone, reiected of men, but precious and chosen of God: wherefore you your selves bee built as lively 1 Pet. 2. 4. stones, a spirituall house. And Saint Paul, Let all things be done to edification, 1 Cor. 14. 27. that is, Let this be the end of all thy workes, the building of Gods spirituall Temple; bee more carefull to build it, than Salomon was for his Temple. If Salomons workemen were one moneth in Libanus, about the worke of the Temple, and 1 Reg. 5. 14. two moneths at home about their owne businesse; Let us exceed them, let us imploy two moneths about the Lords building, and but one about our owne businesse. Let us first seeke the Kingdome of God: for as Elias said unto the widow of Sarepta, Bake me a cake Mat. 6. 33. 1 Reg. 17. 13. first, and after provide for thee and thine: so saith Almighty God to us, Build me an house first, and after for thee and thine.
And as wee must edifie and build houses for ourselves, so for our brethren also: so saith the Apostle, Exhort one another, and edifie one another, but especially wee must edifie our children: a 1 Thess. 5. 11.

sonne in Hebrew is called Ben, that is, a building, because the father should especially build his sonne in Religion and Vertue. Parents must edif^e their children by godly inst^uction. Nature teacheth all men this; the Savage Beare fashioneth her whelpes being deformed, with her tongue: so should all Christians with gentle admonitions, frame the deformed manners of their children. That commandement which injoyneth fathers to teach their children, what the Passe-over meant, teacheth them Deut. 6. 10. this building; and all Parents, if they will have their Children lead a pure life; if they will have them strong in the Lord, and through the power of his might; if they will have them to overcome the Divell; if they will have them true Saints, Sonnes of Abraham; they must edifie them with instruction, and see that the Word of God dwell plentifully in them in all Wisedome. Papists were great builders, they built Churches, Religious houses, as Col. 3. 16. Abbeyes, Nunneries, etc. but they left the principall worke undone, they did not build themselves by the Word of God, in their most holy faith, neither would they suffer others to build, but their guides and leaders tooke away from the people the levell and square of the Word, without which men cannot build: but God bee blessed, the Word is restored, wee have the levell to build by; let us not bee idle, but build up an holy house for God, that hee may dwell with us, and that wee may dwell with him hereafter for ever.
Secondly, this teacheth us, that it is not ynough to begin to build in faith and good workes, but wee must goe on, goe forward, increase in it. Hereupon the Apostles prayed unto the Lord, Increase our faith: habent enim omnes virtutes suas conceptiones, nativitates, incunabula, aetatis incrementa: all vertues have Luke 17. 5. their conceptions, births, infancies, increasings. Hereupon Paul exhorteth the Iewes of Thessalonica, To increase more and more: Our progresse in Religion is compared to building in this Verse, 1 Thess. 4. 1. 1 Cor. 9. 24. and to a race, 2 Pet. 3. 18. Ephes. 4. 14. Pro. 4. 18. Cant. 6. 9.
To the growth of trees.To the ages of men.To the morning light.To the Moone which waxeth.
All which note a progresse in Christianity: houses are edified from the foundation to the wals; from the wals to the roofe; in a race, men runne on to the goale; trees grow bigger and bigger; men waxe taller and higher; the morning light, is brighter and brighter untill the noone day; the Moone waxeth, so must Christians, we must neither stand still in Religion, nor goe backward; wee must not stand still in Religion like the Sunne in Gibeon, nor goe backe like Ahaz his Diall, but wee must goe forward; it is not enough to keepe one talent, but we must gaine by Mat. 25. 28. it, like good land that giveth not his owne seed, but much more: as well was he punished, that hid his talent, as hee that spent his Luke 16.

masters goods riotously: to stand still in Religion, is all one as Good men grow better dayly. to goe backward; Non progredi, est regredi, not to goe forward, is to goe backward; but truly the man who hid his talent, is better than wee: For wee cannot shew that love, and that zeale, that knowledge that hath beene in us in times past. The Church of Ephesus lost her first love, but I would that our Churches were like it: they hated the evill, wee hate the good; they examined the Apoc. 2. 4. Luk 12. 45. false apostles, wee examine none; they suffered persecution, we persecute others, we smite our fellow servants. Iulian the Christian, is become Iulian the Apostata; Simon Peter, is become Simon Magus; Ioseph is become Pharao, Lambes are turned into dogges, and doves, into serpents: Wee have bene idle in the Lords vineyard Mat. 20. not one houre, but eleven houres, as the Master and Owner of the vineyard said unto the men, whom hee found standing doing nothing in the market stead, Why stand yee here idle? So may God say to us, Quare statis otiosi in Ecclesia? Why stand yee here idle in the Church? Wee have stood still with the figge-tree, not three yeeres, but threescore yeeres: I feare me God will say to us, as of the figge-tree, Never fruit grow on thee hereafter: so to Mat. 11. 14. us, Never Faith, never love, never knowledge bee in thee hereafter.
It is a principle in Divinity, a Maxime in that art, that good men goe forward, waxe better: For such as bee planted in the house of Psal. 92, 13, 14. the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of the house of our God, they shall bring forth more fruit in their age; they shall bee fatte and well liking: They are like the Cypres-tree, that bringeth most fruit when it is an hundred yeere old; like the Eagle that reneweth her age; like the Hart that reneweth his strength, by snuffing up a snake into his nosthrils: Every branche (saith our Saviour) that beareth Iohn 13. 2. not fruit in me, hee taketh away, and every one that beareth fruit, hee purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Wee must bee as the Sunne, when hee riseth in his might, wee must increase, and grow in goodnesse, and so daily more and more in Gods favour; we must Iudg. 5. 31. Cant. 6. 9. looke forth as the morning, we must be faire as the Moone, pure as the Sunne, terrible as an army with banners; For though our gifts and graces be small at the first, yet we must grow up and increase more and more; our ditch must become a flood, and our flood a sea: For as Salomon saith, A wise-man will heare and increase Ecclesiast. 24. 35. in learning, and a man of understanding will attaine to wise counsels; yea, and further hee affirmeth, Give admonition to the Wise, and he will be the wiser; teach a righteous man, and he will increase in learning. Examples Pro. 1. 5. we have in the Church of Thiatyra, of whom Christ speaketh Pro. 9. 9. thus, I know thy works, thy love and thy service, and thy faith, and thy patience, and thy workes, and that they are more at the last then at the Apoc. 21. 19. first.
Another principle is, that the evill decease, they are ever learning and never come unto the knowledge of the truth; like the Almond-tree, 2 Tim. 3. 7.

that is soonest blossomed and soonest blasted: they We are most of us non-proficients in plenty of meanes. goe backward, Yea and they proceed from evill to worse. Wee grow in yeeres, but doe we grow in grace, and knowledge, as S. Peter exhorteth, saying, Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ? We draw neere unto our graves, but doe wee Esa. 1. 4. Ier. 9. 3. 2 Pet. 3. 18. draw neerer God and heaven? Alas, there bee more dunses and non-proficients, and bankerupts in religion, then in all trades and artes of the world besides: wee creepe like snailes, wee glide like wormes, wee goe like the messenger of ill newes, slowly: Wee learne little, wee know little, wee doe little: if in forty yeeres to come, we learne no more then in forty yeeres past, our graves will meete with us in the way, and it will bee too late to learne, when wee are come into the land of darkenesse, and place where all things are forgotten. Will God shew a miracle to the dead, or shall the Psal. 88. 10, 11. 12. deadrise, and praise God? Shall his loving kindnesse bee declared in the grave, or his faithfulnesse in destruction? Shall his wonderous works bee knowne in the darke, and his righteousnesse in the land of oblivion? We may say with the Apostle, that whereas concerning the time wee Hebr. 12. 5. ought to bee teachers, wee our selves had need to be taught the first principles of the Word of God, for we are such as have need of milke, not of strong meate. Alas, wee are still children; still at our milke, still in our A. B. C. still in the Crosse-row of Divinity; for what know wee now, that wee knew not tenne, twentie, thirty, forty yeeres agoe? We are like the women that Paul speaketh of, Alwayes learning, and never comming to the knowledge 2 Tim. 3. 7. of the truth: like Tantalus, that perished for thirst in the middest of the waters; and wee in the middest of doctrine: as yet we are in the doctrine of beginnings of Christ; nay, wee have not begun yet: for of Faith, Repentance, Baptisme, Imposition of Hebr. 6. hands, and of the Resurrection of the dead, and of eternal Iudgement, we can say nothing.
Here I am to speake to two sorts of men; the one is proud, and say they have enough, they eede not to learne, as Laodicia said, I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: the Apoc. 3. 17. other is dull and saith hee cannot learne. The first is confuted by the Apostle, If any man thinketh hee knoweth any thing, he knoweth 1 Cor. 8. 2. 1 Cor. 13. 9. nothing yet as hee ought to know: Wee see here in a glasse, in a darke speaking, Letus (...). Let us not presume Rom. 12. 3. to understand above that which is meet for us to understand, but that wee understand according to sobriety. Plura nescio quam scio, I am ignorant of many moe things, than I know. Ignorantiam meam non ignoro, Aug. Origen. Cal. I am not ignorant of my ignorance. Hoc unum scio, quod nihil scio, this one thing I know, that I know nothing as I should know.
The other, the dull man, hee belyeth God, hee belyeth not man, but God; for God hath said wee may learne: If thou callest Pro. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. for knowledge, and cryest for understanding, if thou seekest her as silver,

and searchest for her as for treasures, then shalt thou understand the feare We must bee diligent and constant in seeking Knowledge. of the Lord, and finde the knowledge of God: for the Lord giveth Wisedome, out of his mouth commeth Knowledge and Vnderstanding. And again, the Wise man saith, That all the wayes of God are plaine to them that will understand; meaning, that the Word of God is Pro. 8. 9. easie to all that have a will and a desire unto it: so bee thou willing to understand the Lords Word and Way, and thou shalt understand it: there is no want but Will. Aske (saith our Saviour) and it shall be given you; seeke and yee shall finde; knock and Mat. 7. 7. it shall bee opened unto you: so that if so bee wee would but take a little paines, our knowledge would not bee at the ebbe, as it is. Ephorus and Theopompus were two Schollers; the one needed a bridle, the other a spurre; the one went on too fast, the other too slow: it is not the bridle, but the spurre that wee need. Our faith, I must confesse, is a little stronger, our knowledge a little greater, our lives a little better than in the time of Popery: for the^ we were blind indeed, not as whelps that see after nine daies, not as the man in the Gospell, that saw men walke like trees; but blinde as Beetles, blinde as the men of Sodom, that groped for Lots doore: but alas, how weake is our Faith, how small is our Knowledge, how cold is our Zeale, in respect of that which we might have had, if wee had applied our hearts to Wisedome? What know wee at fourescore yeeres old, that a child knowes not at eight yeeres old? If a childe should never grow in height nor Wisedome, it were prodigious; even so wee are children still, nay monsters: But bee not (saith the Apostle) children in 2 Cor. 14. 20. understanding, but as concerning maliciousnesse bee children, but in understanding be of ripe age. But wee have inverted the order: Let us follow the counsel of the Wise man, In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thy hand rest: that is, doe good in thy Eccles. 11. 6. youth, doe good in thy age, yea at all times bee not weary of sowing, and bee not weary of working, Of well doing: for in due season wee shall reape, if wee faint not: the seede time is nothing, Gal. 6. 9. the growth is nothing, the harvest is all in all; to doe well in youth, is nothing; to doe well in age, is nothing; but to continue till death, to the last gaspe, is pietie in deede. If the righteous turne away from his righteousnesse, and commit iniquity, and doe Ezech. 18. 24, 26 according to all the abominations, that the wicked man doth, shall hee live? All his righteousnesse that hee hath done, shall not bee mentioned, but in the transgresston that hee hath committed, in his sinne that hee hath sinned; in them hee shall dye: for when a righteous man turneth away from his righteousnesse, and committeth iniquity, hee shall even dye for the same, hee shall even dye for his iniquity that hee hath done. As well may we drowne in the Havens mouth, as in the middest of the boysterous sea; and as well fall through the peevishnesse of age, as through the lusts and concupiscences of youth: but of many it may be said, Caput canum, and cor vanum, a gray head, and a greene

wit: Anni multi, and acta stulta; dies vberes, and fructus steriles facies rugosa^at We must build here against the time to come. lingua nugosa; many yeeres, but foolish acts; plentifull dayes, but barren fruits; a wrinckled face, but a trifling toyish tongue.
The wicked is like the Vintner in the Gospell, who broached his best wine first, and after, that which is worse; like Nebuchadnezers Iohn 2. 10. Image, whose head was all of gold, whose shoulders were of silver, whose belly was all of brasse, whose legges were all of yron, and feete of clay; still worse and worse. O brethren, wee build apace, but it is with bloud, as the Prophet sayd, They build up Sion with bloud, and Ierusalem with iniquity, but Sion shall bee Mich. 3. 10, 12. plowed up as a field, and Ierusalem shall bee an heape, etc. And Woe unto Hab. 2. 12. to him that buildeth a towne with bloud, and erecteth a Citty with iniquity. But if wee build not in zeale, faith, knowledge, our houses here shall fall or bee desolate; even great and faire without inhabitant; the foundation is not good: but if wee doe good, and Esa. 59. be rich in good workes; if we bee ready to distribute and communicate, Then shall wee lay up for our selves in store a good foundation against the time to come. Wee have no houses in Heaven, wee 1 Tim. 6. 19. cannot say with Paul, Wee know that if the Earthly house of this Tabernacle 2 Cor. 5. 1. bee destroyed, wee have an house, that is to say, a building, not made with hands, but eternall in Heaven. We have faire houses here, but what have wee in Heaven? Are wee built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Iesus Christ himselfe being the head corner Ephes. 2. 20. stone? Can a man goe a long journey with standing still? Did the Istaelites goe into Canaan? Or the wise men to Bethlem, with never moving? Heaven is a long journey: wee must not stand still, but runne wtih patience the race that is set before us. Heb. 12. 1.
And can wee goe to heaven with doing nothing? With learning nothing? Beleeving nothing? We weave Penelopes webbe: Ipsa texuit, and retexuit, what she woave in the day, shee did undoe in the night: so wee learne and unlearne; whatsoever wee learne on the Sunday, wee forget in the weeke day: we may say of our comming to Church, as Peter said of his fishing, Master, wee have Luke 5. 5. travelled all night, and have taken nothing. So wee have come to the Church twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty yeeres, and some more, and have gotten nothing, have learned nothing, got no Faith, no Zeale, no Knowledge.
But to proceed: As they must edifie themselves, increase and goe forward: so the thing that they must increase and goe forward in, is Faith, for that is the foundation of all Christian Vertues; it is Alpha and O mega, and absque ea nemo potest placere Deo, Heb. 11. 6. Rom. 14. 23. Without it no man can please God, for whatsoever is not of faith, is sinne. Omnia ergo splendida opera Paganorum, and Infidelium, sant splendida peccata, all the glistering workes of Pagans and Infidels, bee glistering sinnes, their prayers, almes, fastings, the patience

of Socrates, the justice of Aristides, the piety of Epaminondas, Faith the originall of all good workes. the constancie of Phocion; they were but bastard-workes, not right workes; they are begotten of Hagar, not of Sara the free-woman; they spring from the waters of Marah, not of Siloh; from the bitter poole Exanthe, not the sweet flood of Hispanis; they proceed from feare or vaineglory, not from faith; For as unto the Tit. 1. 15. pure all things are pure, so unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving, is nothing pure, but their mindes and consciences are defiled. It is true in all workes, that Paul said of prayer, How shall they call on him, in whom Rom. 10. 14. they have not beleeved? Even so, how can they glorifie God, or love God, or serve God, in whom they never beleeved? Paul making a Catalogue of good men, beginneth with Faith, and saith:

By faith, Abel offered to God a greater sacrifice than Cain.
Heb. 11. 4, 5, 7. 8, 20, 21, 33-34.


By faith, Enoch was taken away that hee should not see death, etc.


By Faith, Noah being warned of God, of the things which were not yet seene, moved with reverence, prepared the Arke, etc.


By Faith, Abraham when hee was called, obeyed God, offered Isaac, etc.


By Faith, Isaac blessed Iacob and Esau.

By Faith, Iacob, when hee was a dying, blessed the sonnes of Ioseph: and thus hee goeth on, and at the last concludeth, that by faith, they subdued Kingdomes, wrought righteousnesse, obtained the promises, stopped the mouthes of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, of weake were made strong, waxed valiant in battell, turned to flight the armies of the Aliants, etc.
In every good worke three things are to be considered.
Origo, Finis, Vsus, The beginning. The end, and Vse.
The originall or beginning of every good worke is faith: faith is as the Mother, and the holy Ghost the Father of all good workes: Faith begetteth Love, and Love blossometh forth in Vertue, and Vertue buddeth foorth in good Workes: whereupon Saint Peter inferreth this exhortation, Ioyne moreover Vertue with your Faith, and with Vertue, Knowledge, and with Knowledge, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 7, 8. Temperance, and with Temperance, Patience, and with Patience, Godlinesse, and with Godlinesse, Brotherly-kindnesse, and with Brotherly-kindnesse, Love.
Secondly, the end is the glory of God; Hereupon saith the Apostle, Whether yee eate or drinke, or whatsoever yee doe, doe all to the glory of God. 1 Cor. 1, 3^.
Thirdly, the use is manifold: First, they are unto us signes of our election; and therefore Saint Peter would have us to make our election and calling sure by them. Indeed our election is sure in it selfe, 2 Pet. 1. 10. for God cannot change; yet we must confirme it in our selves by the fruits of the Spirit. Secondly, they edifie others: Hereupon

saith our Saviour, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see No life of grace without Faith. your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in Heaven. Thirdly, that they may stop the mouth of the Adversary: For which cause we are willed to have honest conversation among the Gentiles, that wheras they doe backbite us as evill doers, they may see our good works, and glorify Mat. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 12. our Father which is in Heaven. Here is the triall of a Christian; that proveth us either sonnes or bastards; this proveth us dead, or alive; by Faith wee live: this is the spirit and soule of the inner man; wee have a name to live, yet are wee dead, if wee want Iohn 1. 12. Faith.
There is a double life; of grace, and of nature; Infidels, Vnbeleevers are strangers from the life of grace. As a tree liveth not without Ephes. 4. 18. moysture, nor a bird without aire; nor the fish without water, nor a body without a soule, so neither the soule without faith: For in that wee live now in the flesh, wee live by the Faith of the Sonne of God, who hath loved us; and gave himselfe for us. Yee see Infidels eating, Gal. 2. 20. drinking, sporting, playing, yet are they dead; they are alive to the world, but dead unto God: but the faithfull, they are dead (with Christ) unto the world; but their life is hid with Christ, with God, and when Christ which is their life, shall appeare, then shall they Col. 2, 3, 4. also appeare with him in glory. Pandora carried deadly poyson in a painted boxe, and Lusimachus the cutter, a leaden sword in a golden sheath; and many men, a dead soule in a living body: the body is alive, but the soule is dead, as Paul said of the voluptuous widow; But shee that liveth in pleasure, is dead while shee liveth. To conclude, faith joyneth us to Christ: For Christ dwelleth in 1 Tim. 5. 6. our hearts by Faith; Christ uniteth us to God, 1 Iohn 5. God assureth Ephes. 3. 17. us of life: For in him wee live, and move, and have our being. So that no faith, no Christ; no Christ, no God; no God, no life: God Act. 17. 28. so loved the world, that hee gave his only be gotten Sonne, that whosoever Iohn 3. 16, 18. beleeveth in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting: hee that beleeveth in him, shall not bee condemned, but hee that beleeveth not, is condemned already, because hee beleeveth not in the name of the only begotten Sonne of God. Knowledge is the fountaine of all vertue, and Faith is the sea in which they all runne, and where they jointly end their course.
But it is to bee observed, that hee calleth it not simply Faith, but holy Faith; yea most holy Faith; he riseth to the superlative degree, as David extolled Bashan above all mountaines, saying, The mountaine of God, is like the mountaine of Bashan; it is a high mountaine, Psal. 68. 15. as the mount Bashan. As Salomon extolled his huswife above all women, saying, Many daughters have done vertuously, but thou Pro. 31. 29. surmountest them all: As Christ commended Iohn Baptist above all Nazarites, saying, There is no greater Prophet than Iohn among them Luk. 7. 28. that are begotten of women: And the Lord, Moses above all Prophets: So Iude commendeth Faith above al vertues. All precious stones Deut. 34. are good, yet none like the Topaze; all flowres are faire, yet none Iob 28.

like the Lily; most trees bring fruit, but none like the Apple-tree Faith purifies our hearts, and makes our actions and persons holy. of Persia; or the Tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and gave fruit every moneth. Many vertues are excellent, and further our salvation, yet none like faith. Iustice giveth every man his owne, temperancy restraineth lusts, fortitude beareth Apoc. 22. 2. 1 Iohn 5. 4. all labour and toile, prudence guideth our actions, but faith overcommeth the world; so doe not other vertues: faith is like the three 2 Sam. 23. worthies of David, who brake thorow the whole host, and drew water of the Well of Bethlem. Ionathan and his armour-bearer 1 Sam. 19. slew twenty men. Shamgar, with an Oxe goade, slew six hundred Iudg. 3. 31. Iudg. 15. Philistines; Samson with the jaw-bone of an Asse, slew a thousand men: thus these men brake thorow an whole host; and faith overcommeth the whole world. In this faith Paul insulted over heaven and earth, men and Angels, I am perswaded (saith Paul) that neither life nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor Rom. 8. 38. things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall bee able to separate me from the Love of God which is in Christ Iesus our Lord. And againe, he saith, I know whom I have beleeved, and I am perswaded that hee is able to keep that, which I have committed unto him (meaning himselfe) against that day. It is called Holy, yea most Holy, for all our works are polluted, and receive their holinesse from faith, and faith from Christ, who is the object of it. As the Sunne giveth light to all Planets; as salt seasoneth all meates; so Faith seasoneth all works: for in themselves they are polluted; For who can say, I have made my heart cleane, I am cleane from sinne? For as the holy man of god saith, Hee found no stedfastnesse Pro. 20. 9. Iob 4. 18, 19. in his servants, and laid folly upon his Angels; how much more in them that dwell in houses of Clay, whose foundation is the dust, which shall bee destroyed before the moth? And againe, he maketh this demand, and saith, What is man, that he should be cleane? And hee that is borne of a Woman, that hee should be just? Wee are all as a menstruous cloth, Cap. 15. 14. as an uncleane thing: we all doe fade like a leafe, and our iniquities like the wind, haue taken us away: only Faith purifieth our hearts. To come neerer, fidem sanctissimam vocat, ratione objecti: hee Act. 15. 9. calleth it most holy Faith, by reason of the object: Deum enim trinum and unum respicit, it respecteth three and one, three in Persons, one in Essence. Morall vertues, they are occupied about humane objects, and things created; as liberality about giving of good things; temperance, about meate, drinke, fleshly lusts, leachery, etc. Fortitude in suffring adversity: therefore they cannot be called most holy vertues.
Againe, it is called most holy Faith, in respect of the efficient cause thereof, that is to say, the Holy Ghost; For the Holy Ghost bestoweth upon us all good things, love, joy, peace, long 1 Cor. 12: Gal. 5. 22. suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, Faith, meeknesse, temperance: all these, and all the rest are the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost. Now because the Authour is holy, his Works, his gifts,

and graces bee holy, Nil nisi sanctum a, sancto spiritu prodire potest, If no holines, no Faith. Nothing can come from the holy Spirit, but that which is holy. Aug.
Learne here to judge of the works of the elder World, their almes, their prayer, their love: what love could there be without faith? and what faith could there bee among them without the doctrine of God? Faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. But did they fast often? Wee seldome or never. Did they Rom. 10. 14. give almes, and doe we live unto our selves? are our right hands dryed up with Ieroboams? Did they pray in the night, wee scarce in the day? Did they love one another, agree together? and doe wee sue and sting one another, like the Serpents of Sinai? O brethren, they shall rise in judgement against us, as Christ said of the Ninivites, Except our righteousnesse, our prayers, our love exceed theirs, wee shall not enter into Heaven: our faith is Mat. 11. not most holy, no, nor holy, nay, no faith at all.
And by the way note that hee calleth faith holy, not unholy, unjust, unchaste drunken faith, such as the world braggeth of in these dayes; the dead faith that Saint Iames inveigheth against so earnestly. All lewd men boast of faith: but I will say to them as Iames said, O stende mihi fidem per opera: Shew me thy faith by thy workes; shew mee it by thy zeale, thy piety, thy truth, thy chastity, thy mercy; with our faith let us joyne vertue. The Israelites cryed Templum Domini, templum Domini, the Temple of 2 Pet. 1. 5. the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; the Pharisees cryed, The Baptisme of Iohn, the Baptisme of Iohn; the Iewes cried, We have Abraham to our Father; the Scribes cried, We have Moses to our Doctor; the Ephesians cryed, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: but Ieremy bade the Israelites amend their wayes and their works: Ier. 7. 4. Iohn bade the Pharisees bring forth fruits of Repentance: Christ bade the Iewes doe the Workes of Abraham: He told the Scribes, Luk. 3. 8. Iohn. 8. Iohn. 5. Ephes. 4. 20. that Moses would condemne them; and Paul told the Ephesians, that they had not so learned Christ; and so say we to these men that boast of faith: I will reason with them as Ieremy did with the people, Will yee steale, murder, and commit adultery, and sweare falsly, Ier. 7. 9, 10. and burne incense unto Baal, and walke after other gods, whom yee know not, and come and stand before mee in this house, whereupon my Name is called? even so, will we sweare, lye, raile, slander, and say that we beleeve? Was Gods house a denne for theeves? is faith become a cloake for theeves, whoremongers, lyers, swearers, usurers, Idolaters, blasphemers, drunkards, pot-companions, etc? I say of this faith, as Saint Iames said of Wisedome, This wisedome descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensuall and divelish: so Iam. 3. 5. this faith is not from above, but is earthly, sensuall, and divelish: For faith sheweth it selfe in good workes, and can no more be separated from it, than light can bee from the Sunne, or heat from the fire, or moisture from water.

Lastly, note that hee saith, that this faith is edified and increased If wee had never such measure of faith, yet wee must heare dayly. by hearing (there understood, not expressed of Saint Iude) for the Word is the foundation. Paul in naming the Christian armour, coupleth Faith and the Word together, Above all, take the shield of faith, whereby yee may quench the fiery darts of the wicked; and take the helmet of Salvation, and the swrd of the Ephes. 2. 20. Ephes. 6. 17, 18. Rom. 10. 14. Spirit, which is the Word of God. Fides ex auditu, Faith, commeth by hearing: As possible for a man to see without eyes, or a tree to grow without moysture, or a bird to live without meate, or a house to stand without a foundation, as Faith to bee without the Word. Esay cryeth out, Heare and your soules shall live. Ita Esay. 55. 3. Ephes. 4. 20. 1 Cor. 1. 21. didicistis Christum? Have yee so learned Christ, saith the Apostle? It pleaseth God through the foolishnesse of preaching to save them that beleeve.
Wee thinke that wee are wise enough, that the Preacher can tell us nothing that wee know not, and this is the cause of all contempt: but if thy knowledge were as great as Salomons, to 1 Reg. 4. 29, 30, 32, 33. whom God gave Wisedome and Vnderstanding exceeding much, and a large heart, even as the sand which is by the sea shoare: and Salomons Wisedome excelled the Wisedome of all the children of the East, and all the Wisedome of Aegypt: and Salomon spake three thousand Proverbs: and his Songs were one thousand and five, and he spake of trees from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hyssope that groweth out of the wall: hee spake also of Beasts and of Fowles, and of creeping things, and of Fishes: I say, were thy wisedome as much as Salomons, yet must it be holpen with doctrine; wee must still be remembred of that which wee know, and still know more: Yea the Preacher, though he be learned, teacheth himselfe as well as thee, and his owne faith as well thine, and speaketh to his owne heart as well as to others: such a secret power hath God put into his Word, and such is his Ordinance: Hee hath given some to be Apostles, and some Ephes. 4. 11. Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. By these are the Saints gathered, thus is Christs body edified, thus are the godly repaired, thus wee meet in unity of faith. Paul bidding the Gaoler beleeve, preached unto him the Word. Never Act. 16. 31. thinke to goe to Heaven without faith, or to have faith without preaching (I speake of ordinary faith.) For God can worke miraculously as in children and deafe men, as in Medaelde, mentioned by Danaeus, and in captives; A man may live without meate, but all the world cannot assure thee of it; thou maist have faith by miracle, but neither men nor Angels can assure thee of it; where meanes are, wee must use meanes. Wilt thou fast forty dayes, because Moses and Elias did so? or goe thorow the red Sea, because the Israelites did so? Or goe into an hot Exod. 32. Exod. 14. oven, because the three children did so? Thou mayst perhaps starve then, or bee drowned, or burned. Where God giveth meanes, hee giveth no miracles. So long as Israel was in the desart,

God gave Manna, but when they came into Canaan, where God works not by miracle when hee affords means. they might plowe and sow, Manna ceased: the Starre appeared to the Wisemen in the way, but in Ierusalem it vanished, for there they might inquire. Let us therefore use the meanes; and seeing the means of the edifying and increasing of our most holy Exod. 16. Iosh. 5. faith, is doctrine, let us attend unto it, even so long as God shall give us a body as an house, hands as keepers, legs as strong men, Eccles. 12. eyes as windowes, eares as doores, and an heart as a Treasure-house.



THE TWO AND THIRTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XX. 

Praying in the Holy Ghost.
Faith and Prayer inseparable.



FRom faith hee commeth to prayer: for increase of faith, and all graces must bee had by prayer: where, by the way note, that the originall of faith is immediatly from God, it is his worke; so saith our Saviour, This Iohn 6. 25. is the worke of God, that yee beleeve in him, whom he hath sent: And for this cause the Apostle calleth Christ Iesus, The Author and finisher of our Luk. 17. 5. faith. But the increase of faith is by prayer, and prayer mediate from God by faith, is the gift of God, and prayer is ever a companion, nay the daughter of faith; faith the mother, and it the daughter; for how can wee pray without faith? How shall they call upon him, in Rom. 10. 14. whom they have not beleeved?
A question grew betweene Musculus, Bullinger, and other Churches of Mensbelgarde, Num fides sit a Deo petenda? Whether faith is to bee begged of God? Calvin being to decide the question, said, that Musculus and Bullinger spake duriuscule, somewhat hard: Nam nulla oratio, nisi fide fundata, probatur: God alloweth of no prayer, except it bee founded on faith; For whatsoever is not of Rom. 14. 29. faith, is sinne.
Faith is the mother of prayer; and the mother goes before the

daughter. Augustine proveth, that Cornelius beleeved, because his Prayer the conduit whereby all good things are conveyed to us. prayers were heard. Infideli dat Deus fidem, at non per orationem, sed immediate, God giveth the Infidell faith, not by prayer, but immediatly.
A strong faith begetteth many prayers; a weake faith, weake, and few prayers. No faith, no prayer. Paul coupleth them together, Act. 10. Aug. Ephes. 6. 16, 18. as an armour of proofe; Above all take the shield of Faith: and by and by in the next subsequent verse save one, and pray alway with all manner of supplication in the Spirit, etc. Faith begetteth prayer, and prayer increaseth faith: For as fire kindleth the wood, and the same wood increaseth the flame; so faith begetteth prayer. Rejoice evermore (saith the Apostle) and pray continually: 1 Thess. 5. 16, 17. Faith worketh joy: for being justified by faith, we have peace with God; and yet the same joy is augmented by prayer. Rom. 5. 1.
But now more generally to handle this doctrine, because increase of faith and all graces must bee had by prayer: for by that hand God reacheth them, and in that conduit hee conveigheth them unto us: therefore Saint Iude saith, Orate per Spiritum. Aske, seeke, knocke, and promiseth us that wee shall have, find, and Mat. 7. 7. that it shall be opened unto us. Wee have not, because wee aske not. Iam. 4. Salomon nameth prayer, as the Indian stone that remedieth all diseases; For marke his prayer, which he powred forth to God in the Temple, When a man shall trespasse against his neighbour, and he lay upon him an oath to cause him to sweare, and the swearer shall come before 1 Reg. 8. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. thy Altar in this house; then heare thou in Heaven, and doe, and iudge thy servants, that thou condemne the wicked, to bring his way upon his head, and justify the righteous, and give him according to his righteousnesse. When thy people Israel shall bee overthrowne before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee, and turne againe unto thee, confesse thy name, and pray, and make supplication unto thee in this House; Then heare thou in Heaven, and bee mercifull unto the sinne of thy people Israel. And when Heaven shall be shut, and there shall bee no raine, because they have sinned against thee, and shall pray, etc. Then heare thou in Heaven, and pardon the sinne of thy servants. When there shall bee famine in the land, when there shall bee pestilence, when there shall be blasting, mildew, grashopper, or caterpiller: when their enemy shall besiege them in the Citties of their land, or any plague, or any sicknesse, and they make their prayers before thee, heare them, and bee mercifull unto them, etc. Thus prayer is a remedy against all mischiefe. Physicians for divers diseases, have divers remedies; but a Christian for all and every disease, hath but one only remedy, and that is prayer: For Whosoever calleth upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved: fides est janua ad misericordiam, Ioel. 2. 32. and oratio est clavis quae januam reserat. Faith is the gate to mercy, and Prayer is the key to unlocke this gate. Hereupon saith Saint Iames, Is any man among you sicke? Let him pray, and the prayer Jam. 5. 13, 15. of faith shall save the sicke. Prayer is profitable, powerfull, and pleasant: it is every way profitable, first, to obtaine every good

thing: Verily, verily (saith Christ) I say unto you, whatsoever yee aske Prayer prevalent with not only the creature, but Creator. the Father in my name, hee will give it you. Secondly, to prevent judgements, present or future: Note for this purpose the prayer of Salomon before mentioned. Thirdly, to confirme and strengthen us in all spirituall graces: By Christs prayer was Peters faith kept Iohn. 16. 23. 1 Reg. 8. 33. Luk. 22. 32. Col. 1. 9. Act. 8. 22. from sayling: and the Apostle prayed for the Colossians, That they might bee filled with knowledge, etc. increasing therein and strengthened. Fourthly, to obtaine remission of sinnes: For which cause Saint Peter said to Simon Magus, Pray God, that if it be possible, the thought of thy heart may bee forgiven thee. Whereby hee giveth us to understand, that if remission of sinnes may bee obtained by any meanes, prayer is the meanes; And this also Christ hath taught us, when hee willed us to pray thus, Forgive us our trespasses, as wee Mat. 6. forgive them that trespasse against us. Fifthly, prayer sanctifieth all Gods creatures unto us; so saith the Apostle, The creature is sanctified by the Word of God and prayer. To conclude, prayer is profitable 1 Tim. 4. 5. unto all things; it is like unto Iacobs ladder; by which Gods blessings descended downe upon us; or as Catena aurea, a golden Isidor. de f^uctu Orandi. chaine, by which we ascend up to God. And as prayer is profitable, so is it powerfull; For it prevaileth over all creatures, whether reasonable or unreasonable, and of reasonable, both visible, as man, and invisible, as Angels, whether evill or good; yea, it prevaileth with the Creator himselfe; Daniel by prayer stopped the Dan. 6. 12. mouthes of Lions, among whom hee was cast; by Davids prayer 2 Sam. 15. 31. Gen. 32. was Achitophels wisdome turned into foolishnes; by Iacobs prayer was Esaus wrath alayed; by Mardochaeus and Esters prayer was Hamans malice, like Sauls sword, turned into his owne bowels; by Est. 4. 6. cap. 7. 10. 2 Reg. 19. 15. Ezechias prayer, was the whole host of Senacherib overthrowne: one faithfull mans prayer, is more forcible than the power of an whole army. Witnes the example of Moses, who lift up his hands, Exod. 17. 11. while Israel fought against Amalech, and prevailed. When Marcus Aurelius had almost lost his army in Germany for want of water, the Christians in his campe prayed, and God sent raine in great Eusib. abundance. And Theodoret affirmeth, that Theodosius in a battell Theodo. that hee fought, being in danger to be overthrowne, and his men ready to fly, prayeth, and God giveth him the victory. For as Origen saith, One man prevaileth more in prayer, then innumerable sinners do with fighting. Orig.
By prayer the Divels are cast out: for there is a kinde of Divels that go not out but by fasting and prayer. Mat. 17. 11.
If Christ would have prayed, hee might have had more then Mat. 26. 53. twelve legions of Angels to guard him and defend him. At Elishaes prayer, the mountaines were full of charrets and horses of 2 Reg. 6. 17. fire round about.
Many admirable and extraordinary things have Gods children in all ages effected by prayer. By prayer, Abraham obtained favour for Ismael; by prayer, Moses divided the red sea; by prayer,

Ioshua made the Sunne to stand still in the middest of heaven; by Prayer pleasant to God and man. prayer, Anna became fertile; by prayer, Ezechias procured a longer life; by prayer, Iudith destroyed Holofernes; and Ester saveth the Iewes; by prayer, Susanna is saved from the unjust Iudges; Daniel from the Lions, and Peter from Herod; by prayer, the Leper is cured, the Publican justified, the Divels scared, Heaven gates opened, the fetters loosed, and iniquity vanquished; by prayer, wee have accesse unto the throne of grace; It is a great blessing, that God in his Word vouchsafeth to speake to man, but not comparable to this, that man should talke with God. Yee see the power of prayer.
Thirdly, prayer is a pleasant thing, to God and man.
To God, and therefore resembled to the incense, Let my prayer come forth as the incense, and let the lifting up of my hands bee an evening Psal. 141. sacrifice. For as the sent of incense is pleasant to the nosthrils of man, so are the prayers of the Saints unto God: for when they Chrysost. ascend to heaven, God seemeth to smell a sweet savour like the incense.
Prayer also is pleasant, and delightfull unto man; For if it were a pleasure to Iacob, for to speake to Rachel, and to Ionathan, with David; what a pleasure is it for a devour soule to speake unto God? Oratio locutio est ad Deum, quando legis, Deus tibi loquitur: quando oras, cum Deo loqueris: Prayer is a speaking to God; when Aug. thou readest, God speakes to thee; when thou prayest, thou talkest with God. The child is never better, then when it is in the fathers or mothers lappe: so we shall never be better, then when by prayer we creep (as it were) into our Heavenly Fathers bosome.
And thus wee see the profit, power, and pleasure of prayer: the experience of this hath made good men to spend their dayes in prayer. David rose at midnight to pray; Daniel prayed three Psal. 119. Dan. 6. Hist. tripart. times a day: It is reported of Saint Iames, that his knees were horne-hoofed with prayer; and Nazianzene writeth of his sister Gorgonia, that shee was so given to prayer, that her knees seemed to cleave to the earth, by reason of her continuall kneeling at prayer; and Gregory in his dialogues writeth of his Aunt Trasilla, being dead, that shee was found to have her elbowes as hard as hornes, which hardnesse she got by leaning to a deske, at which shee used to pray: and Saint Ierome writing of Paul the Hermite, affirmeth, that hee was found dead, kneeling upon his knees, holding up his hands, and lifting up his eyes; so that the very dead corps seemed yet to live, and by a kind of religious gesture to pray still to God. The Iewes beganne the day, and ended it with Levit. 1. prayer. It is said of Anthony the Hermite, that having spent the whole night in prayer, hee chid the Sunne at the rising of it, saying, O Sol, mimis propere nobis redijsti; O Sunne, thou hast returned

to us over-soone; I am troubled with thy light, the greatnesse of Divers kinds of prayer, in respect of matter. thy light hindreth mee from contemplation, and the light of my God; and of Bessarion, that hee passed twelve dayes and nights in contemplation; pavimentum erat lectus, the pavement was his bed, water his drinke, barly his bread, and rootes his dainties. If we compare with these men, we shall be found like the Pigmaei, in respect of the great Giants. Wee be not men of prayer, wee rise in the morning, as the wild Asse to his prey, and we lie downe at night, as dogges do in their kennell: The Euchites pray too much, wee too little, or not at all; the Papists prayed in the night, but wee neither day nor night.
But of prayer in respect of the matter there bee divers kindes: Petition. Deprecation. Intercession. Expostulation.
Petition, is for good things.
Deprecation, to remove evill things.
Intercession, for others.
Expostulation, against others.
The Apostle Paul devideth prayer into Supplications. Prayers. Intercessions. 1 Tim. 2. 2. Thankesgiving.
Supplications, are for the removing of evill, whether it bee malum culpae, or Malum poenae; the evill of sinne, or the evill of punishment.
Prayers, are for the obtayning of good, for God will give good Mat. 7. 11. things to them that aske of him.
Intercessions, are in the behalfe of others; so Moses made intercession for the people, saying, Forgive them, or els race mee out of Exod. 32. the booke of life, which thou hast written. So Christ made intercession for his crucifiers, Father, forgive them, they know not what they doe.
Thankesgivings, are for benefits received. Mat. 27.
And these foure, the Apostle referreth in another place to two heads. 1. Requests, 2. Thankesgiving. Phil. 4. 6.
Vnder request, hee comprehendeth supplication, prayer, and intercession.
But the most usuall distinction is grounded on 1 Thess. 5. 17, 18. which is, Petition, and Thankesgiving.
And in all these kindes of prayer, a Christian must be conversant and use them as occasion serves: and thus yee see the distinct kindes of prayer in respect of the matter.
There are other distinctions in regard of the manner, the first Mentall and Vocall.
Mentall, is an inward lifting up of the heart to God, without any outward manifestation of the same by word; such as Moses

was, when God said unto him, Why cryest thou to me? yet hee spake Prayer divers in respect of the manner. never a word with his tongue, onely he sighed and groned.
Vocall is that which is uttered with words, as was the Publicans, Exod 14. 15. Luk. 18. when hee cried, God be mercifull unto me a sinner.
Secondly, A prayer in regard of the manner of it, is Sudden, or Composed.
Sudden, when as upon some occasion the heart is lifted up to God either by sighing or speaking; such as was Nehemiahs prayer; Nehe. 2. 4. and these are called the ejaculations of the heart, which (as one saith) are to bee used as salt with meate; with every bit of meate wee commonly take a little salt to season it; so when wee doe any thing, we must lift up our hearts to God, and season our busines by prayer.
Composed prayer, is the powring forth of some solemne prayer to God, privately by our selves: and such were the prayers that Daniel used to make three times a day. Dan. 6. 10.
Thirdly, prayer is either Conceived or Prescribed.
Conceived prayer is that, which hee who uttereth the prayer, inventeth and conceiveth of himselfe; and such are most of the prayers recorded in the Scripture.
Prescribed is, when a set constant forme of prayer is layed downe before-hand; a thing very frequent in the Scriptures: in Numbers God prescribed a set forme of blessing for the Priests continually Numb. 6. 23, 24. to use: and the 92. Psalme was prescribed, A song for the Sabbath Mat. 6. day; and Christ himselfe prescribed an excellent forme of prayer; and S. Paul observes a set forme of blessing in the beginning and end of his Epistles.
Fourthly, prayer is either Publike or Private.
Publike, when a whole Congregation with one joint consent call upon God.
Private is that, which is made by some few together, as Elisha, 2 Reg. 4. 33. and his servant were alone in a chamber praying for the Shunamites child; or when a man prayeth by himselfe alone, as did Cornelius: and of this kinde of prayer Christ speaketh thus, When thou Act. 10. 30. prayest, enter into thy chamber, and shut the dore, and pray to thy Father in secret, and thy Father which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.
All these prayers must wee send up to God in the mediation of Christ: Nam quid dulcius quam Genitorem in nomine Vnigeniti invocare? Aug. What is sweeter, then to call upon the Father in the name of his onely begotten Sonne? And they must bee powred out with feare and reverence: Our hearts must bee raised from the dunghill of the earth, to the glorious Throne of Heaven, as the Prophet saith, Let our hearts be lifted up. Our gestures must be reverent and humble, and kneeling is the fittest gesture in prayer: Lament. 3. 41. and they must bee delivered with fervency, For the prayer of Iam. 5.

the righteous avayleth much, if it bee fervent. Prayer is for all times and all things.
Yea in prayer wee must bee diligent; Paul would have the Thessalonians to pray alwayes, nay indesinenter orare, to pray without ceasing: but if any man say, they cannot spend so much time 1 Thess. 5. 17. in prayer, they have other things to attend: I answere, that prayer hindereth no labour, it is opus animi, non corporis, a worke of the mind, not of the body: for why, the husband-man at the plough, the pilot at the helme, the mariner at the oares, the coblar at his Last, the weaver at his Loomes, the woman at her rock may pray, and yet lose no time; the heart may bee occupied as was Moses heart at the red Sea. Epiphanius calleth Christians Bees, that have Exod. 14. wax in their hands, their clawes: to note their worke, and hony in their mouthes, that is Hymnes, Psalmes, prayers to glorify God; as is said of the Primitive Church, These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, etc.
One calleth prayers, Gods Grashoppers, Gods Nightingales, Onuphrius. who praise him in the day, and pray in the night: and good men will pray alway with all manner of prayers and supplications in the spirit, Ephes. 6. 18. 2 Tim. 1. 6. and watch thereunto with all perseverancy, etc. O stirre up thy heart that is dull, rowze it up to God, blow the coale, but spit not upon it. Benajah is said to kill a Lion in the snow. It is a great glory to kill a Lion, greater to kill him in the snow, when the hands are 2 Sam. 23. 20. cold, and the body frozen, that a man cannot draw his sword: so the soule is cold, congealed, the spirit is dull, the mind languishing in good things: but if thou canst, then put heate unto it, to wrastle with the Divell that roaring Lion, in prayer and meditation: 1 Pet. 5. 8. it is thy glory with God, and men, and Angels. In other vertues thou overcommest another, in this thou overcommest thy selfe. This world is a sea, our soules are as vessels tossed on it; our vertues, Apoc. 15. as wares to be transported to the Haven, prayer is as a prosperous wind to carry them forward. Now as in the straites of Magellane, of three shippes scarce one is saved; so in the sea of this world, of an hundred, scarce one is saved; for why? Men pray not. The Lord looked downe from Heaven upon the children of men, to see Psal. 14. 2, 3, 4. if there were any that would understand and seeke after God: all are gone out of the way, they are all corrupt, there is none that doth good, no not one: doe not all the workers of iniquity know, that they eate up my people as they eate bread? they call not upon the Lord. On these God powreth out wrath: For so the Prophet prayed, saying; Powre out thy wrath upon the Heathen, that know thee not, and upon the families that call not Ier. 10. 25. upon thy name. Prayer is as a spirituall chaire, wherein the soule sitteth downe at the feet of the Lord to receive the influences of his graces: est porta regalis, per quam Dominus in cor intrat: prayer is the regall gate by which the Lord entreth into the heart, the first fruits of future glory: Manna, that had in it Omne delectamentum, the delicacy and taste of every sweet; the Ladder of Iacob, by which we must ascend into heaven.

By this note, God distinguisheth his house from all houses, My house shall bee called an house of prayer; and his people, from all Prayer comforteth in all estates. the people of the world: they are a people that delight in prayer, and the praises of God are ever in their mouth: others are houses Mat. 21. 12. of banqueting, as the houses of Iobs sonnes; or houses of sporting, as the houses of the Philistins, where Samson plaied; or Iob. 1. 1 Reg. 16. Iudg. 16. Mich 3. Luk. 12. houses of cruelty, as were the houses of the Iewes; or houses of receit, as the barnes of the foole; or houses of destruction, as those of Ieroboams and Baasha: but Gods house is an house of prayer, all other came to nought: the houses of Iobs sonnes were blowne down with the winde; the houses of the Philistins fell upon their heads and slew them; the houses of the Iewes were turned into a field; the barnes of the foole came to a strange heire; the Palaces of Ieroboam and Baasha, became a proverbe.
Prayer is a conjoyning of God and man together; in doctrine God speaketh unto us, and therefore the Word is called, The Spirit 2 Thess. 2. 8. of Gods mouth: and in prayer wee speake to God, and powre out our griefes into his lap: Call upon mee in the time of trouble, and I will heare thee, and thou shalt glorifie mee. Oratio est Deo sacrificium: Psal. 50. 15. Prayer is a sacrifice to God, musicke unto the Angels, a banket to the Saints, an helpe to them that pray, a remedy for the penitent, a weapon against their enemies. Te orante fugit daemon: When thou prayest, the Divell takes him to his heeles and is gone, Resist the Divell (by prayer) and hee will flye from you. Vis omnia patienter ferre? sis homo precum: Wilt thou carry all things patiently? Iam. 4. 7. be a man of prayers. Pray continually, in all things give thanks. Wilt thou roote up vices, and be inriched with vertues? Bee a 1 Thess. 5. 17, 18 man of prayers; Cease not to pray to be filled with the knowledge of Gods will in all Wisedome and spiritual Vnderstanding. Wilt thou overcome Col. 1. 9. troubles? bee a man of prayer: for Saint Iames will have thee troubled and afflicted to pray. Wilt thou know the subtilty of Iam 5. 13. Satan, and vanquish his temptations? Bee a man of prayers. Pray with all manner of prayer and supplications, and then neither rule nor power, nor worldly rulers, nor the governours of the darkenesse of this world shall cause thee to fall. Wilt thou trample under-feet thy corrupt and evill affections? Bee a man of prayers: Watch and pray, that yee enter not into temptation. I never knew a man of much praying, a man of much sinne, no, not of the superstitious Mat. 26. 41. sort, touching the grosse sinnes of the world: Per preces charitas pascitur, fides augetur, spes corroboratur, spiritus exhilaratur, cor pacatur, detegitur veritas, vincitur tentotio, renovantur sensus, totus homo immutatur and fit melior; by prayer Charity is fed, Faith increased, Hop strengthened, the Spirit exhilarated, the Heart pacified, Verity discovered, temptation vanquished, the Senses renewed, and the whole man is altered and bettered.
Paul prayed, and God answered him, My grace is sufficient for Prayer the food of the soule. thee. The Philosophers affirme, God to bee the perfection of all creatures: the creature then is so much the more perfect, by how much he is neerer unto God: in prayers and supplications, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. wee draw neerer unto God then at other times, therefore the perfecter; for we draw neere unto God, not in walking, but in loving; not with the feete of our bodies, but with the affections of our hearts. Let us draw neere (saith the Apostle) with a true Heb. 10. 22. heart in assurance, being sprinkled in our heatts from an evil conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water. All living creatures have their nourishment, every one in their kinde; some live of the Earth as Molles, other some of the Water as Fishes, some of the Ayre, as the Camelion, some of the fire, as the Salamander: other creatures more noble than they, live by meat, as the naturall man: but others more noble than he, as the Angels, by meditations and contemplations. The Soule therefore being a spirituall substance, as the Angels, is nourished and fed with the same meate that they bee: Here is the difference, their vision of God is Col. 3. 3. Ephes. 4. 18. cleere and manifest, ours obscure and darke; their life perfect, ours imperfect; their life is a life of glory, ours is called the life of grace. As the sea followeth the moving of the Moone: for as shee increaseth, that waxeth; so the perfection of a Christian life dependeth on prayer; as our prayers increase, so doth our perfection in Christianity increase also. For seeing the heart is the beginning of life, and of workes, Et quale cor, talia opera: and as our heart is, such be our workes: if the heart therefore be devout, and well ordered, our workes will bee devout and good also: if otherwise, our workes will be vile and naught; For unto Tit. 1. 15. the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving, is nothing pure, but even their mindes and consciences are defiled. To conclude, it is no little proofe of the vertue of prayer, to behold the two principall glories and testimonies, which the Father gave to Christ Iesus in prayer; for in his transfiguration while hee prayed, His face did shine as the Sun, and his cloathes were as Mat. 17. 2. white as the light: and in his Baptisme, while he praied, The Heavens were opened unto him, and the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, lighted Mat. 3. 15. upon him. This should incourage us to pray, and to pray alwayes, to pray, and to pray continually, even every moment, as the least occasion is offered: prayer should bee the key to open the day, and the locke to shut in the night; when wee rise in the morning, we should pray with Abrahams servant, and say, O Lord God, Gen. 14. 12. I beseech thee, send me good speede this day: and when we lay us down at night, to pray with the sweet Singer of Israel, Lighten mine eyes, that I sleepe not in death: and whatsoever wee take in hand Psal. 13. 3. either by day or night, to prevent it with the blessing of the Psalme, Prosper the worke of our hands, O prosper thou our handy worke. Egredientes de hospitio armet oratio; regredientibus de platea, occurrat Psal. Ier. Ep.

intercessio: when thou goest out of the house, let prayer arme thee; Prayer the means whereby wee receive all good things. when thou returnest into thy house, let prayer meete with thee: prayer is vinculum invincibile: wouldest thou binde the Almighty that he may not hurt thee? Prayer is the band by which hee is tyed; and wouldest thou untie him to doe thee good? Prayer must doe it. Prayer is Clavis Scripturae, it is our Oedipus to resolve our doubts; it is our Commentary to understand Gods Word; Oratio est Deo sacrificium, Diabolo flagellum, oranti subsidium: Prayer is a sacrifice to God, a scourge to the Divell, and a helpe to our Aug. selves in all our troubles. And againe, Orationis purae magna est virtus, and velut fidelis nuntius mandatum peragit and penetrat, quo caro non pervenit: Great is the power of pure prayer, for it is a faithfull Aug. in Psal. 36. messenger, shee delivers her errand, and pierceth thither whither flesh cannot come. And this was it which made Bernard to say, Nemo nostrum parvipendeat orationem suam; dico enim vobis, quodipse ad quem oramus, non parvipendet eam; postquam egressa est ab ore nostrum, ipse scribit eam in libro suo, and unum in duobus indubitanter sperare possumus, quoniam aut dabit quod petimus, aut quod novit utilius: Let none of us lightly esteeme his prayer; I tell you that hee to whom we pray, doth not lightly esteeme it; after it is out of our mouth, he writes it in his booke, and one of these two wee may doubtlesse expect, either that hee will grant our petition, or that which hee knoweth to bee better for us. Call upon mee, and I will heare thee (saith God.) Aske, and you shall have (saith Christ.) Before they cry, I will heare them, saith Iehovah. The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him, saith David. O then let us call and cry unto him by earnest and hearty prayer night and day: but let us pray in knowledge with understanding; in faith by beleeving; in remorse, with seeking, in zeale; without cooling; in attention without wandering; in reverence, without contemning; in constancy without revolting; and in love, without revenging. Let our eyes bee fastned, hearts fixed, knees bowed, mouthes opened, and our hands lifted up as to the King of Kings; and as Iacob would not let the Angell goe, till he were blessed, so let not God goe, till wee be heard. Finely said one, Orat misericordia, and non orat miseria? orat innocentia, and non orat nequitia? orat judex, and desiderat parcere? and non orat reus, ut indulgentiam mereatur accipere? Doth mercy pray? and shall not miserie? piety intreate, and shall not iniquity? the Physician request, and shall not the sicke? the rich begge, and not the poore? the innocent pray, and not the guilty? the just and he that never sinned, fall downe, and the sinnefull sinner stand upright? the Sonne of righteousnesse bee humbled, and the sonne of wickednesse waxe proud? shall the judge intreate and desire to pardon, and the traytor not begge to bee forgiven?
Is not Christi actio Christiani institutio? Christs practice our president? But hee prayes, and shall not wee pray? Wee must

pray for our bodies, that they may be preserved; for our soules, The Holy Ghost, the Author of prayer. that they may bee saved; for our estates, that they may bee maintained; for our thoughts, that they may bee sanctified; for our words, that they may bee seasoned; for our actions, that they may bee ordered by Gods Spirit.
But Saint Iude doth not onely exhort to prayer, but also sheweth how wee must pray; In the Spirit: the which words may be understood two manner of wayes, either of the Author of prayer, or of the Manner of praying.
If we understand it of the Author, the sense is good, for Gods Spirit causeth prayer and every good worke; For wee know not how to pray as wee ought, but the Spirit it selfe maketh requests for us, Rom. 8. 26, 27. with sighs that cannot bee expressed: for hee that searcheth the heart, knoweth what is the meaning of the Spirit, for hee maketh requests for the Saints according to the Will of God. The fire which God would have continually to burne upon his Altar, came out from the Lord. Levit. 9. 24. If sacrifices were offered up with any other fire, the fire was counted strange, and the sacrifices no whit acceptable, but abominable Cap. 10. 1, etc. to the Lord. The Heavenly fire, whereby our spirituall sacrifices of prayer must be offered up, is that holy Spirit which commeth out from God; we must therefore pray in the Spirit; yea all good gifts proceede from the Spirit; so saith the Apostle, The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit 1 Cor. 12: 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. withall: for to one is given by the Spirit, the word of Wisedome; to another, the word of Knowledge by the same Spirit; to another is given Faith by the same Spirit; to another the gift of healing by the same Spirit; to another, operations of great workes; to another Prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; and to another diversity of tongues; to another interpretation of tongues: and all these worketh even the selfe-same Spirit, distributing to every man severally, as hee will. So Christ told his Apostles, that they spake not, but the Spirit of his Father; It is not you (saith he) that speake, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. Paul compareth the Spirit of God to a tree, that like the Tree of life yeeldeth all graces; The fruit of the Spirit, Ephes. 1. 18. is Love, Ioy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentlenesse, Goodnesse, Faith, Meeknesse, Temperance, against such there is no Law; for they are under the Spirit of grace. The Antithesis is betweene the flesh and the Spirit: Paul calleth it, the Spirit of Wisdome, And Esay nameth it, The Spirit of Wisdome, Counsell, Power, Strength; Because all these are the effects of it; for Bezaliel Esay. 11. 2. Exod. 31. 3. and Aholiab had their knowledge from Gods Spirit, in the works of brasse and silver: how much more have we in heavenly things? There is no Art, no cunning, no science, but from the Spirit, even in the most wicked. If you say, Quid Spiritui Sancto impys? What have the wicked to doe with the Spirit? I can answere it thus: The wicked have the spirit of illumination, as had Achitophel, 2 Sam. 16. Mat. 18. Act. 23. and Iudas, and Tertullus; but not the Spirit of Sanctification

and adoption. It is said of all the Iudges and Kings, The Holy Ghost the Author of all excellent gifts in any. that the Spirit of God came upon them: so it is said, that, the Spirit of God came upon Gedeon: so it is said of Saul, that the Spirit of the Lord should come upon him, and he should prophesy: and of David, that the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, from that day forward. Iudg. 6. 34. 1 Sam. 10. 6. 1 Sam. 10. 13. Al the rare excellent things of God, are judged by the Spirit. The naturall wise man perceiveth not the things that are of the Spirit of God: But he that is spirituall, judgeth all things. It is Gods Spirit that frameth all our actions and works, and all good things 1 Cor. 14. 15. in us. Hitherto tendeth the ceremony used in the Law, that in the sacrifices, things without life were consecrated with oyle; which thing had a double reference; first, to Christ, to note, that hee was anointed with the gifts of the Spirit, to performe his three offices: for so we read, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon mee, therefore hath the Lord anointed mee, and a. And againe, Thou hast loved Esay. 61. 1. Heb. 1. 9. righteousnesse, and hated iniquity, wherefore God, even thy God hath anointed thee with the oyle of gladnesse above thy fellowes. Secondly, it had reference unto us, to note, that all our duties are accepted of God, as they are wrought in us by the Spirit; but nothing, no not prayer, is accepted otherwise then it is a worke of the Spirit, and commeth from his motion. For this purpose, note what the Prophet saith in the person of God to Ierusalem, I will powre upon them the Spirit of supplications. He calleth the gift of prayer, the Spirit Zach. 12. 10. of supplications, because it is Gods Spirit which worketh in us this gift, and maketh us to call upon God: but more directly is this point proved by that phrase, which Saint Iude here useth, praying in the Holy Ghost. And this yet farther confirmed, in that it is said; The Spirit in our hearts crieth, Abba Father. And Paul layeth downe this point first, Affirmatively, saying, The Spirit helpeth Gal. 4. 6. Rom. 8. 16, 27. our infirmities, and maketh intercession for us: then Negatively, Wee know not what to pray: yet must wee not thinke, that the Holy Ghost doth indeed pray for us, as Christ doth, or as one of us doth for another: For then should the Holy Ghost bee our Mediator, (which was one of Arrius his heresies;) but the meaning is, that the Holy Ghost stirreth us up to pray, and putteth life into our dead and dull spirits, to make our prayers fervent. Well then, prayer is a gift of the Spirit; not common to all, but proper and peculiar to Gods elect, who have the Spirit of God: if no man can say that Iesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost: Surely, no 1 Cor. 12. 3. man can pray and call upon God, but by the Spirit of God. Let us then labour for Gods sanctifying Spirit, and having it, Let us goe along with him, and follow his motions, powring forth those prayers which he suggesteth unto us: and let us take heed, that we grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, which is done by quenching the good motions thereof through our carelesnes; or by Ephes. 4. 36. 1 Thess. 5. 19. resisting the Spirit through our rebellion.
But yet note further, that howsoever prayer is attributed to

the Spirit: yet it is a worke of the whole Trinity, and the Holy Trinity hath a hand in this holy exercise of prayer. The holy Ghost The whole Trinity concurres in prayer. frameth our requests, the Son offreth them to his Father, the Father accepteth them thus framed, and offered up; For the works of the Trinity are invisible, yet distinguished so, that unto the Father is ascribed the originall and beginning of all actions. Ille agit Hebr. 11. a se per Filium and Spiritum; he worketh of himselfe by the Son and the Spirit; to the Sonne, is ascribed the disposing of the action, Iob. 26. 7, 8, 9. from the Father, by the Spirit: to the Holy Ghost, is attributed the consummating, and as it were perfecting of things, seeing he worketh from the Father and the Sonne: Pater agit ase, Filius per se, Spiritus Sanctus, a Patre and Filio: The Father worketh by himselfe, 1 Cor. 12. 11. the Sonne by him, the Holy Ghost, from the Father and the Sonne: so that prayer is a worke of the Trinity, as are all good works. O noble worke, ad quod tanti artifices concurrunt! to Visinu^. the performing whereof so many Artisans doe concurre and meet! the Omnipotency of the Father, the wisdome of the Son, and goodnesse of the Holy Ghost; where goodnesse willeth, wisdom disposeth, Omnipotency performeth; potens est, sapiens est, bonus est, and tamen unus Deus est, qui omnia in omnibus operatur: hee is mighty, hee is wise, hee is good, and yet but one God that worketh all in all.
Or these words, Orate in spiritu: Pray in the spirit, may bee meant of the quality of prayer, that it must be spirituall, not carnall; proceed from the heart, not from the lippes; from the soule, 1 Sam. 1. 15. not the mouth only. Hence is it, that they which pray in the Spirit, are said to powre out their soules and their heart unto God: The Virgin Mary (who without all question praised God in the Spirit) saith, My soule magnifieth the Lord, my Spirit rejoiceth in God: Luk. 1. 46. Rom. 8. 26. And Paul telleth us, that the Spirit maketh intercession, with groanes. Now groanes proceed from the heart and Spirit; not from the tongue and lippes. And the Apostle telleth us, that the Spirit which crieth Abba Father, is sent into our hearts. The Iewes prayed with their lippes; but not with their hearts: therefore God complaineth of them, saying, This people draw neere unto mee Esay. 29. 13. with their lippes, but their hearts are farre from me: Our prayers must be fervent like the spirit: Be fervent in spirit (saith the Apostle;) our hearts in prayer must be lifted up to God; the heart of man, is as it were Gods chaire of estate, whereunto no creature can come; it is proper to God alone, it is his Palace wherein hee most delighteth, wherfore Gods Spirit maketh his abode there, and stirreth it up to pray. The prayer that commeth not from the heart and spirit, it is a key cold prayer: it is frozen before it commeth half-way to heaven. David, to note his earnestnes in prayer, said, that he rored, he spake not, but rored, cried out; and indeed Psal. 38. the Spirit of God is a crying Spirit, not a cold spirit.
Hereby then may wee judge, whether the Spirit of God bee Rom. 8. 15.

in us, and move us to pray, or no: If thy prayer come but from Fervent prayer prevailes with God. the teeth, though it be never so well framed in regard of words, and though thy gestures bee never so reverent and humble, yet all is nothing, the Spirit of God hath no part in this worke: if thy spirit pray not, thou doest but babble; a kind of praying condemned by our Saviour: Paul would have us to pray in the Spirit, Mat. 6. 7. 1 Cor. 14. and to pray with the understanding; that is, earnestly from the heart, and yet intelligibly of the Church and congregation; he had reference to this, when writing to the Saints of Ephesus, he biddeth them, to be filled with the Spirit, speaking unto your selves, (saith hee) in Psalmes and Hymnes, and spirituall songs, singing and making melody Ephes. 5. 18, 19. to God in your hearts. Hearty singing, hearty praying, hearty speaking unto God, is the thing that God accepteth; My Sonne (saith Prov. 23. hee) give mee thy heart. It is of the essence of prayer to be hearty, spirituall, and servent. As a painted fire, is no fire, a dead man, no man; so a cold lip-labour prayer, no prayer; in a painted fire there is no heate, in a dead man, no life, in a cold prayer, no devotion, no blessing: The prayer of the righteous availeth much, if it bee Iam. 5. 16, 17, 18. fervent; it is that, that makes and marres all. And he exemplifieth this, by the prayer of Elias, hee prayed, that it might not raine, and it rained not on the earth for three yeeres and six moneths: and he prayed againe, and Heaven gave rayne, and the earth brought forth her fruit. A cold prayer could not have locked up heaven three yeeres, nor opened heaven; such a prayer made Hanna, 1. Sam. 2. her lippes went: yet spake nothing; Loquebatur non voce, sed corde, prece occulta, sed manifesta fide; She spake not with the mouth, but with the heart, Aug. her prayer was hid, her faith made manifest: such a prayer made Moses, yet spake not a word with his mouth, his heart spake, but his tongue was silent: such must our prayers bee, or els they rebound Exod. 14. backe againe, as a tennis ball; yea they turne to bee sinne Psal. 109. 7. unto us. What? Is hony turned into gall? And balme into wormewood? Is treakle become poyson? is prayer become sin? Yea a plaine sinne, a notable sinne, if wee doe it not rightly: quot preces, tot peccata. As physicke killeth the body, if it worke not in the body: so prayer killeth the soule, if it proceed not aright from the soule: For we have two Axiomes in Divinity.

1. That God regardeth not only the matter, but the manner.
2. Quod non actibus, sed finibus pensantur officia; That duties are esteemed not by their acts, but by their ends.

The manner must be good, and the end good. The Church of Rome saith, that virtualis intentio nonex necessitate requiritur in precibus, sed actualis intentio: a vertuous intent is not of necessity required in prayer, but an actuall. But better said the Papist Criton, who said, that God loved better Adverbes, then Nownes, not to pray only, but to praywell: Non bonum, sed bene agere: Not to doe good, but to doe it well: for wee may doe bona, good things, and yet goe to hell: as did the Pharises, Oratio nec timida, nec temeraria, Mat. 23.

nec tepida sit: Prayer must be neither false-hearted, nor They that call upon God, must depart from iniquity. foole-hardy, nor luke-warme: Oratio timida coelos non penetrat: A false-hearted prayer cannot pierce the Heavens; temeraria resilet ut pila palmaria: a foole-hardy, a rash prayer reboundeth backe againe like an hand-ball; tepida frigescit, conglaciatur, priusquam coelos ascendit: the luke-warme prayer is cooled and frozen up, before it can get heaven.
In prayer, two things are required, Tempus, and cor: time, and the heart: much businesse steales away the time, and a multitude of cogitations, the heart: so that we cannot conferre quietly with God.
Here therefore the prayers of the wicked are rejected. I will (saith Paul) that men pray every where, lifting up pure hands to God, 1 Tim. 2. 8. without wrath or doubting; but the hands which they lift up in prayer, are impure hands, and so are the hearts also.
Pretily said Bias to the Grecians in a naufrage, in a ship-wracke, when they prayed, and cried out to their gods, Silete, ne orate, ne dij, vos nebulones, hic navigantes sentiant: Be silent, pray not, that the gods may not understand, that you like roguish robbing rascals are here sayling. Alas, wee tumble out our prayers, as a Beares whelpe; they are like arrowes without heads, that cannot pierce; like swords without edge, that cannot cut; they be too blunt to obtaine any thing of God: they have no wings to mount up to heaven; We aske and receive not, because wee aske amisse. We do either postulare non postulanda: we aske things that Iam. 4. 3. Bern. are not to bee asked; or else, when wee aske them, wee pray not in the holy Ghost.
Oh that all men knew this, that all England had learned, that not all prayers, but spirituall prayers are accepted of God! but wee are ignorant, and will be ignorant still; filthy and will bee Apoc. 22. 11. filthy still.
But let us amend this fault, and learne at last to pray: for prayer is good, so that it be a true reflexion of the soule, from the feeling of Gods mercies, and our owne wants: God hath promised us all good things under his hand and seale; but yet with a condition, so that wee pray truly, and aske them as we should: The Lord is neere to all them that call upon him, yea unto all such as call upon Psal. 145. 18. him faithfully: For many carry prayer in their mouthes, as me^ carry fire in a flint, and perfume in a pomander; the one without heate, the other without smell; so they carry prayer without all devotion; verball, vocall prayers can obtaine nothing of God. When yee stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you (saith God) and though yee make many prayers, I will not heare.



THE THREE AND THIRTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XXI. 

And keep your selves in the Love of God, etc.
Faith, prayer, and love, have mutuall relation.



FRom faith he came unto prayer; fro^ prayer he commeth now to love: bie est enim aurea catena: for this is a golde^ chaine, every linke is one within another; these three goe together, like the three Angels that came to Lot; like the three graces that are Gen. 19. inseparable; or like the three Worthies who brake thorow the host of the Philistins. Faith begetteth 2 Sam. 23. prayer, and prayer strengtheneth the faith; and neither of these can stand without love: prayer and love be as the two mighty rivers, named in Genesis, Pishon and Gihon; and faith as the garden of Eden, out of which they flow, or the sea, into which they runne, and where all of them jointly doe end their course. Love is a chiefe, a principall vertue; Faith and Love, the one with God, the other with men bee as the roote and the branch; as the mother and the daughter; as the foundation and pillars of all Christian buildings* the end of all is Love; the end of the first table, the Love of God; the end of the second, the love of man; so saith the Holy Ghost, The end of the Commandement is Love out of a pure heart, out 1 Tim. 1. 15. of a good conscience, and out of a faith not fained. Whatsoever precept or commandement is in the Scripture, it hath relation to Love; For be that loveth another, fulfilleth the Law. Christianity is where the Rom. 13.

Spirit is, and where the Spirit is, there is Love; For, God is Love, Love the most excellent of all vertues. and he that dwelleth in Love, dwelleth in God, and God in him. Austen saith; that a man may have baptisme, and yet bee wicked; prophecy, and yet be wicked; take the Sacrament of the body and Aug. Hom. 15. bloud of the Lord, and yet be wicked; be named a Christian, and yet bee wicked: Habere Sacramenta ista omnia, and malus esse potest; habere autem charitatem, and malus esse non potest; He may have all these Sacraments, and yet be wicked; but if he have Love, hee cannot be wicked. Paul reckoning up the fruits of the Spirit, he nameth Love, first, as the Gentleman-Vsher to goe before them all: The fruites of the Spirit (saith hee) is Love, joy, peace, etc. For as Manna Gal. 5. 22. Exod. 16. Exod. 3. Iudg. excelled all bread; as Aarons rod did eate up the rods of the sorcerers; as Gedeons sword passed all the swords of the Madianites; so Love passeth all other vertues. All our bebts should stand in Love; so saith the Apostle, Owe nothing to any man but this, Rom. 13. 8. that yee love one another. Our debts were soone paid, and our Executors should bee soone discharged, if this were: of this debt we can never be discharged, so long as we live. The journey of Israel was ended in forty yeeres; Herods temple was built and finished in six and forty yeeres, Noahs Arke was perfited in an 120. yeeres; but this debt is never ended. Beloved (saith S. Iohn) let us love one another; for Love commeth of God, and every one that loveth, is borne of God, and knowith God: but hee that loveth not, knoweth not God, for God is Love. S. Peter naming many vertues, maketh up the measure, and ends in love; Ioyne (saith he) vertue with your faith; and with vert^e, knowledge, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. and with knowledge, temperance; and with temperance, patience; and with patience, godlinesse; and with godlinesse, brotherly kindnesse; and with brotherly kindnesse, Love. This vertue above all others, is as the hoope or fagot-band that keepeth all close; therefore saith the Apostle, Above all things put on Love, which is the bond of perfection. Col. 3. 14. As the Sunne giveth light to all Planets; as salt seasoneth all meates; as the Moone ruleth over the Sea, and all moist bodies; as the rod of the Tribe of Levi passed in honour all other tribes: so Love passeth all qualities among men. Though I spake 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3. with the tongues of men and Angels, and have no love, I am as sounding brasse or a tinckling Cymball: and though I bad the gift of Prophecy, and knew all secrets, and all knowledge; yea if I had all faith, so that I could remove mountaines, and had no love, it profiteth me nothing: and though I feed the poore with all my goods, and though I give my body, that I be burned, and have not Love; it profiteth me nothing. For this cause hee willeth the Ephesians to follow the truth in Love. Moses did wish that Ephes. 4. 13. Numb. 11. 29. all the Lords people could prophesie, and That the Lord would put his Spirit upon them. Saint Paul did wish, that all men were like himselfe in purity, and that all did speake strange languages, but rather that 1 Cor. 7. 7. 1 Cor. 14. 5. Aug. they prophesied. Saint Augustine wished, that all would remember Love; and brings this reason, Sola est enim quae and vincit omnia, and sine qua, nil valent omnia, and ubique fuerit, trahit ad se omnia; For

onely Love overcommeth all things, and without Love, all things Love is every where very cold. are nothing worth, and wheresoever love is, it draweth all things unto it. And surely, if I might have my wish, and desire, as Salomon had; it should be this, that Saint Iude here exhorteth unto; 1 Reg. 3. namely, so to love, that wee may keepe our selves in the Love of God evermore; that if any of us Christians, be at any time asked what wee worship? wee may answere with Gregory Nazianzen, Charitatem veneramur, wee worship charity. Wee had need cry out, and write no longer against false Catholikes; sola fides, faith only; but against false Protestants, Sola charitas, Love only; for malice and mischiefe aboundeth, and Love abateth. Let faith only justifie, and Love only rectifie.
David compareth Love to the Oyntment on Aarons head, and unto the dew of Hermon: I can co^pare it to the Oyle in the cruze, Psal. 133. 2. 1 Reg. 17. to the meale in the barrell that wasted not, and unto the apple-tree of Persia, which buddeth, blossometh, and beareth fruit every moneth: Now abideth faith, hope, and love; but the chiefe of these is love: It lasteth longer, like a pillar of Salt, it reacheth 1 Cor. 13. further, it profiteth more among men: faith flyeth up to Heaven; Charity is occupied here below on Earth; Faith wrastleth above with the promises of God; Love is busied in good works, as Faith is with God. Paul prayeth that Love may abound more and more: and this hee doth in respect of the scantinesse and excellencie; Charitas laudatur, and alget: Iniquitie aboundeth, Charitie Mat. 24. 12. waxeth cold. This is the Iron age that Paul prophesied of, Know (saith Paul) that in the last dayes shall come perilous times: for men shall bee lovers of their owne selves, covetous, proud, boasters, 2 Tim. 3. 1, 2, 3. 4. cursed speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankifull, unholy, without naturall affection, truce-breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of them which are good, traytours, heady-minded, lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God. Invenietue Christus fidem? Shall Christ, Luk. 18. 8. Gal. 5. 6. when he commeth, finde Faith upon the Earth? But Love followeth Faith; therfore shall he find any Love at his comming? Surely, but a little: England is as the land of Canaan; we have corne and cattell, we have fish and flesh, cloth and wooll; our vallies stand thicke with corne, that maketh us to laugh and sing; God Psal. 65. 11. crowneth the yeere with his goodnesse, and the clouds drop fatnesse: they drop upon the pastures of the wildernesse, and the hils are compassed with gladnesse. Our sonnes grow up as the young plants, our daughters are as the polished corners of the Temple, Psal 144. 12, 13, 14. our Garners are full, and abounding with store, our Sheep bring forth thousands, and tenne thousands in our streets; our Oxen are strong to labour; there is no invasion, nor going out, nor crying in our streetes. The Mountaines drop Wine, and wee wash our paths in butter. We have plenty Ioel 3. 28. Iob 29. Iudg. 5. 1 Sam. 13. 1 Reg. 8. of all things, but of Love. As in the dayes of Debora, there was neither speare nor shield; as in the dayes of Saul, there was no Smith in Israel; as in the dayes of Salomon, there was no

Manna to bee found; and as in Gilboa, there is no Raine; in Gilead Few united in Love. no Balme; in Bashan, no flowers; in Sichem, no Corne, being sowne with salt; in Tyrus no Ships; in Cimmeria no Light: Ier. 8. Iudg. 9. 45. Ezech. 28. so in England, no Love, or but a little. If there be an hundred men in one towne, scarce two love together, and agree together as they should; wherein they bee worse then Divels, for seven of them could agree in Marie Magdaiene; a legion in another man, that is, twelve thousand five hundred Divels, or as other Mat. 26. affirme, sixe thousand seven hundred twenty two Divels: for so Varro and Vegetius affirme, that a legion containeth so many: but scarce seven men of seven score, love as brethren, and so keepe themselves in the love of God.
We are now divided into three companies, like Labans sheep, some white, some blacke, some speckled; some Protestants, some Papists, some Newters; Nay, even among Protestants, there is little love, and lesse agreement; but God, I hope, will make us friends in Heaven, where all injuries shall bee forgotten. Where are these noble paire of lovers become, David and Ionathan, who had but one soule? Eusebius and Pamphilus martyr, 1 Sam. 18. who had but one name? Pilades and Orestes, who had but one life? the one being dead, the other died also? Ruth, and Naomi, who could not bee parted, but where the one would goe, the other Ruth. 1. would goe, where the one would dwell, the other would dwell, where the one would dye, the other would dye, and where one would be buried, the other would be buried also? Basil and Nazianzene, of whom it is said, that anima una erat inclusa in duobus corporibus, that there was one soule shut in two bodies? Marriage maketh two bodies one (so saith our Saviour:) For this Mat. 19. 5. cause a man shall leave Father and Mother, and cleave unto his wife, and they twaine shall bee one: but love maketh two soules one, yea many bodies, many soules but one. If an hundred men love together, there is but one heart, as in the Acts, The multitude of them 1 Sam 18. 1. Act. 4. 32. that beleeved, were of one heart and of one soule, of one minde, will and consent. If a man hath an hundred friends, that man is become as an hundred men; Nam amicus est alter idem: a friend is another the same: Charitas est res augmentativa; Charitie is an Chrysost. increasing thing. There was a day when Herod and Pilat were made friends, but that day (I feare) with many of us will never be, if any are implacable, like the stone Arbestos, which being once kindled, is never quenched; once angred, never pleased. A signe of a reprobate mind: for Paul describing the reprobates, saith, that they are full of unrighteousnesse, fornication, wickednesse, Rom. 1. 29, 30. covetousnesse, maliciousnesse, full of envie, of murther, of debate, of deceit, taking all things in the evill part, whisperers, backe-biters, haters of God, doers of wrong, etc. The Romanes were wont to say of the men of the Primitive Church, Ecce ut invicem se diligunt! See how they love one another! They knew Christians by that badge, as

Christ said, By this shall all men know that yee are my disciples indeed, The love of God above all love. if yee love one another, as I have loved you. But wee may say, quoth a moderne Father; Ecce ut invicem se oderunt! Behold, how they hate one another, oppresse one another! It was wont to be said, Iohn 13. Za^che. Homo homini Deus: One man is a God to another; but now homo homini Leo, one man is a Lion to another; Nay, one man is a Woolfe unto another; Nay, one man is a Divell unto another: we are not now Christians, but Woolves, Leopards, Lions, Divels: Nay, worse: for one Lion eateth not another, and the divels strive not among themselves, but maintaine one anothers kingdome. Let Tygers and Beares, and Leopards teare one another; Let Scythians and Canibals eate one another, who know not God, nor good humanity, but are without all naturall affection: But let us love as brethren, bee pittifull, be courteous, not rendring evill for evill, nor rebuke for rebuke; but contrariwise blesse, knowing that wee are thereunto called, that wee should bee heires of blessing: and if enemies will not be pacified, recommend the cause to God, till wee meete in Heaven, where all injury shall be forgotten: and in the meane while I beseech you (as Saint Paul did the Saints of Corinth) I beseech you (I say) by the name of our Lord 1 Cor. 1. 10. Iesus Christ, that yee all speake one thing, and that there bee no discension among you, but that yee bee knit together in one minde and in one judgement: and whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever Phil. 4. 8. things pertaine to love, etc. thinke on these things, and the God of Love and Peace shall bee with you, and the Lord increase your love, and make 1 Thess. 3. 12. it abound more and more one towards another. Christs commandement is all love; his Spouse is all loving: and Iohn will preach nothing but love, and wee must follow after love, and above all have fervent love among our selves, for that shall cover a multitude of sinnes.
But marke, that the love whereunto Saint Iude exhorteth, is called the love of God; and keep your selves in the love of God: so that not all love is commended, but such love onely,
As is Holy, Iust, True, Constant.
For first, our love must bee Holy love: it is for God, and not against God, under God, and not above God: for hee loves not God, that loves not his neighbour with God, whom hee loves not for God: and hee that loves his neighbour more than God, is unworthy of God, and makes his neighbour to be his God.
Secondly, Our love must bee just: wee must not love one another in evill, but in good, and for good, Pacem cum hominibus, bellum cum vitijs: wee must have peace with men, warre with their

vices. We must love their persons, but hate their manners if they Foure properties of the Love of God. be evill.
Thirdly, our love must bee true Love: Wee (...) and in tongue, but in worke and in truth. Nemo potest (...) ^ ^^hn 3. 18. hominis, nist primitus fuerit amicus ipsius veritatis (...) August. be a true lover of man, unlesse first he be a lover of th^ (...) must love one another, not for their riches, honours, greatnesse, but for themselves; their good must bee sought, not their goods: We^ must not love one another as dogges doe bones, for the flesh that is on them, or as men doe trees for their fruit; but wee must love them for themselves, for this, that they are men, but especially, for that they are vertuous and good men.
Lastly, our love one towards another must bee constant; with some, friends are like flowers, no longer regarded then whiles they are fresh. Many mens love is like the harlots love, who love while there is lucre; and when gifts goe hence, their love goes hence: they are like the puttocks in the fable, that followed the old wife bearing tripes to the market, but forsooke her home-ward when her tripes were sold. En ego non paucis quondam munitus amicis, etc. A man shall be loved in prosperity, but in adversity, as rats forsake an house, when it is ready to fall, and as lice forsake a mans head, when he is dying; so his lovers and his friends will forsake him. Thus our love should be holy, just, true, constant: this is true Christian love, wherein men should keep themselves; For among murtherers, theeves, and drunkards, there is a kind of love, but not the Love that Iude would here to bee among us. First therefore the love of Atheists is condemned, which comes from profit or from pleasure. It is not Charitas ex corde puro, Love out of a pure heart. Love and good works must goe together: 1 Tim. 1. 5. to gloze, eate, play, drinke, game, bee no good workes; therefore this is not love; wee call it good fellowship, but such good fellowes will goe to the good-fellow the Divell, if they repent not: For if wee sinne willingly, after that wee have received the Hebr. 10. 26, 27. knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sinnes, but a fearefull looking for judgement. There is a carnall love: but ours must bee a spirituall love, such as was among the Colossians, of whose Col. 1. 8. love Paul speaketh, Who hath also certified us, of your love which yee have by the Spirit. There is a worldly love, and there is an heavenly Love, and knowledge giveth life to this love; without it, Love is as a dead picture, Lovers glorious, the name is honorable, the praise of it, is from the rising of the Sunne unto the going downe of the Sunne. One saith, that love is like hony in bitter broth, and sugar in sowre wine; it is like unto the Sun unto the world, a candle unto the house, a light for our journey, a line for our life, and a rule for our reprehensions. Si diligis, fac quicquid vis: If Calvin in Iohn. Aug. thou beest in love, doe what thou wilt; speake or bee silent, exhort or rebuke, call or cry, so it bee in love, all is well.

Yet it must be a godly love, an holy charity, but it is impossible to have it with all, some are so wicked. If thou canst have Most love for lucre sake. the favour and love of men, with the favour and Love of God, take it, it is precious, but if thou canst not have the favour and Psal. 133. 1. love of men, but with the disfavour and dislike of God, let it go: For certenly, The amity of the World is enmity with God: Wee must Iam. 4. 4. love men in the Lord; God for himselfe, man for God: Diligendus est Deus propter se, homo propter Deum.
I may compare the love of Atheists to the agreement that is among a kennell of hounds, who sleep together, play together, hunt merrily together, but if a man hurle a bone, they grinne, snatch, and bite one another: So Atheists agree together, till some matter come of private gaine, but then there is grinning, biting, fighting one with another; for the best of them is as a brier, and Mich. 7. 4. the most righteous of them is sharper then a thorne hedge; for from the least of them, to the greatest of them, every one is given to covetousnesse: and Ier. 6. 13. their love is nothing else but a mony love, Come with us (say they) we will lay wait for bloud, and lye privily for the innocent without a Prov. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. cause. Wee will swallow them up alive, like the grave, even whole, as those that goe downe into the pit; wee shall find all precious riches, and fill our houses with spoile: cast in thy lot amongst us, wee will have all one purse. Atheists love their brethren, as Flies love the pot; as Dionysius loved his bottles: so long as there is any meate in the pot, the Flie loves: and Dionysius loved his bottles when they were full, but hurled them away when they were empty: so wee play with our friends. Iob said, when I washed my pathes with butter, and when the rocke Iob 29. 6, 8. powred mee out rivers of oyle, the yong men saw mee, and hid themselves, and the aged arose and stood up: but now they that are yonger than I, mocke Iob 30. 1. mee, yea and they whose Fathers I have refused to set with the dogges of my flockes. But let us no longer love from the teeth outward, but from the heart inward: we speake faire, as Cain did to Abel; wee give good words, as Iacobs Sonnes did to the Sichemites; we salute Gen. 4. Gen. 35. men as Ioab did Abner; we shead Crocodiles teares, as Ismael did to Godoliah; wee kisse one another with Iudas, but with no true 2 Sam. 3. Ier. 41. Mat. 26. love, all is but Court-holy water. This made David to complaine, saying; Surely mine enemy did not defame me, for I could have borne it, neither did my adversary exalt himselfe against me, for I would have hid Psal. 55. 12, 13, 14. me from him: but it was thou, o man, my companion, and my familiar, wee delighted in consulting together, and went into the house of God, as companions: and againe, If he come to see me, hee speaketh lies: for pretending love and good will unto mee, he desireth my destruction Psal. 41. 6. in his heart. We love men for profit: Voluntatis duo sunt calcaria, There bee two spurres of the will, honesty and utility; but utility, profit is the stronger spurre; we should carry holy Love, religious love towards our parents, delectable love towards our neighbours.
The love of Papists is also condemned; In cathedra unitatis Deus

posuit doctrinam veritatis: God hath placed the doctrine of verity Vnity without verity, is nothing but conspiracy. in the chaire of unity: unity without verity, is but conspiracy: for so it is called, their brotherhood is in evill, as Iacob said of Simeon and Levi; they consent against the Gospell, as the high Priests did against Christ; they have neither unity, nor verity; they agree Esay 8. 12. Gen. 49. 5. Act. 4. 27. as the false prophets did, not in the Lord, but against the Lord; they make adoe of their Councell of Trident, and how they agree in all meetings. Alas, a few buckeram Bishops of Italy conspired together, but thirty eight Bishops in all, not like the Councell of Nice, wherein were 318. Bishops, or that of Arimine, where were 600. Bishops, nor like the Councell of Constance, where were 4. Patriarches. 29. Cardinals, 47. Archbishops, 270. Bishops, 564. Abbots and Doctors, at the deposing of Benedict the third. But to leave all this.
Keep your selves in the Love of God. And first, of Gods Love towards us; next, of our love towards God: but in speaking of the Love of God to us, I shall enter into a labyrinth without end, into a sea without bottome: For his Love is so much, as there is no affection in nature, no proportion in the whole world hath been found fit to expresse it; the height of heaven above the earth, the distance of the East from the West, the affection of Fathers towards their childre^; of mothers towards the fruit of their wombe; of nurses towards their sucklings; of Eagles towards their yong ones, of hennes towards their chickens; all these are but the shadowes of Gods Love. Love in God is in the abstract, it is not in him as in us, by accident and participation, but by essence only.
And God hath an immanent Love in him, whereby he loveth himselfe, by the necessity of his owne nature; and hath a transient love flowing from him, whereby hee loveth his creatures, some more and some lesse: according to the liberty of his owne will.
He hath a generall Love to all. For all are his creatures and the workemanship of his hands: but hee hath a speciall Love to some, as unto his Elect and chosen, and his Love towards them is both Temporary, and Sempiternall.
Temporarie, Sustentando, Regendo, Conservando. By Sustaining, Ruling, Preserving.
Sempiternall; gloriam dando: in giving them eternall glory; and the more holy men are, the more hee loveth them: wherupon Saint Augustine doth excellently observe, that God loved the humanity of Christ more than any man, because hee was full of August. Tract. in Iohn. Iob. 1. 14. grace and truth: Yea, Gods Love hath all the dimensions, Thy mercy o God reacheth unto the Heavens: there is the height of his Love. Great is thy goodnesse, and thou hast delivered my soule from the Psal. 36. 5. Psal. 86. 13. Psal. 104. 24. nethermost Hell: There is the depth of his love. The earth is full of

thy goodnesse, saith David; there is the breadth of his Love. All the No love to be compared to Gods love. ends of the world have seene the salvation of God; There is the length of his Love. Yea, Gods Love is transcendent, it can no more bee measured, then yee can measure the water with your fist: For Psal. 104. 24. Psal. 98. 4. Esa. 40. what love shall I compare unto his Love? The love of a woman? It is great indeed: but yet the love of Ionathan to David, was greater than it, Thy love to mee was wonderfull, yea passing the love of 2 Sam. 1. 26. women. The love of a mother? Here is a greater degree than in the former; but yet this love is not so certaine, and infallible, as Gods Love. Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion of Esa. 49. 15. the sonne of her wombe? If they should forget (as some may bee, and some have been so unnaturall) yet will not I forget thee, saith God to his disconsolate and afflicted Sion. For as none can be compared to God: so no love can be compared to his Love; as Ieremy spake literally of his owne griefe, but typically of Christ: Was there ever griefe as my griefe? So may I say of Gods Love, Was there Lament. 1. 12. ever love like his Love? No, no; his Love passeth all understanding. Let us then labour to obtaine, and retaine this Love of God, and keep our selves in his Love: which we shall doe, if wee conforme our wills to his will, and labour to bee like him; to be holy, as hee is holy; mercifull, as hee is mercifull; righteous, as hee is righteous: yea perfect, as hee is perfect: For wee must bee followers of God, as deare children, and walke in Love, as he loved Ephes. 6. us. So much for Gods Love towards us.
And now to speake of our love to God; and that the love whereby wee love God, is a worke of Gods Love, whereby hee loves man. Causa diligendi Deum, Deus est, modus sine modo: The Bern* cause that wee love God, is God himselfe, the measure without measure. And Saint Iohn saith, We loved him, because hee loved us first: For our love springs out of his; as the rivers from the Sea, 1 Iohn. 4. 19. his Love drawing our hearts to him, as the Loadstone doth iron to it; or as the Sardius doth wood, our love answering to his Love, as an Eccho to a mans voice: and as one candle doth light another, so the consideration of his Love to us, doth cause a reflexion of our love to him.
And there bee many reasons to move us to keep our selves in the Love of God: The first is his Commandement, Thou shalt Deut. 6. 5. Deut. 10. 12. love the Lord thy God; And againe, What doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to feare and love him? This our Saviour calleth, The great Commandement. The Commander is great, the Object is great, the use of the duty is great, and their reward is great, that take care to doe it: and though there were no other reason to move us to love God, but his bare Commandement, yet were that reason strong enough to bind us; the power of a King, the authority of a Father, the place of a master, requireth obedience of a subject, child, and servant; but God is our King, our Father, and Master,

and therefore his bare command is sufficient to bind us to love We must love God, because he commands it, and equity requires it. him.
A second reason, to move us to keep our selves in the Love of God, is in regard of equity: For seeing Almighty God doth love us, it is a matter of equity, that wee should requite love with love againe. For though wee cannot love him as wee ought, and as hee loveth us; yet must wee love, for ours is an ascending, his a descending love; and love descending, is more naturall, more fervent and vehement, than love ascending; as wee see in parents, who love their children better, then their children love them: besides, God loved us, when wee were his enemies: Ephes. 2. Aug. Durus est animus, qui si dilectionem nolebat impendere, nolet rependere; His heart is oke, not flesh, but flint, that though hee will not beginne to love, yet finding love, will shew no love. God doth love us; out of his Love hee sent his Sonne, his onely Sonne, the Sonne of his Love, into the world, to save us: hee giveth for us the earely and latter raine, and reserveth Ier. 5. for us, the appointed weekes of harvest yeerely; Hee anointeth our head with oyle, and our cuppe runneth over* wee should bee Psal. 23. 5. very unjust and injurious unto our selves, if wee will not love him: For all things worke for the best to them that love God. Rom. 8. 28.
Thirdly, Commodity should move us to keepe our selves in the Love of God: For first, by this Love, our faith produceth those good duties, which wee owe unto God. For faith is as one hand receiving love, as the other giving. For Faith worketh by Gal. 5. 6. Love. And as Augustine saith, Our life, and all our conversation is named of our love. Nec faciunt bonos, vel malos mores, nisi boni vel mali amores; which being good or bad, make our manners to bee thereafter: such as our love is, such is our life; an holy Love, an holy life; an earthly love, an earthly life; if a mans love bee set on God, his life must needs bee good; and though this bee certaine, That a man is justified by Faith, yet this is as certaine, that the life of a man is justified by love. Rom. 3.
Againe, by the Love of God, wee may know in what estate wee are in. Saint Augustine saith, Duas Civitates duo faciunt amores: Aug. in Psal. 64. Hierusalem facit amor Dei, Babyloniam amor saeculi; Interroget ergo se quisque quid amat, and inveniet unde sit Civis: Two loves make two Citties: the Love of God maketh Ierusalem, the love of the world Babylon; therefore let every man but examine himselfe, what hee loves, and hee shall see in what estate hee is, and to what City hee belongs. As a man by looking upon a diall, may know the motion of the Sunne in heaven; so by looking upon the thing hee loveth, hee may know in what estate hee standeth; whether hee belong to Babylon, or Ierusalem, to Hell, or Heaven, to God or the Divell.

Againe, the Love of God ingenders in us the love of the We must love God, because duty requires it. godly for God: for as hee that loves the Father, cannot but love his children, and as hee that loves his friend, will not misvse his picture; so hee that truly loves God, will love Gods children which are the lively pictures of God: and this love is comfortable, because it assureth us, that wee are Christs disciples, and by this wee know that wee are translated from death to Ioh. 13. 1 Iohn. 3. 14. life.
Againe, from the Love of God ariseth much grace and goodnesse, as much water from one spring. Non habet viriditatem ramus boni operis, nisi manserit in radice charitatis: Good works wither, except they bee nourished by this Love. As the love of mony is the root, and nourisher of all evill; so the Love of God is the mother, and nurse of all good, of all pious offices to God, and Christian duties to man.
To conclude this point: the Love of God is as strong as death; for as death doth kill the body, so our love to God doth mortify our love to the world, and dispels rancour, wrath, malice; and as the rising of the Sunne doth chase away the darkenesse of the night: so the Love of God doth drive away the inordinate love of worldly vanities: and thus yee see the utility of the Love of God.
4. Wee ought to keep our selves in the Love of God, because hee is our gtacious Father, and of his owne good will begate he us, through the Word of truth. Now, if a child must love his father, Iam. 1. 18. of whom hee hath received a part of his body, how much more ought wee to love God, qui animam suam infundendo creavit, and creando infudit: of whom hee hath received his soule, and unto whose goodnesse, hee stands obliged both for soule and body? Hereupon saith Iob, Thine hands have made mee, and fashioned mee Iob 10. 8, 11, 11. wholly round about: thou hast cloathed mee with skinne and flesh, and joined mee with bones and sinewes. Thou hast given mee life and grace, and thy visitation hath preserved my spirit. For these causes ought wee to keep our selves in the Love of God.
These among many, are reasons most sorcible, to keep our selves in the Love of God. How our God is to bee loved, our Saviour sheweth, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, with all thy soule, and with all thy mind. But first, wee must love Mat. 22 37. him with all our heart, that is, with all our affections, joying and delighting in none but in him; For he loves not God, that delights in any thing more than God, as Augustine saith truly, Minus te amat, qui aliquid tecum amat, quod non propter te amat: He loves thee not, who loves any thing with thee, which he loves Aug. not for thee.
2. Wee must love him with all our soule, induring rather a separation of the soule from the body, than that our soule should bee separated from God, who is the Soule of

the soule, and the comsort both of soule and body. How we are to love God.
3. Wee must love him with all our mind, so that our cogitations must bee fixed upon him, and ruled by him; his Word should direct our reason, our reason rule our wills, that so wee may say with the Apostle, wee live not, but God doth live within us. Our chiefest care should bee how to performe this duty to God, how to love him, as the Church said; I am full of love, I am sicke of love. All owe this duty to God, but few pay it, or if they Cant. 5. 8. doe, it is with crackt money, not currant in Gods Exchequer: for our love to God is cold, yea plaine dead; and that appeareth in the breach of the first Table; wee are bankrupts both in piety towards God, and charity towards men: we love the world and our pleasures more than God; wee worshippe not God in Spirit and in truth; wee sweare and blaspheme the name of God; wee prophane and pollute the Sabbaths of God, wee come seldome to the house of God; how can wee say, that we love God? The Love of God standeth in the keeping of his Commandements: So saith our Saviour; Hee that hath my Commandements, Iohn 14. 21, 23, 24. and keepeth them, is he that loves mee: And againe, If any man love me, hee will keep my Word, and my Father will love him, and wee will come unto him, and dwell with him: And againe, Hee that loveth mee not, keepeth not my words, etc. Hee speaketh positively and privatively; The blessed and undivided Trinity will dwell with that man, who loveth God truely; but till wee serve God in holinesse, and righteousnesse, till wee pray diligently, heare his Word attentively, receive the Sacraments penitently, keepe the Sabbaths religiously, use his name reverently* let us be ashamed to say, that wee love God: Nam Regnum Dei, non est in verbis, 1 Cor. 4. 20. sed in virtute: The Kingdome of God is not in word, but in power. Many Christians are mutilated and lame, either they want an eare, and cannot heare God, or they want a tongue, and cannot praise God, or they want an heart, and cannot love God. These Atheists are a disgrace to Religion, a Moth in the garment of the Church, Monsters in nature, Divels in shape of men, as Christ said of Iudas; hollow trees, not holy trees; these men are reprived till the last Sessions; a gibbet is built in hell for them, and all the gold in the world cannot purchase their pardon: this is durus sermo, sed verus sermo: an hard saying, but a true saying.
Wee talke of the love of men, and say, Charity is waxed cold; but as touching the Love of God, there is altum silentium: not a word: wee are like unslaked lime, hot in the water, cold in the Sunne; as the stone of Thracia, which burneth in the river, but is quenched with hot oyle: wee are pennie-wise, and pound-foolish; like the Pharises, which did tithe Mint and Rew, and all manner Luk. 11. 42. of hearbes, and passed over judgement and the Love of God: And yet if we loved God an ell, where wee love him an inch, it were but due debt. O, it is a most honorable thing to bee a lover of God! it was

one of Abrahams greatest titles of honour, to bee called the friend The hope of eternall life, makes Gods precepts seeme easy. of God; it is a most blessed thing, to bee a lover of God; They that love the Lord, shall be as the Sunne that riseth in his strength. And it is a most miserable thing not to love God: for Maranatha, Anathema to them that love not the Lord Iesus. Therefore as Paul prayed for the Thessalonians, that God would guide their hearts in his Love; and this Iudg. 5. 31. 1 Cor. 16. ought to bee thy prayer, and my prayer, and all our prayers; that God would guide our hearts in his Love. And God guide our hearts in his Love evermore.



THE FOVRE AND THIRTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XXI. 

Looking for the mercy of our Lord Iesus Christ unto eternall Life.
The hope of eternall life makes Gods precepts seem easie.



YEE have heard before, that Iude gave the Saints many precepts: now, to mitigate the rigour of those precepts, hee biddeth them looke for eternall life: as if hee should say, If it bee grievous to remember the words of the Lord, to heare it, to get faith to pray, to keep themselves in the Love of God; if nature, if flesh and bloud wil hardly take out these lessons, yet comfort your selves with the hope of eternall life, there will bee an end of all troubles. Salomon hath told you this long agoe, saying, Surely there is an end, and thy hope shall not bee cut off: Prov. 23. 18. all teares shall bee wiped from your eyes, and yee shall bee filled with perfect joy: after this iron world, there is a golden world, Esa. 25. 8. there is a better life prepared for them in Gods house; there are many dwellings, as Christ said, In my Fathers house, there bee many mansions: the time of refreshing will come, as Peter said, Act. Iohn. 14. 1. 3. 19.
And this is all joy, and there is no joy but this: I will give you Luk. 10. 19, 20. power (saith our Saviour to his disciples) to treade on serpents, and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall hurt you. Neverthelesse, in this rejoice not, but rather rejoice, because your names are written

in Heaven. Let not the rich man rejoice in his riches, nor the Hope of reward makes all labours light. wiseman in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, as Ieremy speaketh; but let us rejoice, that our names are written in heaven. Shal the souldier in the wars, the mariner in the boistrous Ier. 9. waves, the husbandman in the cloddy lands, the prentice in a hard service, undergoe great paines in hope, and shal not we? For what sustaineth the souldier but hope of victory? and the mariner, but hope of arrival? and the husband-man, but hope of harvest? and the prentise, but hope of freedome? And shall not the hope of eternall life sustaine us? Dum spiro, spero: whilest I breathe, I hope: this is the poesy of a Christian; the hope of salvation, we must put it on as a helmet; though we sowe in teares, we shall reape in joy. Paul 1 Thess. 5. 8. Psal. 126. 5. setting downe the parts of a Christian life, to sweeten the actions of it; they being hard to flesh and bloud, propoundeth the blessed hope, saying, The grace of God that bringeth salvation to all men, hath Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. appeared, and teacheth us to deny ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World; looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and our Saviour Iesus Christ. It is a blessed hope, a blessed place that we looke for, it is mount Garisim, not mount Hebal. Hee is a blessed God, Deut. 27. 1 Tim. 6. 16. Rom. 9. 5. Iohn 16. Mat. 25. Apoc. 21. Deut. 27. Exod. 19. Numb. 21. Exod. 10. Gen. 3. cap. 13. Zach. 14. Christ is a blessed Saviour, the holy Ghost a blessed Comforter; wee are blessed Children, Heaven is a blessed Kingdome.
There is mount Garisim without any curse, mount Horeb without any thunder, the wildernes of Sinai without any serpent, the land of Goshen without any darkenesse, a Paradise without any serpent, Eden without any weeds, Ierusalem without any Canaanite; there is day without night, Summer without Winter, riches without measure, fulnesse without hunger, pleasure without loathing, life without death.
The faith and love of the Colossians, sprang from the hope of Heaven: therefore Paul tels them, that hee thanked God for them, and prayed for them, ever since hee heard of their faith in Christ, and of Col. 1. 4, 5. their love towards the Saints, for the hopes sake which is layd up for them in Heaven. This stayd Iob in all his extremities; when his cattell were stollen, his houses blowne downe, his children slaine, his friends grieved, his body wounded, his wife alienated from him; I am sure (saith hee) my Redeemer liveth, and Iob 19. 25. I hope to finde him my deliverer, and Saviour: yea the Lord Iesus, for the joy that was set before him, indured the Crosse. God will put a Hebr. 12. 2. difference one day betweene his children and bastards, betweene them that say, that it is but vaine to serve God, and what profit is it that wee have kept his Commandements, and that wee walked humbly, Mal. 3. 14, 15. before Lord of Hoasts? and those that feare God; the Corne shall bee gathered into the Garner, the Chaffe shall bee burnt, the Mat. 3. Goats shall bee separated from the Lambes, the vessels of Clay shall bee broken. Here is a mixture of sonnes, and of bastards; Ma^. 25. of Corne, and Chaffe; of Goates and Lambes; vessels Apoc. 2.

of Clay and of Gold: but in Heaven shall bee a difference; and Body and soule shall be glorified in all parts and powers. if that were not, wee were the most miserable: even Tully would not bee rocked againe in his Cradle.
Amas vivere (quoth Aug.) in vita aeterna? Doest thou love to live everlastingly? Hope (with David) to see the goodnesse of the 1 Cor. 15. 19. Aug. Lord in the land of the living. In this life (quoth Bern.) erit mira serenitas, plena securitas, aeterna foelicitas: wonderfull serenity, full security, eternall felicity; then the whole man shall bee renewed, our soules shall bee fully reformed to the Image of God, as touching the two powers thereof. From our understanding shall be dispelled all darkenesse, and it shall be filled with new light, and that of her selfe, she shall know God, and the will of God, without preaching, without praying, without Sacraments, without bookes and writings to instruct her: for preaching shall have an end, prayer an end, Sacraments an end; wee shall bee as the Angels of God, understanding all things: Now we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 12. but then shall wee know, even as wee are knowne. Our will also shall want all wicked lusts, and shall bee filled with all true Love, both towards God and man, and this love shall never bee interrupted. To conclude, all the faculties of the soule shall bee filled with God and with his power; so as the soule shall nourish the body without meate, drinke, sleep, because hee shall bee replenished with God, and God shall be all in all. Erimus cives Coeli, socij Angelorum, Ephes. 2. 3. cohaeredes Christi: we shall bee Citizens of Heaven, fellowes of Angels, coheires with Christ, Citizens with Saints, and of the houshold of God.
As touching the body, the other part of man, it shall also bee glorified: nulla illius erit senectus, nulla mors, nullus morbus, nullum peccatum: No old age shall molest it, nor death, nor disease, nor sinne, our bodies shall be like the glorious body of the Lord Iesus. Nemo ibi irascitur, nemo invidet, nemo laeditur: there is no man angry, no man envieth, no man is any way hurt or harmed; No lust doth annoy, no divell doth terrify: there is a Sunne without setting, life without dying, labour without wearinesse, pleasures without tediousnesse* there we shall see God as he is, in the sight 1 Iohn 2. 3. Aug. of whom, wee shall doe foure things; wee shall know, wee shall love, wee shall rejoyce, and wee shall praise: wee shall know the secrets of God, which is a depth without bottome: wee shall love God above all, and our neighbour, as wee should; wee shall rejoyce, for in Heaven there is fulnesse of joy, and at the right Psal. 16. 11. hand of God, there is pleasure for evermore: and we shall praise God without ceasing. For saith David, Blessed are they that dwell in thy Psal. 84. 1. house, they shall alwayes bee praysing of thee; there our joy shall be full; all joy here is at an ebbe, but there is the flood of joy, perfection, Iob 15. 11. fulnesse of joy.
Againe, here all joy is mixt with paine; Health, with Sicknes; Life, with Death; Summer, with Winter; the Spring with the

Autumne; Libertie, with bondage; there is all solace, no sorrow; The joyes of of heaven unspeakable inco^prehensible. the first sorrow cast out into shame.
But as touching this eternall Life, whereof Saint Iude here speaketh, a man may well thinke of it, and talke of it, but hee Apoc. 21. 4. can never thinke nor talke of it as it is; Paul saith, The eye hath not seene, the eare hath not heard, the heart of man cannot conceive the 1 Cor. 2. 9. joyes of this life. The eye of man, What can it not see? How little a sound will the eare heare? What great matters can the tongue utter? What wonderfull things can the heart of man conceive? Even for thousands, and thousand yeeres. What Arts and Sciences have beene found out by man? yet cannot the eye see, nor the eare heare, nor the tongue utter, nor the heart conceive of Life eternall. The Apostle maketh a glorious comparison, and yet speaketh but of an earthly building, and of earthly and corruptible things. So the Prophet Esay describeth the Church militant and triumphant, but yet by earthly things; For it passeth his skill and cunning, to set out the perfect beauty and glorie of it; God is infinite; so the reward layd up for the just, is infinite: like unto himselfe; the infinite God giveth infinite paines to sinners, and infinite joyes unto the just.
Peter having but a glimmering of Heaven, was ravished, and cryed out, Master, here is good being let us build Tabernacles, one for thee, another for Moses, and another for Elias. How great then is Mat. 17. 4. the full sight of Heaven? There bee (...), such joyes as are not possible for a man to utter. Mount Thabor was a goodly 2 Cor. 12. 4. Mount: but in the celestiall Mount in Heaven you shall see that, that eye never saw, riches without measure, glorie without comparison, life without death, day without night, solace without ceasing, joy without ending, a land that floweth with milke and hony; there wee shall see the City of the living God. the celestiall Ierusalem, a company of innumerable Angels, the congregation of the Hebr. 12. 22. first borne, which are written in Heaven, the Spirits of just and perfect men, Iesus the Mediator of the new Testament, and the bloud of sprinkling, speaking better things than the bloud of Abel.
But to reason from the lesse to the greater: If here in an Inne bee so many pleasures, what are in our owne home? For whiles wee are strangers in the body, wee are absent from the Lord, but when wee 2 Cor. 5. 6. shall remove out of the body, wee shall ever dwell with the Lord, and abide in Heaven, which is our home. If in a prison our senses are filled with so many delights, what shall bee in a Palace? There shall bee fulnesse of joy and pleasures for evermore. If here in a Iayle there bee so many pleasures to entertaine us, such variety Psal. 16. 11. of colours for the eye, such melody and sweete sounds for the eare, such fragrant odors for the nose, such multitude of dishes for the taste; if in Mount Horeb are so many things, What are in Mount Sion, in our owne Countrey? For here wee are but strangers and pilgrimes, but wee seeke another Countrey, and wee desire a Hebr. 11, 13, 16.

better, that is to say, an Heavenly. If a corruptible body feele Our glorified bo^y shall have Spirituall, and Heavenly qualities. such great sweetnesse, what shall a glorified body feele? For our bodies shall one day bee glorified; Though they be sowne in dishonour, they shall bee raised in glory; though sowne in weakenesse, they shall be raised in power; though sowne a naturall body, it shall be raised a spirituall body: There is no comparison betweene Light and Hebr. 11. 13, 16. 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43. Darkenesse, Gold and Lead, Glasse and Pearle, Men and Angels, Heaven and Earth, Corruption and Glory, Weakenesse and Power, Honour and Dishonour; Our life is hid with Christ in Col. 3. 3. God, and when Christ which is our life, shall appeare, then shall wee also appeare with him in Glory: For life is threefold, Of Nature, Grace, and Glory.
The life of Nature is sweete, the life of Grace sweeter, and the life of Glory sweetest of all; and this life of Glory is hid with Christ in God; and in this life of Glory, there shall bee in our bodies, first, Claritas, beauty and cleerenesse, in so much that as Saint Chrysostome saith, that the bodies of the Saints shall bee septies clariora Sole: seven times brighter than the Sunne. Secondly, in this life of Glory, there shall bee in our bodies spirituall agility: and hence is it, that some ascribe the activity and quicknesse of our soule and spirit, to a glorified body, saying, that such bodies are not spirits, but spiritualized bodies. Thirdly, in this life of Glory, there shall be in our bodies Impassibility; For though here we suffer of every thing, yet there wee shall bee subject to no corruptible passion, or suffering. Lastly, in this life of Glory, there shall bee in our bodies Immortality; here indeed orimur and morimur, at our byrth, wee beginne to dye, accedimus, wee enter into the world, succedimus, wee succeede one another in the world; and last of all decedimus, wee depart all out of the world; but in this life of Glory, wee shall have immortall bodies.
And as the body, so the soule in this life of Glory shall bee glorified: and this her glory consisteth of two things; in her union with God, and in our vision of God: both of these may be gathered out of that of Saint Iohn, When hee shall appeare, we shall bee like him, and see him as hee is: wee shall be like unto him, there 1 Iohn. 3. is our union; we shall see him as hee is, there is our vision. Others adde to the beatitude of the soule, two other actions: one, the fruition, the other, the eternall retention of God: and it is a question among the Learned, in which of these foure, the felicity of the soule doth consist: some, in her vision of God; some, in her fruition of God; some, in her retention of God. I will not determine, onely I say, that in this life of Glory, both soules and bodies shall have triumphum and gaudium, triumph, and joy, they shall triumph over Death; for Death shall bee no more

over him, that hath the Lordship of Death, the Divell; for hee shall never bee able to hurt him. Againe, they shall have joy, God all in all to the glorified Saints. first, in the Majestie of God: secondly, in the humanity of Christ: thirdly, in the society of Angels and Saints: Vide intus, and extra, supra and infra, circumcirca, and ubique gaudium: Looke Aug. within thee, and without thee; above thee, and beneath thee; about thee, and every-where there is joy: Nay, Gaudium super gaudium: joy, above joy; joy surmounting all joy, and without the which there can be no joy; within thee shall bee joy in the glorification of body and soule; without thee, in the company of the blessed Saints and Angels; above thee, in the sight of God; beneath thee, in the beauty of the Heaven and Earth: For there shall bee a new Heaven and a new Earth, wherein dwelleth 2 Pet. 3. righteousnesse, round about us, in the delight of all our senses; for God himselfe shall bee the object of all our senses: Erit enim speculum visui: Hee shall bee a glasse to our eyes, musicke to our eares, hony to our mouthes, a flowre to our hands, balme to our nose: Ibi erit candor Aestatis, amaenitas Veris, abundantia Autumni, Bern. requies Hiemalis: There shall bee the fairenesse of Summer, the sweetenesse of the Spring, the pienty of the Autumne, and the Winters rest: Nay, God shall bee all in all unto us. Heaven is described in the Apocalyps, that the walls are of precious stones, 1 Cor. 13. the gates pearles, the porters Angels, the streetes payed with gold, the City Interlaced with crystall rivers, the bankes set with trees of life, which beare fruit monethly, and the leaves cure the Nations: Their Sunne is the countenance of God, their day never endeth, their felicity never decayeth, their state never altereth. You have beene in mount Horeb, where you saw thunderings and lightenings; now are yee called to mount Thabor, where yee shall injoy the glory of Christ Iesus, and say with Peter, Bonum est hic esse, It is good to bee here. Let them make account of this life, who make their Lusts their guides, their Belly their god, their Kitchin their faith, the World their Friend, and are not onely in it, but of it. But our Countrey is Heaven, our friends Angels, our companions the Saints, our Father God, our mother the Church, our brother Christ, our guyde the holy Ghost, our inheritance Ierusalem, that is from above. The Saint, by loving another as himselfe, hath as many joyes as fellowes, and for that they all love God more than themselves, they take more pleasure of his blisse, than all their joyes besides: the damnation of their friends grieveth them not, because it standeth with the glory of God, which is more to them, than all their blisse.
And thus yee see the joyes of life: and yet all that I have said of Heaven, where wee shall leade a life eternall, and possesse a Paradise of infinite pleasure, is nothing; it is but stilla mari, a drop of water to the whole sea, scintilla igni comparata, as a

sparke compared to the great fire of Aetna, it is nothing: there In Heaven no decay or damping of ioy. needeth no Sunne to shine, no Moone to give light, no porters; the gates of it are open continually, there is food better than the Mann, that fell from Heaven, apparell finer than Aarons Ephod, Ecclus. 18. 9. Exod. 16. Exod. 30. Psal. 133. 2. Mat. 24. Apoc. 2. Hebr. 12. 22. Mat. 17. Esa. 11. perfume sweeter than the perfume of the Tabernacle, a building more stately than Salomons Temple; there is Paradise, without any Serpent to tempt us: Mount Horeb, without any Thunder to feare us; Mount Thabor, without any change to greeve us, Libanon, without any Wildernesse to rent us: there is mirth without mourning, and such joyes and delights, that if all the plants of the Earth were Pennes, if all the Earth were Paper, if all the Sea were Inke, if every Man, Woman, and Childe were a good Pen-man, yet they were not able to expresse the thousandth part of these joyes: Hic in terris, omnium rerum est vicissitudo; here in earth, all things alter and change: after Day commeth Night; after Winter, Summer; after Sickenesse, Health; after Life, Death; after Youth, old Age; after Pleasure, Paine; but there is Day without Night, Summer without any Winter; Health without any Sicknesse, or Sorrow; Life without Death, Youth without old Age, Pleasure without any Paine: there is the Beauty of Absolon, without Deformity, the Strength of Samson, without any Debility, the Wisedome of Salomon, without any Folly: We shall come from Faith to Sight; Aug. Epist. 121. Pro^e Viduae. from the Glasse to the Face; from Aenigma to a plaine Truth; Hic enim ambulamus per fidem, non per aspectum: here wee walke by Faith, and not by Sight; Nunc in spe, ^unc in re; Now in Hope, then in Deede; Nuncforis, tunc domi; Now abroad, then at home; For when this earthly house of this Tabernacle shall bee destroyed, wee shall have an house not made with hands, but eternall in Heaven. For 2 Cor. 5. 1. as the Father said, Quid ibi deesse potest ubi Deus est, cui nihil deest? What can there bee wanting where God is, to whome nothing is wantings? O beati visio, videre Regem Angelorum, Sanctum sanctorum, Deum Coeli, Rectorem terrae, Patrem viventium! O blessed sight, to behold Aug. lib. despir. etc. cap. 57. the King of Angels, the Holy of holies, the God of Heaven, the Ruler of the Earth, the Father of the Living! Woe to mee miserable creature (quoth August.) which am not where the holy Saints bee; for your life is without all gunne-shot and danger of death, your knowledge without errour, your love without offence, your joy without any annoy; I (alas) am in the region of the shadow of death, I know not my end, I would depart hence, but I know not when; I would dye, and this haply shall bee my last day.
But many have no regard at all of this life, they looke too much to the pleasures of the world, which makes them not to looke into the powers of the life to come, not to looke to eternity. It is said of Moses, that he chose rather to suffer afflictions, with the Hebr. 11. 25. people of God in Aegypt, then to enjoy the pleasures of sinne for a season;

The wicked, the Infidels have made a Covenant with death, and are Divers errors concerning eternall life. with Hell at an agreement: they beleeve not eternall life, they hold with the Sadduces, that there is no resurrection; nothing maketh us loth to dye, but unbeliefe. Withipoll wished to live five hundred Esa. 28. 15. Mat. 22. yeers, though but in the shape of a toade; Paulus tertius said at his death, Nunc tria experiar: Now shal I trie three things, Num sit Deus, whether there bee a God, num anima sit immortalis, whether the soule bee immortall, num sit vita post mortem, and whether there be a life after death. The Borussians and the Irish cry to their dead, Quare mortuus es? Why diddest thou dye? Thou hadst wife, children, corne, cattell, oh why didst thou dye? They have no hope. But, brethren, things present will bee past, and things future will 1 Thess. 4. bee present, and last for ever: this life is no life. It were long to rehearse all the errors, that Satan hath troubled the Church withall in this point: I will name but some, of many: first, the Libertines erre, who say, that all men shall be saved, all shall goe to Heaven, contrary to that which our Saviour saith, Not every one that saith Lord, Lord, shall enter the Kingdome of Heaven: And Mat. 7. 14. againe, Many shall come in that day, and shall say, Lord, Lord, have not wee prophesied in thy name, cast out Divels in thy name, and done many miracles in thy name? But he shall answere them, Depart from me, for verily I know you not. And the Prophet telleth us, That though the Esa. 10. 21. number of the children of Israel bee as the sand of the sea, yet shall but a remnant bee saved. The Atheists erre also, who say, Non est Deut: There is no God, no Divell, no heaven, no hell, contrary to that of our Saviour, Goe yee cursed, into everlasting Hell fire.
The Lucianists and Epicures erre, who place all happinesse in Mat. 25. 34. 41. the pleasures of this life contrary to that of the Apostle; If in this life only we have hope in Christ, wee are of all men the most miserable. 1 Cor. 15. 19. The Philosophers, and Pagans erre, who define felicity to be the abundance of riches, joyned with vertue, and not the fruition of God in Christ Iesus, contrary to that of our Saviour, This is life Iohn 17. 3. eternall, to know thee, the only true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent; this indeed is felicity, this is happinesse. The Pep^sians erre, who say, that the heavenly Ierusalem is in this earth, contrary to that of Paul, who saith, Ierusalem, which is above, is free, which is the Gal. 4. 26. mother of us all. The Origenists erre, who say, that the Divels shall bee saved, contrary to Math. 15. The Chiliasts or Millinaries erre, who say, that Gods Kingdome shall last but a thousand yeeres; contrary to that of the Apostle, which saith, That wee shall be ever 1 Thess. 4. 17. with the Lord: and indeed, there shall never bee end of this life, it shall be eternall; eternall, not in respect of beginning, but in respect of ending, it shall continue for ever: and unto this end Paul saith, That Christ hath abolished death, and brought life of immortality 2 Tim. 1. 10. unto light by the Gospell: they that have an entrance into this life, shall never see end of it. Suppose that the whole world were a Sea, and every hundred yeeres expired, a bird must

drinke up one drop of it, in processe of time, it would come to Heaven set out by comparison of the Wombe and World. passe, that this huge Sea shall bee dryed up, but yet many millions of yeeres must bee passed before this were done. Now if a man should injoy this happy life, but for the space of time in which the Sea is drying up, hee would thinke his case most happy and blessed: but behold, the Saints shall injoy this happie life, not onely for that time, but for ever; it is an everlasting life, wee shall never see end thereof.
And as for the glory and happinesse of this life, the quantity and quality may bee gathered from the situation of the place, for Coelum Empyreum is higher than all the Heavens: for Paul nameth it the third Heaven; and it is called, The Land of the living, as if 2 Cor. 12. Psal. 27. the Land which we now inhabit, were a Land of dead men; and indeed, We be dead, but our life is hid with Christ in God. Now, if in this Col. 3. 3. Region of dead men the creatures bee so noble, and precious, what are they in Heaven, in terra viventium, in the land of the living? In this land of the dead, behold the greatnesse of the Heavens, the brightnesse of the Stars, the beautie of the Earth, the plainenesse of the fields, the highnesse of the Mountaines, the greatnesse of the Vallies, the Flouds and Rivers running like, the veines in a mans body; Si omnia haec in terra mortuorum, if all these things bee in the land of the dead, what shall bee in the Land of the living?
Againe, wee know that there bee three places in this life; the first is the Wombe, the second, the World, the third, Heaven: betweene these places there is a proportion: For Heaven is so much greater than the World, as the World is greater than the Wombe, and the more excellent, as well for continuance of time, as greatnesse of place. As touching continuance of time, the first life is no longer than nine moneths, the second life is fourescore yeeres, the third is infinite and eternall. Furthermore the diversity of dwellers in Heaven, and Earth, doe notably set forth unto us the difference of these two places: Haec terra plena peccatorum: this Earth is full of sinners; 2 Pet. 3. 13. illa justorum, that of just and righteous men: for there dwelleth righteousnesse: this of Men, that of Angels, for there are a company of innumerable Angels: here penitents inhabit, there such as have their sinnes forgiven them doe dwell; Here men Hebr. 12. 22. militant, there men triumphant; here friends and enemies, there friends onely, and the elect. If the inhabitants doe so differ, how much doe the places differ? There God shall be fulnesse of light to the understanding, abundance of Peace to the Will, Bern. continuance of eternitie to the Memory; there the wisedome of Salomon shall bee ignorance, the beautie of Absolon deformity, the strength of Samson debility; the treasure and wealth of Princes, povertie; Cur ergo in Aegypto haeremus? Why doe we still sticke, and stay in Aegypt? Why doe wee not goe the direct

way to Canaan? Why feed we of acornes, and not of the Tree of Eternall life the gift of God through Christ. Life? Why drinke wee of broken Cysternes, and not of the waters of life? If wee had but a little sight of this Heavenly Ierusalem; wee would despise Babylon, for in Heaven wee shall see God, and bee equall with the Angels; there wee shall partake of so great joyes, as no Geometrician can measure; so many, as no Arithmetician can number; and so wonderfull, as no Rhetorician can utter, had hee the tongue both of Men and Angels. O ineffabilis delectatio! O unspeakeble delight! where God is their object, a looking glasse for their eyes, musicke for their eares, hony for their taste, sweet balsome for their smell, a posie of all delights for their Heavenly hands. Seeing then that there bee such, and wee looke for such things, Let us bee diligent to bee found of him in peace, without spot and blamelesse. 2 Pet. 3. 4.
But to proceed. As hee would have them to looke for eternall life, so here he telleth them, how they shall come by it, namely by Christ: for eternall life is the gift of God, and commeth of meere mercy, not of any desert of ours: we never brought stone to this building; The builder and worker is God: we never brought one dish to this ba^ket: Omnia parata sunt, all things are ready: we never spun 2 Cor. 5. 1. Mat. 22. one thread of this garment; the garment is Christ alone, and therefore wee are willed to put on the Lord Iesus: wee never deserved Rom. 13. 14. the least drop of the joyes of Heaven: we be servi inutiles, unprofitable Luk. 17. 10. servants: Et quid possunt inutiles servi mereri nisi flagellum? And what can unprofitable seruants deserve but the whip? Quaeris merita? (quoth Aug.) non invenies nisi poenam: Doest thou seeke Merit? thou shalt finde nothing but punishment; if we stand at Aug. the staves end of God, for wages, it is Death, not Life; Hell, not Heaven; Paines, not joyes; For the wages of sinne is death: that Rom. 6. 23. which God doth for us, is a gift, not a stipend, It is hee that must give us an inheritance among them that are sanctified. So Christ said, Act. 20. 32. It is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdome: Gift is free, gift and Luk. 12. 32. desert they are as opposite as the Tropickes, and cannot stand together: wee have not chosen Christ, but he hath chosen us; hee Iohn 15. 18. gave the occasion, not we; it is mercy, not merit; grace, not nature; favour, not debt, that wee must challenge: For by grace are wee saved through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of Ephes. 2. 8, 9. God, not of Works, lest any man should boast himselfe: so said Marie, His mercy is on them that feare him; yet our feare is defective, wee can Luk 1. 50. claime nothing, but mercy; the Canaanite craved but mercy; O Lord, thou sonne of David, have mercy on me. Cui daret justus Iudex coronam, Mat. 15. 22. Aug. nisi cui dedisset Pater misericors gratiam? To whom should the just Iudge give the Crowne, but unto whom the mercifull Father hath given grace? Gratia non invenit, sed fecit nos eligendos: Grace hath not found us, but hath made us to be chosen. Cum Deus coronat merita tua, nihil aliud coronat, nisi munera sua: When God crowneth our merits, he crowneth nothing else, but his owne gifts.

Blasphemous therefore is the saying of Dorbel; Quod Deus Coelum care vendit Three sorts of merits, Congrui, Digni, Condigni. amicis; and quod ipsi care emunt: That God selleth heaven deare to his friends, and they buy it deare; some travell thither by the foote-path of righteousnesse, as the Prophets; some by the foote-path of cleannesse, as virgins; some by the foote-path of repentance, as the Confessors; some by the foote-path of affliction, as the Martyrs; some by the foote-path of poverty, as the Apostles; some by the foote-path of hospitality, as the Patriarches. But God selleth not heaven, he giveth it freely: We are Rom. 3. 24. justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Iesus. Lex data est, ut gratia quaereretur, the Law was given, that grace should bee sought; gratia data est, ut lex impleretur, and grace is given, that the Law might be fulfilled: for All is of grace. Abraham in his faith, David, in his godlinesse, Iob in his patience, Rom. 11. Salomon in his wisdome, Elias in his zeale, cannot stand before God: If thou, o Lord, markest iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand? Where Psal. 130. 3. the Prophet sheweth, that we cannot be just before God by merit, but by mercy in the forgivenes of our sinnes: therfore saith S. Iude, Looke for the mercies of our Lord Iesus Christ unto eternall life.

But to face out this mercy of God, the Papists have found out three sorts of merits; Meritum congrui, digni, and condigni. Merit of congruity, they call those preparations that are before grace, and to this end they alledge Cornelius, who was a devout man, and Act. 10. 2. one that feared God with all his houshold, and gave much almes to the people, and prayed God continually; And yet his prayer, and almes did proceed from that sparke of faith that hee had in Christ, not from any worke of nature.
Meritu^ digni, as when a just man prayeth for an unjust; as Iob, and Daniel for the Iewes, of whose prayer God saith thus, When the land sinneth against me by co^mitting a trespasse, then will I stretch out my hand Ezech. 14. 13, 14. upon it, and will breake the staffe of the bread thereof; and I will send famine upon it, etc. And though these three men, Noah, Daniel and Iob were among them, they shoul deliver but their owne soules by their righteousnesse, saith the Lord God. Whereas it is spoken but by way of supposition.
Meritum condigni, be works of supererogation; Loud words of Lewd blasphemy! too proud words for either men or Angels: For no worke of it selfe is pure, and can stand before God. Quis dabit mundum de immundo? Who can bring a cleane thing out of Iob 14. 4. filthinesse? The Heavens are not cleane in his sight, much lesse men. He found folly in his Angels, how much more in us, that dwell in Iob 15. Iob 4. 18, 19. houses of clay? This Moses often inculcated to Israel, lest they should presume of their righteousnes, and thinke themselves exalted by it: Speake not thou in thy heart (saith Moses) For my righteousnesse, the Lord hath brought me in to possesse the land: for thou entrest not Deut. 9. 4, 5. to inherit their land, for thy righteousnes, or for thy upright heart, but for the wickednesse of those nations, etc. The Lord giueth not thee this good land to possesse, for thy righteousnesse: for thou art a stiffenecked people.

And hee maketh a Catalogue of their vices, how in the wildernesse, in Horeb, and in many other places, they provoked the No merit of condignity but in Christ. Lord to anger: you were never good, neither egge, nor bird, quoth Moses. Merit of condignity, is an action belonging to such a nature, as is both God and man, not to a bare creature; for the Angels themselves cannot merit any thing at Gods hand, for they are said to be elected; now, election is by grace, otherwise salvation 1 Tim. 6. Rom. 11. 5. is in the power of the clay, not of the potter. Yea, Adam also, if he had stood, could have merited nothing of God, seeing it is the bounden duty of every creature to obey the Creatour: For wee are his workemanship, created unto Christ Iesus, unto good workes, Ephes. 2. 10. which God hath ordeyned that wee should walke in them. If we do good works, yet doe wee but our duety: the merit therefore of condignity doth onely agree to Christ, God and man, whom each nature doth to the effecting of this merit, that which belongeth unto it: for the humanity doth minister matter to the merit by suffering, and performing obedience; and the Deity of Christ, unto which the humanity is hypostatically united, doth conferre full and sufficient worthinesse to the worke; Hereupon came the voice; This is my beloved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased; For God was never pleased in any but in Christ: For wee are all by nature the Mat. 3. 17. Ephes. 2. 3, 4, 5. children of wrath, but God which is rich in mercy, through the great love, wherewith hee loved us, even when wee were dead by sinnes, hath quickned us together in Christ, by whose grace yee are saved.
Againe, that a worke may bee meritorious, there must bee a proportion betwixt that and eternall life; but eternall life is infinite, and our merits are finite. Now, a finite worke cannot equall infinite joy: Inter finitum and infinitum nulla est comparatio: There is no comparison betweene a thing finite and a thing infinite, therfore wee merit not. The afflictions of this world are not worthy of the Rom. 8. 18. glory that shall bee shewed unto us.
Againe, all our works are imperfect, Ergo, doe not condignly merit; for all our worke commeth immediatly from the Naturall faculties of the soule, that is, understanding and will: but these are imperfect, being regenerated but in part; therefore our workes are imperfect. For the understanding, it is said: that ex parte tantum videmus: we see but in part, know but in part. For the will it is said, Est Lex in membris: There is a Law in my members, rebelling against the Law of God: for I know (saith the Apostle) that in me (that Rom. 7. 18, 24. is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good thing. And againe hee crieth out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver mee from the body of death? Bern. saith, Cantabo non justitiam meam, sedtuam, Domine; I will not Bern. sing my owne righteousnesse, but thine, O Lord. Should I feare whether that one Iustice will suffice two, or no? It is not a short cloke, that is able to cover a couple; thy Iustice is just for evermore, and will cover both thee and mee: it is largely large, and covereth all my sinnes. And againe, Meritum meum est misericordia Bern. serm. 62. in Cant.

Domini, My merit is Gods mercy; I am not void of merit, so Our workes merit not jointly with Christs merits. long as he is not void of mercy.
The Papists joyne their works with Christ, in case of justifying; for they say, that wee are Coo^perarij; fellow-workers, and coadjutors, and fellow-helpers with God, abusing the words of Paul; So wee therefore as workers together beseech you, that yee recejve 2 Cor. 6. 1. not the grace of God in vaine: as Melchior Canus, in his common places confesseth, that God alone worketh salvation, and by and by hee addeth, Et nos agere sub Deo, and cum Deo, That wee worke under God, and with God: to which end he quoteth 1 Cor. 15. Not I, but the grace of God with me: as if God could not doe it, without us. But wee need not answere these dogges, which can barke, but not bite; neither can they take away the trueth of God, though they can obscure it. But I reason thus with them, Such as the wound is, such is the salve: but the wound came by one onely, therefore the salve is by one only: the Major and Minor are justified by Paul; If through the offence of one, many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man Iesus Christ, hath abounded Rom. 5. 15, 17, 18, 19. to many: For if by the offence of one, death reigned through one, much more shall they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousnesse, reigne in life, through one, that is, Iesus Christ: Likewise then as by the offence of one, the fault came on all men to condemnation; so by the justifying of one man, the benefit abounded toward all men (that beleeve) to the justification of life. For as by one mans disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many also bee made righteous. The conclusion followeth of the premisses. This doctrine of merits is to Christ, as the Moone to the Sunne, or the earth to the Moone, in her eclipse, it eclipseth the death and merits of Christ; For if righteousnesse bee by the Law, then Christ died for Gal. 2. 21. Fulgent. admoni. nothing. Deus salvandos praevenit, damnandos invenit, praeveniente misericordia, velle incipimus, and subsequente misericordia, bonum quod volumus, facere valemus, etc. God preventeth such as are to be saved, and findeth such as are to be damned, his mercy preventing us, we beginne to will, and his mercy following us, wee are able to doe that good wee will; grace in preventing beginneth, and in following keepeth; grace preventeth the wicked, that hee may bee just, and grace followeth the just, that hee may not bee wicked: the beginnings of our vocations, the increasings of our justification, the rewards of our glorification, all these are laid up with God in predestination. And againe, Deus est qui gratis vocat, and vocatos justificat, etc. It is God, that freely calleth us, and justifieth them that are called, and glorifieth them that are justified; Rom. 8. 30. Rom. 9. and Paul calleth good men, Vasa misericordiae, Vessels of mercy, not of righteousnesse: if he had called them, vessels of righteousnesse, peradventure they might have thought, that they had righteousnesse of themselves, Quoth Fulgentius, A Deo est initium bonae voluntatis, ab eo facultas est bene agendi, and ab eo perseverantia bonae conversationis:

From God is the beginning of a good will, from him is Many Papists have renounced their own merits. the power, and ability of well-doing, and from him the perseverancy of a good life and conversation; hee giveth in this life humility, and in the future, felicity, that they may be happy without end, that were humble without end: Vtrumque tamen a Deo (quoth Fulgentius:) Yet notwithstanding both from God: we claime no Fulgent. Epistola. 14. ad. works, but Christs works: Yea the Papists at a dead lift say so with us; Pighius hath given them all the slip in this point. One at his death cried, Solus Christus, solus ille Salvator, Only Christ, he alone is a Saviour: and Sherwin at his death cried, O Iesu, Iesa, esto mihi Iesus: O Iesus, Iesus, bee to mee a Iesus, a Saviour, hee knew no other Saviour; and Bellarmine having tired himselfe about the question of Iustification, at the last he concludeth, that Bellar. it is our safest course to rely upon the mercies of God, and merits of Christ Iesus, propter propriae justitiae incertitudinem, and periculum inanis gloriae: for the uncertainty of our owne righteousnesse, and danger of vaineglory. And Bernard upon his Sermon of the Annunciation Bern. said, that the merits of men are not such, as eternall life by right is owing for them; his reason is this; Omnia merita Dei dona sunt, and ita homo magis propter ipsa, Deo debitor est, quam Deus homini; for (saith he) all our merits are the gifts of God; and so man is rather a debtour to God for them, then God to man: and Frier Ferus affirmeth, that whatsoever God giveth us, is of grace, not of debt: and Gregorius Ariminensis, upon Peter Lombard defends at large, That no worke done by man, though comming from the greatest charity, merits, of condignity, either eternall life, or any other reward temporall, because every such worke is the gift of God; For these are his words, Ex hoc infero, quod nedum vita aeterna, nec alius alterius praemij aeterni, vel temporalis aliquis actus hominis, ex quantacunque charitate elicitus est, de condigno meritorius apud Deum, quia quilibet talis est donum Dei: From this I inferre, that neither life everlasting, nor any other, either of another eternall reward or temporall act of man, proceeding from never so great charity, is meritorious of condignity with God, because every such action is the gift of God. And Lodovicus Granatensis Lodo. Gran. said, Salva me, o Iesu, o vita, sine qua morior; o veritas, sine qua fallor; o via sine qua err^; o lumen, sine quo in tenebris ambulo! Save mee, o Iesus, o life, without which I dye; o trueth, without which I am deceived; o way, without which I wander; o light, without which I walke in darknesse! in te aliquid sum, sine te nihil sum: in thee I am something, without thee, nothing: There is not a wise Papist, but will say this at a dead lift; so said Luther, when hee was a Minorite, Triplex est benedictio, praeveniens, adjuvans, consummans: There is a threefold blessing, a preventing blessing, an helping Luther. blessing, and a consummating; prima est misericordiae, the first is of mercy; the second, of grace, the third, of glory: Mercy preventeth our conversion, grace helpeth our conversation, glory

perfecteth our consummation. Wee can neither thinke any Election, Vocation and Iustification, are of Gods free grace. good thing, till we be prevented of mercy; neither can we doe any good thing, till we be holpen of grace, nor discharged, till we be filled with glory. Wherin now differ we from him in the doctrine of Mercy?

The cause of our salvation is Gods mercy alone, his good will and pleasure, not our works: Concerning election; If the question be asked, why Abraham was chosen, and not Nachor, why Iacob Gen. 11. Mal. 1. Rom. 9. 1 Sam. 16. was loved, and Esau hated; why Moses was elected, and Pharaoh hardned, why David was accepted, and Saul refused; why few be chosen, and the most forsaken? It cannot otherwise be answered, but thus, it was the good will of God to have it so: Non est volentis, Mat. 22. Rom. 9. neque currentis, sed miserentis Dei: It is not of the willer, nor of the runner, but of God shewing mercy. Secondly, concerning vocation: If the question be, why Cornelius the Gentile was called, and not Act. 10. Mat. 11. Tertullus the Iew? Why the babes and little ones of the world, and not the great men? Why the poore, the base, the vile, not the rich, the noble, the honorable? Why the sinners, and not the just? 1 Cor. 1. 26. Mat. 9. Luk. 14. Mat. 11. 26. Why the beggers by the high way were called, and the bidden guests excluded? we can re^der no other reason, but this: It was the good pleasure of God. Thirdly, concerning Iustification: If the question be asked, why the Publican went home more justified Luk. 18. then the Pharise? Why Mary the sinner, and not Simon the Leper? Luk. 11. Why harlots and Publicans goe before Scribes and Pharises Mat. 21. Gen. 21. into heaven? Why the sonne of the free-Woman was received, and the Sonne of the bond-woman rejected, being the elder? Why Israel, which so long sought for righteousnesse, found it Rom. 9. not, and the Gentiles which sought it not, found it? We can render no cause, but this, they sought for it by the works of the Rom. 10. Law, not by faith: our Iustification is perfect, because wee are counted just, Iustitia Christi, through the righteousnesse of 2 Cor. 5. 21. Christ: but our sanctification is unperfect, Vt mera gratia servati, in Domino, non in nobis gloriemur: That being saved by meere 1 Cor. 1. 3. grace, we may glory, not in our selves, but in the Lord. Finely and truly saith one, Proprijs meritis non obtineo regnum coelorum: I cannot Bern. come to heaven by mine own merits; but Christ in a double right obtaining, First, by the inheritance of his Father; And secondly, by the merit of his Passion: Altero ipse contentus, alterum mihi resignavit, he being contented with the one, hath resigned the other to me; it is our worthinesse to know our unworthinesse; Say, thou art an unprofitable servant; say with Viualdus, Non abscondo Luk. 17. peccata, sed oste^do: I hide not my sins, but I shew them; non abspergo, sed aspergo: I wipe them not away, but I sprinkle them; non excuso, sed accuso: I doe not excuse them, but accuse them: peccata enim non nocent, si non placent: my sinnes hurt me not, if they like mee not; Initium salutis, cognitio peccati: the beginning of salvation, is the knowledge of my transgression: in this flesh dwelleth no

goodnes. M. Knoxe said at his death, Satan tempted him to Confession the way to salvation. desperation: but he alledged 1 Tim. 1. 15. that Iesus Christ came into the world to save sinners: after, he tempted him to presumption, and his merits; and he alledged 1 Cor. 4. 7. What hast thou, that thou hast not received? and if thou hast received it, why rejoycest thou, as though thou haddest not received it? And so drave Satan away. Let us renounce our owne merits, and fly to Christs, so shall wee be partakers of eternall life.



THE FIVE AND THIRTIETH SERMON.


VIRS. XXII. 

And have compassion of some, putting difference, etc.
We must use discretion, putting difference betwixt sinners.



THis is the last exhortation; the pith and marrow whereof is, to teach us to use discretion, to put difference of sinners; to pitty some, to reprove others; and lastly, so to walke betwixt both, as that they may hate all sin, even the garment of a sinner, for the sinners sake; the theeves coate, the Adulterers coate, for the hatred they beare to theft and adultery: for wee must hate the evill, love the Amos 5. 15. good, that wee may bee like our elder Brother Christ Iesus; who loved righteousnesse, and hated Hebr. 1. 9. iniquitie.
First, generally wee must use discretion, and make difference of men; we must be like Surgeons, and expert Physicians, who doe not lay one plaister to all sores, nor minister one potion to all patients: this is that serpentine Wisedome, that Christ requireth of his Apostles; Be wise as Serpents, bee innocent as Doves; Mat. 10. 16. Wisedome mixed with Innocencie, and Innocency with it; Wisedome without Innocencie, is but craft and subtilty: and Innocency without Wisedome, is dotage and folly; the one maketh us Foxes, the other Asses; joyne them together, and wee are perfect Christians: wee must have the Word of Knowledge,

to know what to speake, and the Word of Wisedome, to Ministers must be discreete. know when, and where, and how, and to whom to speake; to some mildely, to others roughly, as occasion requireth: this is the precept given to Thessalonica; Wee desire you, Brethren, admonish 1 Cor. 12. 1 Thess. 5. 14. them that are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded: beare with the weake, bee patient towards all men. Some are wilde heifers, and must have a yoake; some are rude horses, and must have a snaffle; some are dull asses, and must have a whip and a spurre; some are unruly, and must bee admonished; some feeble, and must be comforted; some weake, and must bee tolerated, and towards all we must use patience.
This doctrine concerneth all, but chiefly Ministers, they must know, who be woolves, and who be sheepe; who be serpents, and who be doves; whom to draw, and whom to lead; when to pipe, and when to mourne; when to powre in oyle, when to powre vinegar, when to use the menaces of the Law, when to use the promises of the Gospell. All ground is not alike, some must have a share, some a clotting: All wood is not to be used aliee, some will be plained and is soft, some must have a wedge and a beetle: All sores are not to bee handled alike, some must have searing iron, some a seare-cloth: So all Christians are not alike to bee handled; and it is a notable worke of Gods Spirit, to discerne spirits; thus Philip discerned not Simon Magus, as Peter did; Philip 1 Cor. 12. Act. 8. admitted him to Baptisme, but Peter spied him, in felle nequitiae, in the gall of bitternesse.
In Rome the Magistrate had carried before him, Secures and fasces, hatchets and rods; the first, for the great, the second, for the lesse offendors: Alterius vitia emendandae, alterius frangenda. Paul Aug. in. Gal. 2. Act. 5. Seneca. reprehended Peter to his amendment, and Peter corrected Ananias to his condemnment: Nobilis equus umbra virgae regitur, at indomitus, nec calcaribus incitari potest. A rod will checke a free-horse, and a twigge command a gentle nagge, whereas the spurre cannot stirre a stubborne jade, nor the whippe scare the untamed colt. The Nurse, when the Child hath a fall, will first helpe it up, after chide it, and if it fall againe, correct it; so must the Nurse of soules, first helpe a brother out of the mire of sinne, then chide him for falling into the ditch; and if this will not serve, applie a sharper corrasive to his sore: yet let all this bee done with wisedome and discretion, Qui mittit in altum lapidem, recidet in caput ejus, lest he deale like a man that throwes up a stone rashly in his humour, and it falleth downe againe upon his own head, Hierom. ad Ru^t. Monac^. to teach him wisedome.
Well, wee must have compassion of some; for some sinnes are to be pitied: we must be so far from hating, and rejoycing at their falls, that wee ought rather to sorrow and to bee greeved. Hereupon saith Paul, Brethren, if any of you bee overtaken with any fault, you that are spirituall, helpe to restore him in the spirit of meekenesse, Gal. 6. 12.

insult not over him, but restore him, know that thou mayest fall, We must be compassionate to such as sinne of infirmity. thou art of the same mould, he is falne by his own infirmity, thou standest by the grace of God. Noli superbire: be not proud: thou standest not of thy selfe, Noli superbire; but be strong in the Lord, and through the power of his might: pitty thy brother, and restore him with Ephes. 6. 10. meekenesse. The Word in the originall signifieth, to set a thing in joynt, as wee doe a legge or an arme dislocated; not breaking it, but putting it into the place againe, when it is out: and this is done foure wayes, quoth Master Perkins; first, by reprehending Perkins in his Treatise of the Tongue. 2 Sam. 12. generally and covertly, as Nathan did David in a parable, which entred further into him, than if it had beene done roughly. Secondly, in the place of a reprehension, to put an exhortation, as are pilles in Sugar; so Paul prescribed, saying, Rebuke 1 Tim. 5. 1. not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father, and the younger men, as brethren, etc. Thirdly, to propound the reproofe in a mans owne person: so Paul did, saying, Now these things, Brethren, I have figuratively applyed to my selfe, and to Apollos, for your sake, that yee may 1 Cor. 4. 6. learne by us, that no man presume above that which is written; that one swell not against another for any mans cause. Fourthly, to reprove, but with prefaces and insinuations, as that we do it of love, that we do it of good will: so Naamans servant said to his Master, saying, 2 Reg. 5. 13. Father, if the Prophet had commanded thee some great thing, oughtest thou not to have done it? If we be beleevers of Christ, we cannot but lament the fall of a brother: and among the members there is such sympathy, that if one suffer, all the rest suffer with it; Wee are the 1 Cor. 12. 26. members of Christ, and the members one of another. Paul told the Corinthians, that in stead of laughing, they should have sorrowed. What 1 Cor. 5. 2. father is not greeved with the hurt of his children? What friend is not greeved at the losse of his friend? What shepheard delighteth in the wronging and scattering of his flocke, and not in gathering it together? How did it greeve Abraham to lose Gen. 17. 1 Sam. 19. Ismael? How did Ionathan vexe himselfe for David? And how did David rescue a poore sheepe or a Lambe, out of the mouth of the Lion? And shall not wee rescue a soule out of the mouth 1 Sam. 16. of the Divell? If men bee of a contrary minde to us, oh doe not hate them, but pitty them, and instruct them with meekenesse, 2 Tim. 2. 25, 26. praying God to give them repentance, that they may know the truth, and that they may come to amendment out of the snare of the Divell, which is taken of him, at his will. Monicha wept so long for Augustine a Manichaean, that a Bishop said unto her, Filius iot lachrymarum perire non potest: A sonne of so many teares cannot perish. This affection should bee in us towards a sinner.
This was in Abraham, when hee prayed for Sodom, saying, Gen. 18. What if there bee but tenne righteous men, will you not spare the City? And this was also in Moses, when hee cryed to God, saying, Forgive them, O Lord, or else rase mee out of the Booke of life, that thou Exod. 32.

hast written. And in Esay, when hee cried, TurneTurne away from mee, labour M^n more compassionate toward beasts, and beasts to men, than men to men. not to comfort me, I will weepe bitterly, because my people perish. And in Ieremy, when hee wished, That his head were a well of water, and his eyes fountaines of teares, that hee might weepe day and night for the people. And this affection was also in Christ, when hee wept over Ierusalem, saying, Oh if thou haddest knowne at the least in this Esa. 22. 4. Ier. 9. 1. Luke 19. Rom. 9. thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace! The like wee reade in Paul, who wished himselfe, to be separate from Christ for his brethren the Israelites. And it is all our parts to greeve at sinne in another man, and to take pitty upon him, according to the words of my Text, Have compassion on some: but where shall we single out one among the sonnes of Adam, that is so compassionate, as that hee will sorrow for sinne in another man? When he seeth his brother to bee a vicious liver, one wedded to wickednesse, and sunke in sinne, hee will salve it up with humanum est? Cato is said, never to laugh except once, and that was, when hee saw an Asse eate thistles, that the senslesse beast should take pleasure in prickes, which should have been spurs to him to take paines: so we seeing our brethren eating up sinne as bread, and drinking iniquitie like water, rather laugh with Democritus, at their follies, than with Heraclitus lament their faults. And what compassion is in this? Cadit asinus, and est qui sublevet; perit anima, and non est qui curat: men will pitie the poore Asse, for when hee falleth, they will helpe him up againe, but they will shew no compassion on mens soules; for though they perish, they care not: herein they are like the base-minded Gergesites, who had more care of their swine than of their soules. Mat. ^. 25.
The Elephant, if hee meete a wounded person in the Wildernesse, hee bringeth him into his way againe; and the like is fathered on the Dolphin, who when Arion was cast into the Sea, speedily conveyed him unto the shoare. I could wish that men were Elephants, or Dolphins in sparke of good nature one to another. To sorrow one for anothers sinne, it is not our custome. The compassionate Samaritane to the poore passinger* may teach us to shew mercy unto sinners: his wounds resemble afflicted sinners; Mat. 18. his descension from Ierusalem to Iericho; his falling from the service of God; his spoyling by theeves; sinners overthrow by Satan; the Priest and Levite which went aloofe, Sunt mali ecclesiae ministri: bad ministers. Now, the stranger, that infused Oleum misericordiae and vinum justitiae: the oyle of mercie, Lir^. and the wine of Iustice, is any good man moved with mercy and compassion at a sinners wretched estate, and useth all good meanes to reclaime him. To this purpose tendeth the counsell of the Apostle, Beare yee one anothers burden; and as Christ stretched out his hand to take fast hold on Peter, when hee was ready Gal. 6. 2. to sinke into the Sea, so ought we towards our faithfull brethren, overwhelmed with the waves of wickednesse, to have compassion

on them, and by counsell and comfort out of the Word of God, We should not envy the sinner, but pitty him. to save their soules? and this is compassion indeed.
Augustine speaking of the drunkennesse and other sinnes in Africa, said, Tollantur ista, sed tamen cum commisseratione, non aspere, non duriter: Let these sinnes (quoth August.) be taken away; yet with compassion, with mercy, not sharpely, not bitterly; Docendo potius quam jubendo, monendo, non minando: by teaching rather than by commanding, by monishing rather than by menacing: for those Iewes, whom the thunders of Sinai could not terrifie, Saint Iohn, with the sweete song of Sion did Mat. 3. perswade.
Againe, the same Father aforenamed, saith thus, Qui phreneticum ligat, and lethargicum excitat: hee that bindeth a phranticke man, and awaketh a man sicke of a Lethargie, ambobus molestus, ambobus tamen utilis: hee is troublesome to both, yet profitable for them both; Rogat charitas hunc ligare, illum excitare, ambos tamen amare: Charitie obligeth a man to binde the one, and to awake the other, yet to love both: Let all bee done in love, and pittie, and as the Apostle counselleth us, Let us follow the truth in Ephes. 4. 15. love. The Drunkards, Vsurers, Swearers raile on us, in all places, in all Faires and Markets. What then? O pittie them; Have compassion on them: alas, poore soules, their state is pittifull, Luke 23. not odious; Nesciunt, quid faciunt: they know not what they doe: Nec deludendi, nec minandi, sed plangendi: these men are not to bee Aug. mocked, nor menaced, but mourned for. I say to them, as Christ said to the woman of Samaria, If thou knewest the gift of God, and Iohn 4. 10. who it is, that saith unto thee, etc. so if these men knew the gift of God, the power of the Word, they would not doe, as they doe: fret not then at these men, as David counselleth thee, saying, Fret not thy selfe because of the ungodly, neither bee thou envious for the evill doer, for they shall soone bee cut downe as the grasse, and wither Psal. 37. 1, 2. like a greene hearbe. And as Christ commandeth thee, Breake not a Mat. 12. 20. bruised Reede, quench not the smoaking flaxe. Paul, that so hated sinne, and sharpely reproved it in Elymas the Sorcerer, saying, O full of Acts. 13. 10. all subtilty, and all mischiefe, the Childe of the Divell, and enemy to all righteousnesse, wilt thou not cease to pervert the straight wayes of the Lord? Yet writing to the Corinthians, hee saith, I feare lest when 2 Cor. 12. 21. I come againe, my God abase me among you, and I shall bewaile many of them which have sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanenes, and fornication, and wantonnesse, which they have committed: For as there was nothing that did so much rejoyce his heart, as when his preaching profited, so nothing did more cast downe his heart, then when his labour did no good: and againe hee saith, We are fooles for Christs sake, and yee are wise in Christ; wee are weake, and yee 1 Cor. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13, 21. are strong; yee are honourable, and wee are dispised; unto this houre wee both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certaine dwelling place, and labour, working with our owne hands; wee are reviled,

and yet we blesse. Wee are persecuted, and suffer it; wee are evill spoken of, and we pray: we are made as the filth of the world, the off scouring The godly bewaile the fearefull estate of the wicked. of all things, unto this day. He came not with a rod, but in love, and in the Spirit of meeknes: he wept over the Philippians. Ieremy cries out against the sinnes of the Iewes, saying, I harkened and heard, but no man spake aright, no man repented him of his wickednesse, saying, What have I done? every one turned to their race, as the horse Phil. 3. 18. Ier. 8. 6, 7. into the battell: even the Stork in the ayre knoweth her appointed time, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their comming, but my people knoweth not the judgement of the Lord: Yet did he it with great compassion, as appeareth by his own words, saying, Oh that my head were full of water, and myne eyes a fountaine of teares, that I might weepe day and night for the slaine of the daughter of Ier. 9. 1. my people! How greeved it Samuel, after that God had cast away Saul! The text doth say, that Samuel mourned for Saul, and God did chide him for it, saying, How long wilt thou mourne for Saul, seeing 1 Sam. 15. 25. Cap. 16. 1. I have cast him away, for reigning over Israel? Samuel did not say, as many doe, Let him perish, Let him die, He is a reprobate, Let him goe; but mourned and sorrowed for him. Yea the Lord Iesus wept over Ierusalem, so saith the Evangelist, When he came neere and beheld the City, he wept over it, saying, Oh if thou haddest Luk. 19. knowne at the least in this thy day the things that do belong unto thy peace! etc. As if hee should have said, Alas poore towne, alas poore people, yee are now merry and jocund: but oh poore soules, you know not your state, how neere your fall is: whereupon one noteth, We read that Christ was hungry, weary, sorry, angry, how he wept often; but wee read not that hee laughed: for even this Mat. 21. Iohn 4. Iohn 11. Mat. 3. Mat. 12. 25. laughter proceedeth from vanity; Ea sola ridentur, quae notant turpitudinem aliquam non turpiter. As Christ was God, he said: I give thee thanks, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou hast hidde these things from the wise and prudent, and hast opened them to children: But as he was man, he sorrowed for the wicked; and here, by the way note, for the weake and penitent, that when wee speake roughly, and denounce menaces, wee doe it not to them, but to the impenitent: For as a Father sometimes layeth Rats-bane, to kill mice, and the children ignorantly fall upon it: so the weake apply the menaces done to the reprobate, to themselves; but yet they pertaine not to them, but to the bastards, to the impenitent. The Lord will try the righteous, but the wicked, and him that loveth Psal. 11. 5. 6. iniquity, doth his soule abhorre; upon the wicked hee shall raine snares, fire, and brimstone, and stormy tempest, this is the portion of their cup. Wherefore heare the Word of the Lord, ye scornefull men: You say, that you made a Covenant with death, and are with Hell at agreement, but your Covenant with death shall bee dissolved, and your agreement with Hell shall not stand, but the scourge shall runne over you, and passe thorow you, etc.
Againe, though we must have compassion of some, and pitty

them; yet this compassion and pitty must chiefely extend to the We must imitate Christ in mercy and compassion. soule of a sinner (as partly was touched before;) for Saint Iude speaketh here of the soule, this is the highest and greatest point of compassion in the world, to pitty the soule, to helpe it: Learne this of the Schoolemaster of the world, of the wisdome of the Col 2. Hebr. 2. Apoc. 1. Father, of the brightnesse of glory, the Ancient of dayes: for he had pitty on the ignorance of the people: saith the Evangelist. When he saw the multitude, he had compassion upon them, because he saw Mat. 9. 36. them destitute, as sheep wanting a shepheard. He weepeth now over many a congregation in England, that is without a pastour; hee pittieth all sinners, He is a mercifull and faithfull high Priest, and hee Hebr. 2. 17. cap. 4. 15. is touched with the feeling of our infirmities. Wee are all to learne of Christ, to have pitty on our ignorant brethren, to instruct them, to teach them, to exhort the^, to do them good; blessed are such: so saith Salomon, He that winneth soules, (that is, that bringeth the^ to the knowledge of God) is wise; the tongue of such a one is as fined Prov. 11. 30. Prov. 10. 20. silver: those pastours feed best, that are pittifull and compassionate. Papists pretend to follow Christ in those things that are impossible; as in fasting forty dayes; in giving the Holy Ghost to their shavelings; in opening the eyes of the blind, in doing miracles; but in teaching and preaching, and shewing mercy to the peoples soules, they never come neere him: they seeke not the rest of their soules, as Christ did. I am commanded to have compassion on the body of my brother, as, To deale bread to the hungry, to bring the poore that wandreth, into my Mat. 11. 29. Esay 58. 7. house, to cover the naked, and never to hide my face from mine owne flesh; but specially I must have compassion on the soule of my brother, for the more precious that a thing is, the more care is ever to be had of it; herein standeth the love of a father to his children, of the Prince to his subjects, of the minister to his flocke, of one friend to another; for you know the Commandement, Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shalt Levit. 19. 17. plainely rebuke thy neighbour, and suffer him not to sinne. It is strange to see how wee pitty an Oxe, or an Asse fallen into a ditch, but not a brother drowned in sinne; it is vile to set an house on fire, but it is vile also to passe by it, and not to quench it, when it is in our power: it is vile to wound a man, but it is vile also to passe by him, as the Levite did, and as the Priest did, and not to helpe him, as the Samaritane did: it is vile to sinne, it Luk. 10. is vile also not to reprove a sinner, and in time of need, not to comfort him, to save a soule: He that hath converted a sinner from going Iam. 5. 20. astray out of the way, shall save a soule from death, and he shall hide a multitude of sinnes. We thinke it a great matter to give a penny or two to a poore man: but what though I helpe his need, fill his belly, cloath his nakednesse, and yet pitty not his ignorance, blasphemy, and to increase knowledge, zeale, and the feare of the Lord in him; our liberality is maimed, wee pitty, but the

worst and weakest part, that is, the body: follow therefore the Obstinate sinners must bee terrified. counsell of the Apostle, Instruct with meeknesse them that are contrary minded, (meaning such as are not come to the knowledge of the trueth, but fall through ignorance) proving that God at any 2 Tim. 2. 25. time will give them repentance, that they may know the trueth.
Againe, as some men are to be pittied, so other some are to be reproved, and must have the judgements of God denounced against them, and must be terrified with menaces, for that they sinne of malice, not of weakenesse; in knowledge, not in ignorance; they be pertinaces: stubborne, obstinate opinionative, and so to be handled; For as we must not be too sharpe against a weake brother, lest we deprive him of hope: so we may not be too soft with an obstinate man, lest we increase his pride; the one may be driven to desperation, the other to presumption; we may not incidere in Scyllam, evitare Charybdim: We must not fall into Scylla, to avoid Charibdis, but draw out Gods sword, and lay Gods axe to the roote of their trees: so S. Paul in one of his Epistles to Mat. 3. the Corynthians, used oyle to mollify, in the other, wine to search 1 Cor. 5. the wounds; hee brought not a search-cloth, but a searing iron. For there bee foure uses of the Scripture, to teach 2 Tim. 3. 16. trueth; to confute errour; to instruct in manners; to reprove viciousnesse of life: this aggravated the sinne of Ananias, that hee Act. 5. 4. sinned willingly, and this extenuated the sinne of the Iewes, that they did it ignorantly: Ignorantia enim liberat non a toto, sed a tanto. If Elymas had beene a weake brother, Paul would not have used the Act. 3. 17. roughnesse that he did: but because he was an inveterate enemy, steeped in his Lees, frozen in his dregs, he rattleth him up, and saith, O full of all subtilty, and mischiefe, the child of the Divell, and Act. 13. 10. enemy of all righteousnesse, wilt thou not cease to pervert the straight wayes of the Lord? So Saint Peter dealt with Simon Magus, Thy money Act. 8. 20. perish with thee, because thou thinkest that the gift of God may be obtayned with money. Iames and Iohn were filij tonitrui: sonnes of thunder; wee had need now not speake, but thunder, not use tongues, but trumpets, men are so asleepe, that they will not awake, except we thunder. It is said of the three Ministers of Geneva, Vireto nemo fatur dulcius, Farrello nemo tonuit fortius, Calvino nemo docuit doctius: None ever spake more sweetly then Viret, none thundred more strongly than Farrell, none taught more learnedly than Calvin. He that could doe all these three, were a perfect Minister. A Christian must not be afraid to reprove sinne; Noah reproved the old world; Lot, Sodom, and Gomorah; Samuel, Saul; Nathan, David the King; Iaddi and Ahias, Ieroboam the Idolater; Hanani, 1 Reg. 13. 1 Reg. 14. Asa; Elias, Ahab; Ieremy--but what, should I rip up all the Prophets, Christ, Iohn the Baptist, and the Apostles? Ignatius reproved Trajane; Ambrose, Theodocian; Polycarpe, Martion; Chrysostome the Clergy; Gelasius, Anastasius. All these reproved sinne, and are presidents to us to doe the same. If Herod will marry his brothers

wife. Let Iohn tell him, Non licet, it may not be; if Ahab will goe The Prophets of God have terrified the wicked. to Ramoth in Gilead, Michea must tell him, hee shall never returne; if Amazia forbid Amos to preach, hee may tell him, Thy wife shall be an harlot in the Citty, and thy sonnes and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided by line, and thou shalt dye in a Mat. 14. 1 Reg. 22. Amos 7. 17. polluted Land, and Israel shall surely goe into captivity. If the men of Ierusalem will scorne us and our doctrine, Let us say unto them, Heare the Word of the Lord, yee scornefull men* Thus saith the Esa. 23. 14, 17. Lord, Iudgement will I lay to the rule, and righteousnesse to the ballance, and the haile shall sweepe away your vaine confidence, etc. This teacheth Ministers to deale plainely and roundly, not to blanch, not to bring honey in stead of wormewood; not to do as the false prophets did, of whom God speaketh thus, They have healed the hurt of Ier. 6. 14. the daughter of my people, with sweet words, saying, Peace, peace, when there was no peace. This was their sinne, the prophets looked out Lamen^ 2. 14. vaine and foolish things for you, they have not discovered your iniquities, but have looked out false prophesies and causes of banishment. Esay said of the prophets of that time, Qui ducunt te, Esay. 9. 15. seducunt te: The leaders of the people cause you to erre, and they that are ledde by them, are devoured; they should have mourned, not piped. Ieremy cried out against these prophets, I have seene in the prophets of Ierusalem, filthinesse, they commit adultery, and walke in Ier. 23. 14. lyes, they strengthen also the hands of the wicked, that none can returne from his wickednesse, they are all unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorah: therefore thus saith the Lord of Hostes, Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drinke the water of gall; for from the Prophets of Ierusalem is wickednesse gone foorth into all the land: Heare not the words of these prophets (saith the Lord of Hosts) that prophesie unto you, and teach you vanity, and speake the vision of their owne heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord: they say still unto them that despise me, The Lord hath said, yee shall have peace, and they say to every one that walketh in the stubbornnes of his owne heart, No evill shall come upon you. So did Ezechiel at Gods owne commandement cry out against these prophets, saying, Wo unto the foolish prophets that follow their owne spirit, and have seene nothing. O Israel, thy prophets are Ezech. 13. 3, 4. like the Foxes in waste places, they have seene vanity, and lying divinations, etc. And of these prophets Almighty God co^plaineth sore, Ezeth. 22. 25, 26, 28. saying; The prophets are like roaring Lions, ravening for the prey, they have devoured soules, they have taken the riches, and precious things, they have made her many widowes, her priests have broken my Law, and have defiled mine holy things: They have put no difference betweene the holy and prophane; neither discerned betweene the cleane and uncleane, they have hidde their eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am prophaned among them, they dawbe with untempered mortar; seeing vanities and divining lies, etc. Ministers must not be of the number of these prophets, but they must cry alowd, and not spare, they must lift up their voices like trumpets, they must shew the people their offences, and the house of Esay. 58. 1.

Iacob her sinnes. Christ, who brake not a bruised reede, yet thundered against the Pharises, and denounceth many woes against They that reproove, profit more tha^ they that sooth. them.
This also teacheth the people to suffer the Word of Exhortation: but flatterers are most esteemed of them, such as can sow Mat. 12. 20. cap. 25. Esay. 30. 10. 1 Reg. 22. 8. pillowes under their elbowes, and can preach placentia, pleasing things unto them. Ahab cannot abide Michea, if he prophesy otherwise, than hee would have him. This is the difference betweene a wise man, and a foole; the wise will heare rebukes, but the foolish will not: so saith Salomon, Rebuke not a scorner, (meaning them that are incorrigible, such as Christ calleth dogges Prov. 9. 8. and hogges: or he speaketh this by way of comparison, not that the wicked should be rebuked, but he sheweth their malice, and the small hope of their amendment.) Well, Rebuke not a scorner (saith Salomon) lest hee hate thee; but rebuke a wise man, and hee will love thee. And the Prophet speaking of the wicked, saith, They hate him that speaketh in the gate (meaning the Prophet, that openly Am^^. 5. 10. reproveth them) and they abhorre him that speaketh uprightly. But if a Physician give a sharpe potion, or a Surgeon, a sharpe corrasive, it is not to kill the patient, but to recover him. If a shepheard, after his whistle, settes his dogge on his sheepe, it is not to woorry them, but to returne them home; therefore let men suffer the Word of exhortation, as the Apostle intreateth them, saying, I beseech you, brethren, suffer the Word of Exhortation: You are Hebr. 13. 22. sheepe, wee shepheards, and no difference but this, that they in the field have to do with unreasonable sheep; wee in the Church with reasonable: yet some are woolves, not sheep; some are unreasonable and evill men, yet rebuke them. Dilexit Theodosius arguentem: non adulantem: Theodosius loved a reprover, not a flatterer, for better are the wounds of a lover, than the kisses of an hater. David wished to bee rebuked: Let the righteous smite me, for that is a benefit, and let him reprove me, and it shall bee a precious oyle. Better Psal. 141. 5. we chide, then God chide.
And other save with feare.] The feare here named, is not only the denouncing of judgement, by way of doctrine against impenitent sinners, but also the holy discipline of the Church, the fearefull sentence of Excommunication, whereby men are delivered up to Satan, as was the incestuous Corinthian, of whom Paul writeth thus, When yee are gathered together, and my spirit with you, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ; that such one, I say, by the power 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5: of our Lord Iesus Christ, be delivered unto Satar for the destruction of the flesh, that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Iesus. So Hymeneus and Alexander were excommunicate and delivered up to Satan 1 Tim. 1. 20. for their blasphemy. For can there be a greater feare, then to thinke, that wee are estranged from the company of the Saints, put out of the Church, delivered into the power of Satan, wholly committed and commended to the Divell? Thus Babilas Bishop

of Antioch, excommunicated Philip the Emperour for the executing Divers kind^ of excommunication. of an hostage committed unto him: thus Ambrose Bishop of Millane excommunicated Theodosius for a murder done at Thessalonica; thus Symonachus excommunicated Anastasius the Emperour for blasphemy, and Paganisme: thus Innocentius excommunicated Arcadius and Eudoxia, for persecuting Chrysostome. Thus are vile men to be handled, they are to be excommunicate and delivered up to Satan: We must have no fellowship with them. Finely saith one, Triplex est Communio: there is a threefold Hemingius. Communion, Spiritualis, Moralis, Sacramentales. Spirituall, Morall, Sacramentall.
The first with God in a spirituall life, the second with men in our daily conversing, the third, with the Pastor and the Church in partaking of the holy mysteries.
And againe, Triplex est excommunicatio; Spiritualis, Moralis, Sacramentalis. Spirituall, Morall, Sacramentall.
Spirituall, whereby a man is shut out of Heaven, and shall never be partaker of the price of our high calling, which is in Christ Iesus.
Morall, whereby a man is excluded from the company of men. Sacramentall; whereby he is excluded from prayer, the Word and Sacraments. And this excommunication is a fearefull thing; it is to be cut or divided from the body of Christ, and to be delivered up to Satan.
There is a two fold use of Excommunication:
First, Vt excommunicatus pudore victus, ad poenitentiam excitetur, and deflectat a malo: That the excommunicate may bee ashamed of 2 Cor. 2. 7. his sinne, and be brought to repentance, and so to eschew evill. Secondly, Ne contagio ad reliquos serpat: Lest the contagion should creepe and infect others; For a little leaven sowreth a whole lumpe of 2 Cor. 5. 6. dowe: And excommunication is sometime just, sometime unjust: but howsoever it passeth against us, justly, or unjustly, it is to be Greg. feared. Sententia excommunicationis sive justa, sive injusta, metuenda est.



THE SIX AND THIRTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XXIII. 

Pulling them out of the fire.
The sinner, in a dangerous estate.



BEfore yee heard, that we must use discretion, and put difference of sinners, to pitty some, and to reprove some; To save them with feare, that is, by sharp reproofes to draw them out of danger. Now here in these words hee sheweth the great danger men are in; when they sinne, they are in the fire, ready to bee consumed, and therefore hee saith, Plucke them out of the fire. And who can pluck them out of the fire, but with violence? This is the state of the wicked, they are as dry trees and rotten wood; and two things are prepared for them, a sharpe hatchet, and a quicke fire: for, every tree, that bringeth Luke 3. 9. not forth good fruit, shall be hewne downe, and cast into the fire. This is that which the Apostle calleth, the deceitfulnes of sinne. Exhort one Hebr. 3. 13. another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulnesse of sinne; It promiseth safety, and bringeth destruction; so the Apostle affirmeth, Sinne (saith hee) tooke occasion by the Commandement, and thereby slew mee. We thinke wee are well Rom. 7. 11. inough when wee sinne, and yet indeed wee are at the very pits mouth, For when the wicked grow as grasse, and all workers of iniquity Psal. 92. vers. 7. flourish, then shall they be destroyed for ever: And Iob speaking of the wicked: saith, One dieth in his full strength, being in all ease and Iob. 21. 23, 24. prosperity, his brests are full of milke, and his bones full of marrow.

And as the sudden ruine of the wicked is set out by fire, they are The fickle estate of the wicked. ready to be burned; so againe, their state is described by yee, they are as men, that walking on an yee, suddenly fall. So saith the Psalmist, Thou doest set them in slippery places, and castest them Psal. 73. 17, 18. downe into desolation; how suddenly are they destroyed, perished, and horribly consumed? Their estate also is set out by grasse and hearbes, which grow to day, and are cut downe to morrow; so saith David: They shall soone bee cut downe like grasse, and shall wither Psal. 37. 2. as the greene hearbe: their estate also is compared to Chaffe, which now lies in the floore, and by and by is blowne away with the winde. The Prophet saith, They are as Chaffe which the winde driveth away. Alas, all their felicity, and great pompe, it Psal. 1. 4. is but a dreame, it is but as Chaffe, the least blast of Gods wrath will overthrow all their happinesse and felicity, which at the best is most uncertaine and mutable. Iob saith, They spend their dayes in pleasure; and suddenly goe downe to Hell. And hee saith, The Lord Iob 21. 18. doth make them as stubble before the winde, and as chaffe shall they bee dispersed: for in a moment they are gone, and like chaffe scattered abroad: the godly are as trees; the wicked are as chaffe; there is difference betweene chaffe and trees.
Ieremy layeth out the estate of the wicked, by comparing them to sheepe; Let us talke with thee of thy judgements (saith Ieremy Ier. 12. 1, 2, 3. to God) Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? Why are all they in wealth, that rebelliously transgresse? Thou hast planted them, and they have taken roote, they grow, and bring foorth fruit: thou art neere in their mouth, but farre from their reynes: and at last hee saith, Pull them out like sheepe for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter. Now they live, and within an houre are led to the shambles. Iob compareth them to a dreame or vision in the night, and saith, That the rejoycing of the wicked is but Iob 20. 5, 8, 9. short, and the joy of hypocrites is but for a moment: hee shall flee away as a dreame, and they shall not finde him, and shall passe away as a vision in the night, so that the eye which had seene him, shall see him no more, and his place shall see him no more. Moses compareth them to a tale that is told, and hee saith, that they bring their yeeres to an Psal. 90. end as a tale that is told: and Saint Iames to a vapour, that continueth but a little season. How soone is the yee moulten? How soone Iam. 4. is the flowre withered? How soone is a vapour consumed of the Sunne? How soone is a dreame vanished? How soone is a tale told? How soone is a ship past? How swift is the flight of an Iob 4. 25. Eagle? And such is our life: so elegantly David setteth out their fall, I have seene (saith hee) the wicked strong, spreading himselfe like a greene Bay tree, yet he passed away, and he was gone; I sought him, but hee could not bee found: they are gone, they shall no more returne Psal. 37. 35, 36. to their faire houses, and their places shall know them no more where they dwelt; and how they lived we know, but where they dyed, and where they are, God knoweth; they were here, but they are

gone; Ederunt, biberunt, riserunt, luserunt: they have eaten, drunken, laughed, sported, and made themselves merry; but suddenly No mans estate permanent. they are gone. Feare dwelleth in their houses, and brimstone is scattered in their habitations: their rootes are dried up beneath, and above is his branch cut downe, his remembrance shall perish from the earth, and Iob 18, 15, 16, 17. hee shall have no name in the street.
David in his Epitaph cryeth out, Quomodo ceciderunt potentes? How are the mighty overthrowne? So how are these wicked ones overthrowne? So Saint Ambrose made it the foot of his song, speaking of the death of the three noble Emperours, Valentinian, Gratian, and Theodosius; Omnibus, O Valentiniane and Gratiane, speciosi fuistis; O Valentinian and Gratian, that have beene Oratione funebride Theodosi^ obitu and Gratiani. beautifull to all, and admired of all, conjoyned in life, not divided in death, one grave did not separate them, whom one affection joyned together, meeker than Doves, swifter than Eagles, stouter than Lions, gentler than Lambes; the bow of Gratian never turned backe, neither did the sword of Valentinian returne empty. Quomodo ceciderunt potentes? How are the mightie fallen? O quomodo? O how? how? Againe speaking of Theodosius, hee saith, Obitum ejus omnia elementa moerebant: All the Elements mourned for his death; the Sunne was eclipsed, the Moone did not shine, the Ayre was darkened, the Earth trembled, the Waters roared, and the whole World bewailed the losse of such a man: Quomodo ceciderunt potentes? O quomodo corruerunt? How are the mighty fallen? How are the mighty overthrowne? etc. No mans state is permanent: let no man trust his present state: for how soone are rich men impoverished? How suddenly are wise men infatuated? How soone are the honourable abased? How suddenly are the strong weakened? How suddenly are the faire blemished? Laban hath lost his sheepe, Achitophel his wisedome, Haman Gen. 30. 2 Sam. 16. Ester. his honour, Samson his strength, Absolon his beautie, Dionysius his kingdom? How suddenly do the wicked perish? The wicked are as men in the fire, ready to be burned, as prisoners adjudged ready to be executed, as sheepe for the shambles; For behold, Pharaoh now sitting in his chariot, now drowned in the Sea, Exod. 14. and meate for Haddockes! Behold Balthasar, now tossing the pots, and by and by quaking like a beast; behold Herod, now sitting in a chaire of gold, and the people crying, The voyce of a God, and not of a man, and presently strucken of an Angell, and eaten of Wormes; behold Dionysius, to day a King in Syracuse, to morrow a Schoole-master in Corinth. Lastly, behold Cardinall Woolsey with silver pillars, pollaxes, and golden crosses, writing, I and my King, and within a while dead at Leicester of an Italian Figge, with his stinch putting out the torch. To these examples of Balthasar, Pharaoh, Dionysius and others, ^erome addeth many more. Nam feriunt summes fulmine montes, subito: The

Lightnings strike the high mountaines suddenly. Constantins Death comes not sudden to the godly. dyed suddenly in a Village called Mopsi; Iulianus was suddenly hit with an arrow from Heaven; Iovinianus stifled with stinch in a vomit of bloud, Valius perished in the warres against the Goths; Gratian was slaine suddenly at Lions; Valentinianus the younger was hanged; Procopius Maximinus, Eugenius (quoth he) dyed suddenly on the sword; they say that Gregorie the thirteenth died suddenly of a Rheume, of whom Beza wrote, Nec panifex, nec potifex, sed carnifex, Papa pater pontifex. This is the case of all men. But what wicked man will beleeve this, till hee feele it? Every man flatters himselfe, till the plague come, and then hee cryeth out that it came too suddenly, it came ere hee looked for it; For certainely, when a man shall heare the words of the curse, and Deut. 29. 19, 20. blesse himselfe in his heart, and saith, I shall have peace, although I walke after the stubbornnesse of mine owne heart, thus adding drunkennes to thirst: the Lord will not bee mercifull unto him, but the wrath of the Lord, and his jealousie shall smoake against that man, and every curse that is written in this booke, shall light upon him, and the Lord shall put out his name from under Heaven. Salomon noteth three things in the wicked; their plague commeth shortly, suddenly, and without recovery; for marke his words, His destruction (saith he) co^meth Prov. 6. 15. speedily, hee shall bee destroyed suddenly, without hope of recovery: all these three bee fearefull. The wages of sinne is death, yea sudden death. We pray in the Letany to be delivered from sudden death: Rom. 6. 23. but our prayer is nothing, except our life be godly; that shall give a rest to Gods children. No sickenesse, no death commeth suddenly Esa. 28. 12. to the childe of God, for hee prepareth himselfe ever, hee is a childe of light, and of the day, therefore hee will not sleepe as other men doe, but he will watch and be sober. Gods children have oyle in their Lampes, that is, Faith and Repentance; 1 Thess. 5 5, 6. Mat. 25. they have made their reckonings, their loines be girt, and their lights burning; and let us bee like unto these servants, that wait Luk. 14. 28. for their master, when he commeth from the marriage, that when he commeth and koncketh, we may open unto him immediately. Luk. 12. The troubles that came upon Iob were not sudden, he looked for them long before they came; Multa cadunt inter calicem, supremaque labra: many things happen betweene the cup and the upper Iob 1. 25. lip, but not to the godly, for they stand alway in awe of God, and are affraid to offend him: for which cause Salomon counteth them blessed, saying, Blessed is the man that feareth alway: And againe, hee saith, A prudent man seeth the plague, and hideth himselfe, Pro. 28. 14. Prov. 22. 3. that is, the punishment that is prepared for the wicked, and flyeth to God for succour; hee seeth his wants, he suspecteth himselfe, hee daily asketh God mercy; whereas the wicked feareth nothing, like the Amalekites, who eating, drinking, 1 Sam. 30. 16. playing, dansing, and even in the middest of all their sport and pastime were suddenly slaine: For the wicked say, Come, I

will bring wine, and wee will fill our selves with strong drinke, and to morrow Repentance and godly life must not bee deserted till death. shall bee as this day, and much more abundant: but God saith, Hac nocte repetent animam tuam: This night shall they fetch away thy soule from thee; when some are eating, some drinking, some stealing, some whoring, some building, buying, selling, Esay 56. 12. Luke 12. 45. 1 Thess. 5. 2, 3. then shall God come: For the day of the Lord shall come even as a theefe in the night: for when they shall say, Peace, peace, sudden destruction shall come upon them, as sorrow commeth upon a Woman travelling with childe, and they shall not escape: and therefore the counsell of Augustine is good, Vitam emendare, dum tempus habenius, to amend our lives, while wee have time: Operari dum dies est, to worke, Aug. Ser. 4. de sanctis. while it is day: Pulsare dum aperitur ostium; to knocke while the doore is opened; falcem mittere, dum messis durat; to thrust in the sickle, while the harvest lasteth; Negotiari tempore nundinarum; to buy and sell while the Faire or Market lasteth; Misericordiam implorare, ante diem justitiae; to crave mercy, before the day 2 Cor. 5. 2. of justice approcheth: For now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation. Begge mercy then to day, thou knowest not whether God will give thee time and grace to doe it to morrow. To this saying of Augustine, I might adde the saying of Ierome upon his death-bed, as saith Eusebius Cremonensis, Cur moraris, miser, de die in die^ converti ad Deum? O miserable and wretched man, why doest thou deferre from day to day to bee converted unto God? Cur te jam malorum nonpoenitet? Why doest thou not now repent thee of thy sinnes and wickednesse? Ecce mors properat, ut te conterat: Behold, death approcheth to teare thee, and kill thee; the Divell plyeth him to receive thee; the wormes expect thee daily to devoure thee; wit and strength and all beginne to faile thee. But thou wilt say, I will repent in articulo mortis; at the very point of death. O vana suspitio, oh falsa meditatio! O vaine suspition, oh false meditation! Looke and see, if thou canst finde one of an hundred, nay, one of a thousand, that have obtained this grace, and mercy of God, that his end should bee happy, whose life was unhappy; his death good, whose conversation hath beene bad. Ignis est ira Dei: Gods wrath is fire: Nos sumus stipula: wee are as stubble and straw devoured of the fire: wherefore let us worke while it is day, the night commeth when as no Iohn 9. man can work. And as Noah built the Arke in faire weather, and Ioseph laid up graine and corne in the seven plentifull yeeres; and Gen. 6. as the Ant that hath neither Master, Ruler, nor Guide, provideth in the plentie of Summer for the dearth of Winter; so let us Prov. 6. like good Noahs build the Arke of a good Conscience, before the judgement overflow; like provident Iosephs, let us lay up the graine of godliness in the barnes of our hearts, before the dearth of Mercy come, and like painefull Ants, provide food for our soules, before the Winter of justice doth approach. And whatsoever Eccles. 11. we put our hands unto, let us doe it quickly; For there is neither

worke, nor invention, nor wisdome, nor understanding in Ministers save the soules. the grave that wee go unto.
Save them with feare, in plucking them out of the fire.] he saith, Save them with feare. Christians are said to save men, when God useth their speech and exhortation to doe good on men; they are said to winne soules, which is the greatest gaine in the world: For all the gold in the world laid in one ballance, and the soule of a man in another, will not countervaile one soule; they cost more then so, for We are not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, 1 Pet. 1. 18. but with the precious bloud of Christ, as of a Lambe undefiled, and without spotte. Salomon gained gold and silver, and had it in abundance: Alexander gained men, for he subdued whole hosts: Augustus gained 1 Reg. 10. Luk. 2. Countreyes, for hee taxed the world; but good men gaine soules: this is most of all; For he that winneth soules, is happy; happy indeed: For they that turne many to righteousnesse, shall shine as the Prov. 11. 30. Dan. 12. 3. starres for ever and ever. Wee are said to convert a sinner, because God useth our ministery in it: and this should be our chiefe care, to convert one another from sinne, to sanctity; from Sodom to Sion; from Babylon to Ierusalem; from the power of Satan, unto God; For hee which hath converted a sinner from going astray out of the Iam. 5. 20. way, shall save a soule from death, and shall hide a multitude of sinnes: And our Saviour saith, If thy brother trespasse against thee, go and tell Mat. 18. 15. him his fault betweene him and thee; if he heare thee, thou hast wonne thy brother. If parents were as carefull to winne the soules of their children, as they are to save their bodies; and masters to do the same to their servants, by instructing their family; God should have more glory, and they more comfort: but to complaine of this, Vbi incipiam, aut ubi desinaem? Where should I beginne, and where should I make an end? All the foundations of the earth are out of course, most men have no conscience of them that be under them, and an heauy judgement remaineth for them: their judgement is just, and their damnation sleepeth not. Paul would not 2 Pet. 2. have the husband to leave the wife, nor the wife the husband, for that the one may save the soule of the other; for marke his words, For what knowest thou, o wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband? 1 Cor. 7. 16. or what knowest thou, o man, whether thou shalt save thy wife? Even so what knowest thou, o Father, whether thou shalt save thy child? And what knowest thou, o master, whether thou shalt save thy servant? doe thou thy duty: leave the successe to God. For neither is hee that planteth, any thing, nor he that watereth, but God 1 Cor. 3. 7. that giveth the increase: So the Minister is said to save men; Take heed (saith Paul to Timothy) to thy selfe, and to thy doctrine, and continue 1 Tim. 4. 16. therein, for in so doing, thou shalt save thy selfe, and them that heare thee: And yet to speake strictly and properly, there is no Saviour but God; for, there is salvation in no other, neither is there any Act. 4. 12. other name given unto men, whereby they shall bee saved: that is, no other cause or meane. Yet it is said that grace saveth, The grace Tit. 2. 11.

of God bringeth salvation to all men; And that the Word saveth: For it pleaseth God by the foolishnesse of preaching, to save them Many co^curre in the worke of Salvation. that beleeve: And that faith saveth; By grace are yee saved through faith; And that the Sacraments save us: so saith Saint P^ter, The figure, that now saveth us, even Baptisme, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 21. Ephes. 2. 8. 1 Pet. 3. 21. And that Ministers save us; so said Paul afore Agrippa, that God had appeared unto him, for this purpose, To open the eyes of the Gentiles, that they may returne from darkenesse to light, from the power Act. 26. 18. of Satan, unto God; meaning, that they might bee saved: and that God saveth us, Ego sum, ego sum, and praeter me non est Salvator: I am, Esa. 42. I am, and besides mee there is no Saviour; that Christ saveth us, for the Apostle saith, That hee is the Saviour of all men, but especially 1 Tim. 4. 10. of them that beleeve: That the Holy Ghost saveth us: and all this is true in a godly sense: grace saveth as the origen, the roote of all; 1 Iohn. 5. the Word as a meanes under God, faith as the instrument, Sacraments as helpes and leaders to Heaven; Ministers as Legates from God; God as the efficient cause, Christ as the materiall, Iohn 3. 16. 1 Iohn. 3. 2. 1 Cor. 6. 11. the Holy Ghost as the applying cause.
And by the way note, that if the Minister under God saveth men, how then dare some say, that they doe no good? Doe they no good, that save mens soules? Yes, their lips feed many, The Prov. 10, 11, 20, 21. mouth of a righteous man is a well of life, the tongue of a just man is as fined silver; the lippes of the righteous doe feed many: But many thinke that the Preacher doth no good, they thinke, that they can goe to heaven without a guide, they thinke themselves wise, and to see into all duties, as farre as the Minister. Well it may be, that they are wise in some respect; yet as the little eye of the Eagle can see from the height of Heaven, and the great eye of an Owle cannot see the Sunne; so great men, and old men may oversee that which base men, and poore men may see, being learned in the Word. Hereupon said Elihu, Surely there is a spirit in man, but Iob 32. 8, 9. the inspiration of the Almighty giveth understanding; Great men are not alway wise, neither do the Ancient alway understand judgement. David said, I have had more understanding than all my teachers: Psal. 119. 99, 100. for thy testimonies are my meditation. I understand more than the ancient, because I keepe thy precepts. As Polypheme had but one eye; so these Cyclopeans see but with one eye; they see but the world, they see not Heaven? Oh how long shall wee charme these Psal. 55. Mat. 7. deafe Adders? How long shall wee give holy things to dogges, and cast pearles to swine? How long shall wee play on Orpheus harpe to these Asses? How long shall wee sow seed in this barraine ground? We pray to bee delivered from these unreasonable 2 Thess. 3. 2. and evill men. Shall Titius Sabinus his dogge bring meate to the mouth of his dead Master, and hold up his head in Tyber from sinking, because sometime hee gave him a crust of bread? And shall not the people love the Pastour that giveth the^ the Bread of Heaven, and saves their soules? Shall dogges be kinder than

men? Or is there no good to bee done to a Parish, but bodily The saving use should bee made of the Word. good? Christ fedde foure or five thousand with five barly loaves, and two fishes, but we reade not, that hee did it above twice, and that in necessity: But hee bestowed three whole yeeres in preaching to them; the greatest good that hee did in his life, was in Iohn 6. Mat. 14. Mat. 5. Mat. 13. Luke 24. Luke 10. Mat. 12. Act. 10. 38. teaching them.
In the Mount,
In the Ship,
In the Temple,
In their Houses,
In the Fields. Yea in all places; for he went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Divell. These men therefore that say, that wee doe no good, have lost their senses and their soules also: For the living soule, as touching the naturall life, hath foure powers, and foure touching the spirituall life, that is,

Appetitive.


Retentive.


Digestive.


Expulsive.

It must desire the Word. Hereupon saith S. Peter, As new borne babes, desire the sincere milke of the Word; so did David, I will (saith 1 Pet. 2. 2. he) go to the Altar of God, even unto the God of my joy and gladnes, etc.
2. It must keepe; for, Blessed are they that heare the Word and Luk. 11. 28. keepe it: So did the Corinths, for which cause, Paul did much praise them, saying, Now I commend you, brethren, that yee remember all my 1 Cor. 11. 2. things, and keepe the ordinances, as I delivered them to you.
3. It must digest it into good manners; and to this purpose tendeth the exhortation of Saint Iames, See that yee bee doors of the Word, not hearers only, deceiuing your owne selves. So did the Thessalonians, Iam. 1. 22. they received the Word, not as the word of man, but as it is 1 Thess. 2. 1. indeed, the Word of God.
4. It must expell dishonest things; as namely, all maliciousnes, and all guile* all dissimulation and envy, and all evill speaking: So did 1 Pet. 2. 1. the Antiochians: for the hand of the Lord was with them, so that a great Act. 11. 21. number beleeved, and turned unto the Lord. All these benefits come by the teacher under God; For as the nurse hath two brests to give milke to the Infant: so the Minister hath two also, doctrine and life; the one for example, the other for instruction: touching both, wee will say as Paul said, Yee are witnesses, and God also, how 1 Thess. 2. 10. holily, and justly, and unblameably wee behaved our selves among them that beleeve. Wee appeale not to the Infidels, but to the beleevers: For if an inquest of Infidels bee impannelled on us, certenly wee goe downe. Elias shall be said to trouble Israel, the Apostles shall bee seditious, Iohn Baptist shall have the Divell, 1 Reg. 18. Christ is an enemy to Caesar; wee appeale therefore from Infidels to beleevers, and wee hope, they will acquite us: for wee may labi in domo: fall in the house, but not a domo: from the house;

they shall find us sine crimine, without offensive fault, though not sine peccato, without fault. Ministery the meanes of salvation.
Well said the women of Rome to Constantius the Emperour, when hee would have deposed Foelix, the Bishop, or have joyned with him Liberius the hereticke, V^us Deus, unus Christus* una fides, unus Episcopus; One God, one Christ, one faith, one Bishop, (quoth he.) Pretty is the fable of Demostenes, how the woolves made league of peace with the sheepe, so that the dogges might bee removed: but when the dogges were removed, the sheep were woorried: so the Divell maketh league with worldlings, so that they will put away their Ministers: but when they are removed, bee sure, the Diuell will woorry and devoure the soules of the people, as the woolves did the sheepe: For the great redde Dragon, that hath seven heads, and ten hornes, and seven crownes upon his heads, and who with his taile drawes down the third part of the starres of Heaven, and casts them to the earth, stands before the woman travelling with Child, to devoure the Child as soone as it is brought forth: For when the shepheard is smitten, the flocke will be scattered, and your adversary Mat. 26. 1 Pet. 5. 8. the Divell, as a roaring Lion, goeth about seeking to devoure. Well, of all the indignities offered to us, we will say as Mauritus said to Phocas, murdering his children, Videat Dominus, and judicet: So let God judge betwixt you and us: wee labour to save you, and you are like the dogge in the water, who biteth him by the hands, who would save him from drowning.
When Fulvius coquered over the French, and Scipio over Numantia, the people cried, (...), A Saviour, A Saviour: and the earth rebounded, and the birds of the ayre fell down dead, with the resound of the earth, and yet these saved but mens bodies: Ministers save mens soules. As wee cannot have trees without planting, 1 Tim. 4. 13. nor corne without sowing, nor houses without building: so wee cannot come to heaven without teaching: the clowds powre downe rayne and make the earth fruitfull, Ministers are the Ephes. 4. 20. Deuter. 32. clowds, and their doctrines as the dew to make our hearts fruitfull. Can a bird live without aire, or a fish without water, or a body without a soule? No more can the soule without the Word; It is Verbum vitae, the Word of life: Triplex est vita: there is a threefold life: Vitanaturae brutis peculiaris, a life of nature peculiar Iobn 6. Eccles. 2. Col 3. 3. Ephes. 4. 18. to beasts; Vita gloriae, Angelis: A life of glory proper to the Angels; Vita gratia, elect is: and life of grace to the elect; and this life is had by the Word of God. Pregnant are the similitudes, that the Holy Ghost useth in the Scriptures, where hee compareth Ministers to Fathers, to mothers, nurses, watchmen, 1 Cor. 4. 15. Gal. 4. Ezeeb. 3. 1 Reg. 13. Hebr. 13. 7. Apoc. 12. 2. and souldiers, overseers, starres. Children cannot bee without fathers, nor brought up without mothers, nor tended without nurses. Cities in warre cannot bee kept without watchmen, nor kingdomes without souldiers, nor men walk in the dark without sta-light. Solem? mundo tollunt, qui Verbum Dei tollunt: They take

the Sunne out of world, that take away the Word: they are the Without the light of the Ministery, all in darkenesse. light of the world, the salt of the earth, all would wander and ranckle in their affections, if they were not: they should bee as the men of Cimmeria, who never saw the Sunne; men should sit in the Church, as the Aegyptians did in their houses, not able to Exod. 10. Wisd. 5. 6. arise in three dayes. Men might say, We have erred from the light of trueth, the light of righteousnesse hath not shined unto us, and the Sunne of Vnderstanding rose not up uponus. Philip rejoiced, that Alexander was borne in the dayes of Arislotle; Socrates rejoiced that he was borne an Atheuian; and rejoice thou, that thou art a Christian, that thou livest in the dayes of a learned Ministery. The Queene of Sheba pronounced Salomons servants happy for hearing him; 1 Reg. 10. how happy then shall wee thinke our selves, that heare God speake to us by a Minister! O blessed men, that may heare God speake to us every Sunday, and every Thursday, for the increase of faith and repentance in every one of us! Blessed bee that day, and happy bee that houre, wherein God speaketh unto thee by a man. How happy was Galatia then? How did all the Churches count that a blessed Church? Philip thought Alexander happy, that hee was borne in the dayes of Aristotle: and wee thinke our selves unhappy, that wee are borne in the time of Light and doctrine: We wish a change, we wish Mariana tempora; we say, that it was a good world then, men loved one another: yet then they knew no love, no faith, no hope, no God, no Christ; they beleeved as the Church beleeved, and the Church beleeved, as they beleeve, and neither could tell what they beleeved. O blind times! o vile dayes! If a Prince should send an Ambassadour to Rebels, to proclaime pardon, and they should take and abuse him; would it not kindle the ire of the Prince? So standeth the case betwixt God and his people; Ministers being Gods Legats, Gods Harolds; men having runne all the dayes of their life the broad way, when death commeth, then they call for a Guide, but then it is too late, if Gods mercy bee not the more.



THE SEVEN AND THIRTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XXIII. 

And hate even the garment spotted in the flesh.
We^ ^^ust abstaine from all appearance of evill.



THis is the last exhortation that Saint Iude useth, to hate even the garment spotted in the flesh; that is, to hate not onely the wicked workes of the flesh, but also all things which are nigh unto it, all provocations, and inticements thereunto: and so Paul would have men not onely to abstaine from evill, but also from all shew of evill: Abstaine (saith hee) from all appearance of ^ Th^ss. 5. ^^. evill.
Oh the great zeale of Iude here, which ought to be a mirrour to us all! And surely if wee love God, wee cannot but love vertue which hee loveth, and hate sinne, even the garment spotted in the flesh, which hee hateth. Yee that love the Lord, hate evill, (saith the Prophet) he preserveth the soules of his Saints, and will deliver Psal. 97. 10. them from the hand of the wicked. Note the condition; If men will have their soules preserved; if they will bee freed and delivered from the wicked, they must hate evill; otherwise, no preservation of soules, no deliverance of them out of the hands of the wicked: they that sport and laugh at sinne, are fooles, and damned fooles, reprobate fooles, fooles in folio, fooles in print. The foole maketh a mocke of sinne (saith Salomon) and doth not know the greevousnesse thereof, nor Gods judgements against the Prov. 14. 9.

same. Doe wee laugh at Christs death? at that which made We must have no communion with the wicked. him sweate water and bloud? at that for which an Angell came from Heaven, to comfort him? At that which cost him his heart blood? Sumus in felle nequitiae: We are in the gall of bitternesse: What hearts have wee, of flesh or of flint? of folly Act. 8. 23. or of madnesse, that we can laugh at sinne? Wee feed of ashes (as Esa. 44. 20. Psal. 11. Apoc. 2. 2. the proverbe speaketh.) Vpon these men, God will raine snares, fire and brimstone, storme and tempest, this shall bee their portion to drinke. Oh how it pleased God, that the Ephesians hated the Nicolaitans! If that had not been, it is like, that Gods plague had fallen upon them, seeing they were falne from their first love: but this made amends for all. David would not suffer a vile man in his house, There shall no deceitfull person dwell in my house, hee that telleth Mat. 10. 1, 7, 8. lyes, shall not remaine in my sight: betimes will I destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all workers of iniquity from the Citie of God. David would not sit in the chaire of vile men; he hated the enemies of God. Doe not I hate them, oh Lord, that hate thee? Doe not I earnestly contend with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with an Psal. 1. 1. Psal. 139. 20. unfained hatred as they were mine utter enemies. Let all that speake wickedly against God, and take his Name in vaine, observe here, that they are no better than haters of God, and such as rise up against him. And further the Prophet, to worke in us an hatred of the wicked, hee saith, I have not sit with vaine persons, neither will Psal. 26. 4, 5. I goe with dessemblers: I have hated the companie of evill doers, and will not sit with the wicked. Now, if all that is written, is written for Rom. 15. 4. our learning, this teacheth us to have no communion with the wicked. Hereupon, when the Apostle had inveighed bitterly against fornication and all uncleanenesse, filthinesse, foolish talking and jesting; hee giveth immediately the Ephesians this charge, not to bee so deceived with vaine words, as to be companions with Ephes. 5. 6, 7. any defiled with the said evils. That which Salomon saith against making friendship with an angry man, and against going with Pro. 22. 24. a furious man, is likewise to be practised touching all other wicked and ungodly men. Iacob would not have his bones buried among Gen. 44. 29. the Idolaters, hee would then have shaken to have linked, and joyned, and eaten, and drunken with them. Paul would not have the Corinths eate with bad men, lest they should seeme to countenance them, If any (saith hee) that is called a brother, bee a Fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an 1 Cor. 5. 11. Extortioner, with such a one eate not. If that Christianity were amongst ^^ that ought to be, an open prophane evill man should be unto us as a Viper, or a serpent, the smell of him should be so greevous, as the ayre or smell of the plague. For sinne is the same to the soule, that the plague is to the body, rottennesse to the apple, saving that the plague hurteth but for a time, sinne for ever. For the worme dyeth not, and the fire never goeth Mar. 9. 44. out, that destroyeth the body, this destroyeth body and soule.

For tribulation and anguish shall bee upon every soule that doth Sinne is as contagious to the soule, as the plague to the body. evill.
Wicked men must be avoyded in respect Of God: Of our selves.
In respect of God, because they are Gods enemies, for so the Rom. 2. 9. Psalmist calleth them, saying, The wicked shall perish, and the enemies Psal. 37. 20. of the Lord shall consume as the fat of Lambes, even as the smoke shall they consume away. And againe, God will arise, and his enemies shall bee scattered (meaning the wicked.) If they be Gods enemies, it is Psal. 68. 1. fit that all good men should shunne and avoyd them. A subject will not have familiarity with a Traytour and Rebell against his Soveraigne: the wicked are Traitours and Rebels against God; wee ought therefore to have no familiarity with them.
Againe wicked men must be avoyded in respect of our selves, for they draw us into great danger; and the danger they draw us unto, is twofold.
The one concerning our outward, The other concerning our inward Estate.
Concerning our outward estate: how dangerous a thing it is to converse with the wicked; Let these two examples shew, and let them bee instar mille, in stead of a thousand: Iehoshaphat was in so great danger by joyning in warres with Achab, against the Aramites, that all the Aramites bent themselves against him (as supposing him to bee Achab) and that if hee had not in his extremity cryed out unto the Lord, hee had beene slaine in the battell.
A second example wee have in Ahaziah King of Iuda (himselfe being wicked) who went but to visit Ioram King of Israel (more wicked than himselfe) lying sicke of the wounds which the Syrians had given him, and it cost him his life: For the sword of Iehu smote him, and wounded him to death.
Concerning our inward danger, the Apostle saith thus, Evill 1 Cor. 15. 33. words, or evill communications (that is, often conversation with the wicked, noted by the plurall number) corrupt good manners: yea the Apostle is so severe in this point, that hee will not have a wicked person suffered in the Congregation, and therefore hee commandeth the incestuous Corinthian to bee cast out, that is, excommunicated; and hee giveth the reason, Know yee not that a 1 Cor. 5. 5. little leaven sowreth a whole lumpe? Intimating thereby, that one evill person might corrupt the whole Church; and a little Colloquintida marreth a whole messe of pottage; one scabbed sheepe 1 Reg. 4. 39. infecteth a flocke; one sparke of fire may burne an house; and one infected house may spoyle a Citie; one roote of bitternesse Hebr. 12. 15. suffered to spring up, may trouble and defile many: sinne is as contagious as any disease, and wee are as apt to take the contagion

of sinne, as of the plague. This knew David well enough, and We must hate sinne, because God hates it in all. therefore hee crieth out, Depart from me, yee wicked; keepe aloofe, come not neere me to infect my Royall person: For I tell you plainely, I will keepe the Commandements of my God. Even so, wee Psal. 16. should not brooke the society of them that bee vile and wicked, and hate to bee reformed, and cast Gods Words behind them. Psal. 50. 17.
But some will say, This is a doctrine of precisenesse; they say wee need not be so severe against sinners; peccata eorum sunt parva and pauca: their sinnes be but small and few. But small sinnes may wound the conscience, and damne us, if wee looke not to them, to strive against them. A mouse is but litle, yet killeth he an Elephant, if he get into his truncke; a Scorpion is little, yet able to sting a Lion unto death; the Leopard being great, is poysoned with an head of garlicke; a little spittle of a man fasting, will kill a serpent: and the Divell by little sinnes will wound us to death. The sinne, and the coate of the sinne is to be hated, quoth Ambrose. Lib. 6. Hexameron. A reason may be drawne from the blessed Trinity. God the Father hateth sinne, The foolish shall not stand in his sight, and hee hateth them that worke iniquity; Therefore we his children must hate Psal. 5. 5. it. God the Sonne hateth sinne, saith the Apostle, Thou hast loved righteousnesse, and hated iniquity; therefore we his fellow brethren, Hebr. 1. 9. fellow heires must hate it, that wee may be like our elder brother. God the Holy Ghost hateth it, therefore it is said, Greeve not the Spirit, by whom we are sealed unto the day of Redemption: Ephes. 4. Gen. 3. 15. Therefore wee the temples of him must hate it: wee must hate the serpent, and the seed of the serpent. By the hatred of God against the sinne of Achan, judge of all sinne. As great as the Eagle is, yet one may see her vertue in a feather: for it consumeth all feathers; as mighty as the fire of Aetna is, yet one may feele the heate of it in a sparke; as huge as the sea is, yet one may taste the saltnesse of it in a droppe; as great as the Whale is, yet we may feele the power of him in one breath. Hercules body was knowne by the length of his foote, and wee by this sinne of Achan, may know Gods hatred against all sinnes. For the theft of Achan buried close under the ground, brake forth such a stinch in the nostrils of God, as that his garment brought the plague to the whole host; and God no lesse hateth it in all men. Finely saith Augustine, Deus in non renatis odit and peccata and personas: God hateth in the not regenerate both their sinnes, and also their persons; in renatis vero odit peccata, non personas: in the regenerate hee truly hateth their sinnes, but not their persons, as the physician hateth the disease of the sicke man, not his person, or body of the sicke.
Againe, From whence commeth sinne, but from the Divell? What meane we then to joyne with Satan our enemy, and the enemy of God? Hee that committeth sinne, is of the Divell; for, the Divell sinneth from the beginning: Resist the Divell therefore, give 1 Iohn 3. 8.

no place to him: He is an adversary, and shall wee love him? Hee Sinne must be hated, as it tends to Gods dishonor. is a serpent, and shall we trust him? Hee is a murderer, and shall we intertaine him? Sin is furthered by him: therefore let us hate it. I grant, that some enemies are to bee loved, because they are our enemies onely: whereupon saith our Saviour, Love your Iam. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Apoc. 10. ^ohn 8. 44. Mat. 5. 44. enemies, doe good to them that hate you; pray for them that persecute you. And some are to be hated, because they are Gods enemies, and the friends of Satan; so Iohn the sonne of Hanani the Seer went out to meete Iehosaphat, and said unto him, Wouldest thou helpe the 2 Chro. 19. 2. wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? Therefore for this thing the wrath of the Lord is upon thee. And so the wrath and judgement of God is over all those that support the wicked, and will not shew themselves enemies to all such as hate the Lord.
Wicked men must be hated, but yet for their evill, not as the evill concerneth any way us, but as the evill tendeth to the dishonour of God. Simeon and Levi hated the Sychemites for the Gen. 34. 25. sinne of their sister Dinah: but this hatred sprang not, in that God was dishonoured by this sinne, but from a regard of themselves, because that hereby they might receive some disgrace. So Absalon is said to have hated his brother Amnon, because hee had forced his sister Tamar, and two yeeres after, he murdered his 2 Sam. 23. 22. brother for this fact; this hatred of Absalon against Amnon, though it were for Amnons wickednesse, yet it was not good, but wicked, for the originall of this his hatred was not simply the sinne of Amnon, as committed against God, but because Absalon had some speciall disgrace hereby; For Tamar was borne to David of the same woman that was mother also to Absalon. But we must hate the wicked, for their dishonoring of God, and not suffer them to goe unreproved nor unpunished. Immmunity and impunity cause much iniquity. I would learne this; Are Papists the friends of God, or his enemies? If they bee friends; Why have wee professed otherwise these many yeeres? If they bee enemies, then doe wee well not to suffer them. You know what Christ said to the Church of Pergamus, I have a few things against Apoc. 2. 14. thee, because thou hast there, them that maintaine the doctrine of Balaam, which taught Balac to put a stumbling blocke before the children of Israel, Vers. 15. that they should eate of things sacrificed unto Idols, and commit fornication: even so hast thou them that maintaine the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. So we have some among us that maintaine the doctrine of Balaam, and the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, and therefore do well to reprove them, and punish them. The posterity of Saul being rooted out, the famine ceased. Baal Prophets 1 Sam. 15. 2 Sam. 21. 1. 1 Reg. 18. 1 Reg. 20. 42. being put to death, raine and blessing came from God. Remember Gods speech to Ahab, Because thou hast let goe a man out of thy hands, whom I appointed to dye, thy life shall goe for his life, and thy people for his people. This was the sinne of the false prophets: They did strengthen the hands of the wicked. I would it were not the sinne of Ier. 23. 14.

some in this time. I would this sentence were written in the fore-heads Wee must not suffer our selves to bee defiled in body or soule. of our Rulers, or on the hemmes of their garments, as had the Pharises; trust not a Iesuite, a Romish priest, beare not with him, flatter him not, hee waiteth but his oportunity. If Cain may get Abel in the field, he will murder him; if Ismael may get Godeliah fitly, hee dieth for it; Designant oculis ad caedem unumquemque nostrum, Gen. 4. Ier. 42. de vrbis and orbis exitu cogitant: They have appointed to the slaughter every one of us, and they thinke of nothing, but of the ruine, destruction of City, Countrey and of the whole world. The adversaries of Iuda and Benjamin, notwithstanding their faire speeches to Zorobabel, and the rest of the Fathers, Wee will build with you: Wee will sacrifice with you; yet their Ezra. 4. drift was to hinder the building. The Herodians faire speech to our Saviour, Master, wee know that thou art true, and teachest the way Mat. 22. of God truly, etc. was, but to intrappe Christ our Saviour: So all their shewes of love and kindnes towards us, is but to deceive, they waite but for a day, and then our bodies shall be made faggots for their fires. What though the fals-horned Lambs whom they serve, call themselves, Pius, Clemens, Innocent, Bonifacius, yet I may resemble them to the two theeves of Naples; the one called himselfe Pater noster, the other Ave Maria, and yet under that colour they robbed an 116. men: so these robbe many poore soules, not of their substance only, but of their lives. But to leave this, we must hate the garment spotted in the flesh. We must be like unto them of the Church of Sardis, which defiled not their garments; Apoc. 3. 4. wee must by no meanes defile our selves through sinne, which by the Metaphor of a garment spotted in the flesh is understood. The Babylonians, whom God sent to destroy the men Lament. 4. 14. of Sion, would not touch their garments, lest they should bee defiled. If a man beare holy things in the skirt of his garment, and with Hag. 2. 13. the skirt doth touch the bread, oyle, wine, or meate, shall it be holy? the Prophet said, No. If a polluted man or person touch any thing of these, shall it be uncleane? And the Priest answered, it should bee uncleane. For the thing which of it selfe is good, cannot make another thing so; but contrarily, the uncleane and not pure in heart, doe defile and spot those things, and make them odious unto God, which else are good and godly. Well, as Iacob exhorted his houshold to Gen. 35. 2. clense themselves, and change their garments: so must wee clense our selves from all filthinesse of the flesh and of the spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. and put on our wedding garment of holinesse and righteousnes: So sh^ll wee hate the garment spotted in the flesh. Wee must not be like the wicked, which love the garment spotted in the flesh, and therefore drinke in iniquity like water; but wee must fly from sinne, as a serpent: the wicked are like Storks, who feed on venimous things, and make their neast in dung, and are full of sinne, as the Leopard is of spots: but wee must hate sinne, as Amnon hated Thamar, with a double hatred. Why doth God hate the

Divell, but for sinne? by creation hee is an Angell of light, by Sinne onely hated of God, and should bee of the godly. substance a spirit intellectuall, in understanding more profound then any man; yet God hateth him for no other cause but sinne, of which if hee were ridde, hee were a more glorious and lovely creature, then any man, yet sinne maketh us like the Divell, and Psal. 8. no difference, but that hee hath much sinne; and hee is all Iohn. 8. 44. sinne, wee are sinnefull, and hee is sinne it selfe, malice, envy it selfe; so vile is sinne, that nothing could purge it, but Christs blood, yea so vile it is, that hell and everlasting torments 1 Pet. 1. 18. are prepared for it, transit voluptas ejus, non mansura, manet poena non terminatura: the pleasure of sinne passeth, and abideth not, the punishment remaineth, and endeth not. It was a divine voice of a heathen, that if there were no God to punish him, no Divell to torment him, no hell to burne him, no man to see him, yet Seneca. would hee not sinne, for the uglinesse of sinne, and the griefe of his owne conscience. Hate sinne therefore, and hate the Divell, hate death, hate damnation. Si scirem Deos mihi condonaturos, and homines ignoraturos, non peccarem tamen, ob solam peccati turpitudinem: If I knew certainly, that the Gods would pardon mee, and that men were ignorant, and knew nothing of my transgression, yet would I not sinne, because of the onely turpitude of sinne.
We marvell, that things are so out of frame, that sinne doth so abound; but what is the cause? Even our bearing with sinne: for how can the ship bee qniet, so long as Ionas is in it? Moses Exod. 10. 26. would not leave an hoofe in Aegypt; and we must not suffer sinne to goe unreproved. All the vessels of Baal must bee burnt without the City; the very gold that was upon the Idols, was abomination; 2 Reg. 23. 4. and so sinne is an abomination to God.
And heere by the way learne to kill sinne in thy selfe, that God may spare thee; Mactemus porcum gulae, jugulemus hircum luxuriae, occid^mus Leonem iracundiae, extinguamus serpent^m hypocresio's, conteramus c^lubrum invidiae, suffocemus Canem concupiscentiae: Let us slay the hogge of gluttony, kill the goate of Leachery, murder the Lion of wrath, extinguish the serpent of hypocrisie, teare in pieces the Adder of envy, strangle the dogge of concupiscence; yea Mortifie all our earthly members, as fornication, uncleannesse, unnaturall lusts, evill concupiscence, and Covetousnesse, which is idolatry. Yea and Let us crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts: Col. 3. 5. Gal. 5. 1 Cor. 9. Yee and Let us chasten our bodies, and bring them in subjection. Yea and Let us deny our selves, and take up our crosse, and follow Christ.
Againe, Iude here nameth vestem maculatam, the spotted garment; so the sinne must bee ha^ed, not the person that sinneth; the person must bee loved, the sinne hated: For the person is made after the Image of God, and Gods Image must not be hated: the person is redeemed with Christs blood; and seeing hee Gen. 9. loveth them, wee must love them. Againe, hee can make of

Woolves, Lambes, Exvasisirae, vasa misericordiae: of vessels of Reprobates, not to bee loved or prayed for. wrath, vessels of mercy: therefore seeke thou to save him, and instruct them with meekenesse, proving, if God at any time will give them repentance. Quis potest odisse hominem, cujus naturam and similitudinem videt in humanitate Christi? Who can hate a man, whose nature 1 Tim. 1. 15. 2 Tim. 2. 25. August. and similitude he may behold in the humanity of Christ? Deum odit, qui hominem odit: he hateth God, that hateth man: therefore amorem cum hominibus, odium cum vitijs: have love with men, hatred with their vices: so it is said of Ephesus; that they hated the deeds of Apoc. 2. Gen. 49. the Nicolaitans, not their persons, but their errors: so Iacob cursed the wrath of his sonnes, but blessed their persons: so Paul having bitterly enveighed against the Corinths, yet loved the men, and spake it, not to shame them; for so hee himselfe saith, I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved children to admonish you: 1 Cor. 4. 15. thus would hee have us deale with a bad man, with an excommunicate man, not to account him an enemy, but admonish 2 Thess. 3. 15. 1 Cor. 5. him as a brother; hee would have his body punished, that his soule may be saved.
But yet in some cases the wicked may bee hated and cursed, when they shew open signes of a reprobate mind; such God hateth: so saith the Prophet, Thou art not a God that loveth wickednesse, Psal. 5. 4, 5. neither shall evill dwell with thee; the foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hatest all them that worke iniquity. Such must not bee prayed for. The Church therefore prayed not for Iulian, but against him; they knew him to bee a reprobate. For there are two Iudgements; the judgement of Faith, and Love.
The first is in God, the second is left to us: Multi enim lupi sunt intus: there bee many woolves within, if wee respect the first; Et multaeoves foris; many sheep without, if wee respect the latter: and yet wee may judge, when men give signes of reprobation, and hate such persons: thus David hated the wicked, and bade them be packing; Away from mee, yee wicked, I will keep the Commandements Psal. 119. 115. of my God. And againe, I have not haunted with vaine persons, neither kept company with the dissemblers: I have hated the assembly of the evill, Psal. 26. 4, 5. and have not companied with the wicked. But to leave this.
Againe, it is not inough to leave sinne, but wee must leave it with a conscience, with a hatred of it; many leave it to get credit: and some, lest they suffer losse by it, but not of conscience to God: and of many it may bee said, they leave not sinne, but sinne leaveth them: the drunkard leaveth drinking, because his stomacke is decayed; the Adulterer whoredome, for that the strength of nature faileth him; the quarreller leaves sighting, for that hee is crooked and lame, hee cannot bestirre him, as in times heretofore; the covetour leaves oppressing, because hee can oppresse no longer: but all this is nothing; For the body must not onely leave the act of sinne, but the heart must leave

the desire of sinne: Abhorre that which is evill, and cleave unto that Sinne must be hated for conscience. which is good. And againe, wee must cast away the works of darkenesse, and put on the armour of light: Thus must wee leave sinne of conscience with an hatred of it, else it is nothing. But many hold Rom. 12. 9. Rom. 13. 12. sinne, as Cinegerus the Athenian held the ships of his enemies, loden with the rich spoiles of his Countrey, and now ready to hoise saile, and to be gone: First, hee held them with his hands, till his hands were cut off, then with his stumpes, till his armes were cut off; then with his teeth, till his head was cut off; and when all was done, still he held them in desire: So many, when God hath cut off all occasions of sinne, yet they hold it in heart; the old man is sorry, that he cannot be young, to play the wanton; the prisoner, that he cannot be abroad, to steale and robbe; the sicke man, that hee cannot revell nor rowte among his companions; the disgraced man, that hee hath not authority to oppresse; the envious man, that hee cannot revenge: if they might live ever, they would sinne ever; they are sorry they cannot offend God any more; like Iulian, who sorrowed at his death, because hee could not bee revenged of the Galilaean: but wee must leave our sinnes, and be angry, greeved, and displeased with our selves, for our sinnes. Thus Paul was angry with himselfe, with his flesh, with his spirit, and cals himselfe Wretch: Yea miserable, miserable wretch: for thus he saith, Miserable wretch that I am, who Rom. 7. 24. shall deliver me from this body of sinne? Hee speakes in the excesse, hee cals himselfe the first, the greatest sinner: but when he nameth 1 Tim. 1. 15. 1 Cor. 15. his vertue, hee speakes in the defect, that hee is the least Apostle, the first and greatest sinner, but the last and least Apostle. Note his zeale against sinne! If men could weepe teares of blood for their sinne, if they could die a thousand times in one day for very griefe, yet could they not bee greeved enough; if thou knewest sinne, and the reward of sinne, in the damned, thou wouldest not sinne willingly for ten thousand worlds, for the wages of sinne is death: not onely the death of the body, temporall Rom. 6. 23. death, but also the death of body and soule, everlasting death; when men shall alwayes be a dying and never dead; For there men shall seeke for death, and shall not find it. We hate Iudas, Herod, Pilate. Apoc. 9. But hate thine owne manners: thy sinnes with theirs, were the nayles, the speares, the thornes that pearced the Lord Iesus. All Hebr. 10. say that Christ died for sinne, that hee was wounded for our sinnes, and smitten for our transgressions; yet all make him a Esay 53. patrone of their sinnes: the theefe makes him the receivour; the murderer, his sanctuary; the whoremonger, his bawde; they live in sinne, and yet they say Christ died for sinne; kill sinne, Calui^ in Gal. 6. 1. and kill the Divell; kill sinne and kill death, the first and second death. Hee that will encounter with Samson, must cut off his lockes; hee that will encounter with a serpent, must pull out his sting: Now death is a serpent, and his sting is sinne: one may

put a serpent in his bosome, when his sting is out: and wee may Earth-quakes upon extraordinary occasions. let death into our bosome, when sinne is gone, the venim and poison gone.
But to draw us to a greater hatred of sinne, let me apply this late judgement of the earth-quake unto you. These judgements Anno Domini. 1601. Decembr. 24. have never beene, but upon great and rare occasions, and for horrible and notorious sinnes, to note the wonderfull power of God, and to presage some rare events, some strange plagues to fall upon the world. When God gave the Law, the earth shooke. God did it in fearefull manner, to teach Israel, that if the earth shooke, when God spake; much more should their hearts shake. The like earth quake was at the restoring of the Law, in the dayes of Elias. And indeed to whom is the Word of God powerfull and 1 Reg. 19. Esay. 66. 25. profitable, but to him that tre^bleth at it? Of these former judgements David speaketh, O God, when thou wentest forth before the Psal. 68* 7. 8. people, when thou wentest thorow the wildernesse, the earth shooke, and the Heavens dropped at the presence of God: even Sinai was moved at the presence of God, even the God of Israel.
Againe, in the horrible rebellion of Corah, Dathan and Abiram; Numb. 16. the one in the Church, the other in the Commonwealth; the one against the Lords Priest, the other against the Lords Magistrate; there was an earthquake, to teach that hell shall swallow us, as it did them, if we rebell so. Of all judgements, these most manifest the power of God, and foreshew his great anger: so David spake, The earth trembled and quaked, the foundations also of the mountaines moved and shooke, because hee was angry: smoke went out of Psal. 28. 7, 8, 9. his nostrils, and a consuming fire out of his mouth; coales were kindled thereat, he bowed the Heavens, and came downe, and darkenes was under his feete, etc. When Vzziah would usurpe the Priests office, and Zach. 14. ^. confound Church and Commonwealth, and make a Chaos of all religion and goodnesse, God shooke the earth; and when Iericho fell, it is thought by the learned, to have bene by an earth quake. Iosh. 6. And when the wicked Iewes crucified the Lord of glory, all creatures Mat. 27. shewed their disliking; the Sunne was eclypsed, the Heavens lost their light, the starres were moved, the vaile of the Temple rent asunder, the graves opened, the dead rose, the earth quaked: O dura, and obdurata, and indurata corda hominum, quae non contremiscunt! O durate and obdurate, and indurate hearts of men, that cannot tremble! David speaketh of the rare Iudgement of God in this case, and thereby stirreth up all men to feare God. Shall the wildernes quake, and shall not our hearts quake? Absit. The voice of the Lord maketh the wildernes to tremble: and shall not Psal. 26. 5. wee tremble? In the great persecution of the Church, S. Iohn speaketh of an earthquake. Let us not thinke, that these judgements Apoc. 6. 12. bee ordinary, and rise altogether of naturall causes, for great hurt hath ensued. The three famous Cities of Asia, Laodicea for wealth, Hierapolis for learning, and Colossos for strength,

were all overthrowne with earth-quakes. Constantinople was tormented with shaking a whole yeere together. In the dayes of Boniface Earth-quakes, fore-runners of fearefull Iudgements. there happened an Earth-quake, and after followed such a plague of scabbes and botches, as a man could hardly tell his owne dead from other mens. Burdeam: was mightily shaken with Anno. 741. an earth-quake. And in the yeere of our Lord, 1171. the City Tripolis, a great part of Damascus in Antiochia, and Halapre, the chiefe City of Loradin, and other Cities of the Saracens, either perished utterly, or were wonderfully defaced. And An. 1539. in divers places, as at Venice and Flore^ce, there were great earth-quakes which did much hurt. In Anno 1579. April the 6. an earth-quake tolled the great bell at Westminster, and threw downe a piece of Dover Castle: and part of Sutten Church in Kent; to note unto us, that our sinnes overburden the earth, the earth grones, and would be eased: God shakes his hand, the earth trembles, man is carelesse: beware it gapes not, and swallow thee up quicke. When Arrius heresy was entertained in Antioch, God punished it with earth-quakes, to give a Caveat how wee admit of heresy: and six great Cities in Greece, in the dayes of Tiberius; and twelve Cities of Campania in the dayes of Constantine. And wee all now might have beene swallowed up, if Gods mercy had not bene the Anno. 1601. greater. Blessed bee God who kept us; and hee keepe us evermore. But surely this earth-quake prognosticateth that God is comming to Iudgement. As the City of Rome was never shaken, but it presaged some strange event. The yeere before the Carthaginian warre, there were 57. earthquakes at Rome, but there presently followed a lamentable warre. After an earth-quake in Venice, there followed a famine; and upon the necke of that, a plague, which beginning farre North, spred over the whole earth, but so raged at Venice, as scarcely one lived of an hundred: but as a wonder lasteth but nine dayes, so this earth-quake will be forgotten of many. When Ananias fell downe dead suddenly Act. 5. at the feete of Peter, all the Church trembled: and this should make us all tremble; For in my judgement it is a forerunner of Christs comming, or else of some fearefull judgement of warre, Mat. 26. 7. Pliny. or famine, or of pestilence. For an heathen man could say, that earth-quakes portend and foretell fearefull matters ensuing. And note that God sent it at this time, to begin our Christmas with it so mis-spent of all men. The Heathen had their Floralia, Bacchanalia, Cerealia; they went naked, surfeted and were drunken, and they light torches to Proserpina, going naked; and what else doe wee? Wee eate and drinke, and rise up to play, and goe up and down showting and revelling. Hath the grace of God appeared to Tit. 2. 11. this end? Brethren, hath the Lord Iesus gotten twelve dayes of his Father, for prophanenesse, swearing, revelling, etc? I am ashamed that the Turke, the Iew, the Persian should know this: Propter nos male audit nomen Christi: The name of God is blasphemed Rom. 2. 24.

among the Gentiles through us. The heathen had their Cerealia, Fearefull earth-quakes and comets warne to repent. (as I said before) wherein they surfeted to Ceres; and their Bacchanalia, wherein they were drunken to the honour of Bacchus; they had their Floralia, wherein they were idle, and gave themselves to lust and Venerie. Wherein differ our Christmas feasts from theirs; it being spent only in eating, drinking, nay gluttony, and drunkennes, riot, cards, dice, swearing, swaggering, toying, fooling and what not? Is this to celebrate the Nativity of the Lord Iesus? Erubescat Sol, and confundatur Luna: Let the Sunne blush, and let the Moone bee ashamed; Did the Heavenly souldiers thus? did the shepheards thus? did Mary thus? We make melodie, Luk. 2. Ephes. 5. 19. but not to the Lord, our rejoycing is not good, God will turne our feasts into mournings. 1 Cor. 5. 6. Amos. 8.
To this riotous time God fitted this earth-quake; a rare worke of God, the earth being seventeen hundred miles thick, and odde; it being 800. miles and odde, to the Center, as saith Munster, what a work of God is it to shake the whole Globe, the whole wombe of the earth, being so mighty? A great earth-quake there was in the raigne of King Henry the sixth, thorow the world in the even of S. Michael, which continued two houres with thunder and lightning; so that the beasts rored, and the fowles of the ayre cryed out: but in this Queenes time there have beene two earth-quakes, a thing not observed in the raigne of one Prince of this Land this five hundred yeeres. A new starre appeared in Heaven in this Queenes raigne, Anno. 15. that was never seene before: 26. acres of ground removed in Hartfordshire; and three acres at another time, in Devonshire; strange monsters have appeared; strange Comets have beene seene. Hate your sinnes, the Iudge is at the doore.



THE EIGHT AND THIRTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XXIIII. 

Now unto him, that is able to keepe you, that yee fall not, etc.
We can neither stand nor rise being fallen, without Christ.



THis is the Epilogue, the conclusion, the last part of this Epistle; and it containeth two things.
First, A commending them to God and his Grace.
And secondly, A celebration of the name and praises of God.
The first is double, for hee commendeth them two wayes to God: for this life, and the life to come.
Againe, for this life two wayes, first, that they fall not, but persist and stand in the grace begun.
Secondly, that they may bee pure, perfect, absolute untill the day of Christ.
Lastly, for the other life, that they may bee glorious lambs, and not goats; sonnes, and not bastards; citizens, and not strangers; built on the foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, Iesus Christ Ephes. 2. 20. himselfe being the chiefe corner stone: that they may follow the Lambe on mount Sion, and there sing the songs of their joy, Apoc. 14. 3. which none can understand, save the hundred forty and foure thousand, which were bought from the earth.
Now in the first part of this prayer, Saint Iude noteth two things.

First, the weaknesse of man ready to fall. All our sufficiencie is of God.
Secondly, the power of God able to keepe us.
Touching our weakenesse, we neither rise when wee are fallen, nor stand when wee are risen, of our selves; all is of God: for we are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency 2 Cor. 3. 5. is of God. Cum Christo nil nobis deficit: With Christ nothing is wanting unto us, for as Paul saith, I am able to do al things, through the Phil. 4. 13. helpe of Christ, which strengtheneth me. Sine Christo, nil nobis sufficit: and without Christ nothing is sufficient for us; For as the branch cannot Iohn 15. 4, 5. beare fruit of it selfe, except it abide in the vine, no more can yee, except yee abide in mee: I am the vine, yee are the branches; hee that abideth in mee, and I in him, the same bringeth foorth much fruit. In eo omnia possumus, absque eo nil possumus: in him we can doe all things, without him we can doe nothing. And therefore Paul willeth us to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, for all our sufficiencie Ephes. 6. 10. Iohn 15. 5. Psal. 18. 1, 2. is of God. Hence is it, that David saith unto God, I love thee dearely, oh Lord my Strength; the Lord is my Rocke, and my Fortresse, etc.
Wee can neither beginne, nor continue, nor make an end, of our selves, but by God: therefore Paul commendeth the Churches to God ever, as hee onely that keepeth them, that the whole worke of our salvation may bee ascribed unto him: Initium, incrementum, and finis: the beginning, the increase, and the end. Wee are of him in Christ Iesus, who of God is made unto us Wisedome, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. and Righteousnesse, and Sanctification, and Redemption, that according as it is written, He that rejoyceth, let him rejoyce in the Lord. Wherein hee noteth three things; What wee are of our selves; what in God; and the end of all, that God may have the glory. Thus Paul commendeth the Church of Thessalonica to God, saying: Now the very God of Peace sanctifie you throughout, and I 1 Thess. 5. 23. pray God, that your whole spirit, and soule and body may bee kept blamelesse, unto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ: and thus he commended the Church of Ephesus at Miletum to God, saying, Now brethren, I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace, which is Act. 20. 32. able to build further, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. And thus hee commended the Church of Rome to God, To him now that is of power to stablish you according to Rom. 16. 25. my Gospell, and preaching of Iesus Christ, by the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world beganne, etc. And thus did the Apostle commend the Church of the Iewes to God, whether it was Paul, or Luke, or Barnabas, it skilleth not: The God of peace (saith hee) which brought againe from the dead our Lord Iesus, the great Heb. 13. 20, 21. Shepheard of the sheepe, through the bloud of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in all good workes, to doe his Will, working in you that which is pleasant in his sight, through Iesus Christ.
Here by the way, let mee answere one cavill in Popery: they urge, that wee are bidden to stand fast, to grow in grace,

and in the knowledge of the Lord Iesus, to goe forward, to Wee cannot but fall, except we bee preserved. continue.
I answere, that all those places are meant conditionally, if God doth assist us with his Spirit: Sit unus contextus instar mille: Let one context bee in stead of a thousand; as namely, that of Pauls to the Thessalonians, where hee telleth them, that it is God which worketh in us both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. 2 Thes. 1. Psal. 4. 1. He biddeth them worke, yet he explaneth it by and by, that it is God that worketh. Agimus passive, quatenus e coelis suggeritur facultas; Calvin. agis and ageris, and tunc bene agis, cum a bono ageris Spiritu; Wee worke passively, because wee are holpen from Heaven, power is ministred unto thee; thou workest, and art wrought, and then thou workest well, when thou art wrought of the good Spirit: so Paul ascribed the rising and the standing of the Philippians to God, I am perswaded (saith Paul) that he, that hath begunne this good Phil. 1. 6. worke in you, will performe it, untill the day of Christ Iesus: And writing to the Corinthians, hee saith, That God shall confirme them to the end, that they may be blamelesse in the day of our Lord Iesus Christ. 1 Cor. 1. 8. To that end, Christ prayed for the Apostles, saying, Holy Father, Iohn 17. 11, 12, 15. keepe them in thy name, even them whome thou hast given mee, that they may bee one, as wee are: while I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gavest me, have I kept: I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou keepe them from evill. If then the Papists should use these words tenne thousand times (Stand fast) and againe, Continue; tenne thousand times would I retort upon them, that wee cannot stand fast, wee cannot continue, but by God: We flye not with our owne wings, we swimme not in our owne barke; not nature, but grace: not man, but God, doth all in the worke of salvation. Wee stand not of our selves, in our owne strength, but in God. Leviores sumus vanitate: Wee Psal. 62. are lighter then vanity it selfe. If God kept us not, wee should fall every day, every houre, every moment; so great are our temptations. Quomodo stabit debilis inter tot fortes homines? How can a weake man stand betweene so many strong men? homuncio inter tot fortes Gigantes? a litle dwarfe, between so many strong Giants? ^ndus, inter tot armatos? a naked man, betweene so many armed men? Caecus inter tot laqueos? a blind man between so many snares? Viator, inter tot fures? a traveller, betweene so many theeves? Mortalis, inter tot immortales and immundos spiritus? a mortall man, betweene so many immortall and uncleane spirits? For wee wrastle Ephes. 6. 12. not against flesh and blood, that is, principally and chiefely: for our most mortall enemies are more than flesh and blood, more in number, greater in power, craftier in their wiles, or longer continuance; more envious, malicious, cruell, as namely, against principalities, against powers, and against the worldly governours, the Princes of the darkenesse of this world, against spirituall wickednesses, which are in the high places. Hee cals them Principalities, because

they have great rule and dominion, not so much over other Our enemies many and powerfull. Divels, as over wicked men; and calls them Powers, to shew, that their principality is not a meere titular matter, but is armed with power, so as they are able to doe great matters.
He cals them worldly governours, to shew over whom the Divell hath government; not over the elect, but over the world, the reprobates of the world.
He cals them spirituall wickednesse, to declare their nature, that they are spirits, and that they bee evill, and malicious: the words in the originall signify, spirituals of wickednesse, or spirits of wickednesse, that is, most monstrous wicked spirits: these are they against whom wee warre and fight, how can wee stand against them of our selves? Nam illi sunt astuti, nos fatui: they are crafty, wee are foolish; illi fortes, nos debiles: they strong, wee weake: illi experti, nos inexperti: they expert, wee unexpert: illi vigilantes, nos somnolenti: they watching, wee sleepy: illi spiritus, nos caro: they Ephes. 6. 14. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Apoc. 12. cap. 10. Luk. 11. Iohn. 12. 1 Cor. 4. spirit, we flesh: the armour therefore is called the Armour of God, not our armour, but his. The Divell is ever described mighty, and wee weake: to this end hee is called, Leo rugiens: a roaring Lion; Draco volans: a flying Dragon: (...): that old serpent: homo fortis: a strong man: princeps mundi: the prince of the world: Deus mundi: the God of the world: it is therefore the miraculous grace of God, that hee killeth not our soules every houre: for God would have us to live both lives, the naturall and supernaturall: As concerning the naturall life; from the soule, the naturall powers of understanding, will, and perceiving flow: as touching the supernaturall, from grace, prayer, thankesgiving, zeale, love, repentance, mortification doe proceed; and this is called, The life of God: if God withdraw his grace, wee fall presently, even the best men. Peter a notable Apostle, yet fell Ephes. 4. 18. Mat. 26. Ier. 2. 14. for all his brags, at the voice of a girle. Ieremy a worthy Prophet, yet grew desperate: hee that foyled our first parents standing Gen. 3. upon legges of brasse, would soone foyle us, standing upon legges of clay: it is as great a matter to resist temptations, being moved unto it, as for dry wood and flaxe to resist fire being put to it, it is supernaturall in the one, so is it in the other, for us to resist sinne: therefore pray as Christ said: Watch and pray, Mat. 26. 41. that yee enter not into temptation: The fish is not more taken in the nette, nor the bird in the snare, than wee of the Divell; soone hee Iohn 13. 2. entred into the heart of Iudas; soone he filled Ananias his heart; quickly he tempted David, to number the people; and quickly Act. 5. will hee overthrow us, unlesse God keepe vs, that wee fall not.
But to make further use of this doctrine; S. Iude here intimateth unto us, that of our selves wee are ready to fall; our building by nature is upon the sand, not upon the rocke, our shields and swords are of blotting paper, not of steele; our wings like

Icarus, are of waxe: All which I speake to humble the pride of None can presume of his owne strength, but must fly to Prayer. flesh, and blood, that no flesh rejoyce in Gods presence. To which end Paul applieth his speech; Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed, that hee fall not. Adam fell in Paradise, Iudas in the schoole of our Saviour; the Angels from heaven; and doe wee thinke to stand of our selves? No, no. Doest thou trust in 1 Cor. 10. 12. Gen. 3. Mat. 27. 2 Pet. 2. 4. 1 Reg. 11. Iudg. 15. thy wisdome? None was ever wiser than Salomon, yet was he deceived. Doest thou trust in thy strength? None was ever stronger than Samson, yet was hee vanquished, doest thou trust in thy stablenesse and constancy? None more stable, more constant than Peter, yet hee fell; For hee that said unto Christ, I will dye with Mat. 26. thee, before I deny thee; denied him thrice, and every time more fearefully than other. Doest thou trust in thy riches? None richer than the Epulo, and yet hee is in hell in torments. God saith unto Luk. 16. all, Let not the rich man glory in his riches, nor the wiseman in his wisdome, nor the strong man in his strength. O pray to God for perseverance, trust not to thy selfe, bee not proud of thy continuance in the faith; thou mayest fall: when thou seest so many fall, suspect thy selfe, insult not over them; but follow the advice of the Apostle, Brethren, if any of you bee overtaken with any fault, you that Gal. 6. 1. are spirituall, helpe to restore him in the spirit of meekenesse; considering thy selfe, lest thou also bee tempted. Noli superbire, sed time: Bee not Rom. 11. Phil. 12. proud, but feare: as hee said unto the Romanes; yea: Let us worke out our salvation with trembling and with feare. O tremble, tremble, tremble, thou mayest fall. O double and redouble, and triple, and multiply thy prayers unto God, for his assistance; when thou seest the dragons tayle cast downe so many starres, so many learned Apoc. 12. 5. teachers, rare men in Church and commonwealth, say to thy selfe, Am I better than all these? am I wiser than Salomon? meeker than Moses; patienter than Iob? zealouser than Elias? godlier than David? humbler than Paul? yet Salomon was deceived, Moses spake unadvisedly, Iob cursed the day wherin he was borne, 1 Reg. 11. Psal. 106. Iob 3. and the night, wherin it was said, A man child is conceived; Elias was almost desperate; It is enough, Lord, take away my life; Paul was proud of his revelations, and besought God thrice; David fell by 1 Reg. 17. 2 Cor. 12. 2 Sam. 12. Bathsheba. Have all these fallen? and shall I stand for ever? Hath God made me a lease, a grant of his grace, without impeachment of waste? No, I am weake, like a broken hedge, like a tortering wall, Immo in hac carne non habitat bonum: Yea in this flesh of mine Rom. 7. 18. there dwelleth no good thing. Beda, Venerable Beda maketh mention of foure effects of sinne, that is, of our originall fall in Adam.

Infirmity. Ignorance. Malice. Concupiscence.

Infirmity, or weakenes, is in the body.
Ignorance, in the minde.
Malice, in the will.

Concupiscence in the liver, or in the affections of the sensitive Our pronenes to fall, comes from our originall corruption. soule. Vndique ergo labimur, nusquam tuti sumus: we fall therefore every way, and we are safe no way.
Augustine said of himselfe, and the rest of the godly, Quid sum ego, sine te, Domine? What am I without thee, o Lord? And againe Aug. lib. 4. confess. in his Soliloquies: Quod cecidi, fuit in me: That I fell, it was of my selfe; quod surrexi and steti, ex te fuit, Domine: That I rose and stood, this came from thee, o Lord; thou hast opened mine eyes, and I see, that a temptation and a warfare is the life of man upon the earth: no man living is justified in thy sight, for if there bee any good thing in us, great or small, it is of thee, and it is thy gift, none of ours; if any evill, it is of our selves: For no evill dwelleth with thee: Psal. 5. hee therefore that seeketh glory to him of that which is thine, fur est and latro, hee is a theefe and a robber, and similis diabolo, qui invidit gloriae tuae: and like unto the Divell, which envied thy glory: If at any time I have stood, I have stood by thee; if at any time I have fallen, I have fallen of my selfe; and alwayes should have beene in the dirt and mire, haddest thou not raised mee; alwayes thy grace prevented mee, delivering me from all evils, saving mee from evils past, raising mee from evils present, defending mee from evils to come, cutting off before mee all the snares of sinne, which if thou haddest not done, I had beene a theefe, a murderer, an adulterer, a drunkard, an vsurer, and there is no sinne, or kind of sinne, that ever mand idd, but I might have done it: so farre Augustine: for the seeds of the same sinnes that bee in others, bee in us, and would grow, if grace cut them not downe: For there is an infusing grace, and a restraining grace. Granatensis, in his meditations confesseth, that God working in us by grace, doth as a man that kindleth greene wood, he blowes often, but it burneth not: so God sendeth many good inspirations into the heart, but wee stifle them; For, the flesh lusteth against Gal. 5. 16. Mat. 26. Rom. 7. 24. the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; the flesh is weake, and there is a Law in our members rebelling against the Law of our minde, and leading us captive into the law of sinne: This Popish Frier disableth nature, and yet ascribeth unto it, a power, an ability to receive grace, and to stand in it.
Herein we and the Romanists differ, in that they say, grace helpeth nature; wee say, that it wholy frameth nature, that there is no more goodnesse in our nature, then there is water in a flint stone. Hereupon saith God, I will put a new spirit within their Ezech. 11. 19. bowels, and I will take the stony heart out of their bodies, and will give them an heart of flesh, that they may walke in my statutes. And the same thing hee promiseth afterward, that is, to give them a Ezech. 37. 26, 27. new heart, and a new spirit, to take away their stony heart out of their bodies, and to give them an heart of flesh, and to put his spirit within them, to cause them to walke in his statutes, and to keepe his judgements to doe them: and Paul saith, I know, that Rom. 7. 18.

in mee, that is, in my flesh dwelleth no good thing. Non dicit exiguum, sed No goodnesse in us, but that which is infused by grace. nullum bonum in nobis: hee doth not say, a little good, but there dwelleth no good thing in us; the allurements of the world, the temptations of the flesh, the suggestions of Satan, are so many, that if the grace of God did not keepe us, wee should fall every houre, yea if it were possible, the very elect of God should not Mat. 24. bee saved. Laquei sunt in senectute, juuentute, divitijs, honoribus, cibo, somno: there be snares in old age, in youth, in riches, in honours, meate, drinke, sleepe. Saint Anthony saw the ayre full of snares; of tenne shippes, which saile in the sea, scarce one is drowned, and of tenne soules, that flote in the seas of this world, scarce one is saved: Ablata gratia Dei, the grace of God being taken away, what can a weake man doe among so many strong? a dwarfe Bern. among so many Giants? a traveller among so many theeves, and robbers? a naked man among so many armed enemies, not men, but divels? God would have us to live both lives, the naturall, and supernaturall; from the soule, which is the naturall forme, the powers and senses doe proceed; from grace, which is the supernaturall forme, the vertues and the gifts of the spirit do proceed: Let us not despaire therefore: There bee more with us, than against 2 Reg. 2. us, as Elisha said unto his servant; Nam naturae gratia se apponit, daemoni Deus, malae cons^^tudini bonus usus, multitudini malorum spirituum, exercitus Angelorum: Grace opposeth it selfe to nature, God opposeth himselfe against the Divell, good custome against evill, an hoste of heavenly Angels against a multitude of evill spirits: For the Angels of the Lord doe pitch their tents about them Psal. 34. that feare him. God telleth us, that his grace is sufficient for us, and that his power is made perfect, is knowne and evidently seene through our 2 Cor. 12. 9. weakenesse.
A question here may bee asked; If God bee able to keepe us from falling, why then doth hee suffer us to fall? Why did hee let Adam fall by the subtilty of the serpent? why did he let Lot Gen. 3. Gen. 19. Numb. 21. 1 Reg. 11. fall in Zoar, by wine and strong drinke? Why did hee suffer Moses in the desart by infidelity? Why did he let Salomon, King Salomon, wise King Salomon, fall by women? Why did hee let Peter fall through feare, into lying, perjurie, banning and cursing? Mat. 26. Why doth hee suffer most of his Saints to fall, some into one sinne, some into another; and all into some sinne? So that it may bee said of the best of them, Septies in die cadit justus; the Prov. 24. Iam. 3. 2. righteous man sinneth seven times a day: Et in multis peccavimus omnes: in many things wee offend all.
Hereto I answere, Adams fall was permitted of God, to bring to passe this eternall counsell decreed before the foundation of the world, concerning the incarnation of his Sonne, and the redemption of mankind through him: Nam tu quis es, qui litigas cum Deo? Who art thou that strivest with God? Secondly, concerning Rom. 9. the fall of other Saints, God permitteth them for two

causes: either that his mercy might bee made manifest in their God permitted Adam, and the Saints, to fall for divers reasons. pardon, and reclaiming; or else that they may see the frailty of their nature, that they stand not by themselves but by God; For the way of man is not in himselfe, neither is it in man to direct his pathes: that thus God may humble us, and that hee that standeth, may take heed hee fall not. Saint Iude saith not, that God ever keepeth us Ier. 10. 23. 1 Cor. 10. 12. from falling, but that hee is able to keepe us, and will so farre forth doe it, as shall stand with his glory, and our consolation.
And this withall I note, that God never suffereth his to fall for ever: Qui ex Deo est, non peccat: Hee that is of God, sinneth not, that is, non peccat in aeternum: hee sinneth not for ever: their 1 Iohn. 3. light is eclypsed sometime like the Sunne, but never quenched, like the fire on the Altar in the Babylonicall captivity; they sleepe, but they wake againe to righteousnesse, they bee not in a lethargie, in a dead sleepe, like Coranus and Plato, who slept, and never waked againe; ^hey fall sometime, but they rise againe, like the Dromedary; they lye not by it, like the Elephant that wanteth jointes: they have weeds and faults, but they have corne and vertues also like the fields of Sharon, whereas the wicked are as Sichem sowne with salt, where never fruit grew: they have leaves, Cant. 4. but they have fruit also, like the vine of Megeddo; but the wicked Iudg. 9. Mar. 11. are like the figge-tree that Christ cursed, they are all leaves, all sinne, being full of unrighteousnesse, fornication, wickednesse, covetousnesse, Rom. 1. 29. full of envy, of murder, of debate, taking all things in evill part; they lie downe in sinne, they sleepe in sinne, they rise up in sinne in the morning, they live in it, they dye in it; it is Alpha and Omega, Aleph, and Tau, first and last, for the wicked are strangers from the Psal. 58. 3. wombe, even from the belly, thy have erred and spake lies. They fall and never rise againe, they sinne and repent not of the uncleannesse, and fornication, and wantonnesse which they have committed. 2 Cor. 12. 21.
In one word, God is able to keepe us, and doth keepe us, else should wee fall as often as wee are tempted; For wee are as dry stubble apt to receive fire, but there is a plurality of mercies with God, Hee is rich in mercy, hee hath mercy for thousands, he hath Ephes. 2. Exod. 20. Psal. 51. Psal. 126. ^. Ephes. 1. 3. 1 Cor. 2. 8. a multitude of mercies; he hath lesser mercies and greater mercies; Hee filleth our mouthes with laughter, and our tongues with joy; hee hath corporall blessings, and spirituall blessings, temporall joyes in earth, and everlasting joyes in heaven; hee hath a preventing grace in delivering from sinne, and a following grace in pardoning sinne: he hath an infusing grace, and a restraining grace, and Iohn. 17. 2 Cor. 12. 7. his grace is sufficient for us.
But here a question may be moved, whether the Church may fall from God, in doctrine and in manners? num errare potest tam fide quam vita? whether it may erre as well in faith, as in life? To this some answer, Ecclesia non cadit, non errat universaliter, totaliter, fundamentaliter, finaliter; that the Church doth not fall, doth

not erre universally, totally, fundamentally, finally: non universaliter The best have erred. in omnibus membris: not universally in all the members: non totaliter in singulis fidei capitibus: not totally in every article of faith; non fundamentaliter in praecipuis capitibus: not fundamentally in the chiefe heads; non finaliter in aeternum: not finally for euer unto perdition. But admit this, yet it may fall, it may erre.
The question is not, what it doth, but what it may doe: Ecclesia potest errare: the Church may erre; whether yee respect it as universall in Councels, or the singular members thereof severally, quoth Danaeus; for it is manifest that I may erre, and you may Danaeus. erre, and hee may erre, and sic de singulis: and so of every one; For wee set but in part: the which words are meant of every one; wee 1 Cor. 13. 9. proceed and goe forward daily, wee are not yet come unto perfection, wee see the most excellent men have erred, as Thomas in Phil. 3. Iohn 20. Act. 10. Num 9. Exod. 32. Act. 1. the resurrection, Peter in circumcision, Moses in the Passeover, Aaron in the golden Calfe, in Idolatry; All the Apostles in the Kingdome of Christ. Lactantius, Eusebius, Apollinaris, Arnobius were tainted errore Chiliastarum: with the error of the Chiliasts, which held that Christ should come personally, and raigne as a King in this world, a thousand yeeres; yea, all men are lyers, and all pray, Forgive us our trespasses; yea looke into the Apocalyps, and Mat. 5. Apos. 12. 2 Reg. 11. yee shall find, that the woman fledde into the wildernesse; the whole visible Church under Ioram fell to idolatry; Hilary did beleeve the Church rather hidde, for hee could not see it flourishing, and he said, that the mountaines, the woods, the prisons, and the whirlepooles were safer than the temples; for these are his owne words; Montes, and lucus, and carceres, and voragines sunt tutiores quam templa: Arrianisme so prevailed at that time, Hierome said, Ingemuit totus mundus, and Arrianum se esse miratus est: That (...). the whole world wept and wondred, that it was become an Arrian. Peters little ship was now indangered, the windes tost her, the waves beat her on the sides, little hope, but was at the point of sinking, but at the last the Lord did arise, commanded the winds, and the tempest ceased, and a calme succeeded, and all the Bishops which were exiled, were called home againe; then Aegypt received his Athanasius triumphing; then France embraced Hilary returning from warre; then was Antioch gladde at the returne of Chrysostome, and Italy threw off her mourning garments at the returne of Eusebius. I know that Canus calleth these speeches hyperbolicall of Hilary and Hierome: but that is but his hyperbolicall lye. This is the common Inne wherein the Papists lodge most of our objections: but I reason thus, Eadem est ratio totius, quae est singulornus membrorum;

At singula membra possunt cadere.


Ergo totum corpus.


The same reason is of the whole, which is of every particular member.



But every particular member may fall.
The Pope may erre.


Therefore the whole body.

The epistles of the Bishops were corrected by Councels provinciall; and the Provinciall Councels, by the generall; and the former generall Councels, by those that came afterward, saith Augustine. Ecclesiam Dei finaliter errare nego: that the Church of Aug. lib. 2. de Baptism. 1. Iohn 3. God can finally erre, I deny: for hee that is of God, sinneth not; and Christ telleth us, that there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signes and wonders, so that if it were possible, they should deceive the very elect; if it were possible, but unpossible, that they should finally be deceived.
Here the great question is decided, Num Papa potest in fide deficere? whether the Pope can faile in faith? because hee is the whole Church, Virtualiter. To this wee object Pope Iohn the 22. That hee erred, because hee affirmed and held, that the soules of the righteous did not see God till the day of judgement; which heresy of his was condemned at Paris with the blast of trumpers: and we say that C^lestine erred, when hee held, that marriage was dissolved, if either of them, meaning the man or wife fell into heresy: and Gregory, when writing to Augustine of Canterbury, he said, that the husband might marry another wife, Si mulier non possit debitum ma^i^o reddere. Saint Ambrose in a certaine Sermon of his, dicit Petrum fidem sum perdidisse: saith, Ambr. ser. 47. that Saint Peter lost his faith. If Peter failed, certenly his successors may faile. To these Canus answereth, that Iohn the 22. and the rest, erred personally, not judicially: to Ambrose his speech, hee saith, Fides capitur pro fidelitate: that faith is there taken for fidelity; illam ergo, non fidem amisit: it was that hee lost, namely his fidelity, not his faith: and he further addeth, Papam haeredem esse Petri privilegiorum, non culparum: that the Pope was the heire of Peters priviledges, not of his offences.
To conclude with Canus: all come to this point, Bishops, Fathers, Councels, The Popes Legates in Councels may erre; for Christ prayed not for Peters Legates, but for Peter himselfe, quoth the Cardinall of Ture: Immo Papam errare posse, sed moribus: yea the Pope may erre, but yet in manners, not in faith: yea the Pope may erre in faith personaliter, non judicialiter: personally, not judicially, quoad factum, non quoad fidem: as touching facts, not as touching faith, as Sixtus 4. which taught Catherinam Senensem stigmata non habuisse, where hee erred as touching the history, not as touching faith: and they all affirme, that the Pope may erre in his gallery, not in his Consistory: which is a monstrous answere; as though Christ had prayed for the place, the walles, not for the person: as if faith were in the walles, not in the heart. But if the Pope dye in an heresy, though never holden in his Consistory, as Iohn the two and twentieth did, let them tell mee in what state hee dieth: Corde creditur ad justitiam: With Rom. 10.

the heart man beleeveth unto righteousnesse: shall they give The Papists distinctions, how the Pope may erre, and not erre: nice and frivolous. us such drosse for gold, such chaffe for corne, suth lees for wine? Shall they build such stubble upon the foundation? Ignis probabit: the fire shall trie it. Let God and man judge of this answere. 1 Cor. 3.



THE NINE AND THIRTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XXIIII. 

And to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with ioy.
Wee must bee presented blamelesse before God.



THis is the second thing hee prayeth for, as touching this life, that God shall present them faultlesse. Wee shall bee pure and perfect, without fault, without spot, or wrinkle, Nam nil Apot. 21. 27. immundum intrabit, etc. No uncleane thing shall passe thorow the gates of the new Ierusalem. To this end God hath elected us before the foundation of the World, That wee should bee holy, Ephes. 1. 4. and without blame before him in love. Hitherto tendeth Pauls prayer, Now the very God of Peace sanctifie you throughout, and I pray God that your whole spirit, soule and body 1 Thess. 5. 23. may bee kept blamelesse untill the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. Wee are said to be faultlesse, blamelesse, and without spot; not that wee are without sinne, but because God imputes not our sinnes unto us. So Saint Paul would have a Bishop, sine crimine, without fault, non dicit, sine peccate, hee doth not say, without sinne, for no man is sine peccato, without fault, though many be sine crimine, without offensive fault, and yet sine peccate sumus, wee are without sinne, without fault, quia non imputatur nothis because it is not imputed to us: Whereupon David, Blessed is Psal. 32. 2. the man to whom the Lord imputeth not sinne. If therefore the Papists

should cry all the day long, and all their life long, Beatus qui Wee are righteous by imputation of Christs righteousnesse. timet Deum: Blessed is he that feareth God: Beatus qui miseretur pauperibus: Blessed is hee that considereth the poore and needie: Beatus qui operatur justitiam: Blessed is he that worketh righteousnesse: Beatus qui loquitur vere: Blessed is he that speaketh truly, for Psal. 112. 1. Psal. 42. 1. Psal. 119. Esa. 33. 15. he shall dwell on high, his defence shal be the munitions of the rockes, bread shall bee given him, and his waters shall bee sure. I will expound all these blessednesses, by this one, Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputeth no sinne. In this sense Zacharias and Elizabeth are Rom. 4. 6. Luke 1. 6. called just, non quia non potuit, sed quia noluit Deus illis imputare peccata: not because God could not, but because hee would not impute unto them their sinne; for otherwise, if God should bee extreme, To marke what is done amisse, who can abide it? For Psal. 130. 3. wee cannot bee just before God, but by forgivenesse of sinnes: in which respect, the Prophet prayeth thus, Enter not into judgement Psal. 143. 2. with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man that liveth be justified. Let us then learne to expound the Scripture by the Scripture: for that which the holy Ghost saith, obscurely in one place, that hee saith more plainely in another place; and surely, if the Papists had conferred Scriptures, and weighed things by the Word of God, as they have done in the lying Schooles of their owne reason, and traditions, they might easily have reconciled these two, that no man is righteous, and yet that men are righteous and faultlesse, when God imputeth not their faults unto them. For this cause Paul judged all things as dung, that hee might winne Christ, and might bee found in him, that is, (saith Paul) Phil. 3. 8, 9. not having mine owne righteousnesse which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousnesse which is of God through Faith. Hee maketh two kinds of righteousnesse:
The one of the Law,
The other of Faith,
Contenting himselfe with the latter; thus,
August. said, Iustitiam nostram magis constare remissione peccatorum, A^g. quam perfectione virtutum, Our righteousnes to consist more in remission of our sinnes, then in the perfection of our vertues: and thus Ambrose said, Non gloriabor, quia justus sum, sed quia redemptus Ambr. sum, non quod vacuus sum peccati, sed quod remissa sunt mihi peccata; I will not glory because I am just, but because I am redeemed, not because I am void of sinne, but because my sinnes are pardoned mee and forgiven mee. Wee must all say with Daniel, O Lord, righteousnesse belongeth unto thee, and unto us shame: And againe, O Lord, unto us appertaineth open shame, to our Kings, to our De^. 9. 7, 8, 9. Princes, to our Fathers, because wee have sinned against thee, yet compassion and forgivenesse is in thee, o Lord our God, although wee have rebelled against thee. For though a man seeme never so pure in his owne eyes, yet all is corruption before God, and therefore faith holy Iob, Though I wash my selfe in snow water, and purge my selfe Iob 9. 30, 31.

most cleane, yet shalt thou plunge mee in the pit, and mine owne clothes All knowledge and vertue in us imperfect in this life. shall make mee filthy. Paul said, that wee are perfect, and yet eodem oris halitu, dixit nos imperfectos esse: and with the same breath he said, that wee are unperfect. If any man should urge the former words, to prove that our knowledge, our will, our righteousnesse is perfect, Paul confuteth it in the twelfth verse of the same Chapter: so hee said, I know to be full, and to be hungry: hee can doe Phil. 4. 13. this, and hee can doe that, but how? of himselfe? No: Sed per Iesum Christum. I am able to doe all things thorough the helpe of Christ, which strengtheneth mee: not of his owne power or free will. This answereth the common slander of the world, that wee are Puritans, Precisians, etc. But surely if there bee any Puritans among us, either they be Papists, or Familists: for the one say that they are saved by their workes, and the other, that they have payd a price for their sinnes, as well as Christ, saving that he hath payde his money before them; hee died first. As for us, wee know no purity, but the purity of Christ Iesus, wee know that wee are washed in his bloud, and that his bloud doth cleanse us 1 Iohn 1. 7. from all sinne.
But they object the words of our Saviour to the yong man, If thou wilt bee perfect, goe sell that thou hast, and give it to the poore, etc. And againe, Yee shall bee perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect: Mat. 19. 21. Mat. 5. 48. And againe, they alledge the saying of Paul, how? that Christ gave himselfe, that hee might make it to himselfe a glorious Ephes. 5. 27. Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should bee holy and without blame. The two former places deceived the Monkes, and the third deceived Augustine: for it is not meant of this life, but of the life to come: the Church shall bee without blot, not here, but elsewhere in Heaven: For when Christ which is our life, shall appeare, then shall wee appeare with him in glory. Augustine Col. 3. 4. Aug. reasoneth thus, Amor sequitur notitiam, at notitia nostra est imperfecta, ergo amor, justicia, obedientia nostra imperfecta sunt: Love followeth knowledge, but our knowledge is imperfect, therefore our Love, righteousnesse and obedience are imperfect. Sumus 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10. Luke 17. 10. servi inutiles: wee are unprofitable servants, yea even when we have done all that wee can.
To answere therefore that which they alledge out of Mathew, Yee shall bee perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect: And againe, Mat. 5. 48. cap 19. 21. If thou wilt be perfect, goe sell all that thou hast. Christ sheweth rather what wee should strive for, than what we have attained to. Pij vocantur perfecti imputative and inchoative: The godly are called perfect, imputatively and inchoatively, for who can say, quoth Chemnisius, My heart is cleane? Et tamen omnia munda mundis, yet Chemnisius versus Andra. to the cleane, all things are cleane, because wee are accounted cleane, and esteemed as worthy. Marke, what Christ saith, Watch Pro. 20. Tit. 1. 15. and pray continually, that yee may bee counted worthy to escape all these things. The phrase therefore warranted of Christ, our cleanenesse, Luke 21. 36.

our worthinesse, our perfection, is by imputation: the Catharists, the Donatists, the Pelagians, the Celestines, the Anabaptists, the No Saint without sinne. Familists, the Papists, abuse this doctrine of perfection, to derogate from God, and to arrogate unto themselves: and for Canisius in his Catechisme, hee setteth downe in his Chapter of satisfactions, that I never read in any Papist before: he maketh three sorts of men:
One that never sinned.
A second sort, indifferent.
A third, extremely evill.
For the first, he quoteth the place in the prayer of Manasses, that Abraham sinned not; which is spoken comparatively, by way of comparison: such a phrase is used by the elect and chosen vessell of God, Saint Paul, where hee saith thus, Adam was not deceived, 1 Tim. 2. 14. Gen. 3. Cap. 12. 13. but the woman was deceived, and was in the transgression; yet Adam sinned, and God condemned him, but hee sinned not as Eve sinned; so Abraham sinned, in willing Sara his wife to say, that shee was his sister, and not only so; but hee himselfe said that she was his sister; Abraham had now twice fallen into one fault, into one Cap. 20. 2. sinne: except Canisius will now say, that lying is no fault, no sinne, and excuse in Abraham, as they doe theft, murder and whoredome in the Pope, by the example of Israel, who spoiled the Aegyptians of their Iewels of silver, and Iewels of gold, and raiment, and by the example of Samson, Who with the jaw bone of an Asse killed Exod. 12. 35. Iudg. 15. 25. a thousand men: And by the example of Iacobs polygamie, it is said: Qui ex Deo est, non peccat: Hee that is of God, sinneth not; 1 Iohn 3. 9. ^ Iohn 1. 10. and yet the same beloved disciple saith, If wee say wee have not sinned, wee make God a lier, and his word is not in us. Canisius therefore hath frontem meretric^^m: an harlots forhead, and a brow of brasse, and carrieth his face in his fist. These last Papists have exceeded all their fathers in impudency. Ierusalem justified Sodom; and Canisius, Andradius, Ganus, Genebrard, Bellarmine, Ezech. 16. Turrian, Stapleton have justified Thomas Aquinas, Holcot, Briccot, Dorbell, Duns, etc. The Locusts be crept out of the bottomlesse pit; Apoc. 9. 3. Apoc. 16. cap. 20. these croking frogges are crept out of the mouth of the dragon; Satan is let loose to deceive the world, spirits of error are gone abroad, which speake lies through Hypocrisie, and have their 1 Tim. 4. 2. consciences burned with an hote iron: and the last error in popery is worse than the first, as the Pharises said to Pilate concerning Mat. 27. 64. Christ. Sadeele calleth the Iesuites now, postremum Satanae anhelantis crepitum; as Munster said of the men of India: Habent capita canina: they have heads like dogges: non loquuntur, sed latrant: they speake not, but barke against all trueth, like the dogges of the Capitall, who left barking at theeves, and barked at true men: but God shall confound them spiritu oris sui, with the breath of 2 Thess. 2. his mouth.
Quod nominamur perfecti, inculpati, immaculati, in that wee are

called perfect, blamelesse; immaculate, and without spotte, this The Church unperfect in it selfe, perfect in Christ. commeth to passe, non (...), sed (...): wee are called, perfect, blamelesse, immaculate, not in respect of God, but of man; and comparatione quadam, by a certaine comparison, for not the Angels are like unto Gods righteousnesse; for hee found folly in his Angels: our righteousnesse is in part, not absolute, For hee Iob 4. 18. Iam. 2. 10. that faileth in one point, is guilty of all: Et in uno omnes labimur: but in one point wee faile all. You can now put to the conclusion easily, Fortasse vivimus sine crimine coram hominibus; Peradventure wee live without crime before men: Non sine peccato coram Deo: not without sinne before God: which is Pauls distinction. The Church sometimes is called pure, perfect, blamelesse. But it is one thing to consider the Church in it selfe, another thing to consider it in Christ; the Church in it selfe, whether wee consider each member of it severally, or all the members of it jointly, hath many spottes or wrinkles, or else how should it bee said; to bee saved by the grace of our Lord Iesus? The Church considered Act. 15. 11. in Christ may bee said; to bee without spotte, because it is washed in the blood of Christ; and it may be said to bee without wrinkle, because Apoc. 1. 5. it is clad with the righteousnesse of Christ, for Christ is the white rayment, wherewith wee being clothed, our filthy nakednesse Apoc. 13. 18. shall not appeare. The Church militant is holy in affection: for shee fulfilleth not the lusts of the flesh; the Church Gal. 6. 16. triumphant, is holier in perfection; for long white robes are given to every one of them; both the militant and triumphant Church is most holy by the grace of redemption, in the fruition of glory: but the militant spe, in hope; the triumphant, re, indeed; For unto her was granted that shee should bee arayed with pure, fine linnen, Apoc. 19. 8. and shining; for the fine linnen is the righteousnesse of the Saints: for our blessednesse is perfected in three degrees; Per spem and fidem 2 Thess. 1. quotidie crescentem in hac vita: by hope and faith continually growing, and increasing in this life; after this life, while the spirit injoyes Eccles. 12. 7. the presence of God; after the resurrection, when wee shall bee glorified in body and in spirit, when the Lord Iesus shall change Phil. 3. 20. 1 Cor. 13. our vile body, and make it like his glorious body, when God shall bee unto us all in all things. Gods will is done two wayes: sincerely and perfectly; againe, sincerely onely: but imperfectly: the former is naturall to the Sonne of God, for God giveth not him the spirit by Iohn 3. 34. measure: the latter to the adopted Sonnes of God, for in many Iam. 3. things wee offend all; wee have the spirit by measure, and that a little measure; In the old Testament who were more holy among all the people, then the Priests? and yet God commanded them to offer sacrifice, first for their owne sinnes, then for the Levit. 4. peoples: and in the new Testament among all the people under grace, who more holy than the Apostles themselves? yet Christ commanded them to pray daily, and to say, Dimitte nobis debita nostra: Forgive us our trespasses; this therefore is the hope of the Mat. 6.

penitent sinners, that they have an Advocate with the Father. I conclude Our righteousnes is in the remission of sinnes. therefore with Aug. Multum eum profecisse, qui se parum profecisse sentit, and perfectum esse, qui se imperfectum esse novit, and tamen aspirare ad perfectionem; that hee hath profited much, which thinketh that hee hath profited but a little, and that hee is perfect, 1 Iohn 2. 2. which knoweth himselfe to bee unperfect, and yet aspireth to perfection. For God measureth us by our will, not by our power: For if there bee first a willing minde, it is accepted according to 2 Cor. 8. 12. that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not.

This doctrine will give light, and open a window to the doctrine now in controversy, Whether faith or works justify? Bellarmine saith, the word Imputation is the opinion of a thing done in deed, not in shew only: and this is true in a godly sense, for they are truly righteous, to whom God imputeth righteousnesse; but yet in the righteousnesse of Christ, not in an inherent righteousnesse of our owne: as hee is said to have paid the money to his creditour, who paid it by another, though himselfe was not able. And unto this end the Apostle saith, that wee are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption Rom. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. that is in Christ Iesus.
To the place in the Romanes, where Paul saith, But to him that worketh not, but beleeveth in him, that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousnesse; even as David declared the blessednesse of that man, unto whom God imputeth righteousnesse without works, saying, Blessed is the man, whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sinnes are covered; blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputeth not the sin. Bellarmine answereth, that Paul setteth not downe a full definition of justification: For sinne is not remitted (saith he) except righteousnesse bee infused, but yet inchoated onely, not perfected: and yet the comparison holdeth not, betwixt the infusion of light into the ayre, and the infusion of righteousnesse into a man; similia illustrant, non probant: similies doe illustrate a thing, but prove not.
Bellarmine argueth from the comparison, betwixt Adam, and Christ, Per Adae peccatum inhaerens, peccatores sumus: By Rom. 5. the inhaerent sinne of Adam, we are sinners; therefore per infusionem inhaerentis justitiae justi sumus, by infusion of inhaerent righteousnesse wee are righteous. I answere, that the argument followeth not, the comparison holdeth not in the inherence of sinne or righteousnesse, but in the adoption, or getting: From Adam, wee have gotten sinne naturally, but from Christ, supernaturally by faith; by which the righteousnesse of Christ is imputed unto us. Bellarmine reckoneth up many things which be necessary to salvation, out of the second Epistle of S. Peter, the first Chapter; as how we must joyne Vertue 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. with Faith, and with vertue, knowledge; and with knowledge, temperance; and with temperance, patience, and with patience, godlinesse;

and with godlinesse, brotherly kindnesse; and with brotherly kindnesse, Good works the way, not the cause of the Kingdome of Heaven. love: But hee doth detorquere, writhe and bow the question another way, and to another end: For wee doe not exclude good works simply from the obtaining of salvation, (sunt enim via regni, non causa regnandi: they are the way to Gods Kingdome, not the cause of our ruling and reigning in Gods Bern. Kingdome,) but from the obtaining of righteousnes: For it is onely Christs righteousnesse, that maketh us righteous before God, for, hee is our wisdome, and righteousnesse, and holinesse, and redemption; wisdome to instruct us, righteousnes to justify us, holines to sanctify us, and redemption to free us. Hee reasoneth thus.
Faith without Love doth not justify, Therefore faith alone doth not justify, for faith worketh by love. Gal. 5. I deny the Confequence; For though faith bee not alone, without other vertues, yet it justifieth alone; as the hand of the writer is not alone, but hath other members adjoyned unto it, yet it writeth alone; as the eye is not alone, and yet it seeth alone; and the eare is not alone, and yet it heareth alone; and yet to speake properly, faith doth not justify: it is a Metonymicall speech; for to speake properly, the righteousnes of Christ, apprehended by faith, justifieth us; faith as the principall cause doth not justify us, sed ut causa instrumentalis: but as the instrumentall cause: non per modum dispositionis, sed per modum apprehensionis: not by the manner of disposition, but by the manner of apprehension; For although it doth dispose unto good workes, yet it doth not justify in respect of that, but in respect of the object which is Christ; For the blood of Iesus 1 Iohn 1. 7. Christ, Gods Sonne, clenseth us from all sinne.
But Iustification (saith hee) is motus a peccato ad justitiam: a moving from sinne to righteousnesse; as illumination is a moving from darkenes, to light.
I grant, sed non adjustitiam inhaerentem: not unto inherent or infused righteousnesse, but imputative. Hee argueth, that things are denominated from the internall, not the externall forme; as we call an Aethiopian blacke, though he have a white garment on him, quia nigredo est illi insita: because blacknes is naturally graffed in him. Ergo nos justos dici a justitia intra nos, non extra nos; Therefore wee are said to bee righteous, of the righteousnesse that is within us, not without us. I answere, This is true in Philosophy, but false in Divinity. Here we may say with Paul, Beware lest there bee any man that spoile you through Col. 2. ^. philosophy. Philosophy may bee used, so as shee be content to be a servant, not a mistris: but when men measure all doctrine by humane reason, and philosophicall positions, as Bellarmine here doth, then Philosophy is to be taken heed of.
Howlet, in the fifth part of his resolution confesseth, that

works are not the causes of salvation, but the path that leadeth Papists at death fly to Gods mercy in Christ, and not to merit. to salvation, the fruits and effects of faith: as Christ saith, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good workes, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven: That Paul speaking of the cause of Iustification, saying, wee conclude, that Mat. 5. 16. Rom. 3. 18. a man is justified by faith, without the workes of the Law, is not contrary to Iames speaking of the notes and signes of Iustification, saying, Yee see then, how that of workes a man is justified, and not of faith onely. This truth, God extorted from him, as also Iam. 2. 24. from Stephen Gardiner, who confessed this at his death, but would not have it preached to the people; Open that doore (quoth hee) and then farewell all. Hee would bee wiser than God. Mounser also granted it, and cried, Solus Christus, solus Christus: Christ alone, Christ alone. And so Sherwin a seminary Priest, executed for treason with Campian, and others at Tiborne, when hee was in the cart, ready to dye, though he held himselfe a martyr for the Catholike faith, acknowledged nowithstanding ingenuously, the miseries, imperfections, and corruptions of his owne vile nature, relying wholly upon Christ, cried out at his death: O Iesus, Iesus, Iesus, bee to mee a Iesus. And Bellarmine cites often in his workes out of Augustine, Domus Dei credendo fundatur, sperando exigitur, diligendo perficitur: the foundation of Gods house in our soules is faith, the walles hope, the roofe, charity. If faith bee the foundation of all other vertues, as himselfe affirmes, and if it bee our safest Lib. 1. de Rom. Pont. cap. 10. De Iustificatione. lib. 5. Cap. 7. course to repose our whole trust in the onely mercy of God, Propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae, tutissimu^ est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate reponere; For the uncertainty of our owne righteousnes and danger of vaine glory, it is the safest way to repose all our confidence in Gods only mercy and bounty. Then is it not as hee disputes, Lib. 1. de justificatione, cap. 4. wrought by charity: but contrariwise charity doth arise from faith. I will conclude with Bernard, Omnia merita Dei dona sunt, ita homo magis propter ipsa Deo debitor est, quam Deus homini; all our merits are the gifts of God, so man is rather a debtour to God for them, then God to man. So much as touching this life.

Touching the other life, hee commends them to God, that they may behold the presence of his glory with joy: for in the life to come wee shall have plenitudinem gaudy: fulnes of joy. Here all Psal. 16. joy is at an ebbe, it is mixed with some sorrow; light with darkenesse, heate, with cold; health, with sicknes: life, with death; glory, with ignominy: but there is joy, and nothing but ioy; no change, no alteration; day, without night: light, without darkenesse; summer, without winter: youth, without age: life, without death: there we shall have all teares wiped away from our eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall Apoc. 21. 4.

there bee any more paine; but they shall have perpetuall ioy: death The ioyes of Heaven fill all powers of soule and body. and Hell shall bee cast into the lake of fire, and shall bee destroyed for ever; The second death shall have no power upon them that be in heaven, but they shall bee the Priests of God and of Christ, and shall raigne with him a thousand yeeres; That is, for ever. We looke too much to Apoc. 20. 6, 5, 14. Hebr. 6. the pleasures of this world, which maketh us care lesse for Heaven; but looke into the powers of the world to come, vide intus, and extra, supra and infra, circumcirca, and ubique erit gaudium: Looke within and without, above and beneath, and round about, and yee shall find ioy every where; within shall be ioy for the glorification of the body and soule: for our Saviour, even The Lord Iesus, shall change our vile body, and make it like his glorious body, according Phil. 3. 21. to the working, whereby he is able to sub due all things unto himselfe. It is much to have our bodies changed, more, to have our vile bodies changed, but to have our vile bodies so changed, that they shall be facioned like the glorious body of the Lord Iesus, is most of all, and must needs fill us with ioy. Wee shall have ioy without, by reason of the company of the blessed Angels; for wee shall inioy not onely the celestiall Ierusalem, but also the company of innumerable Angels, which shall glad us, and reioice us exceedingly. Wee shall have ioy above, in the sight of God, for wee shall bee like God, and see him as hee is. Wee shall have ioy beneath, of the beauty of Heaven and of the world; for 1 Iohn 3. 2. Wee looke for new Heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousnesse. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Wee shall have ioy round about of the delight of all our senses, when God shall bee the obiect of them all: for he shall be a glasse unto our eyes, musicke unto our eare, hony to our taste, a flowre to our hands, and sweet Balsamum to our smell; there shall be the fairenes of the Summer, the sweetnes of the Spring, the plenty of the Autumne, the rest of the Winter, yea God shall 1 Cor. 13. bee all in all unto us. This life is as a seed-time in teares, as the travell of a woman, as a weary prentice-hood, as a tedious iourney, but the harvest is in the life to come, there shall we reape joy, there Psal. 126. 5. are wee delivered of our child birth, and forget our sorrow, for ioy that salvation is come, our sorrow shall be turned into ioy. A Iohn 16. 21, 22. woman when shee travaileth hath sorrow, because her houre is come, but as soone as shee is delivered of her Child, she remembreth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is borne into the world. In this world wee have sorrow, but in Heaven joy, there wee shall rejoice, and our joy shall no man take from us.
Looke to Iesus the Author and finisher of our faith; and let the same animate us, that did him, hee for the joy that was set before Hebr. 12. 2. him, endured the Crosse, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the Throne of God. Let us so doe, and wee shall follow the Lambe, and be partakers of the price of our high calling, which is in Christ Iesus: tantum gaudebunt, quantum amabunt; tantum amabunt, quantum cognoscunt Deum; sic cognoscunt, ut cogniti Rom. 8.

sunt; so much shall they reioice, by how much they love, and so The land of the living, co^pared with the land of the dead. much shall they love, by how much they know God; and they so know, as they are knowne.
The situation and height of Heaven, may teach us the quantity and quality of the glory of heaven; Coelum Empyraeum is 1 Cor. 13. higher, greater, and more excellent than all Heavens; the Scripture calleth it, The land of the living; as if the earth which we inhabit, were the land of dead men: and indeed, Wee are dead, and Psal. 116. 9. our life is hidde with Christ in God, and when Christ, which is our life, Col. 3. 3. shall appeare, then shall wee also appeare in glory. Now if in this land of dead men, the creatures bee so precious, what shall they bee hereafter, in the land of the living? In this dead land see the greatnesse of the heavens, the brightnesse of the Sunne, and Moone, and starres: the beauty of the earth; how pleasant is it to see the height of the mountaines, the plaines of the fields, the greenenesse of the vallies, the fountains of waters, the current of the streames and rivers; which like veines runne thorow the earth; the mines of gold and silver, pearle, the mines of metals. If all these bee in the land of the dead: what is in the land of the living? There shall bee a new Heaven and a new earth, and new creatures. 2 Pet. 3. 15.
Againe, there be three places in this life:
The first, is in the wombe from our corruption.
The second, is in the world from our birth.
The third, is in Heaven after death.
Betwixt these three, there is a proportion; looke how much the world is bigger and pleasanter than the wombe; so much is Heaven bigger, and fairer than the world, as well in length of time, as in beauty; Touching durance, the first life in the 2 Mathab. 7. wombe, is not above nine moneths; the second life, is foure score yeeres, at the most; the third is infinite and eternall: the Psal. 90. 1 Cor. 13. wombe of the mother, is nothing to the world, and the world, is nothing to heaven, seeing one starre is bigger than the earth. Iob 38.
Againe, the difference of the inhabitants maketh a difference betwixt Heaven and earth; that is full of living men; this of dead Luk. 9. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Rom. 3. men; that of iust men, this of sinners; this of men, Rom. 3. 24. that of Angels, Dan. 7. here dwell the penitent, there the perfect; here dwell the militant, there the triumphant; here dwell friends, and enemies, there friends onely, and the elect; there Hebr. 12. 23. Iob 7. Apoc. 14. God shall be plenitudo lucis nostro intellectui: fulnesse of light to our understanding; Multitudo pacis voluntati: multitude of peace, to our will, Et continuatio aeternitatis: memoriae, and continuance of eternity to our memory.
It is said of the Swannes, that they sing dying,

Cantator Cignus, funeris ipse sui.

And we like Swans in the assurance of the glory that shall bee revealed to us, should live and die reioycing: For we shall be made,

an eternall joy and glory, from generation, to generation; salvation shall The happines of Heaven, set out by comparison. bee our walles, and praise our gate: we shall have no more Sunne to shine by day, neither shall the brightnes of the Moone shine unto us, for the Lord shall bee our everlasting light, and our God our glory; our Sunne shall never goe downe, neither shall our Moone be hidde, for the Lord shall be our Esay. 60. 15, 18, 19, 20, 21. everlasting light, and the dayes of our sorrow shall bee ended: wee shall bee all righteous, and possesse the land for ever. Wee shall come with Israel, from Mount Horeb, where was nothing but thunder, lightning, and clowdes; to mount Thabor, where wee shall injoy the glory of Christ Iesus, and say with Peter, Bonum est hic esse: It is Mat. 17. good for us to bee here. Let them make account of this life, who make the world their friend, and are not onely in it, but of it, whose eyes the God of this world hath blinded, that they looke 2 Cor. 4. 3. not for future things: wee are here pilgrimes, our Countrey is Heaven, our friends the Angels, our companions Apoc. 21. the Saints, our City the new Ierusalem: how can wee sit among the rivers of Babylon, and not weepe to remember the heavenly Sion? O curvae in terris animae, and coelestium inanes! O crooked soules on earth, and devoid of heavenly things! Wee marvell at the Pigmaeans, that are but a cub it high, and live but seven yeeres; and yet our life to eternity is not seven yeeres, nor seven dayes, nor seven houres, nor one houre, it is but a moment; 2 Cor. 4. 17. so S. Paul calleth it. Saturne, one star, is thirty yeeres in motion, in circuit, and we may goe round about the world in three yeeres and odde dayes; so little a space is it. What is a drop of water to the whole Sea? An acre of land to the mappe of the world? the light of a candle, to the brightnes of the Sunne? the life of a child, to the yeeres of Methusalah? the conceite of a foole, to the experience of Noah, who saw two Worlds? or one drop of raine to all the waters in the Clowds, which drowned a whole world? Such is our life to eternity, and the glory of this world to the glory of Heaven: a thousand yeeres are but a day: nay, S. Iohn calleth 2 Pet. 3. all the time since Christs comming, but an houre; he maketh sixteene hundred yeeres but an houre to eternity, to the dayes 1 Iohn. 3. everlasting! Oh thinke oftner of heaven, and the glory of it! Oh, seeke the things that bee above, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of Col. 3. 1. God: set your affections upon Heavenly things, and not upon earthly. Paul prayed for the Ephesians, that they might see the hope of their calling, and Ephes. 1 17. the riches of the glorious inheritance. And pray you for it; for as yet these things are hid from our eyes; videmus tantum terrena: we behold onely earthly things.
If in a golden game some should step aside, and runne after flies and feathers, would wee not count them mad? so is it in Christianity; our life is a race, wee all are runners, heaven is the goale, eternall life the prize, but many step aside after flies and 1 Cor. 9. vanity; We tire our selves in the way of wickednes and destruction, and Wisd. 5. 7, 8, 9. wee have gone thorow dangerous wayes, but we have not knowne the way

of the Lord: what hath pride profited us? Or what profit hath the pompe One day in Heaven more ioyous, than many in the greatest honour. of riches brought us? All these things are passed away as a shadow, and as a poast that passeth by. If a man knew the thoughts of Alexander Magnus, when hee died of the poison of Styx, after all his victories, or the thoughts of Iulius Caesar, receiving in the Senate 52. wounds, and all deadly, after that hee had conquered the world: hee shall see that they tooke little pleasure in their former honors and victories. Philip Mornay saith of Carolus quintus, whom of all men the world judged most happy, that hee cursed all his honors in his old age, his victories, trophees, riches, saying; Abite hinc, abite longe, Get yee hence: get yee away a sarre off; hee found more joy in one dayes contemplation of Heaven, than in all his Imperiall life. Then, then was his mourning turned into joy, and his sacke loosed, and hee girded with gladnesse. Hee that knew the Psa. 30: 11. thoughts of the soule of the rich man in hell, hee shall see, that hee crieth, Woe, woe to all the wealth, honour, pompe, and glory of the world; and had rather bee one day in Paradise, than tenne thousand yeeres in this world: hee curseth gold, house, land, credit, and saith! Vae domni lut^ae, ob quam perdidi auream in coelis: Wo to this house of clay, that hath made me lose an house 2 Cor. 5. 1. of gold in Heaven!
In Saint Lukes Gospell wee doe reade, that when some spake of the temple how it was garnished with goodly stones, and consecrate things; O (saith our Saviour) are these the things that yee looke upon? The dayes will come, when a stone shall not bee left upon a Luk. 21. 6. stone. So say I, O then looke up higher.
Againe, in Heaven is the presence of glory: As there is no light but that which is derived from the Sunne, so there is no glory but that which is derived from the glory of God, that is, true everlasting glory. As there is no right Balme but in Gilead, no right incense but in Sheba: so there is no true glory, but the Heavenly glory: Gloria mundi ut fumus: The glory of the world is but smoke, and as chaffe that vanisheth, as a dreame and vision in the night, that tarrieth not; as if an hungry man dreameth, and Esay 29. 8, 9. thinketh that hee eateth; and when hee awaketh, his soule is empty; and like a thirsty man, which thinketh de drinketh, and behold, when hee is awaked, his soule is faint: so in the world to come men shall say, O what hath pride profited us? Or what profit hath the pompe of riches brought us? Or what good hath the glory of the world done us? Where is the glory of Salomon, the power of Alexander, the edifices and buildings of Nabuchadnezar? The nine hundred chariots of Sisera? The authority of Augustus, which commanded the whole world to bee taxed? What did vaine glory, the multitude of servants, the power of the world, the hugenesse of their armies, their abundance of wealth, and troupes of flatterers profit these? All was as a shadow, all was as smoke, All are passed away as a shadow, and as a poast that passeth by, as a shippe that Wisd. 5. 9, 10.

passeth over the waves of the waters, which when it is gone, the trace This world fraudulent, turbulent, momentany. thereof cannot bee found, neither the path of it in the floods. In mundi foelicitate videbis plus fellis quam mellis: in the felicity of this world yee shall see more gall, than hony; more wormewood, than sugar: the world is full of thornes, not of roses, it promiseth a man that which hee shall never have, and leaveth a man in the chiefe of his pleasures: this world is a coffer of sorrows, a schoole of vanity, a market of frauds, a labyrinth of errors, a flood of teares, a sweet poyson; the joy of this world hath sorrow; his security is without foundation; his labours, without fruit; his teares, without purpose; and his purposes, without successe; his hope is vaine, sorrow certaine, and joy fained. An heathen man could say, that he would not be wrapped againe in his swadling clothes to gaine much. The Apostle calleth it a sea of glasse, a sea for the troubles of it, or glasse for the bitternesse of it, or because Apoc. 15. God seeth into it, as wee see into a glasse. Now rich, now poore; now full, now empty; now honourable, now despised; now alive, and now dead, and never certen; the pompe therefore of it, Saint Iohn compareth to the Moone, crescit and decrescit: it increaseth Apoc. 12. 1. Iob 14. 10, 11, 12. and decreaseth. Man is sicke and dieth, and man perisheth, and where is hee? As waters passe from the Sea, and as the flood decayeth, and drieth up; so man sleepeth, and riseth not; for hee shall not wake againe, nor bee raised from his sleepe, till the Heaven bee no more. And as it is written in another place; Our dayes are more swift than a poast, they Iob 9. 25. have fled and seene no good thing. Xerxes, that great Emperour, was weary of all pleasure, and offred rewards to the inventers of new pleasures, and yet when these new pleasures were found, hee was not contented.
As Elkanah said to Hannah, Why weepest thou? am not I better to 1 Sam. 1. 8. thee, then tenne sonnes? So saith God to us, Why weepe yee, and sorrow yee, why doe yee thus vexe and torment your selves? am not I better unto you, than ten worlds? Is not heavenly glory better than all earthly? Why doe yee leave the fountaine of Paradise; Ier. 2. 10. and drinke of the broken and troublesome cysternes of this world? Why in this golden race do yee step aside after flies and feathers. O taste and see how sweet the glory of God is! looke, o looke into the powers of the world to come! As the inhabitants 1 Pet. 2. 3. of Nylus are deafe by the noise of the water, so many are deafe, when they should heare of Heaven; the world maketh such a noise in their eares, they savour not the things which are of God: Mat. 16. These Ravens feed of nothing but garbage, like Noahs Raven; Gen. 8. these Lapwings make their nests in the ordure; these Betles never sing but in a bed of dung; these Eagles never seaze, but upon a Mat. 24. 28. carkasse; Vbi cadaver, ibi Aquilae; Where the dead carkasse is, thither the Eagles resort. Where there is buying, selling, bargaining, profit, gaine, thither fly these Eagles, their hearts are exercised with Covetousnes, they are brawned in it, they thinke of 2 Pet. 2. 14, 16.

nothing but the world, and the glory of it; but these men shall see one day the glory of Christ to their shame and confusion: but Christ, comfort both in this life, and that to come. the elect shall see Christs humanity more glorious than ever the Apostle saw it on Mount Thabor; apparebit Christus in similitudine carnis: Christ shall appeare in the similitude of flesh, that both Mat. 17. August. in Man. 1. cap. 26. the eyes of man might bee blessed in him, that the eye of the heart might bee refreshed in his divinity; and the eye of the body in his humanity; that going in or out, our humane nature might find in him food and delight. Christ hath made to his Mat. 10. Church a double promise: the one of his spirituall presence by grace, the other of his Heavenly presence in glory; the first is performed; the second, not yet. The Saints therefore pray, Come Lord Iesus, come quickly. And if wee pertaine to God, we will Apoc. 22. looke for his comming, and desire it: wee will looke for the appearance of the glory of our great God, and of our Saviour Christ Iesus: but if we love the world, the Love of God is not in us. Tit. 2. 3. 1 Iohn 2. 15.



THE FORTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XXV. 

That is, to God onely Wise, and our Saviour, be Glory and Maiestie, etc.
The six Atributes of God.



WEE are now come to the last thing contained in this Epistle, which is a thankesgiving to God, with a description of his Attributes.
For he ascribeth to God Wisedome, Salvation, Glory, Majestie, Dominion, and Power.
For I divided this Epistle into the Saluation, Precation, The generall Proposition, The Confirmation by divers examples, The Confutation, and Lastly, the Conclusion.
And the conclusion into two; Prayer and Thankesgiving: this is a Thankesgiving to God, hee beganne with Prayer, and endeth with thankesgiving; for the worship of God doth consist and stand upon two parts:
Precatio,Wee cannot thinke on Christ without thankfulnesse.Gratiarum actio. Prayer, and Thanksgiving.
And these both the Apostle (...) included ^^ one verse, saying, Let both your requests ^ee shewed unto God in prayer and supplication, with giving of thankes* ^ut to leave this.
Saint Iude cannot speake of God without thankefulnesse; thus Paul concluded the Epistle to Rome, saying, To him now that Rom. 16. 25, 27. is of power to establish you according to my Gospell, etc. to God, I say, onely wise, bee praise through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen. So concluded the other Apostles: The God of peace that brought againe from the dead, the Lord Iesus, the great Shepheard of the sheepe, through the Heb. 13. 20, 21. bloud of his everlasting covenant, make you perfect in all good workes to doe his will, working in you that which is pleasing in his sight, through Iesus Christ to whom, bee praise for ever and ever. Amen. And thus concluded Saint Peter, Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ: to him be glory both now and evermore, 2 Pet. 3. 18. Amen. Augustine said, Tu Domine sic excitas ut laudare te delectet, fecisti nos pro te, and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te: thou August. lib. 1. confess. cap. 1. Lord doest so excite mee, that to praise thee it delighteth mee, thou hast made us for thee, and our heart cannot be quiet, till it rest in thee. Vae tacentibus de te, taceat la^des tuas, qui miserationes tuas non novit: Woe bee to them which speake not of thee, hee setteth not foorth thy praise, who is ignorant of thy mercies. Again saith the father, Si omnia membra nostra verteventur in linguas, si tot haberemus, quot Argus oculos, nequaquam sufficerent: If all our August. lib. Meditationum. members were converted into tongues, if wee had as many tongues as Argus had eyes, they were not sufficient to set foorth thy praises: thou art a Lord exceeding great and infinite, without measure and end, and oughtest to be praised and beloved of all. Paul could not name Christ, but abruptly, but breaketh out into thankesgiving, having often other matters inhand, yet cannot he stay, but soundeth out his gratitude, as with a trumpet, as writing to Timothy, and handling other matters, on a sudden he leaveth the thing in hand, and crieth out, Now unto the King everlasting, immortall, invisible, unto God onely wise, be honour and glory for 1 Tim. 16. 17. ever and ever, Amen. So writing to the Romans, and handling the priviledges of the Iewes, on a sudden he leaveth off, and breaketh out into thankesgiving, saying, Of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all blessed for ever, Amen. So writing Rom. 9. 5. to the Corinthians, and handling the resurrection from the dead, on a sudden hee breaketh out to gratitude, saying, Thankes bee to God which hath given us victorie, through Iesus Christ 1 Cor. 15. 57. our Lord.
Iude here useth a figure called Ple^nasmus, to expresse his zeale, hee doubleth and redoubleth, tripleth, and multiplieth his words, till they be many in number; hee is full as the Moone, he Iob 32. floweth as the Sea, hee is as the new vessels which have no vent,

for if the fountaine be full, the channels cannot bee empty; if The Saints plentifull in thanksgiving. there bee moysture in the roote, the branches cannot wither; if there bee heate in the chimney, the house cannot bee cold; if the heart abound, the mouth will bee full of Gods praises; Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur: out of the abundance of the heart Luke 6. the mouth speaketh.
Note this in all the Saints of God, how plentifully doth David describe his thankefulnesse, My soule, praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits: And againe, Praise the Lord, o my Psal. 103. 1, 2. Psal. 146. 1. soule; I will praise the Lord during my life, as long as I have any being, I will sing unto my God. With how many words commendeth hee the Law? What variety hee useth? What cornucopia hee hath? Marke his words; The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soule; the testimony of the Lord is sure, and giveth wisedome Psal. 19. 7, 8, 9. unto the simple. The Statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoce the heart; the Commandement of the Lord is pure, and giveth light unto the eyes. The feare of the Lord is cleane, and indureth for ever: the judgements of the Lord are truth, and righteous altogether. Marke I pray you, how hee calleth it the Law, the Testimonies, the Statutes, the Commandements, the Feare, the Iudgements of the Lord: then what Epithites hee giveth it; the Law Perfect, the Testimonies sure, the Statutes Right, the feare Cleane, the iudgements Truth; then, what fruits he ascribeth to it; that it converteth the soule, giveth wisedome, rejoyceth the heart, endureth for ever. Thus let us learne to measure our selves, and to know the goodnesse of our hearts by the mouth; if wee can speake scantly of God and good things, and plentifully of the world and the vanities of it, our heart is naught, it is withered like grasse, all the dewes of Gods grace are dryed up in it: but wee must rowze up both our hearts and tongues, and say with David, My heart is prepared, O my Psal. 57. 7, 8, 9. God, my heart is prepared, I will sing and give praise: Awake, my tongue, awake, viole and harpe: I will awake right early, I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people, and I will sing unto thee among the nations.
But to come to a more particular description of Gods attributes; and the attributes wherewith hee is described, are

Wisedome, Salvation, Glory, Majestie, Dominion* and Power.

And yet this description is but in part, not a full description; for who can describe him perfectly? hee is shadowed out unto us by the holy Ghost after this manner: The Lord, the Lord, strong, Exod. 34. 6, 7. mercifull and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodnesse and truth, reserving mercie for thousands forgiving iniquity, and transgression and sinne: not making the wicked innocent, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon their Children, unto the third and fourth generation. And againe, Salomon, King Salomon, wise King Salomon shadoweth him out after this manner: Who hath ascended up to Heaven, and Prov. 30. 4.

descended? Who hath gathered the Winde in his fist? Who hath bound All men ignorant, till inlightened. the Waters in a garment? Who hath established all the ends of the World? What is his name, or what is his Sonnes name, if thou canst tell? Oh who can tell his name, or his Sonnes name? Est bonus sine qualitate, magnus sine quantitate, praesens sine situ, sempiternus sine tempore, sine initio, sine fine: Hee is good without quality, great without quantitie, present without situation, everlasting without time, without beginning, and without end. Seditut aequitas, dominatur ut majestas, novit ut veritas, amat ut charitas: hee sitteth as equity, ruleth as majesty, knoweth as verity, and loveth as charitie. For these be not qualities, but of the essence of God; Of Rom. 11. him, and for him, and through him are all things. Hee calleth him onely wise, wherein hee bestrippeth all men, and bereaveth them of wisedome, as the Cumane Asse of the Lions skinne: as Aesops Crow of her feathers, except they have it of God: Hereupon saith the Apostle, If any man want Wisedome, let him aske of God, Iam. 1. 5. who giveth to all men liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him. Ieremie speaketh generally, Every man is a beast in his owne Ier. 10. 14. knowledge, not some, but all; not a few men, but every man. So saith David, The Lord looked downe from Heaven upon the children of Psal. 14. 2. men, to see if there were any that would understand, and seeke after God, but all are gone out of the way, all are corrupt, etc. Paul calleth the Ephesians darkenesse, not darke, but darkenesse, night it selfe: Yee Ephes. 5. 8. were sometime darkenesse (quoth hee) and hee prayeth God to lighten them, The God of our Lord Iesus Christ, and Father of Glory, give unto yo^ the Spirit of Wisedome and Revelation through the knowledge Ephes. 1. 17. of him. And let this be our prayer, that the God of our Lord Iesus Christ, and Father of Glory, would give us the Spirit of Wisedome, and he give us all the Spirit of Wisedome, that wee may bee wise unto Salvation: for that which Christ said of Laodicea, is true of all, Thou saiest, thou art rich, and increased in Apoc. 13. 17, 18. goodnesse, and hast neede of nothing, and knowest not, that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poore, and blinde, and naked. I counsell thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be made rich, and white raiment, that thou maiest bee cloathed, and that thy filthy nakednesse doe not appeare; and anoint thine eyes with eye-salve, that thou maiest see: that is, suffer the eyes of thy understanding to be opened. We are blind, not as whelpes that see after nine dayes, not as the man in the Gospell, who saw men walke like trees, but wee be as blind as beetles, as blind as the men of Sodom, who groped for Lots doore: for what see wee, that the Gentiles saw not? And Gen. 19. yet saw they nothing: for the Apostle affirmeth, that they walked Ephes. 4. 17, 18. in the vanity of their minde, having their cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them; and because of the hardnesse of their hearts. God by the Gospel openeth our eyes, that wee may turne from darkenesse to light, and from Act. 26. 18. Col. 2. 3. the power of Satan unto God. All the treasures of Wisedome and Knowledge

are in Christ. Wisedome and Knowledge are in Angels and in No true wisedome in man, till God infuse it. men as well as in Christ; how can then all Wisedome and Knowledge bee hid in him? Yes, they have it from Christ* for Wisedome and Knowledge is in Angels by Vision, in Men by Revelation, Col. 2. 3. 1 Cor. 1. 22. Prov. 9. 1. but in Christ by union, for hee is the Power and Wisedome of his Father; he is Wisedome and the Church and House Wisedome, wherein all must learne Wisedome: wee know not all things that appertaine to God, nor are we ignorant of all things which are proper to beasts, but we know some things, and are ignorant of others, which are peculiar to men: and so far we see, as God hath illuminated us, and no further; for as all fountaines come from the Sea, and all lights from the Sun: so all Wisedome from God; there may bee Science in the wicked, but not Sapience. Scientia est rerum humanarum, Sapientia rerum divinarum: Aug, Science is of humane and earthly things, Sapience of divine and heavenly things: there is in the wicked Wit, but not Wisedome; or if there bee any Wisedome, it is the wisedome of the world, and of the flesh, but the Wisedome of the Spirit they have it not. They that are of the flesh (saith the Apostle) savour Rom. 8. 5, 6, 7. the things of the flesh, but they that are of the Spirit, savour the things of the Spirit: for the Wisedome of the flesh is Death, but the Wisedome of the Spirit is Life and Peace, because the Wisedome of the flesh is enmitie to God. Achitophel was wise, but not in God, nor for God; the Grecians were wise, but not spiritually; the Philosophers 2 Sam. 17. 1 Cor. 1. 22. 1 Cor. 2. 14. were wise, but yet in part, and in the least part, for from whence commeth (...)? from whence came this division of the gods into majores and minores, into greater and lesser gods? from whence came the furies of Epicures with their Attomies: which cannot bee divided? from whence the fate of Stoickes, bending fast and tying straight Iehova himselfe? from the doting of Aristotle, dreaming of the Worlds eternity? which of these knew the World to be made of nothing; the Word to bee made flesh, Christ to be borne of a virgin, the righteousnesse of one man, to be conferred to another to make him righteous, in three substa^ces or parts to be but one God? For all Wisedome and Religion flow from one fountaine, that is, God. Quem qui nescit, licet videat, caecus Lactantius. est, licet audiat, surdus est, licet loquitur, mutus est, licet vivat, mortuus est, Whom, whoso knoweth not, though he seeth, yet is he blind; though he heareth, yet hee is deafe; though he speaketh, yet is he dumbe; though he liveth, yet is he dead; for this is life, nay, life eternal, To know God to be the only very God, and Iesus Christ whom he hath Iohn 17. 3, 25. sent. The World knowes not God, saith our Saviour, But I have knowne you, and these have known me. Seneca and the Philosophers said, Fortunam a Deo petendum, sapientia a nobis, Fortune is to be begged and craved of God, Wisedome of our selves, Nemo (inquit) Deo ob sapientiam gratias egit: No man hath thanked God for Wisedome. But there was no grace in these lips, they spake proudly. The

Philosophers affirme, reason to be seated in the head, as in a Tower, and from thence as a lampe to shine unto our counsels, God saves by Christ. and as a Queene to moderate the will.
Well, it is God that is onely Wise, and his Wisedome appeareth in the creation, in disposing so orderly, and placing so seemely, all things in their place and degree, as is most wonderfull to behold, with such beautie and proportion in every creature, that unlesse wee bee too too blockish, wee may cry out with David, O Lord, how wonderfull are thy workes! in Wisedome hast Psal. 8. thou made them all. And again, Great is our Lord, and great is his power, yea his Wisedome is infinite. To see the goodly order of Heaven, it will make a man to be astonished at the Wisedome of God, more than the Queen of Saba was at the wisedom of Salomon; to see how God preserveth his Church by his power, and knowes wayes and meanes by his Wisedome to deliver it, might ravish us with the consideration of his wisedome, and to cry out with Paul, O the depth Rom. 11. of the riches, and wisedome, and knowledge of God, how unsearcheable are his judgements, and his wayes past finding ^ut! Yea so wise a God is hee, that deprehendit astutos in astutia: that hee taketh the wilie and subtill in their craft and subtiltie; nay, there is no Wisedome, there is no understanding, there is no Counsell against the Lord. Let us Prov. 21. alwayes then submit our selves to this onely wise God, who knoweth how to deliver us out of temptation and trouble, and to 2 Pet. 2. punish the wicked; for with him is wisedome and strength, hee hath counsell and understanding. Iob 21. 22.
I am come unto the second title, and that title is, that hee calleth him a Saviour, yea our Saviour, a title of great comfort; hee is able to save us, hee is willing to save us: what now is wanting to our full consolation? There is power, there is will in him to save us: upon these two pillars resteth our faith. So Saint Peter comforted the dispersed Church: for having shewed how that through the aboundant mercy of our God, wee are elect, and regenerate to a lively hope, and how faith must bee tried, hee commeth at last to this salvation here spoken of, and telleth them, that they shall one day receive the end of their faith, even the salvation of their soules. The which salvation in Christ is no new thing, but a thing prophesied of old: salvation is the thing that wee all long for: for there is none so wicked, but he would bee saved, and no salvation but in Christ: There is no other name given unto men by which they shall bee saved, save onely by the name of Act. 4. 12. Iesus: hee is (...), a Saviour; so called at his birth. This day is Luke 2. 11. borne a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord; so named before his birth, Thou shalt call his name Iesus: for bee shall save his people from their Mat. 1. 21. sinnes. And thus called after his birth, and Ioseph called his name Iesus, a title knowne in Heaven, honoured in Earth, and feared in Hell. He is a Saviour; a powerfull Saviour, when he Mat. 1. 25. was weakest, then did he the greatest works, that ever were done:

hee was powerfull in his life in doing miracles, in giving sight Christ is properly called the Saviour. to the blind, eares to the deafe, tongues to the dumbe, legges to the ame, life to the dead. O but more powerfull at his death, in saving the world. For then the Sunne was darkened, the earth trembled, the stones clave in pieces, the graves opened, the dead raised; his death reached to Heaven, to earth, to Hell; the Angels rejoyced, the Divels trembled, and all men were comforted. Let Satan boast like Rabsache, that God cannot deliver Ierusalem out of his hands, that God cannot deliver the elect from his power, he is a lier; and the God of peace, shall tread him under our feete shortly; our Michael hath cast downe the Dragon, we may sing the ^o Paean, the joyfull triumph with the Saints; Now is salvation in Heaven, and strength, and the Kingdome of God, and the power of his Christ, for the accuser of our brethren is throwne downe, which accused them day and night before God, and they overcame him with the blood of the Lambe.
For indeed Christs death was our life; his sacrifice our satisfaction; Lact. his labour hath eased our burthens; his wounds, our curing; his stripes, our healing; his curse, our blessing; his damnation, our absolution.
Finely saith one, Thou art sicke, hee is the Physician of thy soule; yea dead in sinne, hee is thy Saviour and reviver; thou art starved through sinne, hee is the bread of life, thou art thirsty, hee is the water; nay dead with thirst, hee is the ever-springing well, the River of Paradise, one drop whereof is more than all the Ocean.
The Graecians for an earthly deliverance by Flaminius, cried so loud, (...), that the earth gave an Eccho, and a rebound, that their cry made the Fowles of the ayre to fall downe dead, their voice and shoute was as the sound of a thunder; how much more cause have wee to reioice in the Lord Iesus, who saveth both body and soule, and delivereth from dangers of this life, and the life to come. The Angels sung at his birth: Glory be to God on bigh, Luk. 2. in earth peace, good will towards men. No tongues of men or Angels are able to expresse this benefit, it is a greater my stery than so, for so the Apostle confesseth, saying, Without controversy, great is the mystery of godlines, which is, God is manifested in the flesh, justified 1 Tim. 3. 16. in the spirit, seene of Angels, preached unto the Gentils, beleeved on in the world, and received up in glory. Moses saved Israel from Pharao; Christ saveth us from the Divell; hee from Aegypt, Christ from hell; hee brought them into the land of Chanaan, Christ will bring us Exod. 12. Col. 1. into heaven; hee sprinkled the dore posts with the blood of the Lambe, Christ our hearts with his owne blood.
The Papists are injurious to Christ, and breake in upon his titles and offices, making him either no Saviour, or else but a little Saviour, in ascribing salvation to Agnus Dei, to the blood of Martyrs, to Crosses, Masses. Papists doe as much

incroch upon Christ, as the Turkes doe: they will not acknowledge election, justification to come from grace, as a right Popish doctrine tends to the disgracing of Grace. Father, but from workes, a stepmother: all their doctrine savours of pride, blaspheming grace, and the worke of grace. Note their doctrines: de igniculis virtutum insitis a natura: of sparkes of vertue grafted in us by nature; de gratia operante and coo^perante: of operating and coo^perating grace; de puris naturalibus: of pure naturals: they will not suffer any body to call God Father, and yet is hee the Father of Mercies, and God of all 2 Cor. 1. 3. comfort. The Church of Rome saith, That all the actions of men unregenerate bee not sinne; that originall sinne needeth no repentance; that a man by meere naturals may love God, feare God, and beleeve in Christ; that a regenerate man may fulfill the whole Law; as said the Trident Councell, that wee may doe works of supererogation. Et quid nunc relinquitar Christe Iesu? And what is now left for Christ Iesus? The Iesuites aske, Why is it not as honorable for God, and as great glory to powre in an inherent righteousnesse into us, as to give us, a reputed or imputed righteousnesse? But so they may aske, Why God kept not Adam from falling? Had it not bene as honorable to have kept him from falling? No, no, for then wee had not knowne the sweetnesse of the Messiah. So it may seeme as honorable Gen. 3. 15. for God to have kept us from sicknesse; but then we had not knowne the goodnesse of the Physician; so God might have given us continuall light; but then wee had not felt the comfort of it, as now wee doe by darkenesse: one contrary openeth another, so that still the reason of the Apostle is good, By grace are Ephes. 2. 8. yee saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: And againe, Wee are justified freely by his grace through the redemption, Rom. 3. 24. which is in Christ Iesus. As poverty causeth wealth to seeme Lact. lib. 2. c. 8. de orig. erroris. good; as darkenesse commendeth light; and sicknes, health, and death, life: so our imputed righteousnes, the glory of God. Wee are as passengers on the sea, wee have many waves to overturne our shippe. God biddeth us undoe our Cables, cast out our anchors, Hebr. 6. and fasten them in Christ: but a sister of ours, that saileth with us, unlooseth our Cables, and casteth out our anchors on the sand, on our works, not on Christs works.
But still to prosecute this point: base miserable men will not bee beholding to God, but they will barter or cope with God, as our men doe in Ice-land, and give him so many pilgrimages, fast so many dayes, heare so many Masses, and doe so many works, till God bee satisfied; but our sinnes are infinite, and Gods Majesty is infinite, and our works are finite: how therefore can they answere that which is infinite? In finitum ac infinitum, nulla est comparatio: There is no comparison betweene that which is finite, and that which is infinite. The Papists are like the madde man Thraselaus, who comming to the haven Piraeum, imagined

all the shippes to bee his; but being cured of that madnesse, saw If wee see our sinnes, we will extoll Gods grace. his poverty: so they imagine all their works to bee good, Heaven to bee this earth, Purgatory to bee theirs, all to bee theirs: but when they shall see their sinnes truely, they will bee of another minde, as was Cardinall Poole, who said that Gods grace cannot bee extolled too high, nor mans righteousnesse cast downe too low: so said Luther, so said Staphilus, so said Turrian, wishing that hee had never written against Sadele.
The third title is glory: For shutting up his Epistle with thankesgiving, he ascribeth to God, glory: glory is the commendation of our lippes from the bottome of our hearts for benefits received. The Apostle calleth it the cabves of our lips: they in Hebr. 13. the Law offered unreasonable calves, wee the calves of our lips; they offered strange flesh, wee our owne flesh; they beasts, wee our selves. Whereupon Paul, I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of Rom. 12. 1. God, that yee offer your bodies a quicke, an holy and lively acceptable sacrifice to God. God himselfe prescribeth this order in trouble; first, to call upon him; secondly, a promise of hearing us; thirdly, a precept to give thanks; Call upon mee in time of trouble, I will heare Psal. 50. 15. thee, and thou shalt glorify mee. Wee performe the first, God the second, but wee performe not the last: wee pray in misery, but wee give not God glory, after that wee bee delivered from that misery. Thus the Israelites, when God slew them, they sought him, Psal. 78. 34, 35, 36. and they returned, and sought God earely, and they remembred, that God was their strength, and the most high God their Redeemer, but they would not glority and praise him for their deliverance: but flattered him with their mouth, and dissembled with him with their tongue. Ten lepers prayed loud in their trouble, for they lifted up their voices and said; Iesus, Master, have mercy on us: but they were mute as fishes Luk 17. 13. 17. after their deliverance, but one glorified God for his clensing; witnes our Saviour himselfe, Are there not ten clensed? where are those nine? they have not returned to give God praise, save onely this stranger. The tenth man with them returned to give thanks and glory to God, but not the twentieth, not the hundred man with us will glorify God; Many pray loud in their misery, like the prisoners in the castle. The sicke man in his griefe with Ezechiah Esa. 38. turneth his face to the wall, and prayeth earnestly unto the Lord; like a Crane and a Swallow, so doe they chatter and mourne, as Doves with their eyes lifted up on high. So the Mariner in a storme prayeth; as the mariners in Assyria, who cried every man Ionas 1. 5. to his God, and cast the wares that were in the ship, into the Sea, for the safety of themselves; so the souldier in the battell prayeth earnestly to God, as the Souldiers of Asa; the husband-men in a drought pray for rayne, like the Tenne Tribes: but when health commeth, when it is calme with the mariner, when the victory is obtained of the souldier, when a gracious raine is fallen to the husbandman; they forget

thankefulnesse, and robbe God of his glory. Many in their sicknesses Thankesgiving the chiefest dutie of a Christian. promise great zeale and goodnesse, and thankefulnesse, but they are like the man in Erasmus his Naufragium, who in a storme promised the virgin a picture of waxe, as bigge as Saint Christopher, but when he came to shore, would not give a tallow candle. Wee promise mountaines, but yeeld mole-hils. Paul saith, As Ephes. 5 3, 4. for fornication and all uncleannes, or covetousnesse, let it not be once named among you, as it beco^meth saints, neither filthines, neither foolish talking, neither jesting, which are things not comely, but rather giving of thanks. As though the life of a Christian should bee spent onely in praising God; as if our tongues were given us onely to that end, as if hee had said, Iest not, Raile not, Speake not ribauldrie, but rather give thankes, use thy tongue to Gods glory, and whether 1 Cor. 10. 31. yee eate or drinke, or whatsoever yee doe, doe all to the glory of God. They that have not glorified God here, shall not bee glorified in the life to come; those tongues shall burne in Hell: this is to lay a good foundation. Paul willeth Timothy to charge rich men that that they doe good, that they bee rich in good workes, 1 Tim. 6. 19. that they be ready to distribute and communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may obtaine eternall life. Now there is not a better worke than to glorifie God, therefore give thankes and sing with the heavenly souldiers, Gloria in excelsis; Glory bee to God on high. Those tongues shall not sing the New song, nor follow the Apot. 14. Lambe, that here have given God no glory. Let thy heart meditate of Gods goodnesse, and let thy tongue utter it, it is that which God requireth, Let them confesse before the Lord his Loving kindnesse, and his wonderfull workes before the sonnes of men. Nicephorus Psal. 107. 15. reporteth of Nestorius the Hereticke, that after his condemnation, in the second Councell of Ephesus, his members consumed, and his tongue rotted in his mouth. The like, the tripartite History reporteth of Nicasius the Donatist and the Eumenians, who eate up Cyrillus liver or heart with salt. The toungs of the wicked shall rot in this life or burne in hell fire, that give God no glory. Tis not enough to meditate of Gods goodnesse in thy heart, but thou must also proclaime it with thy tongue. Noli nimis vultum seu oculos meditationis intueri, nam meliora sunt ubera gratiarum actionis; Doe not behold the countenance or eyes of meditation too much, better are the brests of prayses and thankesgivings. David said, I will alwaies give thankes unto the Lord: Psal. 34. 1, 2. his praise shall bee in my mouth continually, my soule shall glory in the Lord, etc. So let us alwayes praise our God; and never rob him of his glory.
There bee two sorts of theeves that robbe God; the proud man and the envious: the proud man robbes him of his glory; the envious of his Iustice: these bee greater robbers than the Sabeans, Iob 1. 14, 17. who carried away Iobs Oxen and Asses; then the Caldeans,

who carried away his Camels; then Achan, who stole the wedge Wee should exercise our selves to this duty of thankfulnes. of gold, then Barrabas: for all these robbed but from men, but these from God, and that not the least thing, but the greatest, his glory. When we should sound our praises and glory to God, we are silent like Pythagoras Schollers, who spake not in five yeeres; like the dumbe man in the Gospell, who spake not at all. Ios. 7. Mat. 27. I appeale to your consciences, whether for fourty requests made to God, we have given him one thanks? No, no, shame may cover our faces, wee may hang downe our heads with the Publican, and say, Lord, be mercifull unto us, ingratefull, unkind, forgetfull Luk. 38. and vile men. The Father of all mercies, and the God of all consolation give us eyes to see, and hearts to feele so great unkindnes. Let us awake our tongues, our hearts, as David did, and let us say, My heart is fixed, o God, my heart is fixed, I will sing Psal. 57. 7, 8, 9. and give praise: awake, my tongue, awake, viole and harpe. I will awake earely, I will praise thee, o Lord, among the people, and I will sing unto thee among the nations. There is a spirituall palsy in our tongue, that wee cannot praise God; a vaile is over our eyes, that wee see not Gods glory; an impostumation is in our eares, that wee heare not his Word; a Cardiaca passio hath covered over our hearts, that wee thinke not of his blessings; a lethargy in the whole man, that we give him not glory: say therefore with David, Awake, o my tongue, awake, viole, and harpe; I will awake earely: Psal. 103. 1, 2. I will praise thee, o Lord, among the people, and I will sing unto thee among the nations. Speake unto thy soule, chide it, and say, My soule, praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me, praise his holy name: My soule praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits. Vow to God, as the Prophet did, that thou wilt praise the Lord during thy life: Yea, as long as thou hast any being, to sing unto God, and fulfill his desire: I meane Davids, o sing praises, sing praises unto Psal. 146. 1. our God, sing praises, sing praises unto our King; for God is the King of the whole earth, sing yee praises with understanding. Marke how hee doubleth, and redoubleth his words, as Roscius did his gestures; as the Nightingale doth her notes; as the Camelion doth her colors. When the people would not praise and glorify God, hee spake to the Heavens; Heare, o Heavens, and harken, o earth: And Esa. 1. 3. Ier. 9. 22. hee spake unto the earth, O earth, earth, earth, heare the Word of the Lord. And hee spake unto the mountaines, Heare, o mountaines, the Mich. 6. Lord his quarrell, and yee mighty foundations of the earth. He may do so now, this English people will give him no glory* yet all that we have, our wit, our wisdome, our riches our honour, our authority, we should use these to his glory; this is the right end, why God hath given them; wee must not seeke our owne glory in them, but Gods: when Herod was magnified of the people for his eloquence, and honored as a God, Immediatly the Angell of Act. 12. 23. the Lord smote him, because he gave not the glory to God; and so hee was eaten of wormes, and gave up the Ghost. O brethren, it is wonderfull,

that the Heavens raine not downe fire and brimstone upon us, Our unthankfulnes deserveth Gods vengeance. as upon Sodom, that the ayre infect us not, as it did Iuda, that the earth openeth not, and swallow us quicke to hell, as it did Corah and his company, that the fire burne us not as it did Sodom. For that which Christ objecteth to the Iewes, may be verified of Gen. 19. 2 Sam. 24. Numb. 6. 16. us. How can yee beleeve which receive honour one of another, and seeke not the honour that commeth from God alone? In all things that wee doe, wee must seeke to set forth the glory of God: If any man Minister (saith Saint Peter) let him doe it as of the ability, which God ministreth, that God in all things may bee glorified Iohn 5. 44. 1 Pet. 4. 11. through Iesus Christ. Say to God as Aeschines said to Socrates: when others gave him gold, silver, Iewels, Aeschines gave himselfe, like the poore widow, who cast into the treasury, two mites even all her substance. So give God all; thine eyes to see his glory; thine eares to heare his Word, thine heart to beleeve in him, thy tongue to praise him, thy foote to follow him, and thy hand to serve him: and let the saying of the Apostle bee never forgotten, Yee are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in 1 Cor. 6. 20. your bodies and in your spirits which are Gods: stirre up thy tongue therefore to speake of God, and his works plentifully; shall thy bow, and thine arrowes, thy hawke, and thy hound, thy cart, and thy plough have thy tongue tied to them, to delite in their talke? And shall not the Minister in Christ Iesus? Hath thy tongue no portion in such heavenly things? Or if it it bee in thy heart, will it not fill thy mouth with praise? Sermo index animi: thy speech is a messenger of thy minde; an Heavenly heart will use Heavenly talke, and an earthly heart sendeth out vaine and earthly words: deceive not thy selfe; such as thy speeches are, such is thy heart, if thou canst eate, drinke, ride, play, journey with men, and seldome or never talke of God, it argueth a barren heart. If there bee no meate in the dresser, there is little in the kitchin: the mouth is as the dresser, the heart is as the kitchin, wherein things are prepared for God; the vessell is at tilt, when dregs and lees, wanton and filthy speeches, bee drawne from the heart; the quiver is empty, when never an arrow can bee drawne out, never a word that savoureth of goodnes, but all our speeches are for our profit or our pleasure; wee are men of polluted lippes: CHRIST is the fountaine of the water of life, and Esa. 6. Esa. 35. faith in the heart is as the leads or pipes that receive it, and hold the water, and confession is as the cocke of the conduite, Rom. 10. the spowte that lets out the water to all commers. Earthly men seldome talke of CHRIST: but wee have not so unfruitfully learned CHRIST, nor so unhappily given witnesse of his trueth, but better things belong to us, in better wayes wee will runne our course, in a better hope lay downe our bodies: Let them talke of the world that make it their portion; wee looke for a City, whose builder and

maker is God. Let the Aegyptians talke of their walled The godly talke of God, and praise him. Cities; Nabuchaduezzar of his buildings, the foole of his barnes, the voluptuous of his hawks, and hounds; wee will speake of God, and our care shall bee to glorify him: hee is a God of glory, and his is glory: to him will wee give glory, and honour and thanks for evermore.



THE ONE AND FORTIETH SERMON.


VERS. XXV. 

To God onely Wise, and our Saviour bee Glory, Majesty, Power, and Dominion.
How Majesty is ascribed to God.



THere bee six Attributes here in this verse, of God: Wisedome, Salvation, Glory, Majestie, Dominion, and Power.
Wee have handled and heard of three of them, that is, of his Wisedome, Salvation, and Glory; and I am to speake of the other three, Majesty, Dominion, and Power.
Majestie is his incomprehensible greatnesse, which worketh wonders, and bringeth forth most excellent and rare workes: to ascribe therefore unto God, a power and an incomprehensible might, whereby hee doth the workes of wonder, is to render majestie to God. Hereupon said David, Blessed bee the Lord God, even the Psal. 72. 18, 19. God of Israel, which onely doth wondrous things: and blessed bee his glorious name for ever, and let all the earth be filled with his glory: so bee it: Therefore is David so earnest with the tyrants and great men of the world, to give this Majesty to God, and addeth often, Vno oris halitu, that the voyce of the Lord doth all, Give unto the Lord, O yee mighty, give unto the Lord glory and strength, give unto Psal. 29. 1, 2, 3, 4, 10.

the Lord glorie due unto his name: worship the Lord in his glorious Sanctuary. Miracles admired for the the rarenesse. The voice of the Lord is upon the Waters. The God of glory maketh it to thunder: the Lord is upon the great Waters, the voice of the Lord is mighty, the voice of the Lord is glorious, etc. The Lord sitteth upon the floud, and the Lord doth remaine King for ever. Hee repeateth one thing often over: for wee passe over all the workes of God without consideration, like horse and mule that have no understanding, and they are buried in the grave of oblivion. Wee Psal. 22. will not confesse before the Lord his loving kindnesse, and his wonderfull workes before the sonnes of men. They that dwell in darknesse and in the shadow of death, being bound in miserie Psal. 107. 8, 10, 14, 15. and yron, hee brought out of darkenesse and shadow of death, and brake their bands asunder: Let them therefore confesse before the Lord his loving kindnesse, and his wonderfull workes before the sonnes of men. The like hee saith of the sicke, whose soule abhorreth all manner of meate, and they are hard at deaths doore; and of the mariners which goe downe to the Sea in ships, and fee the wonderous workes of God; and to all these, one and the same conclusion is repeated, Let them confesse before the Lord his loving kindnesse, and his wonderfull workes before the sonnes of men. Wee see many wonders, but wee give not God praise in them; a wonder lasteth but nine dayes. Vilescunt omnia Dei miracu^^* all Gods miracles are vile and are not regarded. Augustine said, God doth not now miracles, ob duas causas, for two causes: First, Ne vilescant miracula, as I said before: Secondly, Ne terrena semper Aug. lib. 9. de civitate Dei. quaeramus: that wee should not alwayes seeke after earthly things: it is as great a miracle to governe the World, as to feed Iohn 6. five thousand men with five loaves and two Fishes; Et tamen illud ownes mirantur, hoc nemo: yet all men wonder at that, none at this: Non quia majus, sed quia rarum: not because it is the greater, but because it is rare: it is as great a miracle to raise a barley kernel, as to raise a dead body out of the grave, Vilescit tamen 1 Cor. 15. ob assiduitate^: yet this is not respected, because of assiduity; whereas the other is thought impossible. The Israelites saw the light of Aegypt turned into darkenesse, the waters into bloud, the dust into lyce, the bitter waters of March into sweete, the Psal. 105. Heaven open to give them Manna, the rocke open to give them drinke, the flint stone turned into a well, yet doubted of Gods Psal. 78. Majestie in giving them bread. The Pharisees saw, and perceived the blind to see, the deafe to heare, the dumbe to speake, the lame to walke, the dead to live, yet blasphemed God. The Luke 7. Iewes saw the fiery and cloven tongues, yet railed on the Apostles, as men not full of the Spirit, but full of new wine. Wee Act. 2. in England have seene wonders in Heaven, as strange starres never seene before, blazing Comets at other times; and wonders in Anno 16. Eliz. the Sea, as fishes at the Ile of Tennet, two and twenty yards long; and wonders in the Earth, as trees to remove in Dorset-shire, and

Hereford-shire; yet have wee ascribed to God no Majestie. Nay, God reveales himselfe six wayes. greater wonders than these have we seene: for God did restore to us the light of the Gospell in the greatest darkenes of the world; hee did unhorse the Pope in the time of King Henry the eighth, and increased the light of it, as the noone-day, in the dayes of Edward the sixth; and after it was eclipsed, hee restored the light of it in the daies of Queene Elizabeth: he hath put down the Northerne tumults, hath drowned the Spanish Navy: Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse, and declare the wonders that hee doth for the sonnes of men!
But alas, we have eyes, but wee see not; eares and heare not, wee have hearts like mules, and understand not, wee see no more than beasts, wee are as stockes and blockes: what folly hath Ier. 5. 21, 23. wrapped up all our understanding? What blindnesse hath possessed our braine? And how hath a covering of brawne covered our hearts, that wee give no Majestie to God? That which Paul said of the Gospel, If our Gospell bee hid, it is hid to them that 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. are lost, in whom the God of this World hath blinded their mindes. So say I of Gods wonders, This sinne of England is written with an Iron penne, and with a point of a Diamond. God revealeth himselfe Ier. 17. 1. to the World six wayes.

1 By his Word,
2 By Visions, Act. 26. 18. Esa. 1. 1.
3 By Dreames,
4 By Wonders, or Miracles, Numb. 12. Iohn 5. Mat. 28. 19.
5 By Sacraments,
6 By Types and figures.

By foure or five of these meanes God hath made himselfe knowne to us, especially by wonders, yet wee know him not: wee are greater fooles than Nabal, and verier beasts than ever was Nabuchadnezzar: 1 Sam. 25. Dan. 4. Ier. 8. 5, 6, 7. God must end us, before hee mend us; wee are turned backe to a perpetuall rebellion. Wee give our selves to deceit, and will not returne; no man repents him of his wickednesse, saying, What have I done? Every one turneth to his race, as the horse to the battell. Even the Storke in the ayre (saith God) knoweth her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their comming, but my people knoweth not the judgement of the Lord. This is a nation that heareth not the voice of the Lord, nor receiveth Discipline; shall not these two great earth-quakes this yeere, the one in the day, the other in the night, worke in us a feare of Gods majestie? It is a token Am^^ 1602. that God is angry, and so applied by the Prophet: The earth trembled and shoke, the very foundations of the Earth were seene at thy chyding, at the blasting of the breath of thy displeasure. Psal. 18.
When God would take revenge of the people in the dayes of Tiberius, hee overthrew with an earth-quake twelve Cities of Asia; and in Constantines dayes, ten or eleuen townes in Campania; Lipisius.

when the Iewes under Iulian had tooles of silver to reedify Gods dominion is in all creatures, especially in man. Ierusalem, the earthquake in the night destroyed their worke in the day, and fire from heaven burnt up their tooles. The righteous will see this and rejoyce, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth; and who is wise, that hee may observe these things? that God is a God of Majesty, and magnificence, for it is he alone that doth wondrous things.
The fifth thing here attributed to God, is Dominion, which is the authority of commanding and making Lawes unto all men in the world: by which meanes God ruleth, and hath a dominion or Kingdome in every one of us, whereof the Lord Iesus speaketh in the knitting up of his prayer to God, For thine is the Kingdome, etc. Of this David speaketh, The Lord hath prepared his Mat 6. 13. Psal. ^03. 19, 22. Throne in Heaven, and his Kingdome ruleth over all: And againe, Praise the Lord, all works of his in all places of his dominion: And againe, Thy Kingdome is an everlasting Kingdome, and thy dominion endureth Psal. 145. 13. throughout all ages. And here learne a profitable lesson, that when wee obey the Word of the Lord, and suffer it to rule, and overrule our passions, then hath God a Kingdome, and wee ascribe Dominion to him: hereof the Lord Iesus spake, For when Luk. 17. 20, 21. hee was demanded of the Pharises, when the Kingdome of God should come? He answered them and said, The Kingdome of God commeth not with observation, neither shall men say, Loe here, or loe there: for behold, the Kingdome of Heaven is within you: he meant not the Kingdome of glory, but of grace:
For this dominion or Kingdome is threefold; of Power, Grace, Glory.
The Kingdome of Power is, whereby God subdueth his enemies, and Tyrants of his Church, and crusheth them in pieces like a potters vessell: and of this Kingdome the Prophet thus Psal. 2. 9. Psal. 93. 1. Psal. 97. 1, 2. speaketh, The Lord reigneth, and is cloathed with Majesty, the Lord is clothed and girded with power, etc. And againe, the Lord reigneth, let the people tremble, hee sitteth betweene the Cherubins, let the earth bee moved: the Lord is great in Zion, and high above all people.
His Kingdom of Grace is that, wherby God ruleth in his elect, through his Spirit inwardly, as his Word outwardly: whereof the Prophet speaketh thus, With righteousnes shall he judge the poore, Esa. 11. 4, 5, 6. and with equity shall hee reprove, etc. Iustice shall bee the girdle of his loynes, and faithfulnesse the girdle of his reines: the Wolfe shall dwell with the Lambe, and the Leopard shall lye with the kidde, and the calfe, and the Lion, and the fatte beast together, and a little Child shall lead them. When the corruption of our nature beginneth to bee like the house of Saul, weaker and weaker, and faith, repentance, zeale, knowledge, and other graces of the Spirit stronger and stronger in us, and wee now beginne to love, feare, trust, and serve and obey God, then is the Kingdome of grace in us.

The Kingdome of Glory is that wherein the Angels and Saints We count our selves subjects of Christs Kingdome of grace, but are rebellious. departed now are, and wee shall bee hereafter, when mortality shall be swallowed up of life, when wee shall sing the songs of our triumph; O death where is thy sting? O Hell, where is thy victory? The songs of our joy, such as none can understand, save the hundred forty and foure thousand, which are received up from 1 Cor. 15. the earth.
But here hee meaneth chiefely the Kingdome of grace; for God is a King everlasting, immortall, invisible, and onely wise. Wee 1 Tim. 1. 17. are then his subjects.
The Lawes are the Word. Psal. 2. 8. Psal. 119. 105. Ephes. 6. 12.
The enemies of this Kingdome are Satan, sinne, and death, Hell, domination, the flesh, and the wicked.
The time of it, is to the worlds end. Mat. 28. 20.
The place, is this world and the world to come. Apot. 5. 10.
But o foolish men, how doe wee pray for this dominion and Kingdome of the Lord, when in our works wee destroy it? When wee rebell against the Word, like a rebellious nation? Ezech. 2. 3, 4. and like impudent children, and stiffe-hearted? As the horse rusheth into the battell, so we rush into our sinnes; we sinne Ier. 8. 6. Ephes. 4. 19. with greedines, wee draw it with cordes of vanity; wee love the wicked, we loath the godly; we freeze in love, we boile in malice; Esa. 5. we sell vertue, we buy vice; we refuse Christ, we chuse Barrabas; wee lay away life, and embrace death: wee overthwart the will of God in all things, wee follow our owne wills and desires; wee are traytors to God in the highest degree, as God complaineth; I have nourished, and brought up Children, but they have rebelled against mee. The Oxe doth know his owner, the Asse his masters crib, but Israel Esa. 1. 2, 3, 4. hath not knowne, my people hath not understood. We are a sinfull nation, a people loden with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, corrupt children: We have forsaken the Lord, and provoked the Holy one of Israel to anger. We professe to serve God, but in works wee deny God; we have a shew of godlines, but inwardly wee deny the power of it; our profession Tit. 1. 16. 2 Tim. 3. is like the apples, and grapes of Sodom, faire to the sight, but if you touch them, they vanish to smoke; so all our profession standeth in words, not in works, as Iames said, Ostende mihi fidem per opera: Shew mee thy faith by thy works; so Ostende Iam. 2. mihi regnum Dei per subjectionem tuam: Shew mee the Kingdome of God by thy subjection, by thy obedience which is due to his Word: apply thy heart to keepe his statutes alwayes unto the end.
Bee not deceived, God will not thus bee mocked, in fine wee shall receive the reward of Rebels. Quid dicta audiam, cum facta videam? What should I heare words, when I should see deeds, as Moses said to Israeel, laying out their severall rebellions. So might I lay out the rebellions of England; (...), egge, and bird, all naught; our Fathers naught, and wee also; our

Fathers have forsaken God, and kept not his Law, and we have Notorious sinners, Satans subjects. done worse than our Fathers, and walke every one after the stubbornesse of his heart. As well may wee spit on Christ Iesus, buffet and beate him with a reed, and cry with the mockers, Haile King of the Iewes, as kneele in the Church, and say, Thy Kingdome come, Lord, and yet in our deeds promote the kingdome of Satan, disobey and not receive the Word, which is the power of God Rom. 1. 16. to salvation to every one that beleeveth. Therefore hee so highly extolleth it, saying, The weapons of our warfare are not carnall, but mighty through God to cast downe holdes, casting downe the imaginations, 2 Cor. 10. 5. and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. Wee pray to be like the Angels; we must strive then to come neere Mat. 6. them in obedience.
Three properties are noted in the Angels:



Obediunt


Libentissime,


Citissime,


Fidelissime.



most
Willingly,Speedily,Faithfully.


They are willing to obey: and so wee read, that one Angell with speed killed an hundred, fourescore and five thousand of the Assyrians in one night. We must be like Angels, if we looke Esa. 37. to live with Angels: they praise God day and night, so must we. Esa. 6. But it may bee said of most of us, that which Vivaldus said of Corasius, Erat foris Cato, intus Noro: he was a Cato without, a Nero within: foris Angelus, intus Diabolus: an Angell without, a Divell within; foris Agnus, intus Lupus: a Lambe without, a Wolfe within; Deum ore laudabat, corde and factis negabat: hee praised God with his mouth, but denied him in heart, in deeds: tales sunt mancipia Diaboli: such are the slaves of Satan. God doth not raigne as a King in them, his grace hath no dominion over them; they are in the snare of the Divell, and are taken of him at his will. In this sence, Christ called the Iewes, the sonnes of the Divell: Yee are of your father the Divell, and the lusts of your father will yee doe: so 2 Tim. 2. 26. Iohn 8. 44. 1 Iohn 2. 14. Iohn saith in the contrary, I write unto you babes, because yee have knowne the father. Impij servi sunt tot daemoniorum, quot vitiorum: the wicked are the servants of so many divels, as they have sinnes and transgressions: it is the divell that hath dominion over them, not God by his grace.
As there is in the body a palsy, that striketh the one halfe, and an Apoplexy, that striketh the whole body; so there is in our soules a spirituall palsy, if not an Apoplexy; our understanding is not lightned with the doctrine of God, and our will is not enflamed with the Love of God to doe his will, as it becommeth us. Hereupon Saint Augustine crieth out, Augusta and foeda est domus Aug. animae meae: Straight and filthy is the house of my soule, but when thou commest vnto it, o Lord, it shall bee enlarged and mundified of thee; it is ruinous, Lord; repaire and amend it; it

is filthy, Lord, clense it and wash it; there be many things in this Christ will dwell and raigne in a pure soule. house of my soule, which may offend thy sacred eyes, but who shall purge it and purify it? or unto whom shall I cry, but unto thee; Ab ocultis meis purga me; Clense mee from my secret sinnes? Let this bee our prayer, and pray with that spirit wherewith Augustine prayed it, and no doubt God will heare thee, and have a Kingdom in thy soule. This testimony is true, the Heavens have sealed unto it, and the living God hath spoken it of the children of men; and blessed are wee, if wee beleeve it; there is more happinesse in one day of Gods service, and under his Dominion, then in ten thousand dayes of vanity, in which Satan hath dominion, and wee fall from the Lord of life.
The sixth and last attribute is Power, wherein the excellent praise of God consisteth, which is the ability in God to do what hee listeth; like unto the former attributes, but not all one with them: haec enim magis conjungi, quam confundi velim: I had rather conjoine these things, than confound them, as Calvin said in another case. Of this power speaketh David, O Lord my God, thou art Psal. 104. 1. exceeding great, thou art clothed with glory, and Majesty. And of this power speaketh Esay, Who hath measured the waters in his fist, and counted Heaven with a spanne? and comprehended the dust of the earth in Esa. 40. 12. a measure? and weighted the mountaines in a weight, and the hilles in a balance? And of this power of God speaketh Salomon, Who hath Prov. 30. 4. ascended up to Heaven, or descended? Who hath gathered the Wind in his fist? Who hath bound the Waters in a garment? Who hath established all the ends of the world? What is his Name, or his Sonnes Name, if thou canst tell? And in respect of this power, Christ said, Ecce, vobiscum sum, Behold, I am with you, to the end of the world; whereupon Mat. 28. 20. Aug. Augustine finely; Iturus erat Christus ad dextram Patris, per mortem praesentia Corporali, In regard of his Corporall presence, he was by death to goe to the right hand of his Father, and in regard of his Spirituall presence, hee is with his Church unto the end of the world; secundum ineffabilem and invisibilem gratiam impletur illud, Ecce vobiscum sum: according to his unspeakable and invisible grace that is fulfilled, I am with you alwayes to the end of the world: but according to the flesh, which the Word did take, and as hee was borne of a Virgin, and apprehended of the Iewes, and fastned to the Crosse, and as he was taken from the Crosse, and wrapped in linnen clothes, and laid in the grave, that is fulfilled which is said, Mee yee shall not have alwayes: for forty dayes after Iohn 20. his resurrection hee ascended; Et non est hic: and hee is not here: for hee sitteth at the right hand of his Father in Heaven, and est hic, and yet he is here: for he departed not from them in regard of his Majesty and power, but is still with them: Magna quidem sententia, and tali viro digna. A worthy saying fitting so worthy a Father. As the soule is whole in the whole body, and whole in every part of the body; so Christ, secundum potentiam, by his power

and might is all whole in Heaven, all whole in earth, and all The Christian is strong in Christ, who is all sufficient. whole in every part of the earth: and this is our comfort, for in his passion love is kindled, in his resurrection faith is confirmed, in his resurrection hope is strengthned: for while our Head by his power ascended into Heaven, wee also with him shall together ascend: For all power is given unto him. If Iacob understanding that Mat. 28. Ioseph was alive, could say, Sufficit mihi, quod filius meus vivit: It suffiseth me, that my sonne liveth? much more ought every faithfull Gen. 45. soule to say, It sufficeth mee, that Christ liveth and sitteth at the right hand of his Father, who is unto me in mourning, mirth; in hunger, meate; in sicknes, health; in poverty, wealth, in darkenes, light; in weakenes, power; in death, life: and this is to give power to God, alwayes to depend and hang on his power: not to say as the Aramites, to make him weake in one place and at one time, and strong in another place, and at another time; but strong 1 Reg. 20. 28. for ever: in his strength wee are strong, in his victory, wee overcome. In all things wee are more than conquerors, through him that loved Rom. 8. 37. us. Conquerers, and more than conquerers? What is this, more than Conquerors? O noble Apostle, thou wantest words to expresse thy meaning: what men or Angels can expresse it fitly, what wee shall call this more? Rest in him, trust in him, though your bodies bee weake, your beauty fraile, your health uncerten, your life short, your honours vaine, your pleasures brittle, your troubles great, your wisdome little, your vertues few, your affections many and turbulent, and one day yee shall bee conquerours, and more then conquerours: for his power is made perfect through weakenes; he can bring strength out of weakenes, light 1 Cor. 12. 9. out of darkenesse, life out of death, (...); and make the weake things of the world to confound the mighty. 1 Cor. 1. 27.
Thomas Aquinas doth set out unto us the power of God, by the Aquin. order of naturall things: Nam majora sunt, quae semper nobiliora: for they be the greater, which are alway the most noble (saith hee.) As in the Elements the Water is ten times more then the earth in greatnes, the ayre is greater than the water, the fire, (which wee call the ayre) is greater than the ayre, and the Heavens are greater than the fire, and the highest Heaven greater than the rest; because it containeth, and is not contayned. God therefore which made all, is more noble, more great than all, and is infinite in his essence and power: Sum qui sum: I am that I am, is his name: he is of himselfe, as Kings are of themselves in their owne Kingdomes; we of him, as the authority of Magistrates dependeth on the King. I am, that I am, is his name. As the eye, Exod. 3. which is ordayned to see all colours, wanteth all colour, otherwise all things should seeme to bee of the same colour: so the first Mover is subject to no body, and yet can rule all bodies by his power, and to bee ruled of none; his power is incomprehensible.

The meditation of Christs power, is sweet and comfortable, who can despaire, knowing that in him is fulnes of power? Thus the Christ is all in all unto us. Apostles solaced themselves among the middest of their persecutions; thus let us solace our selves; for who can doe, as Christ Act. 4. hath done? Aesculapius among the Heathen is adored as God in physicke: but Christ hath cured all diseases, he hath given sight to the blind, and tongues to the dumbe, and legges to the lame, Mat. 9. Luk. 7. and life to the dead: Aesculapius did it by hearbes, but Christ by his Word. Hercules is adored for his strength, for killing men, beasts and monsters; but Christ hath overcome Divels, and death it selfe. Bacchus is worshipped for wine, and Ceres for bread: but Christ Hebr. 2. turned water into wine, and fedde five thousand men, with five 1 Cor. 15. Iohn 2. cap. 6. loaves and two fishes. Minerva is famous for learning, but Christ by twelve unlearned men subdued the world. Alexander with the sword, and the Apostles with the Word, one of the greatest miracles in the world. Athanasius libro de incarnatione Christi, layeth out the power of Christ foure wayes; that at his first comming the miralces of Boetia, Licia, Lybia, Aegypt, Cabirus ceased; and secondly, all the oracles of the Divels in Delphos, Dido, Delos, and all Greece: thirdly, their magicke of Chaldaea and India vanished then away; and lastly, that the wisdome and eloquence of Philosophers was silenced and suppressed by the doctrine of the Apostles. Whereupon libro de Passione Dei, he thus crieth out, O Christe, tu lumen nobis in tenebris illuminasti: thou o Christ, our light, didst Iohn 3. 19. lighten us in darkenes; thou at the right hand of thy Father hast Act. 2. loosed our sorrowes; thou being life, hast quickened us being dead; Col. 2. thou being poore, hast inriched us with thy poverty; thou being 2 Cor. 8. Rom. 8. 38. our Mediatour, hast reconciled us to thy Father: thou art to us all in all.
If any object, that hee cannot doe some things, for hee cannot lie. I answere, that Gods power doth not fight with Gods truth. Dicitur omnipotens faciendo quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult: he is called Omnipotent in doing what hee will, not in suffering what Aug. lib. 5. de Civitate Dei. hee will not. Nil Deo difficile: There is nothing hard for God. Potest Deus omnia, sed non vult: God can doe all things, but hee will not: Non tamen pugnat ejus potentia cum voluntate: his power fighteth Tart. adversus Prax. not with his will. Lay thy hand on thy mouth with Iob, reason not against God; Quis es qui litigas cum Deo? Who art thou that strivest with God? so much for the attributes, Wisdome, Salvation, Glory, Majesty, Dominion, and Power.
But it is further to bee noted, that in naming God, To God only wise, etc. Hee comprehendeth the three persons; for these attributes are due to all the whole Trinity, Wisdome, Salvation, Glory, Majesty, Power, and Dominion. The Scripture speaketh diversly of the Trinity; sometime ascribing things to one person, sometime to another, sometimes to all joyntly; as power to the Father, wisdome to the Sonne, goodnesse to the Holy Ghost. Psal. 104. 1. Prov. 14.

Greeve not the good Spirit of God, saith the Apostle. Yet power, wisdome goodnes, are due to all the persons of the whole Trinity, in a Gods glory, dominion, and power, is eternall. more strict sence and signification. Againe, yee shall see the creation of all things ascribed to the omnipotency of the Father; the administration of all ascribed to the Sonne; the sanctification Ephes. 4. 30. Gen. 1. Prov. 9. 1. 1 Cor. 6. ^1. of all ascribed to the Holy Ghost: yet all three create, preserve, and sanctify the Church; Pater a se, Filius per se, Sanctus Spiritus a Patre and Filio: The Father of himselfe, the Sonne by him, and the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Sonne. Augustine speaketh Aug. thus, Sicut ex intellectu generatur voluntas, and ex his ambobus procedit memoria in anima ipsa; As the will springing from the understanding, and from them both the memory in the soule it selfe: so the Sonne is begotten of the Father, and from both these proceedeth the Holy Ghost. This causeth the Scriptures to speake so diversly of the Trinity: Power is attributed to the Father, but not exclusive, exclusively (quoth Vrsinus) in his Catechisme, sed inclusive, but inclusively, for all three are of equall power; sed Patri potentia tribuitur, Vrsinus. quia est fons and origo: but power is given to the Father, because hee is the fountaine, the originall; the rest of the persons are from him, but not as touching their essence, but person and manner of existing. To conclude, the works of the Trinity, quoad extra, are indivisible, but quoad intus, they bee singuler, as the Father begetteth, the Sonne is begotten, the Holy Ghost proceedeth from them both: hold this Axiome in divinity, and learne to speake wisely and soberly of the Trinity.
Well, this glory, Majesty, dominion and power must be yeelded now and ever: for the glory of God endeth not with the end of the world, it is for ever, here, and in heaven; the continuance of this world before God, is but as a day; the Morning of this day was the creation of the Heaven, and of Adam, untill the flood; the Noone of this day was the comming of Christ, the Evening, is the end of the world; a thousand and six hundred yeeres, S. Iohn cals but one yeere. A thousand and six hundred yeeres are past as 1 Iohn 2. an houre, but the glory of the Lord is from eternity to eternity; from everlasting to everlasting; from eternity, as touching election, quae est sine principio, to eternity, quoad reprobationem, as touching reprobation; for it shall abide without end: but in that hee saith, both now and for ever; this teacheth us, that there must be no end of praising God: his praises must bee ever in our mouth, First, for spirituall blessings bestowed here in earth, and in Heaven; as Election, Redemption, Adoption, Vocation, Iustification, Sanctification, Psal. 86. Glorification, for every one of these commeth from God, therefore hee is to be praised both now and for ever. Now, in this life wee must sing Hosanna to the Sonne of David, and hereafter we shall sing Allelujah in Heaven, with all the Saints. For all spirituall blessings wee must say with the Apostle, Blessed be God, which hath blessed us with all spirituall blessings; For temporall blessings, Ephes. 1. 3.

glory and praise is to bee given to God: Christ gave thanks for God is to bee prayed to, and praysed for all things. food; Anna, for a child; Iacob, for riches; Abrahams servant, for prospering his journey; and in a word for all other temporall blessings, as health, wealth, peace, prosperity, God is to be praised now and ever. As there is no end of his benefits towards us, Iohn 6. 12. 2 Sam. 2. 1. Gen. 32. 10. Gen. 24. 48. so there should bee no end of our praises towards him; but wee must praise him both now and ever.
To conclude this point: here is a secret comparison betweene the glory of man, and the glory, dominion, and power of God: mans glory is as a flowre, All flesh is grasse, and all the glory thereof as the flowre of grasse: for so Esay was willed to cry: but though hee Esa. 40. 6. cry it, few will beleeve it, wee trust not the Lord: one speaketh of an Epitaph graven in the tombe of a great man.



Hic fuit, hic fecit, pugnavit, vicit, amauit,


Composuis libros, gentes, populosque subegit:


Quid mihi cum fuit, aut erit? est valet vnum.



He was, he did, he fought, he conquer'd, lov'd,
Wrote books, nations and people hee subdu'd;
But what have I to do with was or Shall*
With me the Present only, is worth all.


Things past bee gone, things to come are uncerten, that which is, and is for ever, goeth for all: glory present will bee past, and glory future will bee for ever: haec vita, haec gloria, non est vita, non est gloria: this life, this glory, is neither life nor glory; for wee are dead, and our life is hid with Christ in God, and when Christ, which is our life, shall appeare, then shall we appeare with him in glory.

AMEN.

This word is an Hebrew word, and it is taken in the Scriptures three manner of wayes, sometime as a Nowne, signifying Christ himselfe; sometime as an Adverbe: so Christ useth the word, saying, Amen, Amen, that is, Verily, Verily I say unto you: and sometime as a Verbe, as in this place signifying, So be it, or be it so. So that this word Amen contayneth more than the prayer it Apoc. 1. Iohn 3. selfe; For in the prayer, wee testify our desire, how that wee desire Glory, Majesty, Dominion, and Power, to bee given unto God: but in this word Amen, wee witnes our faith, that wee believe, Glory, and Majesty, Dominion, and Power, to bee his. So that from hence wee have to observe, to pray with faith, to beleeve we shall receive those things wee have prayed for. This appeareth in the Prophet, Praised bee the Lord for evermore: so bee it, even so be it. And Christ hath taught us thus to shut up our prayers: Psal. 89. 52. Mat. 6. 13. and the Apostle closeth and concludeth his Epistle with it,

Grace bee with you, Amen; for wee must not doubt of Gods promises, but beleeve stedfastly, That all the promises of God are in Amen, diversly used in Scripture. Christ, yea, and are in him, AMEN.
Againe, this word Amen, teacheth us to desire earnestly, 2 Tim. 4. 22. and fervently the thing wee pray for: For the prayer of the righteous availeth much, if it bee fervent. David was fervent in his Iam. 9. 16. Psal. 106. 48. prayer, Blessed bee the Lord God of Israel for ever and ever, and let all the people say, Amen. And verily this word, Amen, noteth our desire, our earnest fervent desire to bee heard, and to obtaine; it is in effect thus much; O Lord, thus bee it unto mee, what my tongue or soule have begged, give it me, grant it me. Amen, Amen. So Lord, even so, Lord.

FINIS.


