



The first Booke of the third Part of the Myrrour of Knighthood: wherein is declared the high and mightie deedes of the Sonnes and worthie Nephewes of Trebatio: and other mighty Princes and Knights: with the valiant deedes of Knighthood of Claridiana, and other heroicke Ladies.


The end of that perillous and bloodie Combat between Rosicleer Prince of Constantinople, and Fangomadan King of the Forbidden Iland, about the libertie of Meridian Prince of Scythia, Floralinda Princesse of Macedon, and the Troyan Oristides: and what after happened more to them.

 Cap. 1.
THe Battell between Fangomadan and Rosicleer continued with no lesse furie, than that vreasonable begun Combate of the Lapythes and Centaures, at the marriage of Pyrithous, the Companion of Hercules: and with like noyse, or more violence, did their stroakes redouble one vppon an other, battering and shiuering their armour, and staining the pauement of the Court (wherein they contended) with their bloods: either so impatient of delay, and desirous to see the others downfall, that they enuied at the breathing time, which both their necessities made them glad to take. Yet (of the two) there appeared a greater and more apparant defect

in Fangomadan than the Prince. For the Giant with his owne vnreasonable hugenes and intollerable weight of his armour was most oppressed: and Rosic^eer by his agili^ie and nimblenes, had more than ordinarie aduauntage: neuertheles he entred not and retired so at his ease, but with his armours burden, the Giants blowes, and hys exceeding trauell, his flesh was greatly brused.
At this time, two things much auayled the prince: the one the excellent temper of his armour, fashioned by the wise Artemidoro, the other his vnmatchable sword sent him from Queene Iulia: for no force had force to enter the armour, nor no armour had strength to resist the sword, especially weelded by so strong an arme.
Two weary howers were past, when as these worthy Warriers (impatient to see their fortunes stand on such doubtful termes) with both hands met with their swords aloft, in such furious manner, that the Beholders (thogh some of them were vndoubtedly verie valiant) were so amazed, that their blood retyred to their affrighted hearts. The Pagan was quicke in the execution of hys blowe, which was the cause that it did little offend his Aduersarie, onely it caused his eyes to flash fire like lightening: but the prince setled his blow so furiously vpon the Giant, that if his steely helme had not beene three fingers thicke, it had parted his head, yet it made him fall vpon the necke of his Elephant, and Trebatioes Sonne redoubling another vpon him, Fangomadan had falne out of the saddle, if he had not preuented it by crossing his armes.
This worthie Prince (descended from Achilles) might then haue concluded the Battle, when as the Moore was in this perplexitie, but hee would not, because it was against gentillitie and knighthood. Long it was not that hee paused, for Fangomadan comming to himselfe threwe from him that which remained of his shield, and with his sword in both hands went against his Contrarie: who co^mitting himselfe vnto God, ran in with a thrust at him, and

saued his life, for that the Giaunt could not fasten a full blow on his helme, but it glaunced downe on the Horse head, which being parted in two, beast and Lord fel to the earth: which greeued Floralinda, who with her Hus^and from a high gallerie beheld this mortall contention. Yet went hee not without his paiment, for there was no ^nchantment could resist Rosicleers Sword, nor the Guider of that well tempered weapon: but with vnmatchable force it passed through his gorget to his throate: which the Giant feeling, he gaue backe, otherwise he had presently dyed.
Although the Sonne of Trebatio was a foot, yet did not his valiant heart faile him, but with a gallant demeanor he abode the comming of his enemie: in such sort that the Giant staid to behold him. The Prince seeing him staye, said: What doost thou meane thou diuelish Furie: ^was becommeth a Knight, for in killing my Horse thou art by custome bound to giue me another, or els to alyght from thine.
No such curtesie (said the Giant) makes me pause: but I thinke one of the Gods are descended in thy shape, but neither his nor anie other force will deliuer thee from my deathfull resolution. And there with he would haue ouerthrown him wt his Elephant: but the Prince stept aside, and as the Giant passed by, he stroke him such a blow, that the sword pared away the armour and part of his arme: so that with great paine he was able to rule his sword. Yet this trecherous Moore returned againe to ouer-run him, and the Greeke abode him with al the dexterie that might bee: and at his second passing by, he assayled him as a tyger doth his pray, laying his strong handes on him wyth such force, that he pulled his furious Aduersarie quite out of his saddle.
The Giant seeing hee must fall, was subtle and cunning, and clasped in the Prince, as the Yuie twisteth about the Dake, because that in their falling he should not

take anie aduantage of him, so that they came both to the ground: whereas might haue beene seene the gallantest wrestling in the world. For although the Giant were huge and deformed, our Knight was as well set and as strong as anie in the world, not being a Giant.
It gaue great con^ent to the Beholders, to see what art and pollicie either of them vsed to get aduauntage of hys Contrarie. The Pagan in this wrestling lost very much blood, and wexed weake by reason of the wound in hys throate: which caused him to let loose the Prince, whose flesh and bones were verie much brused. But seeing it was not then time to loose anie opportunitie, they returned to their Battell againe with so great furie and quicknes, as though it had then but new begun, till such time as verie wearines did inuite them to leaue of, euen for a little breathing: which was not without neede, for they had sought foure howers together, without taking anie kinde of rest.
Those that were present did verie much extoll the fortitude of the pagan, in that he could so long indure against the Prince: for that they knewe by experience how farre the strength of his armes extended. And the Prince vnto himselfe sought by what meanes he might ouercome hys Enemie without killing him: for that he seemed to be one of the most valiantest that euer he prooued: and still hee thought that he exceeded the dexteritie of the mighty Gran Campeon, that was slaine in the Warres of Greece, by the hand of the said Prince. Likewise he remembred the manie and great affaires hee had to doo in other Partes: but that which greeued him most, was that so long time he had not heard of his beloued Oliuia. The which thought kindled in him such cholar, that like vnto lightening hee went to the Pagan, first demaunding whether he would yeeld himselfe for ouercome, and leaue the Battell in the state it was?
But this blasphemous King with a voyce that feared

them all said? Uile creature, is it possible that the Gods will consent being armed in the fielde, so poore a Knight as thou for pure sorrow and greefe should desire to leaue off the battell, and yet wish me to yeeld as ouercome? I do now perceiue that all your deities are vile, and that your power is but small, that one alone Knight dare attempt to doe this. Come downe you theeues from those celestial houses that you haue stolen and vsurped, and I will giue you to vnderstand that I am Fangomadan? And therwith raging like a Tiger, hee assalted that warlike Prince, and gaue him such a violent blow vpon his helme, that he made him stoope and put his handes to the grounde, and doubling the same he stroke him ouerthwart, that it descended on his left shoulder, which the Prince felt verie greeuous, and seeing himselfe so intreated, considering withall, that the force of his aduersarie was increased, he beganne to hammer blowes on him in such sorte, that hee made him seeme all bathed in bloud, puffing and blowing like a bayted bull.
The Pagan would haue giuen him a down right blow purposing therewith to conclude the battle: But the Prince beeing warned by that which before had passed, made shewe as though hee woulde abide it, yet when it did descend, with all the lightnes in the world he auoided and made him strike vppon the stones so furiouslie, that when the swoorde fell it broke off a great peece.
This louer of Oliuia was not iole on so good occasion, but stroke the Giant such a blow and with such good order on his shoulder, that he did not onely disarme the place but also made therein a great wound, out of which began to flowe a great quantitie of blacke bloud. And this victorious Greeke withdrew himself when he saw the wound he had giuen him.
It cannot be imagined what great anger possessed the Giant, for like vnto a wounded Lyon (although somewhat wearie) hee assalted Rosicleer: who had no care to

strike him, but to delay him with his lightnes, for that he knew well it would shortly tyre him. And so vsing his wonted dexterity, he onely auoided the blowes of his enimy.
Those that were beholders hereof did well perceiue the intention of this baptised knight: but yet he could not still so auoide it, but that the giant seazed on him such a blowe, that he made him somewhat to loose his memorie, and to voide bloud out at his mouth, the which Rosicleer tooke to be perilous, and let flie three or foure blowes on high to amaze his contrary, and therewith thrust at him with his sword in such sort that hee hit him on the thigh, and the point passed to the bone.
The Moore did not thinke it to be great, till such time as assaying to follow him, he fell-downe vpon his handes, but he was not so soone downe, as with the quicknesse of his thought he was a foote againe, florishing with his vnmeasurable sword.
This valiant brother to the Knight of the sunne could very well haue ouercome him in thus detaining him, but he sodainely conceaued it to bee cowardise, and therefore determined to put the state of the battell in one blow, and as the giant was striking at him a mighty stroke, he entered within him, thinking to ouerthrow him, but he found him like a rocke: therefore being together he gaue place to the Moore to benefit himselfe of time and occasion.
But the giant leauing his greate fauchion, seazed on the Prince with his heauie armes, and rescused him in such sort, that it seemed he would breake all his members, so that they must needs returne againe to a perilous wrastling, in so much that with the heate of the battell and with wearinesse, they fell both on the grounde, and inforcing one to get the other vnder, they both lacked breath and the giant bloud, through which faintnesse they both sounded, the vnhappy giant neuer againe reuiuing. And this

is alwaies to be looked for of those, who liued as hee did, making his owne content a God, and worshipping his onely pleasure.
All that were aboue woulde haue descended to them, but there was none that could forsake the place where as they were.
For that incontinent the heauen was couered with a thicke and blacke cloude, with such thundrings and lightnings that it seemed that all the firmament would fall to the earth, in the which was hearde the bleating of beastes and other heauy groanes in the saide courte for the space of one houre, till such time as the storme was past, and the heauens became cleare as they were before.
Nowe looking for the warriours they onely sawe the Prince, as one amazed new come to himselfe, and as though his aduersary had been before him, he gaue assault till such time as he was wholy in his remembrance, and saw not the giant.
But that which grieued him most was that he lacked his good sword, which he woon with so deare experience, as was said in the first booke. And looking about for the giant, he sawe on the one side of the court, a sumptuous edifice like to a sepulcher, which was sustained with foure deformed Lyons made of alablaster, the Sepulcher it selfe was all of Christall, so cleare, that all might be very well seene which was within, and marking it well, he knewe that it was the bodies of the giants and their mother who laie as though they had beene aliue with their eies open, and euery one a very long scrole or writing in their handes, which declared the cause of their deathes: but that which made the inuincible Prince Rosicleer most to maruell was to see his good sword sent from Queene Iulia smitten quite through one of the foure pillers that sustayned the couering of the sepulcher which piller seemed to be of very fine Iaspar stone.
And hauing desire with great ioy to pull it out, hee no sooner layd hand on it, but there came foorth so great a flame that it seemed to haue burned him, till such time as he let it goe againe, and then the griefe went away, and he saw hanging at it a parchment wherein was written letters of bloud, which he could not stand to read, for that they did all descend and receiued him, and asked him how hee did feele himselfe? But the excellent and fayre Infant, with a gallant and soueraigne behauiour said.
If you should haue hoped worthie Prince for my helpe, as you in descending to the battell told me, I feare me the Fight had been more dangerous: but thanks be to the powers of heauen, it was concluded by your owne excellent force. Nay rather Madame (said Rosicleer) next to the heauens haue your distresse and beauty praise for this vnexpected Uictorie: for by them was powerfull abilitie added to my weake strength to defend the one, and releeue the other.
Let vs leaue this talke said Floralinda, and goe we to see the sepulcher, for I beleeue you haue lost something therein, for that it seemeth the fire doth defend it.
Then said the Knight of Cupide, were the losse verie much, I should thinke it paide, hauing finished this aduenture for the liberty of the Prince your spouse, although it was not little greefe that my swoord should bee taken away. Such deedes haue you done therewith saide the Ladie, that I meruaile they did not take away your life, although I beleeue to see you accompanied with so manie, they durst not.
They all laughed at that the Infant had said, yet they did greeue at heart for the losse of the Princes Sword. And so they went with a great desire to see where it was, and beheld a maruellous Aduenture, for they saw in the Piller fiue pommells of swords, euery one with his scroll hanging thereat, which declared whose it was. The swordes being one aboue the other, on the highest part

was that of the Prince Rosicleer, whose scrole was written in this maner.

This was the sword of the Prince of Constantinople, Rosicleer, the which he lost at the defended Iland, putting to death with it Fangomadan and his sons, and shall here remaine till such time as the braue Tyger with the vntamed Lyones doth ouercome the guarders and keepers of my Castell, getting without armes or order of knighthoode the entrie thereof, and for himselfe the two swords neerest, swearing to reuenge the death of the vnhappy king.

They remained all amazed to see the boldnesse of the writing, and reading downe lower the second was thus.

None be so hardy or bold with order of knighthood, or being a man, to touch the sword of the worthy Camilla, for that he shall remaine in perpetuall prison, till such time as the rigorous Lyones doth take him out, swearing in the handes of the furious Tyger the reuengement.

They were much more amazed at the second writing, in seeing that alone a woman and without armes was granted the sword. Whereon sodaine passions came vnto ^he faire infant Floralinda for her lost infants, doubting whether they spoke of them or not. But dissembling her griefe, they read the third which said.

The sword of the famous Telarmonio shalbe graunted vnto none, till such time as the hid and vnknowne Basiliske doth descend from my dwelling place, and get the sworde without armes, and sweare the like.

It could not but grieue the Greeke Prince in seeing that all those must be accompted with the other enemies: but animating himselfe he said, few armours they haue left

me, who against me hath sought so many, but there shall not lacke other to supply that of the first. And for all that they did importune him to take his ease, they could not persuade him, but to read on the other scroles, which said.

VVhen the swift leopard goeth foorth of my delightful dwelling, and winneth the key of my Castell, then shalbe graunted him the sworde of Astrusia King of the Medes, swearing in the clawes of the Ownce, to procure my reuengement.

It seemeth vnto me said the warlike Troian, that according as the wise man doth shewe, there remaineth yet more warres for vs to end then those that are past, for that he putteth fiue for one alone offender. It is not to be marueiled at said Meridian, that when one alone is able to offend and defend himselfe, the aduersary seeketh many to assault him, but there shall not lacke other two to shut vp the number with vs, and to count vs so many as our enemies. It seemeth that me alone he doth threaten said Rosicleer, and therfore I wil see the fift sword that shal smite me, and reading it said.

VVhen that the sword of the famous and feared Milon, shal come into the hands of the hid youth, who in my dwelling was nourished with the furious ownce, she not knowing therof, then shall rest the great wise man Gelasio Lord of the couered Iland, hauing for certaine the reuengement of his beloued sister and friends that suffered by the handes of the cruell greeke. And thou worthy youth doe not forget to respect the couetous ownce, although it be to thy cost, for it will be the more for thy glory.

They coulde not vnderstand any more what the writings did signifie. And so with great griefe vnto ye Prince for his good sword they departed. Although he was co^forted

to see that it should come to the hands of one that should pull it out or els die in change thereof. All were ioyfull to see the aduenture ended and they set at liberty, yet ye wounds of the Prince was a griefe vnto the faire Floralinda who cured them iointly with her spouse, with whom he passed the time as you shall heare in the second Chapter.



The Prince Rosicleer was healed of his wounds, and gaue liberty to Brandafidell the sonne of Fangomadan. Floralinda declared to her spouse the losse of her sons: they all returned towards Greece.

Chap. 2.
WIth zealous care the faire Princes of Macedonia did cure the wounded greeke, and comforted the weakenesse of her beloued spouse with her presence, and would not absent her selfe til she saw him whole and sound. She greatly reioyced to see the knight of Cupide, vnto whom that she might shew her selfe thankefull, she cured him with her owne hands, and neuer would consent that any other should do it, for all his often modest desires to the contrary. Sometimes they would al three descend and see that faire castell, and passe away the time in the fresh gardens that were there, and often behold the superbious edifice and curious sepulcher which the pagan had. It so fell out that one day he being altogether recouered of strength, the prince Meridian calling vnto him his spouse and the Troian Oristides, caried them to the chamber of the Prince, who was then vp and walked, although not out of his chamber, for that he was somewhat leane. He seeing them comming, receaued them with that gallant grace (with the which aboue all the rest he was indewed) and said vnto the faire Prince.
It well appeareth worthy Lady that you take liking not to come very often vnto my simple lodging, nowe those delicate handes hath so soone put me in such estate

that I am not as I was wont to be visited. To whom she said* Sir Knight if this way you will carry it, I wel could long ^re this haue giuen you entire health, but I receauing content in your company haue delaied the cure: at which fault of mine, it seemeth you are malecontent, neither can I blame you* seeing the gallant Oliuia is not here by whome you should receaue all the contentment that may be giuen.
You doe well faire Princesse said Rosicleer so to put it off, that I may more and more protest the seruices I haue sworne to the beauteous Floralinda, which if weakenesse hinder not, I wil on any occasion perfourme.
Cease now to talke of occasions said Floralinda, I know ye haue beene alwaies a professed seruant to faire Ladies, and therefore worthily were you called the Knight of Cupide, and in their defences haue you shewen your selfe a second Mars. But tell me certainely sweete Prince, now Mars is vnarmed of his good sworde, were it not a faire sight to see Oliuia his Venus by his side? Impossibilities said the Prince are not to be expected, Oliuia is too farre from hence distant to be here with wishing: but should the Knight of Cupide wish for Venus, she were not farre to seeke, Floralinda of Macedon beeing so nere. With your leaue great Prince said Meridian, if this be Venus, and you Mars, I dare ingage my honour the olde fable will prooue false: for neither will you forsake Oliuia for this face; nor my Venus make Meridian Vulcan for your valour.
Let vs leaue these iestes said Floralinda, if we run into such co^parisons: for if the Prince or I had that intention, yonder shines the same glorious Eie of daie that discouered to all the Gods the lustfull Mars and his faire minion in an iron net, and the same sun would surely shewe our sinne to all the earth. But the Grecian Prince wil neuer proue ye Mars (said Rosicleer) nor Floralinda so light a Venus. Inough, inough, said the Troian Ori^tides, Meridian

is disposed to stand on nice tearmes, it was not long since he was otherwise imployed: but libertie now and the possession of his faire Loue, maketh him secure. The Greeke Prince hath lost his Sword, and his Oliuia is far distant, Meridian may therfore be much merrier than his famous Rescuer. Let vs intend our iourney towardes Greece: and therefore worthie Knight of Cupide, dispose we pray thee of this Castle and the curteous Giant, as to thy bountie best seemeth.
I will giue vnto the Giant (said Rosicleer) that which his bountie and vertue deserueth, being there too vrged by Meridian, Floralinda, and your selfe. Therefore I praye you call him, that we may finish our affaires here.
The Nephew of the Troyan was not slothfull to fetch the Giant: who till that time would not speake with anie, neither come foorth of his chamber with the greefe he conceiued for the losse of his Father and Brethren: and all that while his Sister did cure him, and giue him diet. He came in a gowne of russet veluet cut vpon purple, and the Giant Ladie with him: who although she was great, yet was shee well proportioned. At their comming, all the Princes arose vp, which argued in them great and high curtesie* and beeing all set againe, the Greeke address^d his talke vnto the Giant.
I doo wel vnderstand (vertuous Brandafidell) that neither the death of your Father and brethren, neither to see your selfe ouercome and in prison, and your Castle in the power of a strange owner, hath bin occasion to alter your heart: as one that knoweth vnto what man is subiect, liuing vnder the continuall chaunce and change of fortune. It shall not therefore be needfull for your comfort, to laye before you anie example of him, that in one daye was a King, and in the same was throwne into a cage or prison. This I speake (worthie Knight) for that you should accept this present fortune as a thing you looked for: and so you shall see that the euill shall neuer greeue you, because

it commeth as a thing expected before. The death of them all is a griefe vnto me, and I should haue been verie ioyfull, if there had beene any other meane to haue preuented it, but the imprisonment of these Princes being betweene, deserued that a better esteemed life then mine should be aduentured for their liberties.
It is now done, and there could be no lesse don. Therfore confirme your selfe vnto that which fortune doth offer which is the freendship of these Princes and mine: and if there be any other thing requisite and necessarie for the satisfaction of the dead, you are at libertie and Lorde of the Castle as before, for that these worthy Princes doe thinke it conuenient, and seeing you are a neere neighbor vnto the Princes Countrie, acknowledge him for your friend, and he will fauour you in all he may. And in satisfaction of the pain and griefe they suffered in the inchantment and the losse of my esteemed swoord, hee shall at our intreatie tell vs who is this great wise man, and where hee dwelleth, that in way of prophecie thus foretelleth wonders. And therewith the Prince concluded his speech, giuing contentment vnto them all.
Then the stout Pagan aunsweared, with a kinde of humilitie which proceeded from his vertuous disposition, I will not ^^ower of Knighthood, for this present nor for that which is past, newly binde my selfe to be more affectioned, neither heerwith more extoll the noblenesse which you doe vse, in doing that which is common to so soueraigne a Prince. I liued in securitie and you being the victor, I cannot say I am ouercome. And being conquered by those warlike handes, I do extende that nothing could to mee bee more glorious then to haue put my selfe in the field against him, that Mars himselfe dare not contende with. The libertie which you and these Lords doe giue, I so esteeme of it as is good reason I shoulde, but I woulde change it howsoeuer, to be alwaies in your companie, and employ it (as experience should manifest) in your seruice,

while life lasted, ending therewith my sweete bondage, I acknowledge all you my kinde Lords and friendes for that you demaund touching the inchauntment. Many dayes past, my mother did tell vs that in the Grecian house was borne my fathers death, and now it is wel seen for that you haue giuen it him: and she said, that with very griefe to see my father slaine shee should dye, and that I shoulde see in her reuenge, running brookes of Grekish bloud, for that she had an Unkle, the wisest man that is to be found in all those partes, who neuer woulde carrie vs to see his dwelling, which is called the hidden Iland, and they say that it was neuer seen of any since he dwelt in it: And that for this reuengement, he will ioyne together the greatest part of all the Pagans, nourishing and maintaining fiue Knights which shalbe those which shall sweare the reuengement, to whome he will giue armour and horse, wherewith they shall fight against the Grecian princes, and that the swoord of one of them should bee that which most bloud shall shed, and it seemeth vnto mee that in part it is performed, and I doe beleeue that hee hath with hym those youthes. And at his departure hee tolde mee that I should be constrained by the Greekish vertue to be on that part, against whome hee will procure my reuengement, which he calleth present death: and that I should remain the keeper of this Castle, for defence of all such as shoulde procure the aduenture of the swordes (for so the Castle is called) and likewise that there shoulde bee heare in fast keeping, two Ladies the most principalest in all the world till such time as a Maiden childe in equall battle doth ouerthrow me, and he said that foorthwith I should tell you who it was. This is princely Lords, all that which I doe know of this aduenture, or my euill fortune, for that I find my selfe friend to the Greekes, and must see their bloudes spilt for my cause, but in shedding of mine owne, and loosing my life in your defence, it seemeth vnto me that I doe that which I am bound to doe.
All the Princes remained content with the reasons of this most valiant and new Greeke (for so we will call him from this time forwards) for that Lyrgandeo doth make of him great mention, comparing him with Brufaldoro, and saith that he did exceed him in strength, yet the dexteritie of the other, supplied his want of strength.
You haue well showed heroy^all Knight (said the Troian) the noblenes of your worthie hart, for that you beare it so well against the variable chaunces of Fortune: and there is no doubt you know that vnto whosoeuer she hath shewed her selfe frendly, she hath also made him know the mutabilitie of her wheele. And yet for al this the Greekes will not let but to be as they were, and to haue courage to oppose themselues against anie in the world that shall offend them. For my part I account it glorie for them who like you haue obtained their frendship. For who is more bound to be their Enemie than I, in calling to minde that they raced my first Cittie, and killed so manie and worthie Knights my predecessors as there perished: but now knowing their vertue, I see no reason but to imploye my s^lfe in their frendship. And therefore from this time forwardes I doo receiue you into the number of the Grecian Band, and I giue my selfe to you for one of your most frends. Heerewith they imbraced one another, there remaining betweene them such loue and f^^ndship that indured to the death, as you shal vnderstand hereafter: and for his excellent vertues, they called the Giant, the Greek Knight.
That day they dined altogether, and the Giants Sister was verie much comforted. But all dinner time the Princesse Flora^inda (remembring the losse of her beloued Children) was so sad, that they which were at the Table did perceiue it, and with great instance requested her to tell them from whence proceeded that new care and griefe. Her Husband with the rest vrging her, she was forced to tell them. So beginning with a thousand sighes and christaline

teares which did solemnize her griefe, she said*
It well appeareth louing Lorde and husband to see you without danger, and at libertie, that it is the greatest content that can come vnto me, yet fortune hath beene so contrary vnto me, that me thinke I am not bound to giue her any great thankes, for you shall vnderstand that the fruite of our louing marriage, before I coulde imbrace them* were taken from me, so that onely I know I lacke a Sonne and a daughter.
The afflicted Ladie coulde not speake any word more, neither had she any space, for that they saw the walles of the chamber to open, and there entred foure deformed serpentes, euerie one of them embrasing one of the Knights, leauing the Princesse all alone, whome a terrible and fearefull Griffon tooke vp in his clawes, in such sort that the cryes vnto her louing spouse for help could not profit her, for that the knightes were not able to moue from the place where the Serpents layd hold of them: which Serpentes seeing the other beast gone, let loose the Princes, with such griefe that they were readie to burst because they could not ayde and helpe the Princesse, neither sawe they any more of the Serpents, but they found a letter vpon the boord, the which the Troyan tooke and read: the contents being as followeth.

The Letter of the wise Gelasio.
TO the souereigne prince of the Scythians, and Rosicleer the Destroyer of my blood, with the rest of the new Greekes, health or hate. If his desire who with all hys wisedome and arte doth striue to procure thy death, in satisfaction of that which thy vntamed arme hath done, thou needest not desire to haue the sight of thy sword, till such time as thou feelest the losse of thy blood, so that the hauing it at that time shalbe cause

that thou canst did no more outrage. And thou Prince Meridian, shalt now pay my sorrow for my lost neuewes, with like greefe for want of thy beloued wife: vntill such time as the furious Ownce doth ouercome in equall battell that new Knight thy now Frend, my vnworthie neuew: to whom I will adde no more greefe, but that hee sh^l be ouercome in manner aforesaid. And thou Troyan sha^t loose thy libertie, putting thy head in the power of thy most cruell enemy.

Gelasio.


WIth great paint this valiant Knight co^cluded the reading of the letter, giuing shewes of the griefe he felt at his heart. Then gentle Brandafidel did comfort them, promising that hee would serue the Princesse, with all things necessarie, and verie shortly disinchaunt her and bring her foorthwith to Greece.
This was a great comfort to the Princes, and foorthwith they would not stay any longer in the Castle, wheras so many disgraces came vnto them, but being prouided of horse and armour they tooke the way to Greece, verie much recommending the Princesse vnto the Moore theyr friend, who promised vnto Rosicleer forthwith to become a Christian, and gaue him a swoord one of the best in the world, which was that of King Portias, a great friend vnto the Greekes. And therewith they came to the Sea, taking their way towards Grecia, whereas we will leaue them, to intreate of the great wise man Gelasio.




Who Gelasio was, what aduenture brought him to the hidden Iland: and the reason he had to robbe and take away Infants.

 Chap. 3.
YOu doe remember in the first part of this mightie historie, Rosicleer (calling himselfe the Knight of Cupide) slewe the furious Mandroco, nigh the Grecian Empire. This as saith the wise Lirgandeo (whom we do follow in this historie) had an Unkle, brother vnto his Father called Gelasio, of high and sharp vnderstanding, as much giuen vnto studie as his brother was to armes. So soone as the newes came to Parato (for so was Mandrocos Fathers name) the griefe was such that hee dyed presently, Gelasio not being there, for that he was gone into Egipt to consult with a wise man, was notwithstanding foorthwith certified thereof by the wise Lupertio (for so was the Master of Gelasio called) namely that all his brothers and friendes were slaine, sauing one neere a Giantesse his sister of a goodly proportion, the which hee brought with him in companie of Lupertio, and would not returne vnto the Iland whereof they were Lords: for that foorthwith Trebatio did fortifie the same, ^ut s^ayed them with him, till he had commensed farther in his ^ote, and he was so diligent that hee came to bee one of the most famous in Egipt.
Then foorthwith making signes and coniurations to know in what place he might inhabit best for to make reuengement and follow his (...)* he learned that it shold be in the defended Iland, whereof was (...) a young Giant called Fangomadan, one of the moste strongest amongst all the Giants.
Hee foorthwith concluded with him frendship, helping him with his learning, till such time as hee had brought himselfe thether and the Giantesse. And finding the countrey so fit for his purpose, hee wrought so much that thys fierce Giaunt fell in loue with his Sister, till they were married together: of whom he begate the Giants which were slaine by the Greeke prince and Meridian: who vntill that time did alwayes liue by robbing of the countrie, till such time as hee apprehended those princes, and put them in that inchauntment. And straightwaies he departed from his brother in law, for that hee vnderstood the destruction of his Castle would come, and ordained his habitation more inwards vpon the highest parts of the rocks in the most delightfull and freshest aire that was in the whole world: and he knew that hee who should race out his generation, should be the same Knight that slewe the most valiant Mandroco. Whereat he felt so great griefe that he w^nt about to preuent the reuengment, before the death of his Kindred. At last by arte hee came to knowledge, that of the first and fairest Ladie that hee apprehended, should be borne a Sonne and a Daughter vnder such a Signe and planet, that they should prooue the most valiantest princes in the world: and how that in the parts of famous Assyria should be borne another prince that in force should be equall with the Greeke princes: and at the same time in Phoenicia another, and a fifth begotten by the mightie Sophy: all of such excellent valor, force and strength, that they should bee the parties able to promyse him reuengement.
When he had certaine knowledge of these things, and was assured that Floralinda was Fangomadans prisoner, he tarried the time of her deliuerie* which chaunced vnto her with great paines and throwes* but all turned to her content, when shee saw the fairnes of the Children: although this ioy indured so small a time, that the remembrance therof passed away, for hauing them in her armes,

there entered in two furious Lyons with terrible roaring, and tooke them from her, leauing the feeble Lady with great griefe as you may imagine, to bee in prison without her children of whom the wise man had as great care, as though they had beene his neuewes. Yet to make them to be the more fierce and furious, they were nourished in hardnes, and giuen them mingled with their nurses milke, the milke of Lyons and furious beastes: and they were nourished in such sort, that the wise and learned man did recouer a great part of his lost comfort.
He gaue them names conuenient to the content of their parents, for the Prince they named the hidden Celnido, and his sister, Floralisa, whom others did cal, the rigorous. For that til such time as she was wounded with amorous passions, she was very cruell, as you shall heare.
At the same instant in the figure of diuers beastes hee brought the other infants. The Assirian he called Don Clarisell of Assiria, who died for the loue of Floralisa, as you shall heare.
The Phoenician he named Don Argente of Phoenicia, and that of the Sophy, for that he was the goodliest in ye world, he named him the gentle Torisiano. Hee nourished and brought them vppe with so great care, that there was nothing too deare for their comfort.
The three infants were together, in places different from the brother and sister, who increased in fairenesse and wit, in such sort that the wise man liued the meriest man in all the world.
When they came vnto sixe yeres of age, it was a heauenly thing to see them by reason of their beauty, and either of them seemed to be of more yeres. They did neuer see the one the other, till they woon the swords as shalbe tolde you. He exercised them in learning, and all languages of the world, and the worthy Floralisa learned in such sort, that she grew equall with her brother. When they entered more in yeres he gaue them bowes to shoote

with, and some daies caried them to the mountaines, and had a great delight to see with what brauery they would attempt to hunt with their mountaine kniues, in this sort they passed their life in great delights. The brother and sister would neuer depart the one fro^ the other their loue was such* neither could the one liue without the other.
They called the wise man father, and so did the other Princes, who increased in like maner in all knowledge: and were brought vp in the exercise of hunting, alwaies respecting them, as to such Princes it was conuenient. Aboue the two he did preferre the Assirian youth, who seemed to be no other but an angell in his beauty and soueraigne disposition. Unto them all the wise man gaue hunting apparell, whereof they were very glad, for that they much reioysed in that life, and when they did kill any wilde beast, they brought it home with great ioy and content.
One day he would shew them the strange thinges of his house, and the chambers of the faire brother and sister? and for the same, the day before he inuited the two Scithians to the hunt, telling them, that he would sende them to other newe places whereas was great store of venison.
So the next day, the amorous Delphian pastour shewing his face, the two well agreeing youthes came foorth with two pages which were nourished with them, of the most principall of the Scithians, the page of the Prince was called Atlante, and that of his sister was called, Severo, who caried with them somewhat for their sustentation for that day, for that they would not returne till the euening. Their iackets were of greene cloth of golde, cut vpon white tinsell, and wrought with curious workes, but the Lady by reason of her haire wore a garland with an infinit number of pearles set with diuers colours, and a gallant quiuer at her back and crimson buskins after the maner of the Spartans.
The wise man seeing them in this order so gallantly suted could not chuse but say. Oh Iupiter, I giue thee thankes, for that thou hast suff^red mee not onely to see, but to entertaine as my children, such deuine youthes. And he went to the Lady and said. Oh flower of all the Pagans, wherewith can I pay the Gods this courtesie for to haue in my armes the ^amer of the most brauest Lions. Happie Gelasio that hath such a one, and happie age wherin liueth such a Princesse? Courage my louing children, for this is that which is needful for your shamed Father.
Welbeloued Father the Lady answered, we cannot chuse but esteeme verie much of that which you haue done in our nourishing and bringing vp, neither will my brother nor I imploy our liues but in your seruice, and ende them in putting our selues in whatsoeuer danger for your good. And if our age be sufficient to put it in practise, there resteth no more but to declare how we may reuenge your griefe, seeing it is all that remaineth, and what we cannot performe it shall not be for lacke of willingnes.
I doe clearly vnderstand and know (answered the olde man) that from such a heart as yours can proceede no other intents.
And my seruices shall not be so small, but I will one day deliuer you from death, which is but my duetie, in reward of many things that you must doe for me, and now it is time for you to know somewhat of the world. And first of that which is bred in this hidden Iland. So bringing them foorth at the accustomed doore, which opened towards the sea, he left the^ to follow their game: the wise man returning to that which hee had before determined.
So they went foorth leading in a lease two moste faire Irish Gray-houndes more whiter then the pure Snowe whereas wee will leaue speaking of them, who quickned theyr wonted pace, because that they

heard the roarings of wilde beasts, and taking that way from whence the noyse was heard. And now we wil declare what hapned with the other three Princes, whome the wise man called and said.
Louing sonnes, seeing you be now of good discretion, I must shew you the secrets of my dwelling, for the many things that you must doe for me. So taking the Assirian by the hand, to whom for his gallantnes he was most inclined, he brought them into the great court of the house, which was foure square, and compassed about with fayre galleries* wrought with diuersities of workes. In the midst of the court there was a christaline fountaine with twelue great spoutes of water, which running out orderly made a gallant consorted harmony.
The Princes did behold the strange worke of the fountaine recreating their sights thereon, but more admired when at the farther end they sawe a Nimph, that on her brest did shew fiue pearcing wounds, so cruell, that the entrance of the weapons were not closed, hauing in her hand a writing to this effect.

None howsoeuer valiant, hardy, bold,
Shall dare to taste the water of my fount:
Vntill the closed Scythian womb vnfold,
A light that shall Apolloes light surmount.
Valour and beauty shall ^his worke begin,
And all els faile that it attempt to win.

The Princes did not vnderstand the obscure writing. Then the gentle Torisiano said: of truth louing father we should receaue content if you would declare vnto vs the meaning of this scrole, or els tell vs how we may ease the griefe of this wounded Nymph.
Wel beloued sonnes saide the wise man, the desire of things honourable, I do very wel beleeue is in your worthy brests: but the time and your tender age doth not consent

that you should now prooue any aduenture, till such time as the faire Lyonesse, being chafed with amorous heate doe come to drinke of this fountaine with the coste of her bloud.
And so because they should not stay herein, he passed with them forwards, and brought them into a faire quadrangle, so richly couered with gold, as heart could possibly imagine, hauing foure grates, which opened to a delightfull garden, replenished wt so great variety of fruits that it caused great admiration: but much more woondrous was the intricate knots, which were so curious that they rauished the sight of the beholders. All the quadrangle was full of figures, with Emblemes that declared who they were: all of them were the most famous Captaines and Emperours of the world.
There was seene the desired face of Constantine the great, and that of happy Alexander, the famous African with all his armour bloudy, yet gallantly inam^led: and in his ^ou^tenance a certaine shew of his braue courage.
Ther^ w^s ^he h^rdy (...) ioyfull of his pray, which was so deare to Troy. There the loued Aeneas with his swor^ in his hand ouer the rashe and vnadu^sed ^urnus: nigh v^to him the am^rous He^cules, in womans habite d^^ing on Iole.
There was the mighty Theseus and in his hand the Cretane A^iadne: there the rough and strong hus^and in flames of fire, exclaiming on the shirt sent him by his C^ntaure-deceiued wife. And nigh vnto him was seene all the Grecian Princes, and the mighty Alicandro. The figure of the renowmed Trebasto was in red armour, in such sort as he went out of Tynacria the great, whose aspect, was so maiestical, that these gallant and young youths staid there to reade his Posie, which was.

Trebatio would not leaue this coast for shame,
Were not his lingring here his honours blame.

There was next vnto him a sorrowfull Lady, her Motto could not giue them to vnderstand what it did signifie, but it was straight tolde them, not without great compassion of the Princes, promising her aide to her amorous anger. Nigh vnto that was the three Lights of knighthood, the great Alphebo, Rosicleer and Claridiano, they were all touching one target which had this saying*

Three worldes for these three,
Scarce sufficient bee.

They seemed so goodly of disposition, that they gaue high content vnto the Princes, and they were a greate while beholding their ^^llant and gentle countenances. Not farre from this was the furious Tinacrian, in the beginning of his knighthoode, with an ore banke in his handes, and a precious sword at his side, against a strong Knight, with this deuice.

Nor earth nor sea my fury can asswage.
Against each Element contends my rage.

This strange saying made them more wonder then all the rest, and asking who he was, the wise man told them al his birth? and concluding with a sigh he said: Were it not for him my reue^gement were certain, but this knight without blow of speare or sword shall ouercome him who hath all my hope and by whom I doubted not to haue remedy.
From that they saw many knights, and because they were known, and to auoid tediousnesse I leaue to name them. At the farthest part of all the quadrant in a thicke and delightfull groue, appeared two faire and gallant youthes apparelled in greene* each of them with a knife in their hands, stained with fresh bloud, and each of them a scrole shewing their names.
On the first was writ Don Celthdo the hidden. And the figure of the faire Floralisa seemed the most excellent in the world, and by the gallant haire which was more yellow then that of Apollo, they perceaued and knew her to be a woman, and for her name she had onely these letters, F. and L. But betweene them both, there was a scutchen, whereon was this written.

To change the sea is not sufficient,
But the greene earth shall streame with purple gore:
When the three brethren fierce and violent,
Intend their slaughters on the sea and shore.

As this gallant and gentle Assirian was beholding this warlike Princesse, there increased within him, a thousand thoughts, and that alone sight caused that to succeed which seemed impossible, I meane the subiection of a hart more free then euer yet was knowne in the Assirian nation. And with great affection he asked of the wise man, who that deuine Lady should be? To whom Gelasio answered laughing. Loued sonne it is not conuenient to know who she is at this present, to auoide the knowledge of death, before you see the cause thereof. But the time wil come, that you shal sweare in her hands my reuengement, and vow to be hers, although first it will cost you full deare.
A little more forwardes from those gallant youthes they sawe painted vpon a sea stained with bloude this writing which the Phoenecian Prince read.

Mars ore the new world giues me victory,
And sweares no strength shall passe my chiualry.

With a gallant demeanor said the Phoenecian Prince, of truth discreet father, there must be more experience of our persons ere we be exercised in the sight of such rigorous

figures as these be? Let not this grieue you answered Gelasio, for he that did paint it, did not ground his painting vpon the worke, but vpon the deeds which vnto these three as a fauour from heauen granted them, shalbe attributed, being so many that the seas vast spaciousnes shalbe filled with wonder, yet euery one for his part must enamell it with some of his owne bloud? And when this shal happen, the braue Torisiano shall loose his liberty.
At the end of all, he shewed a rough youth, one of the b^^t proportioned in all that quadrant, although the last, with this deuice: his feete, were setled vppon a world like vnto a gloa^e, all embrued in bloude, as a victor thereof, and in his left hand a banner where in was this written.

Mars ore the new world giue me victory,
And sweares no strength shall passe my chiualry.

In his right hand he had a sharpe dagger, turned with the point against his owne heart, with this writing.

What doth auaile my pur^hast soueraignty?
When of my selfe my selfe shall butcher be.

With a hearty sigh did the wise man solemnize the leauing of these Emblemes saying Louing sonnes, this is he of whom I tremble in my hidden dwelling? This is he that together with his brethren, shall not care to giue battaile to all the Pagan countrey? this is he whom I feare, to whom destiny at his birth did promise triumph and victory of the vniuersall world? This is he whom the world shall feare, till such time as the little tame lambe shut vp in the incha^ted tower (for that she had him in his armes being a childe) he do acknowledge her for his owner, swearing at her first sight, that he is the same that so long time past was promised vnto her. So of this furious

youth I can say no more.
All the Princes exceedingly reioyced to behold so faire figures, and thought the time long to see themselues armed Knights to goe foorth into the world to seek out such valiant Youths, as were there shown, to prooue themselues with them. And so being dinner time, they went into an Arbour, and Gelasio commanded their meate to be broght thether in such princely manner, as though they had been in their Fathers Pallaces. Dinner beeing done, they there passed away the day, till their wonted time of walking: Gelasio not suffring them to see the pallace, where as the Brother and Sister were: for that the two Princes Torisiano and Don Argente of Phoenicia should vndertake shortly a great Aduenture.
NOw am I carried with a swift course to the two gallant Youths, the Brother and the Sister: who after the great roaring they heard, let slippe theyr greyhounds, and with their blades in their handes, they pass^d thorough a great thicket, and came into a Playne nigh the sea side: whereas they saw two deformed Satyres, who had slaine a Knight that came thether in a a Barke, at which deed the monsters (taking great content) made those horrible out-cryes, and detested roarings.
These two Princes verie much mused to see people of that shape, for that they had neuer beheld other, but the Wise-man and their Pages: yet not forgetting the generositie of their couragious hearts, with their swords in their hands, they went against those diuelish monsters, as though they had beene verie well armed, and long exercised to their weapons.
Now want I excellence of Art to describe the heroike resolution of this yong Princesse. O happie Satyre, that deserueth to receiue blowes of so glorious a Damosell. The swift Chariot Driuer of the Sunne (sometimes the Shep^ard

of Admetus, in his course, the better to beholde this battle. The deformed beast would haue caught her in his armes. But this Scithian Ladie would not giue him that fauour, which Iupiter himselfe hardly deserued, but put her swoord betweene them, and hit him in the brest such a furious blow, that there issued great aboundance and flakes of bloud. It seemed not strange vnto the Amazonian warrier (equalling in strength the auncient Bellona) to see that great wound, which would haue caused a thousand faire Ladies to haue sowned: But shee who was borne to giue it, did second another with such swiftnes, that the Satyre was not able to defend it, but she haue him ^ wonderfull wound vpon the thigh, which done she retyred with the swifnes of an Eagle, leauing her enemy very sore hurt.
So rauished am I with declaring the deedes of this excellent Floralisa, that I remembred not the new and fearce Mars her brother Don Celindo, whose battell was worthy to be recorded by the deuine Pierides, or by some (if any such could bee) more excellent Poet that sense rauishing Homer.
With an admirable swiftnes did hee encounter the other mightie Satyre, who with a knotty oake, stroke at him a wonderfull blowe: and this hardy youth without experience abode the same with such gallant semblance that Mars in his glorious Orbe had enuie at it, and at the fall of that mightie clubbe, with a light leape on the one side, closing with him, he stroke him with his short swoord on his right wriste, that he cut it cleane a sunder, and the mizerable Satyres deformed ryght hande and hys great and mightie Clubbe fell both to the ground together.
The worthie Gentleman seeing the good successe hee had against the monster, seconded his first blow couragiously, and pared away a peece of the Satyres leg: the diuelish furie finding himselfe so wounded, would gladlye

haue fled from the valiant Celindo, but his wounds weakened his pace, and the swift Youth fastened on him such and so manie violent blowes, that the hideous monster fell groueling to the ground, with a most horrible and fearfull crye.
At the same instant, the gallant and heroicke Princesse his sister, had brought her aduersarie into like extremitie: for returning vpon him with an inuincible courage she wounded him so sore in his legges and thighes, that she had easie means by his fainting to cast a deadly thrust at him, which entring the bot^ome of his detested and hideous wombe, he staggered awhile, and fell to the earth with a more exceeding clamour, than his horrible and hatefull companion.
At the fall and crie of the first Satyre, their two Pages came vnto them, and seeing the Princes against such dreadfull aduersaries, they fearfully exclaymed, making the most greeuous mone that might bee, for feare of the danger that might ensue to their most beloued Lord and Ladie.
No sooner did the last Satyre fall, which the admyred Floralisa ouerthrew, but with angrie countenaunce she returned to the heartlesse Pages, and thus reprehended their cowardise.
What meane ye, you soft hearted and timerous wretches to vse these exclamations? what danger doo you see vs in, that you thus crie out? turne, and behold our faynt ouerthrowne aduersaries: where with turning about, the bodies of the Satyres were vanished, and an inchanted Castle erected in the place, with a pillar before the gate hauing this inscription.


The Groue of Meruailes discoouered by the most excellent Brother and Sister, shall be here til^ the Ownce which was at the Discouerie, doth return and make entrie in companie with the furious Lionesse, and beeing plagued with mad ielouzie, doth seeke her remedie, making free the en^rie to all with the rigor of her arme, and then shall euerie ^ne know here, in what degree they are beloued: for so wil ^he ancient Medea that it should be.

And more lower was this inscription written.

From this time forwards may those that bee ouercome with loue, prooue the Aduenture of the enamoured, which was discouered by the hidden Prince in his infancie and prime of armes, being the first blood that euer he shed, euen the blood of my Sagittaries: who shall neuertheles be the guarders of my dwelling house, till such time as returning to enter they win the armes of the carelesse and loued Iason, whe^ewith hee wonne the Golden Fleece from the Ile of Colchos.

The Princes remained amazed to see the thinges that there hapned vnto them, and determining to returne for that is was late, they saw comming toward the^ in great hast the reuerend wise man: who they went to meete, and he embrasing them said* O* felicitie of this present age, with what praise shall I exalt the beginning of your most highest deedes, that euer were done by Knights: in truth I know not how to performe it with this my rude tung. But here will remaine a memorie so long as the World shall endure: and there shall not lacke Aduentures for anie Knight wherein to imploy himselfe, whosoeuer commeth this way.
So taking them by the hands they returned: and hee told them that there was an Inchantment, but hee knew not that they should discouer it, neither that it was in that

place, for that it was of more antiquitie than his. Yet for all this, you shall not goe from hence (my louing children, said the wise man) if all things happen not as you desire: for vnto this and more am I bound: and so he carried them home, leauing first (by his arte) on the piller, these verses ingraued.

Louers that long to know with what regard
Their deere lou'd Ladies them doo estimate,
Shall here perceiue their scorne or their reward,
To ease or end their sorrowes passionate.
This (as a glasse) to euerie Louers eye
Shall shew his Ladies loue, or iealozie.
Th'vntamed Hidden with the tender Lambe
First found this wonder and aduenture rare:
Louers may blesse the time they hether came,
For in this place* Loues chiefest secrets are.
Here shall they learne to flye and to pursue,
To craue and giue, to yeeld and to subdue.

This writing (said Gelasio) for a token of the high and worthie beginning, in which you haue made experience of your valors. And I doo not doubt, but they which haue gotten such an Aduenture as this is, shall haue all other affaires for their contents, although not to mine: but it is so ordained by my destenies.
Discreete Father (said Celindo) the Gods wil not that we should atchiue anie thing wherein wee should receiue content, and the same redownd to your discontentment, to whom we are so much indebted.
If it were in your hands (answered the wise man) in good securitie might Gelasio liue to see his reuengement. But shortly Celindo shall you see that which hath caused my paine, and parents death: and so shall you excellent Ladie, but your affections shall be wounded, you shall often wish death which will auoyde you, and flye good fortune

that shall follow you, yet your heroicke deedes shall win you immortalitie, therefore let not your hearts faile you.
And in telling them this, hee brought them vnto theyr chamber, which was of diuers colours: and in the walls innumerable precious stones so placed, that they gaue light to all the chamber. Round about it were diuers figures of Ladies, who in times past and at that time also flourished and were most famous. There was the fayre ^u^^a, and the constant Penelope with her amorous web: there was the affectionate Porcia, with so manie showes of beautie, that it caused in the princes great admiration. Nigh vnto her they saw the negligent Egyptian Cleopatra, at whose feete were three Emperiall Crownes, wyth this saying.

Crowne, Rule, Fame, Loue, and glorious Emperie,
I sought, scornd, won, and lost ingloriously.

The next vnto her was faire Campaspe, with whome Great Alexander fell in loue: and she was hand in hand with beauteous Helena, who seemed to speake vnto Campaspe in this sort,
Once did my face consume Dardania,When I was rapt by wanton Alexander:But thine burnes him that burned Persia,And of the vtmost Inde was Conquerer.My Alexander was his Countries Fire-brand:Thine burned others, but preseru'd his Land.
On the second side was the mightie Empresse of Constantinople, Briana: and nigh her the faire Lindaraza. The Empresse was compassed about with russet Crownes, betokening her troubles for Trebatioes absence: with thys Motto.


Crost Loue embracing gentle Patience,
(Though long) at last receiues Loues recompence.

This is she louing Children (said the wise man) that brought foorth the death of my royall blood: of her were borne those vntamed Lions, that haue raced out my Lynage.
More lower on the third side of that chamber was the ^aire Claridiana and the princesse Oliuia, with ioyous countenances in that they inioyed their desired Loues: and Oliuia seemed thus to say.

Thine is Alphebo, mine is Rosicleer:
Thine match to mine, mine thy Alpheboes peer.

They receiued great content to see these two Ladies, especially when they knew who they were, and what stout Husbands they had.
In the same quadrant was the worthie Arguisilora armed against the brauest Knight in the World, with her beauer vp, the knight seeming to speake thus.

Beautie once Conqu'ror,
In vaine is Valor.

The knight seemed so beauteous, that the Princesse by his Figures sight entertained amorous affections, and asked of the wise man who they were? Hee answered, I am vnwilling (faire Daughter) to tell ye, yet I will satisfie your request. This Ladie is the worthie Queene of Lydia, beeing in the Field, shee will combate with Mars himselfe: and you shall haue no better experience of her valor* than to see her in Fight with this Knight of Tinacria, whom I most feare. It was oyle to the valiant Ladies fire, to heare the Lydian Queene so much praised.
Then began to worke in her thought a thousand amorous conceipts, proceeding from that sight: and shee prooued the most perfect Louer in the world, as shall be heereafter declared.
I am greeued (said the wise man) for you Floralisa, to see how you are entred into Loues sea, where faire weather is painfull, the tempest perpetuall, calmnes continuing with a thousand doubtfull hopes: and yet for all thys thou needest not feare drowning, though the Nauigation prooue more violent than death. Oh poore Ladie, yt neither thy owne beautie, tender age, nor strong heart can winne thee to leaue loue, but carelesly thou admittest entraunce to thy owne care. Thou hast desire to loue, and wilt greeue that the reward will not be correspondent to thy entire affections: but be contented, such are the variable effects of furious Loue. Oh that I could fauour and helpe thee in thy insuing paine and greefe. I doo foresee it so much and sorrow doth so increase in mee to vtter it, that I must of necessitie passe from this place to the next roome: where I will shew you another excellent figure of a faire Shepheardesse. This the wise man did not for that the Ladie should loose her new thought, but that her Brother should beare her companie. So passing to the last wall, they did see so beautifull a Figure of the faire Rosaluria, in the habite of a Shepheardesse, that the tender yong Prince Celindo at that sight made her owner of his hart, in such sort as death alone was able to take awaye the thought there^f. At her feete was this saying.

Lowly habite hides not beautie,
Loue in Kings and Clownes doth raigne:
To win loue, and shew his dutie,
Phoebus was a Shepheards Swaiue.

You may well beleeue that this new louer did reade it with a thousand coulours changing in his tender face, at first rather desirous to be iealous, then fearefull, if he attained sight of his welbeloued: but before he can liue with his ioye, with feare to loose her he shal see much of his blood spilt, and make his eyes cleere fountaines, hoping for a remedy at her handes that neuer accustomed to regard complaints. With this new imagination, they came vnto the last Lady, which was called Lindabthdes, who was figured within the inchanted tower, and at the gate a stout and strong knight assaying to open it: on which gate was this inscription.

Loue that liueth here obscured,
To these paines hath me inured.

The wise man did declare vnto them all the inchantment and that the knight was Alphebo, wherat they receiued new passion and griefe, but not in such sort that it did take away that which they had before conceaued.
So they went out of that pallace with lesse liberty then when they entred. Now they receaued content to be alone, that before thought it death to be seperated. They loue solitarinesse wherein they finde ease to meditate of absent beauty, which but by figure they neuer saw: where we will leaue them till their fit time, for that we haue a large course to runne.



What happened to the Dacian Prince, Don Heleno, in France.

 Cap. 4.
WE left the Dacian Prince in the forrest of Ardenia nigh the fountaine called the Disamorous; because it chaungeth louers thoughtes. He sate vppon the stocke of a winde broken tree, tossing a thousand imaginations in his minde: For his Florisdama, he nowe lamented not, neither did Lydias

beauty any whit disturbe his thoughts: but a fiery and high kindled resolution lifted vp the noble heart of this long distressed Dacian; and of his solitary life, he was exceedingly ashamed. Now he determines to visite the courts of Princes that before frequented forsaken caues: he purposeth now to continue in peopled Cities, that not long since loued the inhabitable deserts. Hereto he was encouraged by infinite waighty and necessary considerations: first the long absence from his countrey, the disgrace he liued in with his friends, his rash and vnaduised abuse of the inuincible Emperour his Unckle Trebatio, which most of all he seemed to lament. Breefely our Dacian was vnlike the old Eleno, that made trees, brookes, beastes, foules, fountaines, secretaries of his vnseene griefes, but as one that had long bin captiue hauing broke^ his bonds and conquered his cruell master, maketh his voice the mirthfull expressor of his hearts ioy, that in his bondage had often manifested the moanings of his soule: so this Dacian that had long beene Loues prisoner, hauing now got freedome; tooke his Lute, his Lute that many times had yeelded sad sounds to the wofull accents of his voice: and finding his musike in another key, he carroled out this ditty in Loues disgrace.


Let him that longs to know where loue doth dwell,
What God he is, what Lordly soueraigne,
Attend to me: who hauing learnt can tell,
His slightes, his shifts, his smiles, and his disdaine.


His habitation is the fondlings thought,
His godhead forged, and his power weake:
Fled he will follow, flie when he is sought,
His praise alone doe fooles and madmen speake.
They that adore him most, yet terme him boy:
But I conclude Loue is an idle toy.


As he was laying downe his Lute, he saw a Damsell making great complaint, who hasted as fast as her palphrey could runne. The Prince purposed to stay her, being desirous to know her griefe, promising to helpe her in all that was needfull. So he went to meete her on his inchanted horse, and when shee came nigh him hee sa^de, Damsell, as you would that fortune should fauour you, tell me part of your euill, for I promise you, I will put my life in hazard to doe you any pleasure you shall lawfully desire.
Sir Knight I giue you great thankes (said the wofull Damsel) for your gentle offer, for any of l^sse courage then so noble a person as you seeme to be cannot help me: my griefe is so great, that whatsoeuer narration must be made in seeking remedy, it more and more aggrauateth it, for that my heauy lot hath determined the time so short, that within these foure daies of force I must meete with one in whom I may with security put all my hope: and I feare none can helpe me, but the Prince Clauerindo our Kings sonne, or the soueraigne Emperour Alphebo, his great friend.
And it hath beene told me, that he was seene and one of his mighty brethren here at the skirt of this mountaine: so I goe with all the speede possible, to see if I can meete with any of them.
Faire Damsell (answered the Dacian) I would gladly that you might meete with one of those famous Princes, but this is of certainty that where as I left them, you cannot come thither in one month, though you make neuer so much hast were ye better horst: but for the duty I owe vnto those knights, although in me there is not that force and strength that is in them, yet I will offer that little which I haue with so good will, as would your beloued Prince if he himselfe were here. Sir Knight good fortune reward you for that which you haue said, and vnderstand yt it is so heauy a busines that if it proceed forwards,

our Prince and his friendes shal receaue great griefe thereby: and seeing they are not here, whome I seeke, I will put into your hands the most lamentable aduenture in all France: but the Iustice which you shall haue on your part, will giue you strength needfull, yea although the mighty Alphebo or Rosicleer should enter into battaile against you, they were not able to approoue the accusation laide against the most vertuous and the vnhappy sister of Clauerindo, Princes of France.
The circumstance I will declare vnto you, for in two daies we may returne into Paris.
The Prince receaued great contentment at the words of the Damsell, and to heare her griefe with euery circumstance he returned with her to the pleasant fountain, wherein his iudgement (and in that hee erred not) he receaued new life. And alighting there they left his horse and her palphrey to graze and feede. And they sate themselues downe vpon the fresh and greene grasse very nigh vnto the Christaline water of the fountaine of forgetfulnesse.
There the Prince, tooke off his helme by reason of the great heate, discouering his beauteous face, much bettered by his new thoughts, which gaue great content vnto the Damsell (who was of her selfe gratious) to see him so faire and young, wherewith she said, by God S. knight with a better good will I committe vnto you my whole power for the battaile, for that I likewise am shee that must loose if any doe thereby, for I am assured that in him whom the heauens hath indewed with so great beauty, cannot chuse but be equall force and strength.
At other times those commendations of his beauty were pleasant to him, when hee felt the wrongs of loue: but now he only procured to fauour and helpe those that were in necessity of his strength, and regarded neither his owne face nor the brauery of Ladies.
Wherefore he said, Yo^ haue good security faire Damsell

in the confidence of your iustice: and my desire to helpe your right is no lesse then that, which should be don by those Princes that you so much enquired after: therefore without circumstance, go to the matter.
The Damsell answered? I doe beleeue faire knight, that nothing can proceede from those hands that will not bring content vnto them for whom they shall vndertake combate: and I know your paines shall not be vngratefied, although those which are like vnto you doe expect no reward, but of their owne bounty, are Champions for the distressed.
Therefore gentle knight you shall vnderstand that at such time as our Prince was brought vppe with the vnknowne Emperour the mighty Alphebo of Trabysond in the ancient and well fortified City of Babylon, in company with that stout Brandizell Prince of Persia. The king our soueraigne liued in the greatest griefe yt might be imagined, for that he could not know nor vnderstand where his childe Clauerindo was.
For the Queene his mother in that she had no other, and he also her first borne it is not to be doubted but that she loued him as her selfe, and that his absence did grieue her very soule.
They passed with this griefe till such time as the high giuer of comforte, did bestowe on them a daughter so abounding in fairenes and beauty, that she was holden for more then humane.
This was an occasion to lighten their age, and to ease their griefe whereby they might the better suffer the absence of the Prince her brother. They made great reioicings at her birth, and there came thither (as was reason) all the friends and vassals of Oristeo the King of France, (for so he was called) to celebrate that happy day, and giue great honour to the Queene Olinda.
The Parents receaued as I say some comfort in possessing such a daughter, for the losse of the Prince.
And faire Grisalinda (for so is she named) as she increased in yeres, she grew so excellent in beautie, that she is ^steemed for one of the fairest that liueth within the vniuersall world.
Now Fortune (to show all her bounties at once) broght the Prince accompanied with the Persian into France, vnknowne, and they were called the Knights of the Flower de Luces: and they did such worthie deedes in the Countrey, that it seemed impossible they should by humane persons be performed. Within a while they entred into Paris, whereas they sustained a long and dangerous Iustes: in the which our Prince slew a strong and mighty giant, which done, they made themselues knowne. At whose discouery (faire knight) I leaue it to your discreet consideration, if the Prince were receiued with ioy or no, for whose absence there was such discontentment. Foorthwith they went to see their friend of Grecia, whereas Clauerindo was maried with the sister of ye said knight, who was called the faire Lindaraza, and she was deliuered of two sonnes at one birth of so excellent beauty being children, as was the Prince their father. Who to giue contentment vnto his auncient parents, sent to our king one of the children, with whose presence, the grandfather and grandmother were almost ouerioyed, and rested not in giuing thankes vnto God, by whose meanes there came vnto them that great benefitte: hee was nourished and brought vppe in the court as the sonne of so worthy a father, and was most curteously vsed of this faire and vnfortunate Aunt.
Now at this time fortune waxing weary of so long enduring ioy, began to returne to her accustomable change, and would now in the end of our Kings daies, determined to vexe him with the greatest disgrace in al the world. And thus it grew.
By reason of the comming of the Kings young neuew, there assembled together much people, amongst whome

were certaine of Alexandria; who with more than ordinary eies did behold the beauty of Grisalnida our Princesse, and did publish the same vnto their Prince: who being a young man, and one that knewe what belongdd to faire Ladies, demaunded of them in more particuler, and their description was such a bait, that it wholy concluded to subiect this passionated yong Prince, who onely by hearing did aff^ct her in such sort, that he did neither sleepe nor eate without imagination of his Lady. Till such time as his passion increasing and his sences fayling, he was brought very lowe, insomuch that for his comfort they caused a painter (an excellent workman) to offer himselfe that he would draw her counterfeit, who gaue him great thankes, and esteemed it as was reason.
Into France came the iudiciall workeman, no whit inferiour to Apelles, and tooke the counterfeit of the Lady, with such art and curiosity, as it seemed the heauens had communicated their life giuing power vnto his working hand. And forthwith he returned vnto his Lord, who iudged the smal moment of his tarying to be many yeres, till such time as he did see the faire face of the Princesse, which was a newe inticement to his prepared heart: in such sort, that what he thought would be a lightning or ease vnto him, fell out to be the increasing of his griefe: and in such sort the amorous passion did lay hold on him, that he left Alexandria pretending to go see an vncle of his. With whose counsell and determination they departed in the habite of merchants, and came into Paris to the feastes that were made for the entertainement of the prince. The iewels they brought was the occasion that the Princesse and her Damsels sent for him to buy them, and made the price at their pleasures, without contradiction of this merchant who without seeing her, at the first report did yeeld her his hart: and therfore he regarded not his precious iems. It was a thing worthy to be noted, to see what passed about the buying of his iewels, and I as an eie witnes can scarce beleeue it, although I saw it.
To conclude, he with the price of his iewels did see at his pleasure the owner of his free will, remaining there with great content, glad that he employed his thought in such a place, counting it a rewarde sufficient for all his wealth.
In briefe he departed from thence very heauily, and to remedy his griefe, he had the courage to put in practise such a thing, which to thinke vpon I am af^aid, much more affrighted when I sawe it done. And this it was, he hauing a confidence in his beauty, wherwith indeede he was much indewed, put himselfe in womans apparel, and seemed therein as beauteous and gallant as our Princesse. Oh how many times worthy knight did I confer and was conuersant with him in that fained habite, taking such content when he entertained vs, with his singing and playing, as was sufficient to bring him to be the most priuate Damsell that attended our Princesse ouer all those that waighted in the court, he neuer shewing any suspition, that should offend the honour of Grisalinda.
Being in this content, it fortuned there came to the court the fearefull Partomio King of little Brittaine, a young knight, and the most valiant that is to be found in all these parts, who when he came made shewe of his great valour. The King who knew how to entertaine and honour such, did lodge him in the pallace which was the occasion he often frequented to my Lady and mistresse and conferred with her publikely, but neuer could haue opportunity in secret. To be short he grewe amorous of her, with such feruency, that he yeelded himselfe to serue her although the v^rtuous Lady did giue him to vnderstand, by neglecting his seruices, that he should not weary nor trouble himselfe, and that it was labour lost he not being such a one as shee could affect seeing his huge greatnesse: for although he was not a giant, he was very little lesse.
Yet notwithstanding this blinded youth alone to himselfe became so passionate, that although we did not know the occasion yet we did see the effect that wrought in him, for he begun to loose his beauty, and to go continually in habiliments of sorrow.
You may imagine sir Knight (if you haue euer loued) in what estate this amorous young Prince was: and so weake he grew, that he kept his chamber, and (among other) was in curtesie visited of our most gentle princ^sse. At whose entraunce, blood retyring into his pale cheekes from his reuiuing heart, he tooke her aside vnto a window and besought her to sit downe, and by her sight to giue ease vnto his sorrow. The modest Ladie with bashfulnesse graunted his request, and desired him to be briefe. Who preparing the passage for few woords with a million of broken sighes, confusedly deliuered his affections, and abruptly desired her fauour: begging with a piteous looke a kinde reply.
To this vnlookt for request the princesse graciously answered, (because she would not adde sorrow to his greefe) willing him that he should not despaire, though yet shee were able to giue him no signe of hope: her minde being subiect to no passion, but v^terly vnacquainted with the thought of loue. So taking her leaue, shee felt Partomio in some hope, insomuch that he soone recouered his wonted strength.
But the princesse hating his importunitie, determined (while he remained in the Court) no more to come publikely abroad, but kept her chamber: and when Partomio offered to see her, she would in no case be visited. For which he conceaued such hate against the Princesse, that without any respect of knighthood, or his ancient royal parentage, trusting in his owne force and strength, he came to accuse our Princesse of treason and and disloyalty, and that she had little respect to her honesty and honour wherunto she was bound.
The King of force must giue eare vnto it, for that hee was a King yt made the accusation. When we vnderstood the manner thereof, it is not bee beleeued what great lamentation we all made: for that it is a law in the Kingdome of France, that if the Woman accused of vnchastitie within thirtie dayes bringeth not one or moe which will defend her honour, shee shall at that time bee consumed in fire.
I will not (for auoyding my owne greefe) detaine my selfe in telling you how her Parents did take it: but it seemed that all the Pallace was on fire, by reason of ye great lamentation which was made, for that fifteene daies were past, and there was none so hardie as to appeare for her, they so much feared that vnreasonable Knight. Till such time as the masked Alexandrian did talke with his Lady, before he went about to accomplish the same.
I, who knew the tract of them, for that my Mistresse had made me acquainted with his secret loue for to her he had discouered himselfe, heard her answere, which was to disswade him from that danger: but no request could perswade him to leaue off that difficult aduenture, replying vnto her.
Now Ladie and Mistres, shall you liue in securitie of my honourable and vnspotted affection: for that it constraineth me boldly to aduenture my life for your vnstayned honour.
Then said the Princesse, if in yeelding mine agayne were a satisfaction, assure ye Prince Arlando, I would doo it. But if you loue me, you would not haue anie liking, that with the price of my fame I should pay so great debt. Touching the battel, which you intend to attempt for my honours defence, I appeale to your owne selfe, that haue tried my vnspotted chastitie. Yet I vrge not this in my owne behalfe, but it is anie Knights dutie whatsoeuer to helpe a wronged Ladie that standeth in necessitie with his sword.
This couragious Youth was somewhat comforted, although he little enioyed that comfort, for the furie of that vntamed King required a greater resistance, althogh the battell was verie well fought: but in the ende he tooke away his life and loue at one instant: wherwith the greefe of our Princesse increased the more, who from a high gallerie sorrowfully beheld the mortall contention betweene the two louers.
Shee then well vnderstood that the Pagan would goe thorough with his businesse, that so soone had cleered and freeed himselfe of the Prince, in whose death she would haue been a companion: not for that she loued him, but to ende her trouble and greefe.
Now I would you should consider what the sorrowfull Princesse suffered, who liuing in hope from the 18. daye, (on which wee sent out a Damsell to seeke her worthie Brother) till this, which is the 24. and yet she is not returned. I know not anie so hard hearted, but would take compassion of so vertuous ladie, that so vniustly doth suffer affliction. Therefore (faire knight) I seeing the o^her Damsell returned not, imboldened my selfe in the right and iustice of this poore Princesse, to put away all childish and womanly feare, and come foorth into these solitarye wayes, publishing my misaduenture. And now seeing I haue no reason to doubt, hauing met so gallant a Warrier as (it seemes) you are, I will not loose my hope, but see how your worthie arme wil returne vengeance for the infamie of that poore ladie. And hauing so great equitie on our behalfe, there is no doubt it wil little auaile the vniust and proud accuser, though his huge proportion and strength were doubled.
Heere you vnderstand (sir knight) the assured cause of my lamentation, which deserueth to be pittied the more, in regard of the ^louds of tears, which euerie day are shed in the wofull and afflicted Court of France. And if (as most constantly my minde perswadeth mee) there bee

in you the valor which appeareth by that worthie countenance, Fortune can neuer offer you so good occasion as this to shew it.
Here the heauie Damsel stayed, ending her talke with a thousand sighes, accompanied with pearly teares that distilled downe her cheekes: which caused great compassion in the free breast of the Dacian Prince, who answered.
Of a truth faire Damsell, you haue reason to seeke punishment for so great an euil as this is: for there is no credite to be giuen to so vnreasonable a Knight as that false Pagan, especially against the Daughter of so great a King. But sure it greeueth me, that she suffered the amorous yong Prince of Alexandria to enter into that deadly combat: although not long since I did know a Knight, that would haue enuied him, for to haue ended wyth hys death a great number of griefes, that by his meanes hee suffered. But for the principal matter, though I loose my life in seeking to defend your Ladie, I doo accomplish no more than that which I am bound vnto: and now seeing it is more than time that we were on our way, let vs trauell forward, for I hope to giue comfort vnto the Princ^sse. And therewith he called his Page Fabio to bring to them his horse and the Damsells palfray: and leaping into their saddles, they tooke the direct waye towardes Paris.
This furious Dacian trauelled on a better horse than anie of the steedes of Titan, who in their course doo compasse daily the circle of the Earth: the French Damsell carried his helme^, as well to honour him, as for the desire she had to behold his excellent beautie. And as they rid, she noted the Deuice vppon his armour, and gessing him a discontented Louer, with some greefe at his sorrow she said.
In truth sir Knight, if your Mistres bee the occasion that you beare this sad Deuice, she is without reason, in

that she hath not attained to know the much loue, which the proportion of your person deserueth. Herein iudge I that she is in fault, because it seemeth vnto mee that you lacke nothing to make you a perfect Louer, but some experience to make you shew the strength that Loue requyreth, and follow the fashion, which courtly Ladies in that case expect.
At another time could this gallant Youth haue answered with more passion than now, when as his liberty was in the handes of them that made a iest of it: but finding himselfe more at ease, he answered.
Of truth faire Damsell, you had reason to say, that it is more needfull to haue strength than anie other thing against this furious frenzie of Loue: for that I had a frend who while he thought to haue cure in loue, found first the ouerthrow of reason, inforcing his sense contrarie to that which he willed, rather than vnto the good which was ordeined: although I now can boldly say both for him and my selfe, we know not to what part of loues rules to incline our selues.
Then it appeareth that you are not amorous sayd the Damsell.
No verily (answered the Prince) for that I could neuer know what it was to bee beloued: therefore as ^ neuer enioyed the name of a beloued, I hate longer to be called a Louer, for that he is not equally to bee iudged wise, that passeth his time celebrating alwaies with ioy ye euening of death: but rather I account him that liueth in this sort, a wilfull foole than a discreete louer. For each man should indeuour to lessen his greefe, and cheere vp his fainting spirites, scorning to hope for or couet that desired gold which onely couereth the bitter pilles, that by their hatefull operation purge the sense of all reason and vnderstanding.
The Damsell speedily to this thus replyed. In another Schoole haue you learned this erronious doctrine, and

not in Loues Uniuersitie at Paris, which through all the world is so much esteemed. I am sorrie that I carry with me a Knight, which esteemeth not a Louer to be most discreete. What creature haue you in the world that liueth without loue? What picture doth giue contentment to the eye, if (by the beautie) the beholder presume not that the painter was enamoured of his worke, vsing affection as his pensill. It is well seene that where loue dwelleth, gentlenes and valor haue their habitation. What hath been the occasion that the Greeke Princes haue filled the world with their worthie actes, but that they haue been amorous?
Against these faire Damsels (answered the free Dacian) my iudgement reasons not, for that loue did giue them alwaies abundance of assured hopes, easing therein and lightning the excessiue paine which the disdained Louer doth receiue. But the accustomable conceipt raigning among beloued ladies, is self opinion of their own worth, a souereigne desire to be faithfully serued, a glorie and pride in their Knights valor: but when the full payment of his deserts (as a true fee for Knights seruice) is requyred, then is the Ladies beautie muffled with clowdy discontent. If she speake, she checkes his audaciousnes: if she looke, she darts vengeance from her eyes: and all the reward the Louer hath is this, that others pittie him, and are eye-witnesses of his true seruice: which she wil scarce vouchsafe to acknowledge.
This greeueth mee more than the rest (sayd the gracious French Ladie) to see how you are vtterly falne out with loue, in that you cannot obtaine to be the onely cheefe in account for the seruice of Ladies. Tell mee (I praye you) is it not a high reward for a Louer, to haue one gracious looke from his beloued Ladie? nay, is it not a salue for manie sustained sorrowes, if hee but once attaine her desired sight?
Yes, it were well (aunswered the Prince) and excellently

for a Louers contentment, to passe the heate of the day priuately in such contemplation, where the Gallant may (without let) salute his Mistres: but when such audacious entrie is made without the ladies special license, I doo iudge it to be one of the most errours which is committed in the ordinarie erring Schoole of Loue. But let vs reckon the best meede the Louer hath for all his mone. Doth shee bestow a smile? Oh then hee is a happie man: that one false sunshine is a sufficient comfort against manie bitter showers: but if shee vouchsafe a kinde word, a gentle touch, or some little idle conference, our kind yong louer is transported beyond all compasse, hee writes pure Castalian, walkes no where but in Tempe, dwells with the Muses, sings with Apollo Io Paeans in Loues praise. Anone (in the midst of all this iollitie) on goes his Ladies frowning kercher, and then his Eulogies are turnde to Elegies, his mirthes to moane: an vncouth caue couers his disgraced head, a darke and queachie groue his pleasant garden, the aire his counsellour, Eccho his scoffer, teares his drinke, care his food: and such a deale of foolerie v^xes this louing foole, that I must needs conclude him to be either desperately mad, or (questionlesse) a verie Ideot. Therefore of Loue and Louers this is my absolute iudgement.

Loue is a busie troublous foolishnes,
Those that commend it, mad and reasonles.

With this amorous conuersation they traueled toward Paris, when vpon the right hand of the Forrest they heard the swift running of a horse: who came in such hast* that before the Prince could put on his inchaunted helmet, the furious Rider was in sight, who seemed rather a Diuell than a Knight.
The occasion thereof was the reflection of the Sunne vppon his armour, which was of shining steele, and colored blacke, and so was his horse, who made no show of steps vpon the grasse whereas he trode, by reason of his swiftnesse.
The gallant demeanor which this Knight showed, did giue great content vnto the Dacian Prince. And here we thinke it good to leaue him, with earnest desire to knowe what that Knight was: and wee will get before him to Paris, where we lef^ the couragious Knight of the Images, Torismondo, Prince of Spaine, who was healed of his wounds, but not of the greefe he receiued in the battel with the mightie Alpbebo.
This Torismond went out of Paris with purpose to seek some of his owne people, and till he met them, to trauaile a few dayes in those mountaines, and to conclude manye aduentures: so that in Paris there was no other talke but of the Knight of the Images.
As he trauelled, he oftentimes sent vnto the Court, to know and learne some newes of his Ladie by the Postes that came from Spaine, and oftentimes he tarried for hys Pages returne at the Fountaine of Merlin, being the resting place for Knights aduenturers, trauelling in that Forrest.
One day as he was expecting newes from Spaine, hee saw his Page comming with a countenance different from that he was wont to haue, for that he came making of great lamentation: which caused some suspition in the amorous Spaniard. For alwayes a timerous heart touching a mans owne euill, doth prophecie (as it were) insuing mischiefe, as to affrighted Torismond at this time it prooued, who gazing stedfastly on Arsilo, thus questioned him.
What meaneth thy sadnes Arsilo, haue the heauens depriued me of all my good, and left poore Torismond to ^ament his Ladies absence?
This youth did confirme his suspition in that he did not answere one word. The Prince as one wholy beside him selfe, said, ah fortune, thou hast now shewed thy selfe who thou art, nowe I feare not thy strength, for that which I most feared, with all thy malice is certainly befalne me. Conclude Arsilo, and declare vnto me these newes that must redowne vnto my death. What should I say soueraigne Prince (answered the page) but that it is as you suspect? death, pale meager death hath seazed o^ your soules content.
This amorous and afflicted youth did not heare the rest, for that he fel vpon the grasse without any sense or feeling, til such time as his page brought him to himselfe againe.
Who in recompence said vnto him. Oh vnfaithfull, why hast thou called me from my ease, what doest thou imagine that there is strength in me to liue, without the life of her, whom rigorous death hath taken from me? I cannot nor I will not although I may liue, being without that good, which was my comfort? How can he liue that only did sustaine his life, in yeelding it into the handes of her who did receaue it with equal comfort. Oh my chiefe good, because I should know the despight of fortune she hath taken thee from me. Oh deere deere loue, how I doe number my wants, exceeding all number with the onely lacke of thy soueraigne beauty. Oh mournfull earth wherfore beginst thou not to lament thy lost ornament, for my losse reacheth farther then the griefe of vnhappy Torismondo. Oh warlike Spaine, how maiest thou from this time forwards leaue off thy glorious name, for that she who was the cause of al your courage is now conquered, by al deuouring death. Oh worthy knightes with what reason may you from this day forwards liue without courage, since she who with her beauty did recreate you all, faire heauen hath tooke away that heauen might be onely faire.
Oh deuine Floriana thou art a creature ordained to extoll the cunning worke of humane nature, but the dieties enuying that earth should beare such perfect excellence, found meanes for to vndoe so perfect a figure, carrying with it all the grace, beauty and perfection of the worlde, ioyntly with the soule of this vnhappy body. You ladies, that were enuious at the brauery of mine, fortune had co^passion of your griafe. Thou hadst reason diuine Floriana to remaine doubtfull of seeing me at thy departure. How ofte^ didst thou vrge me with my plighted faith, the which I will keepe till such time as I am in thy estate, without any feare to loose thee, but to see thee with these eies, wherwith I now doe celebrate thy death. Oh most happy land of Cantabria in times past, pittifull to my lamentations, how maiest thou from this day forwards begin to mourne for the lacke of such a Lady and Mistresse? Now my louing father, may you liue content with my fortune, to see me liue without my Floriana, who was so odious in your eies, for that I loued her. I am vexed still that you doe no^ conceaue it was life to me to loue her, and a sweete ease to suffer for her. Nowe here I sweare by my high thoughts, not to returne to Spaine, but to destroy it once againe, if any therein were the occasion of the death of my loues life, although it were my naturall father. Oh my Floriana, what can I doe to liue content, or who is able to giue it me but death onely? the which if I suffer for thy sake, I will receaue it gladly. And hauing a desperate wil, he pulled out his sword saying. O happy sword, being the sword of my Goddes: with thee at her hands I receiued the order of knighthood: I sweare by her beauty that none shalbe able to disturbe me, til this vnhappy body doth accompany her in death, that did giue it so excellent a life. At that instant he would haue lifted vp the skirt of his shirt of male, to haue thrust his sword in thereat, If the discreet Arsilo had not thrown himselfe before him, and pulled it out of his murdring hands.
Then this grieued youth came to himselfe and saide: Oh my Arsilo, is this the loue you beare me, to hinder me that I go not to accompany in death, that which neuer departed from me liuing? my friend permit it as thou wouldest the heauens to be more fauourable to thee, then they haue beene vnto the sorrowfull Torismundo.
Worthy Prince and my Lord (answered the discreete page) I should offend much therein, in the duety that I owe vnto you and your generous father, and you offende more your owne discretion, for that you cannot suffer that which the heauen doth ordaine, the faire Dutchesse was not for you, for that the commaunder of all beauty had chose her for himselfe.
Amongst worthy persons, there is nothing more to be praised then to know how to beare and suffer the disgraces of fortune, with such courage as they doe her fauours: consider how little ease it should be to your griefe, in killing your selfe.
Doest thou call it little (said the grieued Knight) that alone is sufficient to succour me? wherewith should I end so many deaths which waited on me, but in giuing my selfe one, for the conclusion of all: thys did euill agree vnto the seruice that thou owest mee, sith to die is onelye profitable.
At this time answered the page, I will die ere you shed one droppe of bloud. Heare me a little my beloued Lorde, that I may set before your eies examples for your comfort.
The Phrigians had exceeding cause to bewaile the death of valiant Hector, and they did fill the ayre with immeasurable lamentations; yet not one of them, no not his Andromache, though being deare to all, to him she was most deare, not one of them I say despairingly slewe himselfe, but armed their resolutions against their enemies.
Who could waile a louers losse, more than Venus her



sweete Adonis; whom she found discoloured and dead, his faire body rent by a foule Boare: yet she despaired not amidst her lamentations. Sorrow for seperated friends I deny not is necessary: but to die because they die is diuelish and damnab^e.
Despaire depriueth al grace, doubteth of immortality: and let not your excellence wrong Floriana so much, to make qu^stion of her immortall being. Suppose her gone vnto a Princely habitation, hauing enioyned you to perfourme aduentures for her loue. Let your little short span of life, be the progresse to that house: your iourny done, you shall enioy her sight.
Therefore consider worthy Prince, and besides these reasons, remember the royall bloud from whence you descend, and the harme you should doe to many by your death, who haue need of that life that you so little esteeme? Celebrate the death of your Mistresse, and let me be the first in death, if it may be any comfort vnto you? But I am sure that it is rather an anger to Floriana, who enioyeth a better estate than ours.
Therefore returne vnto your reasonable senses beloued Prince, and con^ider that it is the ordinance of heauen, for that you against the will of your father, woulde loue her, and might haue sought an other equall vnto your estate.
This grieued youth receaued great comfort by the discreete reasons of his page, but not in such sort that it caused him to forget the griefe he felt. The page seeing that he was somewhat quieted and eased, drew foorth a letter saying: This is the last worke that came from the hands of your Lady. This worthy Spaniard did take it (...) kissed it a thousand times, and bedewing it with teares, he opened it, and read as followeth.


The letter of Floriana the Dutches of Cantabria to Torismundo Prince of Spaine.
VNderstand from me welbeloued Prince, that I draw nigh vnto a new estate, being appointed by the heauens: and remembring with what truth you answered my firmenesse, almost life scarce suffering mee to write these fewe lines, I tooke strength to write vnto thee, only for to desire thee by the faith which thou plightedst to bee mine, to passe thy life in my absence with discretion, as is required: and Torismundo, let not my death bee occasion of thy indiscreet dealing. I would welbeloued Prince, that I might in this worlde call thee my owne, but to thy comfort in the other world I will: thither goeth thy beloued Floriana, hoping to see thee, when as the powers of heauen will stande our friend. I can say no more, for that my senses faile. To God I leaue my beloued Torismundo.

Dying Floriana.


This afflicted Gallant concluded the reading of the letter giuing a harty sigh, saying. Oh chance, and is it possible, that now should be shewed vnto me so much euill, and that she commaunds me to liue, and I must performe it. Oh my deare Mistresse how can I liue, who liued onely with your presence? Oh Fortune with how much discontent doest thou giue a little contentment. Oh vnhappy heart so cruelly vsed in the beginning of thy age, and tormented with thy excessiue torments. Ah Floriana to remaine with life will be death vnto me: but seeing that you receaue content therein, I will liue, imploying the rest of my life, to loue in absence, in the ^ame degree as when I triumphed in your soueraigne beautye.
Now you may worthy Spaniard (saide the Page) vnderstande

the discontent that Floriana shoulde receiue by your death, and the wrong you shall commit in not sustaining your life? And therewith the page caused him to eate of such foode as he brought, although it was with an euill will. But yet the heauens did ordaine a remedie worthy to comfort this wofull Prince, for by reason of his great wearines he fell a sleepe a while, although it was not much, for that with a sodaine anger he arose vp saying: Ah my Goddesse, and is it possible that there shall remaine no memorie of thy glorie and my torment, this commeth not of the loue I beare vnto thee? But I doe promise to solemnize thy feast, returning into Spaine, and giue the world to vnderstand with what affection Torismundo loued thee, and in saying this, hee went vnto a great and mightie Poppler tree, on whose barke he fixed with his dagger these verses.

Ye Fawnes, and Satyres seruants to great Pan.
And olde Syluanus, all assemble yee,
Ye lightfoote Nimphes assist a wofull man,
Of wood or water whether ere ye be.
Wilde Forrest beasts shall helpe you in your song,
And roare a base to thunder out my wrong.
Not one must sing a meane in my lament,
Except the still streame gliding on the pebble;
Thus will we carroll out my discontent,
My wofull selfe will sing or cry the treble.
Or if ye will confusion marre our song:
For we are all confounded by deathes wrong.

On the other side of the Fountaine there was a rough and knottie ashe, whereas he descyphred the sweete name of his fayre mistresse, and concluded with this Ode.


Floriana had not dyed,
Had not Fates her Loue enuyed:
Torismundo impartiall Fate,
With a deadly killing hate:
Sought to punish, but could finde
Nothing to torment his minde:
Till the fatall Sisters fell,
Worse than those three hags of hell,
Chancing to behold Cantabria,
And her Soueraigne Floriana:
Heard her praise the Prince of Spaine,
Heard her for his lacke complaine,
Heard her say she was his ioy,
Heard her sweare that no annoy
Could to Torismund betyde,
If she liude to be his Bride.
Where withall from her liues clue,
Hastely the thred they drue:
And with speed they cut the same,
When they heard my hatefull name.
So because I was enuied,
Gentle Floriana dyed.

This worthy louer being somewhat quieted depared and comming to the Christaline water, hee washed his blubbred face and handes, and drunke of the vertuous Fountaine: which so quicklie did worke his necessarie effect, that before he departed from the water, hee knew not what had passed with him, but the amorous life that before seemed to be a dreame: although he remembred all, yet not in such sorte that the death of the faire Floriana should giue him any perticuler griefe, but rather seemed that he did wrong vnto Spaine, that so quickly left it, for blind affection.
Being in this new and free estate, hee saw comming out

of the thickest of the mountaine a Damsell mounted on a mighty blacke horse, with a Lyon before her: who at her arriual, with a gallant demeanor alighted, and comming to the Prince she said in the Spanish tongue: Ualardus Torismundo, a wise man who desireth thy good, as to himselfe, commanded me to bring thee this armour and horse, and although their coulours are now contrary, to the new and pleasant time, and free state which thy destiny hath brought thee; yet the troubles are so many that you must passe, in tormenting your couragious hart, that you may from this present, beare a de^ice conformable vnto that griefe, and in recompence he will desire no more, but that your heart faile not, but alwaies haue in memory, the noble bloud from whence you descend, till such time as the tame Lionesse nigh to the place whereas now you vnderstood of the death of Floriana meete thee, then shalt thou know of the free life that shalbe admitted thee, and then thou shalt leaue this blacke armour, putting on with better reason this which thou nowe wearest, the which shall remaine vpon that poplar, till all be finished that I haue here rehearsed vnto thee, for so it is ordayned.
This swift Damsell tarried for no answere, but with the speede of an Eagle she put her selfe into the Forrest: presently this young Mars, did put of his pretious and greene armour, with the which he did incounter the mighty Alphebo, and hung it on the poplar whereas he found this saying.

He that takes thy armour hence,
which thou leauest for this blacke:
Shall againe in recompence,
giue thee ioy which thou wilt lacke.

With great ioy did this worthy Spaniard leaue his pretious armour, and armed himselfe in the blacke armour,

of truth, for that there were few like vnto it. The armes (as I say) were all blacks, but onely in the middest of the shield was painted Hope and Fortune, Fortune saying thus.

With the turning of my Wheele
all estates of men doo change:
Greefe or ioy (they vsde to feele)
on a sodaine seemeth strange.

Hee had not well concluded the perusing of the shield with the deuice, when that somewhat a farre off he heard a great troope of horse, and sometimes the noyse of Women, which seemed that they were by force constrayned: which was the occasion that he leapt vpon his inchaunted horse, and went into the high way, with all speed possible. But by reason it was night, and the Moone went verye low, he could not see nor know what people they were, til such time as cleere Day appeared from the East: and then from a little hill (whereon he ascended for to learne what it should bee) hee discouered a mightie waggon, drawen with sixe swift horse, being full of people, and to the number of 30. Knights with them, and two furious Giants: by which he conceiued that those in the waggon were caried prisoners. Wherewith he descended from that little mountaine like an arrow out of a bow, and ran with hys horse after them till it was in the afternoone, and then hee was constrained somewhat to rest his horse in which time the Giants got vantage of the way, for that the horses in the waggen were verie good.
After he had a while refresht his horse, this warlike Youth went from thence more swift than the stone out of the sling, till such time as (in trauelling) he saw a gentle Knight with russet armour, and his shield of the same, and in it the deuice of Cupide with two faces, different vnto that hee was wont to beare, for that they were now both closed.
This was the free Dacian (if you doo remember) in amor^^us conference with the French Ladie, on their iourney towards Paris: the Prince (by the vertuous Fountain^) changed had on his shield this Embleme written by the wise Lyrgandeo.

Sith my libertie is gained,
Close those eyes my heart that pained.

The Prince receiued great contentment when he saw the shield with that posie, and willed the Pages that they should follow him softly after, and spurring his inchanted horse, he ran with more swiftnes, than an arrow out of a Scythian bow, inlarging his pace to know that well proportioned and gallant armed warrier, till such time as Apollo lacked little to leaue the world as an orphane, by want of his shining face: and then (in the middest of a great Plaine) he ouertooke the Chariot with manie gallant Knights on horse-backe garding it, among whom (...) dealt in such sort* that he quickly gaue them to vnderstand of what courage he was, to their speedie hurt. For that incountring with the first, (who was a bold knight) he ran him thorough with his launce, for his presuming to meete him: and therewith drew out his good sword, and so behaued his arme amongst that trecherous companie, that it was great damage to euerie one of them that did withstand his furie.
So valiantly he behaued himselfe, that when the Giants and another gallant Knight (big set and in rich armour) returned to see what the noyse was which they did heare behinde the Chariot (for that they were then before) this warlike Spaniard had slaine (...) Knights, and dyd such ^aliant deedes, that the furious Mars was not woorthie of his credit^.
It is not possible to expresse with what violence the Giants, the big knight, with other sixe and twentie that remained (seeing what had passed) began to assayle and incompasse this yong Prince, in such sort, that it seemed by their furie they had bin able to haue broken in peeces a verie strong rocke they were so valiant: but this worthie and valorous Torismundo did sustaine himselfe in such sort, that (by the force of his arme) they receiued a bloodie payment.
At that time his new well tempered armour and horse did stand him in good steed, who was so light and nimble on the one side and on the other, as thought could bee no swifter, which was the occasion that the battell continued in a most honourable sort: yet notwithstanding it could not be but that he had need of succour in a Fight so dangerous, for the warriers with whom he delt were verie valiant.
Such was his fortune, that then the free Dacian did set spurres to his horse, and came at that instant, when as he was executing such furie as the inraged Pirrhus did vpon the Phrigian people.
The Dacian greatly wondred at this inclosed Knight, being verie much affected to his valiantnes, for that hee made no reckoning of the other knights, although they were strong and stout, but still assayled the Giants and that big knight, in such sort, that he made them feare his great and mightie blowes, hauing ouerthrowne twelue other knights.
Then could not Eleno staye, but pricked forward hys good horse, and with his happie launce in hys hand thrust himselfe among the knights, and ioyning nigh vnto the valiant Spaniard, he sayd: Uppon them good knight, for they are but a few, although they seeme to be braue and stout, for our iustice and their pride will giue them into our hands.
This saying was scarce ended, neither had ye Spaniard

answered it* when as with double courage he incountred one of the Giants on the one side in such sort, that he made him to accompanie those thot were faln dead, betng quite thrust thorough and thorough, wherewith he gaue a fearfull shreeke.
At which strange incounter, Torismundo greatly admyred, and was verie glad of that gentle succour in time of so great necessitie. And for to giue his vnknowen frend knowledge of what valour hee was, hee threw hys shield on his shoulder, and went against the great Knight, (who troubled him most) and strooke him such a mightie blow vpon the helme, that he made him fal vpon his horse necke, voyding great quantitie of blood at his trayterous mouth.
At hand was the worthie Eleno, and beholding it hee meruailed at taat blow: and seeing that great knight so ^igh him, and in that sort, his horse also so astonished that he could not stir, he stroke him such an ouerthwart blow, that seazing on the inlacings of his helme, helme and head fell into the greene field, whereat all that were in the chariot wondred.
This blow was not so soone giuen, but Torismundo (who the while was busie with the Giants knights, and had not noted what the Dacian had done) willing to conclude that which was begun, stroke the dead bodie which lay headlesse on the horse so furiously on the backe, so that passing thorough it, it passed to the horse neck, and cutting it asunder, all fell together to the earth: wherewith one of the Ladies that were in the chariot gaue a great shreek saying.
O glorious God, what great force is in this knight, that is not onely able at one blow to cut in sunder the Rider, but the horse also?
The valiant Spaniard turned his head towardes the Chariot, imagining that some knight would haue done iniurie vnto the Ladies, and in the chariot discouered one

of the fairest Ladies in the world, iudging her great beautie exceedingly to exceed that little, which he saw before in Floriana: wherew^^^ he receiued a greater blowe at the heart, than that which hee had giuen on the bodie of the mightie Knight.
Here he that had sworne firmnesse to his Ladie, dooth now striue to dispence with vowes: he calleth the heauen vniust, in shewing him first but part of beautie, his valour wexed weake, and his powers for awhile failed, and faine he would haue spoken to her, that so throughly had subiected him, giuing her in change of her first sight, hys loue-sicke wounded so^le.
With this new desire and amorous passion, hee thrust himselfe amongst those few that remained, and saw the Giant in sharpe battell with the Dacian Knight: but hee accounting the affaires belonging to that Ladie, proper to himselfe, and conceiuing her to be the agreeued and iniured Mistres of the rest, he began a fresh to dispatch more of the Giants Knights, to carrie newes into hell of hys new change.
In this time was not the magnanimous Dacian idle, for that he was in battell with one of the most brauest Giants of all his Nation: but hauing a meruailous good horse he entred in and out at his pleasure, till such time as he saw the stout Spanish Warrier how worthilye hee behaued himselfe against the other Knights, wherewith a kinde of honourable enuie so pressed him, that like a furious Lion he encountred the Giant, who came towards him, striking one the other such heauie and furious blowes, that it caused the worthie Spaniard to stay his battell, for to looke on them: but he saw that the Giant had the worst, for that he faintly trauersed the field, stretching himselfe with the pangs of death: and being ashamed to see so few Knights so long to indure, in the time that the couragious Dacian Prince came vnto himselfe (for that he was somewhat astonished) he behaued himselfe in such sort, that hee

left not one aliue, but onely two, which he receiued to mercie, for to be informed who they were, that attempted this outrage.
A good while before this battell was ended, came thether the Page of the Dacian with his French Damsell, who receiued great contentment in beholding the valour of her Knight, and reioyced that shee carried in her companie so good a warrant in the right of her Mistres Grisalinda.
The new and valiant Louer Torismundo being at libertie, came vnto the Chariot, whereas their Pages had freeed all that were therein of their vngentle bands, and pulling off his helme (his face being by reason of the heat somewhat inflamed) hee showed himselfe to be one of the fairest knights that was to be found, and verie yong: for (as before it was said) his beard did not yet appeare. Comming to the Chariot, hee kneeled downe before the Ladie, saying.
Pardon (faire Ladie) my delay in greeting you, for I could do no more than was in my power, the offence arises not from want of good will: vouchsafe therefore to receiue this small seruice of him, that is readie to put his life in anie aduenture that redoundeth to your content, and to accompt it as his owne.
The Ladie did well vnderstand the affection wherewith he spoke it, but (being restrained by the vnseperable yoake of marriage with the Prince of Geneua, who was present) she answered: The heauens reward you worthy knight, one of the most valiant you are that euer I haue seene: what you haue done for my husband and mee, heauen will requite. It is sufficient ioy to vs, that you haue shewed your selfe so valiant, that we may thankfully attribute the reward only to your worthines, as a thing admirable vnto vs.
It cannot be imagined what greef this passioned youth receiued, in seeing his remedie impossible, whereby hee

perfectly vnderstood the true sayings of the wise man, that he should see himself in excessiue troubles, accounting this (at this present) to be one of the greatest aduersities, that might chance him: yet notwithstanding, because he would not giue them knowledge thereof, he dissembled his griefe and answered.
It were vnequall glory vnto me gallant Lady, to attribute vnto my Arme, that which with so great reason is dewe to this stout warrior, vnto whome with greater right you ought to giue the thankes for your ayde and succour, as vnto one of the mightiest Knightes that euer bore armor.
And at this instant the Dacian Prince was with them, but with his helme on, because they should not know him. for that it seemed vnto him, he had before seene the Prince, spouse to the faire Dutches of Sauoy called Orosia, and greatly maruelled at the beauty and worthinesse of the Prince of Spaine.
So after there had passed many reasons with those Ladies, they did importune him much for to discouer himselfe: which he refused to doe, for that he said he had giuen his word vnto the Damsell, not for to disarme himselfe, neither to enter into any publique enterveiw with any till such time as he had finished an aduenture whereon he then went. Without impeach of this promise Sir knight said the faire Dutches, I hope it will not bee out of your way to beare vs company vnto the citty of Paris.
Then aunswered Don Heleno, I doe sweare vnto your beautie, worthy Ladie, that it is not in my power, for I haue put my libertie into the handes of this Damsell that commeth with me.
Wel, seeing it is so answered the Prince of Geneua, wee shall receiue great content if that at your comming to Paris wee may chaunce to see you, that in some parte wea may gratifie the greate good which you haue done for vs, which will be ioyfull vnto vs all.
The like was promised by the worthie Torismundo, who was greatly affectioned to the gentle disposition of the Dacian* and would haue remained with him to haue knowen who he was.
Afterwards, inquiring of one of the Prisoners, who his Lord should bee? He said, that it was the furious Tilmon, Sonne vnto the mightie Brandafuriel, whome Clauerindo the Prince of France slew, and left this but a verie yong Youth: but when hee grew great and bigge in yeares, he receaued the order of knighthood, and became the most hardiest knight in all that Countrey, liuing in such valiant sort, that he was esteemed for a more worthy man than his father. Which Tilmon (purposing to be reuenged for his Fathers death) came from the Towred Iland, whereof he was Lord, and brought those Giants in his companie, the better at his ease to seeke reuengement. And after we had disimbarked our selues on shoare, wee went through the Countrey in secret, till yesterdaye wee met with this Chariot, which was going towards Paris: and vnderstanding the greefe that the king would receiue for the imprisonment of his Nephewes (as both the prince of Geneua and his Wife were) hee did apprehend them, to procure some occasion (through sorrow) to kil ye French king.
I giue great thankes vnto God and vnto these worthie knights (said the faire Orosia) that your euill pretence took no effect. So for that it waxed late, they tooke their leaue of the knights, and iournied towards Paris, where they arriued the next day, and were receiued with great ioye and content by the king, vnto whom they declared what had happened vnto them by the way, and how they were set at libertie by two alone knightes: whereat the king greatly meruailed, and could not imagine who they shuld be of so great power and strength, that alone durst giue battell vnto so manie together, and against such deformed Giants.
He was somwhat comforted to see his welbeloued Neuewes: yet not in such sort, but that he felt in his soule the griefe concerning his daughter, which in conclusion he was constrayned to make the Dukes pertakers thereof: who although it were a griefe vnto them (as it was reason) yet they studyed to dissemble it, and to comforte their Unkle in all that was possible, and determined that the Prince of Geneua should goe disguised and seeke those valiant Knights, and to giue them vnderstanding of all that passed, that they might frustrate that greate euill which was raysed against the Infant Grisalinda.
The which Knightes, after they were departed from the Chariot, entred into the thicke grouie Countrey, till they came vnto a fayre Fountaine, whereas they lighted: and the Spaniard cast his armes vpon the Prince, and said: Sir Knight, showe not me so much iniurye as you did vnto that precious Lady, in not declaring to me your name: for in doing so, I shall remaine without gratifying of the ayde and succour you did vnto me.
Worthye Knight (aunswered the discreete Dacian) I should be very ill aduised, if I should not acknowledge the great good which is gotten, in making him pertaker of my thoughts, that is of such desert and so desirous: and if I did vse my strength, it was not for that you were in necessitie therof, but the affection which I receiued did constrain me to ioyne with the breuitie of the time, that I might (if it were not a griefe vnto you) demaund what you were, and likwise aduertise you of the most secret things of my hart.
Sir Knight (said Terismondo) I giue you great thanks for that you haue said: as for the rest, it is very apparant my necessity needed your strength, and to both we may attribute the raunsome of those Ladies: for my name, I answer you as you do me: it is not iustice to denie a thing to him that hath so much desire to make me pertaker who hee is.
Know then that I am Torosmondo Prince of Spayne,

whome fortune (that neuer ceaseth to be mutable) hath brought as vanished into this country, being tormented with amorous fyre: and there he declared vnto him all his life and amorous dealings: wherewith the Dacian was bound to declare vnto him of his loues, and the great troubles that he receiued.
At the which the Spaniard remained greatly contented, and they were maruelous affectioned the one vnto the other, and the friendship that was betweene them, did so farre extend, that it indured to the death, which was the alonely meane able to seperate their loue, and not the rigorous battels which they performed (as shall bee tolde you) were not sufficient, but that they were the greatest friendes in all the world, for that in one age, and in one Countrie, and at one selfe time: fortune had giuen them remedy of their griefe.
With this the Dacian told him the lamentable occasion wherefore he went to Paris: at the which the Spanish Prince reioyced at the heart, for that he should once again see the gallant Dutchesse: who was no lesse delighted with his great beautie, th^n hee was rauished and enamoured with hers.
They passed all that night one declaring to the other their former Loues, till such time as the Spaniard did tell him of the great affection he had to the Dutchesse: but the Dacian seeing that it was not good for him, (shee beeing a married Ladie) did cause him to leaue it off. Which was no small matter: for that a new passion (if once it be grapled to the heart) will sooner make an ende of one, than leaue him: but for that the remedie was at hand, it was easie to be forgotten, At which conceipt they did not a little laugh, both of them knowing the wonderfull effect of the fountaine.
The Damsell that vnderheard some of their amorous discourses, said vnto them.
Of truth faire knights, it was no small greefe which the wise man did to disdainefull Ladies, which found so good a remedie against their strangenes. Of my selfe I say, that if I were beloued, I would not vse (as commonly it is seene now among Ladies) to dissemble so much, that it causeth wings to be added vnto knights thoughtes, to seeke out so vnsauerie a Fountaine: for that it feemeth to me by the knowen vertue of this place, it will fall out that she shall remaine forsaken by her dissembling, and her gallant knight shal liue content to see her iust paine and greefe: a worthie reward for proud statelines. For if a Ladie loue, wherefore doth she dissemble? and if she hate, wherefore doth shee not make it knowne? But wee women are so strange of condition, that we thinke that it is sufficient to be women, that all the world may serue vs. This is a thing too vsuall, which ought not to bee accepted amongst discreet people, although it may seeme that she onely is discreet, who often doth vse this false dissimulation: Considering that hee who loueth, and is not dissembled with, doth not deserue the name of a Louer.
This hath place with them that are strange and giue not part of ioy to mitigate the griefe of the heart which loueth them, and I hold that Knight careles, who may bee remedied if hee will vrge it, and yet simply bearing wrong, reioyceth in his griefe, beeing content to bee dissembled with.
Oh faire Ladie answered the tender Spaniard, how sweete should a Louers life bee, if all were of your opinion? and how manie greefes might they daily auoyd? for that Ladies doo dissemble the affection which they beare their Louers, and vniustly intreate them to whome they haue giuen their hearts.
Hencefoorth let all Ladies deale with me so, sayd the Dacian.
Peace Cynicke said the Spaniard, let me goe forward.
It is good a Lady should be circumspect^^ yeilding her honour on any tearmes, and to esteeme it, when all the world doth know that she is faire: but to vse it in such sort, to make her Louer suff^r griefe, she her selfe beeing passioned, and yet makes rigorous showes. Faire Damsell, I take this to be one of the greatest tyranyes that may be vsed either to Knightes or against themselues* considering Knights to gratefie their Ladies, euery moment put their liues at deathes doore: And should the Lady then be coye in his loue whome she loueth with all her heart? if so shee deale, who can condemne him truly that leaueth to know her? for her owne frowardnes is cause of her forgetfulnes.
You haue great reason on your side, answered the gracious Damsell, but these so costly hopes I like not of, that when they come, they are with pure hope loathed: for to my iudgement (and I beleeue all those that try shall find) that the best of all hope in loue, is bought for more then it is worth. In these reasoninges they passed away a great part of the night, till such time as the two newe friendes being wearie, they layed their heades vpon their helmets to take rest, so likewise did the Damsell and their Pages.



The Iusting which Don Heleno and Torismundo, had at their entring into Parris, and what more chaunced vnto them.

 Chap. 5.
APollo had scarse shewed himselfe at his golden window, beholding the large Circle that he had to runne, when as the two valiant friends did arme themselues with their stronge and inchaunted armour, and mounted vppon better horses, then those which the amorous shepparde did shew, and began to trauell towards Paris, with great desire to be reuenged for the Infant Grisalinda.
In this sort they trauelled, till after a little more then two miles they came vnto a great and faire bridge, for to passe the mightie Riuer of Some, nigh vnto the high walles which compassed the Citty. There they saw many Knights staying for to haue passed, and some of them were in battaile.
These furious friendes pricked forwardes, for to see the good Iusting that was there: And asking of one wherefore those Iustes were, it was tolde them that the valiant
Alsino did make the Iustes, defending the beautie of a Lady, that a little before was come vnto the Court. This was the Dutches of Sauoy, and hee was the Nephew of the redoubted King Partomio, that accused the Princesse: who seeing that there lacked but one day, did think to carry her away with him, and the proude Alsino the Dutches.
The Dacian whose bountie was well knowne, did very earnestly require Torismundo that they would let him free the bridge. The Spaniard did it with a very euill will, for that it gaue him great griefe whan as it was told him Alsino was in loue with the Sauoyan Lady. The Pagan gloried that he had slaine verie many: and straight way they sawe when as hee had concluded to ouerthrow those which were there to prosecute their Iorney, they sent vnto Alsino a Page to know the condition of the defence, the which gaue the Knights great cause of laughter, and the Dacian turning to the Spaniard said.
It seemeth that if we had not drunke of the water of the fountaine, we should not haue had contention about the iustifiyng of the beauty of your auncient Mistresse. Although this were not, said the French Damsell vnto Don Heleno, I would commaund you in recompence of the sodaine passions which I had in beholding the passed battaile, that you should doe it in my name.
The Prince receiued great content in that which the damsell said: and therewith shaking his Lance he entred
(...)
But I am most certaine more than ordinarie sorrowe tooke seazure of her heart for the amorous Princes death. So much for her I dare affirme: for my selfe to be plaine with ye, I had rather neuer haue a louer than to dissemble his reward: for I delight not in their mourning sonnets, neither am I pleased that euery eye should bee fixed on his dispairing face, and euery finger point at my disdainefull folly. If I perceiue hee deserue loue, I will crowne him with Loues garland: but if I finde him halting, he shall be sure to know that I can play the cripple. But faire Knights, I am yet no Mistresse of any amorous gallant, my thoughts are not captiued, onely I find my selfe to your worths so many waies bounde, as till I dye I will indeuor to deserue it with duetie. And indeede she prooued as good as her word, as ye shal after heare in the loue of Torismund and Grisalinda.
In this sort at tenne of the clocke in the morning they came vnto the great Citty of Paris, at such time as all the place was full of people, abyding the comming foorth of the mightie Partomio, for that according to the lawes of the realme, the Princesse not finding within the terme set, any to come and conquer the accuser, the King was to pronounce the sentence. All the windowes and galeries of the Pallace were hanged with black, and a heauie and sad rumor was heard amongst the people, at which time the two valiant Friends entred the place: whome the eies of those that were present did much behold, wondring to see their armor and horse.
They were straight waies known by them that were at the bridge, and they began to say, there commeth the valiant warrier, that at one encounter, made the Louer that kept the bridge see starres vpon the ground.
The Damsell went verie gallantly betweene them that were the flowers of Knighthood, with her face couered, in such sort that it made the people to suspect her to be^ more fairer then she was.
Almost all the people in the place followed them, imagining wherefore they did come: and at the Pallace gate they alighted from their horses, with so gallant demeanor, that euerie one meruailed at them.
The worthie Spaniard did take the Damsell in his armes from her horse, and so with them she went vp into the great Hall, at such time as the King was going forth all in mourning apparell, so sad and heauie, that the princes to see him had great compassion. And for they would not delay the time, the mightie Dacian did somwhat lift vp his beauer, the better to expresse his words, saying verie curteously.
God keepe and deliuer thee from traitors, thou mighty king of great France. The fame of a wrong that is done to thy onely Daughter, came vnto the Countrey where I dwell: and it seeming vnto mee a thing impossible, that the daughter of so royall a king should be carelesse in any thing that is agreeable to her honour and honestie, it dyd constraine mee to come, hauing better confidence in her right, than in my valour: but such as it is, I will imploy it in her defence. Affirming that she did not commit any such thing: and besides, that it is euill and dangerous, that so rigorous a law cannot bee referred into the kings hand: but to giue credit to whosoeuer (without any more consideration) that either for passion or for that a Ladyes will is not answerable to their loathsome demaunds, wil then forsooth (false knights as they are) bee so bold to vse their slanderous tongues euen against Princesses, and the royall chast Daughters of holye and Emperiall Fathers.
But least these traytrous accusers should say, that ^nely with armes I come to defend that which is put to the tryall of battaile, cause him to come foorth that doth accuse the princesse, seeing time doth passe away, and I will with armes answere him.
And heerewith he concluded his reasons, leauing all,

but especially the King very wel satisfied with his words and gallant disposition.
In returne of answere the King said, Sir Knight I do esteeme as it is reason, the trauaile which you haue taken for my cause, and the battaile which you will vndertake for my daughter: and beleeue mee gentle Knight, I doe liue deuoide of care, for that I know truth or falshood wil haue successe answerable to their deserts: but for that hee who doth accuse her is a King, and a person that in all thinges is to be creditted, and on the other side my lawe hath admitted it to battaile, I hoped alwaies that some would be found which would combate for her, and in signe of the confidence I haue in her right and your valor, I refer all into your hand, being perswaded your desert to bee much more.
I doe kisse your Royall handes, answered the Dacian for the confidence you haue in me, but whether it be much or little all is at your seruice.
There was ye Prince of Geneua and his Dutches, who came in with the Princesse, whan they vnderstood there was a knight that tooke vpon him her battaile, he came and saluted the Prince of Spaine, knowing him by his blacke armor, and offered vnto him his lodging for the ayde and succour which he had done vnto them.
Unto whome the gentle Torismundo surrendred thankes, but could not proceede any further, for that they sawe comming the mightie king Partomio, and his Nephew the s^out Alsino, who for that they were lodged in the Pallace, came foorth without armor: and when hee came where as the king was, hee sayd with a lowde voyce.
I do much reioce king of France, that you haue knights that will accept this battaile, and I come to giue them knowledge that whatsoeuer Partomio doth speake in pallace, he knoweth how to defend it in field.
The wrathfull Dacian did put himselfe before him,

saying in this manner to his furious and prowd aduersarie.
Truly valorous king, hauing such confidence in your strength, you had no need to raise anie slaunder against so excellent a Ladie.
Thou art verie bold answered the pagan, the cause of it is, in that thou seest me without armour: and to be plain, I put not on my armes, for that I iudged how that onelye in beholding me, thou wouldst gladly leaue off thy enterprise.
Thy pride is not small aunswered the Dacian in hoping to doo that without armour, which is impossible for thee to perfourme, beeing armed and at thy best aduauntage.
Thou maist well talke here said the pagan, vntill the hower of thy death approach. I wish of all my Gods that you were more, that I might giue ye your payments together.
The cholerick Spaniard could not indure anie longer, but as one wholly and iustly incensed with wrath, he thus said.
Those who haue little faith (as thou hast) doo inuade knights with aduantage, and not they which doo gouerne themselues with reason: and because thou art vniust and reasonlesse, thou doost imagine my companion will suffer mee to helpe him. But thus much (on his part) I let thee vnderstand, that before thou partest with him, thou wilt rather wish for help, than desire to haue anie more aduersaries.
Nigh vnto Partomio was the bold and stout Alsino, who with a deuelish furie would haue laide hand on his sword saying.
By high Iupiter I sweare to thee thou babling knight, if I did not assure my selfe that the king my Unkle is sufficient for thee and this cowardly knight, I would neuer put on armor.
Thou maist well goe and put it on, thou vnmannerly knight, vnworthie of a knights name (said the Spaniar^) and hereupon I defie thee forthwith, that thou maist help thy Unckle, in whom thou puttest too great trust: and with a gallant and souereigne iesture, he presently shut down his visor.
Then the diuelish Alsino tooke hold of the Princes skirt of mayle, and pulled so strongly that he drew the Prince after him, saying: It is honor enough that Fortune hath permitted thee to defie and challenge him, that will not refuse to combat with Mars.
The Dacian was nigh vnto them, who seeing his discurtesie, would not remit his paiment till the battell, but lifting vp his fist, he stroke him such a blow vpon the forehead, that he ouerthrew him at the Kings feete, saying: Uncourteous knight, before the King doost thou vse thys boldnes. Did not I foorthwith stay for the battell, I wold giue thee the paiment that thy folly doth deserue.
The wrathfull king when he saw his welbeloued Nephew lye along the ground, like a furie went against the Dacian with his sword in his hand.
The Spanish Prince was nothing dismayed at his diuelish rage: but with two light leapes he put himselfe by his well affectioned and new frend, leauing all that were present greatly amazed at his dexteritie.
Then the King of France came betweene them: which was the cause that this furious Giant did not there ende his life: and king Oristeo commaunded Partomio foorthwith to bee armed, and his Nephew also, who was then come to himselfe, and seeing himselfe in that case, there was no Hircane Tigers furie to bee compared vnto hys: but that foorthwith reuengement should be made (as hee thought) he went with his vnckle.
Then the King commaunded the Princesse to come before them for to giue the knights thanks, and accept them for her Champions: wherewith the poore Ladie apparelled

all in blacke appeared: yet was not she able with her sad lookes to couer and hide some part of her great beautie, which was such, that the couragious Spaniard had not power to resist the entrie thereof into the secret part of his heart: and it was of such effect, that he accused hymselfe, and said it was lost time that he spent without louing of his Grisalinda, whom he worships, and acknowledgeth her for his liues owner. This was such a wound, that neither water nor the wisedome of Merlin was sufficient to heale.
The gracious Princesse in few words (yet excellently couched) gaue power to these knights to become her champions, against the false accusing king and his fierce Cousin. The Princes humbled themselues with such grace, somewhat inclining, so that easily might bee seene theyr gallant disposition and demeanor: but especially ye Spaniard: who was the gallantest knight in the world. Long communication they would not abide, till such time as for the victorie they had done their best: therefore they descended into the court, whereas they viewed their armour, because no ouersight should appeare in them. When thys was done, (without putting their foote in stirrop) they leaped on their well prepared horses, making them gyue a thousand coruettoes, with so gallant a grace, that all sayd they were knights of great worth: and the eyes of the people wer set vpon them with great content, but the incounter with so valiant Enemies, they that had best hope, somwhat doubted.
The worthie Spaniard did first enter into the Lystes, and seeing that their Contraries were not come, hee wyth a lowd voyce sayd. What, doo they not come that wished we were more? it seemeth to mee that their workes are not agreeable to their proud words, and I beleeue they wil not doo what they speake: and if they durst, I hardly imagine their furie being so great, they would thus slack their presence.
Thereby was a Knight, no lesse huge of bodie than Alsino, and something a kin to him, but at least his especiall great frend, with whom he did communicate of his loues, or (better to terme it) his foolish desires, who sayd: Proceed not so forward, thou ill aduised Knight, for that shortly thou shalt thinke this place too little for thee, when as thy hands must be thy defence, and not thy tung. Well, for that thou shalt vnderstand my little feare (aunswered the valiant Spaniard) goe and take thy armour, for I do giue thee license to help thy cousin the prince of pride, and then thou shalt see who shall think the place too little: and therewith he cast his gauntlet in token of defiance. But all that were in the place thought it folly, knowing with whom they should haue to doo, and yet so boldly giue them a companion. The Dacian was nothing agreeued thereat, for that he knew the new passion of his frend, and did intend to helpe him to the death.
During the time that they staied for this so much doubted Moore, this new Louer could not finde anie better exercise, than contemplation on his Goddesse, fixing the end of his speare vpon the ground, and his eyes whereas his heart was. The Dutches of Sauoy stood in a round tower all couered with blacke, and with her the Princesse, who seemed no lesse faire, than heauie and sad. And while the prince was beholding them, ther issued the deformed kinsmen, richly armed: the Kings armour was Lion colour, with suns of gold, on his shield Reuenge with this posie.

Reuenge gainst one is insufficient,
One death cannot my rage content.

Hee was mounted on a furious horse, coloured dapple gray, and all his trappings sutable: hee had vnder his armour a shirt of mayle, and was appointed in such sort, that it caused a cold feare in all the beholders, to see with what brauerie the Pagan did put himselfe into his station.
There came after him that valiant and prowd Alsino, all armed in yeolow armour, full of precious stones and flower de luces amongst them. In the middest of hys shield there was a Ladie painted, with this posie.

Did I but grace his valor, Mars should fall:
But he will win, despite of mee, and all.

The choler was so great that entred into our Spaniard when he saw that louing Posie, vnderstanding vnto what ende it was written, together with the wrong that was done to the faire Grisalinda, without anie feare hee went to him and said. Now is the time (vncurteous knight) that shalbe seene whether I haue hands heere as I had a tongue in the pallace to defend mee: and I will make thee vnsay the falshood which thou intendest in thys deuice thou bearest. When hee was touched with that, the amorous Moore could abide no more reasons, but turning his horse about, he put himselfe against his Enemie.
Now would I that I were inspired with some diuine fauour, to declare the most furious Battell, that euer was seene in the pallace of ancient Paris: the weaknes of my Muse hath no power to expresse the worthines thereof. If some excellent spirit now assisted me, with what content should I prosecute the most heauie and amorous battel of these furious Warriours? Who at the sounding of the trumpets, parted with so great a noyse, as though the vnder earth had trembled, being oppressed with the furie of their couragious horses, on whom they made their incounters in the middest of their course, with no lesse violence, than if two rockes (remooued with the sea) had rushed together.
The speare of the mightie Partomio tooke no holde on the Magicall shield, but it was giuen with so great force and

strength, that it made the Dacian double with his bodie, and to loose one of his stirrops, and the reynes of his horse out of his hand, but not his memorie: which in that extremitie did much helpe him, so that at the staying of hys horse he had recouered al, and returning with great swiftnes, he drew out his sword, and went against his Enemy: with whom he had encountred so strongly, (although hee could not seaze on him a full blow in the middest of hys shield, for that it was of magicall mixture) that he stroke him such a violent blow vpon the brest, which tooke away part of his breath by bending and brusing of his harnesse: and his speare (running forwards) shiuered in peeces, a splinter wounding him in the throate in such sort, that if it had had a little more force, it had cut his throate asunder: yet notwithstanding he wounded him, whereof hys issuing blood gaue testimonie, and made him to embrace the necke of his great horse.
The wonder was great that they all receiued, to see so furious a blow, and from that time forwards they did behold the Battell with more attention, perceiuing by that beginning, the Moore (for all his brags) wold surely haue the worst.
The gentle Spaniard and his Enemie made their incounter in the middest of the carreere, with so great force, that it seemed by the rumour of this course, some great edifice had falne. The incounter of our baptised Knight was somewhat low, for that hee would not erre: yet for all this, his aduersaries shield and harnesse fayled him, and he gaue him a little wound, which troubled him: and they rushed together with their shields and helmes, and with their horses so furiously, that the Moore fell (out of all sense) with his horse dead betweene his legges vnto the ground. Likewise the Christian (being brused with that incounter) was forced to doo the like, but his horse escaped, neuerthelesse he thought with the fall hee had broken hys bodie in peeces.
Yet for all this he began to bussell and make himselfe ready to goe against his enemy with an admirable quicknes, saying: it stood him in hand, being before his Mistresse, and in defence of so faire beautie. All that were in the place did verie much reioyce at the good successe of him with the blacke armor: but by and by he was troubled in that he sawe the third defied Knight come swiftly with his speare in his reste against the Louer. This wrathfull youth did not feare him, but before the Moore woulde passe, seeing the Prince make shewe as though he would abide him, he somwhat stayed his horse, because he would not misse, and comming neere him, he bare his speare lowe, intending to carrie him away at that thrust. But the Spaniard commending himselfe to God, at such time as he deliuered his Speare, put himselfe on the one side, laying holde thereon with so great quicknes and strength, that he forced him to let it loose, because els hee should haue fallen, and so the Moore passed forwards: caried with the furie of his horse.
This newe Louer, hauing gotten his Speare in his hand, and won it in such order, would shewe some of the antiquitie and bloud whereof he came. Therefore he did tosse and shake it before his faire Ladie, that behelde him fixing her eye on the place where hee was, and hee perceiuing that she did looke vpon him, as indeed all the people did, noting with what brauerie he did it: euen as if he had been vpon his good horse, he went after him that then was returned and comming to ouerrun him with his horse, which caused great laughter and noyse in the place, till such time as they were aduertised what was done. Then they saw that the Spaniard firmed his feete on the ground, and threwe the Speare with so great strength that he stroke him in the middest of his shield, and made him fall ouer the crouper of his horse, whereas against the ground his head receiued a greate and greenous fall, and besides he caried a tronchon of the speare in his brest,

whereout began to run much blood. Presently amongst the people there arose a great noise saying, Hee with the black armor doth begin to quaile the pride of the kinsmen. The furie of this famous Prince of Spaine did not heere rest, for when he saw him with the Lance ouerthrowen, and that the other could not cleere himselfe from vnder his horse, he went vnto the last, and tooke him by the legges, drawing him vnto the place whereas the proude Alsino lay blaspheming his Gods that had giuen such force to one Knight, at two blowes to bring them into that estate. And when he came to Alsino hee said: Nowe beast thou maist see that it is better to put more hands to the battaile than so much pride, I will not helpe thee from vnder thy horse, till such time as this champion doth come to himselfe, that shall beare thee companie in death: so he layde him by him, and left them in that sorte, causing greate laughter among them all, and pleasing the innocent Princesse, who then began to feele some new alterations, iudging with some passion, that which all men publiquely spake of the valiantnes of the Spaniard: who as though he had done nothing, threw himselfe ouer the Pomell of his swoord, and so backt his horse that came vnto him, which was esteemed of all for high noblenes. After he had a while beheld the place where his Goddesse was, a thousand imaginations working vpon the newe forge of his thought, hee returned to see his companion: who at this time with his swoorde in his hand (very ioyous to see the gallantnes of the new louer) went against the redoubted Moore, who vnsheathing his great fauchion and blaspheming his Gods, they settled such blowes on their inchanted helmets, that all the compasse did sound thereof. They were some what amazed, but the Moore had the worst, by reason that the inchantment of the Dacians good swoord, was of more antiquitie and better than that of the Pagan, so that the magical temperature of his helmet doing him little good, his sword must needs enter in therat more tha^

two fingers, wherat Partomio was greatly amazed: but remitting to the force of his arme what lacked on the helm they began to strike in such sort that their armor s^emed a new forge for Vulcan, approouing each of them with costly experience to shew his enemy his force and strength. In this the King seazed on the heroycall Dacian such an vntoward blow, with so great force, that he made him decline his head to the horse neck, renewing the blow, he seconded another, that if it had hit right, it would not haue gone well with him: but it serued onely to inflame cholar in the Prince, and made him more quickly to come vnto him selfe: wherwith he assailed the Moore, raising himselfe in his stirrops with his swoord aloft, with so gallant demeanor, that it caused the stout heart of the Pagan to feare the blow, and to put his shield before for his defence, although it were but little helpe, for that the furie of the Dacian was so great, that hitting it he cut it in two peeces, and descending down by his brest to his shield hand: hand, shield and reines of his horse came all to the ground, and his horse with feare not feeling the bridle, striued to goe forth of the impalement^, if the lame rider had not giuen him such a blow on the head that he cleue it in peeces, faling with him to the ground, hard by ye spaniard, who at the noise of the fall came to himselfe, being before in an extasie with beholding the faire Lady. They might well haue killed him, although with great lightnes hee went from his horse, and at the same instant the proud Alsino (with the help of his cosin) was cleere from vnder his horse, and seeing himselfe a^oote, he pulled out his mightie swoord, and came against the Spanish Prince: who receiued them all three through the great corage he had, whilest the Prince his friend did alight from his horse, and although it were done in great hast, yet could he not come so quickely, but that the Spaniard had assalted the feared Partomio, for that he should not goe before he had first proued the sharp edge of his swoord.
And for that he had no shield he at his ease stroke him such a blowe vpon his arme that the force of his armor coulde not r^sist his swoord, but it must needs cut his infidel flesh, and charged him so sore, that it made him put both handes and knees to the ground, and he said: Now thou shalt vnderstand furious Pagan what I said to thee? That thou shouldest see thy selfe in that extremit, ythat thou shouldest haue need of helpe.
At this time approched his couragious Friend, and almost enuious at that the new louer had done, intending to requite him with the like, he assailed Alsino that was on the one side, and lifting vp his swoorde with both his handes, hee stroke him such a side blowe vppon his helme, that he little enioyed his standing, but hee ouerthrewe him side-longs with a great fall, so that all that were in the place began to say: long liue so good friends that know how to reuenge the dishonor of our Princesse. The King did verie well heare it, and although hee commaunded them to holde their peace, it did little profit. Therefore turning to the Prince of Sauoy hee said: Of truth if these two be not the Greeke Princes I cannot imagine who they should be that haue so great force. Let not your highnes maruell (answered the Prince) for as I tolde you, I sawe them against the Giants deale such blowes, that if I had not beh^lde it I could not haue beleeued it, and I doe perswade me that the blacke Knight is none of the Princes of Greece, for that he is verie yong, and so I beleeue is his companion.
Then it came to the Kings imagination that it should be the Prince of Spaine: but that thought left him, for that he did see him ouercome at one blowe in the same place.
And turning to beholde the battaile, they sawe the blacke Knight come vppon the Pagans cosin, and strike him such a sound blow that he made him to stacker backward, three or foure reeling paces, and following the

same stroke him another on the helme, in such sort that he gaue him a deepe wounde, wherewith the stoute Alsino gaue the Spaniard such a blowe, that he made him stoope with one of his knees: but it was little for his good, for that with a light leape hee freeed himsefe from betweene them, and seeing how the Dacian did deale with the Giant, he began to florish with his swoord and to part them from the place where they twoo made their battaile, and this expert youth (awayting his time) closed with the cosin of Alsino, and thrust him thorow to the backe, and ouerthrew him on the hard ground, sauing himselfe with a light leape, so that Alsino could not reach him: if the Princesse reioyced at this, I need not perswade the reder, that hath had any experience of the sweete wound of loue. This louing Ladie could not dissemble, but turning to the faire Orosia of Sauoy she said. It seemeth vnto me gentle cosin, that your comming hether, hath begun all my good fortune by the force of that Knight, which as I beleeue doth all this in your seruice.
It is not to be doubted (answered the Lady) being satisfied of your beautie, that he doth this for you: hauing alreadie done as much for mee to set me at libertie. Happie Dutches of Sauoy (answered the Princesse) that you obtained such a Knight for your defence, and much more happy may the Princesse of Fraunce be, to obtaine such knights to defend her honor being indued with such excellencie.
And as they thus conferred, being young and kinswomen, their new change appeared, and it was no griefe vnto them to fauour the knight with the blacke armor, in in that they were bound vnto it: so looking into the combate place, by reason of a great noise that was amongst the people which said. From the Heauens descend the reward of such a knight that so doth honor the French court. They perceiued that the valiant Dacian at one irefull blowe, had ouerthrowen the King vpon the earth and cut

off his head, at that time that the cholorick Spaniard had done the like to Al^ino, and rouled them out of the place with great contentment vnto the King. Then the Spaniard went vnto the Dacian, who vpon his knees gaue him thankes, that with so great honour had holpen him. The gentle Spaniard did the like, and cast his armes vpon his necke, saying: Pardon me (my entyre frend) in that you haue seene my follies. Whereto the Dacian aunswered: Whatsoeuer errour hath beene committed, it bringeth a pardon with it selfe: and whatsoeuer you haue done, hath been to mee great content, for that I perceiue your Ladie doth receiue the like pleasure. And from this time forth, let vs intreate of your matters with such wisedome, as is required in such a case as this is: and if it bee requisite to carrie her out of France, I profer my selfe in your seruice. Torismundo did much esteeme this ayd promised, binding himselfe to more than to venter his life for him. And comming vnto the Damsell they said: For that she had done them so great frendship, and kept them so good companie, that whatsoeuer she would willingly should be done, shee should expresse it. The French Damsell being somwhat abashed, sayd. I am sorrie sir Knights, that you doo renue in me that, whereunto I am so much bound: but the dutie that hath wanted in mee, my Mistres will performe in such measure as is reason. Faire Damsell (sayd the Spaniard) this alone is sufficient to leaue me in euerlasting bondage to you, if you procure your Ladie (finding my heart true) to be intreated to yeeld such pittie, as true loue requireth: and when ye would speake with vs, you may alwaies come vnto the Forrest, whereas wee dined to day. She said, she would doo so. At that they could not talke anie more, for that the King came in companie with all those mightie Princes and Knights, that were wyth him. And when he approached, as these two frends were kneeling down to kisse his hands, he raised them, and imbraced them, saying. I will not sir knights, that you suppose

my comming is to reward that which you haue done: for I cannot pay so great a debt: my onely desire is, that yee would commaund my person and estate, in anie thing yee please, and I will procure it, as if it were for Clauerindo my deere Sonne. Wee doo well know couragious prince (said the Spaniard) that whom God hath indued with so much vertue he wil not leaue him without so much grace but that all the world shal desire to serue him: our reward is sufficient, in that ye haue admitted vs for your knights in this cause, wherefore in all other things I and my companion are at your commaundement. And now seeing there is no more to be done, giue vs leaue (wee pray you) to depart. You will not deale so vncurteously with me sir knights (said the king) to take from vs the bond wherein wee are so much bound, as to goe away, and not to take your rest, and ease your selues in this our pallace. I doo assure you worthie king (answered the Dacian) that wee cannot tell you who we are, neither can we tarrie with ye without breach of our honour: and this we hope you will not permit, only for the desire we haue to imploy our liues in your seruice. For my part (said the king) you shal not be importuned, onely my desire is, that you pull off your helmes and speake vnto the princesse, for it is shee who is most bound for this deed, The Spaniard answered, (faining his voyce, for that he wold not be knowen). We may as ill yeeld to this, as to the other, by the order of knighthood which we haue receiued, and verie much shall we be blamed, if we make so long tariance, as to speake wyth the princesse: but hauing opportunitie, wee will returne and serue you in all that you will command vs. The king answered: With this I remaine content, although I shal not forget the wrong, till such time as you performe that which you haue last promised: and taking them by the hands, he lead them thether whereas the princesse was, and her welbeloued Mother, who could not satisfie her selfe in imbracing her, as if shee had beene new risen from death.
And when they came thether the King said, Daughter I cannot intreate these Knights to remain in our Court, that they might receiue the graces and thankes for that which they haue done for you. I would faine see if the request of Damsels were of more effect than that of Kings. It is not possible, welbeloued Father (answered the vnacquainted Lady) that they will loose the debt wherein they haue bound vs, in going away without telling vs who they are.
Most faire Princesse (answered the Dacian for that the Spaniard was not able to mooue himselfe): The heauens doe know what griefe my selfe and my companion doe feele, in that we cannot receiue the curtesie of so high a Princesse, in remaining in this Court* but it would bee an occasion for vs to falsify our promise, if wee delay any longer time. Touching our names, we are of far Countryes, and of so little fame, that if we should tell you, onely it would be cause for vs to loose somwhat of that which we haue gotten. Touching your father and Court wee haue not deserued any thing, but occasion being offered, heere we giue you our faithes to returne and serue you. I wilbe surety for this your promise, said the faire Dutches. I am content therwith (answered he in the black armor) making strength of weaknes, and see wel that our faith receiues no wrong, although we goe secure that you will haue compassion theron. So making their obeisance vnto the Ladies, they tooke their leaue and descended, much against the wil of the Spaniard. And mounting vpon their horse, they tooke their leaue of the Damsel* who made her selfe to be known vnto the King and the Princesse, wherof they receiued high and great content, and asked her who they were, but she tolde them what they had concluded, but neuer would say what they were: where as wee will leaue them in their suspitio^, for to speake of the three princes, whom we left in the way toward Greece.




Of the aduenture that happened vnto the Princes, Rosieleer, Meridian, and Oristides the Troyan* nauigating by Sea.

 Chap. 6.
THese three stout warriers were farre ingulfed into the Sea, on the way towards the Grecian Empire, full of greefes, the Troyan for his Country: the knight of Cupid for his faire Oliuia: and the mightie Prince of the Scythians, not alone for his faire Floralinda, but for his welbeloued children, not knowing when he should see them again: but somewhat comforted for that there remained in their companie and as their keeper their new friend Brandafidel, who made him promise that so soone as the strong inchauntment was finished, to returne and bring them to Greece: whereas the Princes will was hee should abide his comming. They sawe that their shipp made such great way, that it seemed it did ^lie, bearing most towardes the Orient, to the parts of the desert of Arabia.
In this sort they nauigated fiue daies, till the sixth, when as the golden heauen began to shew her fairenesse, they discouered not farre from them, a boate which sailed that course which they did: and by reason that their Ship sailed so swiftly, in a moment they ouertook it, and in it discouered a mightie Knight with white armour quartered with blewe, full of many and costly stones, and a greene hat vpon his head of a strange work, with many feathers full of spangles of golde, which caused the lookers on to wonder: hee was to seeme but of fewe yeeres, but more browne than white of colour: he was with a Lute in his hand, as one that was intended to sing and play: but when he saw the Princes in their ship likewise armed and* well proportioned, he reioyced much at their gallantnes, but

could not imagine who they should bee, for that eyther of them had russet couerings vpon their armour, and couers likewise for the deuises on their shields. The Princes were verie ioyfull, when they saw that wel proportioned knight, who entred vnder hatches and came foorth again with his helme on his head, and on his arme a shield of the same color of his armor verie gallant, in whose fielde was portraied a Lady with a sword in her hand, and at her feete a knight with the same armor that he wore, who was kneeling on his knees with this posie.

My seruice shall approue,
That I deserue thy loue.

The Princes receiued great pleasure at the deuice of the stout Knight. The Troyan did request the other two Princes (for that al the Country was fildwith their valors, that they would suffer him to answere whatsoeuer that Knight should demaund. The princes with very good will did grant it vnto him: and in ioyning their boate vnto his, there came foorth from behinde, a weeping Lady, that caused great compassion: who seeing that the knights did cause them that gouerned their inchaunted boate to ioyne with them, and being nigh she said. Worthy knights, as you would fortune to giue you rest in your desires, tell me some newes of the Greeke Princes, or of some of their friendes, for that I doe come in their demaund from a far countrie, because I was giuen to vnderstand, that they alone doo protect and defend those that cannot help themselues of which number I am one, and shee that sent mee to seeke them, another.
Comming from the mightie Citty of Lira in the kingdome of Lacedemonia, and going to Sea I met with this gentle Knight, who demaunded of me wherefore I came. And giuing him to vnderstand my necessitie, he made me answere, Well seeing that those whome I came to seeke

were so mighty as al the world doth know, that although he went to receiue the order of Knighthood by the handes of the mightie King of Mauritania, who is the most famous Pagan that is now knowne, yet he ioyed to change his pretence, and caused me to enter into his boate, saying, that he likewise would seeke them, and demaund of them the order of Knighthood, that of their great valors somewhat might come vnto him. So it is answered this gentle youth, as the Damsell hath said, and it shall be greatly to our content to tell vs that we demaund.
The knightes greatly reioyced with the demaund of the Knight, and the Troyan answered him, Of truth gallant Knight, you could not haue met anye, that so perfect newes could giue you of these Princes as I, for it is not long since my companions and I did departe from one of them, although I beleeue it will be difficult to finde them now, for that they goe in secret on a certaine aduenture. For the rest I beleeue that there is none more friends to them the^ we three, for that their bounty is as an adamant to the will of him that will imitate them in their proceedings.
The Knight with the white armour answered, Sir Knight I giue you great thankes for the newes you giue me of them, and for that the finding of them is difficult it is sufficient for me to haue met some of their friendes for to giue mee the order of Knighthood, and therefore I doe request you Sir Knight, to giue it mee foorthwith, although I haue not done you any seruice, for I haue somuch to doe, that the little time I am detained, will be the occasion of my eternall lamentation.
Therefore doe it foorthwith, and I shall receiue great content therein, for that you are the first Knight, that I haue met of the Christian sect, and he of whome I haue demaunded first this thing.
Then the Troyan said, I would gentle Knight as I am their friend, that one of these Princes of Greece were here for to make more certaine your honor, as to receiue the order of knighthood at their handes: yet seeing it cannot be otherwise, but I must be hee that must receiue the curtesie to giue you that which you demaund, with license of my companions (although it were better to be done by them) I doe giue you leaue for to shewe your power, in defending all such as are in necessitie of your person: And therewith he kissed him on the cheeke, and hee remained armed the best knight of all the Pagans, although without the feastes requisite for so high a Prince, yet for all this the Sea did celebrate the day, with bearing the name from that time forwards of Happy, which indured a great time vntill it was stained with bloud, as shall be told you in the fourth part of this historie.
This furious Moore was ioyfull and content that hee was an armed Knight, and rendring thankes to the gentle Troyan he said Gentle Knight, Iupiter rewarde you the honor which you haue done me, in performing that which my soule so much des^red: but although this exceeding great curtesie bindeth me to serue you al my life, yet I beseech you receiue no griefe at that which I shall say, for so I am commaunded, and I wel vnderstand that the cause is more difficulte, seeing by this charge I may assaile all the world. But it is better to performe my word though my hart dye: than not performing it, to liue without honor in perpetuall infamie and disgrace of my Lady, which I esteeme worse then rigorous death. So setting apart whatsoeuer perrill, and the duetie I owe you, I say from this time foorth I defie in mortall battaile, hee that will deny that the faire and soueraigne Princesse Flora of Argentaria doth not exceede all that liue and haue liued in fairenes and beautie, and this I will defend, against the princes of Greece so esteemed in the world.
The cholar was great that entred into the Knight of

Cupid, and a thousand times he was about to answer him but that he remembred he should wrong the Troyan, vnto whom was leaue giuen to answere all. But the Grecian needed not to meddle: for the Nephew of Priamus with great mildnesse, (that better shewed his valour) did answere: Of truth sir knight, you loue your Ladie verie much, and it seemeth to mee, that she ill rewardeth so great affection, to put you in a demaund so perillous: for the Greeke Princes and their Frends will defend the same, although they had no Ladies. And seeing it is her will, it were better that she did come with you, that in seeing her beautie, without anie strife may be graunted that which you doo publish of her. For I doo know two (and the cheefe Ladies of the Grecian Empire) that will not consent to anie such thing, neither wil their princes: in whose name (I say) that I am readie for the battell. This amorous Moore aunswered not, for that (with the swiftnesse of an Eagle imbracing his shield) he lept into the Barke of the Troyan: who at his entrie with his Sword in both his hands gaue him such a blowe, that by reason hee was but young to receiue such buffets, it made his teeth chatter, one against another, till such time, as he firmed himselfe well, and made him readie (without drawing his sword) for the battell? The Troyan was not a Knight for to assault anie vpon aduantage: but seeing that hee drew not out his sword, he said. What sir Knight, wil you conclude the battell without sword? if you had the weapon of the furious Achilles, it would be somewhat difficult, much more without it, and you also being without experience. Worthie Knight answered the curteous Pagan, I doo wel conceiue it to be as you say: but this is the meanes which I was commaunded to vse: so that there rests no more for you but that you attempt to doo your best, and I will defend my selfe.
The boldnes and courage of the Youth, caused admiration in the princes, that he would make battell without

sword with the Troyan: who said vnto him. Sir knight, either let vs leaue off the battell, or seeke somewhat to defend thee, for that the Frends of the Grecian Princes doo not accustome to fight with anie, except it bee with great equalitie.
It is not in my power (answered the Moore) therefore thou needest not obserue with mee these respects. I knowe they are good: but for this battell, it is enough for me to go thorough with it, so as I may perfourme the commaundement of my Mistres.
The Troyan was kindled like fire, and said: Well, looke to thy selfe yong Knight, since it must be done without swords.
O Muses, might I now wet my tongue in your sacred Fountain, then should I artificially declare the rigorousnes of this battell. For as though they had had swords in their hands, or their hands had bin swords, they began to strike in such sort, that quickly both the one and the other were assured of their aduersaries strength. But at the assault, for that the Moore was of bigger bodie than the Troyan, he might at his ease strike him vpon his magicall helmet, beating out so manie sparkles, as though it had been with his sword, and made him to decline on both his knees: but the Troyan rose vp verie furiously, and being nigh, he grapled with him, and in entring, he stroke him vpon the breast of the harnesse such a blow with hys fist, that by reason the place is there most perillous for his breath, it lacked but little that he had not stroken out hys life: and found time (by reason of his amazednes) to lay his strong hands on him with so great force, that if he had wrested a little more to the left side, he had ouerthrowne him. With this, the couragious Pagan came to himselfe, and returned more furious than the lion on his pray, and caught his Contrarie by the middle, so that he carried him three or foure paces, without putting his foote on the ground, leauing him brused, and the Princes satisfied

of his strength. Then they returned vnto their contentious battell, with so great a noyse, that it seemed to bee an hundred Knights. It was a thing worthie to note the dexteritie with discreet retyring and bold entring in of these rare Warriers: strange it was, and more brused theyr bodies, than if it had been with swords. At this time the Moore stroke his Contrarie such a blow with his fist vppon his arme nigh to his elbow with so great force, that he had thought he had broken it: and the greefe was so great that he could not returne his payment. The Pagan did not let passe the occasion, seeing that it did behooue him, but doubled another blow vpon his shoulder, as if a rocke had falne vpon him.
They were wonderfully amazed to see the furie of the pagan, saying within themselues: that he was one of the most valiantest in all the world, and that if he shuld come to haue the experience and vse of armes, he would prooue therein most excellent.
It was great reason they should so thinke, for of thys pagan Lyrgandeo speaketh manie things: making manie times mention of him in this great Historie, and of his deedes that were diuers for the loue of his Flora. And seeing this battell was for her, and the first that hee fought for the reward so much expected, it was without comparison to remember the courage wherewith he executed it: which made the victorie to be doubtfull, and the Troyan amazed to see how well his Contrarie defended himselfe, and offended him.
Being therefore ashamed that one alone Pagan should hold him so, he set vpon him, and strooke him so straunge a blow vpon the forhead, that he made him to loose the sight of his eyes, wherewith he clasped him in his armes: but thereby the Troyan could get nothing, for that the Moore was bigger of bodie, and yonger, so that what the one did by dextertie and experience, the other did with youthfull courage.
In this manner they came sometimes aboue and sometimes vnder in the Boate, procuring on both parts to conclude the Battell: and it had been ended with both their deaths, if the Scythian Prince had not put himselfe betweene, and parted them to heare him speake, knowing with himselfe that his Frend should doo much better with his sword. He then said: Sorrie I am sir Knights, that in this sort you giue the world to vnderstand your valour, and not as they that intend to ende their battell with an honorable conclusion: I speake not this to haue it quyte left, but request you that you would not now ende it, tyll such time as this knight may doo it with the sword. They being both as well indued with curtesie as with force and strength, at one instaunt parted, and the Troyan sayd: Most valiant knight, I am content to leaue it off with the condition you haue named, for to giue you content, if my competitor be so agreed. The worthie Pagan answered: I would be verie glad to doo that which you demaund, but the one is contrarie to the other, for if I doo not conclude this way, I cannot lay hand on my sword: so that it cannot be otherwise, and therefore pardon mee, who till now neuer denied anie thing that was requested of me. The prince answered: I will giue a remedie for the same, if it be offence to none, and take your hazard vpon my selfe. I am content said the Moore, because you shall perceiue that I will not refuse to giue you contentment: and howsoeuer it bee (beeing from hence) I will hold you for my frend, for that it seemeth to mee your worthines and curtesie doth deserue it. Let it be so answered Meridian, (being much pleased with the gentle answere of the Moore) and let vs goe thether where your Ladie is, although it hinder vs of our iourney, and there we will condition with her, how this battell shalbe concluded. This giueth me greater content said the Moore, for that the Goddesse of Beautie shall fully satisfie you with what great reason I doo defend her excellence. Well seeing it is so said the prince, I

will imbrace you for a frend, holding now in mine armes one of the best knights in the world. It is I that doth profit thereby (said the Pagan) to see mee in the conuersation of such companions.
There they all imbrased the one the other, and Rosicleer tooke off his helme, and discouered that deuine countenaunce, which was such, that the Moore said: without all doubt, this knight is one of the Princes of Greece, or els Mars himselfe, for such proportion and shewe of valour I know not who hath attained except it be those, whose fame in all the world is in equall degree both for fairenes and valor. In me Sir knight (the prince answered) is not that which you speake of, yet at least I haue good will (though I lacke force) to imploy it in your seruice: and I am verie glad that this battaile remaineth to bee yet decided, that we may reioyce our selues in your companie, all the time that we shall spend till wee come thether. And I beleeue in this our boate we shall goe more at our content, and to me and my companions a farther reioycing (setting all anger apart) if it will please you to serue your selfe of that we haue.
I giue you great thankes gentle knight (answered the Pagan) for the company you doo offer mee: for although there is not in me any good part to deserue it, yet there shall not lacke gratitude for to acknowledge it in such degree as it is reason. And therewith hee caused his Page and People for to passe all into their ship: but the Damse^ seeing that it would somewhat disturbe her going into Argentaria in time of so great necessitie, said that shee would depart and take her iorney towards Greece, for that if she should tarry so long, she should fal into rebuke. The which she would haue done, if the Troyan Oristides had not stayed her, and told her in secret that there was Rosicleer the Prince of Greece (wherof she was verie glad, that she had so good successe) and aduised her to hold her peace and bee still till he told her more: so therewith shee was quieted

and put a fardle which she brought with her into the beat, the which (with the swiftnes accustomed) began to nauigate the right way to Argentaria.
In this sort went these foure stout warriers in the boat debating of diuers things: and finding fit opportunitie for the same, the Prince Meridian (in the name of the rest) did request the Moore that hee would certifie them who hee was. The curteous Moore answered, I cannot but in all giue ye content, seeing such Knights doth demaund me.
You shall vnderstand, gentle and well disposed knights, that I am the Prince of Tharsis, the onely Heire of the kingdome after the death of my father, and being a child, I was tolde by wise men that in the beginning of my knighthood, I should passe many perrils for loue: and it seemeth to mee that it goeth forward accordingly, this being the first which this Knight hath put me in. I being in the Court of my Father, the King of Argentaria passed by one part that lyeth vpon our Kingdome, and brought with him his daughter, of few yeeres, but the fairest that euer nature framed, the which Lady I being a child, not knowing then what I did (but now I should kill my selfe if I performed it not) without any more consideration but with the content I receiued, I made her a mansion in my brest: where so long shee indured, that in good earnest shee hath wholy possessed my soule. Our Fathers were great friendes together at such time as they were aduenturous Knightes, which was the occasion that hee detained them in Tharsis a long time, but yet verie short for poore Lisarte (for so I am called). I am perswaded gentle knights, that she did not greeue to see with what truth I did loue her, she would neuer make any shewe thereof vnto me. I might haue demaunded her of her Father, and an easie thing it had been to haue attained her for the release of my griefe, considering the great frendship that was betweene them, but I did it not, neither will I, for that therby I should offend the affection I haue to her, to procure loue by any other

meanes, than the right passions of a louer. To conclude, my fortune was such, that her Father carried her to his kingdome.
I will not declare vnto you what griefe we two felt at our departure, it were but to fill you with amazmentes, but they shalt well feele it that haue knowen what benefit or losse co^meth to be alienated, or accompanied with the beloued. I iudge as the one is a life, the other is a death, for the life I haue passed in her absence bringeth no content, for that I was cleere without her sight: and I beleeue it is an ordinary thing with Louers.
Now about a month past there came messengers from Argentaria to my Father, demaunding succour, for that a furious and fierce Giant, being affectioned to the faire Flora, doth demaund her in mariage (and I doe beleeue that the heauens hath created vs for one). To which she answered, that first she wold teare her self in peeces rather the^ marry to him. At which answere he was so angry, that at the instant hee ioyned together more then thirtie thousand men, and fierce giants, with whom he hath begun to spoile the Country.
My father for that he was bound, went in person with much people, and came thether in good time, in such sort that they kept the Giant busie.
Amongst other things there came a letter vnto me from the faire Princesse, ye which doth ease her absence when as it troubleth me. And for that I know you wil receiue content therby, I wil read it, and then you shall see the reason I haue to loue her: they al said that they should receiue great pleasure to heare it, and therwith he read it as followeth.

The letter fro^ the Infant Flora of Argentaria, to the Prince Lisarte of Tharsis.
WElbeloued Prince, if my absence hath caused in thee any firmnes towardes her that so long since professed her selfe to be thine, neuer can there be greater occasion to shew it, tha^ now fortune, making me need help

when I began to loue thee, did liue without care of any chaunge, thinking my selfe most free, and making a iest of my hearts strange imprisonment, assured in all good being thine. But proude fortune enuious of this my quietnes (which was the greatest felicitie I had) hath giuen me rigorous experience of her turning wheele, and so ordered, that the proud King of Cilicia hath beseidged my Citty with purpose to carry away the spoiles of my small beautie, that is due to you: and now seeing in what necessitie she remaineth, whome you called the owner of your heart, according to the promise you once gaue me, there is no need of perswasion I hope but that you will come: for now (beeing a woman) I put my confidence in your strength, as when I was a child I trusted in your promis. And although it be somewhat out of the way, receiue the order of Knighthood by the hands of the King of Mauritania, for that according to the fame as is heere reported, hee is the floure of Knighthood among the Pagans, and till you come to me let none girt on your swoord. The Gods be your guide, and giue mee life to imploye it in your loue.

Flora the Princesse of Argentaria.


You may well vnderstand worthy kinghts (said the louing Pagan) that I haue reason to loue her, who when I thought she did abhorre me, hath certified me of her affection with so louing a style, and iudge it not pride in me to defend her worthines, whichin al ye world is a thing worthy to be known. And I do hope though I am in defiance wyth this knight, it is no let that hee should helpe to raise the seidge of my Lady.
I warrant you (answered the worthy Greeke) although I defend the valor and beautie of Ladies, yet shall not my arme be the last in so iust an ayde. And I did hope no lesse of you (said the beloued Lizarte) but that your valor should be equal to the noblenes of your mind, and yet being wel

co^sidred, it is not worthy much thanks, for that you do only what a knight is bound vnto: with this and such like they trauelled, and passed away the loathsome and wearie nauigation, till the fourth day that the Barke arriued at a fresh and delightfull Countrie, which gaue great content vnto the Princes, for that they were wearied with the sea. Forthwith they disimbarked their horses, and a palfry for the Damsell, who was very ioyfull to goe in companie with such knights. She went with her face couered, and the knightes with their visors open vppon their mightie horses, they being so gallant and the Sunne shining on their rich armour, it was a heauenly thing to behold them, and the sight thereof did dasell the eyes of the Beholders. They commanded them that had the gouernment of their barke to stay for them: so they began to trauell, receiuing great content to see the freshnes of the Countrie. The furious Pagan if any occasion should bee offered of assalt for himselfe, broke downe halfe an oake, and laying it vpon his shoulder hee beganne to trauell with it, that it greatly delighted them to behold him: and as they rid, they passed away the time with him with sweete and amorous conuersation, for that he was so good a seruant to Cupide, till such time as they came into a great plaine, where as they saw more then fortie knightes in a troope trauelling by the way, and in the middest amongst them, was some on horse-backe without armour, which gaue them great desire to knowe what they were. And when they came more nigher, they saw that they were two knightes, the one of middle age, the other somewhat entred in yeeres, which had their hands bound behinde them, which caused in the Pagan great compassion, for that he was by nature vertuous, who with his oake came vnto one that went somewhat behinde, and said. Sir knight, if it be not much griefe vnto you, my companions and I shal receiue great content, that you would giue vs to vnderstand, what countrey this is, and what people they are that thus trauaile.
The curteous demaund of the Tharsian did binde the knight, to answere, who said: sir Knight, this is the mighty kingdome of Argentaria, a fruitfull country. And those knights that are Prisoners, are Unkle and Cosin to the Princesse Flora, whom the fearefull Arlante Lord of the Cilicia doth demaund in marriage, and for that her father did deny it, he hath made war against him, and had it be^ne ended, but that the King of Tharsis came with a mightie power to ayde the King of this Country, and yesterday was the first battaile that was giuen, in the which was many of our people slaine, for that the Tharsians did shewe themselues what they were: yet for al this, foure Giants that hee brought with him, at the retiring of the people apprehended the Kings brother, Unkle vnto the Princesse and his Sonne, for the which our Arlante reioyced much, but he would not put them to death, because he would not anger his Lady, knowing that in the end, they should doe by force, that which now they will not doe, being so much desired.
Oh infernall furies, I beleeue the rage is little among you to be co^pared with that which entred into the affectioned youth: for that without any more speaking, he lift vp his fyst, and stroke him such a blowe that hee made both braines and eyes to flye out of his head, and spurred his horse with so great speed as might be deuised. And ouertaking the^ in the middest of that plaine (the syth doth not so swiftly enter into the tender grasse) as this diuelish youth entred with his knottie oake, ouerthrowing both horse and knights, with such quicknes that it was a pleasure to behold him, whose beautie caused great affection in the princes. Then the noble troyan, the more to satisfie the Moore of his worthynes, pressed foorth his furious horse, and entred among them in such sort that they seemed wolues amongst sheep. In the meane time that these two were occupied for to dispatch this bloudy war, their Pages did vntye the hands of the prisoners, who were astonied to see

the great force of those knights* who the one with his swoord and the other with his oake* so handled these miserable people, till onely twoo remained, who thinking to find more helpe in their horse than in their force, began to flye with as much speede as they could: but the wrath of the Tharsian was such in that extremitie, that he followed after them without admitting any mercy (the which he otherwise much esteemed): but for that it was in busines which touched his beloued Flora, and that she had receiued griefe, for the lacke of her Unkle and Cosin, he gaue them their payment as the rest and returned with a quiet pace vnto his Companions who abode his comming with the prisoners, and they receiued him with great content, and verie glad they were come in the Countrey, whether as they were bound. The prisoners did yeeld them great thankes for the succour they gaue them. Then the Troyan asked how farre it was to the Campe? The prisoners sayde that it was litle more than a mile: then they entred in among the trees, and lighted, but pulled not off their helmes, vsing no more speech but that they were wandring knights who hearing of the vnreasonablenes of the Cilician, came to helpe the Lord of the Country.
The knight that was prisoner did much esteeme it, and gaue them great thankes in the name of his brother the King.
There they consorsed that foorthwith, through the thickest of that mountaine, the two Knights with all their pages and the Damsell should enter into the Cittie, for that they foure would first see the scituation of their enemies Campe. The Father and the Sonne would verie gladly haue borne them companye (for they were both good knightes) but they would not consent thereunto.
So they began to goe forwards being armed with other armour of the Moores, not without griefe of the Damsell, but she seeing that Argolio, Page to the Greeke Prince went with her, she was comforted.
Being departed from them, the three frendes a newe praysed much the Pagan, and hee answered them with great discretion, wherewith he was indued more then all other Pagans. They pulled off their helmes for to eas^ themselues till it was night, for that then they would set vpon the campe, for that they had informed themselues of the way, and had agreed with them that went vnto the citie of Napea, whereat was incamped al the enemies, that at the beginning of the night, the gate which opened vnto the campe should be left vnlockt, for that they would bend their course thether: so taking their watch word, because they would not bee dispersed, which was, Troye, they mounted on their horse and rid towards the Citty, at that time when as the Sunne had altogether hid his face vnder the deepest caues of the earth, and came at such tim^ as they were all at rest, and were sure that fewe would trouble them, because they were al wearied with the battell.
The two first watches of the night was past, when as these foure most strong warriers, did enter into ye carelesse campe of their enemies, and agreed to goe vnto the tent of the braue Cilician King. And concluded amongst them that the Grecian should remaine at the entry doore, and the other three should enter in.
With this agreement they went vnto the great tent (and for that the Moone did show her selfe more fairer then she did to her beloued Endimion) they might goe straight thether without speaking to any, for that the watch thought they were of the Royall guard.
At one instant they all alighted, and left their horses at the doore in the keeping of the Greeke Prince: they entred in the companie of other Cilicians, and came when there sate in counsell with the King, the foure mighy Giants armed with rich and shining armour: and at that time they concluded the next day to giue assalt vnto the Cittie.
But braue Knights said the pagan King, be aduertised that if it may be possible, kill not anie, wherby discontent shuld redound to my beloued Flora, whom I would not offend in anie thing.
It is impossible to note the anger that this amorous Tharsian receiued, to heare that deformed Giant talke of Flora, as a Ladie proper vnto himselfe: and not hauing power longer to hide his intent, he tossed about wyth hys knottie staffe, and with a lowd voyce sayd: Tarrie awhile (false King) before thou doost enioy her excellence, thou shalt feele the weight of my oake. Then without considering in what danger he put himselfe, he stroke him so strong a blow vpon the helme, that he made him (against his will) to leaue the seate where he sate: his two Companions were not slothfull, with the securitie they had of the keeper they left at the doore, but with their cuttyng swords laid on those Knights in such sort, that before they could turne them, they had left but some few, and those verie sore hurt, being the most principall in all the camp: but by reason that the Giants were verie strong and well armed, they ioyned with them a well fought and intangled battell.
The valorous Louer of Oliuia, was not idle, for that at the doore (like a good and faithfull Porter) he let none enter, but that he left his life in recompence: till such tyme that at the noyse there came vppon them so much people, that the Troyan was constrained to giue out the signe, and to goe foorth at the doore, whereas with the Giaunts they were in great trouble for mounting their horses: but with the helpe of the Greeke they at last got vp. Lisarte carried in triumph a heauie Mace of the kings, which when he fell from his seate hee tooke from him: with the which it was a maruellous thing to behold the hard and lamentable blowes that he stroke vpon those euill armed people. In this sort went these foure Frends thorough the camp, ouerthrowing horse and knights, and amongst them ^he

well corded tents: so that it seemed a great Armie had bin ioyned together, the rushing of these foure was so great. In this sort they crossed the Campe, leauing dead and euill wounded, more than three hundred men, besides the principalls of the Councell of warre. Those were they, which the pagan King greeued most to loose. And when he came vnto himselfe (as a man out of his wits) hee began to make a noyse, reuiling and forsaking his false Gods, and entring into the roome whereas they were, hee sayd: Now you euill Gods, may you seeke those knights that fauour you, in whom you haue put so much power, and began with a club to beate his poore Gods, paying them that which he deserued. At last hee vowed that hee would not vnarme himselfe, nor suffer any to enter to see him, till he had been reuenged on those rebellious Knightes, that so much at their ease wer departed. Who leauing the whole Campe afraid, they came vnto the bridge of the Cittie, whereas they found to the number of ten thousand men, readie to come foorth, if need had so required, and for Captaine of them a worthie Tharsian, somewhat a kin to the fierce Lisarte, who was so angrie, that hee would haue returned with those people vppon the Campe. Which had been no smal aduantage: but yet his frends did stay him, saying: that the next day he should not lacke occasion for the same. With this the cholericke Youth was pacified and entertained the Captaine of the people verie curteously, and he them likewise, and guided them vnto the pallace, whereas the Kings did tarrie for them, and the gallant Flora. The heroycal Tharsian was imagining what to doo, and doubted he had done litle in her seruice that night in that he had left him aliue, that iudged himselfe worthie to deserue her: yet for al this he encouraged himselfe, and purposed not to be knowne, till hee had ouercome that furious Giant, and presented his head to his Ladie. The King receiued them with great thankes, for that in al respects he was a good Knight, and frendly to honor such as

came vnto him, and verie thankfully gratulated the succor they offered and had made to him and vnto his daughter: yet would not they suffer themselues to be knowen, although the Princesse did desire them verie much. There was appointed for them a lodging where they should take theyr rest: where they were serued with manie dainties, which the Princesse sent them, who imagined that her Prince was amongst them.
These foure Companions supped with great contentment, and for to please the Moore, all the supper time they talked of Flora, declaring the reason he had to loue her, for that she was so faire. And they were not deceiued, for she was one of the comeliest in the vniuersall world, and for her sake the Tharsian put himselfe in great daungers as shalbe told you.
When they had done, they went to rest, but sent that night order vnto the Kings, that early in the morning all his people should be armed. By and by it was noysed abroad in the Citie, what aid and succour there was come, for the which all the night great fier lights were made for ioy, and accompted the warres to be ended, hauing those foure Knights.



The ende of the Battell betweene the Tharsian and his Companions against their aduersaries.

 Chap. VII.
THe Louer of Daphne had begun to renue his light ouer the world with his hote presence, when as those foure Frends mounted and armed went vnto the pallace, leading after them all the people of the Cittie voluntarily, who seeing them so gracious, said.
The Gods haue well ordained, that for foure Diuells haue sent vs foure Angels to deliuer vs from their hands. Then they came vnto the Pallace, wheras the kings and the princesse were tarrying for them, verie ioyfull to see their gallant demeanor. Whereas foorthwith (because they would loose no time, they agreed, that the Grecian and Prince of Tharsus, should goe foorth into the Campe, and that the rest should be aloofe off, to yeeld their helpe when need required.
They all reioyced at the agreement: wherewith the common people began to place themselues vpon the wals of the Cittie, the better for to see what these knightes did* The like did the princesse and her damosells, from that part of the pallace that looked towards the Campe: there they tarried the comming of the two Frends, her heart working with exceeding ioy and desire to behold the battell, as one that had no small interest in the action.
These two passed through the streetes so pleasantlye, that which way soeuer they went, the Ladies gaue them a thousand blessings, and the people with high voices gaue testimonie of that they desired. The Tharsian was mou^ted on his mightie horse, and at the pommell of his saddle did hang that bloodie Mace that he won the night before, with a speare that seemed to be a beame of an oake tree, and a gallant horne at his necke that became him well. They all meruailed at the furious countenance they both shewed: for although the Grecian was not so great, beeing about three fingers lesse than the prince of Tharsus, yet he was altogether as well set, and rid in such sort, that all did esteeme him for a stout knight, when they saw his gallant disposition.
Foorthwith they went foorth into the Campe, and when they had passed the bridge a bow shot, the Tharsian lift vp his visor, and began to blow his horne with so great force, that he made it to be heard throughout all the Camp, and said.
O furious and fierce Pagan, is it possible that hee who would haue the faire Flora for wife should be so carelesse, his enemy being in the field? Come, if thou wilt haue the weapon that thou didst loose yesternight, and bee reuenged: for heere I doe tarry for thee. The Princesse did verie well from the place whereas shee was, heare what the Knight said, being very ioyous that so good help was come vnto her.
The Tharsian seeing that he came not, blewe his horne againe and said. O vile Moore, wherefore dost thou stay and not come foorth into the field, thy Lady being there? Come* come for it is now time for to make shew that thou dost loue, and the effect of all thy force.
The Pagan tarried not long, but put himselfe at the doore of his Tent, mounted on a proud and mightie horse, armed in blacke armour, full of red knots, which caused feare to them that did behold them. There were two Giants that would not agree that he should goe forth, and for that they were armed, and mounted vpon great beastes, they sayd to him: stay mighty Arlante, for wee will goe and bring vnto thee those vncurteous knights, disturbers of our quietnes, for it is no right to giue them so honorable a death as to die by your hands.
So pulling downe their visors they went without company from the bridge, whereas they caused more to bee in a readines, when it was needful. It did not greeue these two frends to see them come in that sorte, being so big that they seemed great Pine trees.
At their comming the biggest of them who was called Fermonte said: what is it that you would haue Knights, that so early haue risen for to disquiet the King Arlante our Lord? if you come to seeke your death for the offence which you committed yesternight, hee doth not come to giue it you, for that he will not giue you so much honor.
The Tharsian tooke in hand to answere him, and said,

thou vncurteous beast, if the tyrant haue anie anger against vs, and so much delighteth to make warre wyth them that neuer did him wrong, it were better for him to take reuenge himselfe, or else peraduenture he meaneth to take vengeance of his wrath and your deaths together. So without anie more words they turned their horses, and made their incounter in the middest of their carreere with such a noyse, that it seemed foure furious rockes had met together, their incounters were such.
The valiant Tharsian seeing that it was the first lance that he ran with in all his life, and beeing also before hys faire Mistres, hee commended himselfe to Mahomet for helpe, and incountred the fierce Giant with such a blow, that with a truncheon of the launce in his breast, he made him fall to the ground, so that hee mooued neither hand or foote, with so great wonder vnto them that were present, that they forgot the wondrous blowe that was giuen by the warlike Grecian: who (as though the faire Oliuia had been present) encountred the Giant so strongly, that hee made him to fall ouer the horse crupper, pearced thorough and thorough: and he was incountred in such sort, that it made him stagger in the saddle, and the Tharsian failed his stirrops with his strong incounter: but in recouering himselfe, hee stayed to behold with what gallantnes the Grecian returned, more esteeming him then than he did before.
From the Cittie there was heard a great noyse of mirth, the people saying, We haue one diuell lesse.
The two good Frends of these stout Warriers came foorth of the Citie, for that they saw the other two Giants did make themselues readie for to incounter them, and that out of the Court of Guard came foorth the fierce Arlante, mounted on a mightie Elephant, and at his saddle bowe another mightie mace of steele hanging, whereby it did appeare, he was verie cunning in vsing of that kinde of weapon.
The two Giants seeing their companions on ye ground at one blow, without keeping the law of Knighthood, came with their speares to incounter the two good Frends, who did abide them without anie feare, the one with his new sword, and the other with his mace. When they came to make their incounter, it was a sight worthie to be seene: for euen as thogh they should strike vpon a rocke, in such sort the Giants mooued the Knights, passing the one by the other without anie staggering. Foorthwith they returned with their mightie fawchions in their hands: and all of them at one time smit such blowes, that it was meruaile they fell not all to the ground.
Somwhat more did the Princes show themselues, for that the Tharsian (with his heauie mace) reached on the helme of his Enemie such a blow, that hee made him decline his head to the saddle bow, and comming with another, if he had hit him full on the head, he had ouerthrown him: yet (for all that) he gaue him such a blow vppon the shoulder, that (with verie greefe) he could no more mooue his shield arme. But the Giaunt (roaring like a Bull) strooke such a blow, that (lighting vppon the Tharsians helme) it made him fall vpon his horse necke without anie sense, and it seemed that he was dead, for that his horse carried him about the field, till hee came vnto the place whereas the first fierce Giant lay astonied wyth hys incounter.
The Giant being now come to himselfe, arose vp, and seeing his mortall Enemie in that sort, hee assayed for to take him in his armes: and he had done it, if at that time the Louer of Floralinda had not come, who seeing the vncurteous dealing of the Giaunts, (hauing a good horse) came at such time as this wretch was laying hold of the Prince, and gaue him such a thrust with the breast of his horse, that the vnweeldie Monster fell downe vppon the ground.
Now was the couragious Youth come vnto himselfe, and acknowledging his estate, he humbled himselfe to the Prince for his ayd and succour, and therewith hee lift vp his mace, and went to the other Giant, who came and receiued him with his fauchion aloft: but this beloued youth did execute his blow in such sort, that he made his braines flye out of the s^ull, and ou^rthrew the Giant to ye ground. And when he saw that the Scythian prince would a light from his horse, he came to him and said: Worthie knight, let this reuengement be mine, for that it toucheth me, and I will procure to execute it, and therwith he leapt as swift as an Eagle vpon her pray: which caused all that were in the Cittie to maruell, and likewise his Ladie, who remembred her Lisarte, and prayed God that he were one of those Knights.
The Greeke prince vsed his aduersarie in such sort, that he could not rule his sword: which being perceiued of the prince, he closed with him, and caught hold on his healme with so great quicknes and strength, that he pulled it off, and strooke him withall such a blow, that hee ouerthrew him at his horse feete. By which time, the Tharsian had cut off the head of his Enemie, with great content vnto them al, and praised the Moore when they saw him mount on his horse without putting his foot into the stir^op. With manie requests he tooke the speare of the Troyan, who let him haue it being greatly affected to the valiantnes of the Youth.
At this time came foorth the stout Arlante, saying: Come to me all yee weake knights, for of you all I purpose to take reuengement.
The worthie prince of Tharsus put himselfe first forwards, and said: Stay proud king, thou shalt perceaue that thou dealest not with knights which doo vse to combat with anie such aduantage: for euerie one of himselfe is sufficient (by the helpe of the immortall Gods) to make a more misshapen wight than thou sweat drops of bloud.
And all this might haue been excused, if thou hadst don like a Knight to haue come forth, when I de^ied thee but thou wouldst needs send three Giants, to make them pay that which thou owest: and seeing that thou art so angry with that knight that stroke thee yesternight and tooke away thy weapon, looke vpon him for I am he, and if thou wilt assure me from thy other knights, I will make equal battaile with thee, with condition* that if I ouercome thee, thou shalt foorthwith raise thy seidge, and if thou ouercomest me vse thou thy will on mee, and my companions shall returne to the Citty, and thou shalt haue time to doe that which thou doost intend. Well said Arlante, I would that Mars himselfe would come to help thee, and yet for all that I shoulde not thinke my selfe reuenged: and turning about his horse he would haue assalted him. But the gentle Lisarte sayd, stay King, for first I will giue them to vnderstand, to whome my heart is bound of this battaile that I summond, for if I had the libertie as thou hast, I would make an end of it foorthwith, but thou must giue mee sureties for thy word, and sweare before some that thou wilt accomplish it, and I will doe the like.
Thou makest many excuses said thee Pagan, and I beleeue thou dost it because thou wilt not performe it.
The gallant Louer was much vexed thereat, and therfore requested the Troyan to goe and make the Kings acquainted of this agreement: but they would not consent thereunto, for that it seemed they were some what wearied of their daies worke, whereat the two Knights receiued greefe.
But seeing it could not be otherwise, the Giant returned to his Campe blaspheming his Gods: and our knight with his companions, went into the Citty, whereas the Kings came foorth to meete and receiue them, wherea^ passed between them many matters important, which for

to auoyde tediousnes I doe let passe, neither what the true Louer felt when hee was before his Flora, who receiued them with so great ioy and content: but yet they woulde not pull off their helmes till the battell was ended. So they went to take their rest, tarrying till the morning, al praying vnto God to giue them victorie against so great an enemy.
When as the gallant Tytan had left the morning comforted, and went to Thetis with new shewes of fairenes, these foure warlike youthes, being armed with their shyning armour, went foorth into the Market place of their Cittie, whereas the Kinges and knightes did abide their comming, and did beare them company vnto the bridge, leauing the Princesse with a thousand suspitions in her louing imagination, whether hee that put himselfe in so great perill and danger, were the knight whome she had printed in her heart, or not: yet for to giue them content and shew foorth her gallantnes, she apparelled her selfe al in blew, wrought vpon Salamander skins, then being many bright shining Carbunkelles, embroydred thereon with diuers Laces of her owne hayre (which wee may equall with the thrids of gold which the Nimphes of Arcadia did spinne) she made a sightly garland, with so strange kinde of working, that I knowe not what Artist could equall it. Shee greatly contented her Louer in sending him a Beuer of blew, like vnto her garment, by her damsel, who said vnto him with great curtesie, Sir knight my Mistresse the Princesse Flora commends her vnto you, and for that you doe goe to make battaile for her, desires that you would vowchsafe to carrie this fauour, for shee cannot as she would helpe you with more than with this.
The loued Tharsian answered, faire Damsell say vnto your Mistresse the princesse, yt he which so long time past doth liue bound to her perpetuall seruice, hath little neede of such curtisie, but being incouraged by her gift to present her the head of the King of Cilicia in recompence for the

Beuer, or in the demaund to loose myne owne life, and being for such a Lady I account my death happie. And therwith she returned to the Princesse, who considered much of the answere of the Knight, concluding to confirme in her amorous suspition, that it should be her beloued prince Lisarte.
And therewith shee went vnto the windowe with her Damsels to see the battaile, with more fearefull care then euer shee had til that time, cursing a thousand times that Giant, that had done them so great wrong, till such time as she did see comming her welbeloued Louer, who was the ioyfullest man in all the world, for the fauour which the Princesse had sent him. And when hee passed by the window, he did obeysance and made his great horse to ^ow his knees with such a grace, that made all the Ladies much affected to him, to see his gallant demeanure. At his entring into the field, hee put for iudge on his part, the Kings brother and his Sonne, vnto whome he had giuen libertie, and caused all the army be in a readinesse if need required.
The gallant Tharsian put his horne to his mouth, making it to sound throughout all the Campe, to aduise the King of his comming, who came armed with his accustomed armour, sauing that on his shield there was a Serpent carrying in his clawes a Lady which he tooke from a fierce crowned Lyon that had her, with this Posie.

Stronger from strong doth take,
The pray he nill forsake.

This valiant youth did well vnderstand to what ende he had that deuise, and for that the possession of her should bee gotten by strength of arme, and not with reasoning whe^ he came nigh him he said: Giant it seemeth guiltines in him yt professeth to be a seruer of ladies to be negligent:

And hauing such confidence in your strength, you might haue come sooner and assured your happines with my death.
And now seeing there is no more to doe, because thou shalt vnderstand how little I esteeme thee, these knights shall be witnesses and iudges on my part, whome I commaund, that if the Gods being enuious at me, do help thee, that they raise the siedge.
The couragious Prince of Tharsis, looked for no other thing, but turning about his horse, hee behelde his Flora, from whence he knew shuld come his courage and strength, and prepared his speare against the Pagan, who likewise came against him.
Now haue I good occasion discreet Thalia, to haue my rude tongue forged, for that it is so blunt, that I beleeue I cannot shew how these valiaunt Pagans, incountered in the middest of their swift course, with so great force, that Mars himself would haue doubted to haue met with them: and for that they were both strong, without any mouing in their saddles, they both passed the one by the other vpright without receiuing any hurt, making the shiuers of their speares swift messengers of their strengths. At one time they returned with their heauy Maces, settling such blowes that both of them gaue shewe of their valors, and fell both vpon the pommels of their Saddles as dead men, and their horses carried them about the field, til such time as the Tharsian came vnto himselfe, and like a Lion he went against his enemy, with his vttermost strength, and before that hee recouered himselfe from that troublesome blowe, he gaue him another vpon his shield so great that it sounded as though he had stroke vpon a bell, breaking it all to peeces in his hand. Who seeing that it was not for defence he let it fall, and assalted the Tharsian with force, and with both his hands settled such a blow vpon his shield, that he made it to recoyle on his breast, that almost with the great paine hee was without sense, and therewithall

staggred in his saddle, but recouered it, it was the occasion that he was wholy kindled in quicke choler, and stroke so thicke vpon the cruell Pagan that hee seemed to grinde and bruse both bones and flesh, entring and going backe with such dexterity, that all who did behold the battaile greatly maruelled, that they so long endured in equal degree, without acknowledging any bettering betweene them.
But shee who receiued most blowes was the faire Flora, who seeing her Knight before such an enemy, and thinking him to be the same he was, her colour went and came in her face diuers times, shewing sadnes at euerie blow which her knight receiued: which were such and so many, that if she had not beene the reward of the battaile, he could not haue sustained them: but reinforcing his courage, hee gaue such a blowe on the left side of his enemies helme, that it lacked little to haue ouerthrowne him from his horse, and made him to giue a fearefull shrieke with the griefe thereof.
The furious Giant did returne him an answere in such sort, that it seemed to disquiet him, it was so cruell: there anew began their furious combate, so that it seemed all the seruants of Cyclopian Vulcan were there ioyned together. The braue Pagan did lift vp his Mace and went to the gentle Louer, who withstood him, and put himself so much forwards at the receiuing of the blowe, that hee could not reach him but with his armes, and let fall that heauy weapon with the strength of the blowe, leauing the poore Knight that he seemed as though he had been stonned, and being so nigh, the King sawe hee could not hurt him with weapon, he layd hands on him, and griped him in such sort that hee made him to doe the like, whereas was seene a gallant wrastling, and by reason they were both of great force, the one could not recouer of the other any aduantage but were forcing each other with the contention of their wrastling, that they made their horses to stoope on their

knees. They were but mortall, and to shewe they were such it was not much after foure houres battaile, so well fought (that Mars would haue bin weary) that they loosed one from the other, and breathed a while: then taking againe their Maces, they began to lay on without any pittie, procuring the speediest way they could ouercome: it chaunced that the Tharsian did looke vp to the windowe where as his Lady was, and seeing that shee stirred not, leaning with her cheeke on her hand, hee thought it was because she sawe in him some weaknes: wherewith hee pr^ssed to his enemy, and stroke him vpon the helme such a blow that he voyded bloud at his mouth, and fel vpon his saddle bowe. Euerie one thought he had been dead for that they saw his horse carry him about the field: but within a while he came to himself, without comparison much more malitious then the angry Uiper in the sandy Libia, and with both his handes he gaue an answere to his contrary so rigorously, that hanging down his armes and voyding bloud, it made him in that state that his horse carried him towards the window wheras the Princesse was, who seeing her Louer in that case, her heart would not suffer her to see so heauy a sight, but she turned her back, at such time as the greeued youth came vnto himselfe, and seeing the backe of his Flora, considering from whence it did proceed, he pricked foorth his great horse, and assalted the Pagan, and raysing himselfe in his stirrops, with both his hands he gaue him such a blowe vpon the crest of his helme, that he buckled it vnto his head, wherewith he had a great fal to the ground with so great griefe vnto his people, that it forced them against reason, and without considering what their Lord had commaunded, trusting in their great multitude, to giue an assalt, saying: Strike downe and make dye that euill knight that hath slaine our Lord: but that incouraging was to their hurt and damage, for yt the valiant louer seeing them to be a vile kind of people, returned to them so rigorously, that quickly hee made a broad

way whereas he went. Those of the Cittie were not forgetful, nor the valiant Princes, for in a moment they opened the gates of the Citty, whereout came all the knights, and before them the three pillers of Knighthood, and set vpon their enemies (who were without Captaine) making great slaughter, wounding and killing with such force, that quickly the field was witnes of their crueltie, all to besprinckled with Cilician bloud, and in such sorte they did presse them, that at the euening they had almost none to fight with, and followed the chace vnto the seaside: there it was that the Argentarians, did most at their content make reuengement, and remained rich with the spoiles for many yeeres: and being honored foreuer, they returned to their Citty with little losse: yet they slew that day more then thirty thousand men, besides a great number of captiues. They were all amazed to see the Knightly deeds of Rosicleer, whome they esteemed in equall degree with Mars. The Kings receiued them all with that content, as they were wont to receiue such as were victors, increasing more their ioy with the hope they had to know what they were, who said that it should be done in the pallace. Then the gentle Lisarte caused to cut off the Pagans head, and made his Page to keep it til he came at the Pallace, whither they went. And being all set down, the valiant Tharsian rose vp, and with the head in his hand, went and kneeled down before his Lady, who was the ioyfullest woman in the world, saying Sir Knight, Iupiter reward you for that you haue done this day for me; for me to reward you I will not binde my selfe thereunto, neither doe I beleeue that if I should venter my life for you it would bee a iust reward, considering what for me and my father this day hath bin done by you and your valorous frends, whome and you in the behalfe of these kings, I desire to pull off your helmes, and tell vs who you are, which shall be in regard of no duety, for that which is done is sufficient, but to leaue vs a memorie of your vertue and noblenes.
I am therewith content faire Princesse, said Lisarte more than this doth the time that you spent, when we were nourished together, bind mee vnto I am Lisarte the Prince of Tharsis, and haue not made my selfe known till such time as I had concluded this little seruice, which hath beene according vnto my strength, but not co^formable to your desert. And therewith he pulled off his helme, which caused great consentment to all that were present, and his father had no end of ioy, in that he knew his sonne to bee so valiant.
The King (Father vnto the Princesse) seeing that the Prince of Tharsis was a mean to raise the siedge from his Cittie, and to obtaine so glorious a victory, hee went vnto the Princesse and taking her by the hand, he gaue her for spouse vnto the valiant Tharsian, whereof hee was wonderful ioyous, and she no lesse delighted, which ioy I leaue to the consideration of true Louers.
This gallant Lisarte when hee sawe his fortune sure, turned to his new and welbeloued spouse, and said for that worthy Princesse you shall bee more certified of my firmnes, and with what truth you are esteemed: I haue tarried vnto this time, for to haue you girt me with my swoord, although this Knight (pointing to the Troyan) gaue me the order of Knighthood: hee would not, neither I my selfe would suffer it, but at your hand: yet foorthwith I defied him to mortall battaile. Then he told them the occasion of the battaile, and the agreement, whereat they all maruelled. But the faire Princesse because she would not be ingratefull for that which the three knighets had done for her, said with a soueraigne grace. Welbeloued Lord I am content, you knowe that if I loued you, I doe loue you should make it manifest to all the Knightes in the world. But yet I doe conclude this battaile, in that I see you haue better occasion to make long frendship, then breede any rigorous enemitie, in seeing what this knight and his frends hath done for you, it is no iustice yt you so euil reward the^:

and the rather, in that he loues and esteemeth his beloued Ladie, which is reason, and liues to honour her, which is his dutie: and it were a fault not to defend her to ye death: for there is no better loue, than that which is confirmed with deedes. And for that both of you are such Louers, I shall receaue great content that you d^o confirme true frendship with him: and I will sweare the sinne vnto his Ladie, till such time as my fortune grants that I may see her to confirme it: and on this condition I doo girt ye with this sword, not to offend but defend so meritorius a knight. So taking him vp, shee caused them all foure to imbrace, vniting vndeuided frendship, as Lisarte and h^s people expressed in the great warres at Constantinople, where hee shewed his loue to the Troyan: who (with the rest) greatly thanked the Princesse for confirming that league. The Princes would foorthwith haue departed about the Damsells busines: but at the request of the betrothed Ladie, they taried ten dayes. In which time the Troyan maintained a gallant Iust.
The new betrothed princes in this time vsed such cunning (although but yong beginners in Louers in wished delights) yt then was begotten one of the mightiest knights among the Pagans, proouing so valiant, that he was held for one of the Greeke Princes, with whom he had great frendship, but especially with Claramante, as shalbe declared in the second Booke of this third Part.
The ten dayes ended, the Princes vndertooke theyr iourney, with great greefe vnto the faire Flora, who affected them greatly. The new married Lisarte did greatly desire them to let him goe in their companie, but they would not consent thereunto. At their parting, the braue Greeke did declare vnto them who he was: whereat they much greeued, seeing they had not done him ^he honour hee deserued. In recompente whereof Lisarte promised to visite him in the Empire of Grecia, although hee could not performe it so soone as he intended: but when he went, it

was in companie with his Sunne, and they were called the Knights of the Sunne: vnder which name they dyd wondrous deeds.
Manie rich gifts being bestowed on the three Princes, they tooke their way with the Damsell (in Rosicleers inchanted Boate) towards the famous Cittie of Lyra in the Kingdome of Lacedemonia: where we will leaue them, and returne into France, to see what amorous aduentures there hapned.



What chanced to Torismundo Prince of Spaine in the Kingdome of France, the ende of his loue, with the departure of Don Heleno Prince of Dacia.

WE left the faire Princesse Grisalinda, amorously passionated with meditation onely on the Knight in the blacke armour: which thought had so possessed her hart, that her chast desires could no longer resist: for this amorous fier where it findeth resistance, burneth with more furie. In such sort it troubled this tender Ladie, that the conuersation of the Ladies was nothing pleasant vnto her, all her content is now to conferre with her cousin the Duchesse, and Alcisa (for so was the Damsell called) about her vnknown beloued. Alcisa comforted her with manie examples of Ladies, who merely hid their amorous greefe, and obtained a quiet and honourable end, as the faire Oliuia, and the worthie Claridiana: for saith she, in the sea of Loue they alone can tell how to saile in faire weather, that patiently endure the tempests, knowing that in the end they shall attaine the desired port. I my Alcisa (said the Princesse) if there were anie hope of obtaining, it were somwhat like: but for a Ladie to loue, and take delight in her owne affection, the beloued not knowing her faith, what comfort can sustaine her? or expressing first her affection, how can it be but she erreth against ye modest order of Ladies, who

know by experience they are beloued, before they make anie show of thankfulnes. This (said the Damsell) is the greatest errour that is made in Loues warre: for some in setting before them the simple poynt of honour, haue conuerted their ioy into lamenting, and dyed solitarie, for that they would not liue companie. How much more doth the royall priuiledge of loue stretch farther than this? not iudging it dishonour to put backe a little honorable fame, for the content which loue bringeth. Leaue off then Madam this wayward nicenes, and be not ashamed to vtter what your heart feeles. If you will assure me to comfort this worthie Knight, and honour him with your loue, I will goe seeke him in the Forrest, and make him the happiest among men. Doo good Alcisa (said the Princesse) and binde me euer to be thine: but I pray thee be not too lauish to vtter my affection, yet bring him to the Court, and see how I will reward thee: nay, rather say my selfe will be his reward, than he should be slacke in comming. Alcisa promised to goe, wherewith the amorous Ladie was somwhat comforted, and dissembled the greefe that she suffred for his absence, and receiued content to see the Iustes and Tornayes that were made for her sake.
Then flourished Knighthood in that Court more than in anie in all the world: the occasion was, that the King did intreate Strangers verie well, in giuing honour vnto those that deserued, lodging them within his Pallace: insomuch that all the Court was full of Knightes, who came at the fame and report of those Triumphs, and to behold the faire Grisalinda.
They who shewed themselues most excellent, were the Princes of Geneua and of Claramonte, the last being a rough youth, and verie amorous of the Geneua princes sister, that was in companie with Grisalinda* also the Duke of Pera, all valiant Knights. But aboue all for brauerie was the couragious Duke of Soma, a yong Knight and a valiant, who serued the Daughter of Armineo the Kings

Brother. She was verie faire, and called Liciana, nothing agreeued to be beloued of such a Knight, making shew of her affection vpon all occasions. To this great Court did the prince of Phrigia come, being a yong knight and of great strength: who trauelling to seeke aduentures, heard of triumphs, and purposed to shew his Knighthood. Thether came also the King of Carthage, called Pontenio, a valiant Youth, and of the race of Giants. The prince Riendarte of Phrygia, when hee saw the great beautie of the princesse, affected her entyrely, but dissembled it till he had made shew of his person.
The Challengers were the Dukes of Soma and Pera, and great prizes were ordained by the King, to be giuen to the best Deseruer. The Iustes were ordained to begin the first of May, and end at Midsummer, by which time they expected the prince Clauerindoes comming.
When the appointed time was come, it seemed that Paris was a celestiall Cittie, so much and so excelent musike was heard therein. The same daye early the King banquetted all the princes, that they might haue time for the Iustes: which banquet ended, the Challengers armed themselues, and came foorth conformable to their estates. Both had greene armour full of Flower de Luces, and manie precious stones amongst them, with their capparisons of the same: each had to attend them fiftie pages in green veluet, cut vpon gold Tinsell. In their shields was all their difference: the Duke of Soma for that he liued beloued, had on his shield his Ladie painted, with a crowne of fragrant lillies on her head, and this posie for the border.

Crownd for curtesie and beautie,
By desert and my bound dutie.

He rode gallantly forwards, making obeysance to the Ladies, the high Constable of France carrying his shield and speare.
The couragious Duke of Pera had on his shield a hart pierced thorough, with this posie.

She is faire whom I regard,
Yet thus she doth my hart reward.

The Duke of Bauier did carrie his shield, and another Noble-man his helme. When they came to their standing, manie Knights as wel Naturals as Strangers (desirous of honour) came foorth vnto the Iusts. The Duke of Soma was the first that began, against whom came a French Knight called Raymiro, on whom all people fixed their eyes. They each assaulted other with the force of their armes and swiftnes of their horse, till in the middest of the great place they made their incounter so mightely, that the Duke failed one stirrop, yet passed by, and ouerthrew the Frenchman with a great fall vnto the ground. Then they greatly esteemed the Duke of Soma, for that the French Knight was knowen to be valiant. Then came foorth a Spanish Knight, called the stout Salandrio, who clasping well his legs, went against his Contrarie, where they made terrible encounters: the Spaniard lost his reynes, which was the occasion for them that knew him, the more to esteeme the Duke of Soma. They recouered each of them again a great speare, and with double courage assaulted one the other, that the people were all in doubt, till that in the midst of their course they incountred in such sort, that the strong Spaniard lost his saddle, and the French-man his stirrops: yet in recouering, hee leapt vp on his horse againe verie lightly, giuing great content vnto his Ladie, who was ioyfull of that which her gallant Knight had done. She was talking with the faire Orosia, who was desirous to see what her Prince could doo.
Then the Duke of Soma left the Lyst, and gaue place for the braue Duke of Pera, who for that he was in disgrace

of his Ladie, his blowes were mortal, so that in ten courses hee ouerthrew eight Knights dead to the ground: till such time as on the one side of the place, came in that stout Pagan Pontenio King of Carthage, all in blew armour with white bends, and mounted vppon a mightie Roan horse.
Of this Moore speaketh Artemidoro, who made promise vnto his Ladie, to trauell in the world two yeres in praise of her beautie, and to carie to Carthage al ye names of them he should ouercome, where she remained all the time that he trauelled in performing that rigorous and hard promise. And for that he was absent, hee wore his armor of that colour, and on his shield the picture of Faith placed in the heauens, with this posie.

More than humane is thy hope,
my assurance is diuine:
Faith and vowes in heauen are fixt,
Thine am I, and thou art mine.

This Kingly Moore caused much expectation of valiantnes at sight of his person: who entring the Lyst tooke a great speare, and spurring his fierce horse, they came and made their encounter in the midst of their course, with so mightie blowes, that the Moore passed forwards vpright, without anie staggering, which made them all glad: but he of Pera made a little moouing in his saddle. Foorthwith they tooke other speares, and with double courage they made their encounter, in such sort that ye Duke came to the ground, the gyrths broken, and the saddle between his legs, whereunto was attributed his fall. The Moore crossed to the counter lyst, his horse doubling vnder hym, but he recouered him verie lightly. The Duke put the fault in the gyrths, and would haue returned to the iust againe, whereuppon they had like to haue come together, till such time as the Iudges did determine that it was an

ouerthrow. Then did they sound an infinite number of instruments, and (being a foote) the Moore mounted on his horse without putting anie foote in stirrop.
There hee did tarrie the comming foorth of the other Maintainer of the Lysts: who came foorth with so much cholar, that all stood still to behold him: and not without some doubt to the faire Liciana, fearing to see him in some perill.
They encountred with the swiftnes of their horses, and ioyned shiuering their speares into small splinters, and passed by well setled. Other speares they tooke, and dyd the like, till such time as the Moore being angrie at so much delay, chose a great speare, and incountered the couragious Duke so strongly, that it did not profite him to be beloued or amorous, but he must come to the ground: neyther went the Pagan free, but receiued one of the greatest encounters that euer he sustained in all his life, so that if he had not embraced his horses necke, he had falne aswell as the Duke did. But in setling himselfe, he began to doo manie gallant trickes in the field, at the sounding of the instruments.
In such sort he behaued himselfe, that before euening he ouerthrew to the ground more than thirtie well approoued Knights, whereby hee was esteemed to bee one of the most valiantest Knights in all the world. And for that it was verie late, there was not anie Prince of worthines or estimation, that would make proofe of his valor till the next day.
With great care was the discreet Alcisa all that daye about that which she had promised vnto the Princesse Grisalinda, and for to put it in effect, she intended the next day to goe foorth vnto the place appointed between her and the frendly Knights. Who (so soone as they were foorth of the Cittie) went with their Pages into the wood to rest themselues, whereas before they did eate.
The night being well spent, they returned vnto ye Cittie, and lighted at a house, whereas they left theyr horses in good order: so they pulled off their helmes, and wyth their strong habergins which they wore and their swords they went foorth to walk: and for that there was so much people, they were not looked at, neither their entring into the Pallace marked, whereas the braue Spaniard contented himselfe with the sight of his Ladie and Mistres, and vnderstood the successe of the Iustes, with purpose to returne thether within two dayes. At their comming in the tables were taken vp, which was the occasion, that they might at ease content the^selues in the sight of the ladies, for that the king did admit Dauncing that Night. They being there in this sort, the King of Carthage entered, and for that the knights did not giue him way at the first, he being somwhat prowd (which obscured his deeds) he said: Doo you not see knights who entreth, for to shew the curtesie that becomes ye. The Spaniard was gentle by nature, but being in high and louely imaginations, he answered: And thou knight, indued more with pride than good manners, doost not thou see vs that are heere, and aske license for to come in. The Moore would not indure that answere euen of Mars himselfe: and therwith layed hand on his sword, as also did three or foure of his knights that came with him. But when the Dacian did see that all the mirth was turned vpside downe, he quickly made a large way, for that at two blowes he ouerthrew two dead to the ground, and recouered the doore, because they should not be compassed about. The Spaniard who was verie desirous the Carthaginian, reached him a little blow on the head, which was the occasion that all the kings Guard were in an vproare. The which these two Frends seeing with a trice they were in the Court yard: and making so good shift as they could, they left sixe dead, and so went towards their lodging, til such time as the people in the pallace were in quiet.
The King straight waies commaunded search to bee made who it should be that were the doers: br but reason there were so many, it could not bee knowne who they should be. The tumult was only that night, for that from that time forwards, there should none enter into the Pallace with armour no^ without license, on any day that daunces were admitted.
The Spanish and Dacian Knights as they were yong men, and that their bloud wrought more in them tha^ sleep, would not goe to rest, till they had gone round about the Pallace, and for that it butted vpon so gallant and delightfull gardens, they might there passe away the time, till the night were farther spent, and drew nigh to that quarter whereas the Ladies were, which butted towards the gardens.
The Prince of Spaine knew it, for that hee was there before: and comming more nigher, they heard a deuine voyce, which at the recording of a Base, did sound verie sweetly, which gaue great comfort vnto the Princes: they were verie light, and giuing the one the other their hands they leapt into the Garden: being within they went by little and little till they came so nigh the windows, that they might discerne who played, which were three Ladies that stoode at an Iron grate window in the Moone-light: the one of them had a Lute, and beginning a new to sing, they came so nigh, yt not onely they heard the musicke, but also what they did talke: and they heard one of them say. Faire Grisalinda if the Knight with the blacke armour were so fully certified, how you loue him, as we are of your voyce, there should not need any other helpe but his presence for you to ease your sorrowfull life. The Princesse answered: Ah Orosia I am so fortuneles that I beleeue none is able to certifie what my soule requireth, or what my heart doth suffer, for as yet I know not whome to loue: it may be the Empresse of Trapisonde, or the peerelesse Queene of Lira, who hath taken that armour, and pittying

my necessitie hath taken vpon them the battell. Of this you may liue well assured, said the Damsell Alcisa, for they are men, although in grace and beauty, they may be compared with these worthy Ladies.
Well if it be so (answered the afflicted Ladie) how can they liue, who so truelie loue, and haue so little hope, or none at all of remedie? for by his absence it appeareth hee hath a mistresse, to whome he doth pay the true tribute of his thought, and this is the cause that I onely in the world am fortunelesse. I am perswaded (answered the other Lady) that he respecteth something in this Pallace: for that if you remember at such time as he looked towards the place whereas you were, he was intranced in his imagination, which is a plaine shewe that there is something that causeth his griefe in our company. I beseech God said the Princesse, that it proue s^, then shall I liue in hope to see him: but in the meane time giue mee that instrument, for I will make these trees witnesses of my griefe, and the birdes that build in them: with this she playde like a second Orphens, and to the instrument she song this song, with an Angellicall voice.

If Mars vnbinde these bands of Venus Sonne,
Wherein the boy intangled hath my thought,
Ioy and delight vnto my heart will come:
Els valors sight I haue too deerely bought,
And ceaseles I (compelled) must complaine,
Loue layd the plot to kill me with disdaine.
Or if braue knight thou twist thee in these bands,
That me insnare and nere will be vntwinde:
Ile yeeld mine honor to thy princely hands,
Or dye distrest, if thou doe prooue vnkinde.
And Swanlike sing vpon my dying day,
Of life and loue no more, no more* away.

This Lady concluded her song with (...) earnest sigh, so that I know not any but would haue been moued thereat, and after a small pause shee said. Oh Princesse of France, how is it that in thy tender age thou beginnest to feele loues lawes? Little (but cruel) God, why hast thou made me subiect, I know not to whom? Ah nowe I perceiue my life is but short, seeing in the beginning thereof, so much griefe hath beene reserued for me.
If thou delight proud Loue to haue me serue thee, why hast thou bound mee to one whom I knowe not where to find? What triumph hast thou in such my affliction? Ah faire Orosia, help me to ban this false bewitching boy, this theefe of hearts: but all is vaine, he will bewitch, and wee must honor him: all our exclaimes are idle and bootlesse passions. Then taking the Lute she againe sung as followeth.

Gentle Loue commaundeth me,
To his hests I must agree:
Though my loue I neuer see,
Yet must I his louer be.
Sweet loue from this rigour stay:
No no no no thou must obay.
If I yeeld how can I tell
Where my wandring loue doth dwell?
His regard would please me well,
His disdaine prooue wor^e than hell.
Loue then from this rigor stay.
No no no no thou must obay.
If I yeeld I thee inioyne,
By thy Psiches gentle eyne,
And thy beauteous Mothers shrine,
That my loued may be mine.
Els thy cruell rigor stay,
No no no no thou must obay.

She ceasing this sweete and amorous song, they heard the other Lady sayd. Hope (faire Grisalinda) in thy good fortune: what, comfort your griefe with courage, seeke helpe of the beloued, which must remedie you of all paine, other hopes but illusiue.
If this werr so, answered the Infant, that I knewe where to seeke reamedy, my griefe should not hurt me. It is not so vncertaine, answered Alcisa, for I will tomorrow seeke these Knights, and if occasion be offered, I will certifie your Knight the paine that for his sake you suffer.
Ah my Acilsa said the Princesse, if you doe so you may reuiue soule: for now liuing I dye, hauing surrendred my wil haue no power, but to loue, and there is no end set for this tempesttuous trauaile of my thought, I doe beleeue said Alcisa, that at these new triumphes, they being Knights and desirous of honor, first they will shewe their valiantnes in the Court before they will depart out of the Countrie, whereas I know they haue found some remedie for the griefe they brought.
Then they are amorrous answered the ielous Princesse. No said the Damsell, but I heard them praise a Ladie much, and said they should neuer forget her, if memorie did not faile them, to remember the good which by her they had receiued. But seeing it groweth somewhat late, it shall be good that we depart, whereby the Ladies do not conceiue any thing of our long being heere, for it will be no small occasion of suspition.
So they departed, leauing the two frends in obscure darkenes, seeing her absent that with her presence did ease those inward desires which the Spaniard suffered, although he was greatly content to haue seene by experience the loue which the Princesse did beare him, that without knowing who he was, or any farther consideration she was so wholy surrendred to him, and feared hee would not omit her faith.
Then the worthy Dacian said, Lord Torismunde, we may now goe with great securitie, and worke some meanes to comfort your Lady, and it shall bee some ease to your griefe, in reuiuing her: to morrow we will be at the fountaine against the Damsell come, and of her wee shall vnderstand the order that wee must vse in this our busines, for by her helpe wee shall make the way easie to take her from France, carrying her for Spaine, and considering with whome she is, her father will easily pardon her: and if it doe not chance to your content, they shal cut in peeces the Dacian Prince before they shal haue her from our power. With this they turned out of the garden, and went towards their lodging, where as their Pages tarried for them, with great griefe for their long absence: but when they saw them they were glad, and slept quietly the rest of the night that remained: but at the breake of the day couering their armor because they would not be known, they went into the Forrest where as the Damsell should come, to giue the^ knowledge what had passed in the court: Who in the morning being masked went foorth vpon her Palfrey, right vnto the place appointed, but missing a little the way in wandring amongst the trees, foure knights met with her, who seeing her beautie and disposition, they would haue vnhorsed her, but she vsing the vsual weapon of women, cryed out, and the Princes did heare her, who were hard by.
The braue Spaniard finding himselfe fullest armed, a foote as he was went vnto them: they were all alighted with the poore Damsell, who cryed out for succour. And when he came thether hee knew her not, but being choloricke, he put himselfe amongst them with his sword in his hand, saying: Away vile Knights, and laye no handes on the Damsell, if you doe you shall dye for it, and reaching the first vpon the head, in reward of his folly he cut it downe to the shoulders.
The three which remained, seeing the death of their

companions, and that he was but one onely, drew their swoords and went to him.
But this warlike youth so behaued himselfe amongst them, that he stroke the second such a blow vpon the arme that arms and swoord fell both to the ground, who seeing himselfe lamed, he beganne to cry out and runne into the forrest, whereas within a while after he yeelded vp the ghost: the other two purposing to be reuenged, they assalted him. He seeing their ouermuch contempt, payed them in such sort, that at two blowes he made them beare the first company, with great content to the Damsell, for that she saw it was her knight. And taking off her maske she went vnto the Knight with her armes open, saying: I did well know Sir knight, that if any succour did come vnto me, it should be from this mightie arme. Happy Alcisa that hath come to knowe the best amonst knightes in her behalfe.
This amorous Torismunde reioyced in his soule when hee sawe the Damsell and knewe her, and said vnto her with great content, those false Knights faire Damsell did not so much esteeme you as I doe, that so against your honor and my content would haue displeased you. Thankes be to God Sir Knight, and your strength said shee, which gaue them their payment as they deserued, and according to my will, which shall bee alwaies ready in whatsoeuer for your content. At this time came the worthy Dacian with his swoord in his hand, whereat they did not a little laugh: and the Damsell said vnto him. It well appeareth sir knight, who hath most care to doe mee frendship, for if I should haue tarried for you, I beleeue mine honor had bin lost, and now I say that the lacke of care in the seruice of Ladies is verie euill, for at such time as it may bee lacked, that after it ca^not be remedied with life, the which I would haue dispatched if these false knights had gon forwards with their rigorous intent: but seeing that between you two there is so great frendship, it seemeth that being

remedied by your companion, I am bound to serue you both, which I wil do to my power. And therwith she declared why she came to seeke them, and gaue them to vnderstand of all that passed in the Court, and what the Prince of Phrigia purposed in loue towards Grisalinda. At which the Spaniard was so angry that he said, I vow that I wil no more put on armour if this go forwards, and foorthwith I will go paie him the reward of his boldnes. The Dacian when hee saw him so determined, said, that hee should quiet himselfe, for that in these matters hast is not profitable. This knight is in France, and he cannot be so strong to resist vs: and seeing you haue not gone forth to the Iuste you may goe thether and deale with him. This Irefull Youth was somewhat appeased, but not in such sort, but that the Damsell plainly saw the good will which he had vnto the Princesse, and seeing it would not be taken in euill part she said. What is it to you gentle knight that the prince doth imploie his thoughts vpon Grisalinda? The Prince answered, to see the euill he doth to an other in procuring to loue where he deserueth not. And how are you certaine (answered the Damsell) of this euill which he doeth? My poore armes giueth testimonie thereof (answered the Spaniard). Then sir knight you are he that exceedeth the prince of Phrigia in loue. Not him alone answered the youthful prince, but all the world: and vpon this I wil enter into the field with all the world. Nowe am I glad answered the Damsell, for that you shal haue need of Alcisa. And how is it yt he must haue need said the Dacian, what are you so much in fauour with the Princesse touching this knight, it is due to our desire in procuring her co^tent with the earnest truth of our soules? I should doe verie euill worthy knights (said the Damsell) if I knew not my duty therin, and I wil put my life in hazard for your co^tents and for that you shalbe certified of al, know that your companio^ is beloued, my Mistres affecteth him without knowing who he is: there is no need to keep in secret who ye are.
And there with shee declared vnto them all that passed the night before, and all was to know who they were: but the Prince desired her on his part, to doe his commendation vnto the gentle Dutches of Savoy, and to certifie her what he pretended to doe in her seruice. Then they agreed that the Damsel should returne, and certifie them that they would bee at the iustes. So putting themselues in a secret place of the forrest to repaire their armour, they saw come foorth of the fame, a Damsell mounted on a great horse, and before her a fardell, and when she came vnto them she said vnto the Dacian. Worthy Heleno, the wise man my Lord and thy faithfull freend doth send thee this armour, for that thou shouldst this day in the French Court, shew the royall bloud from whence thou didst proceed. And to you Prince of Spaine for that he vnderstands you shall giue him great ayde and succour, he sendeth you another where with you shall make the beginning of your ease: and all other matters he wisheth you to leaue to his power, for that he will doe therein as for myselfe. So without tarrying any answere shee returned like the winde, and they lost the sight of her quickly: with great ioy the knights tooke the armour, and left theirs hidden amongst the bushes, and with the help of the Damsell they were armed, that shee might know them and giue aduise vnto the Princesse when they came thether: so with this agreement they tooke their leaue of her, and returned to rest themselues a little, and eate of that which their Pages had brought, ere they went to the Iustes, the which at that time was begun so strongly that it gaue content to al the beholders: for the mightie King of Carthage was one of the strongest in all the country of Moores, This gallant Moore changed his armor, and put on one of a russet colour striped with green, bordred with blew vpon his shield was there a Phenix hard by his Lady, with this Posie.

The Knight and Lady both may liue secure.
When he is valiant, she a Phenix pure.

This gallant Carthaginian entred to be looked on: and after hee had compassed the Court, with a fierce countenaunce he put himselfe at the Lyst end to abide the Iusts. There wanted no Knights to be in readines, and the first that would prooue himselfe was the famous Lord of Claramonte, armed with strong armor, mounted on a mightie horse: who taking a speare, came and encountred his Contrarie so strongly, that they both staggered in theyr saddles, and the French Knight lost one stirrop. But for that he was valiant, they iusted againe: but it happened otherwise than he thought, for he fell on the ground wyth shame. Straight there entred in his place a gentle knight of Almaine called Agesilaus, who had three courses wyth the King, but in the end he left his saddle. Then entered the mightie Baldomes, armed in carnation armour, and his deuice in his shield was a bloodie sword. Hee beeing knowen of all, they said that there would be the best iusts of all that day. They met together with all theyr forces, without anie moouing, the like hapned the second and thyrd courses: but at the fourth, hee came to the ground wyth a great fall, and the Moore remained somewhat wearie with those strong incounters, yet pass^d forwards with a slowe pace, at whose valor they all reioyced. And from that time he began to doo such wonders, yt before it was one a clocke in the afternoone, hee had ouerthrowen sixteene knights. Then changed he his horse, and tarrying the Iust with a great speare, he saw enter on the one side of the place two knights, the gallantest proportioned that he had seene, and mounted vpon mightie horses. He on the right hand seemed to bee most corpolent, and was armed with a shining armour of an euill coloured yeolow, but in riches verye strange. All the buttons and workes were of white and red, which in the Sunne showed gallantly, and could not be well discerned for the rich stones it had. There was a Groue painted on his shield, out of the which came foorth a Ladie with a sword in her hand, as thogh she wold wound

a Knight who was on his knees before her, showing hys heart, with this Embleme.

If thou wilt smite, behold my hart:
Be kinde, or kill; death easeth smart.

His Companion (who shewed no lesse grace and gallantnes than the first) was armed in armour quartered like a chesse with blue and gold: there was set about the quarters diuers kinds of precious stones, and all ye ioints were lion tawney, and on his shield a shining heauen, and in the middest a Pellican, cherishing her birds with her owne blood, hauing this Motto.

Open thy breast, thou gentle Pellican,
And change we harts: els dyes a fainting man.

These gallant Knights at their entrie gaue great hope: who crossing ye place with their speares tipped with sharp and bright steele, rid till they came to the galleries, wheras the Princesse was, who was feeding her sight wyth that ioyfull obiect. Unto whom, the two Knights (when they passed by) did their obeysance with a souereigne gallantnes: whereat the Ladies did somewhat raise themselues from their seates. The discreet Alcisa did very wel know them, for that she saw them armed in the Forrest: and now hauing occasion to speake for her Knightes, for that the passionated Princesse did aske her if shee knewe them? she answered: Madam, I doo know them: for he with the Pellican is that happie Knight of the blacke armour, to whom are due all good aduentures in the world, and whom of right I am bound to serue, for that he did not onely deliuer me yesterday from death, but did also defend my honour from foure rude knights that were desirous to spoyle it: and in payment of their boldnes he slew them, giuing me afterwards plainly to vnderstand, that he doth

liue amorous, and wil haue no other content, but yt which commeth of loue, accounting you for his naturall owner, not desiring other reward, more than the glorie of your thought. I did well beleeue my Alcisa (answered the amorous Ladie) that in yeelding my affaires to your charge, there could nothing redownd vnto mee, but that which should be comfortable: and there is small neede to perswade mee to that which I esteeme as my life. I perceiue said the faire Duches, that Alcisa will show her dutie vnto the Knight of the Blacke armour, seeing shee did not onely learne of him that hee loued, but also I beleeue she told him that he was beloued. Alcisa answered, I wil stand for my knight, and deale in his affaires as for mine owne, and more earnestly, hauing occasion. But thys I would that you would consider of, for I told him that hee might come this night and talke with vs by the Garden, whereas yesternight we were singing. Ah speak no such thing answered Grisalinda, for to imagine it is a greeuous offence to my reputation. There can be no offence nor danger said the Damsell, seeing you loue and they knowe the place. For you shal vnderstand, that yesternight they heard all your singing and conference. Therefore seeing your affection is to him manifest, let me perswade you to meete and conferre, whereby you may know who hee is, and if there be no disparagement in his birth, I know not wherefore you should refuse to receiue him for the knight of your seruice. And now let vs looke what they doo, for I am certainly assured that these Iustes will be lamentable to some.
So all three (the better to talke of their loue) did put themselues together, and beheld the knights, at such time as the mightie knight of the Groue (for so wee will call the Dacian) came and talked with the knight of the Pellican, (which was the Spanish Prince): and his conference was to this effect, that he wold let him haue the first Iustes, in the mean time yt he contemplated on his Lady,

who apparelled all in russet tinsell with manie and costly stones, was leaning on her breast at the window, and a garland vpon her haire, which seemed like Ariadnes Coronet that beautifies the heauen. The bodies of her gown were somewhat open, and part of her snowie breast appeared to her knight, who had pitched the great end of his speare on the ground to behold that sweete prospect, wyth so great negligence, that it caused all the people to say, he seemed as good a Louer as a Warrier.
With this the worthie Dacian came to the victorious Pagan, and said: Gentle knight, seeing this is the office of Gallants in seruice of Ladies, I would know if the Iusts be free for all perils? So that you would agree (answered the Moore) that it might be from the Tilt, I am content. You vnderstand me right said the Dacian, let it be at your pleasure: and therewith they went into ye great Court, taking big speares with bright steelie heads: so that all had great regard vnto their incounters, and imagined that the knights were of great force.
Being in the great Court, they came to meete with so mightie incounters, that it seemed vnto all and vnto themselues especially, that their armour had broken to peeces. The Moore made his incounter in the midst of the Dacians shield, with so worthie a blow, that he made hym fall backwards on the buttockes of his inchaunted horse, and if the speare had taken a little more hold, hee had ouerthrowen him: but he incountred the strong Moore in such sort, that (piercing his breast-plate with a little wound) he ouerthrew him to the ground. He was no sooner falne, but he rose vp againe with all lightnes possible with hys sword in his hand, abiding his Contrarie, who with an easie pace on his horse came gretly amazed at that strong incounter: and at his comming the Moore said vnto him. Knight, thou art bound to perform the battel with swords, seeing it was at all perills. I doo not now receiue anie delight therein (answered the Dacian) for that we will not

trouble other Knights that would iust: for they that doo demaund battell in generall Iustes, make show as if they before had some perticular defiance, which hath not been betweene you and me, but for that the Tilt was somwhat troublesome, I desired the open place, onely at more ease to prooue my launce. This Knight hath reason in all hys speech said the Iudges, and is not bound to admit the battell, not hauing anie will thereunto. Then you doo mee wrong, answered the Moore. Let it not greeue you sayd the Dacian Prince, for if you thinke to receiue such pleasure by triall of a battell. I will abide your comming ten dayes hence within the woodes of Ardenia, where if you doo not ease your stomacke, it shall be your owne fault, and none in mee for the performing of my word. Let it be as thou wilt answered the Moore, although I should receiue greater pleasure if it might bee now. Well, since thou wilt needes said the Prince, mount vpon thy horse, and he that first looseth his saddle or anie part thereof, let hym be ouercome, and remaine at the will of the other. This is great curtesie said the Moore, and so with a trice he mou^ted his horse, and put hand to his sword, and imbracing his shield he went against the Dacian: who met him, and together they strooke such blowes, that they humbled the^selues to their saddle bowes. All that were in the great pallace stood still to behold that cruell battell, sauing onely the amorous Spaniard, whose powers of his body wer all in suspence, remaining onely glad by sight to get ease for his soule. Whereat the gracious princesse receiued no small content, to see him so busied onely in beholding her beautie. The worthie Heleno raised vp himselfe very angerly for the great blow hee had receiued, and seeing that in giuing and receiuing of blowes was onely a delaye of the battell, and a cause not to giue place to his Frend for to doo that which was reason, he determined to aduenture it vpon one alone blow, trusting in the strength and nimblenes of his inchaunted horse, and therewith seeing that

the Moore retourned more furious than a lyon, hee made show as though he would stand and abide him, and at the time he should receiue the blow, hee spurred forward hys light horse, and made him at a spring to enter so nigh, that the Moore could not strike him, but with the hilt and pommell of his sword: and although it was such a blow as the Dacian felt, yet it was more troublesome for the Moore, for that hee felt his wrist thereby greatly pained. Thys skilfull Youth desired no other thing, but at that instaunt stretching foorth his left arme, he let fall his shield, and hauing time, he laid his strong hands on the Moore, and held him so fast, and so quickly spurd forward his furious horse, that ere he returned to himselfe, the Prince carried hym by the armes out of the saddle, with a great shout of them that were in the Court, publishing his valour. In this sort he carried him vnto the place whereas the Iudges were, demaunding of them if hee were bound to doo anie more? No of truth sir Knight said they, for yours is the honor of the battell in the face of all the world. The Pagan made no reply, but desired to returne and prooue himselfe again with the Knight, and defied him to mortall battell, which the Iudges would not suffer. The Prince with quiet pace put himselfe into the Court, choosing no iusting speares, but speares of fine and pure steele. There lacked not some Knights, which were come thether desirous to get honor, who prooued their aduentures with the prince, but by reason all went on his side, some he left without life by his rigorous incounters, and others without anie desire to returne and prooue him againe: till such time as they saw three Knights, euerie one in a sundrie part to enter into the Court. Hee that came first was the prowd Tribano King of Argier, although after he humbled himselfe to the amorous yoake of Cupide, and thereby lost a great part of his pride: and so now he went seeking at whose hands he should loose it altogether, and by chance his good Fortune brought him to the Dacian Youth.
He came armed in purple armour full of greene A^tichokes, and of great price. There was painted vpon hys shield the God Cupid, with that rigorousnes as in auncient time he was painted, with his bow and golden arrowes, his face somwhat discouered, and he compassed about with foure most furious lions, whom he seemed to lead bound in a slender thrid, with this posie.

Loue the Lions heart doth quaile,
No powers against his darts preuaile.

All remained greatly delighted with the Deuice on his shield, as wel as at his gallant disposition: for in showing it he put himselfe to encounter with the Dacian, parting the one from the other with the lightnes of their horses, and meeting in the middest of their course, they gaue heauie blowes, but they passed with great swiftnes without anie moouing: the like hapned at the second and third courses. Then taking new launces, they encountred so stronglye, that their speares with a thousand shiuers flew into the ayre, and they meeting together with their horses, it seemed as though a great house had fallen downe. And by reason that ye strength of the princes horse was so great, there was no resistance found in his contrarie, but that hee and his Owner came to the ground, and the prince staggered so on the one side, that hee could not stay himselfe: and because he would not be noted, hee tooke it for the best remedie to leape from his horse, the people giuing a ioyfull cry, for they all affected him verie much. By this time the valiant Spaniard had left his loue-trance, and seeing his frend afoote, spurred his horse with such grace, that the sight of the ladies followed him. When hee came to Heleno, hee intreated him to giue place, that he might as well manifest his strength, as he had showen his loue. The Dacian departed the place, and the Spaniard with a great speare in his hand put himselfe at the ly^ts end.
There wanted not one to come into the Ly^ts, with desire to get more honour of that new Knight, than the diuel that was past. The first which entred was the dreadfull King of Cyprus, who did meruailously affect the faire Orosia. This Moore came in red armour, full of golden Sunnes, their beames stretching foorth with diuers coulours which beautefied the show: and on his shield there was a nosegay of flowers, which a faire hand seemed to giue vnto a knight that stood before it, with this posie.

From this hand there commeth flowers,
That comfort all my vitall powers.

They came the one against the other so fast as their horses could runne, and encountred with so great force, that it seemed to the Spaniard hee was run cleane thorough: but the valiant Moore descended to seek flowers in ye field, hauing it destined, for that the encounter seemed to come from the hands of death: and rising vp with shame, foorth he went, purposing to giue as much occasion of weepyng as there was then of laughter.
There is no question but the princesse reioyced at this, to whom Orosia sayd: It seemeth vnto me (fair princesse) your knight hath handled his affaires to day with discretion, reinforcing his courage by your beautie in the tyme he spent in beholding you, whilest his Frend did keep the place of Iusts. At least answered the amorous Ladie, if the content which he receiued in the beholding it, should
be the occasion of courages increasing, I doo assuredlye beleeue, that he alone will ouerthrow all the knights present.
Foorthwith appeared another gallant knight, being a valiant Tartarian, cousin vnto the vnhappie Zoylo, that was slaine in the woods of Grecia by the hands of Brufaldoro, about the armour of Bramarant. He came in quest of his kinsman, and vnderstanding of his death, hee returned into Tartarie, for that he did inherit the kingdome,

Zoylo being dead, and remained no lesse affectioned vnto the Greeks then his cosin, and did shew it at due time, that to him they did owe the restoring of Greece. He was called the curteous Andronio, who came vnto the Spaniard and said, gentle Knight, I shal receiue great curtesie that before we do Iuste, you tel mee, if you bee any of the Greeke Princes: for that my Launce shall bee more to serue them, then offend them.
Of truth Sir knight (answered the generous Spaniard) I would bee one of them if it were but to inioy your frendship, I am none of them, although I hold my selfe for one of their frends.
Then I request you gentle Knight, that our Iuste may be with speares of Iuste, for that I haue sworne by the faith of knighthood, neuer to them nor to any of their frends to be contrarie for the frendship which they kept and doe keepe with the mightie Tartarian Zoylo, whose body they haue in their Country. I am content Sir Knight to doe it in this, and in all what you please shall be granted: so they went to take each of them a Lance, he pendring in his mind of the force of vertue, that bringeth with it people of so farre and remote Countries. And taking their Speares they returned the one against the other, with the swiftnes of their horses, and broke their speares, as though they had runne against a Rocke, without any harme dooing, and the like vnto the third, then they encountred on their shields so strongly, that they came vnto the ground, although the Spaniard with the reines in his hand, went to helpe the Tartare, whose horse was slaine with the blowe, and had one of his legges vnder him. And pulling it out, he gaue him the preheminence of the battaile, requesting him for to remaine in his place. The which although he did esteeme it, yet he wold not do it: he was foorthwith serued of another horse in the behalf of the King, for that the Spaniard would not mount on his, til such time as it was brought to him, for he esteemed

him much, neither would the Moore goe foorth of the place for the content he had of the knight, but foorthwith tooke of a sandal that was vpo^ his shield, and discouered the fairest figure that might bee imagined. Which was the face of a woman, the most bright and shining in the world, insomuch that there were few in the place that might behold it, the brightnes was such, and taking it in his handes, he went vnto the Spanish knight, and gaue it him, saying: Gentle knight, now is accomplished that which a wise man of my Countrie told me, that I should loose my liberty with my shield, which I should giue vnto the first knight that should ouerthrow mee, and now it seemeth that it is performed. I would it were better for you: for whereas it was giuen mee, it was in some estimation. Because I will not doe any thing to gainsay your will gentle knight (said the Spaniard) I take it, and I giue you mine to vse in exchange, and I would faine win an owner that would sustaine it with the honor as hee which doth giue it hath done, and so gaue him his, and took that of the Tartare, and neuer King receiued a better gift.
The faire Spaniard reioyced at the heart, when hee sawe howe well it became him for his doubtfull Loue: there was neuer Louer that had the like, and noting the faire face that was vpon the shield, it seemed it was the face of Grisalinda. And in reading the Posie that was in it, he vnderstood that it was agreeable to his imagination, and this it was.

Why should I complaine of absence,
Being ioyed with her presence.

There could not be giuen to this louing youth a ^hing that did more content him: so verie ioyfull he was, pransing his horse in the ayre, he put him selfe to abide the

Iuste: then foorthwith appeared the worthie Duke of Sauoy, verie ioyous of the beautie of the faire Orosia, he entred with the companie that his estate required, with twentie Pages apparrelled all in carnation Ueluet, with gold parchment Lace, cut vpon siluer Tinsell, which was verie sightfull.
The Duke entred with the same colour, mounted vpon a mightie, Fleabitten horse, the best that was in al that place (besides those of the two frends) with many plumes vpon his head and helme. The Duke of Ornos carried his speare, being an ancient knight.
In this sort he passed by the Ladies, whereas was his faire wife, who knew not were she was with ioy to see her gentle and welbeloued Lord, so well proportioned. The Irefull Spaniard did know him by his deuise, which was a Sea, and in the middest of it a beauteous gally, and on the one side of it a Lady who gaue her hand to a knight that was in the Sea, with this Embleme.

I shall not sinke where my faire beauty sailes,
But floate sustaind: so much my loue preuailes.

The grateful Spaniard would shew vnto the Dutches his bounden duetie, and how in earnest truth hee honored her: for when hee should make his encounter, he made shew as if he erred in the blowe, and lifted vp his speare for that hee would doe the Duke no harme, and receiued ^he Dukes encounter vpon his newe and faire shield, which most grieued him.
The Duke thinking hee had failde by chance, commaunded other speares to be brought, and seeing him misse ^he second and third, he said. Sir knight I am beholding or that which you haue done, although heere it seemeth it might be excused.
The Spaniard answered: My Launce (worthy Duke) is not accustomed, to seaze on that which his maister loueth, I desire not your hurt, but doe offer in what I may to doe you seruice.
Euery one did much praise the knight, imagining certainely who it should be: but the Dutchesse when she saw the curtesie that hee vsed with the Duke, said vnto the Princesse, from this day forwards faire Grisalinda, if yee were importuned to fauour the knight of the faire portrature (for so wee wil cal him) do not let this kindnes to the Prince my husband be vnrequited: for hence foorth for his valor and curtesie I wil euer study to giue him his desert. For this Lady (said the Damsell Alcisa) wherefore doe you leaue mee out in so iust a demaund: who doth owe more vnto the Knight of the faire Portrature than I? if he deliuered you from prison, he deliuered me from death and dishonor: so that on this wee must contend. And I will call in my ayde the Knight of the groue, for although we are in one opinion, touching loue towards him, I know not from whence is taught this heresie in the law of loue, there must onely be one beloued. With such helpers answered the yeelded Lady, it is not vnlike but that the Knight shall obtaine his meeting* for here is nothing procured but for his content: yet let some looke to the fame of Grisalinda, since nowe the Princesse of France is in hazard.
Their sweet conuersation was cut-off, for that the Sun was about to bathe her selfe in the West Ocean, and then there entred on the one side of the great Court, to the number of thirtie Knights, al with vpper signes of mourning. And the last was a valiant Knight with the same deuise, his visor downe, with a great Speare of cleere and sharpe Iron, his shield all steele, and in the middest thereof was painted Ielosic, with this Posie.

My Loue lookes on me with disdainefull eye,
Which makes me full of watchfull Iealosie.

At that instant hee was knowen to bee the Prince of Phrigia, for seeing with what strangnes the Princesse did intreate him, hee liued the most passioned man in all the world, and his passion did pintch him so much, that hee was constrained to come, not as vnto so ioyfull feasts and triumphes, but as vnto a rigorous and mortall battaile, suspecting that the Princesse did loue one of those twoo Knights. So that he came to defie them to mortall battaile.
In passing thorough the place, hee went directly vnto the Knight of the faire portrature and said to him. I wold know Sir knight the reward that shall bee giuen to him that shall conclude these feastes. The honor of a victor (said the Prince) and he to remain as most valiant, which is enough. This is for them that seeke honor (answered the iealous Moore) and not for him that hath attained to the top of honor, so that it seemeth vnto me all your glorie is but little, for that I wyll depriue ye of it in this place.
Thou commest with more confidence than is reason (answered Torismundo) and seeing thou wilt challenge me, let our prize be the head each of the other. Thou art conformable vnto my desire (said the Pagan) and turning about his horse, he went against the Youth, who taking a great Lance, burnished the head in the sight of his Ladie, and knowing that that Moore was he that desired to be her louer, he made his encounter with so famous a blow, that both Moore and horse fell both to the ground, hauing his louing brest pearced thorough with the speare, wherat all began to make a still murmuring, to see the horse of the Phrigian Prince ouer throwne at one blow: those that came with him, who vnder their sad deuise were all armed, trusting in that they were so many, assalted the Prince with a heauie lamentation, saying: make dye that euill knight, in recompence of the death hee hath giuen to our welbeloued Lord.
Some encountred with him, and some threwe their

speares at him so strongly, that they almost heaued him out of his saddle, but being settled he pulled out his sword, and went against them, striking the first such a blowe, that he made him beare his master companie, cleauing his head downe to the necke, and from that time hee so dealt, that heauie it was for him who durst abide him, for that eyther without death or a lamentable life in being lame he went not from him.
The gentle Dacian and the mightie Tartare, seeing the villanie of those knights, went to ayde him, but there had been no need, if the king had not sent his guard to apprehend them: knowing certainely that it was the prince of Phrigia that was slain, vnto whom he did not beare so euil will, but that he thought to haue bestowed his daughter on him: but the three valiant warriers bega^ so to vse themselues, that verie few or none of the Phrigians remained: but by reason that the number of Courtiers were great, they were driuen to helpe themselues by the lightnes of their horse. The Dacian was behinde and the other two before, returning at fit times with such furie, that still they ouerthrew two or three to the ground, till such time as they got foorth into the plaine, where pricking forwardes with their horses, they were quickly a good way from them of the Citty, leauing them matter to talke of for many daies. So they put themselues in the thickest of the mountaine, whereas they stayed to see if they could discerne any body: and finding themselues in securitie, they alighted, and the two Frends went and embraced the Tartarian Andronio, to whome the Spaniard said. I would sir knight that this fauor, which fortune hath shewed vs, in giuing vs your ayde, might so continue that absence might not take it from vs. It is I that do gaine answered the curteous Tartare, to inioy so good copanie* I will not say frendship, for that in me there is no deserte. I is so great answered the Dacian, that it is a vantage for vs to shut vp the perfect number of frends with so great

and curteous a knight: and then they began to giue each other to vnderstand of their doings, vniting betweene them so great frendship, that indured for euer.
Therewith their Pages tooke out victuals to eate vpon the greene grasse, such dainties as the discreet Alcisa had brought them, and so passed away the little part of the euening that remained, in sweete conuersation, which is neuer more excellent that among vertuous Frendes. So that some auncient writers put humane felicitie in hauing frends. Alexander the great gaue great shewe of this content, when it was demaunded of him, whether he most reioyced, in that he was Lord ouer all the world, or to haue many frends? He answered, to haue frends, for that with them hee had gotten the name to bee called great. A saying worthy of such a Prince.
Now returning to the thee that remained in the Forrest, hauing no other desire amongst them, but the one to giue content vnto the other.
The Dacian said vnto the Tartare: Tell vs gentle knight are you in loue for? those that bee subiecte vnto the lawes of loue, cannot possibly passe the night but in acknowledging where their heart is: and if it bee in this Countrie, you haue no better occasion to speake than now.
I am a stranger in this Countrie worthy Prince (answered the Tartare) and as yet I haue had no time to beholde the beautie which hath beene tolde mee is therein, so that I thanke you there is no neede of this trouble.
If it be so (answered the Spaniard) it would bee a griefe to request you to goe with vs to the Citty, to help a louer. It shall not be greeuous (answered the curteous Andronio) but rather a ioy, to imploy my person in your content.
Well then (said the Dacian) wee may not stay: and

therewith they left their helmes, and onely with their corselets couered with their Pages cloakes and their swoords, they went vnto the Citie: the which they found all in a vprore for the death of the Prince of Phrigia and his knightes, and none could euer imagine who they were that should doe it: so putting themselues amongst others they went into the Pallace, where as they saw the king, who commaunded, that they should with great diligence seeke out the three knights, that he might know who they were.
There they vnderstood how that the king, to take some refreshing, would the next daye with the Princesse goe foorth to a house of pleasure which was in the Forrest, which gaue great content vnto the Princes, thereby thinking to haue better opportunitie. Thus they passed a great part of the night, till it was time to goe toward the garden, and when they were all three come thether, the Prince of Dacia leapt vpon a wall, and gaue his hand to the rest, so they entred with great content vnto the Tartare, that they would admit him in a busines of such import. The two knights went softly towards the windows, where they heard a noise, by which they thought that Alcisa was tarrying for them, and the Princes: but it was nothing so, for it was the Queene of Holand, and her daughter the faire Grisanea, cosin vnto Grisalinda (for that their mothers were sisters) who were in sweet conuersation at the windows: and to heare what they said, they all drew nigh vnto a bush of Roses, wheras they might heare what the French Lady said. It had bin great glory for this Court faire cosin Grisalinda, if this day you had been heere to honor it with your beauty, although the knights should haue receiued griefe at your sight. Whereas your beautie was gentle princesse (answered the free Lady) mine wold haue made small shew but onely increase yours the more.
This is good faire Grisanea, said Orosia to see howe you liue deceiued, in the great quantitie, which nature hath

bestowed on you, in making you the best and most esteemed, and now you come to compare with vs that haue the least. My Cousin and these Ladies of France are thankfull for your long stay, for that your absence gaue place to them to be looked at, yea and esteemed, in drawing after them the eyes of those braue Aduenturers, as well proportioned for loue, as to ayd and succour Ladies. Manie haue told mee said Grisanea, that they haue shewed themselues both ^ightly and valiant, but especially those two that came in together last. Of that (said Alcisa) ye death of the Phrigian prince will giue testim^nie, by ye hands of the most valiant in the world amongst Knights, and faire amongst faire Ladies. If with the like passion that you praise him (faire Damsell) he regard your beauty said Grisanea, without all doubt he hath born away for reward the freedome of your will. There is no need to giue hym that said Alcisa, that so long since hath been put into hys hands, as into the hands of the best Knight in all ye world, and he which hath most done for the honour of France: and to serue him all the dayes of my life shall be my glory, and I will thinke all my trauell ease. If this Knight had his Ladie heere said the Hollandesse, he had little need for to watch, hauing so earnest a Frend for him as you, he may liue without care of the great woe that those are woont to haue, which he touched with this passion. I perceiue by this said the French Ladie, you know well this euill by experience, for that ther is none that can cast these doubts, but they that haue felt Loues greefe. Things are known ladie said Grisanea, without experience, for we may iudge of them by report. Not touching the euill that Louers do suffer said Orosia, for that it neuer commeth to a certayne and limitted end: for when the Louer thinketh his pain is pittied after he hath spent his life therein, he is still abhorred. I beleeue Madame said Grisanea, you that haue bin such a seruant to Loue, can tell all the troubles thereof. Faire Princesse answered the Sauoyan Lady, I hope also

to see the time, that you may talke by costly experience, and not be beleeued so easely, as you beleeued me, without knowing my glorie or greefe. And in recompence hereof, in the behalfe of these Ladies, I doo request you to let vs bee pertakers of your voyce: for according as it is heere sayd, there is not the like to bee heard in this Countrey. You shall see Madam said Grisanea, I will obey you in all I may, but I shall now put you out of all doubt my voyce is not so good as it is reported. And there with she tooke a harpe, and began to tune it with so excellent order and agreement, that her gracing the gracious concord, began new discords in the princely Tartarian, who prepared his hart to giue in recompence for faire Grisaneas musique. Pittie it was to see the amorous Princes new passion, but on these greeefes tis bootlesse to shew compassion, for the beloued onely can giue ease. The faire Ladie began, making the heauens a witnes: who reioycing at her musick, did with their influence inspire the harts of all that were present, kindling in them new cares of loue, and more than all the rest the gentle Tartarian was rauished, his magical armour not being sufficient to withstand it, but her diuine voyce penetrated his soule.

Line you secure that I doo liue secured
From Loues allures, his witchings, and his woe;
I to his guiles will neuer be inured,
Ne doo I long his needlesse lawes to know.
Downe downe I sing, hey downe as merely,
As Louers sigh and mone incessantly.
Loue is a ioy ymixt with endlesse sorrow,
A clowdie heauen, a bright tormenting hell,
To day content, but quite vndone to morrow;
A flowring banke that harbors serpents fell.
Downe downe I sing, hey downe as merily,
As Louers sigh and mone incessantly.
Thus scorning Loues sad weeping weladay,
I sit secure, and smile at others greefe:
And cheerly chaunt a gladsome roundelay,
While they wring hands, and beg refusde releefe.
Downe downe I sing, hey downe as merily,
As louers sigh and mone incessantly.

This free Ladie had scarce concluded to make show of her libertie, being shortly after taken by the gallant Tartarian, when as the faire Grisalinda said. Wee liue not heere (gallant Princesse) with so much freedome, nor in our Court doo we estrange the contents of loue: for wee see with how much sharpnes those are chastised that do declare themselues for rebells against imperious loue: but though we be not snared, we feare the time, and so maye you shortly for all your disdaine. We haue had manie amongst vs that haue to day abhorred loues lawes, and to morrow repented it, accusing their rashnes, and acknowledging the same, as to a Prince, to whom now they pay iust tribute. And for that I doo desire it, I should reioyce to see you begin to loose some what of your strangenes, for that I am perswaded, with some new meanes Loue pretendeth to demaund accompt of the time you haue spent from vnder his banner and seruice. Let vs not put her in so much feare said the faire Orosia, for that in flying from it she may finde a partie whereon to imploy her thought, and not finding him, hold her selfe happie, if shee had neuer knowen so much libertie. Then said Alcisa wil I reioyce, to see how that is admitted which now so earnestly she condemneth: and taking the harpe out of her hand, shee gaue it vnto the Princesse Grisalinda, who tooke it, saying. I know not (faire Cousin) whether in behalfe of Louers I can say anie thing, with an instrument tuned with so free hands. The three Knights attended hir song, and verie earnest was the Tartarian, who said vnto his Frends.
I doo not meruaile that in France there bee so valiaunt Knights, for that there be Ladies to animate those whom they loue, and kill them that they scorne. In this sort said the Dacian ther is vantage in louing, if from thence proceedeth to be valiant. And perceiuing some new passion had hapned to him in hearing them sing, hee said: Come nigher, let vs heare what they will say in fauour of Louers. The Tartarian if it had not beene for discouering them, would haue exclaimed against loue, because yet his wound was greene, but so it festred, that at length he prooued the truest louer of his time. The Spaniard was so desirous to heare his Ladie, that he scarce heard what past betweene them, yet hee and the Moore at last went verye nigh the window. When she began to play, shee gaue a heauie sigh, as a request to beg attention of him, whom she little thought to be so neere her.

Where Loue lackes can be no life,
But an endlesse dying paine,
Compassed with care and strife,
Idle, bootlesse, wretched, vaine.
Loue is heauenly, Loue is holly,
They that scorne it wait on Folly.
Loue combynes two hearts in one,
By sweet Loue all ioyes increase:
Whence Loue dwells departeth mone,
At his sight doth sorrow cease.
Loue is heauenly, Loue is holly,
They that scorne it wait on Folly.
To be free and not to loue,
Sauage freedome I it hold:
Yet Loues fier Beasts doth moue,
Taming Tygers fierce and bold.
Therefore say I Loue is holly,
They that scorne it wait on Folly.

I sing this sweet Cousin said the Princesse, for that y^ shall vnderstand (as I told you) how reuerently wee doo esteeme of Loue. It well appeareth answered the Hollandesse, that you acknowledge an Owner: if it be so, let me know it, for vnto mee you may disclose the secretes of your heart.
God deliuer me (said Orosia) that I should impart my thoughts vnto so free a Ladie, for she neither knoweth how to ease greefe, nor rightly to pittie the grieued. When I see (faire Grisanea, said the French Princesse) that the absence of your Louer dooth paine and greeue you, then shal you finde me a comforter, and I will giue you knowledge of that little loue I haue: and I am so certain that it will be shortly, that I shall not erre ere long to say: God giue you ioy of your alteration. Meane while let vs depart, for feare we be too long mist. They gone, the Tartare stood confounded at the grace of Grisanea: at length he said vnto his Frends. Of truth worthie Princes, although I had verie earnestly iniurde you, yet you could not haue taken better reuengement, than to bring me to a place where I haue lost my libertie, not knowing who hath tooke mee captiue. The harme is so common (sir Knight answered the Spaniard) that it is esteemed as the most certainest thing among Gallants, which professe the seruice of Ladies. But it is so strange to me (answered the Tartarian) that I cannot iudge thereof, but according to ye greefe which it causeth. Thus conferring, and on the death of the Phrigian Lord, they tarried the retourne of the Damsell, who likewise greeued, that the Princes were forced to giue so long attendance.
At last they came both in their petticoates vnto ye window, the princely Ladie trembling to see her selfe before her beloued Knight, imagining what offence she did vnto her fame, in comming in such sort: but the amorous passion did ouercome all, so that they came vnto the window without feare, and made a little noyse for a signe. So the

prince came vnto the window, which was somwhat low, and hauing no power to speake a word, he kneeled on his knees, demaunding her hands to kisse. They both remained silent, which thing is common betweene them that loue well: for when they meete, their eyes onely speake, their tungs are mute. The Ladie, seeing his dumbe passion, making strength of weaknes, said: I would not sir Knight, that my comming hether at so vnfit an hower should cause you to iudge it rather rashnes, than the bond wherein I stand bound to you for the good you haue done me. Besides, Alcisaes perswasion, is the greatest cause of this boldnes. Deuine Princesse (answered the fearefull Youth) I see well, that your excellence intendeth euerlastingly to binde mee more and more by your manie fauours. That I should conceiue either rashnes or lightnes in this your humble visitation of mee, were agaynst my soule irreligious sacriledge, and against your deuine curtesie vnpardonable blasphemie. I rather blesse my Fates, that haue reserued me to this happie hower, honor your pittie that hath respected my passions, and acknowledge my dutie to Alcisa for solliciting my sute so effectually. Your owne deserts sir knight said Alcisa, was onely the solliciter in your loues sute. I for my life and precious honours preseruation, am till my death your bounden hand maid. And though vppon my soule I durst vndertake that neuer anie disloyall thought will enter into your couragious breast, yet is my Mistres charie of thys loue bargaine, for gentle knight, manie knights haue dealt vngently with gentle Ladies. Therefore ye must protest deeply ere she will beleeue, and keepe religiouslye what you doo protest.
Ah gentle Damsell said the Spanish Prince, to myne harts sorrow your eyes haue been the witnes. And if yee doubt me, I sweare by the religion of true knighthood, by all the vnstained honour of rightfull armes, by the famous remembrance of my thrice reuerent Predecessors,

if Grisalinda will be gracious to her vowed knight, of a more constant seruant should no Lady in the whole world boast.
I doo confesse sir knight said the princesse that I am infinitely bound vnto you, and your vowes I verely beleeue for true, but you shall pardon me for setting my affection, much more for plighting my faith to a knight whom I know not. Souereigne princesse said the Spaniard, after I had seene you, and that this Damsell declared vnto mee your worthines, I haue procured things that redound vnto your honour, seeking the certainest meanes to performe the same, and I haue not found any thing with more content than to put my life in your seruice, and desire no other paiment but your acceptance. Touching my birth, I assure you I am the Sonne of a most royall king, and sole Heire of a rich and populous kingdome, all which hopes with my true hearts spotlesse loue I humbly offer at your feete.
The Princesse held her peace awhile, pondering the weightines of the cause: but the discreet Alcisa said vnto her, You need not Madam make anie stay hereat, but performe his sute, although it be the greatest curtesie yt may be granted: I will be his suretie he will be thankfull, and neuer contradict your pleasure, seeing with what plainnes you doo accept him. And therewithall perforce shee tooke her hands, and gaue them vnto the Prince, who inclosed them in his, not hauing anie power to speake, till ye princesse said. At my pleasure I make no question but I shal be reuenged for so manifest wrong done thus against my will.
The prince seeing her somewhat angrie, sayd: Faire Ladie, if the righting of these wrongs must bee satisfied with my death, let me now receiue it, and I will account it welcomer than death. And therefore (answered the princesse) will I not this time with deserued death punish you.
Doo not proceed anie farther said the Damsell, but pardon vs: and therewith he offered to kisse her hands. Then she told him the next day she should goe to a house of pleasure, charging him not to leaue France without her lice^se. Thus parted they, he returning to his Frends the ioyfulst man liuing: and so his passion led him, that hee spake not to them till they came to their pages. The princes markt it wel, and laughed thereat: and the Dacian (though he were somwhat drowsie) requested to be partner in his ioy? He would haue answered, but their desire to sleepe, with another accident that happened, which shall be handeled in the next chapter, brake off his pleasant discourse at that time.



What chanced to the Princes by Brandarte King of Cyprus and his Knights: and how they deliuered out of his power all the Queenes and Princesses that he had taken prisoners.

 Chap. 9.
THe worthie Torismundo (rauished with ioy to see himselfe so fauoured, intended to pertake his ioy with two frends: who being wearie were laid to sleepe, and hee hauing as much neede, meant to beare them companie, but they wer scant asleep, when a noyse of horses did disturb them, yet they let them passe, till by and by there followed others, which disquieted the^ in such sort, that they prepared to take horse and followe them: but on a sodain the Damsel who before had broght them their armour came foorth with a fardle, and making her selfe knowen vnto them, she said. The Wiseman my master commendeth him to you, and biddeth you to weare this armour to day: and to you valiant Tartare (for the ayde and helpe that one daye the Empire of Grecia shall haue of you) he doth send these armes, for with them shall happen the greatest and first content that now ye can desire.

(And as the other time) without any more tarrying, shee departed: leauing them greatly content, for that the armour was as good as they had seene. Then they left their other with the beauteous shield amongst the bushes, and with great speed armed themselues, and mounted on their horses, they went foorth into the high way, and commanded their Pages to come by little and little towards the bridge Sequana. When they were foorth they mended their paces, but they could not see any body, so for that they would not loose the way, they alighted, till such time as the carefull and amorous Apollo, purposing anew to salute the Morning hasted him forwards in his course. At this time the three valiant Frends, beeing mounted on their light horse, tooke the trace of them that had passed: But for that the country was so full of trees, halfe the day was past and they had no newes of them, till they were tolde by a wood maker, that they were passed directly vnto the house of peasure, whether as the king that morning had gone to recreate himselfe. Almost deuining howe it should be, they went vpward into the field, till the hower of two then they saw a faire Tent armed in the middest of the field, nigh vnto the way that they passed to the house and there staied certaine Chariots that seemed to be ful of Ladies.
The Princes stayed, and the Tartarian requested them that they would let him alone to goe into the fielde, and that they would tarrie for him there. For to giue him content the two frends did graunt it, who lighted from their horses, and when their Pages came, they commanded Fabio the Dacians page, for that he was most discreet, that he should muffle himselfe, and goe thether, and see what succeeded vnto the Prince of Tartaria. Who with his visor downe and his speare in his hand with a quiet pace, went directly vnto the Tent, at such time as came foorth therof a knight armed with yellow armour bordred with blewe, mounted on a mightie horse, and in the middest of

his shield, at the side of a mightie Riuer, there was a Ladie as though she were a writing, with this Posie which said.

When my griefe I let her know,
In the sand she writes my woe.

The Tartarian receiued great content at the good disposition of the knight, and staying to see what he would do he saw that he went vnto the first Chariot, in the which there was alone three ladies, which seemed the most fayrest in all the world, all three apparelled alike in golde tynsell cut vpon blewe, and their haire according to the vse of Spaine, with sightly lockes, which graced more their faire faces, and comming vnto them the knight said.
Faire Ladies, the solitarie knight commaundeth mee in his behalfe, I should doe to you his commendations, and for that he hath vnderstood the brauerie of the Ladies of France, and how renouned they are in the world, hee gesseth there will bee knights desirous to shewe their forces in their seruice. From this time I defie them in the name of your beauties, maintaining that you alone deserue the names of faire and beautifull, and to bee beloued aboue all, and I will runne three Speares with euerie one of them, on condition that he who falleth shall loose his horse and shield, and there to leaue his name, and if vnto him it chanceth otherwise, that faire Tent shall be the reward of his victorie. And I with the same launces doe defie all knights, with the condition aforesaid, that my passions is more iust than any that hath suffered by loue, my lady being the sole occasion, shee and no other deseruing to be lady and Mistresse of my thoughts.
It caused the ladies to laugh at that which those two^ knights would defend: but the answere they remitted to the Duke of Soma, for that hee and all the other Dukes

and knights that were at the Iuste, came for the loue o^ the Princesse and the king, who at that time were arriued. The Duke gaue them thankes saying: of truth sir knight, the lady whom this solitarie gallant doth serue, seemeth to be most faire according to his opinion. Yet notwithstanding neither of them shall lacke those that will answere them.
Without any reply or answering, he in the yellow armour bore downe his launce, and put himselfe in place whereas he and they in the Chariots might see the Iusts. Then might they see come foorth the solitarie knight armed in siluer armour full of red listes, and in the middest of his shield a field painted full of sweet flowers, and he lying in the middest amongst them, with this Pos^e.

I doe liue alone content,
In this pleasant languishment.

He was mounted on a great and mightie horse of a browne colour, with a gallant semblance, tarrying to see how his companion did, for that he should runne with two and himselfe with other two.
The Duke of Samo went foorth to the encounter, but although the Moore was one of the valiantest in his Countrie: yet at the first encounter he lost the reines out of his hand, at the third the Duke of Soma went to the ground, his saddle all in peeces, with griefe vnto all, for that he was welbeloued. Foorthwith in his place entred the valiant Duke of Pera, assalting the one the other, the Duke was out of his saddle. Then the Moore put himselfe on the one side, that the solitarie knight might enter, who entred with a great grace forcing his horse, till such time as there went two Knightes to the encounter, and the like happened vnto them as did vnto the rest.
The cunning Moore that first did Iuste, was making himselfe ready, tarrying to see who would come foorth, then entred into the field the curteous Andronio, Prince of Tartaria, mounted on his light horse with the armor which the wise man had sent him, which was all gilt, and theron placed many Serpents of curious worke, and on hys shield, which was of the same colour of his armour, and thereon M. of colour red, with this Posie.

Since I am chanst into deaths fatall lot,
I like my chance if so my Loue be got.

All the Ladyes and knightes fixt their eyes on him, in seeing his gallant shape, who passing before the chariot, made his horse kneele downe, with so gallant a grace that ye most did affect him, but none more regarded him tha^ the Princesse of Holland Grisanea, who by seeing him, yeelded in such sort, that she began to be angry with her selfe, for that she was so bold to speake euil of Loue the night past. Uerie quickly she made shew thereof, for turning vnto the Ladies she said. Let vs haue good hope in this knight, that will better defend our beautie than those that are past: with the affection wherewith she spoke it, it did plainely appeare that it did come from her heart, and therewith the braue French Lady said: I pray God Lady cosin, that the force of the knight of the Serpents bee alone to make free the passage, and not to leaue some of vs without libertie.
The Hollandesse did well vnderstand her meaning: but she dissembled, and answered cleane contrarie to the matter, saying: I pray God that he be sufficient to cause them to surrender their armour vnto our guarders. They had made their defiance, and with swift running of their horses they came the one against the other, and meeting in the middest of the way, they gaue such an encounter, that it seemed they had pearced one an other thorough. The Moore

lost his right stirrop, and in ^^ming of his foote, because he would not fall, he made a foule wauering, which was seene of all, but purposing to make amendes for the same, he tooke another great speare, and went against the Tartare, and encountred him with so great force, that the vexed Moore, lost his Saddle, and the Tartare his reines, which was the occasion that his horse carried him verye nigh vnto the Chariot, but in recouering them, hee made him returne, and did a thousand gallant trickes with him, al the which were pleasing actions to the heart of the faire Grisanea, who could not chuse but say. This Knight faire Cosin, seemeth much like vnto him that yesterday had the praise of the Iustes. The like thought the other two Ladies: but the Dutches broke it off saying, it cannot be he for that he would not come without his companion, neyther durst any of them come for the death of the Phrigian Prince.
The proceeding forwards on their talke was cut off by the cruell Iustes of the two knights, for in the middest of their carreere they met in such sort, that it seemed it had bin two great rocks, the one passed by the other wt great vp rightnes, the one being greatly amazed at the strength of the other: and taking other great Launces, with all the swiftnes possible, they encountred, and shiuered them all in peeces, which whirling in the ayre declared the force of their rigorous armes. The Moore did a little stagger on the one side, but not in such sort to bee accompted notable, neither so but they did all praise his great force: but that of the Tartare was iudged in fauour amongst the Ladies, and amongst the knights with enuy, not onely vnto them but also to proud Mars if hee were there, for giuing them so great force. They returned with the great furie wherewith they were indued, and encountred in the middest of their course, shiuering their Launces in small peeces, which was the occasion that it pearced not their armour, but so oppressed the knights, that the horse of the Tartare

bore backward three or foure paces, and settled his buttocks on the ground, which made them that were present to thinke that all would haue come together: but he seeing how much it stood him in hand, and more there then in any other occasion, it was needful for him to profit himselfe of his strength, and to hold him fast vnto the necke of hys inchaunted horse, and pricked him so stiffe, that hee made him to leap forwards, which caused the Ladies to be verie desirous to know who he was. The curteous Andronio returned, and thought that the encounter had beene of small effect, wherwith he saw that the fierce Moore lay along on the ground, and by him his horse that did beare him companie, who with the force of that strong encounter, the one remained without life, the other without sence: Wherewith verie lightly hee leapt on foote, and went vnto the yeelded pray, and it grieued him for that he thought he had bin dead he lay in such sort: and when hee came vnto him, hee tooke his helme from his head to giue him freshe ayre, so that he might come vnto himselfe, who at his return seeing himself in the power of his enemie, that willed him to yeeld, he answered: Ualiant knight it is not fit, that you should demaund more than the honor which you haue got in ouerthrowing me in this sort, it had beene greater content vnto me, that you had ended my life, and sustaining my honor, then to leaue me so voide thereof. The Louer Andronio was greatly affected vnto the discreet words of his aduersarie, and without any more wordes, hee gaue him his hand and helped him from the ground, and craued pardon of him for the death of his horse.
Nigh vnto them there was a French Knight, who was ashamed that hee was ouerthrowen by the Moore, who hauing no respect vnto reason, but vnto the passion which guided him, said: you haue not to receiue any griefe valiant knight of the Serpentes for this, for that it was first ordained* that he who lost his saddle should loose therwith his horse, and it is rather a vantage, and that hee should

not inioy that which an other inioyeth not. The Tartare could not but receiue griefe, to see the signes of sorrow that he made to receiue that shame, which the French knight had vsed toward him: but Fortune did quickly giue him his hands full of occasion for to be reuenged on all.
But the Moore vsing the licence and libertie which the Tartare gaue him, without taking leaue of any, tooke an other horse out of the Tent, and with his companion entred the same forrest, and left the tent for the knight to do therewith his pleasure: who for that hee had surrendred it vnto the Ladies of the Chariot, on foote as hee was, for that they sent to call him, he went vnto them. And vsing great curtesie, wherof they were worthy, comforting his troubled brest: he said vnto them. Faire Ladies although I doe not know for whom I haue done this little seruice, yet I come to aske my discharge, with offer of my good will, for any other matter of great importance.
Thankes vnto you gentle knight (answered the affected Hollandesse) for this newe offer, with securitie that for so much as you imploy your selfe in shewing your strength in the fauour of Ladies, there could not fal better occasion than is this wee haue seene, to free this passage, els we should haue beene driuen to seeke others.
The louing French Knights did not let to blush at the words which the Princess^ said: but dissembling they made no answere, for to heare what Grisalinda did say vnthe knight.
Worthy Knight of the Serpents, said she, you shal content these Ladies and me in declaring vnto vs your name, and who you are.
With a gallant grace (answered the heroycall Tartare) I would willingly faire Ladies that as fortune hath put into my hands, life, for to imploy it for your seruice, that it woulde giue mee strength and power for to doe a thing so iust, as to leaue my name in your handes.
But fortune enuying the glory that should follow heerof, forbiddeth me by a former charge to tell who I am: for that in telling thereof, it will bee more costly to my fame than vnto my life. The Holland Lady, with great content would haue answered him to the purpose (but greatly fearing that her cosin had been she that had subiected his wil) yet seeing that it was impossible to get any more of the Moore, she said vnto him: of truth Sir knight it seemeth well by the companie that you bring with you vpon your armour, that you conforme your selfe well with them, for they haue not vsed the crueltie as you haue done with those knights in taking from them their honor, and yet will not tell vs who you are. Faire Mistresse answered the amorous youth, my small aduenture hath been the forger of this deuice: but I doe giue you my word, that within three daies (with another deuice that shall not shewe so much rigor) to tell my name and who I am, or els to send you word thereof, if I cannot be the messenger. By your word Sir Knight, said the Sauoyan Lady, wee remaine sure it will be so. Assuredly (answered the amorous Tartare) that with earnest truth I speake it, and first my life shall faile me, ere I breake my word, besides I wil leaue for a pawne one of my weapons. And so with a soueraign gallantnes, he tooke out his dagger (which the great wise man Gelasio had sent him with the armour) and kneeling downe he put it in the handes of the Princesse of Holand, and with it his heart more amorous then euer any knight of his Countrie, and said: With this faire Lady it shalbe Iustice in you to take reuengement, if I faile in that I haue promised.
It were not amisse Cosin Grisanea (said the amorous French Lady) seeing with what affection you haue taken that dagger, that hee which hath giuen you a gift, should carrie in the place thereof an other from vs, being bound thereunto. The faire Dutches in the behalf of the Moore, did helpe to take a rich Iewell from the neck of the Princesse

Grisanea, and with a gallaunt grace said vnto him: Sir Knight, weare this for a remembraunce of your promise, and assure ye that on your Knighthood we expect the performance. I remaine bound (faire Ladies, sayd the Prince) for this great fauour, and on a Knights word I will keepe my word: so mounting his horse, hee returned into the thickest of the Forrest, leauing the Ladies praysing his discretion and valor. Grisanea could not hyde her ioy, but sportiuely thus began: I am prouided Ladies of an armed Tent and a Dagger, what hinders me now to be a souldier? So pulling the dagger out of the rich sheath, the pictures of a Knight and a Ladie, with certaine Letters were grauen thereon, which the Dutchesse of Sauoy thus read.

Grisanea Princesse of Holland, true Owner of the mightie Tartarian Andronio.
Indeed said the French Princesse, I see now Cosin you are a souldier, though dissemblingly you yesterday denied your Captain Cupid: for neuer would so worthy a knight haue grauen your picture on his dagger without your consent. I shal hardly be beleeued said the Holland princesse, but I protest I neuer heard the name, nor spake with the Knight before: neither doo I beleeue hee is a Tartarian, my Louer (to be plaine with ye) I pray God he prooue. At this the other ladies laughed, and she to make them more merrie, confessed she was Loues captiue. So (hauing the ritch Tent brought after them) they passed towards the House of pleasure, nigh which by Sunne set they had attained: where a while wee will leaue them to tell you of the discontented King of Cyprus.

At the Triumphs in Paris, among manie that Torismundo ouerthrew, the prowd King of Cyprus was one, who left the place, with purpose to be reuenged: for as I

told ye before he earnestly loued Orosia Duches of Sauoy. And for that occasion neuer fitted him to declare his loue vnto her, he determined to steale her away, being boldned by his great force, and the strength of foure most valiant Giants that he brought with him, and a cousin of his that was the Knight at the Passage, and ambushing the rest of his Companie nigh vnto the House of pleasure whether the Ladies went.
These were those that the mighty Andronio ouerthrew, who intending reuenge, ioyned with the Giants and ambushed Knights: and this was the noyse that the Princes followed to the fresh and greene field, where the Tartarian requested that hee might cleere the passage for the Ladies: and hauing ended so greatly to his honor, being ioyfull of that rich iewell, he returned vnto the Knights, and gaue them knowledge of all that had succeeded, which delighted them verie much, by reason of their frendship confirmed with the Tartarian. So he alighted to rest hymselfe, and tarried til it was night, that they might all three goe together to the house.
The faire Moone had scarce begun to impart her light receiued of the Sunne, when these three Frends rid towards the house of pleasure: yet being vncertaine of the way, they wandred till it was almost midnight, and then came into a mightie great field, where they be held trauelling a verie faire Chariot, and before it two most furious Giants, armed with strong plates of steele, and in the midst two knights, who seemed to be of great strength and after the Chariot other two mightie Giants, mounted on light horses, with fearful iauelins in their hands. When they came nigher vnto them, they heard that those which were within the Chariot made great lamentation, wherby it appeared they were forced.
The enterprise was difficult, yet they determined to succour them, and to incourage them theretoo, the Dacian sayd: Worthie and valiaunt Frends, now is the time to

shew the courage of your hearts, in attempting so doubtfull an enterprise: do you two assaile those that are before, and I will prooue my fortune with those Giants behinde. On this they agreeed, and the Dacian was the first yt approached with his furious horse: at the noyse whereof the two Giants turned about, and seeing him alone, they thought him a very Foole, and one of them onely went against him, whom the Prince in the incounter ouerthrew dead to the ground. By this the two valiant Louers had entred battell with the other foure, with such a noyse as if there had been an hoast of Knights. The Dacian heard this furie, being in combat with the other Giant, and considering what need his Frends had of helpe, hee hasted the battell, giuing the giant such a blow vpon the helme, that he tooke his sense from him: and thinking he had been dead, he entred like a Lion amongst the Giants and Knights, saying* Upon them stout and valiant Knights, for they are vile people, and too few to withstand our forces. That frendly voice was heard aswell of ye two princes, as of the Ladies that were in the Chariot, who iudged them to bee their louers, according vnto the Knighthood they shewed. At this time the Giant which the Dacian ouerthrew, had recouered his heauie fawchion, and with mortall furye came to the Tartarian, striking him such a wonderfull blow, that he made him fall on his horse necke, voyding blood at his nose and eares. Then passing forwards, hee came vnto the two Moores and said: Away with the ladies you like, while my fellowes keepe these diuelish Knights busied. So the king of Cyprus, his Cousin and the Giant, went vnto the Chariot, and tooke each of them a ladie, lamenting could not auaile them. Yet in this hast the king of Cyprus tooke not his beloued Dutches, but the princesse of France, with whom like an Eagle spurring his furious horse, he went directly towards the sea side. The mightie Giant tooke for his lot, her whom Apollo would haue chosen for himselfe, for with him he carried the beauteous

princesse of Holland, and his Cousin the faire Orosia: at whose shrikes the Tartar recouering his sense, followed the Giant as fast as his horse could runne, thorough a bushie way vnto a great plain, where he ouertooke him two howers before day, and ere the Giant could ^et down ^he Ladie, he smit him so rash a blow, that the princesse was in perill to be troden vnder the horse feete, and the Giant remained without sense. Andronio gaue a second blowe that wounded the Giant in the necke, which caused hym to come to himselfe, and like an infernall furie with hys dreadfull fawchion he came against the Tartar, and both together stroke such blowes vpon their helmes, that they quickly made show of their great force. The noyse was such, that it caused the trembling Ladie to come the sooner to her selfe: and beholding the battell, shee perceiued the Knight fought for her libertie against that monstrous Giant, wherfore on her knees she desired the giuer of stre^gth to strengthen him. When the Tartarian saw the pearly teares distill from her sun-bright eyes, with the poynt of his sword hee went against the furious Giant, who wyth his fawchion aloft came towards him, but by reason of the swiftnes of his horse, he thrust his sword into the Giaunts bodie, and drawing it backe drew ^oorth his life withall, the Giant falling to the ground with so fearfull a crie, that the princesse trembled, though she were freeed by the Giants death. With no smal ioy the prince alighted and comforted her, when he beheld it was his beloued Ladie, and pulling off his helme, he discouered his fa^e, beeing high coloured with the heate of the battell. No lesse ioyfull was the faire princesse, in seeing him so well proportioned a Knight: who when he came vnto her, kneeled downe and said. Receiue faire princesse this smal seruice, with more intire good wil than my tung can expresse. Then answered the affected Ladie: Ualiant Knight, so much haue ye done, that I can no way reward ye but by publishing ^our force, which is the mightiest that I haue seene? and for that

I should esteeme, tell mee your name, and withall carrie me where the Queene my Mother is, whom I beleeue remaineth sorrowfull for my absence. Madam (answered the ioyfull Tartar) I haue no will but to accomplish your will, and receiue great ioy that you wil imploy me in any thing. I am Andronio the Prince of Tartarie: and in telling you this I doo discharge my promise to you yesterday, when I left my dagger in pawne, and receiued this rich iewell in place thereof: which because it hath been on that faire necke, added abilitie to my weake strength, and boldens me to request ye that I may wear it as your knight, in whose name I wil execute all my dooings. The Lady was verie ioyous in seeing him she loued to bee the Knight that succoured her, and said: I craue pardon worthie prince, in that I haue not intreated you according to your desert: but I am excusable, by reason I knew you not. All is satisfied said the Prince, if you accept me into your seruice. You aske quicke payment (replied the Princesse) but lest you should condemne me of ingratitude, let it be according to your wish. This ioyfull Youth did perforce kisse her hands, washing them with teares through the content he receiued: which nothing greeued the Princesse, when she saw with what affection he did it, accompting her self happie, to be beloued of such a prince. The which this couragious Youth perceiuing, and incited by their solitarie beeing, he said vnto her halfe trembling. Faire princesse, after all this happines it would greeue me, if Fortune (enuying ^ny good) should tread downe my glorie, and bestow it on another: you might if you please (time and place so fitting) assure mee of happines, and rid nice of all doubt. Your speech is strange to me^ said the vexed princesse, to my reason it seemeth conuenient, being intertained wyth this gentlenes, you should consent your selfe. Nothing is more certaine faire Ladie (answered this fearefull Youth) than the curtesie which you alreadie haue shewed me in receiuing me for the knight of your seruice, is suf^icient

reward for more than all my worth, yet to assure my good, make me happie by a husbands name. Sir Knight said she you are too forward, and if I thought anie misbehauiour in me caused this boldnes in you, I would let out that lightnes with my life. These words and the sharpenes of their deliuerie, so wounded the Tartarian, that he fell sensles on the princesses lap: who seeing him in ye case, was readie to beare him companie, but with teares and cryings she recalled him, and he reuiuing, said. Ah haplesse Tartarie, twice bereft of thy natural Lord, who by disdaine in France is seazed on by death. Oh my valiant and new Frends, no more shall I contentedly reioyce wyth you. And you (cruell Ladie) may triumph in his death, that hath defended your honor and life. Ah worthie knight said she, God knowes what sorrow I suffer, for that with my honour I cannot worke your content, there being such difference in our Religions: yet rather than you shal thus afflict your self, sweare to me to be bap^isde, and I do yeeld my whole estate into your hands. Expresse I cannot the Tartarians ioy: he vowd to be baptisde, possest his wish, and with his betrothed wife rid toward the house of pleasure, and on the way she told him, how the Giants first set vpon them by the riuers side.
We will leaue these Louers on the way, and declare the end of the battell betweene the two princes and the Giants, who held them so hard, that they could not preuent the carrying away of the Ladie. The valiant Dacian to conclude the battell, stroke the Giant such a blow, that it tooke away his sight: and at that time had the Spaniard made his aduersarie stoop on his saddle bow. And beeing nigh the Dacian, he stroke him so surely on the buckling of the helme, that head and all fell to the ground, and then with two blowes they both together dispatched the other Giant. Then without any stay they folowed those that carried away the Princesses, and ouertaking them at the edge of the mountaine, they cried: False Knights, leaue

your pray, the same will cost you your heads. And therewithall they smit two such blowes, that they made them leaue their Ladies: and foorthwith there was betweene them a sightly battell, for that the Moores were the valiantest in all their Countrey. And for that the Spaniard did make battell before his Ladie, (for at ye time he knew her) he made so great hast, that he ouerthrew him at hys feet, and lighting from his horse, he cut off his head, at the same instant that the Dacian had giuen a mortall wound vnto his Moore, ouerthrowing him with a great fall vpon his backe, and by and by hee yeelded vp the ghost. These two perfect Frends when they saw their work done, went vnto the Ladies with their helmes off. The French princesse knowing her welbeloued Louer, receiued him with the greatest show of affection that she could, saying: Oh Flower of Knighthood, how shall I repay you thys great good? It is but little faire Princesse (said he) that we haue done for your libertie, your worthinesse and beautie dooth deserue it. And none being by but the prince and the Duchesse whom they might trust, they vsed very amorous co^uersation, till such time as the absence of the Princesse of Holland did hasten them to depart. And by reason it was not as yet day, they lost their way, and found themselues in the morning nigh vnto the Fountaine, where ye Prince did leaue his greene armour, by counsell of the Damsell that the Wiseman sent: and therewith declared hee vnto them all his passed estate, and who he was, whereof shee was verie ioyfull. There they ioyned hands, to which contract the Tartarian and Grisanea came, who were receiued with exceeding ioy, the French Princesse especiallye reioycing, to see her Cousin Grisanea so quickly chaunged.
The worthie Spanish Prince pulled off his armour, and laid it aside: being vnarmed, he seemed one of the fairest personages in all the world, which was a new snare, to cause the gentle French Ladie the more to loue hym.

And therewith they began to prouide for their departure, wh^n on a sodaine they saw come foorth of the thickest of the Forrest a furious Dragon, which amazed these three princes: yet fearlesly they attempted to defend their Ladies. But the Monster left them, and went directly to the shield with the faire portraiture, that the Tartarian had giuen the prince of Spaine, which she tooke betweene her sharpe nayles, and gaue so terrible a crie, that made them all to fall to the ground: and rising vp, they could not see the Dragon, but a piller standing by the christaline fountaine of Forgetfulnesse, hauing an Inscription thereon, which the Dacian Youth read, as followeth.

From this day forwards the water of Merlins Fountaine is forbidden to anie, till such time as the Sonne of the bastard Lionesse, in companie of the Flower of the Spanish Nation, the one and the other doubtfull, boldened by the keeper, do take out of the deepest of the Fountaine the faire shield; the victorie confirmed in the presence of the amorous Hircan Serpent. But thou Knight that art desirous before that time to attempt this Aduenture, leaue thy desire, els death shall be the reward of thy boldnes.

All were wondrously amazed at this new Aduenture, and could not imagine to whom the entry should be granted: yet were they ioyfull that before the water was denied, they had vnderstood the effect. And for that it was late, and the princesses desired to returne to the house of pleasure, they tooke their way thetherwards, with great content vnto the Dacian, to see how wel it succeeded with his Frends, he iudging them now not alone for Louers, but as men secured from Loues tempests: hauing a kinde of enuie at their happie estate. With this imagination and consideration of the manie troubles hee had suffered, hee kept no companie with the princesses: and that which worst and most greeued him at the heart was, that hee

neuer receiued any rest: but rather iudged that he should begin a new to suffer greater.
The French Princesse seeing him ride so solitarily began thus sportiuely to talke. I see my handmaide Alcisa sounded your minde my Lord of Dacia: for shee told mee, you had forgo^ all loue sicke passions, and would not bee so idle busied as to intend amorous busines. Madam said he, you might rather say I am now idle, for I protest whe^ I did loue (as once I confesse, I knew that madnes) neuer was any so busied as I, night, day in company, alone, I was so troubled that I account no trauell like it, and I hope neuer againe to trauel with that burden. O Sir said Orosia, if ye haue loued there is no doubt yee may againe, doe not disdaine a louers name: see by example the fayre Grisanea, that was yesterday free, and she forsooth would none of loue, singing, saying all was against loue, and now you see the tunes her musique in another key. And so may he said the Holland Princesse, but belike he scorneth the French beautie, and meanes to seeke farther for more faire. So faire and so curteous said hee, haue I seld seene, and if I euer affect, I wish it may be heere. In this sweet conuersation they trauelled, when at the sixt hower, they saw much armed people trauelling the way agallop, right towards the Sea side. They imagined whether they went, commaunding their Pages to goe and aduise them of the libertie of the Ladies, that the knightes might bee quieted. So they prosecuted their way till they came verie nigh the house, whereas they met the King, and all those mightie Princes which went to seek them. It is not to be expressed to auoide tediousnes, what ioy the King and all those Knights had, and the more when they knew who they were, and what they had done before for the honor of France. The same day at the request of the Prince of Dacia, knowing the valor of the Spaniard, hee did so much that the King in publike did ioine thei^ hands, who in secret had ioyned their hearts. The Nephew of Franconio

reioyced to giue his daughter vnto the discent of Ricardo the Catholike King of Gades, and of the Kings that succeeded in Spaine. A happie coniunction, seeing that from thence must proceed fruite that will make the world to wonder. In like manner the Queene of Holland receiued content to giue her daughter, to him who with good diligence did procure before hee was a louer the reward of a Louer. All the Court did reioyce, and the free Prince of Dacia sustained his libertie. Also the gallant French Ladies consecrating their fame to immortalitie. The curteous Andronio would not depart with his louing spouse, but tarried till she and the Princesse of France were both brought to bed. And when their times came, they were deliuered of two Sonnes the most fairest in all the world. That of the French Lady was called Grisaliano at the request of his faire mother. That of the mightie Tartare, was named Andronisio. These yong and new Princes caused great reioycing in the Court, and the king shewed it by the gifts which he gaue. The Dacian did passe his free time with his welbeloued frends, till on a day at the taking vp of the tables, there entred the Damsell which the wise man had sent him so many times, who making great curtesie vnto the king, she went vnto the prince Heleno, and gaue him a letter from the wise Lirgandeo, who did read it aloude, being as followeth.

REmembring and acknowledging wherein. I was bound so long time past vnto your father and you valiant prince, studying how much I may shewe it for your conduct. I haue found it co^uenient that you leaue the dainties of the Court, and return to the auncient trauels: now void from your warlike mind, and with the armor which my damsel shall giue thee, thou shalt depart foorthwith, aduising the Tartare thy frend, that the princesse in recouering more strength to sustaine so long a iorney, hee returne thether, wheras with great necessitie he is desired:

and to haue me in the number of his frends, for I wil deal faithfully in his affaires: he who gouerneth the world be thy keeper, and giue thee forces to suffer that which is tarying for thee.

In concluding the reading of the letter, the Damsel said, that foorthwith he shuld arme himself, for that it was conuenient with all speed he should go foorth of France, wheras so quickly free hearts do humble their necks vnto the amorous yoke of Cupid, and therewith she tooke out a russet armour, and began to help to arme him, and gaue him a shield, with the ancient deuice of Cupid with two faces. They al receiued content to see the riches of that armour, but not without griefe to consider that the owner should so long be absent: so he tooke his leaue of them all, not admitting the company of any, he embraced his good frends, not without some sorrow, but especially to the Ladies. So the valiant Heleno went out of France, leauing them to talke of his great strength for many yeeres: and when he came to the Sea side, he found his inchanted boate, who ingulfed him into the sea in such sort, that hee lost the sight not onely of them that did beare him companie to the Sea side, but also of the most highest rockes that were there. All the Knights returned vnto Paris, much lamenting the absence of ye Prince, although it was a ioy to see the bringing vp of the yong Princes, euerie day more and more increasing in beautie, till the time came that the Tartare with his faire wife @ yong Sonne did imbarke themselues in a wel appointed ship, to saile towards Tartaria, at whose departure the faire Grisalinda was left solitarie, who with motherly affection did bring vp her Sonne the Prince and her cosin till they came to the age of fourteene yeeres, who in the bignes of their bodies and gallant disposition seemed to bee of many more yeares: where as wee will leaue them, for to tell of that which hapned to the Tartare trauelling to his Country.




What hapned to the mighty Tartare Andronio at the Sea, with a ship of Rouers, of the ayde and succour that Rosicleer and his companions gaue him.

 Chap. 10.
TOwards Tartaria went this curteous Andronio, with his welbeloued Princesse Grisanea, verie ioyfull for the good chance which fortune had giuen him in accomplishing his desires with so little greefe vnto his minde. In the same degree of ioy was the faire Grisanea, dryuing away the painful voyage with the presence of her welbeloued Andronio, and the faire Prince Andronisio, from whom the amorous Lady did neuer depart, accompting that life to be death with the absence at least of one of them. So they trauelled with prosperous gales, Aeolus shewing to them greart frendship, til the tenth day of their nauigation, they beheld two ships with full sailes bearing their course: by and by the worthy Tartarian began to put in order his knightes in the most dangerous parts of his ship, because they should not come vpon them vnprouided, not without many teares of the faire Princesse Grisanea, who began to complaine on fortunes mutabilitie. On the contrarie her Louer went vpon the fore-castle of the Ship, being armed with his strong and shining armour, and at his going foorth met with his beloued Lady, who greatly increased the couragious minde wherewith he was indued. At this time the two great Ships were come so nigh that they might discerne who came to them, for at the ships side appeared a furious fierce and vnseemely knight, that lacked little to be a Giant, w^^^ with many moe other knigh^s beganne with great noise to bid them yeeld. But the Tartarian seeing that with such people, it was not boote to reason, answered them with their swoords in their handes, and caused his ship to be grappled, with that of the great knight,

with more courage then if he had the victorie of that battaile secure: so there began betweene these two, one of the most rigorous battels that euer was seene at sea. For that the Rouer was one of the most valiantest amongst the Pagans. At their meeting they settled two so myghtie blows, that both of them with the griefe, gaue testimonie of the force of his enemie. Our valiant Andronio, redoubled an other on the deformed knight, which lighted on a Target of fine steele which he had for a shield, which being done with great cholar, he saw him to step backe three or foure paces, wherwith he entred after him, thinking all had been ended: but in a moment before hee could enter into the Ship of his contrarie, he was with a sharp assalt disturbed by the great Knight, who stroke him vpon the shield, and although it could not enter by reason of the Magicall temper, yet he droue it to his helme, with so great force that it made him not onely to loose that which he had got, but all his standing by the force of the blowe, wherewith began such a battaile that it seemed to bee of many more Knights. Those on the Tartares side did well defend themselues, and offended their contraries: but when the second ship came and boorded her on the other side, it was cause that the curteous Andronio left the battell with the other, and supplyed the greater necessity, and did great wonders, for whereas he went hee made a broad way amongst them that were so bolde in troopes to enter into his ship, trusting in their strengths because they were so many. There he found the lacke of help that his good frends had done for him, and was assured if they had beene there, those people had been but a few to haue withstood their forces. Likewise it grieued him to see the weeping Princesse with her Sonne in her armes from vnder hatches, beholding the bloudy battel, committing all her charge vnto the high maker of all the world, and that hee would not permit the losse of her husband before he were Baptized, which he had so earnestly promised to perform.
At that time the afflicted Lady did see, that they entred into the ship in three other places, that she could scar^e suffer so horrible a spectacle, and the more when as the great Knight with a light leape entred the ship, crying victorie, with the losse of many liues, whome hee ouerthrew with his sencelesse blowes, all which went vnto the heart of the fearefull Princesse. At the bustling and noise which the Pagan made, the curteous Tartare returned that way which he came with his sword coloured in bloud, and assalting him said. Oh vnsatiable furie of Hircania, when wilt thou conclude thy vntamed furie? And with his sword he stroke him such a blow vpon the helme that glanced to the gorget in such sort that it made a troublesome wound, whereat issued much bloud, which was the occasion that the Moore returned (with much more furie than the Lion on the yeelded pray) and stroke the Tartare such an ouerthwart blow on the waste, that he made him to fall vpon a banke in the Shippe, but as quicke as thought hee ^ose vp againe, and returned on his enemie, and defended that part: but in the other parts, there were so many more tha^ he had, that his knightes beganne to bee dismaid and to retyre to the Castle on the poope, and defended the Cabbin whereas the Lady was, who gaue such shreekes that they reached vnto the heauens. And he who neuer failed them that called vpon him in their necessitie, did ayde them: In that there came directly vnto them the inchaunted ship of the three couragious Princes, Rosicleer, Meridian and the heroycke Troyan, that was going vnto the kingdome of Lacedemonia: who with the stormes at Sea came that way, whereas the battaile was. And seeing the sea staind with bl^ud, and that there were two ships to one, they determined to helpe the weakest, and to do that which they were bound by order of knighthood. So they grapled their ship with that of the Tartare, and could not imagine, who that valiant knight should be, that made such defiance against so many: and for that they would not delaye theyr

succour, embracing their shields with their swords in their hands, they leaped in, and ouerthrew three that they met at the entrie. The warlike Greeke went directly where as the great knight was in battaile, and without stay (for that he imagined he was a Rouer) he gaue him so strong a blow, that he almost deuided him in two parts, and ouerthrew him at the feete of his enemy, leauing him greatly amazed to see so furious a blowe. And hauing no more time, seeing so good succour and the victorie at hand, he couragiouslie set vpon his enemies, hauing by him the piller of Knighthood, that would not let him strike a blow, he assalted them so fast on euery side. The other two princes were not idle with the rest, but seemed as lightning, striking on both sides to the griefe of those miserable knights, vpon whome came the iust iudgement of God, conformable vnto the life they led, and the great iniuries which they had done both by sea and land without any difference of nations, paying now all that they enioyed, for they dealt with knights that neuer stroke blowe but they killed or maymed an enemy. And the Grecian Mars being affected vnto the valiantnes of the Tartare, said: Uppon them stout knight, for they are before your force vile and base people. And therewith with a gallant semblance, he threwe his shield on his shoulder with his swoord in his hand (that of Queene Iulia was not better) and began to wield his furious body so hastily, that within one hower they found not one with whom to fight, although there entred into the ship more then two hundreth knights all chosen men: but with the help of their frends, did he and the Tartare enter into the ships of their contraries, and did in strife maine other wonderful maruels till such time as they saw they could make no resistance, both the one and the other ship did yeeld, and craued mercy for their liues of the two valiant warriers: who vsing their accustomed clemencie, and that which is natural vnto worthy victors, they receiued them prisoners.
So leauing the Ships with good watch and ward, hee returned vnto their owne, and met at the entrie their two good frends: whereas when they were together, the valiant Tartare pulled off his helme and went directly vnto the Greeke and said. Warlike knight, let my fortune be so good that I may know whom I may giue honor to, as the restorer of my life, in knowing who you are, and the like of your companions. Gentle knight (answered the beloued of Oliuia) we are of the countrie of Greece, and knights of so little fame, that if wee should tell you, wee should not thereby be knowen* Oh mightie Iupiter, with a great voice said the curteous Andronio, is it possible that I haue so great good in my Ship: and that those who hath ventured their liues for my libertie, are of that happie Country where the Sepulcher of my vnfortunate Cosin Zoylo is? worthy knight do not deny me your names, for you shall declare it vnto him that is the greatest frend to all Grecia. I am the happie Andronio in that I haue met with you, and Cosin to Zoylo a deare frend to the Grecian Princes, and now by my fortune or better to say misfortune, for lacke of such a Cosin, I am come to bee King of the people of Tartary. And now since I haue told you my name and who I am, and with what security you may tel me yours: doe not deny it me, for I doe imagine that vnder these armours goeth some of the Princes of Grecia. The heroycke Rosicleer pulled off his helme and discouered his faire face, being bound by the good reasons of the Tartare, yet doubtfull of that he told touching the death of his beloued frend Zoylo: and he said, valiant Andronio, it shall be an vniust part to hide who wee are vnto him that so plainely hath giuen vs to vnderstand of his doings and who he is, we are bound to doe the like, so that in knowing you shall receiue content. I will tell you, This knight (pointing to Meridian) is Meridian Prince of the Scithians. And this knight is the warlike Oristides the Troyan, and I am one of those princes of Grecia,

to whom you are indebted so much as you say. I am called Rosicleer, and by an other name the Knight of Cupid, the greatest friend to the Tartar Zoylo, and you haue made me not a little maruell in saying that he is dead.
With strange content went the curteous Andronio to kisse the hands of the warlike Greeke: who not admitting such costly curtesie, raysed him from the ground, remaining imbraced of the Tartare: who with the ioy hee receiued thereof, said: I will not ventrous Prince yt the knowing of you be without giuing part of the ioy vnto my wel beloued Princesse. Who hauing heard that ye Grecian prince was there, came foorth and humbled her selfe to Rosicleer, giuing him and his Companions hearty thanks for their ayd. He graciously entertained her, yet was hee verie impatient to heare of the death of Zoylo, inquiring of Andronio about the circumstances: who hauing tolde them, Rosicleer vowed reuenge, wheretoo Meridian and Oristides promised their helpe. But the Greeke princes sorrow being perceiued by the Troyan, he altred their communication, and incited them to know of the knights that were prisoners, who was that mightie pyrate? and likewise who faire Grisanea was? Of the last Andronio resolued them, in manner as you haue heard: certefying them beside of the prince Don Heleno, whereat the Greek did not a little reioyce, for that since they left Tinacria, hee neuer heard of him.
Now touching the Rouer, a Knight that was prisoner and one that seemed a principall in that Crue, sayd: Understand worthie Knights, that the dead Knight and Owner of these ships and diuers other that range this Coast, was the furious Bruncaldo, a great Rouer, and feared of all these Ilands: for that he was Lord of one hereby, although a little one, yet the strongest of them al, for the difficultie of the entrie, hauing at the port one of the strongest Castles in the earth, called the Doubtfull Castle, the Iland also taking name thereof. To keepe which when

he goeth abroad, he leaueth two fierce Giants that married his Sisters: and in that Castle he hath manie miserable prisoners. The Princes pittying the estate of the Iland, intended to free it and the prisoners: and in theyr proceedings were thus aduised by the Knight. The best meanes to take the Iland sir Knights, is to haue your ship towed as if she were taken, and to put out at our tops the common Ensigne of victorie, which is a Flag, with the Sunne in a blacke field: for otherwise the entrie will be verie difficult, by reason of a chaine that crosseth from one rocke to another. I being knowen will tell the warders Bruncaldo is in his bed wounded in taking the Prize. Of all wayes this is the surest, and to this I aduise you, aswell for the reuerence I beare to your worthines, as the compassion I haue of manie Knights and Ladies that remain there prisoners.
They all liked his aduice, and caused the Tartarians Knights to enter the two ships, and hang out their Ensigne of victorie, towing the princes ship after them. The next morning they came within sight of the Castle, which was seated vpon a rocke, hauing a waye no broader than for two to passe, cut out of the same rocke. At the entrie it had two towers in which the Giants lay, and more inward was the lodging of Bruncaldo, gallantly built, with stones of diuers colours: and betweene these three towers was a large paued court, wherin fiftie Knights might combat on horsebacke.
So soone as they had sounded victorie, they were answered from both the towers with excellent instruments, for ioy to receiue their Lord, and to warne them that kept the chaine to open it, which was presently done: whereat the princes greatly reioyced, and thanked the Knight, who (lif^ing vp his visor) told them on the shore that their lord was sore wounded. With this they landed, ascending vp by two and two: first Briano the Knight of the Castle and the valiant Grecian, after them the princesse and Damsells,

and so the rest in order. In this sort they ascended the steps, making as if they reioyced in their bootie, till such time as they were in the highest part of the Castle, vnsuspected. When they came there, the two deformed giants (vnarmed) did receiue them, verie ioyfull that their brother in law was come, although greeued that hee was so sore wounded: neuertheles (said they) wee will present this Ladie to the wife of Bruncaldo. But said the greatest Giant, I had rather deale with him that had so much power to wound my Lord and Brother. Briano aunswered: He paid his boldnes with his life, and lost his Wife (that is this Ladie), vnto whom my Lord commaundeth great honour should be done, for her beautie sake, and to bee in companie with his Wife, till he commeth foorth of ye ship. The disguised knights receiued great ioy to see with what discretion Briano proceeded in his busines, and esteemed him (as indeed he was) to be a perfect good man, and a iust Knight.
The Grecian prince made a signe vnto Oristides and Meridian, that each of them with foure of those Knights should (as though they went for some other matter) take the gates of the two towers, while he and the Tartarian with the two Giants and the discreete Briano, went vnto the higher tower leading the princesse and her damsels as if they had been prisoners, to the great contentment of the Giants.
Heere might the two couragious princes haue concluded this aduenture without anie molestation, but they accompted it base and voyde of Knighthood, to assaile them without armour: therefore they passed forwards with all their companie, till they entered into the great Court, at whose rich workmanship they all wondred. There they saw painted manie ancient pictures, the which did beautifie more that sumptuous Court. There were excellently wrought of Iasper stone two paire of staires, one right against another.
The princes gazed not at anie thing, least the Gyants shuld suspect them, who gaped so on the princesses beauty that they put her in great feare with their vgly countena^ces. Then they entred into the hall, which seemed to bee fit for an Emperour, the ceeling being full of gold and stones of rich price. The Wife of Bruncaldo being ther, moued not when she missed her Lord: but (as full of pride as tyrannie) said. I would excuse your comming Woman, so that my husband were vnhurt: but as hee was reuenged on your husband, so will I reuenge me on you. And therwith she tooke foorth a great bunch of keyes, and gaue the^ to a woman to carrie the Ladie to prison. The anger was so great that Andronio receiued to see his Ladie thorough feare change colour, that without farther consideration, he pulled the keyes from the woman, and throwing them at Bruncaldos wife, he droue two or three of them into her forhead, and slew her where she sate. This chance much greeued the Grecian, but it could not be remedied, and seeing all was discouered, he put the Ladies behinde him, and drew his sword. The wrathfull Tartarian was determined to assaile the Giants: who seeing the death of their sister, and how they were betraid, came towards the princes with their fawchions aloft. To whom the Grecian said: Stand false Knightes, for wee are not accustomed to fight with vnarmed men: put on your armour, for the worthie arme that tooke away your brothers life, will also take away yours. Oh vile creatures said the Giant, will you delay my reuenge while I put on armour? I would Mars and all the Gods were before mee, and thou shouldst see I had no need of armour for them, how much lesse then for you? And in saying this, he stroke a blow at the Tartar^ vnawares, that it was meruaile hee had not cut him in peeces: but he arose againe, brused with the fal he gaue him on his backe, and was striking at the Giant, but the Grecian put the poynt of his sword betweene, and stayed the execution thereof. And for that the Sonne o^

Trebatio would not haue of them anie vantage, he again said: take your armour furious beasts, for therewith you shall haue enough to doo to deliuer your selues out of our hands. Yet ceased they not to strike, and they with great lightnes auoyded: till one of the Giaunts with a hoarce voyce said. Stay foolish Knights, and you shal see me stay longer in arming my self, tha^ in taking away your liues. So they descended the staires, making a great noyse, and at their comming into the Court they met foure or fiue of the Tartarians knights and slew them, offring as much to the princes at the gates, who letting slip their blowes entred within them, and with their armed fists feld them to the ground, and wold haue cut off their heads. At which the Grecian came downe (hauing left the Tartarian aboue to keepe the tower) and would in no case let them be smitten vnarmed, commaunding a Page of the Castle to fetch their armour, and in the meane time they came to themselues. And considering they were by two knights ouerthrowne, they blasphemed their Gods, and hasting to arme one another, the eldest said. Tarrie a little ye captiue people, and you shall see how deere I will make you buy this treason. When they were armed, shaking their bright fawchions, they came against them all. Rosicleer was a Knight of great patience, but the prowd words of the Giant had so earnestly angred him, that it made him say thus. For that you shal vnderstand how I esteeme ye* come both ioyntly to me, and you shall finde my deeds differ from my words: and therwith he let flye three or foure blowes aloft, which made them seeke defence for theyr heads. When he saw them looke aside, he gaue the yonger Giant such an ouerthwart blow on his thigh, that hee cut him to the boane: but the other Giaunt reached hym with the poynt of his fawchion vpon his shoulder, that it made him stoop with his hands to the ground. The principall hall was toward the court, so that from thence the Tartarian and his Wife saw the valour of the Grecian:

who at this time was more coura^ius, tha^ if he had fought with one alone Knight. The Tartarian being amazed to see his valiantnes, could not chuse but say: Uerely it seemeth all the Gods did ioyne together at the birth of thys inuincible Warrier, and put in him more strength than remaineth in them all. A happie country is it ye eni^^th such Lords: happie Zoylo, that amongst such frends hast found a sepulcher: and happie Andronio, that hath seene with his eyes, what els he would not haue beleeued. Of truth (worthy husband, said Grisanea) I would gladlye some of those Knights would helpe the Grecian Prince, not that his valor hath need thereof. but that we should be the sooner rid of th^se people, for I am not yet free of the feare I receiued. Oristides had no need to be intreated, for with a light leape hee stept in, and receiued on his shield the second blow that the Giant Tembloso stroke at the Grecian, which made him bow to the ground. As he arose to reuenge it, the Grecian said vnto him: Stand away Oristides, and staine not your sword in so euill blood. And in so saying he gaue a thrust at the furious Tembloso, and returned vnto the other Giant, striking him so mightie a blow vpon the helme, that hee made him almost senslesse. At the same time had the Troyan stroke such a blowe at his hands, that almost he had parted them asunder, which made him giue a fearfull shreeke, where with his Brother stroke the Greeke Prince such a blow on the helme, that if Artemidoroes vertue had not be^n therein, his lyfe had been in great perill. The Giant was nimble, and would not loose any occasion, therefore hee entred, desirous for to strike him another blow: but the Troyan did breake the execution thereof, which gaue the Grecian time to recouer himselfe. The other Giant by reason of the first wound Rosicleer gaue him, fell vppon his knees blaspheming hys Go^s. The Ladies of the Princesse receiued great content to see him fall, and said: It seemeth to vs that one of them doth come by little and little to the ground. The

gentle Troyan did verie well heare those words, and went against the hurt Giant, but comming nigh, him, the G^ant with his left hand laid hold on the skirt of his hab^re^on, and drew him within his armes. The Troyan knew well in what perill he was, and to be more at libertie, and the better to helpe himselfe, he let his shield fall from hys arme. The Giant seeing that, so crushed him, that ^e verely thought his armour would haue entred into his fl^sh, his greefe was so much: yet for all that hee did not forg^t his dagger, which he thrice stabbed into the Giant, and as often drew it foorth with his blood, and the fourth time he thrust it in vnder the skirt of his habergion vpwards with so much force, that the murdring blade came to his heart. Which caused the Giant with ye pangs of death to squeeze him so strongly, that if it should long haue indured, it had not been possible but hee should haue been in great perill: but his breath failing him, he opened his armes, and committed his soule to the diuell, and his bodie to the senslesse earth the Troyan being so faint and wearie, that he was forced in great hast to pull off his helme, to take the benefite of the coole ayre, and sate him downe vppon the dead bodie of the Giant, with great contentment vnto them al. And being a little refresht, hee busied his ey^s in beholding the battell betweene the inuincible Rosicleer and the furious Tembloso: which seemed but then to begin. Yet the Giant shewed himselfe to be somwhat ^ea^^e, by reason of the weight of his strong armour, and the great lightnes of the Prince: who entring in and out, made him verie wearie, which was the occasion that the Prince assaulted him the oftner, wounding him so on the legs, that all the Court was stained with his brutall blood* Our valiant Grecian seeing his aduersarie began to faint, layd hold v^on his shield with so great strength, that he pulled him perforce vnto the ground with so great a fall, that hee was almost without sense or moouing, and before hee had anie memor^e to recouer himself, he stept to him and with his

left hand pulled off his helme, and cloaue his head to the necke. Then he sat down to rest himselfe, and asked the Troyan how he fared? Well said he, though almost out of breath: but let vs meete the Tartarian and his Wife, who are comming to visit vs. With that the faire Princesse came, and said: Thus farre (worthie Princes) extendeth the courages of women, to shew signes of greefe or ioy, as they doo receiue cause by the successe of the battell. I thanke ye faire Princesse for your ioy, aunswered the Grecian. But their conference was broke off by the manie embracings which the Tartare vsed to the Grecian, for the frendship which hee had with that vnfortunate Zoylo, whom in the face Andronio did much resemble, yet he had more strength than he that was dead. Then searched they Castle, and found the Wiues of the Giants making great lamentation for the death of their husbands. After they had dined, they required Briano and some of the Knights of Tartarie, to goe and release the prisoners. All the seruants and people when they vnderstood the death of the Giants, gaue their obedience vnto the Princes, more reioycing to receiue them for Lords, than those cruell Giants.
Then they demaunded the keyes of the prison of one of the Giants Wiues: who seeing themselues in the power of their enemies, ioyned together with the keyes in their hands at a window that opened vnto the sea, wherein desperately they threw themselues, rather than they would liue pittied. It was so high from whence they fell, that ere they came to the water, they were starke dead. That rash deed could not but greeue them all, but seeing it might not be remedied, they commaunded that the doores of the prison should be broken open, which was done by the pages of the Princes verie sodainly. They being aduertised what number of prisoners were within the seuerall dungeons, commaunded them to be brought foorth into the Court, aswell women as men, and manie children.
Who when they saw people enter (thinking they were of the Giants sending) they began to say: Whe^ butcherly people, more crueler then the furies, will you ease so many deathes, with taking away of our liues: what profitte find you in executing your fury on them that cannot make resistance?
Then said Argolio the Page of the Grecian Prynce, wee are none of those peruerse people which you thinke: but we are seruants vnto certaine knights who haue gyuen you liberty. One could not heare another, the noyse of pleasure was so great made by those miserable Captiues: some referring it to God like good Christians, others thinking that it came from Mahomet. So that there was none but gaue thankes vnto them whome they acknowledged for their Gods.
With infinite ioy and great shewes of contentment came foorth all those miserable people, and when they came into the court, and saw the Sunne, they all kneeled on their knees, and gaue thankes vnto God for their libertie, and those venterous knights. They were in all more than three hundreth persons, which caused no small compassion vnto the Princes, who with some pittifull teares did accompany the people. Amongst them ther were some knights and people of respect, principally two women, and three or foure men, which were together on the one side. The valiant Greeke went downe thether, and with him the other princes with their helmes off. They receiued them with so great noise, that the one could not heare the other, till they all came and kneeled downe before the Grecian. But they who most reioyced were the companye of the two women, that were seperated on the other side: for one of them and a knight holding their hands together, went a great pace, vnto the Greeke Lord, and with a loud voice said: Oh flower of the Greeke nation, was it not enough that in the beginning of your Knighthood, and my tender yeeres you gaue me a husband, and

defended my honestie at the cost of your person. Speake vnto me Prince of Grecia, for I am that Linerua your detter of life and honor, I am shee for whome you did not refuse the habite of a woman, to defend my life honor and fame.
This is the husband you gaue me, now Lord of the vally of the mountaines. The Prince stayed for to behold them, and by and by he fell into reckoning who they should be, and did embrace them with great loue, as hee that had to them great affection, when hee heard that which they declared. And taking her by the hand, he went with her to the Princesse, that shee might prouide her of apparell and her companions: and gaue charge to the discreet Briano that he should likewise, prouide for al the rest of the people that hee had set at libertie. And there afore them all did this Lady tell who she was saying. O valiant Prince, how I doe esteeme my selfe happie, since my eyes haue seene that which so long since I haue desired, for since you departed in the habit of a youth from the valley of the mountaines, we neuer left desiring to knowe to what end came so high a beginning as not being an armed knight you did for me: and declared vnto him, that which in the beginning of this great historie you haue heard, when as he changed with the apparell of this Ladie (who was called Linerua, and slue that cruell Argion, and made voide, that abhominable custome which he obserued) til such time as Lelio, my brother and your Page, at his returning from the great Britain for your absence, told vs, he did vnderstand that you were of Grecia and no lesse then a Prince: and Son to Trebatio Emperor of Constantinople. If Linerua and her deer beloued husband Brandidonio reioyced hereat, you may put it out of doubt. So foorthwith when we knew the happie news of the Prince your brother, we did procure to see you. Then we left those your Castles in the guard and keeping of my brother Telio, and with onely two Pages and this daughter, we departed the

Ualley towards Grecia in a Ship that was well prouided: but fortune did take from vs the good and content which we should haue receiued in seeing you, and so altered the Sea, that it droue vs to th^se partes, although we haue learned, there is no more betweene this and that place, but one day and a night sayling beeing faire weather: we were straight apprehended with my daughter who was then but little, and we were put in a darke prison, where as I had no other good but seeing him whom you gaue me for a husband and Lord, and my daughter, which is here. It goeth now vpon thirteene yeeres heroycall Prince that wee haue been in prison, without knowing any thing of my Father and brother. And heerewith the Lady concluded with teares of ioy, for that she sawe the Prince.
Hee did not so much esteeme your vertue as I doe (answered the Greeke) that so cruelly hath intreated you: but thankes be vnto God that hath giuen you libertie, for vs to see one the other: and nowe you are not to take any griefe for that which is past, but to giue order howe they may know of you in your countrie, and to remaine in this till order bee taken whether you shall goe thether, or remaine heere.
The next day hee commaunded that all those of the Iland should ioyne together, and hee made vnto them a long oration concerning the hard seruitude which they were freed of by the losse of the Giants. And that hee would make them a Lord and a gouernour by his owne handes, and told them who hee was, the more to reioyce them. And with the consent of them all they maried the discreet knight Briano with the daughter of Linerua, and caused them to sweare him for their Lord.
They all receiued content with that the Prince ordained, and the new maried couple were verie ioyful to see the liberalitie of the Prince, although time dyd come when it was gratified and payde.
They were foure dayes in the doubtful Castle: In the end of which, the Princes did take their leaue of those of the Iland commending them vnto peace. The like did the three frendes vnto the Tartarian, which was no small griefe vnto the faire Grisanea and the Tartarian: but seeing it could be no otherwise, they tooke it forwell. So they set their course towards Tartaria, whereas they were receiued with all content possible, worthy of a Prince so well beloued as was Andronio, of whome in the third and fourth part shall bee made large mention, where as we will leaue them, for to declare of the Princes.



What succeeded the three Princes that went with the Damsell into Lacedemonia.

 Chap. 11.
THe three couragious warriers ingulfed in the Sea, went towardes Lacedemonia, talking of the Tartare their new frend, and of the gallant and braue discretion of his Lady. So leauing on the one hand the Ausonian Sea, the eyght day early in the Morning they entred the Port of the Citty of Archina, for so Strabo doth call it: whereat the Damsell receiued no small content and said, that from that place to the great Cittie of Lyra was two dayes iourney. There they disimbarked themselues and went a Land, with their deuises changed, leauing their ancient and knowen shields in their inchaunted boate, they had al a like: for in a green field this alone was written,
If against Loue we doe not fight,We doe not feare our tryed might.
The Damsell reioyced at that Poste, it came to good purpose for her busines, and said vnto them, Knightes o^

reuengement (so we wil now call ye, I pray God that the end bee conformable vnto the Pos^e and the iustice which we haue. If you haue Iustice answered the Grecian, account your busines done, for that is able to giue vs forces more than we enioy. Your strength doth well assure use gentle knightes (said shee) although it were for a matter more difficult: but wee women haue this condition, where we loue, we are not in quiet, but when we see them secure: and I beleeue that it is generall for all that loue, neuer to be assured of the good, while they liue in hope: the like we haue in our anger, for that there was neuer woman that hath beene vexed, but would procure at cost of their liues to recompence their griefe, and rather yeelde vnto death then want reuengement. God deliuer me (said the gentle Troyan, vnto the Damsell) from falling into your wrath if you be so froward: and therefore I say hee liueth a merrie and sweet life, that hath neither ioye nor griefe caused by women. For first, for to get ioy he must serue a world of time, and when he commeth to receiue a fauour, it is with such trouble that ere hee feele it, by and by with the turne of an eye all is turned to his disgrace: But I beleeue women are of the opinion, that griefe at their hands, is an ease to a Louers heart.
It may bee gentle Knight (sayd the Damsell) that he that pondreth not the content that the Louer receiueth (if the Lady beloued be esteemed) being busied in easie things, but doth remit the content onely to the odedience promised by loue, and to receiue discontent for glory, and for great content the griefe ordained by the Ladye, and rigorous thornes for tender flowers, comming from her handes.
Of truth Damsell answered the Troyan, if this be all the fauour that Ladies doe giue: and thereby no other daintie to comfort their Louers, from this time I say: he that liueth of this doth not knowe what is good. She said: It seemeth that your companions bee of your

false league, or els they will make shewe to defend my profound opinion, and for this battaile I wil none of your ayde, except ye be Louers. There will not lacke answerers for you faire Damsell (said Rosicleer) for I doe know some that did liue in sorrow in respect of them that gaue it, for it is a sweete discharge for them that loue to suffer, if the minde be constrained by the fairenes of the beloued: and this certaine imagination can doe so much, that when sorrow commeth, it is not felt, the reason is, for that the sences are found occupied, with so excessiue content, as commeth of a faire sight, that it is not sufficient to vnlodge it out of the minde. But there be some of so little heart, that at the first encounter they yeeld, without considering the grief that is procured to the beutie of his Lady, giuing to vnderstand that he is not able to anymate his heart against the assalting griefe. Who (if he knewe howe to loue) would contend and depart glorious from this battaile, if hee esteeme this tryumph for most honorable.
Then answered the Troyan somewhat touched (if an other should haue spoken it, his swoord should haue defended it). This is when as the Lady is correspondent vnto her louer with daintie fauours, and sorrowfull for his griefe, and receiueth it as her owne, then is it no griefe that he doth suffer, being certaine of his doubt. Then said
Meridian, not one (Lord Oristides) being grieued, did marke the discharge of his griefe, for that it should not be meritorious before the Lady: being certaine what he would haue, and to lay before it the reward. This doth exclude reason from perfect loue, which is the notablenes of minde, where with good is desired for the beloued, and doth procure it with trouble, and hath the reward, not of that which is hoped for, but of the acte wherewith it is done, leauing the reward of his content vnto the generositie of the Ladie: then is it giuen more liberally and more earnestly, than when the Louer doth binde her

in declaring what he did suffer. Nowe you doe vnderstand Sir Knight (said the Damsell to the Troyan) the truth of my opinion, and ye doe wrong to withstand it, being so reprooued of all. And I hope that before you depart from Lacedemonia, you will change your iudgement according to the curiositie, wherewith this truth is declared.
In this communication they spent the morning, till it was high time to go to dinner: in a fresh and green groue they dined, recreating their sight, with the pearlye Fountaines and sweet Medowes, and their ear^s wyth the sweet songs of the little birdes, who flying the heate, were there in the shadowe, declaring their griefes with tunable chirpings.
The Princes came to the head or sping of a gallant Christall Fountaine, which was vnder certaine myrtle trees, and there they alighted, and let their horses taste of the water of that sweet and cleere spring and the green grasse that was there. Then did their Pages bring forth such victuall as they brought from the doubtfull Castle, making on the greene grasse a more daintie Table than they had in Grecia, and they passed Dinner with as great content: if that Meridian had not disturbed it with the remembrance of the losse of his wife, although he was somwhat eased with the confidence in Brandafidell: and they all no lesse reioyced at the sweet musike which the birds made in the shadow, than of that which they were wont to haue in the Royall Pallaces: but the one and the other they did leaue, for to heare a delicate voice, which at the sound of a Harpe they did heare not far off, and considering what it should be, they heard that it began with a prosound sygh in this sort.

Though I be scornd, yet will I not disdaine,
But bend my thoughts faire beauty to adore.
What though she smile when I sigh and complaine,
It is I know to try my faith the more.
For she is faire, and fairenes is regarded,
And I am firme, firme loue will be rewarded:
Suppose I loue and languish to my end,
And she my plaints, my sighes, my prayers dispise,
O tis enough when Fates for me doe send,
If she vouchsafe to close my dying eyes.
Which if she doe, and chance to drop a teare?
From life to death that balme will me vpreare.

With an other sygh no lesse than the first did the wofull voice conclude, which gaue occasion to the free Troyan to arise, and taking his shield he desired them to tarie for that hee would know who hee was that with so great griefe did publish his sorrow, and went directly thether whereas the voice was, and vnder a high and great pine tree, he saw lying along, a knight armed in armor all plated siluer like, ful of green Roses, without his helm, which lay by him, and a shield of the colour of his armor, and in the middest of the field in place of the flower, was this Posie.

Nor frownes nor scornes preuaile,
Resolued loue to quaile.

The knight was very yong, and one of the fairest that euer he saw, his eyes were swollen with weeping. The Troyan had great desire to know who he should be, but stayed for that he saw he would return to his doleful song, in this manner.

Let heauen and earth, let Gods and men conspire,
To adde more griefe vnto my greeued minde:
So my faire Saint doe know my true desire,
I haue enough, content therein I finde.
Loues bonds are heauen, dull freedome is a hell,
Come all worlds woe, yet loue can make it well.

This louing Youth intended onely to make the ayre pertaker of his greefe: so turning himself vpon the green grasse, he said: Oh Loue, why in the beginning of my ^e^der yeres hast thou made me place my felicitie in a person that hates mee? Ah sweete Mistres, I doo acknowledge your desert, and giue my greefe to witnes it: yet, if I may say it without offence, as you are rare in beautie, so I am a Phoenix in loue. Oh that it pleased the heauens I might shew you my louing heart? there should you see how faith sustaineth the same, against the extremitie of all your crueltie.
This afflicted Youth could proceed no further, for that he was disturbed by the Troyan: who (desirous to know what he was) in this sort saluted him. I would fain faire Knight, know what hath brought you into this estate, and if you stand in need of my person, I will imploy it in your helpe. I need not your companie (said this disturbed Louer) much lesse your helpe: depart I pray you, for your presence doth me wrong. Thou art vncurteous (answered the Kinsman of Hector) so to reply vnto my Knightly offer. Nay then I perceiue (said the Youth) you are ignorant what pleasure solitarines bringeth to the passionated Louer. I (answered the Troyan) and hope euer to be ignorant of such pleasing sorrow. O heauens! how hast thou liued said the Youth, and art not amorous? Now God defend me (said Oristides) from that madnes. O generous thoughts of mine, replied the Youth, is it possible that Rosabel should liue, and heare Loue slandered? tarrie thou false Knight, for with thy blood I trust to write vpon these trees the glorie of them that be Louers. And therewith like a viper trodden on he arose vp to lace on his helme, and sodainly cast a thrust at ye Troian, that hee made him retire backe three or foure paces, almost past memorie. Ere hee recouered, the Youth strooke him so on the Uisor, that hee made him see starres in his darke helme: and doubled another vpo^ his shoulder, that shrewdly pained him. By this

the Troyan did plainly see, that the Knight with whom hee dealt was aswell Mars his sonne, as Cupids seruant, and therefore rowsing himselfe, he smit him such a blow vpon the shield, that he made him put one knee vpon the ground. The Youth was cunning, and at the discharge of ye blow, hurt the Troyan so on the legs, that his red blood distained the greene meadow. With exceeding furie tooke Oristides his sword in both his hands, and doubled two such extreame blowes, that the young Knight knew not where he was: but quickly recouering himselfe, he retourned a double paiment. A thousand thoughts came vnto the Troian in imagining who this valiant Youth might bee, yet so he dealt with him, that he made him sweat drops of blood. At the noyse of this rigorous battell came the two Princes, at which instant the Youth had feld the Troyan to the ground: whence quickly recouering, and with his sword seeking to reuenge, the Princes stept betweene them, saying: Part Knights, it is not iust to permit this battell to come to an end, without knowing the cause. It is (sayd the Youth) because this Knight counteth a Louers life vnhappie, which occasion is not so small, but if I liue, with his life he shall answere it. Sir Knight (said Meridian) let not this flight quarrell hinder our important busines: the matter being no more, but you thinke Loues bondage sweet, and he in libertie findes his content. But that you shall perceiue doubt of his ablenes is no cause of this, I will warrant that (within these ten dayes, either here or where els soeuer you will appoint) this Knight shall ende the battell. I am content (aunswered the yong Knight) for that your gentle disposition doth more binde mee, than this Knights arrogancie: therefore let the battell be here, where onely accompanied with my solitarie thoughts, I will attend you. Stand aside said the valiant Troyan; in cases that concerne my owne honour, I am more bound, than to wait on strangers: therefore there is no reason to disturbe vs, till the battell be ended. It cannot be said Rosicleer,

for you haue giuen your word vnto this Damsell in a time limitted, wherein if you faile she looseth her credit, and she that sent her her honour: and for this busines, without impeach of your honor, you may leaue it till another time. The Troyan wold not denie the prince, so they parted, and left the Youth, much praising his valiantnes: and thereof the Troyan thus said. The beautie which he hath and his few yeres maketh me to doubt, for that in all my life I haue not seene a fairer Creature: what he shuld be I cannot imagine, except he be a kinsman to the Grecian prince, for he resembleth much the prince of the Sunne your Brother. All were doubtful whom he should be, but most of all the Grecian, for that his heart did giue him inwardly that he should be of his blood. With this suspition they came to their pages, and fell to such victualls as they had, and determined to loose no more time, because ye next was their vttermost day. When dinner was done, they demanded the matter of ye aduenture: the which (after she had cured the Troyans leg, and told her iudgement of his libertie) she began with a gallant grace to declare in this manner.
You shall vnderstand worthie Knights, that of thys mightie Kingdome of Lacedemonia is King a most vertuous knight, called Astrafio, worthie of much praise for the prudent gouernment of his Common-wealth: and as he deserued, so had he the loue of all his people. It was the will of heauens high Commander to blesse him with two Daughters at a birth: so like, that the difference is onely betweene them in their names: and so exceeding faire they were, that they rather were esteemed of all to be celestiall Angells, than humane Uirgins. They were both brought vp and nourished in the royall pallace of their ioifull Father, who was so delighted in their excellent perfections, that he had no other ioye or contentment, but to behold them, and to bee conuersant in their companies.

The eldest is called Thomiriana, and the yongest the faire
Sarmacia: who so delighteth in hunting and armes, that she is among Knights compared with the Empresse Claridiana. When she was of age to weare armour, she was knighted by her owne Father, and maintained a mighty Iustes, to her eternall honour. So farre was the prayse of these two sisters spred, that Liuio the prince of Laodicea (calling himselfe the knight of the Crownes) came thether with one alone page, and fell in loue with Thomiriana the eldest Sister: his affection so increasing, that he was forced to discouer it both to her selfe and to her Father: who reioyced and the Ladie likewise, that she was affected of so excellent a prince. All the Court was wyth their loue delighted, and she that most seemed to delight in it, was the warlike Sarmacia, who dailye conuerst with Liuio and her Sister, when they were in their amorous conuersation. So long she dallyed in beholding their dalliance, that all her thoughts were captiued with Liuioes perfections: and the more she striued, by reasons of wrong against her Sister, trespasse against her Father, and iniurie against her owne fame, to suppresse this fire, the violenter it raged. Solitarines contents Sarmacia, if anie thing could content her: but nothing can content her, till Liuio know her hearts affection. So one day as they wore a hunting she discouered it to him, whereat the prince did not a little meruaile, but dissembled it, giuing her kinde words, somewhat to quench her burning desire: but whe^ this noble prince came vnto his Thomiriana, he confirmed the faith he had giuen her, with earnester shewes of affection than before: The ielous Sarmacia was in presence, and not able to indure the sight, went foorth and wept: but Liuio (like a constant prince) the more to assure his Thomiriana, demaunded her of her Father in marriage: who gladly graunted it. But when the prince would haue kissed the kings hands as a Father, ye furious Sarmacia stept betweene them, and said: Louing father, it is not conuenient

for the honor of Lacedemonia, to giue my Sister to a Knight so disloyall: who to your curtesie being bound, is notwithstanding most vniust. And this I will maintaine against all the world. The Lord of Laodicea, did wel vnderstand the cause of her accusation, and thus answered* Ualorous Princesse, your too much vniust rage causeth ye to doo me wrong, which in my honours defence (much against my will, you beeing a Woman) I will approoue. That may not be Prince Liuio said the King, for by our law the accused maye not enter battell with the accuser, but within two months bring one to answere for him. It is no small wrong answered the Prince, that being accused, I cannot defend my selfe. I am the gladder said the Lady, for I am willinger to punish some other for your iniustice than your selfe, because my Father loues ye. Ah Ladie said the Prince, you know I know the reason of this falshood, but I will not publish your fault. I know well said shee, thou art impudently audacious: and were not my Father present, I would presently bee reuenged. The King commaunded them asunder, till the 2. months or the triall were past. You may well gesse at my Ladie Thomirianaes greefe: who taking mee into her chamber, (after manie showers ofteares) thus said. O my faithful Damsell, how doo the heauens deuide my life in parting me from Liuio, by the tyrannie of my cruell Sister? Hasten my death, O you destinies, if I may not liue to reioyce with so loyall a Prince: for I vow if he be not Owner of my will, to be Deaths bride ere I marrie any other liuing on the earth. What hast thou got Sarmacia by this crueltie? Is this my reward for participating with thee my hearts secrets? Well thy gaine is, that thou hast got the name of a cruell Sister: and my hope is, that I shall finde one able to disprooue thy falshood. After this passion, she coniured me with manie ceremonious protestations, that I should with all diligence seek her a knight to combat her Sister, whereby shee might obtaine Liuio for her

husband. So I promised her, that no other than the princes of Grecia or some of their frendes I would bring for so iust a defence, although therein I lost my life. And nowe seeing my fortune hath fauored me to bring such high princes, it is time for you to shew that which you haue promised to all women that should haue need of your forces: for on this dependeth the life of the Princesse Thomiriana and the noble Prince Liuio. Faire Damsel said the Troyan, your demaund is iust: for it is no part of a sister to take away the content her sister receiueth, for shee was rather bound to keep it secret and further her, that made her partaker thereof. And though it be a hard thing to enter in battaile with a woman, yet I wil take it vpon me if these valiant Princes bee therewith content. Many thankes sir knight (said the Damsell) I giue ye, and I do receiue it for the greatest curtesie that nowe you can shew mee, in that the busines of my Lady is so dangerous, and seeing so ventrous and valiant a knight as you are doe deale in it, I am secure: and I doe beleeue your companions will thinke well of it. And to shewe the valor of their persons they shall not lacke occasions in this country: for it is said by wise men, there are heerein maruelous aduentures. They al reioyced in that the Troyan Prince would take vpon him the battell for the Princesse. And Meridian said: it seemeth vnto me faire Damsell, that this knight feeleth the effect of the Country, seeing hee hath begun to follow your band in putting his life in aduenture for women: a thing which before seemed impossible. And I beleeue worthie Prince (said the Damsell) hee wil shewe more than this, it may be we shall see him leaue the battaile, or if he ouer come, bee ouercome by his enemy: many more free than he haue lost their liberty in this country of Lacedemonia, and it shal be no strange thing vnto her to subiect such a free heart, as he hath seemed to haue, for I am certaine in seeing him of so gallant disposition he will bee amorous: then shal be see^e the truth that a while since he

reproued. At this time they beganne to discouer the populous Citty whether as they iourneyed, and therefore tooke their helmets which their Pages caried, and pulled downe their vizors, they kissed her on the cheeke, aduis^ng her not to tell who they were: so they tooke the most sweetest way to the Citty, and came thether at the third houre, when the king as yet had not gone out of the Pallace. They entred in at a gate called the serpent gate, the people that were in the streetes following them, and the eyes of Ladies waiting on their gallant proportion: yet not any able to imagine what knights they should be. In this order they arriued at the Pallace, where as they alighted, and mounted into the Royal hall, where as they did see a great number of Ladies and Knights: the Ladies in companie with the Queene and her daughters, and Knightes did accompany the vertuous King. The entring of these three warriers did not a little trouble the whole Hall, for that they knew not what they would haue: but when they saw them goe directly to the King, they all pacified themselues.
So when as the heroycke Troyan had done his bounden duetie, in lifting vp somewhat his visor, hee directed his talke vnto the King in this manner. Worthy King of Lacedemonia, my companions and my selfe trauelling to seeke aduentures to procure fame, as Knightes should, did heare somwhat far off from this place, that in your Court is great wrong done vnto the Prince Liuio of Laodicea and vnto your daughter Thomiriana. For as it hath been told vs, you granted your daughter to him with great ioy: whereat arose your second Daughter (with confidence of her owne strength) and made contradiction thereof: whereas of right she should haue procured the effect, for many reasons that shee hath knowne. And so although I neuer combated against any woman: heere I saye, that I will defend the Princesse cause agaynst whome soeuer, from the Sunne rysing

to Sunne set, if he be content to commit it into my hands. Sir knight said the king, for your commendations of my vertue, I thanke you: but for the rest, it is put to the order of battell: so that there is nothing to stand vpon, but to see if the prince will admit you for his Champion. Therewith came foorth the prince, apparelled in crims^n taffeta cut vpon cloth of gold, richly laced, with so great gallantnes, that the princes did all affect him. All did vnto him curtesie, which he graciously returned: and humbly thanking all the knights for their great trauell, hee sayd vnto the Troyan. Sir, I referre to you my whole right, although (if it pleased the king that I might defend myne owne cause) I would bee loth to indaunger anie knight: but he saith, it is against his law. That law said the Grecian prince, is verie preiudiciall in a Common-wealth: for some may be accused, that can find none to defend the^. This is not to be iudged by you sir knight (said the king, somwhat angerly) for those that ordained the law, did it with more reason than you haue shewed to contradict it. The Greeke prince being vexed, thus answered: All that you say sir king, in your person I gainsay not: but I defie anie other, that thinketh I presume to iudge any thing which I will not defend. Neither doo I beleeue sayd the king, that there will want knights to answere you, if ye make anie Challenge: and therfore you may vse your discretion. Then answered the Grecian, your person excepted (for the vertue which thereof hath been reported) I do defie two knights together, so they be naturally borne in this kingdome, that will affirme this law to bee good and iust. And I doo defie other two said the prince of the Scythians, that will maintaine there hath been vsed iustice (according to the right of Nations) towards the prince of Laodicea, but rather great and manifest wrong. Which Challenge we will foorthwith defend by armes, because will not multiply their anger by delaye, yt be affected to maintaine this most vniust, violent and intollerable law.
There did not lacke foure knights that came foorth of the Principallest and moste valiant in all the Kingdom, such as were iealous of the honor of their king, and gaue their gages vnto the Princes, thinking thereby to get great honor. Then came the faire Sarmacia, not adorned in her shining armour, but in a gowne of blew cloth of goldfull of Precious stones: vpon her head she wore a vayle so white that thorow it was plainely seene her golden haire: about her necke hung a rich swoord by a red sendall, and although it were vpon the garment, yet it seemed to be wrought in it. Ind this sort she passed by all the knights, who gaue her way to passe where the Princes were, who greatly maruelled to see her gallant disposition. And when shee came to them (being affected to their gallant proportion) she said: which of you gentle Knights is he that must make battaile with me. All of vs (answered the heroycke Grecian) are Knightes faire Lady to defend your beauty: but he whome fortune hath made choise of for this, is this Knight (pointing to the gentle Troyan.) She iudged him of high valor, and hee could scarce turne his head to behold her, his sences were rauisht in such forte that hee knewe not what thing could giue him content, but to serue that gracious Princesse, and it seemed to him that she came from heauen to make conquest of his heart, and performe that which the Damsell has said. Oh false and rigorous Cupid, shall I not put my hand to my penne, but thou must put thy selfe before me with thy cruell effectes? and that to Mars cannot be graunted to draw his swoord, but thou wilt laye hold on his shield? and that one drop of bloud goeth not out, but it must be done by thy hand? It is wel seen in the Nephew of Troylus, that only sight could humble to the rigorous yoke the high necke of that most free knight: who with Mars himselfe would battaile, about the good he found in his freedome. The new Louer could not speake, and loue alone left him courage for to seeke meanes how he might

not offend her whom he worshipped. The experimented Lady did verie well marke his disturbance, and would not suffer it to proceede any further, but said: when will you Sir knight that wee make our battaile? By and by said the valiant Troyan* for that whe^ death is looked for, to hasten it, is life. The Lady did well vnderstand it, and it greeued her nothing at all, for that it seemed shee neuer saw a better proportioned knight. Then came the foure knights armed with their armor, and went into the court where as the warriers did abide their comming. The sixe knights at the sound of the the trumpets, did meete, and made strong encounters: but the two which they hit, they ouerthrew to the ground both horse and man, without any mouing of hand or foot, they no more mouing than a rock, and the two which remained on horsebacke, returned vpo^ them with their swoords in their hands: but the Grecian Prince, wold not that his delaying shuld be any hindrance vnto the Troyan, without drawing his swoord, hee went to one, and taking him in his armes, he pulled him out of his saddle, as though he had been a child, and quesed him so hard that he made him to cry out. And he carried him directly vnto the standing where as the king was. At that instant came his frend Meridian with his foe, leauing the place for the noise of the people, in praising the strength of the two frends. In this sort they came before that noble king: and the Grecian said, mightie King, although the vertue which wee haue heard of you, doth binde vs to bee your frends and to serue you in whatsoeuer shalbe offered: yet the rigorous law hath made vs to passe the sound purpose which we brought with vs. Therefore we will not that heereof any thing should insue: but that you should behold it with eyes of reason. Most valiant knights (answered the curteous Lord) although it seemeth not so euill as you do iudge of it, I will make it voide, onely for to performe that which knights of so great strength and curtesie require. And so from this day forwards I do it hold for nothing:

but will that the contrarie be obserued. By this meanes most noble King, answered Meridia is the right way to atchiue to be well beloued, and not onely to be feared. Then did the Iudges bring forth the Princes with great honor, and left them with the amorous Troyan, who had his eyes fixed that way, whence should come the Robber of his heart, till they saw her come accompanied with the most principallest of all the kingdome. What may the Troyan hope after, in that hee found himselfe ouercome, and how shall he defend for the Prince of Laodicea, when as striking his lady is more than death? This new seruant of Cupid* had such variable and contrarie thoughts, that he knew not where to begin. Till in the end he determined not to hurt his Ladie in any sort that she should receiue anger, as you shall vnderstand in the Chapter following.



What the end of the battell was, betweene the Troyan Oristides and the faire Sarmacia: and also what hapned to Rosicleer with the knight of the Forrest.

 Chap. 12.
A Thousand suspitions wrought in the Troyans heart when hee sawe the Soueraign Princesse of Lacedemonia Sarmacia, armed with fresh shining armor all ful of F S. gilt, and the field of them blew, with so many precious stones that there was no Prince in the world but would esteeme her, her helme and shield of the same, had each a plume of feathers, and on her shield the same deuise of armor, with F S. and this Posie.

Firme faith will discouer,
The intention of a Louer.

She entred in, forcing her horse with such a grace, that all the Princes said, shee much resembled the Empresse

Claridiana in her gallant proportion, when the worthie Princesse came she said, come foorth knights, for now you may shew how you can defend your Iustice. It is hard to me (answered the timerous youth) for that my fortune hath brought me to be against them whome I worshippe. The gentle Lady made no answere, but turned about her horse and came against the Troyan, who made shewe of the like: but at the encounter he lifted vp the point of his Launce, but shee shewing the promptnes of her balor, made her encounter in the middest of his shield so strongly that it made him somwhat to decline backwards vpon his h^rse crouper, and passed forwards with a slow pace, till being settled, he returned and threwe his speare from him a good way off, which was noted of al them that were in the place, neither would hee drawe his swoord. The Grecian seeing occasion to effect what he determined, did come to the Meridian and said. It seemeth vnto mee that Oristides hath met with one which bringeth him out of the opinion wherein he was, and I beleeue he will not nowe fight with the knight of the Forrest: whether I request you, in the conclusion of this, that you will bring him, where as that faire youth doth tarrie for vs, where I will stay for you without faile: and it is not conuenient that you goe with me, for any thing that might heere happen* The Prince promised to follow the Grecian, who as swift as an Eagle, tooke vp a Launce which one of the knightes left, and threw his shield at his back, he went thorow the companie of people vpon his inchaunted horse, leauing them all maruelling at his gallantnes: but their desire to see the battell of the Princesse did take from them that immagination. The warlike matron when shee came nigh vnto him said: That knight who hath taken vppon him the busines of Ladies, what so litle ouersight he ouerslips is a notable fault, howe much more this which you hau^ done, for it is noted of all. This were Lady (said the Louer) if the battaile were made with knights and not

with Angels, against whom my Lance and swoord haue no power, neither may my selfe doo lesse then worship the^. You do me wrong Sir knight said she, so to driue off the battaile. But it is more wrong said he, that I should enter in combat with her I so affect. The Lady somewhat angry, stroke him such a blowe vpon his shield, that it seemed a rock had fallen vpon him: and seconded another with a thrust, that she made him almost to loose his saddle, and gaue him the third with so great courage nigh vnto the skirt, that she disarmed all that part: yet for all this the Troyan did nothing but breake her blows, and put a side his body by the lightnes of his horse. The minds of some that were present were in doubt, although the Prince of Laodicea was secure. Contrarie thoughts were in the rigorous Damsell, who made so great hast, that sometimes it tooke away her breath. The Troyan did beare her a mightie blow, and in crossing his swoord for that it was of better mettle than the Ladies, it cut hers asunder in the middest, whereat he receiued great discontent, for that which his Goddesse shuld receiue: but loue wroght so in that small time, that it forced him to shewe a gentle tricke, and gaue great suspition to all that did behold it. Which was, he seperated himselfe a little, and tooke hys swoord by the point, and offered it vnto his Ladie, saying: Let your highnes pardon mee in that you haue lost your swoord by my occasion, with this you may conclude the battaile, in taking away my life: which is the most readiest in all the world to serue you. I haue no need of other weapons (answered the valorous Damsel) hauing a dagger wherwith to succour me, you haue not any thing to do but with your swoord to doe your best. It is not vsed, goddesse of my life, said hee, in our Country, to make any battaile with weapon of aduantage: and therwith he put it vp into the sheath, wherat they all maruelled, and also the king, who could not refraine but say. This knight doth much esteeme of women, for that he hath no power against

them, not attributing it vnto her new affection. Now doth the Troyan fully vnderstand the letter which the wise Gelasio did send, when they were vpon departure from the Iland of Fangomadan, that he should see his head in the hands of hys most cruell enemy. And for that it might the sooner ve accomplished, he closed with the Infant, and laid his amorous armes on her: but hee found a contrary answere in the angry Lady, blaming her owne ouersight, she did wound him cruelly with her dagger betweene the ioynts of the vambrace, that it made him giue a pittifull grone, which caused the Lady the more to respect him, as though be had done al the seruice possible. And it could not be but that the gentle Sarmacia when she saw the bloud of him that loued her, vpon her dagger, ^ut that she took some new compassion, and although it was but a litle it increased so much that it endured to the death. The amorous Troyan seeing himselfe hurt, tooke hold of her dagger by the hylt, with so great force that hee wrung it out of her hands, and left her without, and offered his vnto her saying: it doth not profit gentle Lady, the procuring of reuengement with your weapons, for if you wil it must be with mine, although vnworthy for that they are dedicated to your seruice. In this contention and amorous wrastling, they continued till Sunne set, which gaue him occasion for to leaue his Lady, and a ligh^ing from his horse, went whereas the Iudges were, who gaue him the glory of the victory, at the sound of an infinite number of instrumentes: but seeing that with reason his Lady might be greened, he would not leaue her so, but went whereas she was, and kneeling down, gaue her his weapons for to do with them and himself her pleasure. I for this time (said the somwhat affectioned Sarmacia) wil none of your weapons, neither accept you till such time as with mine own, I take reuengment to your cost. For the rest the Prince of Laodicea is free, the heauens hath ordained it, and my sister wife to him that I loued more than my soule: but I will first pul it out

with my own hands, than loue him that doth not consider my desert. Neither doe I thinke to put on any more harnes, if I doe not let him vnderstand the euill he hath vsed toward me. And therewith so fast as hir horse could run she went foorth, the same way which the Grecian went, and none was able to stay her, although the King cryed out that they should doe it: for she rid threatning of them that did offer it, and knowing her will they did let her passe, where as the Prince within a litle while did see her enter into the Forrest that was so nigh vnto the Cittie. The worthy Lady being departed out of the place, leauing the Louer in obscure darknes with the absence of his Sunne, hee went vnto the King, requesting that foorthwith they might be married, hauing confidence that Liuio the prince of Laodicea had committed no offence. There needed no great perswasions, for the king greatly loued the Youth. Euery one requested him to pull off his helme, and to tell them who he was: but he seeing that Rosicleer was lacking, and that it would be troublesome to stay, he excused it as wel as he could, remitting it vnto the Damsell, of who^ he tooke his leaue and said, that she shuld tel them whom he was the next day, for that he wold not meet with them. She did promise him not with a few teares, to see her selfe absent from so valiant and worthy Princes: but for that she could doe no otherwise, she forth with made them to be knowen vnto her mistresse Thomiriana, that accepted it with great content, requesting her not to make it known vnto any til that day was past. All reioyced with the new Prince, for he was of all welbeloued, and remained greatly bound vnto the princes, when as he knew who they were, where as we a while will leaue them.



Of the great battaile, that Rosicleer the Prince of Grecia had with the knight of the Forrest, and what hapned.

 Cha. 13*
WIth new and carefull thoughts, went the Grecia^ Prince forth of the Court of Lira, and could not tell

who that faire and tender Youth should bee, that was so valiant. He knew not whether his horse did carrie him, neither what he did, he was so trobled in his imagination till such time as hee heard a rusling amongst the bushes: and looking with more attension then before he did, he heard a voyce which said vnto him. Worthy Sonne of Trebatio, wherefore dost thou hasten to seeke the Knight, for the blowes thou smitest on his body, thou giuest to Oliuias soule. The obscure wordes did cause him more to suspect, and he could not imagine from whom it was spoken, but not reckning of them, he pricked forwards his horse with more hafte, directly whether as he thought he had left the knight: but he had not ridden many paces when he heard the same voyce, which said. Knight of Cupid, is this the loue thou hast vnto thy Oliuia, behold if thou dost this, thou goest against her will. Although I loose my life and all the Grecian estate, (answered somewhat alowd the angry Prince) I will goe forwards to see who this Knight might be. The voice said. O euill knight that for so many fauours giuen by thy Oliuia, thou wilt now pay her so euill, reioycing to goe to shed her bloud. This gaue him a greater desire to know who the youth should be, and could not imagine that it should be his Sonne, for then he thought Oliuia would haue tolde him of it. In this doubt, the night ouertooke him, not far from a sheephouse, where hearing noise, he went thether, and asked part of their poore sustentation: to whom they gaue it with great good wil, for that he was of a gallant proportion and wel armed. He sate down with them to supper: and when hee pulled off his helme, they receiued great content, to see him so faire and Maiesticall: being at Supper, the cheefest said vnto an other Shepheard: haue you seene one so like the knight that was heere yesterday? The Prince did well vnderstand them for that hee could speake the language, and asked them where he might find that knight they talked of? It may be said the shepheard, yt he wil be here to night,

for he told vs yesterday, that he must remaine hereabout a few dayes. Can you tell me said he, whom he is? No, answered the Shepheard, onely somewhat of his valor wee can tell. For one day being here at dinner, there came a chased Liones, who would haue run vppon vs, and without doubt haue slaine vs, if he had not been here: who arose vp, and at one blow cut her in two peeces, and sat downe as though he had done nothing. Wee carried the Liones for a present to our holy Temple: and at our returne, we saw him ouerthrow two Knights at one Encounter, the one with his launce, the other with his armed fist, and without more tarrying, he put himselfe into the thickest of the Wood. The prince reioyced at that he heard, imagining him to be his Brothers Sonne. So passing away a good part of the night, he parted from the Shepheards, leauing his horse with them, and went a good way off, putting his shield vnder his head, he fell asleepe: till Cynthia gessing the yong knight (who lay not farre off) to bee Endimion, shined with more than ordinarie brightnes, and with her light beames awaked both the knights at once: the yong knight bidding sleepe farewell with a great sigh. Then taking a Harpe, he began to sing so sweetly, that ye Greek prince with heedfull attention hearkened to his song.

Of Loues great power, eternall be my Song,
His praise be still the subiect of my verse:
And as I sing, let me the praise reherse
Of my harts Souereigne, though she worke my wrong.
Be still my ^ung, thou speakest blasphemie,
Wrong is not offered by her Deitie.
She looketh strange, because I should intreat,
For it is reason mortalls suppliant bee
To Saints, indude with heauenly Maiestie,
And such is Liriana, or more great:
Therefore I must not count it iniurie,
What seeming harme so ere she offers mee.

The amorous Youth with new sighes concluded hys sweet song, and then thus complained: Ah Liriana, what hath Rosabel deserued, that thus he must liue a dying life, banished from your presence? If it be that hereby you desire to haue your beauties fame spred by my hearts affection, let me be a little comforted by knowing that I am affected. Now would the Nephew of Achilles haue gone vnto him, but was againe stayed by his sweete and delicate voyce, that sounded in this manner.


Let be my greefes, why doo you mee assaile?
In vaine in vaine my death you doo intend:
My thoughts alone my feeble life defend,
And cheere my dying heart, when it would quaile.
Then Greefe auoyd, since thou canst not preuaile,
For why my thoughts my absent Ladie see:
And that conceit alone giues life to mee.


It giues me life, a wearie wearie life:
Come therefore greefe, thou maist at last haue gaine,
For my heart faints afflicted by disdaine.
Sad hope yeelds vp vnto the murdring knife
Of blacke despaire, whose terrors still are rife:
And driue all ioy from wretched wretched mee,
Because my thoughts no smiles but frownes doo see.


But Griefe away, againe I bid adieu,
No more no more I will thee intertaine,
I will embrace my freedome once againe:
No more will I desire her face to view,
Whose wrongs so long I bootlesly did rue.
But liue I will contemning louers life,
Wherein all good is geason, wrong is rife.


O impious blasphemer! (sodainly cride out this youth) shall Rosabell euer presume againe to see the Sunne, that

against Loues power hath so blaspheamed? Repent thee Rosabel, repent thee: wherewith he againe thus sung*

Sweete Loue shew pittie, shew pittie:
For I haue thee offended*
I doo disclaime my hatefull dittie,
Which I so rudely ended.
Thou art almightie (Loue) alone,
Life without thee there is none.

The Louer of Oliuia would no longer stay, but pacing swiftly to the Youth, counterfetting his voyce somewhat like the Troyan, thus said: Up Knight, and defend thy louing life, for I am come without my companie, because I would not be parted til I haue proued libertie the sweetest life. I doo much esteeme of you sir Knight (said the vnknowne Nephew of Trebatio) not onely for comming, but for comming thus vnto mee alone: and therewith lacing on his helme, hee assailed the Greeke Prince in such sort, that at three resistlesse blowes hee ouerthrew him to the ground. O infernall Furies, to which of you shall I compare our Prince, when he saw himselfe by one alone Knight so handled? for rising againe, at two blowes hee left him almost senselesse: but recouering, there began the greatest battell in the world. Witnesses they wanted not anie, for the Forrest Nymphes and Satyres, beasts tame and wylde were their beholders: the Shepheards also, awaked with the noyse of their strokes, stood wondring at their furious fight. Foure howers the faire Moone gaue light to their heauy blowes: and then leauing the worlds charge to her amorous br^ther, she left (for pittie) the ^ight of that pittilesse battell, the contenders beeing so wearie, that they were forced to breath themselues: the couragious yong Knight imagining, that (except some diuell had possest him) it could not be the knight with whom he combatted the night before, touching true loue and free libertie.

So thought the Greeke prince himselfe, for neuer anie but his brother brought him to that estate. With this conceit his choller so increased, that without speaking any word he went against his Enemie, whom he found not vnprouided, and together they stroke such blows, that they both stooped on their knees. Foure howers they thus continued, much wearied, but nothing discouraged. And in the midst of this contention, the wise Lyrgandeos Damsell came foorth of the Forrest, and put her selfe between the^, saying: Stay Knights awhile, and heare me speake, for hauing done yee both seruice, I am come to aske a boon of you. Both the Knights knew her, and presently granted it. Leaue off your battell then said she: and though it be my request, yet is it for both your benefits. Rosicleer was somwhat mooued, yet at last hee said: Damsell, for your sake I am content, if this knight be so pleased. I am not pleased said the yong knight, to haue the battell cease. I will exclaime on you said the Damsell if you doo proceede, to be a false knight and recreant of your word. For you promised me when I guided you to the Caue of ye wise Artidon, (where you demaunded the ende of your loue, and whose Sonne you were) that you would neuer deny me a lawfull request: and this is most iust, for it requisite that betweene you there be eternall frendship, and heere I am certaine it must begin. And in ending these words, shee vanished away, leauing them much amazed. Both of the knights put vp their swords, and the Grecian thus began. Most valiant knight, it seemeth this Damsell knoweth more of our estate than we our selues: and seeing she saith we must be frends, for my part I offer it you with most intire affection, being likewise heretoo mooued with certain inward motions, which I cannot expresse. Inuincible knight, answered the faire Youth, great is my benefit to haue frendship with the best knight in the World: and I may well say they told me true, that certefied me my best good should meete me in Lacedemonia And heere looke I

for as much good as I haue in Grecia, thogh there remain my Souereigne Oliuia, whom you (for then had the yong Knight tooke off his helme) so much represent, as were it not that I know she is not giuen to armes, I should beleeue it were her selfe: therefore faire Sir, resolue my suspitious heart, of whence you are? What my selfe knows I will acquaint you with replide the Youth. The Soldan of Niquea brought mee vp, in companie of Doriano hys Sonne, and Liriana (my diuine Mistres) his matchlesse Daughter. Till I was of age to beare armes, I tooke the Soldan for my Father: who then knighting me thus said Rosabel, thy Parents are to me vnknowen, for a lionesse brought thee to mee an infant, and by a white Rose on thy breast thou hadst thy name: a Scroll shee brought in her mouth, which said thou shouldst be my greatest enemie, till the Swan put peace betweene vs. Though it somwhat greeued me to be of vnknowen Parents, yet my hope to enioy Liriana, possessed me with ioy: and she a little cherished my hope, till on a sodaine shee forbad mee to soll^cite her with loue, and with her coynesse banished me the Countrey. So (discontent) I imbarked my selfe for Russia, purposing there at the Caue of the wise Artidon to enquire touching my birth: but I was driuen by tempest on this Coast, where I was no sooner landed, but I heard a voyce that said. Welcome the glorie of Greece and honour of great Britaine, the greatest Frend your Father hath sends you this armour, and willeth you to leaue off that you weare. And seeing no bodie, this armour was laid by mee, which you see fitteth my bodie as it had been made for me. While I was arming mee therewith, a Dwarffe came vnto me, and said: Take courage Rosabel, for you shall in this armour meete one of the valiantest knights in the world, and him shalt thou assaile with bitter hate, beeing most bound to yeeld him loue. After the Dwarffe departed, came the Damsell that parted our battell, saying to me: Rosabel, grant me a boon, and I wil bring you to the

wise Artidon. This being the thing I most desired, I promised her anie iust thing: whereupon immediately shee brought me thether. Being there, the wise man vnto my demaund thus answered: That it was not conuenient as yet to know my parents, but he said they were such as in Grecia most flourished for armes: that my loue should in the ende after manie sorrowes prooue succesfull. And for a token of the truth, hee said that I should meete in Lacedemonia the Knight that discou^red the Caue, whom verily I gesse to be your selfe, and desire thereof to be resolued: for of my selfe I haue said all I know. With great aff^ction the Greeke Prince answered: Were the discouerie death faire Knight, yet would I satisfie you in that yee aske. Know then, that I am Rosicleer, Brother to Alphebo Emperour of Trapisond, and he that discouered the Caue of Artidon, when once I departed discontent out of Great Britaine from Oliuia the Princesse thereof, now my beloued Wife. The content that Rosabel receiued exceeded: and in his ioyfull passion he brake out. O that Fortune so fauoured me (right worthie Prince) that I might call you Father: in the meane time, let me honour ys as my Lord. And therewith would haue kissed his hands, but Rosicleer kissing his cheek, said: Were I blessed with such a Sonne, I would thinke the heauens on earth had giuen me all happines. But I will intreat you to go into Greece with me, where of Oliuia we shall be resolued: and I will afterwards with all my Frends goe with you to Niquea, whence (if she consent) we will bring the Ladie you so much loue. Oh with what content remained Rosabel! he could not but embrace his suspected Father: who with like affection infolded him. As they sate thus ioyously together, Meridian and Oristides came to ye place, who wondred to see the Grecian so familiar with ye young Knight. But Rosicleer resolued them of his suspitions, and began to perswade the Troyan, that he should not offer to proceed with the battell in defence of free life: for (sayth

hee) I perswade me this Knight will put the matter into my hands. So will he too doubt ye not said Meridian, for O^istides is alreadie Loues sworne Champion. Therewith alighting, and all fitting together, the gentle Scythian discoursed from poynt to poynt the whole manner of the Combat betweene the changed Troyan and the faire Sarmacia; whereat Rosicleer exceedingly laughed, but Rosabel rose vp, and embracing the Troyan said: Being Frend to this worthie Greeke Prince, I am bound to you in dutie: but being a true Conuerti^e in recanting the heresie you held yesterday, and becomming Loues seruant, my loue to you is more increased. As the Troyan began to reply, he was disturbed by the swift comming of a verie well proportioned Knight in blacke armour: who being neere them, said. Worthie Knights, by your armour I see you are the same that yesterday in the Pallace of Lira wrought meruailes. Farre off is my natiue Country, where that I might iustly report I haue dealt with such a Knight, my desire is to proue my selfwith him that made the last battell. The Troyan stept foorth and said: I am the Knight ye looke for. It seemes you are indeed said the blacke Knight, therefore mount you, and defend this that you shall heare: You did not in the Combat yesterday the part of a Defendant, ye should haue forced your aduersarie to confesse the wrong done to the accused, and not haue so delayed the time to make an end without victorie. Doo you know sir Knight said the Troyan, who was my contrarie? A woman said the other Knight, but that is not a whit materiall: the right of the battell thou performedst not, and thereupon growes my defiance, which if thou be a iust Knight thou wilt answere. Els (sayd the Troyan) let Sarmacias faire eyes neuer giue end to the begun sorrow of my heart, if thou be not answered and chastised also for thy presumption. And therewith the furious Troian mounted his horse, and assailed his Contrarie, vsing all able violence hee could both with sword and speare.

But this blacke Knight vsed the like curtesie with him, as he had done vnto the faire Sarmacia, for indeede it was she: and neither with point of speare nor edge of sword did she returne him blow, but onely for foure howers defended her selfe against his fierce assaults: and then finding opportunitie, she cloased with him, saying. Be not so hastie warlike Knight, I come not to v^x you, but quit your kindnes shewed me yesterday at my Fathers Court. At this, the Troyan sodainly retyred, and the Ladie vnarming her head, sayd: Now am I out of your debt. And out of yours shall I neuer be said Oristides (trembling with feare of her indignation), but pardon me diuine princesse, and receiue my sword that hath offended you, and with it the Owners heart. I receiue it said the Ladie, and giue you mine in pawne, till wee meete againe, as meete wee will: and in saying this, shee returned as swift as winde, leauing the princes not a little wondring and reioycing, but especially Rosabel, who highly delighted in the Troians change. And as they were bidding God giue him ioy of his sword, they discouered a Barke that came swiftlye towards them:: and from vnder the hatches appeared a Damsell resembling her that parted their battell, ye said. Worthie Princes, the wise Lyrgandeo needeth your help, and desireth you to enter this Bark. Rosabel was neerest, who with his horse presently leapt in, saying: I will bee the first, to shew my dutie to your Lord. He was no sooner entred, but the boat remooued from land, and the damsell cryed alowd to them. Now Rosicleer will thy mortal enemie Gelasio worke that vengeance on thy Sonne and Oliuias, which on thee he could not, in the Iland of Fangomadan: and thou Troyan, looke to haue all thy content turned into lamentation: and with this ye boate and all departed out of sight, leauing the Princes so greeued, that if the true messenger of Artemidoro had not comforted them, their perill had been great. Heere must we awhile leaue them, to tell you what hapned to the prince of Dacia.




Of the aduenture which hapned to the Prince of Dacia on the Sea.

 Cha. 14.
THe worthy Dacian, glad of the happy fortunes of Torismund and Andronio his new frends, sayled in his inchaunted boate from France with great swiftnesse, till comming where he might behold part of Sauoy and Spaine, his barke made some small stay, that his kinde eyes might gratifie with their louing lookes the Countries of the faire Dutchesse whom in France he rescued, and his kind Torismund hee so much loued. And being ready to breake foorth in passion to praise their happie Princes, hee was disturbed by a violent whirling of the water: from the middest thereof arose a Sea-nymph, sitting on a Dolphin, who said. The content is great (gentle Knight) which the fight of these daintie Countries doe giue you: but I tell you, their best fortune shall be when the great Lyon of Spaine, shal send his deer and hidden Tyger (who till then shalbe nourished in base clothes) for a scurge to his beloued Countrie, filling the Ausonian lake with strange bloud. This shal be he who in his tender yeeres shall conclude things that shall be more esteemed than those that are past: and so farre he shall extend his arme, that the destinies with pure enuie shall triumph ouer him, to triumph of the victory due vnto him, attributing to his power that which the rigorous Tyger had got. And this shall not be the last good, which the heauens doth promise vnto Spaine: neither doe they so much forget Sauoy, for the most and the best good of Spaine shal come vnto Sauoy, and that land shall bee equall with the most aduantaged, and may the^ be called the fresh flower of Spaine, her good comming by curteous vsing of the venterous Lyon, who being retyred into his little Caue, shall reioyce in the tender little Lambe, who with his meekenes

doth subiect the vntamed nations. This said, the Nimph tuning a harpe, began to sing as followeth.

Not those faire three in Ida that contended,
To win the Ball, the Shepheard Venus gaue,
Whereat the other two became offended:
In all their worths faire Catalinas haue.
For it is she alone, and none but shee,
Excelles the graces of those gracious three.

Hauing finished her song, she said: by this beautie shal Spaine bee blessed and you shall shortly loose your freedome. Wherewith the Nymph vanished, and the inchanted Barke kept course into the Italian Sea: the Dacian sailing somwhat troubled* though neuer perswaded again he should be a louer. The fourth day of his nauigation, the swift Barke ran a shore in Italy: and the Dacian for that he was wearie of the seal, foorthwith caused his inchaunted horse Tirio to be taken foorth. With this the warlike Youth armed himselfe, and mounted vppon his horse desirous to meet some people to be informed what country it was. With this desire he passed till it was mid day, following the current of a brooke, till such time as he came to the head spring: there he washed and refreshed himselfe of the heate, and did eate of that which Fabio brought with him: then returning to his begun Iorney, he heard not far off blowes of a combate, then he tooke his Launce and with a light pace followed the way from whence hee heard the noise, till such time as hee sawe amongst the trees, two knights in battaile, and neere them a Damsell bound vnto a knotty Ashe making great lamentation. Not with a little griefe came the pittifull Prince vnto the Damsell, who seeing him so well proportioned, said. Ah Sir knight if there bee in you the strength (which your person sheweth) deliuer me from th^se two false knights, who are in controuersie which shall defile me. The Prince was so

angry that without remembring to vnloose her, he returned against them, saying. Backe Knights, for so vniust a cause you should not make battaile: more iustly eyther of you should help women, and not seeke to dishonor them. Much lesse care hast thou of her (they answered) that with out any more consideration leauest her to the mercy of our swoords: and without any more respect, they both returned against the Dacian, mallice making the^ quickly frends. The Dacian wold not with the point of his Speare, take reuengement of such people, but with the end hee had in his hand, he stroke one such a blow vpon his harnes, that he buckled it to his brest in such sort that it tooke away his vitall breath, where with he fell dead to the ground: and returning to the second he stroke him so on the head, that he made his braines flye in the field, therewith quenching the desire they had vnto the Damsell. In the meane time Fabio his Page had vntyed her, who greatly maruelled at the valiantnes of the knight, and came vnto him saying. The heauen (Sir Knight) reward you for this you haue done for me. For from thence commeth the reward of them that giue such succours, which with my life likewise I will repay. I giue you thankes faire Damsell said the prince: but I pray you tell mee what was the occasion that these Knightes did thus misuse yee, as also what Countrie this is where I am? The Damsell humbling her selfe, said: most valiant Knight, for euill persons to put in execution their kankred will, little or no occasion at all serues. So it is, as I walked on my way in this Forrest, I met with them, and laying hold vpon me, without any other occasion, they put me in that sort as you found me, and by and by began their battaile to try who should first make spoile of my honor. And to the ^est touching this Countrie; you shall vnderstand wor^hy Knight, that you are verie nigh vnto the great ^ittie of Rome, for in two daies iourney you may ^^me thether.
The gentle Dacian was ioyfull to bee in that famous Countrie, so praised thoroughout al the world: with many thankes he departed, leauing the Damsell much bound to his seruice, and verie ioyfull that she had seene so warlike a knight, she went onwards on her way. The Dacian took his way towards Rome, and came that night vnto a faire and delightfull groue of poplers, where he intended to passe away the night, being sommer: so there he alighted from his horse, and made his Target his pyllowe: but about aleuen a clocke at night he was waked by the noise of two shepheards, who not farre from him were a talking: but he imagining it to be some other thing, buckled on his helme, and went by little and little amongst the trees to see who they were y^ talked, til by the light of the Moone he saw two shepherds set downe vnder a huge pine tree talking together. And as one that was free from the grief of amorous cares, he receiued content to heare their talke, the one who seemed to be yonger then the other, with some shew of anger said. It is not to be doubted, frend Lisio that the brauerie of my shepperdesse exceedeth, for onely with her beautie, hath nature atchiued the name of famous. Which causeth Aliano to affirme his shepperdesse is she that deserueth Apollo for her shepherd. If he receiue content to come forth it is onely to behold her, but not to giue her light, for hee doth well know the eyes of my shepherdesse exceedeth his beames brightnes. And this will I defend, against them that be honored for Goddesses in the great Tinacria. And therewith taking foorth his wel tuned rebecke, he began this song with great sweetnes.

My Loue is of the Heard beloued,
Yet by his teares she is not moued.
In the sand his words she writeth,
And rends the songs that heinditeth
O this she me with scornes requireth:
If I say I will not loue her,
My eyes teares my griefes discouer,
I must loue though she doe hate,
Sue though she disdaine my state,
And sing in teares; this life me best delighteth.

At the end of this song, thus answered the other Shepheard. Aliano thou dost loue, and takest it for the best life: I doe not condemne thee, but rather conceiue as thou desirest the fame due to thy Shepheardesse. For this is the course of euerie louer, to say that his Shepheardesse is a Phenix, and for such a one doth hold her, his crow must needes be a swan who euer gainsaie it: and yet there can be but one excellent, and if yours be she, whome doe all other Shepheards praise, especially Poncenio. The cholar of the amorous shepheard would not let him proceede any farther, but he said. It is sufficient frend Lisio, I can with my rough crooke make knowne that Poncenio is an heryticke, in affirming that his Shepheardesse deserueth the merit of mine: and being ouercome with cholar, at two leapes he put himselfe nigh vnto Poncenio with his knottie crooke in one hand, and in his other his Ierkin, and said. Defend thee shepheard, for it is time to see, if thou hast hands to maintaine that which thou hast so falsely published. Poncenio was not a shepheard, that would take such reprochfull words: so with the swiftnes of a hawke hee put himselfe in the same order as his contrarie was, where you should haue seene one of the prettiest contentitions in the world: for as the shepheards did esteeme the^selues to be louers, they did not forget to be valliant. The Dacian Prince reioyced in beholding them, and greatlie wondred at the power of Loue, that amongst shepheards shewed this rigor: but he suffered them not to proceed forwards, for that the contention would be perilous. And so with a quicke pace, came amongst them saying: giue way gentle Shepheard, it is not iust that this contention shuld

goe forwards. Valiant knight answered Poncenio, it is not so small a matter as you thinke, if you haue fasted loue, you can say it is the greatest and most iust quarrell and rather to choose death, than in this case to leaue off contention: yet for all this, for my loue (said the Dacian) I will that ye would be frends. Of truth gentle Knight (answered Poncenio) many daies past haue I procured thys frendship with all plainnes in ye world, and I beleeue because it was so simple, it hath bin occassion that this shepheard doth thinke I doe it of necessitie, he knowing which all the world shall know, that if he loue, I liue by louing a shepheardesse, who in beautie, discreation and proportion, equalleth the most excellent. I cannot (said Aliano) but acknowledge the many good parts of your shepheardesse brother Poncenio: yet for all this you know, that my shepheardesse hath caused her to yeeld. These are passions (sir knight) said Lisio, so long time past, that it would be tedious to declare them: But since you haue taken the matter in hand, I pray you perswade them to leaue off contentions past and become frendes: for frendship doth ease the sower troubles of this amorous euill. And therewith the Dacian Lord went directly vnto the Shepherds, very ioyfull that he had seene that controuersie, and he tooke them perforce by their hands, and made them frends, which endured vnto death. And the more to binde their frendship, they all foure together sate downe on the greene and fresh grasse, making a signe vnto Fabio, to bring the horses, and likewise to inioy the frendship of the shepheards. The gallant Youth did pull off his helme, and shewed foorth his faire countenance, but he had not so soone pulled it off, whe^ as the shepheard Lisio fel down at his feete, saying. O warlike Prince of Dacia, what a happy day hath this been vnto me? wherein I haue seene that which I so much desired euer, him whom the gallant countrie of Tinacria worshipeth for their God, as a restorer of their lost content. The prince caused him to arise, wondring how he was known

in those parts: and demaunding of him, howe hee knewe him. The Shepheard answered, Worthy warrier, I am a naturall Tinacrian, and haue there fed and kept Cattle, and came many times vnto the Citty, whereof the whole Country beareth the name, there I haue seene in the Pallace portrayed your figure, and the Emperour Alphebos of Trapisond, vnto whome those of Tinacria are so much bound. And your figure and his I so earnestly printed in my hart, that I desired aboue all things in the world to see the substances. I giue you great thankes (said the Prince) for the good will which you haue shewed vnto the Emperour and mee, and in any thing I may, commaund mee. Great pleasure I shall take if you declare vnto mee any newes from those partes, for since I departed from Rosicleer the Prince of Grecia, I haue not heard any thing thence for trauelling in strange Countries. That which I can say (answered the shepheard) is the ioy which the Emperor of Constantinople your Vnkle hath, for the acknowledging of the Princes of Trapisonde to be the sons of the mighty Alphebo, although I beleeue it will bee no lesse ioy to know the Prince of Tinacria, Poliphebo, who they say is equall in valor to all the rest of the brethren: for being called the knight of the siluer branch in al parts whereas he hath trauelled, hee hath left the world full of his fame. The Dacian curteously thanked Lysio, and was ioyful at his newes: and after some earnest perswasions of them to continue frends, he prepared to ride towards Rome, the Shepheards bringing him on his way within the sight of the Common way, and were grieued to part with him. Which he seeing, promised if occasion serued hee would againe see them* at which reioycing, they returned to their Foldes: where wee will leaue them, to tell what hapned to the Prince on his way to Rome.




What hapned to the Prince Heleno, with the Emperors daughter of Rome Roselia: and her guarders.

 Chap. 15.
THe morning star, had scarce shewed it self, when as the Lord of Dacia, in Iorneying toward the mighty Citty of Rome, stayed to refresh himself at a cleare fountain, preparing his armour, til it was time to ride, for that he began to discouer the Citty and to meete with much people: so he trauelled till it was two a clocke, when being not far from the Citty, hee saw comming by a great and broad way, a troope of people, where he imagined it shuld be needful to take his speare of Fabio his Page, aduising him that in no case he should tell who he was, till he aduized him. In this sort he went nigh vnto the tumult of people, where ^e might discouer a great and sumptuous Coatch, which was drawen by twelue white horses, al their trappings and furniture ful of precious stones and vpon them twelue dwarfes, all apparelled in greene cloth of gold, according to the colour of the coach, wherein came three Ladies, in his opinion the fairest that hee had seene. She in the middest (who seemed to be cheefe) was in greene likewise, but so full of precious stones, that it dazeled his sight. This gallant Lady was with her haire loose, with a rich Fanne in her hand, and vpon her gilted head a garland of fine gold, wherein was set a shining Carbuncle, which of it selfe gaue a great light. The two Ladies were in red, cut vpon blew Tinsell, full of gold lace with curious works, their gownes somwhat low collars in such sort, that their snowy brestes were discouered: behinde the Coatch came twelue knightes, armed in fresh and shining armor, and before it as many all with greene Beuers, full of figures, which signified the Ladies name, Nigh vnto the side of the Coatch came three knights, the best proportioned in the world, the one with greene armor,

the richest (except his owne and his Frends) that he euer saw. In his shield was painted a Ladies face, with this posie.

This faire fier is the light
That giues brightnes to each sight.

He was gallantly mounted, his horse trapped sutably in greene. The other two were in shining red armour, and on their shields both had one deuice, beeing a sea couered with a net, and at the ende therof a faire Ladie, with this Motto.

Loue the earst did glorie get,
Cannot scape faire Beauties net.

As the Dacian admired them, so wondred they at him: and on the sodaine came a Damsell to him, and with gallant curtesie said. The three knights that are the keepers of yonder Ladies, gessing you a knight amorous, desire you to iust with one of them. I wold satisfie that request sayd he, but I pray you certefie them I am not amorous. It is like (said the Damsell) you loue your Ladie little, that dare not for her hazard a fal: but you shall iust ere ye goe, or shew great signes of cowardise. And therewyth she rid swiftly to the Knights and Ladies, who laughed exceedingly, especially when she told them he bare Cupid for his deuice, and yet denied to be amorous. Back they sent her againe with this message. Sir, our knights send you choice of three things: whether you wil iust with the^, loose your shield, or blot out the deuice, for with that shield they sweare you shall delude no more. They haue the aduantage (answered the prince) for Louers are made hardie by their Ladies fauors. The Damsell thinking him a pure coward, said: Therein they shall haue no aduantage, here, take this rich iewell for my fauor, on this condition, that if you be ouerthrowne, you surrender it to the victor. Agreed said the Dacian: and with great gallantnes he stood readie for the Iusts: all the three knights hauing receiued fauors of ye Ladies, to giue if he wer victor.

The first yt came against him was one of the red knights, whom the Dacian ouerthrew to the ground, beeing himselfe therat no more mooued than a rocke: then came the other red knight and was serued in the same order, to the great amazement of all the beholders. Heleno being nere the damsell said: I want a speare (faire damsell) for thys greene Knight, playe you the Page and choose mee a good one, and you shall see me well defend your iewell. The ioyfull Damsell chose two of the best speares, and giuing him one, he went against the greene Knight, that stayed for him: and in the encounter both brake, and with their horses rushed so together, that the greene Knight with his horse dead between his legs came to ye ground. The prince comming to the ouerthrowne Knights said: Of this euill your selues are guiltie, heereafter iest not at them whose strength ye know not. The greene knight curteously yeelded his iewell, but the red Knights defied him to mortall battell, but the Ladies in the Chariot forbad it: and vnto the Dacian the Damsell thus said: Roselia the Emperors Daughter (being the Ladie in greene, accompanied with the Princesses of Scotland in red) desireth to know your name, and that you would accompanie her to the Emperours pallace. The Da^ian being nigh the Coach shewed his faire face, and at his eyes drew to his heart her fairnes, both being enamoured either of other: at length with verie great reuerence he said. Souereigne Ladies, pardon I beseech you the vnwilling greef I haue giuen vnto these knights, the fauors are this Damsells that fauoured me^ with hers: and where your Excellencie askes my name, and commaudeth my vnworthie attendance, this is humbly my answere: I am bound from both, till I haue finished an aduenture, which ended, I will both answere and attend on you. On that condition said the princesse, we are this fauor, giuing him a iewell, and bee as speedie as you may, for I will expect your returne. The Dacian boowing himselfe promised his attendance: and so parting, he

put himselfe into the thickest of the woo^, and they wondring at his worthines, returned toward the Cittie. Our Dacian being in the wood and alighted, could not forget the beautie of Roselia: yet loath to entertaine loue thoughts, he tooke his Lut^, and to the sound thereof sung in thys manner.

Fond affection, hence and leaue mee,
Trie no more for to deceaue mee.
Long agoe thou didst perplex mee,
Now againe seeke not to vex mee.
For since thou leftst off to assaile mee,
Power nor passion could not qua^le mee.
As the Lambe the Wolfe I flye thee,
As my foe Loue I defie thee:
Wend a way, I care not for thee,
Childish tyrant I abhor thee.
For I know thou wilt deceaue mee:
Hence away therefore, and leaue mee.

Till euening in contrarie imaginations he rested, and was then disturbed with the noyse of two Giants and foure knights, who were come so neere him, that he might easily heare one of the Giants say: Are you sure our princes of Gibia are acquainted with our comming? They are said the other Giant, but will not bee seene till wee haue tane away the Ladies. Then said the first Giant, let vs hast to the pallace, for as I get the Scottish Ladies for our princes, so will I haue the Emperours daughter Roselia for my Sonne: and in this talke they poasted toward the Cittie. Our Dacian (glad of this occasion) was not farre behind, but at the entring of the gate rushed among them. To whom one of the Giants said: For thy hast fond hardie knight, either tell vs what thou meanst to make such speed, or leaue with vs thy horse for thy presumption. My horse I will neither leaue (said he) nor tell ye my busines.

But thou shalt said the other Giant tel me, and as he was laying hold on the princes arme, with the great end of his speare he ouerthrew him to the ground, and with a light leape cleered the gate for his page and himselfe, stepping aside, to see which way they tooke. The Giants thought him some diuell, and by reason of their busines would not follow him: but being guided by a knight that knew the way, they went directly to the pallace Orchard, and mou^ted the wall, sending their horses to a place appointed. Alwaies the prince was within the hearing, and leauing his horse with Fabio, followed them ouer the wall: by which time they had reared a ladder vp to the Princesse chamber window, and one of the Giants beeing almost at the top, the nimble Dacian ran and ouerthrew the ladder, so that with the fall the Giant brake both his legs, making such a crie, that the Court was straight in an vprroare. Our Gallant in this time was not idle, for that betweene him and the other Giant began a rigorous battell, which hee had quickly ended, but that the foure knights who were verie strong, greatly troubled him: but he soone dispatched two of them, and in the seconds fall, the Giant smit the prince so rudely on the helme, yt made him to kisse the earth: but it was little for his good, for as he thought to catch him in his armes, the Prince arose with ye point of his sword vpright, which vnder the skir of his armour passed through his heart. As he was falling, the other cripple Giant ful of mallice, came creeping to doo a mischiefe: but the prince quikly deuided his head from his body, wherat ye knights vainly sought to flee, for the heroicke Eleno stept before them, and parted one to the breast, the other falling at his feete he tooke to mercie, because he shuld reueale the treason to the Emperour: before whom and the prince of Almaine, who were now with twenty armed knights come, and before the Ladies that from the windowes beheld the battell, all was by the knight confessed: and the manner of the princes following them by himselfe told. Whereat

the Emperour standing amazed, ye Dacian kneeled down, and to the Prince of Almaine he said: Receiue (worthie Prince) this little seruice, for the greef I put ye too yesterday. When the Prince perceiued it was the Knight that ouerthrew him, he imbraced him, saying: valorous knight vse to me no such curtesie, for I am infinitely bound vnto you, for this seruice done vnto my Lord the Emperour. The Emperour hauing heard of him before, and beheld the mightie strokes on the dead giants and knights, could not speake for ioy, but taking him by the hand, led him to his Daughters chamber, and finding her with the two Princesses of Scotland, he said: Daughter, I haue broght you this knight prisoner, keepe him safe, but vse him well, for I know you are not ignorant of his desert. And turning to the Dacian, he said: Where my best ioy is* ther I leaue you, and I de^^re ye to tell me your name? I am of Tartarie, and called the Knight without loue. My small desert most royall Emperour, meriteth not this gracious fauour, but your kindnesses are euerlasting bonds to binde me to your seruice. The Emperour left him to his rest, his lodging being appointed hard by the princesses: but neyther he nor she possessed their wonted rests, Merlins water hauing now in his breast lost the operation, and Dianaes rules beginning to dye in hers. Arbolinda the Scottish Princesse was Roselias co^forter, but our Heleno was alone: till carefull Fabio maruelling at his masters long stay, knockt alowd at the Court gate, and made earnest enquirie for his master. The Emperour had vnderstanding thereof, who caused him to be conueied to his master, that was not a little ioyfull of his comming. Being in the chamber, and suspecting no hearkners to be nigh: Fabio said the Prince, in anie case confesse not that I am Heleno Sonne to the King of Dacia, but call me the Knight with out loue of Tartarie, for so to ye Emperor haue I named my selfe: for betweene his Maiestie and my Father was a great quarrell when they were Knights Aduenturers, which is

not yet ended. The amorous Roselia and Arbolinda heard all ioyously, but she was more delighted, when the prince tooke a Lute and thus expressed his loue passions.

Yeeld vp thy life into the hands of Loue,
For faire Roselias beauty bids thee so:
Poore Dacian prince, her curteons fauour proue,
Liue if she graunt, or dye if she say no.
For in her smile or frowne is set the date,
Of thy heauens blisse or euer dying fate.
But Fondling, how canst thou expect such ioy?
A stranger and desertlesse of her grace,
But doe exclaime against that cruell boy,
That bound thy freedome to her Angels face,
And rather dye than thy hearts pride discouer,
In daring thoughts to be a Goddesse Louer.
Yet is she faire, and fairenes should be milde,
She Princely is, and free are Princes hearts,
With thoughts ingrate they will not be defilde,
But giue large giftes for very small desartes.
O then make sute, she may perchance regard,
And for thy small desert giue rich reward.

The princesse was so ouerioyed, that shee retyred to her chamber, and thus requited his affected Sonnet.

Teares in mine eyes, suspition in my heart,
And modest shame deny what I desire:
Faine would I ioy* but still appeareth smart,
And threatens paine if I come neere this fire.
Wherein God wot I burne and it in mee.
Perforce I yeeld a yeelding loue to be.
Sweete Cytherea charge thy gentle Sonne,
That he be kinde and I will thee adore,
With myrtle boughes Ile to thy altar runne,
And praise the Paphian Goddesse euermore.
White doues Ile dayly offer at her shrine,
If this faire Prince proue firmely to be mine.
But if like Ariadne he me leaue,
When I haue made him Master of my heart,
I must exclaime Loue teacheth to deceaue,
And is vniust to recompence desart:
O farre farre off* be such a thought I craue,
From him who for my Lord I meane to haue.

Hauing finished her Song, she was incouraged by Arbolinda to goe through a secret doore into the Princes cha^ber, which with some feare shee attempted: and being at the doore, they stayed to heare him againe thus sing.

If I must (sweet Loue) obay,
Be pittifull to mee I pray.
And let me haue my Loues reward,
With pittie let her me regard,
And then thy quiuer I will fill
With arrowes to content thy will.
I for thee will I euer fight,
My name shalbe Loues martiall knight,
On my shield thee will I weare,
Still thy colours will I beare.
If thou help my heart distressed,
Thou shalt be euer blessed.
To my faire I will appeale,
That with me she gently deale,
Farewell hope loue will not yeeld,
Yet I beare him in my shield,
The toward boy is too too crosse,
And delighteth in my losse.

The princesse at the songs end, by Arbolindas meanes entred, and thus the Scottish princesse began merily to queststion him.
Sir* like diligent Warder^ we come to hearken of your health: and being but awhile since neere your doore, wee heard one name himselfe Heleno Prince of Dacia, who if he be your Frend, is hether welcome, if otherwise, he shal not here abide to vexe you. The Prince perceiuing how he was discouered, remained a while confounded: but intending to dissemble it if he might, he said. Faire Ladie, than my selfe and my Page in this place till your comming I assure ye this night there hath been none: and where ye tell me of a Prince of Dacia, I assure ye I know not any such. It is verie likely said Roselia, you are vnacquainted with him, your Countries are so far asunder, and your affections farther: he being a Dacian and a louer, you a Tartarian, and without loue. Leaue off this trifling said Arbolinda, we know you (gentle Prince) to be Heleno: but bee secure, for the Princesse commeth not to meddle about your parents busines, but to giue kinde answere to your hearts desire, if your tung lately deliuered not dissembling passions. If it did answered Heleno, let me for euer be tunglesse: but pardon me diuine princesse, that so rudely haue attempted to name your excellence. If impatience at my presumption trouble your gentle heart, discouer Heleno to the Emperour (for I am he) that hee maye reuenge his hate against my Father, and the harme offered to your Highnes. Your desert sir knight is great, and your desire much, ingratefull I will not be, but intertain you for my Knight: and as you better deserue, expect reward. Withall I enioyne you, that for my sake yee attempt an Aduenture in this Cittie. So least we be all ouerheard, as lately we ouer-heard you, we will for thys time part. Thus went the Princesse away happie by her knights affection, leauing him in a paradice of content: where it is reason that till the Sun arise we let him rest, and in the next Chapter you shall heare of his most admirable aduenture.




Of the accusation that the Prince of Dacia made of the Princes of Gibia, and the ende of the aduenture that was in the place.

 Chap 16.
NO sooner had the Sun beautified the morning but the Emperor commaunded the Princes of Gibia to appeare in the great hall: whether himself with his daughter, the Prince of Almaine, and the Princesses of Scotland conducted the amorous Dacian: who in that great presence discouered y^ treason of the Princes of Gibia, howe they had consented with the Giants to steale away the Princesse of Scotland, and to giue the daughter of the sacred Emperour to a base and hideous Giants Sonne: which accusation the knight prisoner confessed. And when the Princes denyed it, the Lord of Dacia chalendged them to mortal battel, the one to fight two houres and then the other to help him. Which they accepting, the combat was presently appointed: to the great griefe of the Princesses of Scotland, who not withstanding considering the violence intended, were somwhat pacified, and by Roselia perswaded to hope for better Princes: and so they agreed to stand with her to see the combat, the Prince Heleno being alreadie entred the li^^^, and not perceiuing his aduersaries ready, busied himself to be hold a maruellous chapple on one side the Court, seated vppon foure pillers of white Iasper, and all the couering of the same: in the middest seemed a Knight to be thrust thorough with a sword, the richest that euer the Prince had seene, and his armour of the same worke that his was, but farre richer, and vpon his shield he had the auncient deuise that he was wont to haue, which gaue him no small content, and reading a writing it declared the aduenture, and was this. At such time as the fauored Swan shall shewe her valor in this mighty place, commaunded by the simple Doue,

a knight shall get the armour of the vnhappie Brutus, who gaue himselfe a lamentable death with his owne swoord. The Prince of Dacia would foorthwith haue prooued the aduenture, but he was aduised by the signe, that his enemi^s were in the place. And therewith hee turned about his horse with a gallant demeanure. There came with them many of the Court, and the eldest first put himselfe right against the Dacian, the yonger remaining still at the beginning of the Listes, tarying till twoo houres wer past to helpe his brother. So when the fearefull signe was made, the one came against the other as fast as their horses could run, and encountred with all their force in the middest of their careere: but that of the Prince of Dacia was the greatest, for striking him in the middest of his shield it made both him and his horse come to the ground, with great admiration to all them of the Court. The Dacian would take no aduantage of him, but alighted from his horse, and taried til that the Prince was cleare of his, who very couragiously with his swoord in his hand came against the Dacian, giuing him so great a blowe, that hee made him stoop with one hand to the ground, and turning to renue the same hee stroke him so vpon the right shoulder that don Heleno felt it euill: but rising vp he approached with so rigorous an answere, that he made him giue three or foure steps backwards ready to fall, and followed him so, that if hee of Gibia had not been cunning, hee had ouerthrowne him: for he seeing his intent, put the point of his swoord forwards, and as he was earnest to come on, if his armour had not been magicall, our Dacian had not gone free, for hitting him in the buckling of the brest-plate his swoord did somewhat enter, so that it was needfull for him to beare backwards because he would not be hurt: but he returned with great cholar, and closed with his enemy, both giuing together so heauy blowes, that he of Gibia was forced to put both his hands to the ground to keep him from falling, and the Dacian Lord, made an vnmeasurable

staggering. From that time they continued wyth great force, no aduantage appeering between them, he of Gibia maintaining himselfe for more then one houre with great honor against Heleno: yea halfe of the second houre was past, when as the cholar of the Dacian was turned into liuing bloud, and throwing his shield at his backe, he tooke his swoord in both his hands, and gaue him of Gibia so strong a blow vpon his helm that he cloue his head, and ouerthrew him dead at his feete, breaking his swoord in three peeces, the pommell onely remained in his hands. I will let passe the griefe that the faire Arbolinda sustained and leaue her in a sound in the Princesse lap, who was busied in beholding the knighthood of the Dacian Lord, who had no time to secure himself, when as like the wind the second Prince of Gibia came foorth with desire to reuenge the death of his brother: and more respecting rage than the order of Knighthood, he came behind the gentle Dacian with the brest of his horse, with so strong an encounter, that he layd him on the ground, passing ouer him with his horse, and left him almost without breath: but in recouering himselfe, more furious than a viper of Hircania, he aboad the comming of his enemy, who came with so great swiftnes, that it was miraculous the Dacian eff^cted that which he did. For as he passed by, he threw the pomell and hylt rf the swoord, with so great strength as if it had bin forced out of a peece of ordinance, and stroke him on the helme so vntoward a blowe, that whether hee would or no, he made him leaue his saddle, and without sence to fall to the ground. The content was great that all receiued at so venterous a blow: and if thereat the worthy Roselia did reioice, there is no doubt, and the more when as she saw that the prince, as one that had done nothing, went directly vnto the edyfice with an ireful pace, with the trunke of a speare in his hand: but he was not so soone come thether, whe^ as between the pillers, the earth did open, and there came foorth a serpent, as long as a lance:

who beating the ground came against the Prince, that with no little feare did abide her comming. At first she rose vp so high that he could not strike her head, but her body the trunke was so short, but the serpent stroke him with her taile, with so great force, that shee threw him a good way from the pillers, giuing him a greeuous fall to the ground: which did not a little greeue the Emperor and al those that desired to see an end of the aduenture. The Dacian was so kindled in cholar, that he wisht it had been two serpents: and with a light leape assalted the serpent, who giuing wonderfull shrikes came to catch him with her clawes: but before she could fasten her tallants, our Heleno did execute his blow with the trunke of the Lance vpon her head, with so great force, that hee made her fall to the ground and followed her to haue stroken another blow, at such time as shee did incorporate herselfe in such sort, that he could not hit her but on the necke, breaking al in peeces the trunke of the Lance: but he went not away boasting of that blow, for the Serpent set her furious nailes vppon his shield, and pulled it so strongly, that she got it and brake it, which made the prince the more to wonder, for that hee thought his shield had been magicall. And so with a newe feare, his Lady bearing him company with a thousand sighes, he did abide the Serpent with his armed fist, for he had no other armor left, and as she came aloft, without any feare he went vnto her, and lifting vp his hand, he stroke her such a blow vpon the head, that hee made her loose her blow, but yet she caught him betweene her clawes with so great rigor ye it seemed she had thrust them into his bowels. He thinking that he had bin wounded to death, quickly drew out his dagger, and with the point nailed her in the head two or three times, and made her to stretch foorth her selfe with the pangs of death, in the middest of the edyfice. The Dacian arose vp so wearie and wounded, that all were greatly admired, how he could sustaine himselfe on his feete: but as though he had been whole, he assalted the

shape that had the armour, and vpon a soddaine there passed before him, a furious Gyant saying. Stand cowardly knight, for first thou must know the sweetnes of my fauchion, and therewith gaue him such a blow vpon the helm that halfe his head was vnarmed. The Dacian was in great feare of death, in seeing the small defence which his armour had, to that which the Giant had, and then found the lacke of his good swoord: but considering who did behold him, he went vnto the Giant, who again was lifting vp his heauie fauchion: the Youth making shew as thogh he would abide it, but at the fall, hee closed with him and his dagger in his hand, and neuer left stabbing til he fel down dead. Then assailed he again the portrature, when sodainly a tempest filled all the place, so that the Prince could not be seene, and in the thicknes of this storme the great wise man Nabato apeared to the Prince, giuing him the armour and weapons of the portrature, and charging him not to stay after he had ouerthrowen the prince of Gibia, but hye to the sea where was his inchanted bark: for said the wise man in this storm Roselia and her frend the princesse of Arbolinda are taken away: but at last you shall meete with your content. With that the storm cleared, the Edifice was vanished, the two princesses among the Ladies missed, and the Dacian ouerthrowing the prince of Gibia for dead, poasted away like lightning on his horse Tirio, his page following him to the inchaunted Barke, leauing the Court in a confusion, till the Emperour was comforted by the wise Nabato; who tolde him though the taking away of his Daughter were greeuous, and by her loue much bloud should be shed: yet should it be in the end ioyous, and for the honor of the Empire. The Emperour knowing Nabato euer to haue had care of his affaires, gaue credit to him, but yet retyred with the prince of Almaine, both very sad into the pallace. The wise Nabato had in his power Roselia and Arbolinda, and making the^ by his arte forget all feminine feare, he apparrelled them

pages, and sent them in quest of the Dacian, which they desired: intending to see what other Lady hee loued, and to reuenge the disgrace (as they tooke it) done them by his sodaine departure Them will we leaue, and turne to the fiue Princes left with Gelasio: and of the maidenhead of their knightly aduentures.



What hapned to the Princes in the defended Iland, brought vp by the wise Gelasio.

 Chap. 17.
THe wise Gelasio seeing the Princes in yeeres increase, and in valor to bee excellent, sent first foorth Celindo and his Sister, he apparelled lyke Apollo shee like Pheobe: but mounted on twoo fierce horses spotted blacke and white, who ioyfull to sit such beastes, with boare Speares in their handes, went on their wonted hunting, and followed their game so long till they came to the Castle of Fangomadan: where reading the writing that promised the aduenture to them that durst attempt it without armes: and also that there were weapons within, the Princesse winded the horne so shrilly that all the place rung thereof* When sodainly the mighty Fangomadan with an iron mace in his hand, and a swoord by his side all armed issued foorth, and in his company a deformed Sagittary, with arrowes of Iron and a bowe of steele. The Giant seeing those faire youths commaunded them away, telling them he was not to try the aduenture with such Infants: when Celindo and his Sister with their fistes at once strooke the Sagittari^ and him two such blowes on the wast (for higher they could not reach) that they retyred foure or fiue p^ces backe, the which so incensed Brandafidell, (being led to furie contrarie to his nature by, inchauntment) that hee sought to take the Lady in his armes, but shee closing with him drew out his swoord and sayd: Now furious

beast am I weaponed, and thy aduantage of weapons shall be to thy hurt, and therewith shee cut him on the thigh to the bone: and with a light leap stept to the Sagittarie wounding him in the arme, as he was readie to shoote one of his arrowes at Celindo. For which her brother was nothing pleased, but to quit her stept to Brandafidell, and smit him so on the knee, that he could scarsly stand: wherewith Celindo entred the Court, and came to the sepulcher, and in dispite of the Sagittarie that followed him drewe out the swoord which Rosicleer lost in the battailes conclusion with Fangomadan, and therwith returning, he encountred his aduersarie, with admirable boldnes. Meane while the Giant and the princesse were close, and indured an admirable wrastling. To beholde which the Princesse Floralinda was gotten to the windowes, and knowing the battaile was for her deliuerie, shee prayed to the heauens to ayde those amiable younglings. Whome (though vnknowne) shee affecteth as her Children. By this the Sagittarie thinking to gripe Celindo, was preuented by a deadly wound giuen him in his brest, which made him fall, and the Prince without feare did sit on his senselesse trunke to behold the end of the dangerous wrastling betweene his Sister and the giant: who left him with her strong resistance nigh dead on the Pauement: with whose fall there hapned so great a noise that it frighted the young Princes, and Deuine Floralisa, looking for enemies stept to the sepulcher, and drew thence the swoord of Camilla. But presently sweete musique altred that feare, and the gentle Brandafidell the newe Greeke awaked from his inchauntment, and comming directly to Floralisa, whome shee doubted for an enemy, he said. Diuine Princesse pardon mine error in offering blowes to a Youth of so excellent prowesse: the good yee haue done mee with this contention no tongue can tell: for now is the inchauntment ended.
With this Floralisa left, and then Floralinda the princesse of Macedonia descended the staires giuing praise to God for ending the aduenture: and looking on Celindo shee thought vpon her Lord Meridian, and in his sisters face she seemed to see her selfe: with all motherly affection shee imbraced them, saying: O that you were the lost Children of the Scythian prince and Macedonian princesse: and so with many ioyfull teares she intreated them to tel where they were born? To whom the yong princesse answered: Diuine Lady, of our birth we are ignorant, only nurst in this Iland by the wise Gelasio. Infinite ioyes at once possessed Floralinda with this answere, for she made no question they were her children: and no lesse ioyous they were of their weapons and her freedome. At length they both importuned the Giant to giue them the order of Knighthood: which he willingly did, and the mother girded on the daughters sword, and the sister her brothers. There vowed they frendship to the Giant. Who told them it was now time to part, for the imprisoned Lady must be freeed to goe see her husband: and wishing them to commend him to the wise man his Unkle, whome they called father, they all parted ioyfully: the Castle gate shutting with a great noise of a battle, which caused ye brother and sister to stay, the Giant and princesse found themselues at the Seaside, and there entred a ship to sayle towards Grecia. Where wee will leaue them, to tell you how the other three princes Argante, Clarisell and Torisiano were welcommed at the Castle of Fangomadan: who following their hunting as the brother and sister did, came directly wher they read the writing which said: No knight nor person weaponed must attempt to enter. Whereupon with an excellent courage they stucke their boare speares in the earth, and hanging their swoords at their saddle bowes, they came to the Castle gate which sodainly opened, where at entred, and found three Arkes, and in each of them an armed Knight, and on their helmes their names, the first was Milo of Rome,

the second Astrusio King of Media, the third Telamon of Greece, Milo out of the piller in the inchaunted sepulcher had drawen his sword, and began a most rare battel with vnarmed Clarisell, who with great lightnes cleered himselfe, and closing with Milo wrung from him perforce his sword, and therewith assailed the other two knights that were entred combat with Argante and Torisiano: who without respect of knighthood, left the vnweaponed youths and assailed Clarisell: who so defended him that the noise of the battell was dreadfull. This was the noise that Celindo and his sister heard, and comming within sight, they thought to assist the youth, when sod^inly a Caue opened, whereout issued a hideous monster, that clasped Celindo and ran in with him: but Floralisa followed so neere that the monster had no time to shut the Caue. Argante and Torisiano this while came to the sepulcher* and offering to draw the two swords out of the pillers, they were hindred by the violence of fire: And sodainly came before them two mightie giants each with a long key at his girdle, off^ing to take the yong princes in their armes, but between them foure began a most perillous and daungerous wrastling wherein the princes being almost wearied, they sodainly broke the keyes from the Giants girdles and smiting the^ in the forheads with a horrible crie they fell downe dead. Then went the Youths againe vnto the Sepulcher, and Torisiano drew out ye sword of Astrusio and Argante Telamonios, for with the two Giants deaths the inchantment ceased. Then went th^se ioyfull princes, and with the key^s opened the doore where Clarisel was maintaining the battell against the three inchanted knights: who seemed like furies when they perceiued the youths possessed of theyr swords, and for three howers they maintained a doubtfull battell, but being all by the princes ouerthrowne, they vanished away, leauing their armours, wherewith the princes armed one another, finding the armours so fit, as if it had been made for them. Being armed said Clarisel vnto

his companions: In such a Castle as this, it is verie like there are more keepers. Being better prouided of armour, our care is the lesse said Argante. So they searched about the Castle, but could finde no bodie, onely they dyd heare the furious blowes of a battell, that seemed by the hollownes of the sound, to bee fought in some vault of the Castle. This was the battell betweene the beauteous Floralisa and the inchanted Camilla. For the princesse following the Monster that bore away her brother, at ye foote of a darke paire of staires ouertooke him, and parted hys head from his shoulders. When Celindo was about to re^der thankes for his rescue, he was hindred by the descending of the furious Camilla, who forced both brother and sister thorough a long entrie into an open Court: where she fought almost sixe howers. O that I had sufficient arte to describe the excellence of this fight, and to quote the vnbeleeueable dexteritie of this excelling Damsell, aswel in giuing as auoyding dangerus blows. The last that of this long fight made an ende, was a desperate thrust cast vnder the gorget of Camilla, that parted her throate, and vnarmed her head: where with falling downe, the princesse in sted of ioy mourned, to behold so beautiful a face as Camillas stained in bloud. But on a sodaine the bodie vanished, and a voyce said: Knight, arme thy selfe, and pittie not mee, for I am vnhurt. With more content the Ladie tooke vp the armour, and by her brothers helpe was armed therein. And so they ioyfully ascended the stayres, and in the Court fo^nd the three faire princes with the wise Gelasio: being so ioyfull, that he continued a long time in imbracing them. Though the princes had neuer seene one another before, yet by the pictures they remembred one anothers countenance: the yong Assyrian at the fight of Floralisa making such fuell of his heart, as loues fire and his liues light, were either at once extinguished, so long his affection continued. The Wise-man caused Celindo to knight them all, and Floralisa to girt their swords* and

and so he brought them home, and after they had dined, he brought the brother and sister out at the doore that conducted them to the sea side, where they slew the Sagittaries the first day they hunted: and the wise man said, follow this way Celindo, and win armour. Being come to the place, they read this writing on a piller.

Who euer doth intend to haue;
The armour kept within this Caue,
Which kinde Medea forgd by Arte,
For Iason false, that slue her heart,
Let him attempt a danger great,
Through vnseene fire and sure felt heate.
Before he bring it to an end,
With monstrous shapes he must contend.
Fierce beastes, foule fends the porters be,
To barre him from his entery:
Yet is there graunted vnto one,
To win this armour, els to none.
That shall be cald the hidden youth,
To him tis graunted of a truth.

And a little lower there was on the same piller this inscription.

The youth must enter and no other,
The Sister may not helpe the brother.
If she attempt she must returne,
Else ceaselesse shall our fier burne.
For neither strength nor hardines*
Preuaileth in this busines.
Be warned therefore and take heed,
For onely he of this must speed.

Floralisa carelesse of the writing, went in with him; but they were so afflicted with heate, that they hath returned.

I perceiue Sister said Celindo, that as the writing saith, I must enter alone: therefore I pray you stay at the entrie with our horses. I would gladly haue borne you companie said she, but seeing it may not bee, heauens Guider prosper you in the aduenture. So entred this valiant and couragious Youth, as boldly as if he had had on his sisters armour: but he had not gone farre, when sodainly one laid hold of his sword, and pulled it from him perforce, and a voyce ioyfully said: Hee must haue a greater care of hys owne weapons, that seeketh to win others. The prince with his swords losse and violence of the heate, doubted to goe forward with the enterprise: but comming to a doore that opened into a great Court the heat left him, and a furious Griffon came against him, whose braines with hys shield flat in both hands, he at the first blow beat out. He had no sooner done it, but he beheld before him one lyke a mightie furie, who said: Thinke not vnhappie Knight, to win easily the victorie: and therewith lifted vp a huge mace, hauing also Celindos sword at his girdle: which the Prince espying, ioyfully ran within him, but could by no meanes recouer his sword, which so vexed him that he laid hold on his mace, and continued strugling with him for it more than an hower, at which time the furie vanished, leauing his sword on the ground, which he took vp with no lesse ioy than when he first won it. So being very wearie, he rested awhile in the midst of the Court, and wondred at the gallant building: at last he rose, and came to a gate of steele, that had thereon this writing. Whosoeuer wil win the Armour of the beloued Iason, let him knocke with the pomell of his sword, and he shall find the entrance dangerous. Celindo (for all the threatning) knocked presently, and the gate opened: but on either side stood two deformed Sagittaries, with hatchets of steele in their hands readie to strike hauing their armes aloft. At which sight the Prince was somewhat amazed, but taking courage, he ran vnder one of the Sagittaries armes, which did not

onely cause the Sagittarie to loose his blow, but both hys hands: for his fell^w ouer-reaching to hit the Prince, pared them away by the wrists, while the prince giuing the Sagittary on the further side a blow on the thigh, that almost parted the bone, rusht into the hall: whether the one handlesse, the other halfe leglesse followed him, both who^ at two deadly thrusts he left dead, and stopped to a Table whereon lay the richest armour ye was euer seene: which before he could well touch, there issued a Ladie with two faire Children to him, saying: It repenteth mee not that this armour made for the faithlesse Iason, that forsooke me and these two children, fitteth such a knight. I charge you to be confident in seruice of Ladies, especially your owne Ladie, and let my example which I will in this ditty decypher, bee to you a looking glasse. With which word excellent musique sounded and the Lady thus sung:
I was of Colchos the admired,Wherein the fleece of gold (desired,Of many knights their liues that lost)Remaind vntucht, the seekers crostWith bloody death, till I did seeThe face that won my libertie.O my fortune fortunelesse,To loue so soone my hearts distresse.Old Aesons snone whom I reuiued,Of life and beauty me depriued,The Dragons fierce for him I quaild;Against the keepers he preuaild;All my deere Countrey I forsooke,And him for all I gladly tooke,O my fortune fortunelesse.To loue so soone my hearts distresse.For when I thought I was beloued,And for his good my Arte had proued:To Creufa he his sauour lent,And falsly from Medea went.Who iustly moou'd with kindled yre,Slew these two Babes, burnt her in fire.O my fortune fortunelesse;To loue so soone my harts distresse.
Then discoursed she to him all the storie of Iasons loue to her, (for shee was the inchaunted Medea) and remember (said she) the Ladie you shal loue is of Grecia. To the Prince of Scythia haue respect, for by Nature you are thertoo bound: and how euer by Gelasio you are charged to the contrarie, yet loue the Grecian princes, and much good fortune follow you. Herewith she and the Children vanished, and he ascended armed vp vnto his Sister, who thoght long of his comming, but at his sight was exceeding ioyfull, especially embracing him for performing the Aduenture. When either had sufficiently delighted themselues in saluting other, they returned to the Castle, not entring by the ordinarie gate, but by the Fountaine Court, where were the precious Daggers, which Floralisa woon for all her Companions, by the death of a Sea monster* that assailed her as she passed by the Fountaine. The wise Gelasio brought all the princes, (for by then Clarisel Argante and Torisiano wer returned from hunting) into the chamber where the pictures were: where, Floralisa fixed her eyes vpon the Image of the Tinacrian Poliphebo, Clarisell gazed on her, and Celindo on Rosaluiras Counterfet. Who knowing his loue was of Grecia, determined to trauell thether, and to this the Wise-man agree^d, for that they should defie the princes. Clarisel went alone, full of passion, and solitarines best fitted his disquieted thoughts. The Brother and Sister went the next day, and the daye after their departure Argante and Torisiano followed, hauing

first vowed eternall frendship. Them will we now leaue, till time giue vs leaue to talke of them, and return to the faire Roselia and Arbolinda of Scotland, that followed
Heleno prince of Dacia, apparelled like pages:



What chaunced Roselia and Arbolinda, in seeking Heleno Prince of Dacia.

 Cap. 18.
YOu are not ignorant I am sure, that of all greefes none equalleth the sorrow we receiue to be seperated from those we do affect: nor anye paine is easier ouerpassed, than the trauell to follow them whom we desire to see. Roselias example and Arbolinda her kinde Frends may serue for proofe: for they pursued the Dacian through all dangers of sea and land, Roselia led by loue of him, and Arbolinda by affection to her. One day (the Dolphins dauncing on the vntroubled waters) there came a ship hulling along by the barke wherein these boy-like Ladies sayled* in which ship were Lisarte prince of Tharsus, and Florisarte his Sonne: who beholding the beautie of the two pages, (for so they tooke the princesses to bee) caused their ship to stay, and Lisarte thus said. Faire pages, doo this yong Knight and me so much fauour, as to tell vs to what Knights you doo belong, and in what Countrey you were borne? Arbolinda (who at the sight of yong Florisarte was enamoured) thus answered: Faire sir, wee haue no Masters, but were borne in Thracia, and are now going toward Scotland to certayne Triumphs, where we hope (if good Fortune prouide not better for vs before) to finde some famous Knights that shalbe our Lords. I would (said Florisarte with an affectionated sigh) that my Father the King of Tharsus and Florisarte his sonne were so happie to entertaine ye. Arbolinda noting the affection the prince spake with, replied: We shalbe happie to be entertained of such royall Masters.

Lisarte like one ouerioyed embraced them both, and discharging the Marriners, they tooke the Princesses aboord their ships, and demaunded their names? Mine said Arbolinda is Artimio and this my fellowes is Roselio* Lisarte tooke Roselio for his Page, and Florisarte entertained Arbolinda, in whome hee so delighted that he wholy to her surrendred his heart, not knowing whome hee loued: yet promised he to loue none but whom Artimio his page appointed. Who therof exceeding ioyfull; gaue him her own picture in a table, whereon he dayly contemplated. Lisarte ioyed no lesse though farre in other sense in his Page, and as they sate sweetly conferring, the Dacian passed swiftly by in his inchanted boate, to whom Roselia cryed: Knight stay for them that follow thee Arbolinda seeing her faynt, and the Princes wondred at her sodaine change, cherished her vp first and told Lisarte, that the Knight in the russet armour had done his fellow and him much wrong. Artimio, said Lisarte, I will not liue if I reuenge not your wrong. Roselia greeuing to heare the Dacian threatned, said: many haue said much and failed in the enterprize, And while they were in this conference, came by the gentle Brandafidell, who was going with Floralinda into Greece: the Princesse sitting aboue hatch somewhat discontent, being grieued at her long being at Sea. Lisarte noting the Giants ^ignes and the Ladies sadnes, gessed she had some wrong: therefore taking his swoord in his hand, and his shield on his arme, he called, saying* ^ady if you be distrest, speake, and I wil deliuer you: knight, said the Giant* you are more forward than you need, if the Lady wanted help, tis like the would demaund it. And then artmore vncurteous than thou needst answered Lisarte, for if she be not dis^rest, yet I deserue thanks for my good will, and that shalt thou know if thou darest abide. O howe full of furie was Brandafidell! with a fearefull voyce hee commaunded the ships to be grapled.

The faire Floralinda was notable to disturbe the battaile, for she saw the Giant so angry, that shee durst not come nigh him. He quickely put on his helme and tooke a great heauy mace, at whose point did hung other sixe bullets of steele, and with a furious aspect taried for his enemy. The warlike Tharsian came against him, but was receiued with such a blow, as had almost cost him his life. But returning to himselfe, he repayed it so on the helme that it made him stagger on the one side two or three paces, and entring with the swiftnes of an Eagle, with a stiffe arme, he gaue him such a thrust vpon the brest that he made him recoyle back two or three paces, and with this would haue entred the bark with a light leape: but although the blow was great, yet it did not take away sence from the Giant he put his left leg forwards, and inlarging his arme, with a close fist he stroke the Tharsian such a blowe vppon the brest, he ouer threw him on his backe in the middest of his barke, and with the quicknes of a thought he put himselfe in the same order as he was before, abiding his enemie, who full of anger returned, and between them continued a greeuous fight, for more then three houres: but Lisarte was likely not to get much, for that the place was narrow, and the Giants weapon vnreasonable. The gentle Tharsian was a shamed, to acknowledge the vauntage that his enemy had in the str^^itnes of his place and would haue giuen halfe his kingdome to end the battaile wyth him vpon firme land. In this time the curteous Brandafidel was not (...)* hauing a desire to conclude the battel, and that the Princesse shuld vnderstand what a good keeper she had, he whirl^d his weapon about ouer his head, making shew as ^^ough he would strike him. The gentle Lisarte did abide him, till he saw it comming making an internall noise, ratling the one with the other, and in passing be would haue stroken a ^hwart blowe at his armes: but the giant was so politick that in giuing an other turne helping it with some what yeelding his body, he forced two

bullets into his shield with so deuilish a furie that it pulled it out of his hands, and threw it a great way off, and left him so astonished, that he thought verily hee had also away his arme. The furious Lisarte like a serpent returned, bearing his body low, fearing the second blow, and with both his hands seazed a blow hard by the Giants elbowes, and although hee did not cut him by reason of the finenes of the armor, yet he tormented them in such sort ye his diuelish weapon fell from him. The curteous Giant had thought his armes had been off: but the excessiue greef being past, putting backe his left leg, he drew out his fauchion, no lesse feareful then the mace, for that was by Lirgandeo warranted: you may well vnderstand the ioy that the Tharsian receiued when that fierce weapon was gone, and so firming his foote he ioyned with him, where began so sightly a battell that it amazed the beholders: till the Sunne declined they fought, and then with loud voyces they called for lights: but the soueraigne Lord, knowing what those knightes should doe in the augmenting of his faith, apparted the battaile with equall honor vnto the^ both, for at the bringing forth of lightes, they were all put out with a easterly wind, which rushing betweene the barkes, did part them a good way the one from the other, in such sort, that by no meanes they could ioyne, the Giant cryed out that he would tarrie, and the other that he did abide him: yet at the rising of the Moone, they were sixe miles the one from the other, with so great griefe vnto the Tharsian that he would not beleeue but that he had lost honor with his enemy: so there was not any that durst speake vnto him, no not his Son. But the faire Roselia did bolden her selfe and said. Ualiant Prince abate your Ire, and be fully certified, that if your co^trary hath got any honor, it was not with any losse of yours: but rather as I imagine, had the battel bin on land, we should haue remained wt the palm of victorie. So without anger, they supped with great content, praising the brauery of the Giant.




The gallant aduenture that hapned vnto the Princes, about the libertie of a Knight.

 Chap. 19.
WE left the faire Florisarte ioyfull of the picture when he knew not the person: and with inward sighs bega^ to say. Ah tender yeres that so truly are brought vnder the yoke of Cupid. With how much reason may the world complaine of mee, to see me yeelded without knowing who is my owner? Ah Princesse Flora, your sorrowfull Son, desireth loue and hath put his libertie he knoweth not where, and hath giuen it to one absent, and suffereth mortal grief without any hope of ease. Who could euer be a perfect louer, if he had not fed and contented his eyes on his beloued? Oh cruell discretion to loue I know not whom, and therewith, with no lesse grace than he that brought stones to be molified in hearing his song, he began to sing in this sort.

Pigmalion like I loue a senseles thing,
In hope the substance one day will appeare,
Of this sweet shape which I do hold so deare,
Which sight content vnto my heart will bring.
And rid my soule of sad dispairing feare*
O happy then, I happy should be named:
But I beleeue her like was neuer framed.

She was not far that should remedy him, and might haue done it with louing him: yet she entred into the chamber, dissembling her griefe, and with a louing boldnes said. I wold not Prince of Argentaria ye the picture which I gaue you should be the occasion of your vnquietnes: there is no doubt (...) with me your sorrow must be departed: and seeing it is so dangerous for vs both, it were better to loose the memory of the lady, the^ to haue for her absence such disco^fort.

I say that this worthy Prince that you might inforce your courage for that these woundes of Loue many times doe so earnestly treade downe the strength and reason of the Louer, that when he returnes to himselfe he hath no force for the same, and this doth happen vnto them, that feareth to be loued: but vnto you what thing is there, that can giue you any griefe being fully certified that you are beloued, and they who sent you this figure doo liue by your affection. Ah Artimio my wel beloued brother, answered the afflicted Prince, how is it that I know not my selfe, neither can I giue my selfe any testimonie, with this new change: I feele it will end me, and I know not to whom I shall acquaint my griefe, neither know I who is the occasion: and if I do perseuer herein, according to the force wherewith it is begun, there is no doubt but the griefe will afflict mee in such sort that I shall dye with the most greeuous passion that euer louer suffered. The amorous Arbolinda with her eyes full of water, answered saying: Let passe this griefe, and to assure ye shall haue comfort of your Lady, weare this iewell, which hath many yeeres hung about your Ladies necke. And therewith she tooke from her neck, a worthy and esteemed Diamant, and put it on the Princes necke, which gaue him the greatest content that might be imagined. Being in this sweet conuersation, the Pilot of the Barke entred, and said that he had discouered a faire aduenture at the Sea, where with they armed themselues with their rich and shining armor, and went forth to the Barkes side to see what it should be. And they saw a thing that made them not a little maruell, for that not farre from their barke, they sawe a Tower so bright, that it seemed to be of Christall, it was seated vpon foure Pillers, more firm then if it had bin on the land: with great desire they hastened on their iourney, til abou^ the third houre, they drew nigh vnto the Pillers, who seeing the great richnes and workemanship, did iudge tha^ deuine hands had done it and not humane. They wen^

round about it, to see if there were any way to mount into it, but they found none, but comming nigher vnto it, they might see certaine letters grauen in gold on one of the pillers, which the valiant Lisarte read in this manner. If any hath a desire to giue libertie to the flower of great Brittaine doing greater seruice vnto Grecia, putting a side all feare: let him blow this horne, he shal finde the entrie easie, but the comming forth dangerous. There needed no more for the valiant Lisarte to indanger his life, vnderstanding that it redounded for content vnto Grecia. So putting on his helme, he blew the horne with so great noise as doth Eolus when out of his darke iawes hee issueth to giue battell against all the world. He had not well taken it from his mouth, commending himselfe vnto the God that Rosicleer did worship, when as hee laid hold on a Ladder that was throwen from the top of the Castle, by which hee mounted more swifter then a bird. Hee had not well put his feete on the Christaline flower when three furious Giants fiercely assalted him: the first he cut a sunder in the wast, when much to his amazement the two parts sodainly became two Giants: and pittilesly assailed him, till his good chaunce suffered him to wring fro^ one Giant that had the inchanted life a heauy mace, with which hee so bestirred himselfe that he made that cursed company flye from him amai^^. But when he thought the victory sure, there came forth a goodly knight, saying. Thou shalt not slay my kind keepers and take me from my pleasant dwelling, and ther with doubled so many blows vpon Lisarte, that he left him on the floore almost without life, and the inchanted knight tooke the prince in his armes purposing to throw him out at the window: but Lisarte being recouered and closed in that sort, pulled off the inchaunted knights helme, whose face when he saw, he guest it to be Rosicleer, and said. Alas my Lord Rosicleer, what hath the Prince of Tharsus deserued, that you should vse him so vngently? When the Knights helmes was off the inchauntment ceased. And

he said: Knight your valor hath deliuered me from this inchantment, for which I rest bound vnto you. I am suspected indeed to be the Princes son you name: but my weaknes approoues me vnworthy of so excellent a Father. Lisarte remembring the words on the piller, and beholding his countenance, assured him he was the Sonne of Rosicleer: and there they imbraced, Lisarte discoursing what hapned to them in Argentaria, and Rosabel what chaunced in Lacedemonia. So a while we will leaue them and follow the gallant Brandafidell and the Princesse Floralinda.



What hapned in Greece to the gentle Brandafidell and Floralinda.

Chap. 20.
WIth many milde perswasions did Floralinda mittigate the rage of Brandafidell, beeing parted by the tempest from Lisarte: and in short time they both landed in Grecia: where Brandafidel expected store of aduentures: so causing the Princesse to bee mounted on a milke white Palfrey, hee himselfe bestrid his huge Alfana, (being a beast bred in the mountaines of Barbarie,) with a huge Launce in his hand, and his dreadfull mace at his saddle bow: On the tenth day as they iourneyed towards Constantinople, they met a mighty great Knight and with him twenty knights in troop, and comming neere them, the great Knight, said: I can hardly bee perswaded Giant that this Lady goeth with thee willingly: but if she doo she is vnfit for thee, therefore deliuer her vnto mee, and this horse which seemeth to be good. You ask much said Brandafidell: but would yee not bee content to leaue the Lady, so I gaue you the horse. No said the great Knight, and therwith one of his troop laid hold on Floralinda, which made her giue a great shreeke. Not the viole^t lightning with more swiftnes breaketh out of the cloudes

than the rage of Brandafidel sent death to that presumptuous knight and three of his companions, for with his lance cast violently from his hand he ouerthrew foure dead that sate in ranke, and with foure bullets of his dreadfull ma^e made foure more at one blow to beare them companie. But the great Knight entred within him, and stroke so dangerous a blow, that the Giant wel perceiued he had a strong aduersarie: but with the ende of his mace on his brest-plate Brandafidell gaue such a foyne, that hee ouerthrew him senselesse to the earth. By this the other twelue Knightes had round inco^passed him, but like the Cyclops hammers fell his heauy bullets on the weake anuyles of their heades, that heere some brainlesse there others senselesse lay dead on the ground. When he thought all had been ended, the great Knight recouered, and betweene the^ continued a battaile no lesse furious than the dreadful contention betweene Anteus and Hercules. On foote they fought, for Brandafidell would haue no aduantage, and in the courage of his enemy hee tooke pride: but remembring his presumption against the Princesse, hee whirled his dreadfull mace, and parted with two bullets his head in peeces. At the knightes fall Floralinda ioyed, but Brandafidel left not till hee had slaine all the wounded Knightes but one, whome he charged to confesse the truth what that great knight and his company were.
The mizerable man shaking and trembling with dread of death, deliuered this answere: The dreadfull Friston Lord of the Ilands of Tamixio, with Frinto his brother, and this Knight their Nephew whome you you haue slaine, hearing of the tryumphs in Greece, came with more than three score knightes and other seruants, and surprized a Castle heere in Grecia verie suddainly, being of great strength: whether for this ten dayes they haue brought many prisoners, which they doe in despite of the Greeke Princes.
I and my fellowes were their seruants, and now another troop are abroad with Friston and his brother, meaning to take any comming to these triumphes* and for the Ladies sake assailed you. And for your outrages said Brandafidel, beare your companions companie: wherewith he dashed out his braines. Then comming to Floralinda, he besought her to repose her selfe, and not to goe to Constantinople till the triumphes did begin. To this she agreed, and hauing refreshed themselues, Brandafidel went vp to the side of a hill, and thence discouered a Chariot wherein were many that made great lamentation, and two mightie knightes with twenty other knights. The curteous Giant perswaded himselfe, those were the proud brethren, and they in the Chariot prisoners: wherefore placing Floralinda and the Pages within the thicket where vnseene they might see the battaile, he crost toward the Chariot, mounted and armed at all pointes, and thus said to the two brethren being formost: Knights in this free Countrie why guard ye any that complaine? giue me a good answere, or in the name of the Greeke Princes I defie you. The pride and wrath of Friston would not suffer him to answere, but in his rashnes ran to meete with vengeance, for in the encounter Brandafidel ouerthrew him with his horse vpon him, whose waight pressed out his infernall soule: but Brandafidel had like likewise to haue falne, for the reue^gefull Frinto with all the other knights ranne on him at one encounter. But hauing setled himselfe he came like a rauening Lion on the heard of Deare, making them dearly buy the cowardize of that incounter. Yet was the battaile verie doubtfull, till on a sodaine a goodly knight in precious armour came by, and demaunded of the prisoners in the Chariot the cause of the battel, the cheefe of them said. The Giant with the dreadfull mace (Sir knight) seeketh our libertie: for comming to visit the Emperor of Greece, the Knightes that fight and their companions, vniustly seazed on vs. Without more reasoning the Knight in rich

armour ran to the proud Frinto, and at one stroke parted his helme and head. Brandafidell being wearied, was glad of such ayd, and tossing his heauy mace about, left but fi^e knights able to fit on horsebacke; who trusting better to flight than fighting, gaue the raines to their swift steedes, whom the Knight in the rich armor so far followed, that he returned no more to the Chariot. The Giant sorrowed that hee could not know him: but comming to the Chariot, he vnbound the prisoners, wherein faire Floralinda (that like amiable Phoebe issued from the thornie closset of the wood) assisted him. Being free they gaue the Lady and Giant many thankes: and being questioned of their estate, thus said the cheefe of them. My name is Don Siluerio Prince of Lusitania, this Lady my wife is Archirosa Queene of Thessaly, are come to visit Rosicleer prince of Greece: and fearelesse of all trecherie in this Country came sporting from our Knights vnarmed as you see, and were sodainely surprised. O ye Gods said Brandafidel, how happie am I to deliuer the innocent, being the frends of my deare frend Rosicleer. With this came 50. knights of Lusitania, and the Princesse Archirosa said. I see braue Giant, we shall not need what we most wished, I mean your warlike company to guid vs vnto Constantinople, for now our own Knights like rain when corne is ripe come to smal purpose to accompany vs. I am glad they are come said the Giant, for I haue this princely Lady that I must guid thether* meaning Florinda: who still was masked, because she would not be known, with great curtesie they all parted, wondring at the Giants valor, but more at hys good disposition. Being all cleere departed, the Gyant thanked Floralinda hu^bly, for (said he) your gracious sight gaue me this noble victory: wherewith she tooke a precious iewell from her necke, saying. Knight refuse not to weare this fauor, for your comfort well deserueth a greater gift, The Giant proude thereof humbled himselfe vnto her, beseeching her to mount her Palfrey: for saith hee,

God willing we will free the prisoners in the Castle that these false Knights haue taken, and there will we rest to night. The Princesse bad him doo his pleasure. So setting forward, they attained sight of the Castle a little before Euening, and the Giant (putting on the Helmet of Friston) called to them within to open the gate, saying hee was Friston their Master, wearied with combat, and had brought a Ladie and a rich Prize with him. To whome the Knight that opened the gate said: Welcome my lord, here haue we also a Knight in rich armour, who slew fiue of your Knights within sight of the Castle, and him haue we trained in, and shut into your chamber. Use curteously this Ladie said the Giant, and some of you bring ye key, that I maye chastise him with death, before I put off my armour. This was no sooner commaunded, but it was done, and Brandafidel perceiued it was the Knight that assisted him in the battell, yet faining his intent, hee sayd: Prowd Knight, that hast entred my Castle without my license, come take thy weapons and descend into ye court, that I may punish thee for murdring my seruants. Thou speakest something like a Knight said the Prisoner, but I hope to punish thee, for maintaining such false cowards as these are. So they descended together, and as they were going downe the staires, Brandafidel with his mace brayned two Knights that attended them, and turning to the Knight that went with him, he said: Assist me sir knight, as you did to day assist me in the battell at the chariot, and you shall see we wil not leaue aliue one of these euill people: therefore I pray you goe vnto the gate, that none escape you. The Knight perceiuing who it was, ioyfullye tooke possession of the gate, while Brandafidel like a hungrie Wolfe raged vp and downe the Castle, and so chased them, that fearfull to be all slaine, they ran vnto ye gate, thinking to get foorth: but there death likewise encountred them, sitting imperiously on ye Knights sword in the rich armour, whom they had trecherously imprisoned.

In briefe, they slew all that could resist, onely a few seruants they saued, who seemed ioyfull to be deliuered from their tyrant masters. Then went they both to Floralinda, and before her the Giant said: Knight, be yet so kinde vnto vs after all your passed kindnesses, as to tell Brandafidel (the vowed Frend to prince Rosicleer, Meridian. Orides, and all the Greeke princes Frends) who thou art? I am (said the Knight) Sarmacia Daughter to the King of Lyra, who come in quest of that Oristides you named vnto me, who with Rosicleer and Meridian I left departing towards Greece out of my Fathers kingdome: and with this shee discouered her beauteous face, excelling Mineruas in her greatest brauerie. Floralinda admiring her excellence, gaue infinite commendations of the Troyan Oristides.
O iealozie, how desperate are thy effects, how full of diuelish distrust? No sooner did Sarmacia heare Floralinda praise Oristides, but a gloomie discontent shaddowed the former beautie of her amiable countenance, and neyther answering nor demaunding anie thing more, shee called for her horse: who was no sooner brought, but ere they being a foote could hinder her, she had left the Castle, and put her selfe among the thickest trees, who with the glyding snakes and dumbe wormes became that night her secretaries. The Giant wondred at her soda^ne departure, but Floralinda gessed at the cause, saying: Surely the Ladye is amorous, and iealous of my speach about Oristides. At last (with some greefe passing her sodaine departing from them) they tooke their repose, and in the morning sent the prisoners to the Emperour of Greece, charging them to offer themselues to be disposed of at his pleasure, and to tell him how the prowd Brethren were supprest: which they did, and the Emperour reioyced at the newes, for he was preparing himselfe to come against them. And hee could not but meruaile what one alone it was that had perfourmed so much.
In this Castle will wee leaue Brandafidel and Floralinda, and returne to tell what hapned to Lisarte in the inchanted Tower with Rosabel.



What succeded Rosabel, Lisarte and Florisarte after the inchantment was finished.

 Chap. 21.
WHile Rosabell, Lisarte and his Sonne were in great content in the inchanted Tower, there appeared an olde man before them with a little booke in his hand: who cried out on Lisarte, said. Thinke not to glory in my miserie, for thou hast taken from mee the Sonne of Rosicleer my enemy, but on him and all the frends of Greece by help of this booke will I bee reuenged. Rosabel being neere him snatched away the booke, and said: By this booke thou shalt not be reuenged diuelish inchanter, and wert thou not priuiledged by age I would ende heere thy euill life. So being about to throw the booke into the Sea, the wise Lirgandeo appeared, and charged him to giue him the booke, and to commit Gelasio his Fathers and Mothers enemy into his custodie. And then he told Rosabel from point to point how Gelasio had vsed hys mother in taking him away, wronged his father with all hate, and all his frends. Roselia was amazed, and somewhat doubtfull that all had been deceipt, yet remembring his many goods done by Lirgandeo, he gaue the booke and Gelasio vnto him with this charge, that though hee were wicked he should vse him well. Then Lirgandeo aduising them to hasten presently to Niquea, the old man vanished away, and the Princes descended the inchanted tower, and on a piller read this writing: The rough Tower shall remaine, til the ancient crowned Lyon, set at liberty the lambe and Lyonesse. The Princes could not vnderstand the meaning, but hasting toward Niquea, they recouered

land within foure daies, being to Rosabels imagination the most pleasant Country in the earth. Rosabels Page carried his helme, Roselia Lisartes, and Arbolinda Florisartes: and the two Ladies comming somewhat behinde, the beauteous Roman thus said. Ah Princesse of Scotland; what a painefull seruice haue we gotten? I promise you I am weary of this lackying. Rest your helmet on your palfrey said Arbolinda: for it is better hee dye than you bee wearied. And yet perchance your minde tyreth ye, being discontent. Therefore be aduised, hate to remember your inconstant Dacian, and see if Florisarte will affect you. You doe wrong me said Roselia (somewhat angerly) to (...) braid my knight, and flout me with yours. Nay said Arbolinda, if you will quarrell, looke for a bloudy fray, and so prettily parted her horse that Roselia could not chuse but smile. By this they came somwhat nigh the Princes, who were plotting about their affaires in Niquea, and in the middest of their conference they met twelue knightes, whome Rosabel saluted in their language, and curteously demaunded of them some newes. One of them answered: Our newes now is that the Soldan of Egipt is with many Giants come to a fire the faire Liriana in mariage* And Marcello the Soldan her father thinking it conuenient, agreeth thereunto: and for the same the Egiptian hath published Turnayes within these 20* daies, Rosabell answered, Sir knights we thanke you, and for this kindnes if there rest in me or my companions any power, commaund vs. The Knights parted: and the Princes seeing Rosabel somwhat sad, comforted him, and Lisarte would haue no nay but that Florisarte should of Rosabell receiue the order of knighthood: and for w^nt of a Lady to girt the sword, Florisarte would needs haue Artimio girt his sword^ which she denying often, and being stil vrged, she brought forth the sword of Don Heleno, and said: Faire Sir, I gird ye with the sword of one of the valliantest knights liuing. This gift made at wonder and haue ioy at (...) therof

onely Roselia sorrowed to see her knights sword at an others side, but Arbolinda easily answered that matter. Florisarte being knighted they plesantly reposed that night in a groue of Pines: and in the morning they were no sooner mounted and entred into the way, but they saw neere them a troop of two thousand knights, and in the midst as Generals two goodly knights in red armor striped with blew, and the Princes gessing them to be of great account stayed to giue them way, when sodainly a knight in name of their Lords challenged them to Iuste. Florisarte was appointed to giue answere, who said: So it might proceed no farther than the Iustes he was content: and presently they made themselues redy, ouerthrowing at sixe encounters eighteene of the squadron. Wherewith the two cheefe knights set forwards, whom Rosabel and Florisarte encou^tred so strongly, that they ouerthrew them, and lifting vp their visors alighted themselues to help them vp. The two knightes no sooner sawe Rosabel, but they cast off their helmes and embraced him: who called to remembrance they were his old companions in the court of Niquea, sons to the King of Celandia. Lisarte and the Pages comming together were glad to see this new frendship, at which time Salernio the elder brother said: Nowe wee are sure Lord Rosabel to perform that which we were doubtfull of before, seeing you and these braue knightes are in our company: for being certified by our sister that is in the Court of Niquea, how wel the Princesse Liriana loueth you, and what mone she and her cosins make to be married to the Soldan of Egipt and his Nephewes against their likings, we haue attempted with these knights at the Turney to take the^ away, hauing to that end twentie thousand more knights in readines at Sea: and in the tumult also to bring away our sister, and to haue sought you through the world. Rosabel was so glad to heare that Liriana loued him, and so thankful to the Princes ye his inward affection to all appeared in his silent embracing. And while hee was preparing fit

words to gratulate such fauour, a Page came riding to them from a goodly proportioned knight, whose armour was very precious, and two Lyons in his shield, and chalenged them all to the Iustes. The yonger brother of Celandia would needs begin, but was ouerthrowen in the encounter, Salernio had the like successe, Lisarte lost his saddle, and the strange knight his stirrops: and Florisarte and he passed each by other like two inuincible rockes. Then Rosabel prepared himselfe, but the knight lifting vp hys Beuer said: Farre be it from Oristoldo sonne of Sacridiro king of Thessaly, to runne against any that so much resembleth his fathers deerest frend. For know Sir knight in my other encou^ters I marked your beauteous face, while the visor of your helme was vp, and sawe you to be so like the picture of Rosicleer Prince of Greece, that I offer my small abilities to your seruice, beseeching pardon for Iusting against your frends. O heauens, how happy am I said Rosabel, to be cou^ted the son of a father so much loued? And therwith they al embraced Oristoldo, and acquainting him with their busines, he vowed the aduenture of his life. Then spake Lisarte who had most experience and thus aduised them: We wil take shields like vnto Rosabels, (whose deuise was iealozy leaning vpon faith) and wee sixe will onely enter the Iustes, taking with vs one Page to certifie this hoast of knightes that shall attend vs somewhat neere the Citty of our proceedings. At the turney we wil be against the Soldan of Egipt, whom about Sun set we will finde occasion to kill, and then when the tumult is greatest ascend the gallerie, (for in some gallerie it is like the Ladies shall stand) and bring away the Ladies: which to effect, if we want help, the page shal certifie these two thousand knights, who being fresh and couragious, wil assure our enterprize. Al liked this Counsel: so leauing Artimio and Roselio with the two thousand knights, they tooke Alirio Rosabels page: and entred Niquea when the Turnayes were ready to begin.
It pleased the Soldan of Egipt for so requested the Soldan of Niquea, that the Egiptian knights and the Giants hee brought, shuld ioyne with his courtiers: and the Captains of the knights strangers should bee the Kings of Media, of Garamancia, and Armenia. The king of Garamancia was all in Lyon coloured armour, and on his shield a knight mouing a Globe, with this posie: I feare not strength but Fortune. The other two kings were in armour full of pearced hearts and on their sh^ews the same deuice with this posie. Forgetfulnes of loue is cause of death. They had following them ten thousand knightes and some Gyants: among whom our fiue princes put themselues. The^ entred on the other side the knights Courtiers beeing so magnificent, that it shewed manifestly the great maiestie of their Prince. After the^ followed the Soldan of Egipt, all his furniture being red, set with a number of precious stones: his deuise was a Lady apparrelled in the colour of his armour, and a knight holding her by the hand hauing at his feete Loue and Fortune with this Posie, Commaunding these, this is mine owne. His Nephewes were armed in siluer coloured armour, Loue smiling beeing painted in their shields. Then came the Soldan of Niquea, and after him diuine Liriana, with her Cosins and the Princesse of Celandia, with such admirable beautie and excellent sound of instruments, as if they had beene Angels, and the place celestiall. But the Soldan of Niquea, the Ladies and other aged Princes vnfit for fight were no sooner placed, but the drea^full trumpets sounded the encounter. Against the Soldan of Egipt and his Nephews, ^an the kings of Garaman^ia, Media and Armenia and at the first encounter tumbled their proude bodies on the earth: which so enraged the Soldan, that he ^^fied them to mortall battel: where 30 sierce Giants rushed in on his part, and ouerthrew many of the knights strangers putting the king of Garamantia in great distresse being vnhorsed: then stepped Rosabel vnto him and lighting

from his horse perforce mounted him thereon, which the king and all his knights tooke very gently, but especially when they sawe his manner of mounting, Rosabel went to a huge Giant and pulled him to the earth, mounting in his saddle, and dooing such wonders that on him and his fellowes, (who by this time at three encounters had ouerthrowen twelue Giants) all the beholders eyes were ^ixed. The Soldan of Egipt grew to impacient, that neglecting the duety of armes, hee turned the ioyfull Turneyes to a battaile most dangerous: and calling for a huge and mightie Giant named Penastrol that entred like a mighty Pine, hauing also in his hand, a speare bigger than an Argosies maine mast, ouerthrewe an infinite number of the knights strangers. But Rosabel beholding Liriana put himselfe before this furie, and as he had been a warrier sent from the clouds, pearced the bosome of this deformed Penastrol, that he fel vpon the ground, couering a great part thereof with his vnproportionable bugenesse. All the beholders shouted at the fall and c^yed: Inuincible are the knights of iealozie, and the great Gods blesse the^ wt ^auours, the power of stends cannot stand against the^. The Princesse of Celandia and her sad neeces being neere her, Liriana said vnto them. My minde giues mee you knight that ouerthr^w Penastrol with the d^uice of iealozie is Rosabel, for stil his eye is on this place. As they were answering her, they were disturbed by the noise of the old Soldan of Niquea, who cryed fro^ his seate, saying: knight saue his life for it is my Sonne. And looking what it was, they saw Rosabel hauing vnarmed the Soldan of Egipts head (and making himselfe deafe at the old Soldans crying) cut off h^s head, and vaunting afore Liriana, (...)* (...) see how thy forced Loue speedeth. And at the same in^tant, Oristaldo and Florisarte had dispatched his two ne^hewes: When Lisarte like wise rescued the two brethren (...) Celandia from two furious Giants, that had vnhorsed ^hem: at two strokes dispatched their (...). The furious

Soldan seeing the death of him hee meant to make his Sonne in law, came downe in his armour, and sent to raise all his Knights. Lisarte perceiuing rage to grow vnreasonable, and glimmering twilight readie to draw the obscure curtaines of night whereby their purpose might be shadowed, he with the yongest of the Celandian Princes (his sonne and Oristoldo following them) mounted in to the gallerie, and seazed on the Princesses, who sounding through feare, had no vse of speach to call for rescue, nor if they had cried could they haue been heard, the noyse and tumult was so great: for the Ladies that waited on them sent out shrill cryes able to haue pierced the clowds, but the heauie groanes of dying men, and deadly brayings of wounded horses, so filled the place, that ^ootlesse were all their lamentations. For now Rosabel was mounted and Liriana before him, the two Bretheren had her two Kinswomen, and Lisarte their Sister. Before them rid Oristoldo and Florisarte, filling the iawes of death wyth heapes of dying men, that fondly sought to hinder theyr swift escape. For Marcello had commanded the chaynes that serued for pales to the place of Tornay to bee taken downe, that all the Cittie being armed, might enter and inclose the Knights strangers, to reuenge the death of the Egyptian Solda^: the gates indeed it was folly to close, because a great wal was ouerthrowne, to ioyne the field adioyning to the Pallace greene, that the Court for Tornay might be more spacious. Through this place passed our sixe Princes, all men making meanes to giue them way, but not one so mad to follow them. And quickly comming to the place where they left their knights and pages: there they set downe their amazed Ladies, who began lamentably to complaine. But when they knew what Knights they were, their feare was turned vnto ioy, and Liriana aboue the rest, reioyced in her Rosabel. Neuerthelesse, considering the danger wherein the Souldan her Father was, it was thought necessarie that Rosabel, Florisarte and

Oristoldo should returne to the battaile: whereuppon determining, they changed their horses, helmes and sheelds, because they would not be knowen, and posted to Niquea with all speed. In the meane time the pleasant Celandian princesse (to cheere vp Liarana that drooped for the absence of Rosabel,) carrolled out this sweete dittie in praise of Fortune.

When Tyrants will had neere constraind
Our Virgins state to haplesse stay,
And in our hearts we all were paind,
With thinking on the wedding day.
Then Fortune turned our distresse,
To endlesse ioy and happinesse.
The hatefull obiects of our harts,
Plumde in their pride did threat the skie:
And them we liked for deserts,
As exiles forced were to flie.
Yet Fortune that our griefes did see,
Prouided vs of remedie.
She sent our frends that quaild our foes,
She gaue vs life when death was nigh,
To ioy she turned all our woes.
Downe cast with greefe, she raisd vs high*
Her Godhead therefore we adore,
And praise sweet Fortune euermore.

By this the three princes entred the Battell, finding the Soldan vnhorsed, defending himselfe against two giants, whom Rosabel at two strokes cut in sunder. With this ye King of Garamantia approched, saying: Soldan retyre thy knights, and if I or my fellow kings bee guiltie of this daies tumult, or thy daughters rape, let vs die. He speaketh reason said Rosabel, heare him great prince. For your desert I will said the Soldan, on that condition, and therewith he caused retreat to be sounded.

And so the kings submitting themselues to bee tryed that they were innocent of conuaying the Princesses away: they were deliuered vnto an aged Prince to keep; and the three Princes with swift speed returned to their Loues* where in the middest of their delight a crosse accident barred their pleasure as shall bee expressed in the next Chapter.



How the Princesse Liriana and her companions, sweetly conuersing with their loues and brethren, were sodainly surprized by the wise Lupercio and inchaunted.

 Chap. 22.
THis vaine world wherein pleasures are gotten with much paine, giueth no certaine continuance of the good wee toyle for: but rather an houres storme of euil, snatcheth from vs all the content that in a whole age with care we haue gathered. Experience of this, these Princes sodaine griefes shal be, who had scarcely obtained a breathing time of ioy, but a world of sorrow was heaped on their heads.
If you be remembred in the beginning of this historie where Brandafidel described the estate of Fangomada^ and the cause of the inchauntment, to Rosicleer, Meridian and Oristides, after ye death of his Brother, he telleth the^ of one Lupercio a wise man in Egipt that was master of his Unkle Gelasio, and taught him his deuilish Artes. This Lupercio, being acquainted with the successe of all things at Niquea by his Arte, and knowing also where the Princes and Princesses were; put himselfe into an inchanted Chariot, drawen with foure furious Griffons: and departing from his deuilish habitation, came neere the pleasant place where these Princes (fearelesse of such execrable euil) were delighting themselues with amorous conuersation. Neither did this Lupercio hate them for any other

thing than because his scholler Gelasio was by them so crossed and imprisoned. It was about the houre of twelue at midnight, when after long toyle the Knights intended to take rest, the Ladies offering to watch and be their keepers, Liriana begun a ditty to bring them all a sleep, in whose vndersong Roselia, Arbolinda, the Soldans neeces, and the Princesse of Celandia assisted her with voice and musique.


Sleep while we sit and be your Guard,
Your tyred lims rest in our laps:
Your endlesse faith be our reward,
Then care we not for after haps.
Lyke you lay Mars on Venus knee,
While she did sing her Lullabee.
Lullaby Lulla Lullaby,
So sweetly Warre with Loue doth lye.


Thou wert the substance of my griefe,
But art the ground worke of my ioy.
Thy absence causd my sorrow cheefe,
But now thy sight exiles annoy:
I mournd for thee, thou weptst for mee,
Yet sing I now ioyes Lullabee,
Lullaby Lulla Lullaby,
So sweetly Warre with Loue doth lye.


The Knights had not closed their eyes, nor the musique fully closed in due straines with the conclusion of the Ladies song, when sodainly a fierie chariot drawen by ^oure Griffons descended, and out of the chariot issued two fearfull Centaures, that snatching vnder either arme a Lady, carried away to the Chariot Liriana, her two Cosins, and the Princesse of Celandia, with such swiftnes that the Princes were not able to rise ere the Chariot was mounted in the ayre, the Ladies making such lamentation, as the senselesse trees assisted by the whistling of the winde

among their leaues, seemed to sigh for their sorrow: Liriana being heard alowd to cry. Oh Rosabel, why am I taken from thee, when in thee was all my ioy? And with this the chariot and Ladies were out of sight. O tragicke Sister, that beutifiest thy writings with griefe-discoursing lines, a little lend me thy all able help, that in concluding this booke I may straine teares from the pittying eyes of the Readers when they shal conceiue the sorrow that the princes conceiued at this sodaine accident. All of them so greeued, as the dull earth drunke with their teares, sent foorth from her pierced bosome salt and brackish springs, that yet remaine in the forrests of Niquea as endlesse testimonies of that sad midnights misaduenture: the chast Moone clouded her bright countenance, and sweet Venus in her spheare lookt more discoloured, than when the son of Mirrha was murdred by a sauage Boare, and the Day-Starre refused to lead backe the hoast of heauen, to giue way to the next daies morning: but mourned in the skies euen as when Ceyx his sonne was drenched in the Seas. But if all these Planets, Earth, Springes and Princes sorrowed, ye grief and rage of Rosabel so much exceeded all, as neither the fortunelesse Mother of those fourteene Sons and Daughters slaine by the son and Daughter of Latona, could with her griefe equall his sorrow: nor the wrath of Alcides whe^ he sacrificed himselfe on the mountaine of Oeta be compared to this yong princes rage. And surely had not the wisedome of Lisarte preuailed, he had desperatly ended his life: who perswading him and the other princes, that by the words on the Christaline piller, which supported the tower where Rosabel was inchanted, it was very likely they were borne thether: and therwith combining themselues neuer to cease trauel til they had found them out: both Rosabel and the other princes were somewhat quiet. So parting themselues two and two: Rosabel and Oristoldo went backe to Niquea, to answere for the imprisoned kings, and there to hearken if they might heare of the Ladies: the

two princes of Celandia sent home their ships and knights and onely with two pages followed this aduenture: so did Lisarte and his son another way accompanied onely with the two disguised Ladies their pages. And seeing their heauy parting hath tyred my wearied spirits, I wil end this book (after that for your better memory) I haue collected the places together where we left our knights and Ladies.
The gallant Torismundo prince of Spaine we left reioycing with Grisalinda the princesse of France and his yong son, the valiant Tartarian with Grisanea princesse of Holland and their sonne, trauelling to his country, from the doubtfull Iland where Rosicleer made Lord (after the death of Bruncaldo the Rouer and his brethren the Giants) the discreet knight Briano, giuing him to wife the imprisoned Damsel daughter to Rosicleers old frends the Lord and Lady of the valley of the mou^taines. Rosicleer, Meridian, and the new Louer Oristides, we leaue going to Sea from Lacedemonia, ful of sorrow for the losse of Rosabel. The faire Sarmacia ful of iealous passion we left in ye forrests of Grecia, and not farre off Brandafidel and Floralinda in the Castle they had gotten from Friston: the inchanter Gelasio inprisoned by Lyrgandeo: Liriana, her Cousins, and the Celandian princesse borne away in the Chariot. How Rosabel and his frends parted, you heard before: onely wee haue not been copious enough in expressing Roselias sorrow for the Dacians absence, whom she last saw passing by Lisartes ship in his inchanted boat: where also wee last left him. And heere will wee leaue off, intending with him to begin our next Booke.

FINIS.

