the picture of a Papist or a relation of the damnable heresy detestable quality and diabolical practice of sundry heretic in former age and of the papist in this age compile in form of a dialogue or conference between a minister and a recusant the first dialogue wherein be prove that the papist be Staurolatrians or the recusant we a Jesu in come suffrag sol. 137. the minister a how now neighbour have I find you crouch to a crucifix the recusant sir what make you here the minister sir I be to confer with you the recusant to confer with i what authority have you the minister I have authority sufficient for it be decree in the late synod hold at London that b b synod 66. every minister be a preacher and have any popish recusant or recusant in his parish and think fit ^y the bishop of the diocese shall labour with they diligent from time to time thereby to reclaim they from their error the recusant well let i make a end of my prayer and then I will come and confer with you the minister no neighbour God love alacrity in his work excuse he much dislike the delay that make let i go kiss my father and those shift in the gospel let i go bury my father or take leave of my friend be not admit in the lord business no more be this of you let i make a end of my prayer the recusant yes I pray you give i leave the minister I pray you entreat i not for I dare not give you leave to commit idolatry the recusant idolatry do you charge i with idolatry the minister it be a old say and I see that it be true not only in corporal whoredom but inspirituall c c prou. 30. 20 a adulterous woman eat and after wipe her mouth and say I have not commit iniquity with what face can you deny yourself to be a idolater have I not take you in the recusant you have take i indeed pray before a crucifix but I hope you account not that idolatry the minister yes saint Ambrose tell you that to worship the crucifix be gross idolatry and before he d Ambros Theodo^^ Arnobius make this answer in the behalf of all true christian e e Arnob. adverse lib. 8. part we neither worship cross nor wish for they you that consecrate wooden god ^ chaz^s nicephorm lib 18. cap. 54. the happy adore wooden cross as part of your god in a word you may as just be term * and Staurolatrae as the for you worship the f Euthymius in nicephor H^s^^ib 18 cap 54 cross of Christ as well as they the recusant no we worship not the cross itself but Christ h alexand. de Hales part 3 quaest 30 art u^t that be crucify on the cross the minister i Greg Valentia Tom 3 ^d^ lolat. punct 6 @ b^liarm i mag. lib 2. ca. 23 yes g g Them Aquin part 3. quest 25 art. 4. Thomas Aquinas Alexander de Hales Gregory de Valentia and the rest of your chief doctor do teach that crucifix be to be worship with the very same worship wherewith Christ himself be to be worship the recusant I answer with cardinal Bellarmine that albeit crucifix be to be worship with the same worship yet be it with respect to Christ and that the worship pass by the image to he the minister this shift will not serve your turn for to co-adore the crucifix with CHRIST be palpable idolatry as may be prove by the determination of the council of Ephe^u^ the recusant how I pray you the minister Nestorius conceive the manhood of Christ to be a distinct person from the word or son of GOD and withal he frame a coadoration whereby this manhood be to be adore with the word now the counsel of Ephesus condemn this coadoration in like sort may we condemn your coadoration of the crucifix with Christ but to leave this particular why do you bow your knee and lift up your eye and hand to the crucifix the recusant why may I not the minister why because God require this outward honour of eye hand and knee as due to he alone l l Isay 45. 2d I have swear say he by myself the word be go out of my mouth in righteousness and shall not return that every knee shall bow unto i m m Ephes 3 14 for this cause say n lamen 3 48 Paul I bow my knee unto the father of our lord jesus Christ let lift up our heart with our hand say the prophet Hieremie to God in the heaven and o o Psal. 123 ^ I say the psalmist lift up my eye to thou that dwell in the heaven the recusant ^ if this honour of eye hand and knee be due to God alone then why do you give it to your parent and magistrate the minister God allow parent and magistrate that present his person in blessing and judge to have some part of his external honour and in that respect do we lift up our hand to they and bow our knee before they but as for image God himself have make a flat prohibition that they shall have no part of his honour p p exod 20 5. thou shall not say he bow down to they but I pray you sir what be the principal cause that move you to keep this crucifix in your house the recusant true to pu^ i in remembrance of Christ bitter passion forr y sin and to stir up myself to sorrow compassion and tear by consider the pitiful handle of Christ upon the cross the minister I can but judge you to be not only very dull but wicked that can remember Christ crucify except you have a crucifix before your eye to kindle your appetite and to move your heart with such a carnal commiseration and pity as we often find in ourselves when we see deserve torment inflict upon malefactor let i therefore entreat you to content yourself with such mean as God himself have commend unto you thereby daily to renew the memory of your redemption and not to devise such yourself as serve only to provoke you to a natural and human affection the recusant what mean have God command unto we to put we in mind of the passion of Christ the minister true the true preach of the word of God and the right administration of the sacrament the recusant be there any representation of Christ passion in these two the minister yes there be as lively a representation of the passion of Christ in the preach of the word and in the administration of the lord supper as if Christ be yet in crucify and as though his precious blood be now distill from his hand and side this appear by the very word of the apostle saint Paul who tax the galathians say q q gal 3. o foolish galathians who have bewitch you that you shall not obey the truth to who jesus Christ before be describe in your sight and among you crucrify that be to who be preach the doctrine of salvation by Christ in as lively and evident manner as if Christ have be paint with orient colour before your eye and crucify in or among you as for the administration of the lord supper the same apostle tell you that r r Cor 2 23 24. 25 the lord jesus in the night that he be betray take bread and when he have give thanks he break it and say take eat this be my body which be break for you this do you in remembrance of i he say not keep that crucifix in your house in remembrance of i the recusant although he say not so yet I see no reason but that we may as lawful paint Christ in our house with colour as you paint he with word in sermon and in the administration of the lord supper the minister sir there be not the like reason for the lord allow the one namely the description of Christ in speech and in the administration of the lord supper but the other to wit the carve or paint of his image in your house and that for a religious use he utter condemn in the twenty of say s s exod 20. 4. thou shall make thou no grave image neither any similitude of thing that be in heaven above neither that be in the earth beneath nor that be in the water under the earth but I marvel that you stand thus in defence of image see that all the ancient father who you pretend to be on your side do in express word condemn the use of they and be so far from teach you with your late writer that image be laymens book as that they tell you with the t t Haba. 2 18 prophet HABACUK that they be teacher of lie the recusant do the ancient father condemn the use of image which of they I pray you the minister Clemens alexandrinus speak of his time say this v v Clemens Alexand in 6 Strom. not be etc. with we there be no image that be material and see with eye but only such as be perceive by the understanding and inwardman because that God who be the only true God be apprehend by the understanding and inward man and not by the outward sense and of the same mind be the other Clement as appear by these his word 10 10 Clemens epis^ rom ja^ob lib. 5 run not unto these image of wood and stone to honour picture and image that have no soul again this be nothing else but the suggestion of the old serpent who make you believe that you be very devout when you honour the insensible thing yea he cry out say what manner of impiety and how great ingratitude be it to receive the benefit from God and to give thanks unto stick and stone Tertullian likewise say that y y Tertul. cor. mil. it be great indignity that the image of the live God shall be translate into the image of a idol or of a thing that be dead and answer a usual objection he say z z Tertul. idaean it be no hurt that the same god by his law forbid a similitude to be make and by a extraordinary precept command the similitude of the brazen serpent to be set up if thou will obey God thou have his law make thou no similitude if thou look to the precept that be give after for make a similitude then see thou imitate Moses make no image against the law unless God bid thou as he bid Moses and Arnobius point at the true image of God say thus a a Arnob (@) 8 what image shall I ma^e to God who image if we judge aright man himself be Lactantius also affirm that there be no religion where image be worship b b lib 2 Instit. (@) c. 18 say he with he agree s Austen say c c Aug ^e^onsen^u emang lib 1 c. 10 Christum and they be worthy to be deceive that seek Christ and his apostle not in the holy scripture d Or^g cell lib. 7 but inpainted wall and not to stand any long upon this particular * * (@) lib 1 cap 24 irenaeus Origen e e athanas gent athanasius f f Epiphan. 1. ban Hierosol Epiph^nius g g chrysost in Gen cap 31 homil. ^ 7. Chrysostome h h (@) (@) 3 Hierom and the rest of the ancient father do full subscribe to the same truth yea the whole counsel of Eliberis detest paint and carve image and banish they quite out of their church as idol i i council Elibert ca^ 36. say they we have decree that picture ought not to be in church lest that which be worship or adore ^e paint on wall the recusant although the council of Eleb^ris do banish image out of their church and will not suffer they to be adore yet the second council of Nice do authorize both the have of they and the adore of they the minister what tell you i of the second council of nice that council be not hold till almost eight hundred year after Christ second I answer you that their authorizement of image want universality for there be short after a synod of the bishop of France Italy and Germany in which Charles the great and the legate of the bishop of Rome be present that condemn the second council of nice as heretical the recusant how prove you that the minister I prove it by the testimony of Huicmarus archbishop of Rheims who live when these thing be fresh in memory his testimony be this k k Huicmarus Rhemens. c^nt^ Hui^mar jan cap 20 the seven general counsel so call by the grecian indeed a wicked counsel touch image which some will have to be break in piece and some to be worship be keep not long before my time by a number of bishop gather together at nice and send to Rome which also the bishop of Rome direct into France wherefore in the reign of Charles the great and the see apostolic willing it so to be a general council be keep in Germany by the convocation of the say emperor and there by the rule of the scripture and doctrine of the father the false council of the grecian be confute and utter retect of the confutation whereof be a good big book send to Rome by certain bishop from Charles which in my young year I read in the palace thus you see how that image be not establish in church in these west part of the world till almost eight hundred year after Christ the recusant well be it grant that other image be not establish in church before that time yet it seem by the testimony of l l cari^ Lactantius m m m^^^t ^^^l in Oct^uio Minutius n n Tertul lib 3. ^^ntr Martion Tertullian and o o chrysost ^o^^il 55. i^ math. Chrysostome that crucifix be use in the time next the apostle the minister no they be not public receive in the church till above seven hundred year after Christ for it be not decree till about that time that the image of Christ shall be set up p p synod Trullens ^an. 82 that be in the room of Agnus Dei. as for the ancient father that you allege to prove the contrary they speak not of the form crucifix but of the real crucifix of Christ himself crucify upon his own proper cross to make a end now of this day conference jexhort you as saint Paul do his auditor at lystra to turn q q act. 14. 15 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) from these vain foolish and paltry idol and to break this your crucifix in piece and the rest of your image the recusant break my crucifix in piece marry God forbid the minister if you will not I will the recusant will you the minister yes see here the recusant what reason be there that you shall thus break my crucifix in piece the minister true great reason for it be God commandment that we shall r r exod 34. 13. overthrow the altar of idolater and break their image in piece and cut down their grove we have also the example of sundry godly man as fit pattern for our imitation herein to begin with Moses s s exod. 32 20 he take the calse which the israelite have make and burn it in the sire and ground it unto powder and strew it upon the water and make the child of israil drink of it hezekiah likewise t t 2 reg. 13. 4. take away the high place and break the image and cut down the grove and break in piece the brazen serpent that Moses have make and call it Neh^shtan that be a piece of brasle lo here you see that though the brazen serpent be a ordinance of God a figure of Christ and a monument of the israelite deliverance from fiery serpent in the wilderness yet when it be abuse to idolatry this good king break it in piece and not think it worthy to be call a serpent call it by contempt Nehushtan a piece of brass the recusant I see that king may lawful break image in piece but it follow not that you may therefore lawful do the same the minister yea but epiphanius also though he be no king yet find a paint cloth in the church of Anabletha by jerusalem he do v v Epiphan. epist a johan. Hierosolymit as he himself report tear it in piece and pronounce that paint imagery notwithstanding it represent Christ or one of the saint to be quite contrary to the sacred scripture and thus for this time I leave you trust that you will not impute that to i as a vice which in epiphanius be account as a virtue the recusant I can but impute thi^ unto you as a vice because it appear hereby that you be a enemy to the cross of Christ and be ashamed thereof the minister no sir 10 10 August apost ^erm 8 cst we be not ashamed of he that be crucify but in that part where the sign of shame be have we the sign of the cross and for my own part y y Aug in Psa. 141 habea^ in front I be so little ashamed of the cross of Christ as that I bear it not in a secret place but in my forehead yea I be so far from play either the * * (@) Christ videan in front aug. in psalm 141. pagan or Puritan as that when I baptize any z z ju^^^us martyral Orth^^oxos a^ quest 118 a bu^er with my right and ^^gne then in the ^ame of Christ a usu^ inecclesit and praese it be etc. and I hold it neither unseemly nor unprofitable that the sign of the cross shall be use in baptism not so much because it be of that long time and continuance in the church as that it be of so good use and tend to such good end as be most simple and of present admonition as put we in mind of the cross of Christ so it be right understand and religious entertain wihout any addition of superstition the second dialogue wherein be plain show that the papist do give that honour to the saint which be due to God alone and that a great part of their popish litany be compose by the heretic Gnapheus and his fellow the recusant the minister o gross what a number of god have you b b i^^enal in satire there be not wont to be so many god as now a day the heaven be content with a small number of they and lay less burden upon the shoulder of poor Atlas the recusant god c c Bellar^ beatitud. sanct. lib. ^ 19 we make they not our god but our intercessor only to God for we the minister yes you make they not your intercessor only but your protector and you hope not only to be hear by their intercession but to be save by their merit for of Gregory you say thus in your prayer that be let he save we from our sin that in heaven we may rest with the bless and of Sabbas you say d d missal rom ^x co^cil trid^at (@) in (@) D^c^mbr^ p^ge 5. let bless Sabbas by make intercession for we protect we o lord and of all the apostle in general e e missal rom in prefat ^eria^^ by thy apostle keep we with thy continual protection and of saint Peter and of saint Paul in particular f f (@) rom. concede grant that by the merit of they both we may obtain eternal glory and of Mathias g g missal rom in page 38 by the prayer of Mathias make we to be cleanse from our sin and defend and h h missal rom page 27. let not the prayer of saint Chrysostome be want unto we and which may both cause our gift to be accept and also obtain thy pardon for we as for the virgin Marie you make intercession to she not only by request but also by merit yea by command as appear by this speech of Damianus i i damian serm. 2 not Mari^ altar thou have access unto that golden altar of reconciliation not only govern but also command not a handmaid but a lady and you apply that unto she which in the psalm be speak of God the father and the son for thus you pray in thou o lady have I put my trust o lady have mercy upon i the lord say unto my lady o my mother sit thou on my right hand etc. and thus k k missal Nostrapiaus that be o happy mother which d^est purge away our sin by thy mothet authority command our redeemer and again l l bea^ Mariam in suff^ag fol 57 d^le blot out the sin of we miserable wretch wipe away the filthiness of we sinner and by thy prayer give unto we the life of the bless yea you commend yourselves unto her alone say o o queen of heaven mother most dear to thy son do not thou despise i unto thou alone I commend i and you exclude our saviour Christ from his office of redemption and make she m m innocentius in ^e 300 di^r indulgent the only hope of they that be in despair and the saviour of sinner you do also hold it lawful to say the to saint and to say unto they n n fox act. mon. pag 1274. hallow be your name because God have make their name holy and that their kingdom may come because the kingdom of heaven be they by possession and far that their will may be do see that their will be God will and so of the other petition but to adjoin one answer more though you do but pray unto saint as intercessor only yet thereby do you make they god and consequent idol for by pray unto they you acknowledge that they have power to hear and help in all place and at all time @ and that they know the secret of your heart now to hear and to discern the very heart be a proper action of the godhead for the lord as Solomon say o o 1. reg 8. 39 only know the ^ of the child of man prayer also be a proper part of God worship as Christ our saviour teach say p p Matth: 4 10. he only shall t^ou serve now than it follow by necessary consequent that you make the saint god by your ascribe to they the proper action of the godhead and by give that to they which be god in property for to what thing soever the glory that be due unto God be ascribe it be make another god as appear by these place of scripture Gen 30. 2. be I as God who have deprive thou of the fruit of the womb 2. reg. 5. 7. be I a god to kill and to give life Isay 48. 11. my glory will I not give to any other but to proceed how do you prove that the angel the virgin Mary and the rest of the saint do hear our prayer and make intercession for we and that we be to pray unto they the recusant our chief argument be draw from the testimony of the ancient father the minister from the ancient father I have peruse some of they yet can I never find in they any ground for this matter nay I find much to the contrary to begin with saint Origen he tell we q q Ori^ lib 5 that all vow all request prayer and thanksgiving be to be direct to God the lord of all thing r r ibid. and that none shall dareto offer prayer but only unto the lord God and what need we to oft our prayer to any but to he s s Ambr. s^in epist rom 1. to win God unto we we need none to speak in our behalf but only a devout mind t t 5. let we therefore to use saint Chrysostom word fly unto God who be both willing and able to ease our misery if we have a suit to man we must first meet with porter and warder and persuade parasite and jester and oftentimes go a great way but in God there be no such thing without a mediator he be to be entreat and he yield unto our prayer withoutmony and without v 2 17. cost and charge yea it be but in vain for we to offer any such honour to the angel and saint @ for those who honour be in God will have no honour to they but to give you a blow with the hammer of heretic 10 10 August cap 15. saint Augustine be persuade that if the dead do know the action of the live and understand the secret thought of the heart that then his mother monica who love he dear in her lifetime will sometime have appear to he after her death and that she be in a life of far more felicity will not have grow so cruel towards he but he say that she be never present with he neither by dream nor any apparition whatsoever and therefore he suspect great that she have no knowledge of he yea y y aug. ibid. he allege Isai. 63. 16. doubtless thou be our father though Abraham be ignorant of we and Israel know we not yet thou o lord be our father and our redeemer and thy name be for ever which confession of the people make he to think that the dead do not know the deed of the live z z ibid. he allege also 2. reg. 22 20 where it be say that josias be take away that he may not see the evil which be to come upon the land but not to stand any long hereupon your angelical doctor acknowledge that the soul of those that be depart out of this life do a a exse aq^^n part 1 quae^ 89 art 8 of themselves know nothing that be do here below upon the earth the place of scripture that make he acknowledge this be job. 14. 21. where it be say that a dead man do not know if his son shall be honourable neither do he understand concern they whether they shall be of low degree and true this be a very pregnant place for if a dead man do not know that which be sensible to the eye of man how be it possible that he shall know the secret of man heart which be insensible and can be see but by the all-seeing eye of God the recusant sir although you can find no ground for this matter in the writing of the ancient father yet I can for I find that s. Austen himself pray both to the b b Aug in serm. 19 San^^ virgin Mary and to c c Aug in other saint and that he be of opinion that the d d Aug relig cap 55 angel do both hear our prayer e e Aug ^pt^^ 120 and deliver our prayer unto God yea that we may f f Aug tra^^ 84. in johan pray to the martyr that they may pray for we that we may walk in g Aug confess 93 their step q he do also very think that his friend do think on he in heaven and before he s. h h chrys^n ps^ 8 Chrysostome make mention of the intercession of the virgin Marie and of other of the saint and in the work of Gregory Nazianzene I find certain prayer of his both to the virgin i i Gre^ naz^anz ^^^ 29. Marie and to k k 31 athanasius join hereto the testimony of saint l l Hieron epist 25 lerome who say that Blesilla be dead do pray for her mother paula be alive the minister I answer you four way first I say that there be many thing in the writing of the ancient father which be father on their name whereas indeed they be not they but some base fellow who to win credit to their writing assume noble name as a one of our judicious m (@) in Problemat divine have show at large second I answer that the father which you all for the proof of this matter do not at the first ponderous consider of this question and that afterward when they do judicious sift it and discuss it they be either of acontrarie opinion to their former or speak thereof very faint waver and doubtful to verify what I have say take a view of saint Austen who be to dispute this very question say thus n n August mo^tu^^ cap 13. let every man as it please he take that which I shall say Nazianzene also speak of saint Basile be dead use this doubtful speech o o Greg Naztanz or ^t 30. now be Basile in heaven and there as I think he offer sacrifice for we and pour out prayer for the people and speak of his dead sister Gorgonia he say thus p p 25 if thou take any care of the honour of we and if this reward be give by God unto holy soul that they shall perceive these thing then receive my prayer three although some of the ancient father be happy of this opinion yet all be not for I have show that some of they do hold the quite contrary four although the ancient father have all joint embrace this opinion yet be not we therefore bind to receive it for q q aug. epist ^^^ we be not to esteem the disputation of any yea albeit they be catholic and commendable man to be as the canonical scripture so that save the honour whichis due to those man we may dislike and reject any thing in their writing if we find that they have think otherwise then the truth have as it shall by God assistance be understand either by other or by ourselves but to draw towards a conclusion by who think you be these saint put into the litany the recusant doubtless they be put in by the catholic father the minister no sir they be not put in by any catholic but by heretic for I find that the heretic Gnapheus be the first that cause the virgin Marie to be put into the public prayer of the church and to be name in r r 15 ^^ every prayer and invocate and I make no question but that he and his fellow put in the rest of the saint and that your pretend catholic church do tread in their step the recusant it seem then that you hold the honour of saint to be heretical the minister no I hold that the saint be to be honour and that three way viz. by a reverend esteem of they by a godly imitate of they and by praise God for propose such holy example to we as pattern for our imitation 1 they be to be honour by reverend esteem of they and ^y keep they in perpetual remembrance thus the prophet s s 2 Sam 1. 16. David commend jonathan for his fervent and constant love Elias and our saviour Christ the woman that pour on he a box of ointment say that t t mark 14 19 wheresoever the gospel shall be preach throughout the world that which the woman have do in anoint he shall b^ speak of for a memorial of she and thus the virgin Marie as a prophetess foretell that v v Luke ^ 48. all nation shall call she bless and this kind of honour do the ancient 10 10 (@) no^ (@) quo^^^^ ^abricam^^ August (@) lib 22 cap 10 father likewise give to the saint 2 they be to be honour by a godly imitate of their faith in Christ the fear of God and all good virtue wherein they excel and for this cause the example of the godly be call a cloud of witness by a allusion to the cloud that do guide the israelite through the wilderness for as that cloud do lead they to the land of Canaan so shall the example of the faithful lead we to the heavenly Canaan and this kind of honour be also give to the saint by the orthodox y father 3 they be to be honour by give God thanks for they and for the benefit that God vouchsafe by they to his church thus do the a a gal 1 13. church glorify God for saint Paul conversion and thus do we honour the saint but we dare not go further and rob God as you do of his honour and give that honour to they which he have appropriate to himself lest we shall be account guilty of robbery to our only lord and master who be a b b exod 20 5. jealous GOD c c Isay 48 ^^ and will not give his glory to any other d d 1 Tim 1 17 now unto the king everlasting immortal invisible unto GOD only wise be honour and glory for ever and ever amen the second dialogue wherein be plain show that the papist do depend as much upon the pope exposition as the rabbinical jew do upon the exposition of their jewish rabbin and that they be so far from join with the ancient father as that they join both in matter of doctrine and manner with the arrian abellians adam^ans aetians apostolicks angelick anthropomorphite Anomi bonosians basilideans beguaraine caians carpocratians circumcellion Cathari cataphryge capernite dositheans eutychians Ethnophronians euphemite gnosimachi hemerobaptist herodians helzait helcestee hieranchit^s heracleonite monothelite maletians messalians montanist manichee marcionite nestorian Novatian nudepedale nazarite Nicolaites Osseni Priscillians pepuzian pelagian prodicus pharisees scribe sampsee severians simonians tatians valentinians and zuenckseldians the recusant sir what news hear you from London the minister great news the recusant what I pray you the minister true that one Thomas Percy and other popish gentleman be discover to have contrive the most horrible treason that ever enter into the heart of man the recusant what treason the minister they have think horresc^ to have massacre a a see the discourse of the manner of the discovery of this (@) intend treason page 3 4^ the king our head the queen our fertile mother and those young and hopeful olive plant not they but we our reverend clergy our honourable nohilitie the faithful councillor the grave judge the great part of the worthy knight and gentry as well as of the wise burgess the whole clerk of the crown counsel signet seal or of any other principal judgement ^eate all the learned lawyer together with a infinite number of the common people nay their furious rage shall not only have light upon reasonable and sensible creature without either of degree sex or age but even the insensil shock and stone shall not have be free of their fury the hall of justice the house of parliament the church use for the coronation of our king the monument of our former prince the crown and other mark of royalty all the record as well of parliament as of every particular mansright with a great number of Charters and such like shall all have be comprehend under that fearful chaos and so the earth as it be open shall have send forth of the bottom of the stygian lake such sulphure smoke furious flame and fearful thunder as shall have by their diabolical dome day destroy and deface in the twinkle of a eye not only our present live prince and people but even our in sensible monument reserve for future age so as not only ourselves that be mortal but the immortal monument of our ancient prince and nobility that have be so precious preserve from age to age as the remain trophy of their eternal glory and have so long triumph over envious time shall now have be all consume together and so not only we but the memory of we and we shall have be thus extinguish in a instant so that @ if the lord have not be on our side may England now say if the lord have not be on our when man rise up against we they have then swallow we up quick when their wrath be kindle against we then the ^ 124. water have drown we and the stream have go over our soul then have the swell water go over our soul praise be the lord which have not give we as a pray unto their tooth our soul be escape even as a bird out of the snare of the fowler the snare be break and we be deliver and let this our deliverance move you to worship our god and to embrace our religion the recusant why shall this move i the minister sure if there be nothing else to move you to a embrace of our orthodox catholic faith yet this our late deliverance methink shall invite you thereunto Darius you know when he have see Daniel deliver fr^m the power of the lion he be thereby induce to fear the god of Daniel and to make a decree that in all the dominion of his kingdom c c dan 3 26 man shall tremble and fear before the god of Daniel and Nabuchodonosor make the like decree before when he see the deliverance of the 3 child d d dan 3 29 that every people nation and language which speak any blasphemy against the god of shadrach Meshach and abednego shall be draw in piece and their house shall be make a jake because there be no god that can deliver after that sort now let the sameminde be in you that be in Darius and Nabuchodonosor let our deliverance from this devilish plot which be within twelve hour of the execution move you to tremble and fear before our god and to turn Protestant the recusant turn Protestant no I will never turn the minister why will you not the recusant why because your religion be a new religion the minister a new religion you be like the stoic philosopher of who we read in the act of the apostle that they dispute with saint Paul and call he b b act. 17 18 19 a sour of word a setter out of strange god and a teacher of new doctrine but I pray you sir do you think that your religion be the old religion the recusant do I think so I be past think for I be sure that c c d. hill in his quartron of reason of catholic religion p 44 it be to use the word of one of our learned doctor most plain teach by all the ancient father of the first second three four sift and sixtage after Christ and that it have be ever without all controversy teach by the father of every age since until this day the minister it be no wonder to hear a heretic brag of antiquity for it have be the usual manner of heretic in all age to take unto themselves the church scripture father all antiquity consent continuance and perpetuity unto the end of the world to insistin some particular dioscorus though he himself be a heretic yet cry he out in the council of chalcedon that he defend the opinion of the ancient father that he have the testimony of athanasius Gregory Cyrill and of the rest of the holy father that he have they not by snatch or at the second hand but utter in their own book that he do not vary from they in any thing and that he be cast out with they his word be these Concil. Chal the like outcry make the heretic Euty che and carisius his follower in the same s s act 1 ^^ 4. council and weeread how that t t Vid^ Aug cres^on lib. 4. ^ 17. cresconius the donatist dispute with saint Austen cite saint cyprian that the v v council (@) 1 pag 877 nestorian heretic allege the authority of the council of nice that the 10 10 socrat. lib 4 c 26 arrian heretic produce the testimony of s. Origen and that the novatian heretic y y cyprian epist lub. after a apish manner take unto himself the authority of the church and of all the ancient father thereof now to make application hereof by the like apish imitation do you take unto yourselves the church counsel father and all antiquity whatsoever but what do I term it a apish imitation you do indeed imitate the ass that Aesop tell of which to make other beast afraid put on a lion skin and therewith jet abroad terrible think thereby to deceive his fellow for as the lion skin be but lap about he and grow not to his body so although you be no true member of the church yet cover you yourselves with the title and name thereof think thereby to z z no^^afrade nomin^^ Christian Cyprio (@) (@) rum deceive simple people that be soon inveighled to fancy any thing and albeit your religion have not continue the age of ^n man of the old world nor come to the age of Methushelah be not yet nine hundred year since first it come to light yet bear you the world in hand that it have be most plain and evident teach by all the ancient father of the first second three four five and six age after Christ and that it have continue ever since until this day a a cap. (...) o how great a show do falsehood make the recusant not to trifle out the time in word can you disprove what I have say the minister yes I can prove that you be so far from join with the ancient father as that you have indeed join with sundry ancient heretic both in matter of doctrine and man the recusant with what heretic the minister with the arrian adamians abelians aetians apostolic angelicke anthropomorphite Anomi bonosians basilidians Beguardines caians carpocratians circumcellion Cathari cataphryge capernite dositheans donatists eutycheans Ethnophronians euphemite gnosimachi heremobaptist herodians helzait helcesee hierarchite heracleonite monothelite meletians messalians montanist manichee marcionite Novatian nudipedale nazarite Nicolaites Osseni Priscillians pepuzian pelagian prodicus pharisees scribe sampsee severians simonians tatians valentinians and zuenckfeldians the recusant to observe this your alphabetical order wherein do we join with the arrian the minister the arrian though they be abominable heretic yet brag b b August serm. tom 6 they that they alone be the true catholic and call all those that be not of their sect ambrosians athanasians and johannites so you although you be indeed nothing less than catholic yet you do usurp the name of catholic as due alone to yourselves and do call all those that be not of your faction * * Harding in his con^at of the apol 42 81 222 zwinglians lutheran caluinist and turkish Hugenotes 2 the arrian make great brag of the long continuance of their church say that they can show that it have continue about a thousand and two hundred year so do you likewise make great boast that you can c c rhemist annot. in act 28 sect ^ show the descent of your church from Adam 3 the arrian make universality a note of their church as appear by this speech of Naziauzene d d Nazianz. in serm. (@) con. Arriann^^ where be they that define the church by a multitude and do despise the little flock yea the arrian heresy be diffuse throughout the whole world as be apparent by this testimony of saint Hierome e e Hieron in di^^ adverse and see Arrianum now with these vile heretic do you agree for f f pellarm lib 4. ec^les ca^ 4 rhemist in ^ct cap. ^ sect ^ you make universality to be a mark of the true church 4 the arrian teach that the church may expound the scripture at one time one way and at another time another way which make saint Hylary to say thus unto they g that be faith therefore follow the time and not the gospel to this heresy of the arrian do you full subscribe for you teach that the sense of scripture may be diverse according to the variety of your practice and diversity of time the h Bohemico^ su^ papa pag. 1447. pope say one of your chief master may change the holy gospel and may give to the gospel according to the place and time another sense yea i i nicol. C^^^ ^o^^mo^ epist 7 say another it be no marvel though the practice of the church do expound the scripture at one time one way and at another time another way for the understand or sense of the scripture run with the practice and that sense so agree with the practice be the quicken spirit and therefore the sripture follow the church but contrariwise the church follow not the scripture 5. the arrian deny Christ to be Autotheon God of himself so do you likewise deny that Christ be God of himself and do affirm that he have not only his person but his substance of the father whereupon k k rhemist in jo^^n 1 sect 3 you be bold to charge m. Caluin with blasphemy for say that Christ be God of himself as well as the father but what need I observe any semblance betwixt you and the arrian your own writer confess that pope liberius give his hand and heart unto they m m Alphons ^ar^^ lib 1. ^ 4. Liberio Papa say Alphonsus as for pope liberius it be well know that he be a arrian the same also acknowledge Sabellicus n n Sabellic Ennead. 7 lib 8. that be the arrian heretic by their entreaty unto the emperor Constantius obtain of he that pope liberius may be restore again into the city with which good turn liberius be move as some write become a arrian in good earnest and with his heart with they both agree cardinal o o nicol Cus^ d^ concord lib 2 ^ 5 liberius liberius give his consent to the error of the arrian and in a other place p p cusan concord lib 1 ^ 14. liberius and honorius and other pope sit for a while in Peter chair be mislead fall into schismatical error and thus much concern your agreement with the arrian now let we proceed in order to the rest the recusant what agreement be there betwixt we and the adamians the minister the adamians q q August d^ ^^^e^ cap ^^ condemn marriage in priest so do you 2 the adamians though they hold it unlawful for priest to marry yet they hold it to be lawful to have woman and courtesan in common so do your divine of Louvain hold that r priesthood be pollute with matrimony not with harlot and one of your Jesuit affirm s s (@) jesu^^^ cap 6 sect. ^ page 105. ducend^ that a priest sin less by commit adultery then by mar a wife the recusant wherein do we agree with the abelians the minister the abelians though they t t August ^eres cap ^ think it unlawful for any of their sect to live without wife yet they never keep company with they to this heresy of they do your v v rhemist in act 21 sect 1 rhemist incline over far for they hold that priest which be marry before order ought not afterward to have access to their wife and yet be they their wife still neither be the marriage knot dissolve between they the recusant wherein do we resemble the actians the minister actius the old heretic use to say thus o o Epiphan lib 5 haemu 56. to have the company of a woman out of marriage be no more a sin than it be for a man to claw his ear so some of your faction have not be ashamed to say as p p jacob de Valentia in ps. 118 one of your own side report that single fornication may be lawful use the recusant wherein do we join with the apostolic the minister the apostolick r r August cap 40 Epiphan 61 receive none into their order that have wife or possess any thing in property but those only that vow poverty and single life so do your church condemn all monk and friar that possess any good in property and both monk and priest that match themselves in marriage the recusant wherein do we agree with the angelicke anthropomorphite Anomi and the minister the angelicke be t t Epiphan. Ange^cis Aug cap 39 isidor lib 8 Originum council Loadicen can 35 repute heretic because they worship angel so be you likewise to be repute because you pray unto angel say the anthropomorphite 10 10 Aug hare cap 50 imagine God to be like a mortal man so do you when you figure the image of the most bless and sacred trinity sometime with three face as in your z z horae common prayer book print in the year of our lord 1555. and sometime like a old man have a long grey beard and his son sit by he with a dove between they the anomi be repute heretic for that they either contemn or corrupt the law of God how then can a a George do^^^e (@) (@) plai^e in^^^u^^ion ^a^ely print you wipe away the blot of heresy who take away the second commandment out of the decalogue and do hold concupiscence to be no sin which God in his b b exod 20 17 law condemn for a sin the c c E^thymius in worship the cross of Christ so do you the sign of the cross the recusant let we now come to the bonosians wherein do we resemble they the minister the bonosians prefer human tradition before the word of God so do you d d so^o in confess Catho^ Eccles page 138. say one of your approve writer be of more antiquity and of more efficacy than the sacred scripture e e Canus lib. 3. ^ol 98 add hereunto say another that for confound of heretic there be great strength in tradition then in the scripture the recusant wherein do we join with the basilidians the minister the basilidians do as both and epiphanius do record f f iron lib 1 ^ 23 ^t Epiphan 24. conceal and hide the mystery of their religion least holy thing shall be cast to dog so do you for the self same cause as appear by these speech of Harding a popish doctor g g Harding con^ut 213. you prostitute scripture as bawd do their harlot to the ungodly unlearned and rascal people and in in another place h h Harding in his art 15. 7. the unlearned people be keep from the read of the scripture by the special providence of God that precious stone shall not be throw before swine 2 the basilidians i i iren lib. 1 haer^^ ^ 2d worship image and enjoin all their follower to do the same so do you worship the image of the virgin Marie and of sundry other saint and do k k council T^^d^^ sesse 9 enjoin all man to do as you do 3 the basilidians l l Iren. lib 1 ^ 2. use enchantment and superstitious admiration so do you conjure water say and salt say you do also conjure and enchant sundry other thing as appear by your m m Meng^^ exorcism book of exorcism yea you make exorcist and conjurer a holy n rhemist ^^^ Tim 3 sect 7. Concil. Trident. sess 7 cap 1. @ order and that order a o sacrament of the church the recusant wherein do we agree with the Beguardines the minister the Beguardines hold that p p Clementin lib 5 do 3 cap. 3 a man may be perfect in this life so do your q q rhemist in joan 4 sect 1 rhemist in their annotation upon the gospel after saint John 2 the Beguardines hold that r r Clementin lib 5 do 3 c. 3 a spiritual man be subject to no human obedience so do you hold that s s Papa solutut papale abud hosi^ens the pope be not bind to any human law yea he subject not himself unto the law of God but take upon he to dispense with they at his pleasure and think that he may lawful break they and if any man chance to tell he of the breach of any law he will by and by answer t t johan 23. be not I a pope thereby signify that be pope he be subject to no law the recusant what semblance have you observe betwixt we and the caians the minister the caians v v (@) (@) 38. worship angel and pray unto they so do you as have be already show 2 the caians 10 10 (@) ibid. avouch all their folly and heresy not by the scripture but by tradition as they say from saint Paul so do you avouch all your fiction and forgery not by the scripture but by tradition from saint Peter the pope territory and lordship be forsooth y y innocent 3 cap saint Peter patrimony his tyrannical usurpation z z (@) in chren Henric 3 7 urb eccles. in palate latera^ saint Peter royalty his dignity a a Leo epist 45 saint Peter honour his prerogative b b ibid. saint Peter right his stateliness c c Leo epist 87. saint Peter reverence his closet d d innocent 4. extrav. saint Peter see his city e e Onuphrius saint Peter borough and his poll money f f vrb eccles. saint Peter penny yea you depend so much upon saint Peter as that you be not ashamed to affirm that Christ take Peter in at be into the company of the indivisible unity and that the pope speak by the inspiration of saint Peter k k Leo h Petri Math Pa^^^^in Henric 7. ^ epist 89 say Leo we beseech you to keep those thing which all cause be discuse and prove have be decree by we by the inspiration of GOD and of the most bless apostle Peter the recusant wherein do we agree with the carpocratians and circumcellion the minister the carpocratians use as both l l (@) (@) 1 ^ 2 irenaeus and m m Aug (@) (@) cap 7 Augustine do record to worship image and to burn incense unto they so do you the circumcellion n n (@) (...) (@) think it a matter meritorious to kill those that be contrary to th^ir sect so do your romish doctor account it lawful yea meritorious to murder those prince and people that be not of your religion for the proof here of I refer you to cardinal como letter that be date at Rome januarie the 30. dom. 1584. wherein he thus write to William Parrie * * the ^ v. s. have ^^to d^ we in^lus^ not p^^ the schri^e persevere be confarne v. s tantom te v. s. buon (@) corcede let di cho v. s. ha and ossiche ch ^ in Vuo v s. (@) mighor pi^ v. s. metta dun^ li fine io i l^ a 30 Genuaro m. d 84 the english sir the holiness of our lord have see your letter with the credence enclose and can but praise your good disposition and resolution which as you write tend to the service and benefit public where in his holiness exhort you to continue and to bring to pass that which you promise and to the end that you may be aid by that good spirit which have induce you to this his blessedness grant you full pardon and forgiveness of all your sin as you request assure you that beside the merit which you shall receive in heaven his holiness will make himself a far debtor to acknowledge your deserve in the best manner that he may and so much the more because you use so great modesty innot pretend any thing put therefore in act your holy and honourable thought and look to your safety and so I present myself hearty to you and wish you all good and happy success from Rome the 30 of januarie 1584. lo here you see how that pope Gregory the 13 grant to Parry full pardon and forgiveness of all his sin and assure he that he shall receive merit in heaven if that he can murder his sovereign but 1. sam. 26 9 the pope take upon he to do that which the very scribe condemn mark 2 7. his assurance be little worth for * who can lay his hand on the lord anoint and be guiltless * and who can forgive sin but God only the recusant wherein do weresemble the capernite and cataphryge the minister the capernite dream as the o o John 6. evangelist testify of a carnal manner of eat of Christ flesh so do you when you affirm that the natural and substantial body of Christ be real eat with tooth and local descend into the stomach yea some of your writer teach that the body of Christ may be receive of brute beast which the capernite never be so gross as to avouch p p Alexande^ (@) pa^ 3 (@) 45. if a d^gge or a hog say alezander de Hales shall eat the whole consecrate host I see no cause but that the lord body shall go therewithal into the belly of that dog or hog Thomas Aquinas also sharp reprove they which think otherwise his word be these q q th^m (@) part 3 (@) ^ be ^ some have say that as soon as the sacrament be take of a mouse or a dog straightway the body and blood of Christ cease to be there but this be a derogation to this sacrament and of the same blasphemous opinion be Petrus johannes de burgo with the whole sect of thomist the cataphryge do make their eucharist of the (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) m^n^t^^ (@) (@) ^ ristia^ (@) (@) aug. d^ c. 26 s aug. (@) c 38 Isid. lib 8 ^ belsabub Christian blood of child so have your priest show the people in the sacrament the blood of duck and pigeon make they believe that it be the blood of Christ the recusant wherein do we agree with the Cathari the minister the Cathari @ boast much of their merit purity and perfection and account all man wicked that be not of their sect so do the late traitor as appear by a certain letter which one of they write a little before their late intend massacre wherein be these word God and man have concur to punish the wickedness of this time lo these catholic believe that they have speech with God and that he enjoin they to kill all the wicked in the realm and to constitute a we world consist only of the innocent 2 the Cathari Theodo heresy lib. 3 rebaptize those that be already baptize so we read in the history of France and Flaunders that the popish priest there have rebaptize those that be already baptize by protestant minister the recusant wherein do we resemble the dositheans and the donatists the minister the 10 10 Epis^an heres. 13 a e Christum dositheans abstain from the use of marriage although they be marry and give not that one benevolence which saint y y 1 cor. 7 3 Paul bid the husband to give to the wife and the wife to the husband they be also note for their voluntary fast and for their superstitious afflict of their body now with these heretic do you go hand in hand for you account it great holiness for marry to z z Petrus Cath o^ live a sunder and to take upon they the vow of monkery yea you hold that * * a Petrus de Soto in ass^^ wife be not bind to give to their husband due benevolence if they be heretic you hold it also to be a work meritorious to a wear sackcloth to be give continual to fast to lie hard to fare mean and by other such way to punish and afflict the body the donatists b b August hare cap 69 it cassianus psal. 60. abstain from the assembly of all other man whatsoever which be not of their opinion and tie to a small corner in Africa that catholic church which be diffuse over the face of the whole earth now as the donatists believe that the church be only contain in Africa and consist only in the obedience or c c Donat^ part of donatus so do you in like manner believe that noneare true member of the catholic church which do not take the pope d Geron more can. po^m (@) eccles. ar^ 9 linda^ut lib 4 8^ bellarm lib. 3 c 2 ^^ (@) 12 part live under his obedience and acknowledge he to be their chief pastor and the vicar of Christ upon earth 2 the donatists deny the true preach of the word of God to beean infallible note of the church of Christ hence be it that saint Austin dispute with the donatists tie both himself and his adversary to the scripture his word be these c c aug. eccles. c 16. let the donatists if they can show their church not in the speech and rumour of the man of Africa not in the council of their bishop not in the discourse of any disputer whatsoever nor in lie sign and miracle because we be forewarn and forearm against these but in the prescript of the law in the prediction of the prophet in the verse of the psalm in the voice of the shepherd himself in the preach and work of the evangelist that be in all the canonical authority of the holy scripture now as the donatists reject that which be the true and infallible note of the church and depend upon the speech of the man of Africa upon the council of their bishop and upon lie sign and miracle so do you as the writing of sundry popish f f hosius cardinal in confess cap 21 in Lindanus in Pa^oplia lib 4 cap 83 wit tenbergen in c eccles. eccles. canisius in catechism in tract precept eccles. bellarm eccles. lib 4 c 3 Stapleton lib 1 princip doctrine cap 19 and justitut lib. 6 cap 6 writer give sufficient testimony 3 the donatists thought that a man ought not to be force to the truth as appear by these word of saint Austen to g g Aug epist 5 h Aug lib 2. c 78 vincentius think thou that no man ought to be force to righteousness whereas thou read that the master say to his servant compel all that you find to come in the same father also testify that Petilian another donatist cry out thus that be jesus Christ come so to work faith not that he may compel man but rather invite they but if it be lawful that any shall by the law be compel yea even unto good thing you wretch ought to be compel by we to the most pure faith but far be it far be it from our conscience that we shall compel man unto our faith this frantic error of the donatists have some of your popish doctor late revive and renew with fresh and new colour i i d. hill in his quartron of reason of catholic religion page 181 if your service say one of they be good and godly indeed and the very true service of God etc. yet be you not to request i much less urge i to go to your service again k k page 182. great do you offend GOD there in England in force people to go to the church contrary to their conscience 4 the donatists albeit they in word profess meakenesse and say that they will use no compulsion in matter of religion yet will they have use compulsion have they be able to have do it l l August Crese lib 4 c 5^ say saint Austen that be after the same sort the kite when he be not able to snatch away the chicken may name himself a dove so you profess the meekness of dove because you be not able to snatch away the chicken I mean that you will use compel mean to bring we to your romish faith if power be not want in you we be well enough acquaint with the furious rigour and violence that the pope agent use in this land in the day of queen Mary with their m m read the 11 book of the act and monument imprison chain scourge scorch and burn of old young man woman learned and unlearned 5 the donatists as saint n n August epist parman lib 1 c 7 lib 2 c 9 2 epist lib 2 c 11 c 26 Crescon lib 3 c 51 lib 8 c 5^ Petil^ lib 2 c 9^ epist 50 48 166 Austen testify in sundry place of his writing hold that christian prince ought not to meddle with man and matter ecclesiastical so do o o bellarm c 28 ^ pontifice rom lib 1 cap 7 rhemist in Heb. 13 17 in rom 13 sect 5 in 1 14. 16 you 6 the donatists p p martyr aug. epist 68 live as the eve and be honour as martyr so do you honour million as martyr which die for conspiracy treachery idolatry and other such like capital crime q q see the catholic supplication exhibit to the king at his first entry into this realm our religion say you be seal with the blood of million of martyr the recusant all this which you say will not move i to forsake my religion for herein be I baptize herein have I hitherto live and herein will I die the minister you be much like the heretic Eutiches who be require by the ancient father assemble in the council of Chalcedon to join with they in the profession of the apostolic faith when he be not able to answer such argument as be object against his recusancy pretend his baptism and say r r council chalced act. 1 thus have I receive of my forefather and thus have I beeleeve in this faith be I baptize and sign and in the same have I live until this day and in the same I wish to die but tell i I pray you do you in baptism profess the romish religion be you baptize in the name of your holy father the pope or in the name of the father of the son and of the holy ghost and do you stand bind in baptism to yield faith and obedience to any person save to God only the ordainer of the sacrament of baptism do the pope or any of his polshorne priest baptize you no l l August petil lib 3 6 49 it be Christ that baptize as saint Austen have well observe and to use saint Chrysostom word t t chrysost in mat. bomil 51 it be not the priest that baptize thou it be God himself that hold thy head thy baptism therefore bind thou not to the bishop or church of Rome but to the will and precept of God who hold thy head and in who name thou be baptize the recusant well have you observe any other semblance betwixt we and the euticheans the minister yes the euticheans v v Aug c. 92. deny that Christ after the union of the two nature have a true body but as Leo signify 10 10 Leo ieiu^i^ 7 serm. 6 a body without shape dimension or circumscription so do you hold that Christ body in the sacrament be without all shape and dimension that may be perceive 2 the euticheans say that Christ be whole both in heaven and earth as appear by Vigilius his speech against they y y v. lib 4 cotra Eutich ^ 4 the flesh of Christ when it be on earth sure be not in heaven and now because it be in heaven certain it be not on earth now your transubstantiation bring in this euticheanisme for you hold that the body of Christ be both in heaven and earth at one time yea on as many altar and in as many place as the sacrament be 3 the heretic Eutiches although the scripture be against he yet do he bear the world in hand that they be on his side z z Concil. Chalce 4. tell i quoth he jest with they that reason with he in what scripture lie the two nature so although your religion be repugnant to the sacred scripture yet you blush not to avouch that a a see the catholic supplication before allege it be agreeable to the sacred text of God word and gospel 4 carisius Eutiches his follower boast that the ancient father ' be on his side when as indeed they be against he b b Concil. Chalced act 4. say he thus do I believe according to the three hundred and eighteen father so do you make great brag that all antiquity be on your side and that your c c see the catholic supplication religion be believe by all primitive pastor establish by all ecumenical counsel and uphold by all ancient doctor but I hope to make it more than manifest before I leave you that it be indeed the common sewer of heresy the recusant wherein do we agree with the Ethnophronians and euphemite the minister eunomius teach that so a man be of his faith and religion it skill not great what sin he commit d d Aug cap 54 say saint Austen to this heresy of eunomius subscribe cardinal Bellarmine for he teach that so a man adhere to the church of Rome and profess outward this roman religion it skill not whether he have any inward virtue or no. his word be these e e bellarm eccy cap 2 this be the difference between all other opinion and we that all other require inward virtue to make one a member in the church and therefore they make the true church invisible but we although we believe that there be to be find in the church all virtue faith hope and charity yet that one may be say in any sort to be a member of the true church f f Damascen 6. the scripture speak we do not think that a inward virtue be require but only a outward profession of faith and fellowship of sacrament the ethnophronian fobserue diverse heathenish custom so do you as hereafter God will shall be show at large the Euphemitae will needs as g g Epiphan 80. epiphanius report be call because of the multitude of their suppose martyr the like conceit have you of yourselves otherwise you will not brag of your million of martyr and honour every traitor as a martyr as you usual do the recusant wherein do we resemble the gnosimachi and hemerobaptist the minister the gnosimachi hold that h h Damascen do vulgar christian be not to study the scripture so do i i Navarius in Enchirid hosius lib 3 authorit art you the hemerobaptist be k k isidor Etymol lib. 8 cap judaeorum Epiphan 17 Christum repute heretic because of their continual wash so may you be repute because you use to sprinkle yourselves with holiwater 2 the l l Epiphan 17. Christum hemerobaptist think they be cleanse from their sin by these their wash so do you as hereafter God will shall be plain show the recusant wherein do we agree with the heretic which saint m m Aug cap 47 Austen call Hierarchitae and n n isidor Etymol lib 18 cap Christien Isidore Heraclitae the minister they hold as the same o o ibid. father testify that child die young shall not possess the kingdom of heaven so do p p (@) Tridet sess 7 ca^ 7 becalm lib 1 baptism c. 4. position Ingolsta George D^di^ in his instruction of christian religren pag 13. you exclude all child out of the kingdom of heaven that die unbaptized and do place they in limbo the recusant wherein do we join with the herodians the minister the herodians q q ^^^ damasken ^ares give the name and honour of Christ to so do you give the name and honour of Christ to the pope allow these word of Bernard to Eugenius r christuse s s rog. cup^rs de (@) thou be by unction Christ and be therefore to be call the lord Christ yea you say that the pope be t t (@) in (@) 22. a god as well as Christ a be of the second intention compound of God and man and that v v ^ cu^^^s (@) p. ^28 (@) 6 ^ (@) (@) Christ and the pope in the church be one and the same head but to speak particular of Christ office you give to the pope Christ kingly priestly and prophetical office to begin with his kingly office the pope be say your blasphemous writer 1 the * * r. cu^ers de (@) pag 43. ^t Paul 4 D^cen (@) in pulla king of king and lord of lord z z (@) (...) 6. the lion of the tribe of juda a a (@) lib 1 sect. 7 to who al^ power be give in heaven and earth as for his priesthood this also you give to the pope call he b b distinct 40 (@) Papa^^ R Cupers page 29 Andreas in cap. pa ^ap (@) (@) and that great priest according to the order of Melchisedeke and as touch his prophetical office what do c epist ded^^at^ad Greg 13. you not oppugn it for you give unto the pope supreme authority in interpret of the scripture account he the supreme judge in controversy of religion and prefer his judgement before the judgement of the whole world d d eccles. page 11. say one of your writer e e joharme Turre cremate lib 3. cap. 64. say another yea you make old wife fable of equal authority to the word of the gospel and command that their tradition be honour f f council trident sess. 4 with the like affection of pi^ty and reverence the recusant wherein resemble we the Heracleonites the minister the heracleonite do g g August cap ^6 Epiphia 6 anoint their follower depart out of this life and give they a kind of i Bellarm. extreme unct. cap 10 lib 6 c 35. extreme unction so have you devise a sacrament of h h council tria^nt sess. 14. can 1 bellarm extreme unct. cap 2 catech ^on p 495 Gregor. Valentia lib cap 1 canisius sect 5 Henriques lib cap 7. extreme unction wherein you anoint the five sense of the sick party his eye ear nostril mouth and hand also theireyne which be the seat of concupiscence and his foot which be the instrument of execution 2 the Heracleonites use certain k k aug. c 16 Epipha^ prayer or rather magical enchantment over the sick so do you 3 the prayer which the Heracleonites use over the sick be in a * * August c 16. strange language so be you 4 the Heracleonites ground their anoint and prayer upon the first chapter of saint james so do you as appear by these word of canisius m m canisius extreme how sandy a foundation this be I hope to make it appear most evident in a other place I will now but touch and go 5 the Heracleonites ascribe remission of sin to their prayer charm and anoint as these word of saint Austen give sufficient witness o o Aug cap 16. the same power ascribe you to your prayer over the sick and anoint for you affirm that this unction p p canisius extreme unct. catech rom page 500 give health to the body q q pellarm extreme unct. ca 7 8. gregor lib 1. c 1 council trident less 4 c 4 catech rom page 505 canisius extren unct. sect 1 wipe away the relic of sin and r r catechism Roman pag 507 cause the devil to flee from they the recusant wherein do we agree with the helcesee and halzait the minister the s s Theod lib 2 cap helcesee helcesee make a twofould Christ the one above in heaven the other below here upon the earth so do you feign a twofould Christ the one above in heaven which be visible palpable and circumscriptible the other in the sacrament which be invisible incircumscriptible etc. 1 the t t Epipha 19 Christum helzait pray in a tongue not understand of the common people so do you 2 the v v Epiphan helzaite worship the relic of saint so do you the recusant wherein do we join with the meletians and messalians the minister the * * Theod lib 4. meletians use mavy sacring bell in their service so do you yea you be worse than the meletians for the meletians do not baptize bell but you a a pontif. 16 baptize bell and ascribe unto they a spiritual power against evil spirit thunder lightning etc. b b fox martyrology p. 865. 1 ed this be one of the grievance which the prince of Germany complain of in the assembly at Noremberg that the suffragans exact of the people such great sum of money for baptize of bell yea we read that pope John the fourteen c c at the coronation of the emperor Otho baptize the great bell of the church of Laterane and give unto it his own name ^ the d d August cap 57 massalians do mumble over their prayer with their lip have their heart far from God and believe that they be hear for their much babble so do you mumble over your prayer upon a pair of bead and rehearse a number of noster and creed to give a instance in your e e print 15 83 jesus psalter in the preface of that book you give we to understand that there be three kind of psalter the first be David psalter which contain thrice fifty psalm the second our lady psalter and contain thrice fifty Maries and the three be jesus psalter contain fifteen petition which be ten time repeat do make in all thrice fifty and just suitable hereunto there be fifteen petition where jesus jesus jesus mercy be ten time word for word to be repeat in the begin of they and if you fail in the account your denotion be imperfect 2 the f f theod. diuin decret. cap messalians affirm that baptism be only avaieleable to cut away former sin so do g g council trident sess 7 ^an 10 Petrus Lomb. lib 4 dist 14 rhemist heb 10 sect ^ you affirm that baptism do only purge and respect sin past and that sin commtt after baptism be to be do away by other remedy the recusant wherein do weresemble the the minister the h h irenaeus lib ^ c 18. do baptize in a unknown language so do you baptize in a language not understand of the vulgar sort 2 the i i Epiphan. ^4 do anoint those who they baptize with chrism and opobalsamum so do you use anoint in k k Hugo lib. 2 part 6. ^t Ga^r^ ^i^^ lib ^ distinct 6 quaest 3. baptism and in l l catech rom p 324. confirmation 3 the m m I^enaeus lib ^ adverse ^a^ 15 account themselves perfect so do your order of religion account themselves to be in the state of perfection 4 the n n iren lib. 1 ^ 1^ allege a multitude of apocryphal writing so do you 5 o o Epiphan. haeres^4 ^4 marcus the founder of their faction go about to make his follower believe that he can transubstantiate wine into blood in the sacrament so do you the recusant wherein do we agree with the marcionite the minister 1 the p p epip^an haeres. 42. marcionite give woman power to baptize so do q q can. Adijcim^^ 10 quaest. 1 ^an mul^er dist 4 bellarm baptism cap. 7. you 2 the r r Epiphan 42. marcionite separate marry folk under the pretence of religion so do s s Bellarm. c 21 propos^t you 3 t t Epiphan. 42 Martion though he extol virginity yet live he unchaste so do your popish priest 4 v v Epiphan. Haeres. 42. Tertull lib 4 Martion Martion teach that diverse man soul be deliver out of hell by Christ descend thither so do * * canisius fid: sect 1^ you teach that the soul of the patriarch be in hell before Christ descension and that they be thence deliver thereby rhemist in act 2 sect 12 e^ George Douly priest in his plain instruction page 13. the recusant wherein do we join with the manichee the minister the y y August cap. 6. manichee teach that Christ have not a true body but a imaginary body so do you when you affirm that the body of Christ lie hide in the eucharist under the form of bread which can be unless his body be a fantastical body for every true body be visible palpable and circumscriptible and have the dimension of height breadth and depth 2 the z z serm. 4. ^t gelasius gratia in part. 3 distinct 2. ^ manichee abstain from the cup of the lord supper and receive one kind only so do a a Concil. trident sess 21 ^c^n 2. rhemist in Johan 6 sect. 11. bellarm lib. 4 eucharist cap 20 you 3 the b b Aug epist. 74 manichee condemn marriage in their priest who for their excellency they call so do c c (@) 28 c nu^^um faferek catech rom page 526. you in you 4 the d d August Manich ^ib 2 c 13 manichee although they abstain from flesh in their feast yet use they diverse other dainty meat so you albeit you be c c distinct 4 can enjoin to forbear flesh yet may you with the f f Carthusian^ Carthusian monk feed on most dainty fish and power in wine withal the recusant wherein be we like the monothelite the minister the monothelite teach that there be but one will in Christ so do honorius the pope as appear by this his speech g g council Constant 6 act 12 2 Polychronius a Monothelite heretic go about to confirm his false doctrine by vision and apparition and affirm before the whole h h council constant 6 act 15 council of Constantinople that a certain beautiful young man appear unto he and teach he to say that there be but one will in Christ many such like apparition produce you for the confirmation of such doctrine as can be confirm by the scripture as namely your blasphemous doctrine of transubstantiation and adoration of your breaden God your superstitious prayer for the dead your heathenish doctrine of purgatory and other such like doctrine of devil and lie of Antichrist the recusant what agreement be there between we and Montanus the minister i i Epiphan ^ae^^s 48 Montanus albeit he reject not the sacred scripture yet dispute he that they do not contain all thing necessary to salvation so albeit you reject not the scripture yet dispute k k bellarm lib 4 c 4 5 Stapleton in prefat in ret^ct (@) tr^^ A^bertus Pig^i^^ d^ eccles. Hierarch l^ 1 ^ 2 (@) Ca^^^^^cor lib 3 fol 98 L^^danus lib ^^ Andradiu^ Payva lib 2 you that they contain not all thing necessary to be know concern faith and manner 2 l l Tertul lib Montanus teach that small sin be to be purge after this life and that soul shall not depart out of prison until they have pay the uttermost farthing so do m m council trident sess 9 po^itiones jugo^stadiens ecclus 1519 (@) 6 Petrus de Soto in confess cathol bellarm lib 1. c. 1 lib 2 c 6. rhemist in Math 12 sect 6. you teach that there be a certain infernal place in the earth call purgatory in the which as in a prison house the soul which be not full purge in this life be there to be cleanse and purge by fire before they can be receive into heaven 3 n n Tertul ^oron^ (@) Montanus teach that prayer oblation and sacrifice shall be offer for soul depart so do o o co^cil trident sess 9 Cat^^^ rom. pag 127. you teach that the soul torment in purgatory do find great ease by the prayer sacrifice fast indulgence and also by the alm of the live 4 p p etrus Soto in confess Cathol. bellarm ^ib. 2 c. 15 ^^ 18 rhemist in Thessalo 2 sect 19 @ Aug cap 26 the montanist hold the prophecy of Prisca and maximillain great reverence so do you the lie legend of catharine and of other 5 the q q Tertul. Corona mili^es montanist boast of their martyr so do you as have already be show the recusant wherein do we resemble the nudipedale nestorian Novatian and Nicolaites the minister you resemble the Aug cap 8 nudipedales in take it for a act meritorious to go barefoot in pilgrimage and procession you resemble the nestorian in cover yourselves s s theodoret. with a cloak and colour of the right faith you resemble the Novatian in entitle your congregation by the name of the catholic church cyprian (@) 73 (@) novatianus as say cyprian for the Novatian heretic after the manner of ape which be not man yet do counterfeit man and do covet to seem man will challenge to himself the authority of the catholic church and the truth whereas he himself be not in the church but contrariwise a rebel against the church you resemble the August cap 5. Nicolaites in hold it to be lawful to commit adultery the recusant wherein do we come near the nazarite the minister the August cap 9 nazarite mingle jewish ceremony with christian religion so do you as appear by sundry particular to insist in a few of they you y y missal rom consecrate every year a paschal lamb after the fashion of the jew as be apparent in the end of your * * according to the use of Sarun mass where there be annex the form of consecate the Paschall lamb with this prayer vouchsafe to sanctify this Paschal lamb that as many of thy people as do eat thereof may be replenish with all heavenly benediction etc. and I have be credible inform that there be certain monk near our university of 10 10 at Barnewell abbey by Cambridge Cambridg that do use once a year to roast a lamb whole and so to eat it with herb 2 you borrow your jubily from the jew as both z z commun lib 5 do 9 Clement 6. clement the 6 acknowledge in his bull and other of your fat bull of Basan 3 your a a Decret. part 3 distinct 4 c 127 sprinckel of holy water your b b distinct 4 cap 11. hallow of church your c c decret gregor lib 1 do 15 cap 1 gloss anoint of man and woman and many other d d galat 4 9 impudent and beggarly rudiment be beg of the jew the e e ^piphan Nazar nazarite also brag of their revelation and miracle so do f f bellarm Ecceles lib. 4 cap 3 Cunerus in lib eccles. you the recusant wherein do we join with the heretic call Osseni the minister the g g Epiphan haeres. 19 Christum Osseni affirm that prayer shall not be use in a know language so do you affirm that the service of the church shall not be celebrate in the vulgar tongue but in the latin only and this tongu^ your setter forth of the complutense edition do so much exalt as that he be not ashamed blasphemous to h h in Praefat. write that he have place the latin text between the Hebrew and and Greek as CHRIST between two thief the recusant wherein do we join with the priscillians the minister the priscillians separate i i August haee cap 70. husband from their wife and wife from their husband so do you separate marry folk and place they in monastical place yea one of your chief k k matrim cap 21 Propos. 1 writer set down this proposition that a man or wife before marriage consummate may enter into a monastery albeit the other party be most unwilling 2 the l l canonicaru^ sumente etc. aug. cap 70. priscillians boast that the sacred scripture be on their side so do you m m (@) in his quaitron of reason p 39 we do not teach say one of your doctor any doctrine but such as be derive out of the holy bible 3 the n priscillians wrest the scripture from their true sense and meaning and give unto they such exposition as serve for the confirmation of their error so do you wring the text till you make it bleed and so press the two dug of the scripture the old and new testament that to use the word of a ancient * * volusia epist. add Nichol 1 writer instead of milk you drink nothing but blood 4 o o August ibid. the priscillians make the book apocryphal of equal authority with the canonical so do p p council trident ^^ss 4 you 5 the q q Aug cap 70 priscillians make no account to forswear themselves so that thereby they may cloak their filthiness and villainy no more do you as appear by these word of your rhemist r r Remist in act 23 if thou be put to a oath to accuse catholic for serve God or to utter any thing to God s s the papist account all the magistrate in this realm for God enemy enemy thou cughte first to refuse such unlawful oath but if thou have not constancy and courage so to do yet know thou that such oath bind not in conscience and in the law of God yea * * lib. 4 Instit. sacerd cap 21. 22 index say one of your romish cardinal when a judge demand a oath unjust then may the examinate use a equivocation according to his own mind contrary to the judge mind as for example be thus demand do thou that fact he may answer I do it not understanding secret in his mind not at this time or to tell it to thou or some such like shift lo here your rhemish and romish doctor to use saint Austin word t t aug. cap. priscillians and answeareable to this their doctrine be the practice of your seminary priest for they when they be bring before a judge or justice do I warrant you common answer by the aforesaid equivocation and it be indeed no marvel for one of your saint do the same as witnesle Navarrus in these word * * navar. Tom 5 cap. ^2 saint Francis be ask which way a certain mur therer do run which have pass by he put his hand into his sleeve answer that he go not that way meaning that he go not through his and the like answer I fear will you and many of your fellow recusant make if you be demand which way any of the late traitor go that be not yet apprehend but let we come to the pepuzian the recusant wherein do weresemble they the minister the v v August cap 27. pepuzian hold it lawful for woman to enter into the ministry and to administer the sacrament the same power give 10 10 bellarm Ba^t^s^ sin cap. 7. you not only to lay-man and woman but to pagan that be not baptize themselves 2 the y y August (@) cap 27 pepuzian honour their town pepuza and call it Jerusalem so do you honour the city of Rome and the holy city and the seat of the pope holiness but you be great deceive for as jerusalem be first a z z mat. 27. 53 holy city and afterward become a a killer of the prophet and a a math. 23. 37 stoner of they that be send to she so Rome albeit it be once a b b rom 1. ^ faithful city yet be she now c c reu^l 1. 6 drunken with the blood of saint and with the blood of the martyr of jesus yea she be become such a sink and sewer of all wickedness as that your own friar ^rie out d d mantua^us in ^^log ^ e e Idem fast lib 2. alas at Rome now nothing but money do reign virtue be quite banish the whole city be become a stew 3. the s s aug. cap 27. pepuzian brag that in the say pepuza there once appear Christ in the form of a woman so may you brag that in the say city of Rome there once appear Christ for sog you call the pope in the shape of a woman for there be once a woman pope as sundry h h Platina in johan 8 ^acob Bergom lib muheribu^ Sabellicus Ennead 9 li^ 1 Chal co^dyl h^ 6 Volateran lib 22 Ravisius ^^x^ot in ^ vi^ilem (@) Mantu (@) (@) lib 3. (...) roman pontif. rodrigo Sanches in don alonso 3 Pero Mexia^^ ^ect johannes de Pineda part 3 lib 1^ cap 23. johannes Parisijs lib. ^^ Papali Balam monachus in lib. Pap^ Anton^nus (@) ^ (@) 6. alonso in Enchyrid lib writer testify who in a most solemn procession as she go with accustom pomp to visit saint John de Laterane be open deliver of child between the church of saint Clement and the theatre which be now call Coliseo to the wonderful amazement of those that be present and to prevent the like mishap ever after there be immediate provide i i Sabellicus (@) 9 lib 3. a chair of the recusant what need you english this I pray you leave this matter and come to some other particular the minister it be no marvel that you be loath to hear any more of this matter for it be a great blot to your succession that a whore sit sometime in saint Peter chair but proceed to the pelagian the recusant wherein do we agree with they the minister the k k council milevitan c. 1 council Aphrycan c 76 ^t aug. cap 88 August Stenchus in Annot. in gen. a. Bel pelagians hold that Adam if he have not sin shall have die and that he die not by reason of his transgression but by the condition of nature so some of l l arm. cap. 9 your doctor hold that Adam body be by nature create mortal and that sin be not the cause of the mortality thereof 2 the m m Aug cap 88 council c. two Concil. Aphrycan c. 77 @ in lib. centrover in controver bellarm amissione cap. 15. pelagians hold that child be conceive and bear without original sin so do n you hold that the virgin Marie be conceive without original sin 3 the o o aug. julian. lib 6. c. 6 pelagians teach that concupiscence be sanctify by baptism and that it be evil before baptism do afterwards begin not to be evil so do you teach that concupiscence in the regenerate be p p Concil. trident ^est 5 ^ 5 censur Colon pag 46 54 Catechi^ rom. in precept 9 no sin but indeed q q Franciscanus M^lan part 4. in disput. a good thing not consider that of saint Austen r r Aug julian. lib. 5 c 3 the concupiscence o^ the flesh against which the good spirit lust be both sin and the punishment of sin and the cause of sin 4 the pelagians say that the gentile might by philosophy know God and be save so do s s Catharinus in comment in 1 Tim 4. lib. 3 orthodox you 5 the t t August julian lib 4. c 3 pelagians will not subscribe to this doctrine of the ancient v v Concil. Arausican can 22 ^0 cyprian lib 2 epist 2 Hie^on in gal. 3 Greg lib 2 moral cap 15 August lib. 1 cap 3 father viz: that all the work of unbeliever be sin no more will you for it be your resolute sentence 10 10 alex. de Hales part 3 quest. 66 Thomas Aquin in 1 second quaest. 109 bonavent in 2. sent. distinct. 2d bellarm great arb. lib. 5 cap 4 ^ 9 Gabriel Biel. 3 sentent-dist 27 Ruard tapper great arb. pag. 291. that a man press with no temptation may without faith by the special help of God and without it by his own strength so do that which be moral good that no sin at all be commit therein 6 the pelagian define that only to be sin y which be do voluntary and upon knowledge so do some of your popish z z lib 3 orthodox doctor 7 the a a August lib 1 great cap 18 pelagians hold that a man be endue with free-will before he have receive the grace of God so do you all joint 8 the pelagians teach that man free-will b somewhat avail to cause he not to sin for which cause saint Austen speak thus of Pelagius the archhereticke c c Augustine epist. 106. sometime he poise the power of the will with such equal weight in even balance that he may determine how it avail somewhat to cause we not to sin which if it be so there be no place reserve for the help of grace without which we see free-will have no force at all in cause we not to sin to this haerisie of Pelagius subscribe d tapper Ruard tapper Atb. p. 294 288 and the whole e e c^^il cried' S 6 can 7. counsel of Trent 8 yea some of the pelagians hold that a man by f August c. 88 innocent epist 93 August the strength of his own free-will may keep all the commandment of God so do some of your g g gab^ell Biel 3 send dist 27 jap arb. p 291. doctor 9 the pelagians ascribe more to man free-will than they do to God grace so do you when you say h h gratiae molina great Arb quaest 14 art 1. 12. thom. Aquin. gent lib 3 c ^59 Greg that the efficacy of God grace do depend upon the cooperation of man will 10 the i i August cap 8. pelagians affirm that grace be give to the merit of our work so say k k Gabriel Biel. lib 2 dist 27. Andrad lib 6. page 507. you that to the merit of our work be give both 11 it be the heresy of l l August cap 88 pelagians to teach that grace be not only obtain by good work but also by they keep and augment with this jump the determination of the council of Trent when it say dix it accept m m council trident sess 6 can 24 12 the n n Aug lib 2 c 5 cap. 88 pelagians teach that it be not impossible for a just man to be quite without sin in this life and you be not far from this heresy when you say o o council trident sess 5 @ 18 sot in assert Cathol. Ruud t^p p. 189 lib. 4 justisi^at cap. that a man be able in this life to perform the law of God perfect but we may say to you as orosius do to that heretic Pelagius * thou say that it be not impossible that a man shall be without sin I repeat it again and often time the man which can do this be Christ the son of God either take that name unto thou or lay aside thy boldness God have give that but to one and that be he which be chief and first bear among many brother 13 the pelagians when the ancient father tell they that no man be perfect and void of sin answer thus p p d^^ they Pelag. Ctesiphont no man be perfect in such a degree of perfection as God be perfect so when we tell you that our righteousness in this life be imperfect and such as to use saint Austin word * * justitua in Aug civita li. 19 c 26 rather consist in the remission of our sin than in the perfection of our virtue your a unswear be this q q Ruard tapper pag 189 although our righteousness be imperfect in comparison of that which we shall have in heaven yet it be perfect in respect of our weakness 14 the pelagians interpret as saint r r Hieron in ies cap 13 Hierome say these sentence of scripture our justice be like a cloth of a monstrous woman and no man be good Noah not one in this sort of as if the holy ghost have mean that man in comparison of God be not just or good and the self same sleight and evasion use s s jodocus Tilestanus in lib confess Antuerp cap 6 you 15 the pelagian to prove the strength of free will and the perfect fulfil and accomphsh of the law usual object on this wise God have give a sundry commandment to man since his fall some pertain to the law some to the gospel as commandment to turn unto God to believe to repent and all commandment be give in vain unless there be freedom of will to do they or not to do they t t Aug great lib. arb c. 4 ^ liquid palagiant say saint Austen the pelagians think themselves cunning man when they say God will not command that thing which he know a man be not able to do the self same objection use cardinal v v bellarm lib 5 great cap 18 Bellarmine not consider that these commandment set not down what we can do but what we shall do not our ability but our office and duty 10 10 August great lib 5 ca 4 say saint Austen that be God do therefore command we to do some thing that we be not able to do that we may understand what we ought to crave of he saint Ambrose also be of the same mind with saint Augustine as appear by these his word * Ambros epist ^4 the precept be give for no other cause but that the help of the precept giver may be seek 16 y y Bellarm. lib 5 great c 15 you object with the z z Aug nature great cap 67 pelagian that if there be not in man free-will there shall be no place leave for reward or punishment for if a man say both they and you do evil of necessity he deserve no punishment and if he do well unwilling a Aug: ibid. he be worthy of no reward we answer with saint Austen in well do there be no bond of necessity because freedom or liberty come of love which be shed abroad in our heart by the holy ghost 17 b b bellarm great lib 5 c 14 you object also with the c pelagian that sin be either necessary or voluntary if necessary it can be avoid and so consequent be no sin if voluntary it may be avoid therefore man have free-will and may avoid sin we answer with saint Austen d d Aug Caelestinum perfect man have once free will give he but because he sin willing there follow as a reward of his sin a necessity of sin the recusant wherein do we agree with the heretic prodicus the minister prodicus say that e e Clement in Stromat li. 3 it be lawful to commit open fornication so say some of you f f jacobus de Valentia in ps 18 judaei saraceni and Christiani confess one of your own side as well Jew as saracen as also bad christian to the intent to excuse and defend their wicked life say that single fornication may be lawful use and Erasmus speak of some of the best of your roman clergy say thus g g Erasmus in Enchirid. Christiani c. 14 a great many of they who the common sort take for good and godly man not a whit abhor single fornication and a sober use of pleasure reckon it to be but a petty fault yea this vile opinion be s^ eager maintain by some of your side as that the bishop assemble in the late council of Basill be constrain to decree h council Basili Sess 20. that h fornication shall be sin Antoninus also the archbishop Florence be fain to stand up against they say i i Antoninus in sum. part 4 tit. 22 cap 2 s 3 hereby be confute the error of they that say that single fornication be no sin the recusant wherein do we resemble the scribe and pharisee the minister the pharisee separate themselves from the common sort of man as more holy than they and contemn the poor publican as sinner and therefore k k in dictionar hebraic some learned man think that they be call pharisees as separate and divide from the common sort in holiness of life much like unto your monk which be call carthusian 2 the scribe and pharisee l l Mat 23 23 tythed mint and anise and cumin and leave the weighty thing of the law as judgement and mercy and fidelity so do you for you be so precise as that you will not eat a egg in Lent and yet will you not stick to lay your hand on the lord anoint and to murder the noble 3 the Pharisee be m m josephus lib. Tom a lib 17 cap 3 a subtle kind of man arrogant and sometime enemy to king and ruler so be you as appear by your late traitorous and unnatural stratagem 4 the scribe and pharisee n n Mat 23. 15 compass sea and land to make one of their profession so do you Jesuit and Semina^ie priest 5 the scribe and Pharisee despise Christ and his disciple and call they nazaren in despite of his country and hence come this scornful question o John t. 4^ use by Nathaniel o can there any good thing come out of Nazareth after the same manner do you scoff at our religion and say with Harding that it begin not at Jerusalem but at Wittemberge p Harding in his confutation of the APol. 6 the scribe and Pharisee boast much of their succession and say we be q q John 8 33 Abraham seed we be r r John 9 28 29 Moses disciple we know that God speak with Moses but this man we know not from whence he be or what he can show for his succession and when Christ begin to confute their error they say unto he s s Luk 20 2 Catena in Luk 20 tell we by what authority thou do these thing or who be he that have give thou this authority which word of they saint Cyrill frame in this sort t t Cypril in^^ thou be of the tribe of judah and therefore have no right by succession unto the priesthood take upon thou the office that be commit unto we s. Chrisostome likewise imagine the pharisee to say thus v v chrysost in Mat homil 39 bellarm lib ^ eccles. c ^ ^^ rhemist act 23 sect ^ thou be not of the house of priest the senate have not grant it thou the emperor have not give it unto thou the like boast make ^ you of your succession yea pope Symmachius be not ashamed to avouch that if the pope want virtue and goodness of his own the virtue that be give he by Peter his predecessor be sufficient his word be these y y distinct 40. and your gloss upon the same say thus Petrus Peter have make the pope heir of his goodness z ibid. 7 the Pharisee put their confidence in their work and think they can merit eternal life by they for so saint a a Phil 3. 7 Paul say of himself that be a Pharisee his work be his gain and advantage in the matter of salvation * andrad lib. 6 page 5 17 Soto in assertione cathol Lindan lib. 3 cap 20 the very same doctrine of confidence in work and of the merit of salvation thereby do b b Concil. trident sess 6 c 32 your popish doctor teach in their book and pamphlet extant to the view of the world 8 these pharisee c c mark 7 8 lay the commandment of God a part and observe the tradition of man so do you 9 the d d Epiphan. 15 Christum scribe be repute heretic for that they bring in a sophistical exposition of the law and for the self same cause may you well be range among heretic for there be never any heretic that ever devise more vain and sophistical exposition upon the word of God nor more contrary to the meaning of the holy ghost than you have do 1 to insist in some particular to prove that whosoever accuse the pope shall never be forgive pope sixtus e e Concil. tom. 1 six allege math. 12 32. whosoever shall speak against the holy ghost it shall not be forgive he neither in this world nor in the world to come 2 to prove that the pope be great than the emperor innocentius the three f f decretal lib. 1 tit. 33 obed. allege Gen 1. 16. God make two great light the great light to rule the day and the less light to rule the night and he interpret it thus g God create two light in the firmament of heaven so in the firmament of the earth two ruler a great light and a lesser light that to the and the emperor the one to govern the day the other the night that be the pope to govern the clergy the emperor the laity 3 to prove that the pope may set his foot in the neck of the emperor pope Alexander the three h h 40 allege psalm 91. 13. thou shall walk upon the lion and asp the young lion and the dragon shall thou tread under foot 4 to prove that the pope power be great than all other create power extend itself unto thing celestial terrestrial and infernal Antoninus allege psalm 8. 6. 7 thou have put all thing under his foot all sheep and ox yea and the beast of the field the fowl of the air and the fish i Anton in sun part 3 do 22 c 5 s. 4 5 6. of the sea etc. where say he by ox be mean jew and heretic by beast of the field pagan and infidel by sheep christians both king and subject by bird of the air angel in heaven and by fish in the sea soul in purgatory 5 k k io capistr eccles. 1 2 fol 21. do not the lord say another of your sophistical scribe command Peter Luke 5. 4. to launch out into the deep that he may signify the height of power in Peter again why do the lord send Peter only to the sea to fish with a angle or hook but chat he will insinuate that he intend to set Peter over the whole surge sea of the tempestuous world and why do he command he to fish with a iron hook but that he be dispose to commit unto he the sword both of the spiritual and temporal empire 6 to prove the antiquity of the cardinal of Rome l l Andrea Polyd invent lib 4 cap 9 Andreas barbatius allege 1. Samuel 2. 8. the corner of the earth be the lord 7 to prove that the church of Rome have the m epist. ^ pre-eminence over all other church allege math. 16. 18. upon this rock will I build my church and he expound it thus upon this rock that be upon the church of Rome will I build my church 8 to prove that the church be build upon saint Peter * * bellarm pontif. rom. lib 1 cap. 17 Bellarmine allege the self same place and expound it thus upon this rock that be upon thou Peter will I build my church but the ancient father expound this text far otherwise hear the word of saint Austen n n aug. dom. mat. serm. 13 thou be Peter say Christ and upon this rock which thou have confess upon this rock which thou haste acknowledge by say thou be Christ the son of the live GOD will I build my church that be upon myself the son of of the live God will I build my church I will build thou upon i notme upon thou for man intend to build upon man say I hold of Paul I of Apollo I of Cephas and other that will not be build upon Peter but upon therocke say I hold of Christ for the rock be Christ upon the which foundation Peter himself be build sith no man can lay any other foundation beside that which be lay which be Christ jesus saint Hierom subscribe to the same exposition o o Hieron in Math 16 18 by the rock say he we understand Christ who Peter confess for if we take Peter for a stone of the foundation all the apostle shall be alike according to that which we see in the Apocalyps and in the same current run p p Euseb. in homil in Paul ^ Chrylost homil 55 in Math 32 in serm. 21 Pentecost Eusebius q q Ambros in Ephes c 2 in lib Ambrose @ Chrysostome s s Epiphan in lib 2 epiphanius t t Origen in Mat 16 tract. 1. Origen 10 10 beda in johan. cap 21. Gregory beda a a Hilar lib 2. ^ Hilary @ fabianus and the whole stream of the ancient father but to wound you with your own weapon Titelman a friar agree with the forename writer his word be these b b fabianus epist. zenone^ @ Titelmanin Math 16. upon this rock up on this truth of faith which thou haste confess and have utter say thou be CHRIST the son of the live GOD and also upon myself a most sure rock which in thy foresay speech thou have confess I will build and find my church so do also a other of your writer c c in Math 16. it be not say he for man that he shall be a rock even as job say be my strength the strength of stone nay on the contrary all flesh be grass and every man live be altogether vanity it belong only to Christ that he shall be a rock etc. again d d ibid. when Christ say I will build my church upon this rock he mean nothing else then he will build his church upon a sure and unmovable foundation against which all the assault of his enemy can be able to do nothing by this it be manifest that Christ build not his church upon Peter as a chief foundation for we be build upon the foundation of the prophet and apostle jesus Christ himself be the head cornerstone or upon any other man for no man be so firm and constant that he can be move as we may also see in Peter and therefore a other rock be to be seek for and true in the scripture Christ himself be often call a rock or stone as in Isai I will put in Zion a cornerstone approve and choose whosoever believe in he shall not be confound and in the psalm the same stone which the builder refuse be become the head stone in the corner 9 to prove that saint Peter be not only the head of the church but of the apostle also e e bellarm rom. lib 1 cap. 12 Bellarmine allege math. 16 19 I will give unto thou the key of the kingdom of heaven and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth shall be bind in heaven and whatsoever thou shall lose one earth shall be loose in heaven but this text of scripture prove no such matter as the ancient father have well observe f f Orig in Mat 16 tract 1. say Origen this say to thou will I give the key of the kingdom of heaven be common to the rest of the apostle and the word that follow as speak unto Peter be common unto all again if only upon Peter thou think the whole church to be build what will thou say of John the son of thunder and of every of the apostle shall we dare to that against Peter only the gate of hell shall not prevail and against the rest of the apostle they shall and not rather in they all and every one of they that to be true which be say the gate of hell shall not prevail and that also upon this rock will I build my church for if this speech to thou will I give the key of the kingdom of heaven be common to all why then shall not all that which go before and follow after as speak to Peter be common to they all saint cyprian be of the same judgement with saint Origen as appear by these his word * * cyprian prelate the same be the rest of the apostle doubtless that Peter be endue with equal fellowship both of honour and of power but the beginning come of unity that the church may thereby be show to be one Hierome also hold that the place before allege be not sufficient to prove saint Peter to be the sole ministerial foundation of the church his word be these h h Hieron lib 8 adverse jovinian thou will say the church be found upon Peter yet in another place the same thing be do to all the apostle and they all receive the key of the kingdom of heaven and equal upon they all be the strength of the church settle beda likewise be of opinion that the power of bind and lose be give to the apostle with out any prerogative of one morethen other I will give you his express word i i Bede homil. in evang. the power of bind and lose although it seem to be give of the lord to Peter alone yet without all doubt we must know that it be also give to the rest of the apostle to this doctrine also have whole k k Concil. c. 9 synod med. 96 c 1. counsel subscribe but what need I stand in quote of ancient father and counsel I will wound you again with your own weapon and make you cry out with julian l l Theodoret Tripart histor lib 6 cap. 17 behold we be wound with our own quill out of our own book they take armour which in fight they use against we hear the word of one of your own school doctor m m 1 elect 2 can 3 4 page 84 all the apostle have equal power with Peter which I thus understand that every one of the apostle have power ecclesiastical in the whole world and to all those act to which Peter have the same Covarruvias also one of your own canonist come with this canon shoot against you n Covar Tom 1. part 2 s. 9 pag. 242 4 Catholicorum etc. according to the authority of catholic writer and the common tradition of all man the apostle receive o equal power with Peter both of order and jurisdiction in so much doubtless as every apostle have equal power with Peter from God himself and that both over all the world and to all action that PETER can 10 to prove that Peter be at Rome your popish p p rhemist in 1 epist Petri ballarm de pontif. li 2 c 2 doctor quote 1. peter 5 13. the church that be at Babylon salute you by quote whereof they have gain thus much that Rome be q q revel 17 5 great Babylon the mother of whoredom and abomination of the earth 11 to prove that the pope sit in Peter chair can err in matter of faith and doctrine your r r Bellarm. lib 4 pontif. cap 3 rhemist annot. in Luk 22. sect ^^ doctor quote Luke 22 32. the lord say Simon Simon behold Satan have desire you to winnow you as wheat but I have pray for thou that thy faith fail not in which word our saviour Christ promise not that Peter judgement shall never err but that in his great and dangerous temptation into the which our saviour foresee he shall fall his faith shall not utter fail I have pray for thou that thy faith fail not that be s s chrysost ho-mil 72 Chysostome ne in fine that thou final perish not and in another place t t in Math homil 83 Christ do not say thou shall not deny i but thy faith shall not fail for by his care and favour it come to pass that Peter faith shall not utter be extinguish reverend v v beda in Lu. 22 beda likewise say that our saviour pray for Peter not that he shall not fail that be that after he be fall by deny he he may rise again by repentance to his former estate now mark I pray you how ridiculous this illation of romish doctor be I have pray that though thou do thrice deny i and shameful forswear i yet nevertheless thy faith shall not quite fail therefore neither peter nor the pope can err in any point of religion second suppose that CHRIST have pray that PETER shall neither err in judgement nor fail in the temptation now at hand what do this advantage your holy father the pope for if this be to be understand of the pope then must he also first be sift by Satan as Peter be and deny Christ as Peter do for if the one part must be understand of the pope then of necessity must the other be also and so consequent must you needs confess as well you may that the pope be a denier of Christ and a shameful forswearer of he three this text do indeed quite overthrow your romish religion for your doctor joint teach that Christ prayer be available for the pope to keep he from error not in the temple or pulpit or closet or any other common or private place but only in his chair consistory and council in debate doubtful cause of religion as if Christ have pray not for the man but for the wall which be direct against the word of our saviour for he say not I have pray for thy chair tribunal court consistory and counsel that they shall not err but he say I have pray for thou note his person that thy faith that be the persuasion of thy heart believe in i shall not utter fail lo here Christ pray for Peter person and not for Peter chair last although Peter have great confidence in himself say 10 10 Luke 22. 33 I be ready to go with thou into prison and to death y y John 13 37 I will lay down my life for thy sake and z z math. 26 33. though that all man shall be offend by thou yet will I never be offend notwithstanding I say all this Peter deem he thrice and swear that he know not the man now as Peter trust two much in himself and esteem more of himself then his fellow disciple do chance to fall more shameful than all they so your holy father the pope trust to much in his own strength and esteem more of himself than all other bishop do happen to oppose himself against Christ and to do far worse than all other as Peter therefore find his faith to have quail acknowledge his fault and go out at the crow of the cock and weep bitter so your pretend successor of Peter find himself to have fall away from the true God into idolatry and apostasy shall with Peter acknowledge his fault and go out of Babylon and weep bitter 12 to prove that the church can err a a bellarm eccles. lib 3. cap. 14 Bellarmine allege 1. tim. 3-15 that thou may know how thou ought to behave thyself in the house of God which be the church of the live God the pillar and ground of truth but he be great deceive herein for that church which the apostle here call the house of God and the pillar of truth be not any visible company but a invisible that be the elect only in a visible congregation for they alone be that house wherein God dwell as it may firm be prove by these word of the apostle b b Heb. 3 6 Christ as the son be over his own house but what house be it be it a visible church c c ibid. no we be the house if we hold fast the confidence and rejoice of the hope unto the end second the church be call a pillar metaphorical because it be like unto a pillar for as a pillar do support and underprop^e a building and make it more stable firm and strong so the church do sustain and support the truth for the truth be no where preserve but in the church neither be there any place or seat in which it rest save only among the godly in the church now than if your will reason thus truth be no where to be find but in the church therefore whatsoever the church decree be truth you do in reason commit a fallacy for the church may preserve truth and yet be not altogether free from error 3 the argument which Bellarmine draw from this text of scripture follow not for james Peter and John e e galat 2 9 be account (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to be pillar and yet these pillar err both in matter of doctrine and manner they err in manner when they f f Mat 16 56 forsake Christ and flee and they err in doctrine when they g g John 20 9 know not the scripture that Christ must arise again from the dead and when they dream of the restore of a earthly kingdom h act 1 6 to conclude this particular the apostle call the church (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the pillar of truth and not (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the foundation of the truth and saint Chrysostome lest any shall take occasion i chrysost in 1 Tim 3 15 from the apostle word to ascribe overmuch as you do to the church convert the proposition and say (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) truth be the pillar and the establishment of the church 13 to prove that the church can err your k k the annot. 1 Tim 3 15 doctor also allege Math 28 20 lo I be with you always until the end of the world which promise be not as l l bellarm eccles. lib 3 c 14 Bellarmine will have it make to any visible church or congregation but unto the godly and elect only as the learned father expound it to begin with saint Chrysostome m m chrysost in Mat cap vlt. Noncumillis say he he say not that he will be with they only but with all that afterward shall believe neither be the apostle to live until the end of the world but as unto on body he speak unto all the faithful saint Hierome subscribe to the same exposition n n Hieron in mat. cap vlt. Christ here show that he will never go from believer so do also Rabanus maurus a ancient divine o o Raban in Comment. in by this be mean that until the end of the world there shall not be want in the world such as be worthy a heavenly mansion and dwell place to adjoin one answer more this text which your popish seducer allege do rather make against than then for they for Christ according to his promise be with every one of his elect and not with soon one particular man only as they will have the place to sound and to use saint Origen word p p Origen in Rom. 15 it be speak to none of the apostle and to none of the faithful singular I will be with thou but to the multitude of church plural I will be with you yea some of your * own writer acknowledge that Christ say not I will be with thou Peter and with thy successor only but q q Dyonis Carthusianus in I will be with you that be with you and your successor and with all the faithful and the say Dyonisius gather not hence as your late writer do that the visible church can possible err r r Dyonis ibid. but that faith shall never fall away total but that christian religion shall abide in some until the end of the world 14 to prove that not only the predestinate but the reprobate also may belong unto the true church and be member thereof s s bellarm eccles. lib 3 c 7 Bellermine quote math. 3 12 where the church be compare to a barn floor wherein be both chaff and wheat and math. 13. 47 where it be compare to a draw net cast into the sea that gather of all kind of fish and 2. tim. 2. 20. where it be compare to a house wherein there be not only vessel of gold and of silver but also of wood and of earth and some for honour and some unto dishonour all which place must be understand of the visible church whereof the reprobate may be member for a time and not of the invisible whereof none can be member but those only that be true engraft into the body of Christ jesus for to produce your own decree against you t t Decr part. 2 24. quaest. 3. cap. 8 they belong not to the church which be corporal mix in the society thereof be separate by a most lewd life to be short the place allege by Bellarmine do prove that wicked man may be in the church but not of the church this my distinction be grounden upon the very word of saint John u u 1 John 2. 19 they go out from we but they (@) not of we for if they have be of we they will have continue with we but this come of pass that it may appear that they be not all of we 15 to prove that the catholic church be and have be always visible 10 10 Bellarm. eccles. lib. 3 ca. 12 Bellarmine heap up these place of scripture Math 18 17 tell it unto the church act 15. 4. when they be come to jerusalem they be receive of the church phil. 3. 6 concern zeal I persecute the church for a answer hereunto I will lay down the sundry signification of the word church in the sacred scripture this word not to speak of it as it be y y Psal 26 5 act. 19 32 40. use in viz. for a company of wicked people be take six way 1 for all the elect that have be in the world be or shall be and in this sense it be use in the symbol of the apostle I believe the catholic church and Math 16 18. upon this rock will I build my church Ephes. 1 22 God have appoint Christ over all thing to be the head to the church and chap 5 32 I speak concern Christ and concern his church 2 for that part of the elect which triumph with Christ in heaven and be common call the try umphant church this be that church which s. Paul call z z ephes 5. 27 a glorious church not have spot etc. or any such thing and that a a Revel. 7. 9 great multitude which no man can number of all nation and kindred and people and tongue which stand before the throne and before the lamb clothe with long white robe and palm in their hand in token of victory 3 for that part of the elect which war upon earth and be call the militant church and of this the apostle speak act 5 11 great fear come on all the church and 1 Tim 3 15 the house of God which be the church of the live God 4 for particular congregation confess Christ true religion as revel 2 1 unto the church of the ephesian etc. 5 for the governor of the church as math. 18 17 tell it to the church that be to the governor of the church 6 for the people or flock commit to every pastors charge as act. 20. 28 take heed unto yourselves and to all the flock whereof the holy ghost have make you overseer to feed the church of God etc. in which word poimnion and do signify one and the same thing now to apply this distinction the place allege by Bellarmine do prove that particular church and the member thereof be visible but they prove not that the catholic and universal church be visible now we grant that particular congregation be visible but we deny with the ancient b b Clemens Alexand lib. 7 Strom. Ambros in epes c 3 aug. in 90 concione 2 father that the catholic church be visible and do hold that it can be espy but by the eye of faith therefore your cardinal dispute not 16. to prove that it be impossible that the visible church shall utter fail upon the earth and fall from God c c bellarm eccles. li 3 c 13 Bellarmine quote math. 6. 18. the gate of hell shall not pervaile against it in which place our saviour speak of the universal invisible church and not of a particular visible church as Bellarmine expound it for have he speak of a visible church he will have say I will build my church because many particular visible church be then about to be in the world but he say I will build my church note one church not many even as it be also in the creed I believe the church not this or that church but the catholic church which be a invisible company of the faithful elect and choose to eternal life and not a visible company of man profess the same faith and religion and acknowledge the bishop of Rome to be their chief pastor as your popish d d Lindan lib 4 cap 84. canisius precept eccles. ar^ 9 bellarm eccles. lib. 3. cap. 2 doctor define it again have Christ here mean any other church but the church universal then have he not be as good as his word for the gate of hell have prevail against the four great patriarchal sea of the church Constantinople Alexandria Antioch and Ephesus and against all other particular church that flourish in the former a^es it remain therefore that we expound this place not with Bellarmine of a particular visible church but of the catholic universal church against which the gate of hell e e shall be of strength but they shall not pruaile by strength 17 to prove that general counsel ought only to be call and appoint by the pope authority f f Bellarm. council lib. 1 cap. 12 Bellarmine allege math. 18. 20. where two or three be gather together in my name there be I in the mid of they lo hear your learned writer say that to assemble in the name of Christ be to assemble in the name of the pope a goodly exposition 18 to prove that all man be bind of necessity to receive the decree of counsel without any trial or examination of they f f Bellarm. Concil. lib. 1. cap. ^8 Bellarmine quote deut 17. 12 that man that will do presumptuous not hearken unto the priest that stand before the lord thy god to minister there that man shall die but he quote not the word immediate go before h h verse ^^ according to the law which they shall reach thou and according to the judgement which they shall tell thou shall thou do see here there be no absolute judicial power give to the priest but according to the law thus do your cardinal dispute with we as the i i matth. 4. 6 devil do with Christ quote only that which serve for his turn and leave out that which make against he 19 to prove that the good of the clergy both secular and ecclesiastical aught to be exempt from pay tribute to prince k k bellarm ca. 2d Bellarmine quote Ge. 47. 22 only the land of the priest buy he not for the priest have a ordinary of Pharaoh and they do eat their ordinary which Pharaoh give they wherefore they shall not their ground and verse 27. joseph make it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day that Pharaoh shall have he five part except the land of the priest only which be not pharaohs but Bellarmine consider not that the word cohen here use signify as well a prince as a priest to quote some place for the verify hereof in the 41. of genesis verse 45. joseph be say to marry Asenath the daughter of Potipherah cohen that be prince not priest of on for I do nor think that joseph will marry the daughter of a idolatrous priest likewise in the 2. of Samuel chap 8. verse 18 it be say that the son of David be chief ruler or prince not priest so in the 20 of the same book verse 26. the Iairite be call cohen le David that be a chief prince about David as saint Hierome expound it say l l Hieron hebraic in lib the Iairite be a priest of David that be a ruler as it be else where write the son of David be priest that be ruler of there brother now to make application of this that have be say whereas the text only prove that the prince or officer of pharaohs household who be maintain by pharaohs provision be exempt from pay tribute to Pharaoh Bellarmine pretend to prove thereby that priest be exempt too to conclude be it grant that they be thereby exempt it be but a politic law make by JOSEPH for that country only prince of other country be not bind to that constitution 20 to prove that every one have from his nativity a angel for his custody the m m Rhem. in Apoc. 1 sect 9 rhemist quote act 12. 15. it be his angel which place i think may better be translate thus it be his messenger for the n n act. 12. 5 church that make earnest prayer unto God for he be not so simple as to think that a angel o o verse 13 knock at their entry door but they very think when Rhode tell they that it be Peter that knock that it be a messenger come from Peter 21 p p Rhem. ibid. they do also for the same purpose quote gen. 48 16. the angel which have deliver i from all evil bless the child etc. but here by angel be to be understand Christ as appear by genesis 31 13 where the same angel be call the god of bethel and by gen. 32 28. where jacob be call Israel because he have power with God and by the 30. verse of the same chapter where the place where jacob wrestle with he be call peniel because he have there see GOD face to face 22 to prove that the angel do offer up our prayer unto God your q q Rhem. in Apocal. 8. rhemist quote Revel. 8. 3 then another angel come and stand before the altar have a golden censer and much odour be give unto he that he shall offer with the prayer of all saint upon the golden altar which be before the throne but they consider not how that saint Austen upon this place say that s s aug. quaest in euangel. 34 this angel be Christ that the golden his body out of which God Aug homil. in Apocal. 6. smell a sweet savour and that CHRIST do sanctify our prayer as the altar sanctify the gift 23 to prove that angel may be worship your t t apocal 19 lect. 4 rhemist quote josua 5. 14. joshua fall on his face to the earth and do worship but herein u u joshua etc. Origen homil. 6 in josua to use saint Origen exposition will not have adore and worship he have he not know he to be God for who else be the prince of the army of the power of God but our lord jesus Christ thus you see how that Origen think that joshua worship not a angel but the lord Christ x the captain of the lord host 24 to prove that the virgin Marie be free from original sin * * joshua 5 14 and 15 * bellarm lib 3 call lt. Sanct. cap 15. Bellarmine quote Cantic. 4 7. thou be all fair my love and there be no spot in thou but saint Paul who be a better expounder of the scripture than cardinal Bellarmine take this place in the canticle to be mean of the spouse of Christ and not of the mother of Christ for he y apply it to the church which be all glorious and without spot or wrinkle and not to the virgin Marie who to use saint Austin word z z Aug sanct. cap 4 be more bless Ephs 5. 27 by perceive the faith of Christ then by conceive the flesh of Christ 25 to prove that there be seven sacrament viz. baptism the eucharist confirmation penance matrimony order and extreme unction your a a bellarm lib 2. c. 26 Rhem in apocal 1 sect. 3 doctor heap up together sundry place of scripture where the number of seven be mention as 2 reg. 5. 10. elisha send a messenger unto he say go and wash thou in jordan seven time and thy flesh shall come again to thou and thou shall be cleanse 29 37. seven day shall thou cleanse the altar and sanctify it so the altar shall be most holy job 42. 8 take unto you now seven bullock and seven ram and go to my servant job and offer up for yourselves a burn offering etc. and the revel where mention be make of seven church seven angel seven star seven candlestick and seven thunder I wonder that b b jud 8 these dreamer do forget to quote gen. 41 18 19 20. where Pharaoh dream that he see come up c revel 17 8 out of the river seven lean and evil favour kine which do eat up seven fat kine and Revel. 17 3. where saint John see a woman sit upon a scarlet colour beast full of name of blasphemy which have seven head etc. for this beast with seven head be call a mystery or a sacrament as your vulgar translation have it I will not say that by this beast with seven head be mean the pope with his seven sacrament for d the seven head be seven * * viz Caelius Auentinas Exquitinus capitolinus palatinus quirinalis mountain whereon the woman sit they be also seven e e viz. consul Decen king f f viz. consul five be fall and g g viz. one be and h h viz. another be not yet come but I say that they may as well pick out hence their seven popish sacrament as from the place which they allege for the number of seven be here mystical and prophetical as well as there 26 to prove that all which die unbaptized unless the want of baptism be recompense either by martyrdom or penance must needs be deprive of eternalllife your i i bellarm lib ^ baptism c 4 Rhem in John 3. doctor quote John 3. 5 except that a man be bear of water and of the spirit he can enter into the kingdom of God whereby water be not to be understand material water but spiritual water wherewith the holy ghost dothwash we into newness of life or if it be to be understand of the element of water yet as the master of the sentence expound it k k Petrus Lombard lib. 4 scent dist 4 it must be understand of those which may and yet contemn to be baptize yea one of your l l innocentius 3 Greg Decret. lib. 3. tit. 42. cap 3 pope judge that this place make nothing against baptize of infant as appear by these his word 6 etc. by the very letter it be apparent that the foresay authority he speak of this place and of diverse other such like must only be understand of those that be of age which have a multitude of sin and can be understand of little one which only have original sin but if the pope have not say it m m Bernard epist 77 I can altogether despair of their salvation if contempt do not prohibit the water of baptism but only a impossibility of have of it n n Clemens epist 4 for it be a good and a convenient thing to wash the body in water good I say but not that principal good whereby the mind be cleanse but that this be a sequel or a consequent good thing to that whereby the flesh be wash 27 to prove that the body of Christ be real and substantial in the sacrament you usual quote math. 26. this be my body but you must know that the scripture usual speak tropical in the declaration of the sacrament and say this be for this signify and represent for example sake and for verify what I have say take a view of gen. 17 10. where circumcision be call the o o this be my covenant gen. 17 10 covenant itself whereas it be a p p it shall be a sign of the cou^nant 17 11 sign only of the covenant and of Exod. 12. 11. where the lamb be say to be the q q it be the lord Passover lord passover when as it be only a r r it be the sacrifice of the lord Passover exod. 12 27. sacrifice and s s the blood shall be a token for you exod. 12 13. token of the lord passover saint Paul also speak of the sacrament of the jew say that t t ^ 10 4 the rock be Christ that be signify Christ now to apply this in the same sense Christ here speak of this sacrament of the new testament say this be my body that be this signify exhibit and present unto you my body this my exposition be confirm by the judgement of saint Augustine v v Augu. contr Adimant cap. 12 the lord doubt not to say this be my body when he give a sign of his body and in another place 10 10 August in Psal. 3. Christ do commend to his disciple a figure of his body yea the seven general council upon these word infer thus y y Concil. tom. 3. in Nicen 2 act. 6 etc. behold therefore the whole or only image of that quicken body to wit the substance of bread which he command to be set before they lo here they hold that our saviour command to be set before his disciple not the form only of bread but the substance of bread and not this body but the image and figure of his body z z August in Psal. 3. why do thou therefore make ready thy tooth and the belly believe in Christ and thou have eat he 28 a a canisius extreme unct. Rhem. you ground your sacrament of extreme unction upon the 5 chapter of james vers. 14 be any man sick among you let he call for the elder of the church and let they pray for he and anoint he with oil etc. whereunto I answer that the gift of heal be then in the church as appear in mark 6 13 and that this anoint with oil be in those day a sign of that miraculous gift and that the gift be now take away the sign be to no use 2. it follow not that this anoint with oil be therefore a sacrament because the apostle use it in heal of the disease for Christ himself do b b oh. 9 6 spit on the ground and make clay of the spittle and anoint the eye of the blind with clay now do it therefore follow that this anoint the eye of the blind with clay be a sacrament because Christ use it in cure of the blind c c mark 7 33 he do also put his finger in the ear of one that be deaf and stammer in his speech and do spit and do touch his tongue do it follow then that it be a sacrament to put our finger in the ear of deaf man or to spit or touch the tongue of they that be dumb 29 to prove that it be lawful for the patriarch of the hebrew by way of dispensation to have many wife d d bellarm matrim cap 11 4 Bellarmine quote Gen 16 2 where Sara give consent to Abraham to take another wife which she say he will not have do if it have be unlawful whereunto I answer that from the fall and infirmity of holy man or woman the argument follow not to prove the thing to be lawful e e gen. 9 21 Noah offend in drunkenness and f f Genesis 19 33 lot in incest and g g 2 sam. 11 4 David in adultery and h h 1 reg 11. 1 Solomon in marry many outlandish woman and i i Matthew 26 Peter in thrice deny his master do it follow that it be therefore lawful for we to do the like no k k aug. in 51 there be not propose to thou any example of fall but of arise when thou be fall take heed thou do not fall let not the slip of the great be the delight of the lesser but let the fall of the great be a tremble to the lesser for the l l Aug doct. Christian lib 3. 23 fall of the great be write to this purpose that the say of the apostle may every where be tremble at where he say let he that stand take heed lest he fall Bellarmine therefore play the spider and out of a good flower suck deadly poison second I answer that Hagar be not Abraham wife while Sara live for she be still under Sara correction and be call her maid as you may see in gene. 16 6. then Abraham say unto Sarah behold thy maid be in thy hand do with she as it please thou etc. and verse 9 then the angel of the lord say to she return to thy dame and humble thyself under her hand 30 to prove that the patriarch and prophet before Christ come be not in heaven but be keep in a infernal place of darkness call Limbus and be thence deliver by Christ descend into hell m m Bellarm. lib 4 cap. 11 Bellarmine allege Zachar. 9 11. I have loose thy prisoner out of the pit wherein be no water but saint Austen do far otherwise expound this text and in a better sense for he be of opinion that the prophet there speak of the deliverance of the people from their cruel and unjust bondage and captivity and that by the pit without water he meave n the dry and barren gulf of human misery where there be no flow spring of equity but stand puddle of iniquity 31 to prove that Antichrist shall be one particular man and shall have a proper name o o bellarm lib 3 Pontif. ca. 10 Bellarmine allege Revel. 13 18. here be wisdom let he that have wit count the number of the beast for it be the number of a man and his number be six hundred threescore and six but of a other mind be irenaeus who be a most ancient doctor of the church even the p scholar of Poly carp who be the disciple of saint John that write the revelation his testimony be this q q iren lib. 5 adv c. 30 but the name Lateinos also contain the number 666. and it be very likely because the most true kingdom have this name for they be latin which now reign thus you see how that irenaeus think that Antichrist shall not have a name proper to one man but a name that agree to a kingdom state company or succession of man and of the same mind be arethas cappadox as one of your own r r Feu-ardentius in Iren. l. 5. c. 30 writer acknowledge yea the say father report that those who have see saint John s s Facie iren lib: 5 ca. 30 face to face do testify that the number of the beast name t t sexcento sex decada hex acontasin atoncada ae quail monasin Iraeneus ibid. according to the computation of the greek by the letter that be therein shall contain 666. and that it v be very likely that his name shall be Latino 10 10 Whitakerus in resp. that which say be very likely we without doubt may bold affirm to be a most certain and apparent truth and that which he can but y guess at in his time we may now define time which be the best interpreter of a prophecy have make that plain and perspicuous which until the * prophecy be clear by they fulfil and event thereof be dark and ambiguous to conclude then I hold it to be a oracle for truth have not guess at it that Antichrist z Iren. lib 4 cap. 43. name be roman or latin for these character (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) do signify 666. and this number be gather of the small number (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which in the whole make 666. as appear by this computation of z z Feu-ardentius in Iren. lib. 5 cap. 30. fen-arden^tius I have set down this computation not to play the cabalist upon letter but to show that this antichristian beast be a latin and to bring you to a full detestation of the romish church for what church be there in the world that can so just be call the latin church be not the head of that church a latin do he not reign in Italy which inolde time be call Latium or do he not make the latin translation of scripture only authentical use he not the latin tongue in his idolatrous synagogue do he not a a Revel. 13 16. make all both small and great rich and poor free and bond to give unto he their fidelity oath and obedience and to come to his latin service and do he suffer any to b b Revel. 13 17. buy or sell or to live within his territory save he that profess himself to be a roman or latin in respect of his religion 32 to prove that Antichrist shall re-edify and c bellarm pontif. lib 3 c 13 rhemist in 2 Thess. 2 build again the temple of jerusalem and have his imperial seat there your doctor allege 2. Thess. 2. 4. he do sit as God in the temple of GOD etc. whereunto I answer that it be impossible for Antichrist to sit in the temple at jerusalem because it be destroy within the compass of 40 year after Christ by d d li. 7. c 9 10 the army of Titus vespasianus in such sort that their be not e e Luk 21 6 a stone leave upon a stone that be not throw down but you will say that though a stone do not now lie upon a stone yet be it not impossible to make one stone to be upon another there I answer that be impossible for we f f Ruffin inst li 8 c 38 theodoret. 3 cap. 20 read that the jew by the leave and help of julian the emperor endeavour to build again their temple and city about 330 year after the death of Christ but the lord to show that he be not please as g g Sozomen lib 5 cap vlt. Sozomen say with the renew of the temple hinder this their enterprise first by fire from heaven and after out of the earth and by terrible earthquake whereby many of they be slay but you will further say that the reason why God hinder julian from building again the temple be because he will suffer none to build it again save only Antichrist I answer that he will never suffer any man that either be or shall be to the end of the world to re-edify and build again that temple for h there shall be in the temple as the prophet Daniel i Daniel 9 27 have foretell the abomination of desolation and that desolation shall continue unto the consummation and end that be k k Hieron in dan. 9 until the consummation of the world and end of all thing yea l l Luk 21 2d jerusalem as say our saviour shall be torden under foot of the gentile until the time of the gentile be fulfil that be until there m m Mat 24 29 30 appear the sign of the son of man in heaven and there be sign in the sun and moon and the power of heaven be shake which shall be immediate before the last judgement now then see that God have thus accurse jerusalem with perpetual desolation I gather hence that Antichrist shall not sit in the temple there as Bellarmine teach you and consequent that by the temple in this place be not to be understand the temple of jerusalem by the temple therefore he mean these congregation that be sometime true visible church that shall notwithstanding their revolt be repute and take to be true church by the member and favourite thereof to this exposition do both the greek and latin father subscribe Cathisthesetai tun naon he shall sit in the temple of God that be say saint n n chrysost in 2. Thessaly ^ Chrysostome eye tas not in the temple of jerusalem but in the church whereunto agree that of Oeucumenius jerousalem legei eye tas the apostle say not he shall sit in the temple of jerusalem but in the church of God o oecumenius in 2 Thess. 2. that be in such church as both have be true visible church of God and do also retain the name and shadow of the church as for the latin father they be so far from think that jerusalem shall be the seat of Antichrist as that they confident avouch that Rome be mystical Babylon speak of in the revelation and consequent that the church of Rome be the seat of Antichrist and not the temple of jerusalem I will acquaint you with their express word p p Hieron lib. 2 jovinian say s. Hierome Rome be either with the Greek a name of strength or with the Hebrew a name of height and sublimity Rome see that thou be answerable to thy name let virtue exalt thou not pleasure debase thou thou may by repentance escape that curse which our saviour have threaten thou with many other such like place have the same q q Hieron epist quaest. 11 add Algasiam in comment in Isaia cap. 4 praefat. @ August lib. 18. cap. 22. cap. 27. father in his worthy writing saint Austen also agree with he and say that Rome be Babylon another Babylon and s s August lib. 18. cap. 2. Babilonia a second Babylon yea t t cusan lib. 2. cathol cap. vlt. your own cardinal confess that beda and all the ancient interpreter have so expound this place in the revelation thus you see in part how that your exposition be quite contrary to the exposition of the ancient father and as sophistical as the exposition of the scribe many other place of scripture may be produce which your writer have by their false expositious corrupt but I have think good to make mention of these only as be place of great consequent now let i entreat you that you will vouchsafe from henceforth to embrace these our exposition and to reject the corrupt gloss of your own expositor the recusant embrace your exposition no I will embrace the pope the minister the pope why I pray I pray you the recusant why because he can err in expound of the scripture the minister not err v v Alphons lib. 1 cap 4. in no fit I do not believe that there be any so impudent a flatterer of the pope that will give he this pre-eminence that he can neither err nor miss in expound of the sacred scripture for see it be well know that many pope be so utter void of learning as that they know not the principle of grammar how may it be that they shall be able to expound the scripture beside this I have already show you that your exposition agree not with the word of scripture the recusant what though 10 10 hosius a if a man have the exposition of the church of Rome touch any place of the scripture although he neither know nor understand whether and how it agree with the word of the scripture yet have he the very word of God the minister o horrible blasphemy you have I see the same opinion of the pope exposition that thou rabbinical jew have of the exposition of their rabbin for they as lyra report cry out thus y y lyra in Deuteron cap. 17 we must needs receive what soever the rabbin propound unto we although they tell we that the right hand be the left yea z z rabbi Abraham hispanus notwithstanding say they our exposition seem to we never so true and right yet must we throw our truth to the ground for the truth indeed be with they to be plain with you have we no other cause to eondemne you for heretic yet this one i think shall be sufficient the recusant what! do you repute all those to be heretic that a a scriptaest Hieron in galat 1. Isid. lib 8. Orig. expound the scripture amiss admit we do err in expound of the scripture be we therefore to be range among heretic o horrible blasphemy the minister yes I hold with the ancient father that he be a heretic that expound the scripture otheerwise then the meaning of the holy ghost require so be it he persist and persevere therein after that the true sense thereof have be show he but not to stand any long upon your exposition let we proceed on and take a view of your agreement with the severians sampsee simonians tatians valentinians and zuenckfeldians the recusant wherein do we agree with the severians and sampsee the minister the severians as testify b b Aug cap. 24. saint Austen depend much upon such miracle as they either forge themselves or effect by the help of the devil so do you as your own writer acknowledge c c alexand. de Hales part. 4 quaest. 53. mem. 4. in say Alexander de Hales in the sacrament appear flesh sometime by man procurement and sometime by the operation of the devil the d d Epiphan haeres. 53. sampsee keep the spittle of two woman who they worship and the dust of their foot and carry it about with they to cure disease withal so do you worship the ash and relic of saint and carry they about with you for the same purpose that the sampsee do the recusant wherein do we resemble the simonians the minister Simon Magus give his own image and the e August cap 1. image of his whore selene to be worship of his follower so the present church of Rome give the image of the whore of Babylon to be worship and the image of those that be the author of their pretend religious order 2 Simon Magus f f August ibid. teach as saint Austen witness that it be no sin to use woman that be without make difference betwixt wife concubine and harlot so do you teach that he that have no wife may instead of she have a concubine as be apparent in some copy of your g g Dist. 34. be 1505 decree where these word be to be find he that have not a wife aught in steed of she to have a concubine and in the chapter immediate follow it be thus write it be lawful for a christian man to have only one woman either his wife or in steed of his wife if his wife be want a concubine yea say your great abbate h h cohabit Panormitan the bishop be not bind to deprive a priest that keep a concubine 3 Simon Magus i i act 8 20. think that the gist of God may be obtain with money and thereupon those that buy and sell order be by the ancient father account simonians k k Concil. Chal ^ed act 15 can. 2 say the three hundred and thirty father assemble in the council of chalcedon those also be repute simonians that obtain their order by flattery or by the letter of great personage l l chrysost in act. Apost. cap. 1 homil. 3 say saint Chrystome speak of this kind of simonians of both these sort of simonians there be great store in saint Hieromes day as may appear by this speech of he m m Hieron in epist. tit. c 1. and of both these sort there be also great store in the romish church at this day as appear by this spanish n n Collect. Herman nunes proverb Obispo with bribe the bishop be make blind that crown-shaved ass order find but what do I speak of those only that buy and sell order o o Mantuan lib. calam. 3. say friar Mantuan speak of the church of Rome among we church priest altar sacrifice garland fire franckencense prayer and heaven be set to sale yea God himself may be have for money among we but what do I produce only one witness you shall have more than those of your own religion to verify what I have say matthew Paris a monk of saint Albon say that the p p Mat Paris in Henrico 3 241 unsatiable greediness of the church of Rome so increase confound right and wrong that lay shame aside as a common and impudent harlot she prostitute herself to every man for money account usury for a small fault and simony for none hereunto may be add the testimony of q q durand council lib 2. Durande and of Bernard of Clunice who speak of Rome say thus r r Bernard Cluniacens in Satyra Roma that Rome give all thing to they that give all thing all thing at Rome will pass for money and unto they may be adoyn Thomas Becket who when for his wilful disobedience and treason commit against his prince he have flee to Rome for aid and succour and see that nothing will be wrought there without money write thus thereof to the bishop of Mentz meretrix Rome our s s Thomas beck epist. Archiepisc Moguntin mother be become a harlot and for money prostitute herself to sale but to come to the pope themselves we t t Platina in Benedict 9 read that pope Benedict the nine sell his popedom to Gregory the six that sixtus the four v build a sumptuous stew in Rome appoint it to be both masculine and feminine and make a gain of that xVid in johan. cap. 6. beastly trade and that these verse be make of pope Alexander and spread abroad in his time viz. Alexander clave Christum pope Alexander make sale of his key of his altar and of Christ himself well may he sell those thing for he pay dear for they to conclude on of your y y johannes monachus canonist speak thus of your romish court and a other of your z z johannes Andreas canonist allude to the name of Rome versifi thus yea a a theodoric theodoricus b Felinus c c Extrau ab 1 num. 5 fol. 18 Panormitane d d in tract Archiadocus florentinus e e Extrau Hostiensis and other of your own writer acknowledge how that the romish church pruiledge both the pope and his cardinal to sell bishopric deanery abbey archdeaconry yea and all other thing that be call by law positive and thus much concern your agreement with the simonians now let we come to the tatians valentinians and zuenckfieldians the recusant wherein agree you with the tatians the minister f f Epiphan 46 tatianus the heretic and author of the sect of the encratite do condemn all marriage as a impure state of life so do pope g g gratian'ss distinct 28 cap Syricius condemn all marriage as unclean both in the clergy and the laity 2 both the heretic tatianus and the heretical pope Syricius to prove that marriage be simple evil h allege rom. 8. 8 they that be in the flesh can please God and galathians 6 8. he that sow to the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption in which place the apostle speak not of the work of nature but of corrupt nature which overturn the divine order which God in the creation set in nature the recusant wherein resemble we the valentinians the minister the valentinians use a barbarous and unknown tongue among the common people as appear by these word of saint Jerome i i Hieron theodor. the valentinians terrify the simple people with a barbarous sound of word that whatsoever they understand not they may the more wonder at and have in reverence and this practice of the valentinians may fit be parallel by the practice of the romish church at this day in use a unknown and barbarous tongue in their church-service I call it a barbarous tongue because the common people understand it not for k k 1 14 11 except I know the power of the voice I shall be unto he that speak abarbarian and he that speak shall be a barbarian unto i the recusant wherein do wejoine with the zuenckfieldians the minister the * * Vide. hosius Polonus in lib. zuenckfieldians refuse to be judge by the scripture call they beggarly element and flee unto the inward and secret revelation of the spirit and in like sort do you refuse to be judge by the scripture call it dead ink and what not I will give you the express word of your approve writer l l controvers. 3 eccles. say Albertus if thou say that these matter ought to be refer to the judgement of the scripture thou show thyself to be void of common sense for the scripture be dumb judge and in another place m m Pigghius eccles. lib 3 cap. 3 the scripture be as one no less true than pleasant say like a nose of wax that easy suffer itself to be draw backward and forward and to be fashion this way and that way and howsoever you listen be of the same mind with and examine council t^^dent pag 32 most impious call the scripture the black gospel and inken divinity o Lodovicus a canon of the church of Laterane in a oration open pronounce in the counsel of Trent come not far short of they both say the church be the lively breast of Christ but the scripture be as it be dead ink and with he jump the bishop of Poitiers in the say council p p hosius lib. 2 b Sleid. lib. 23. the scripture be a dead and a dumb thing as also be all other polique law hosius also the pope legate and precedent in the say council when objection be make that king David be not a bishop but only a temporal prince have write the psalm blush not to give this blasphemous answer q what if king David write the psame we write ballad every body learned and unlearned but to come to the pope himself pope Leo the 10. when he have receive a great sum of money for indulgence he say to cardinal Bembus r r Sibrand Lull. de Papa rom lib 10 cap 2 o Bembus how much have that fable of Christ profit we and another time when the say cardinal allege a testimony out of the gospel he answete what do thou tell i of that fable of Christ thus you see how that your writer do fly from the scripture and when they be convince by they fall to accuse they for which cause they may just be range amongesthereticke s s iren adverse lib 3 cap. 2. for heretic when they be reprove by scripture they begin to find fault with the scripture as if they be not well write and as if they be not of sufficient authority or be doubtful utter or that they which know not tradition be never able by the scripture to find out the truth thus also you see what gross error you maintain t t August epist 166 God so revenge our cause against you that he may kill your error in you that you may rejoice together with we the four dialogue wherein be firm prove that the papist be in sundry thing as bad as the turk and in some thing worse and that it be a cry sin for a subject to attempt the murder of his sovereign the minister sir at my last be with you I acqvaint you with some London news now let i entreat you that you will vouchsafe to show i the like kindness and to relate what you have hear since the recusant I have hear a long discourse of the manner of the discovery of the late intend treason the minister sir I will glad hear that for I have hear of diverse that it be discover but I do not yet certain know how it be discover the recusant it be discover by the mean of a certain the letter be write without a name in a disguise hand letter that master Francis tresham send to the lord Mountegle some ten day before the parliament the content whereof be these my lord out of the love I bear to some of your friend I have a care of your preservation therefore I will advise you as you tender your life to devise some excuse to shift off your attendance at this parliament for God and man have concur to punish the wickedness of this time and think not slight of this advertisement but retire yourself into your country where you may expect the event in safety for though there be no appearance of any stir yet I say they shall receive a terrible blow this parliament and yet they shall not see who hurt they this counsel be not to be contemn because it may do you good and no harm for the dauger be pass so soon as you have burn the letter and I hope GOD will give you grace to make good use of it to who holy protection I commend you the minister do he say indeed that God have eoncur with they to murder the king and his noble he may fit be herein compare to one Thomas Muncer a Anabaptist who ordinary preach be these God have warrant a johan Sleidan Com 5. i face to face he that can lie have command i to attempt the change by these mean even by kill the ruler and his bloodthirsty companion may also as fit be compare to phifer the lewd companion of the say muncer who do but dream in the night time of the kill of many mouse and present bear his companion in hand that God have warn he in a dream to make away the noble but I pray you sir what do the lord Mountegle with the letter do he burn it as he be advertise the recusant no b b see the discourse of this late intend treason he no soon do conceive the strange content thereof but he conclude not to conceal it what ever may come of it whereupon notwithstanding it be somewhat late in the night and dark he present repair to his majesty palace at Whitehall and there deliver the same to the earl of Salisbury and the earl of Salisbury show it to the king upon Alhallows day in the afternoon the minister the lord Mountegle do therein discharge the part of a most dutiful and loyal subject for he imitate mordecai who no soon know that Bigthan and Teresh seek to lay their hand on the king Ahashuerosh but he tell it unto queen ester and ester certify the king thereof in Mordecais name to apply this to a good use if you know any romish Bigthan and Teresh that seek to lay their hand on our dread sovereign it be your part to certify he thereof and if you have intelligence of any king of aram that take counsel with his servant against Israel if God by any mean reveal it unto you it be your duty with d d 2 king 6 9 elbid verse 12. elisha to make know to the king of Israel @ even the word that the king of aram speak in his privy chamber and if you know any ishibenob that intend to slay David and to give he a terrible blow you must with f f 2 Sam 21 17 Abishai though with expose yourself to peril present succour he and smite the Philistin yea you must with the g g 2 sam. 23 16. three mighty even with the hazard of your life break into the host of the philistine and draw water out of the well of Beth^lehem and bring it to David if he long for it to conclude if any treacherous letter come to your hand it behove you to be eagle-winged and speedy with the lord Mountegle to disclose they lest as David say to Abner it be say to you g g 1 Sam 26 16 you be worthy to die because you have not keep your master the lord anoint but in this letter i think there be only give a general obscure advertisement of a terrible blow to be give how I pray you be the meaning thereof find out the recusant true h h see the discourse of this late intend treason the king himself consider the former sentence in the letter that they shall receive a terrible blow at this parliament and yet shall not see who hurt they and join it to the sentence immediate follow for the danger be past as soon as you have burn the letter do thereupon conjecture that the danger mention shall be some sudden danger by blow up of powder understand by as soon the quickness of the danger which shall be as quick at a end as that paper shall be in blease up in the fire the minister imuscal in Psa. ^18 26 welcome happy and acceptable be he who God have raise up to be king over we for he have according to the emblem of the egyptian a sceptre for power and jurisdiction and with it a eye for watchfulness and discretion and of he may we say as Pharaoh say of joseph when he k Gen 41. 38 have expound his dream can we find such a man as this and as the queen of Saba say of king Solomon happy be the man happy be these thy servant which stand ever before thou k 1. king 10 9 and hear thy wisdom bless be the lord thy god which love thou to set thou on the throw of Israel because the lord love Israel for ever to make use hereof why do you seek to mur there our sovereign that have receive such a extraordinary measure of God spirit David dare not lay his hand on king Saul albeit m m 1. sam. 16 14 the spirit of the lord be depart from he and a evil spirit send of the lord vex he for when he have Saul alone in the cave and may have slay he he spare he say n n 1. Sam 24 7 the lord keep i from do that thing unto my master the lord anoint to lay my hand upon he for he be the anoint of the lord and after to Abishai offer to smite he with a spear to the earth he say o o 1 Sam 26 9 destroy he not for who can lay his hand on the lord anoint and be guiltless and to the young man that slay he p p 2 Sam 1 14 how be thou not afraid to put forth thy hand to destroy the anoint of the lord and command he to be slay for this his fact he say q q 2 Sam 1 16 thy blood be upon thy own head for thy own mouth have testify against thou say I have slay the lord anoint yea he himself be touch in his heart because he have but cut of the lap of Saules garment whereupon saint Austen say thus r r 1 Sam 24 6 s s Aug lib 2 cap 48 if Saul have not the holiness of his anoint I demand what it be that David reverence in he for he both honour he be alive for his sacred and holy unction and revenge he be slay and he himself have but cut off the lap of his coat his heart smite he and he tremble for the fact behold Saul be not innocent yet have he the holiness not of life but of unction now if David tremble because he have cut off the lap of Saules garment who have but the holiness of unction only how dare you cut the throat of those prince that have the holiness both of life and unction if he dare not lay his hand on Saul from who the spirit of the lord be depart how dare you my tongue falter in pronounce the word and the lord confound he that entertain any such intent spill his blood in who the spirit of God dwell so plentiful how can you touch the lap of his garment without tremble that be such a constant professor such a perfect textuary such a sound expositor such a christian liver and such a live library and walk study Bibliothece it be peripatoun moustion eunapius the recusant why use you this speech to i be I one of those that seek to spill the king blood the minister what though you be not a scorpion you know have his sting within he though he do not always strike and a ground Papist I know carry always a wolvish nature which prepare he ever to the spoil though he never do hurt but proceed I pray you in relate the discovery of your catholic tragicomical treason how do they purpose to have perform it the recusant they o o see Guido fawkes his confession propound to have it perform by gunpowder and by make a i under the house of parliament which place they make choice of the rather because religion have be unjust suppress there they think it fit that justice and punishment shall be execute there the minister so it be think fit that their head shall be set up upon the parliament house because they think to have blow up the parliament house and as heliodorus tell Seleucus of the temple of jerusalem so may we tell the pope of the parliament house p p 2. Maccab. 3 38. 39 if thou have any enemy or traitor send he thither and thou shall receive he well scourge if he escape with his life for in that place no doubt there be a special power of God for he that dwell in heaven have his eye on that place and defend it and he beat and destroy they that come to hurt it for * * the earl of Salisbury in in answer to certain scandalous paper page 20 21 as to use the word of one of our worthy noble where this prodigious massacre shall have be commit be the same place where the ancient religion of the primitive church shake off the bond and fetter of the roman corruption under which it have long continue in servitude so while the same faith shall be religious and constant profess it shall never be in the power of mortal man to shake the least corner stone of that bless and sure foundation but what store of powder have they provide to have it blow it up withal the recusant they have as I be credible inform provide thirty six barrel of powder a thousand of billet and five hundred of faggot beside many huge stone iron crow pikeax and hammer head the minister what machiavelians or rather matchless villain be these what dogged dog what bloodthirsty Nero what bloody mind Joab who will ever think that the affection of man can be steel with such cruelty and barbarity and who will ever imagine that the son of man can be thus savage and have such sanguinary condition but why do I term they man I be deceive they have the face of man indeed but the mind of wild beast and why do I call they the son of man the rock sure father they and they suck not the daughter of man but the dragon in the wilderness the dragon in the wilderness no they be more savage than dragon woe worth their treason it be the unnaturall that ever be hear of I will give it a epithet if there be any to express it and thus I leave they wish that they may be draw on hurdle from the prison to the execution to show how they have be draw by brutish affection that their privity may be cut off and throw into the fire to show that they be unworthy to be beget or to beget other that their belly may be rip up and there heart tear out and throw into the same fire as be the fountain of such a unheard of treachery that their body have harbour such wicked heart may be cut off from their head and divide into many quartar as they be in the body politic divide by treason from the head and other sound member and that their quarter may be fix upon the gate of our city and expose to the eye of man that as their nefarious attempt be a evil example to other so their quarter limb may be a heedful caveat to other but to proceed by who shall this powder have be set on fire the recusant by Guido fawkes their sentinel for when he be take there be find three match and all other instrument fit for blow up the powder in the vault ready upon he the minister what a vile miscreant be this what a villain in a vault what a machiavellian with a match what a bloodsucker without a match do Caligula his predecessor match he no for he be but r dirt soak with blood but this will have be dirt swim in blood do Caligula himself match he no for he but wish that the people of Rome have all one neck that at one blow he may have cut they off but this runagate of Ephraim not only wish it but contrive it and be ready with his match to have give we all at once a terrible blow nay do the devil match he no for though he cause the house to fall upon jobes child yet s s job 1 19 leave he one alive to tell job but this more than devilish varlet have think to have blow up all at once and not to have leave one to escape to have tell who hurt they fie Guido fie be thou so far from be according to the ancient exile proverb as that thou be worse than daemon how be thou fall from thy kind and become so degenerate and wild have the pope who you common call your holy father and sometime your t t Papa R Cupres eccles. pag. 61 numb Papa extrau in johan 22. lord GOD teach thou this u u Benzo in hist. ind. what kind of God with a mischief be this that have beget such impure and wicked son if the father be like the child there can be no goodness in he the recusant sir what mean you to speak thus sharp against our holy father and his child how dare you speak thus of he that be Peter successor at Rome and Christ vicar upon earth and who 10 10 nou Tosterus apol port 1. Enchirid. pag. 64 have no less authority over all christian give he of Christ who vicar he be than a hireling have over bruit beast if his holiness have intelligence hereof he will sure excommunicate you and it will be lawful for any catholic to z z lege^ grat. in Decret. lib 5 decret gregor 9 cause 23. quaest 8. cap. kill you y y gregorius 9 lib. 5. Decret^ tit. 7. cap 5 the minister a fig for he and his excommunication I care no more for he then Charles the five who be menace by pope Paulus the three with excommunication if he will not yield up physance into his hand answer thus let he understand by his ambassador that if he will needs be thunder out of his excommunication I will thunder at saint Angelo with my canon and attilerie in like manner say we to you let he understand by those that fly to a foreign nest after the Partiche have breed there that if he will needs thunder out his excommunication against we protestant that lay open his antichristian pride we will batter the very wall of Babylon with the canon of scripture and to give he a warn peal if the pope be as you say he be the vicar of Christ he shall give you that a a Math 22 21. mark 12. 17. Luke 20 25. thrice recount precept of Christ give unto CAESAR the thing which be Caesar and give unto GOD the thing which be God but the pope give you not that precept but this instead thereof give unto i the thing which be Caesar and give unto i also the thing which be God for the first he say in effect give unto i the thing which be Caesar when he b b Antonium in sum part 3. tit. 22 cap. 5. challenge a universal dominion and sovereignty over the whole world not only over ecclesiastical person as bishop and other inferior minister but also civil as emperor and king for this universal dominion appertain not unto he neither do the ancient bishop of Rome ever challenge it as may appear by these argument 1 have this universal sovereignty appertain to the ancient bishop of Rome or have be challenge by they than it be very likely that the ancient father will have make mention thereof but the ancient father be so far from mention of it as that they mention the quite contrary c c chrysoft Popul Antioch homil. 2. say Chrysostome the emperor have no peer on earth and before he Tertullian d we reverence the emperor as next unto GOD and inferior only to God with they both agrea optatus e e optatus Parmenian lib. 3. none be above the emperor but only God who make the emperor 2 f f Euseb: constant lib 3. cap 23 lib 4 cap 42 socrat. lib. 1 cap 34 Constantine g g Euagrium lib. 4 cap 9 justinus h h novel 123 justinian i i Sozomen lib. 7 cap 9 council chalcedon act. epist. theodosij Dioscorum Theodosus k k Vide. theodoret. lib 4 cap 8. Valentinian l l with lib 1 Legum cap 76 Charles and other ancient emperor claim a sovereignty over the bishop of Rome and other bishop of that age yea they exercise this their sovereignty and show themselves to be their superior by their command of they in cause ecclesiastical and that they do not usurp in this case saint Austen plain show in his 162 epistle 3 m m Aug epist 166. Constantine n n novel 123. justinian o o Euagrium lib t cap 12 Theodosius p p lib 5 cap 2. Gratianus q q cod lib 1 titul 3 cler. cap anthemius and the rest of the ancient emperor show their authority to be far great than the authority of the bishop of Rome and other bishop in their time not only by command of they but also by correct of they for their offence and by their appoint of penalty to be impose on they that do not yield obedience to their imperial law and constitution r r Caus 2 quaest 7. cap. 4 the ancient bishop of Rome be so far from claim a superiority over the emperor in their time as that they do prostrate themselves at their feeete and become suppliant unto they and that about church-matter as for example Leo the 4. submit himself and become a humble suppliant to r Ludovicus s s distinct to cap Lotharius t t Leo epist 9 epist. 24 Theodosius that counsel of bishop may be call and controversy decide 5 the ancient bishop of other see be so far from acknowledge the bishop of Rome to have any sovereignty over the emperor in their day as that they do not acknowledge they to be their superior but their fellow bishop only as may easy be gather out of the writing of v v cyprian Episc cyprian 10 10 chrysoft in homil 43. in math. cap. 23 Chrysostome y y Hieron in epist. Hierom z z Euseb li. 5. c 20 Eusebius and a a Concil. 6. council african cap 92 cap 105 Galfred monumeten lib 8 cap 4. other yea Boniface the 3. be the first that challenge to himself the name of universal bishop as hereafter God will shall be plain show I come now to the second part of the forenamed precept that the pope say in effect give unto i the thing which be god I prove it by these particular 1 because he challenge to himself infinite knowledge and suffer his canonist to give unto he a b b decret Gre get lib 1 tit. 7 cap. 5 heavenly arbitrement and as it be a divine and infallible judgement yea to say that he be a c c Cornelius Episc Bitoni in habit in council trident light come into the world but man have love darkness more than light 2 because he challenge to himself infinite power and suffer himself to be call d d judah Simon beg epist Modrusae in Concil. juda the lion of the tribe of judah and to have ascribe unto he e e council Lateran sess. 10 in Stephan 10 power above all power in heaven and in earth yea f power to be able to do all thing that God can do except sin only 3 because he suffer himself to be call g the cause of cause which title the very heathen h h Arist 2 Metaph. cap 1. philosopher know to be proper to God 4 because he suffer himself to be call i i Cupres eccles. pag. 61 52 kromans 13 19 the god of revenge which title God do appropriate to himself say @ vengeance be i I will repay 5 because he suffer your canonist to call he lord God even in that new l l impress Lugduni dom. 15 55. edition which by the authority of pope Gregory the 13. be correct and publish their word be these m m Extrau to believe that our lord God the pope the author of this and the aforesaid decretal can not decree as he have decree it ought to be judge heretical 6 because he be say to be n n Extrau in johan 22. a GOD as well as CHRIST and a be of the second intention 7 because he look to be fear of man as much as God yea more than God as appear by the complaint of Frederick the second o o 2. epist. Othou Bavar Aventinum l. 7 pope affect lordship and divinity and that they may be fear of man no otherwise than God yea more than God 8 because he take upon he to command the angel of heaven for so we read that Clement the 6. in his bull concern those that shall come to Rome to celebrate the iubiley * * etc. Clement 6 in bulla de jubil ^ command the angel that if any one shall die in that journey they shall bring their soul be whole free from purgatory into the glory of paradise 9 because he make his own decree constitution and tradition of equal authority to the sacred word of God and enjoin man to receive and honour they p p council trident sess. 4. with as great affection of piety and reverence which injunction a certain q q jacobus Nachiantes Felice Papa pag. 144 bishop in the tridentine counsel mislike but he be therefore expel out of the counsel by the pope legate 10 because he suffer the master of his palace * to give unto he he not r gainsay it power to s s Silvester Priereas Luther change the holy gospel and to give unto the gospel according to place and time a othersense 11 because he suffer another master of his palace to saverre that the authority of the church and pope of Rome be great than the authority of the scripture 12 because he take upon he to abrogate the law of God yea to t t George Douly leave the ^ commandement quite out in his rehearsal of the commandemet see his plain instruction or rather his destruction take the second commandment quite out of the decalogue and to v v s 8 divide the last commandment into two against all reason and 10 10 Origen homil 8 in exod chrysost homil 49 in Math antiquity 13 because he take upon he to 10 10 Extrau commun. lib 5. tit 9 cap 4. lib 7 orat. Innocent. 22. in come suffrag fol. 132. Balaeum in 10. forgive sin which be a proper action of the godhead as the very y y mark 2. 7. scribe deny not 14 because he suffer his canonist to give unto he a z z in Romano Michael Modina in Christian lib 7 cap. 17 power over the law of God yea to dispense a a distinct 38 lector dist. 8 7. presbyter against the apostle and b b Felin cap statut against the whole new restament also now to wound they with their own quill c c antonin part. 3 tit. 22. cap. 6 superior be none inferior the inferior may not dispense with the commandment of the superior by these particular it appear not only that the pope challenge those thing which be god but that he advance himself above God and show himself that he be God and so consequent that he be that man of sin that son of perdition and that adversary prophesy of by saint Paul 2. Thess. 2. but to come unto the second title which you give unto the pope if the pope be as you say he be the successor of Peter then shall he teach you with Peter d d Pet 2 13 14. to submit yourselves unto all manner of ordinance of man for the lord sake whether it be unto the king as unto the superior or unto governor as unto they that be send of he but the pope teach you not to submit yourselves to your sovereign but to murder your sovereign and to take arm against they e we will and command say that impious pope Pius subject of England to z take arm against Elizabeth the queen William Parrie say f f see cardinal como letter before allead god pope Gregory the 13 shall receive merit in heaven be he can make away his sovereign yea g g see the defence of english catholic c 5 subject say the defender of our english catholic may take their sovereign and hang they up upon gibbet against the sun and to prove this they allege number 25. 4. the lord say to Moses take all the head of the people and hang they up before the lord against the sun but if these defender be not more than blind they will perceive this their treacherous illation to be erroneous for first the lord command this revenge to be take and second the magistrate be appoint to be the revenger they do therefore erroneous and treacherous infer upon this that subject may hang up their sovereign see that subject be no sovereign ruler and have also a straight commandment from the lord h h Psal 105 15 not to touch his anoint yea this place be so far from make for you as that indeed it make much against you for see that you be idolater it may hear be gather that his highness may lawful take the chief of you and hang you be before the lord against the sun as Moses do the chief idolatrous israelite nay it be in all humility be it speak his bind duty to do it for as say saint cyprian allege this very precept and i i deut 13 9 another of the same k nature l l cyprian in but to return again to your romish cannibal @ what be the cause that move they to attempt the murder of the king majesty and the whole senate of the parliament the recusant true they be thereunto move as both Guido fawkes and Thomas winter m m see their concession confess only for religion and conscience sake they be therefore i think more to be bear withal the minister they be never a whit the more to be bear withal for it be not lawful for subject to attempt the murder of their sovereign for religion sake or for any other pretence soever go with cresset and torch light throughout the whole book of God and throughout the spacious volume of the ancient father and tell i whether any priest high or low or Levite prophet evangelist apostle ancient father ever have teach counsel and much less practise the like I say not against lawful magistrate but tyrannous ruler and such as be by the express sentence of God reprobate to produce a few example be a idolatrous king and n n 1. reg 12 28 29. make two calf of gold and set the one in bethel and the other in dan nevertheless the man of God that come out of judath albeit he o o 1. reg 13 reprehend the king and foretell he the ruin of his realm yet do he not persuade any of his subject to murder he or any foreigner to make war against he king ahab p p 1. reg 16 3^ walk in the sin of the son of and take jezabel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the zidonian to wife and go and serve Baal and worship he and the lord prophet be so evil entreat in his time as that they be q q 1 reg 18 4 hide in cave a hundred in one cave and a hundred in a other and there feed with bread and water yea some of they be slay by jezabel notwithstanding r 1 reg 18 18 all this Eliiah the chief prophet of that time albeit he reprove ahab because he have forsake the commandment of the lord and have serve Baalim yet do he not incite any to murder either the king or the queen in the time of the prophet isaiah the prince be so wicked as that he cry out against they say s s esay 1 23 24 thy prince be rebellious and companion of thief every one love gift and follow after reward they judge not the fatherless neither do the widow cause come before they therefore say the lord God of host the mighty one of Israel ah I will ease i of my adversary and avenge i of my enemy t t verse 26 and I will restore thy judge as at the first and thy counsellor as at the beginning thus do the holy prophet complain of the exaction of the prince show they their fault admonish they of God vengeance and foretell they of their restore of the good judge and counsellor he do not animate encourage and incite the people to avenge themselves of their prince and to lift up arm against they as the pope do the prophet amos also note the vice of the prince in his time and call they the v v amos 4 1 kine of Basan which oppress the poor and destroy the needy the prophet Micha tax they for 10 10 Mich 3 2 pluck off the skin of the people and their flesh from their bone and the prophet y y Zephan. 3 3 zephaniah call they roar lion and their judge raven wolf all which title give sufficient testimony that the ruler and judge in their time be very wicked man and such as do grind the sace of their subject and yet all this notwithstanding they do not advise the subject to mutiny or rebel against their prince yea the captive jew in Babylon be so far from seek to take away the life either of Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon or of Balthasar his son as they write to their brother at jerusalem to z z Baruch 1 11 pray for the life of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon and for the life of Balthasar his son that their day may be upon earth as the day of heaven and that God will give they strength and lighten their eye etc. and answerable hereunto be that advice which the prophet jeremy give the captive in the 29 of his prophecy though in word somewhat different a a jerem 29 7 seek the prosperity of the city whether I have cause you to be carry away captive and pray unto the lord for it for in the peace thereof shall you have peace but to come near Christ time John Baptist the forerunner of Christ see in his time b b Idu mean a counterfeit Jew usurp the realm of Galilee and jury and know well enough that the roman be gentile and idolater and that they have deprive the people of Israel of their liberty and unjust bring they to be tributary unto they and yet notwithstanding when the c c Luk 2 14 soldier demand of he say what shall we do he say unto they do violence to no man etc. he say not revolt against the empire or take arm against the roman yea albeit he know that his death be plot by Herodias yet do he not animate his disciple to murder she or Herod neither practise he any mean to escape but submit his neck to the excutioner and to come to Christ himself he be so far from blow up house with powder and from make a fiery massacre of those that be not of his religion as that he d d Luk 9 59 reprove the wish of saint James and saint John who desire that fire may come down from heaven and consume the samaritans because they receive he not and he be so far from make prince to pay tribute to he as that he e e math. 17. 27 pay tribute himself and be demand whether it be lawful to pay tribute or no he answer thus f f math. 22. 21 give unto Caesar that which be Caesar yea when the officer of the jew take he and bind he he forbid Peter to use the sword say g g John 18 11 put up thy sword in the sheath he say not to Peter as catesby say to winter * * see Thomas winter confession stad by i Tom and we will die together there be also great difference between the disciple of Christ and the disciple of Antichrist for we read that when saint Peter be hold prisoner by king there be earnest prayer h act. 12 5 make of the church unto God for he and not any Jesuitical plot lay by they thereby to deliver he yea he enjoin the church to i i pet. 2. 17 honour their king to omit the rest s. Paul exhort Timothy to make k k 1. Tim 2 ^ supplication prayer intercession and give of thanks for all man for king etc. albeit such as reign in his time be pagan and idolater and agreeable hereunto be the practice of the primitive church as Tertullian plain show l l Ter tull apol. cap. 30. nos say he describe the prayer which the old christian of their loyal affection make for their heathen governor we pray for all emperor that God will bestow upon they a long life a peaceable government a safe palace strong army obedient subject and a quiet world to which let we add the practice of s. Ambrose who when Valentinian require he to yield his church answer thus * * Ambros lib. 5 epist 32. with my consent I will never forego my right if I be compel I have no way to resist I can sorrow I can weep I can sigh tear be my weapon etc. in a word * you neither carry as a * * the earl of Salisbury in his late answer to certain seandalous paper pag. 11 12. noble beraean have well note the mark of Rome heathen nor of Rome Christian for under heathen emperor the victory be scorn which be barbarous get and when Rome be pure and primitive you shall find the arm of the church be tear and prayer but now their oracle be so far degenerate from the former purity of that ancient church as they make murder spiritual resolution and open threaten the life of king that be god breathe image when the prophet David tremble to violate the skirt of king Saules garment to make use hereof these ancient roman shall in judgement rise against you and condemn you for they conspire not the death of pagan infidel and tyrant that make havoc of the church of god but you wish and watch to destroy the most Christian king to overturn the little world of his dominion to shake the pillar thereof with mutiny and sedition and nish it with worse than Catilinarie conspiracy the recusant sir although some of we have wish and watch to destroy the king yet all of we have not you must not condemn all for some the minister sir I condemn you not all but I condemn the religion of you all for your religion bind you all to attempt the like christianus say m creswell in pag 201 one of your seducer Christian people be strict bind in conscience and hazard of their soul to make the like resistance if that they be able to perform it and say a other the english catholic who n Bannes in 20 28. thom. quaest. 12. art 2 exempt not themselves from the power of their superior and who wage not war against the protestant in that land be in some sort to be excuse because they have not sufficient power out of these word of Bannes and creswell I gather these two thing 1 that your religion bind you all to play the traitor and to take up arm against your country 2 that the reason why you do not take arm against your country be only because you have not power sufficient to match we for have you sufficient power your romish doctor will hold you inexcusable if you do it not you may therefore fit be compare to serpent which may be handle whilst the cold have benumb they but when they be warm they will hiss out their venomous poison my meaning be no mystery if you be harbour a while long in the bosom of this common wealth you will in time get such warmth and become of such a competent strength as that you will be able to match we if not overmatch we but I doubt not but that his majesty and the state will look to this betimes and not nurse up lion whelp for their own overthrow as Amilcar bring up his son for the ruin of Rome I will therefore leave you to the justice of his majesty and the state who know well enough that it behon wise prince as a great * * the earl of Salisbury in his late answer to certain scandalous paper pag 10 statesman have well observe to keep down faction which be ever humble till it get the key of power and now let i entreat you to confer with i about some point of religion the recusant I will confer with you no long the minister why will you not the recusant because you be to use doctor hardings term a a a Harding in his confession foll. 222. turkish hugenote the minister a turkish hugenote sir if you will vouchsafe to confer with i a while I will prove that you be turkish and not we the recusant be roman catholic turkish the minister yes as may appear by these semblance which I have observe betwixt they and you the 1. semblance the turk at this day for all that b b sozom. lib. 6 cap 38 history make plain mention and themselves also can deny but that they take their first beginning from Agar the bond woman yet for the very name and stock sake they choose rather to be call saracen as though they come of Sara the free woman so you although you be as I have former prove abominable heretic yet do you challenge this title to be call catholic but c c this surname catholic be not use in the apostle time Biblioth Tom 3. sympronian novation cathol epist 1 Apostolis as say pacianus a ancient father under the apostle no man though Baronius say the contrary be call catholic and albeit d 1 pag 3. 9 e this surname catholic be use after the apostle time and that by the apostolic people Pacian ibid. part and error when after the apostle there be heresy and man begin to rend in piece and divide God dove and queen by sundry different name the apostolic people require their surname whereby they may distinguish the unity of the uncorrupt people lest the error of time shall rend in sunder god undefiled virgin yet see I no reason why you shall require the same surname which the apostolic people do see that you embrace not that doctrine which they maintain but the heresy which they condemn as I show you at large in our first second and three day conference but it be no marvel to here you entitle your congregation by the name of the catholic church for as say Lactantius f f this surname catholic be and be challenge by heretic every conventicle of heretic do imagine themselves to be true christian and their church the catholic church but I proceed to another semblance the 2 semblance the turk as I have show already call themselves saracens of Sara so do some of your popish friar call themselves franciscans of saint Francis and other call themselves dominicans of saint Dominicke for which cause we may just hold you to be the synagogue of Antichrist for as a ancient a a Hieron advers. Luciferia^ father say whensoever thou shall here those that be call christian not to have their name from our lord jesus Christ but from some other as marcionite valentinians montense campate know thus much that they be not the church of Christ but the synagogue of Antichrist we may also for the same cause hold you to be carnal b b 1 Cor 3 4 for when one say I hold of Paul and another I hold of Apollo be you not carnal the 3 semblance by succession the Turk at this day possess and hold the 4 great Patriarkal see of the church of Constantinople Alexandria Antioch and jerusalem which be once sanctuary of religion and place of great faith and devotion so by succession the pope challenge at this day the see of Rome which be once I deny not the eye of the west and the anchor of true piety the 4. semblance albeit the church of Rome be once the eye of the west and the true church of God yet fall she away from God into idolatry and apostasy about the year of our lord 607. for in the year 602 do Gregory the first who be the last true and godly bishop of Rome c c in lib. 6. epist 30. avouch this solemn as a manifest truth that whosoever do take to himself the name of universal bishop the same be Antichrist now five year after viz: in the year 607. do Boniface the three who be the first antichristian bishop of Rome take unto himself the title of universal bishop and since he all his successor have take unto they the same antichristian title now as this antichristian pope arise in the western church in the year of our lord 607. so do Mahomet arise in the eastern church about the same time as be prove in sundry d d Zigaben in Elench Isma vincentius Beluacens lib 23 cap 39 hist Peregrin Philippus Lonicerus in turcic hist laonicus lib. 3 N^uclerus generate 22 and Danaeus in cap. 96 book extant to the view of the word the recusant it be true indeed that Mahomet arise in the eastern church about that time in the reign of the emperor heraclius but I deny that there arise up any antichristian pope in the western church about the same time the minister well to make it most evident appear unto you the aforesaid vain glorious e e bonifacius prelate in the year 607. begin to dispute that Rome be always the lady of the whole world and therefore that it be meet that the bishop of that city shall go before other bishop in degree and dignity now to attain this be a thing most difficult for albeit that the emperor do let it slip yet do the bishop of other nation confident gainsay he allege lawful cause why they withstand he unwilling to acknowledge the bishop of Rome otherwise then for a brother companion and in power equal with they notwithstanding all this the say maleface of Rome desist not but continual urge to attain unto his purpose until he have by many request and gift obtain of wicked phocas the emperor who murder his master the emperor mauritius and his child to come to the empire and be after slay himself by heraclius that succeed he that he may be call the head of the catholic and universal church or the ecumenical and universal bishop which title of blasphemy when as John the patriarch of Constantinople have challenge not long before viz. about the year 602. pope Gregory f affirm confident that therein he be the forerunner of Antichrist that the g king of pride meaning Antichrist be then at hand and have a army of priest thereby insinuate that he shall be the prince of priest prepare for he now the pope be your prince of priest for so cardinal h h Bellarm. Pontif. rom lib 2 cap 38 Bellarmine call he who far exceed John of Constantinople in all antichristian pride challenge a sovereign and universal authority not only above all other bishop and priest but also above all prince and potentate by this than it appear that the church of Rome do then become antichristian when the say pope Boniface take unto he and his successor the title of vuiversall and catholic bishop and about the same time as have be show do Mahomet arise in the eastern church I proceed now to other semblance the 5. semblance this Mahomet be a arabian and a Ismaelite i au. Danaen in cap 96. and take wage of the emperor heraclius to serve he in his war and when the saracen and arabian revolt from the emperor he encourage they in their defection and in this mutiny he be choose to be a commander of these rebel thus grow from a seditious soldier to be a captain of a rebellious host he with his mahometical force subdue Phoenicia Palestina Syria Mesopotamia and diverse other country and as for the christian he make havoc of they as sundry writer do testify @ sophron epist Sergium in Synod. 6 Constantinop act. 11 zonaras Tom 3 annual Vincent Beluacons lib 23 Paulus lib 18 histor Simo lib. 1 epist. now to apply this as the saracen be traitor to the emperor heraclius so be the pope to the emperor and prince of Christendom for first the emperor of Greece by the pope rebellious opposition against their sovereign lord in the ungodly defence of image be bereave of their dominion in the west by which mean the empire be rend asunder way be make for the Turk and although at the first they seem to honour their new erect emperor in the west 4. who they create for their own defence yet afterwards they never cease until they have get superiority over they and ever since it have be their practice to strengthen and advance themselves by weaken and deject the emperor and all other christian prince as much as they can the 6. semblance Mahomet h h lib 23. cap. 4 1 specal histor i i Platinain 7 commit many robbery and such like villainy so we read that Boniface the 7. have get the popedom by ill mean rob saint Peter church of all the jewel and precious thing he can find and so run his way but to insist in that which be fresh in memory there be late k k see the discourse of the late intend treason pag 48 one grant a gentleman who have associate unto he some other of his opinion all violent papist and recusant come to a l l at warwicke stable of one Benocke a rider of great horse and have violent break up the same steal out all the great horse that be therein to the number of seven or eight belong to diverse nobleman and gentleman who have put they into the rider hand to be make fit for their service but not to speak only of the robberry of these traitor it be one of your decree make and decree among the papist that m m decret Papale Grat cause 15 q it be lawful to rob protestant who you call heretic of their good the 7. semblance Mahomet n n lib 23 cap 41 specul hist. commit many bloody murder and so have the pope to make this plain by enumeration of particular it be o o a Ben cardinal say that Gregory the 7. poison six pope to make himself a way to the papacy and seek to murder Henry the emperor as he be at his prayer in the church p p Matth Paris in Henric 3. and that innocentius the 4 seek to poison Conrade the emperor there be also a massacre intend in the church of Florence and julianus Medici murder by the q q Raphael Volateran Politian pact appointment of pope sixtus the 4. jomit Vrbanus the 6. who r r cyprian Valerain Vrban 6 put five of his cardinal into sack and drown they because they favour Clement the 7. and Alexander the 6. who command Antonius Mancinellus his tongue and both his hand to be cut off because he make a invective oration against his impure life and who be so cruel as that a s s Zanzarius famous man of that time a excellent poet make these verse of he that be the roman bishop who promise heaven to other man be go himself to hell by reason of his villain and murder I come to stephanus the 6. and Sergius the 3. who be so barbarous cruel as that they t t Martin Polon 898. 907 Platin. in Stephan 6 serg. 3. pull their predecessor out of his grave the one cut of his finger the other his head and cast his carcase into Tiber and sixtus the last be as your own u u lib. 3 art 2 pag 57 quodlibetaries report so full of cruelty heresy and villainy as that the Jesuit preach open in Spain against he * * it seem that pope sixtus be better than other pope otherwise the Jesuit will not have rail on he in this sort rail on he and call he a Lutheran heretic a wolf and what not yea cardinal Bellarmine be ask by one what he think of his death answer thus as far as I can perceive understand and apprehend our pope be go to hell lo this do Bellarmine write as it be upon the tomb of one of your pope as the people of Sicilia write abuse a article of athanasius creed upon the tomb of a cruel viceroy of they o o theatre lib 2. but what do I insist upon the immane cruelty of pope towards those that be of their own religion let we take a view of their brutish immanity towards those that be of the contrary religion what can I speak of this nay rather what can I not speak how hideous be the torment that be invent by the pope and inflict by his inquisitor upon protestant in foreign country first p p Reginaldum Gon Inquisit. fol 23 24 25 26. 27. they command a officer to have the imprison Protestant into a certain place where the rack stand which common be a deep and a dark dungeon under the ground with many a door to pass through ere a man can come unto it because such as be put thereto shall not be hear to strike or cry in the which place there be a scaffold rear where the inquisitor the and the clerk do sit to see the anatomy make of he that be bring thitherto then the link be light and all the player enter that have part in this tragedy the executioner who tarry last to make all fast as they say and to see every man in before he come also at the length and of himself alone make a show worthy the sight more than all the rest of that rout be whole array all over from the top of his head to the sole of his foot in a suit of black canvas such as superstitious people wear on Mandy Thursday when they scourge and whip themselves as the custom be in most place under popery if not in all much like that apparel which the devil in stage play use here with we in England moreover his head be cover with a long black hood that reach over all his face have two little peep hole to see through and all to this end to make the poor soul the more afraid both in body and mind to see one torment he in the likeness of a devil after the lord be set down each in their place they begin with he again and exhort he afresh to speak the truth free and voluntary otherwise at his own peril be it for if either his arm or his leg or any other joint be break in the rack as it happen to diverse so that he chance to die thereof for more gentle than so they mean not to deal with they let he blame no man but himself for they think that after they have give he this fair warning they be now discharge in conscience both before God and man and therefore be guiltless what harm soever come unto he by mean of the rack yea though he die thereon as innocent as the child new bear after this with sharp rebuke and menace word they command that the party be strip stark naked be it he or she yea though it be one well know to be the most honest and chaste maiden or matron in all the city as they be never light without sundry such in this their shambles who grief no doubt be not half so great in respect of any torment that present they endure as it be to beeseene naked in such a presence but to proceed when they be strip naked they draw on a close linen breech and then the lord signify to the tormentor by some token in what sort they will have the party punish for as their torment be in number many so in sort they be sundry but the most usual be the jeobite and Pullie with water cord and fire yet before they inflict these torment upon they they persuade they to utter whatsoever they know either by themselves or by other of their acquaintance in the mean space while they be thus common with he one come behind he and bind his hand with a cord eight or ten time about and because nothing shall be think to be do without authority and order of law the inquisitor call upon he to strain each hard than other be thus bind to the rack they begin yet once again to persuade with he and beside the bind together of his hand they also cause his thumb with some small line draw very straight and fasten both the line that tie both his hand and thumb to a certain Pullie which hang on the jeobite then knock they great and heavy bolt upon his heel if the party have none already or else hang betwixt both his foot upon those bolt which he have certain weight of iron at the first time but five pound and so hoist he up from the ground while the poor Protestant hang in this plight they fall to their persuasion once again command the hangman to hoist he up on high to the very bcame till his hand touch the Pullie then cry the inquisitor and the clerk upon he to confess somewhat after that he have hang a good space and will grant nothing they command he to be let down and twice so much iron more to be lay on his heel and so hoist he up again one inch high if it may be threaten he that he shall die none other death except he declare unto they the truth in such matter as they demand of he and therefore charge the hangman to let he up and down that the weight of iron hang at his heel may rend every joint in his body from other at which intolerable pain they bid the hangman slip the rope sudden that he may fall down with a swinge and in the half way stop and give he the strappado which be do all his body be out of frame arm shoulder back leg and all the rest of his joint by reason of the sway tear each part from other then if he will not then yield they cause more iron to be add the three time so that the silly protestant be half dead and more be by their commandment hoist up again and to augment his grief they then begin to tail upon he call he dog and heretic and if this pitiful creature do call upon Christ as for the most all that be persecute for his truth sake do then fall they say my q q Reginaldus Gonsaluius Montanus in author to mock of he say jesus Christ jesus Christ let jesus Christ alone and tell we the truth what a cry out upon Christ make thou confess what we ask thou and makeu no more ado and herein do my author very fit resemble they to the jew that mock and deride Christ say r r Math 27 behold he call for Elias he trust in God let he deliver he now if he will have he but to return to the tragedy if the party be let down promise to tell they somewhat and perform it indeed that be the very ready way to make he be worse handle then before because they think that now he begin only to broach his matter this horrible butchery continue from nine of the clock in the morning till high none or a hour after which be end the jailer begin to play the bonesetter so well as he can and to put his arm and leg in their right joint again and put on his clothes bring he back to his prison or rather carry he have never a leg to stand upon yea sometime drag he by the arm or leg too too pitiful and within two or three day they send for he forth again into the audience and provide so that in the way from the prison as he pass by the place where the racke-stocke stand the hangman shall stand for the nonce to show himself in the say likeness of a devil that the party in pass by may have a sight of he and thereby be occasion the more to remember his former torment who come into the court find the inquisitor the ordinary and the clerk ready set each man in his place which after their manner fall in hand with he at which time if they can get any thing out of he they cause he to be carry to prison again but if he declare any thing they press he the more and such matter it may be his hap to disclose that it may chance to purchase he the rack once more upon hope of get some great matter at his hand but if they be resolve before to put the party to the rack once again then about three day after his last be there they send for he again to come before they and what with earnest entreaty and terrible threat they labour to have he shrive himself of all his opinion and heresy as they call they and to appeach as well such person with who he have have conference in such matter as also all other who he know to be of the same mind and if the poor protestant continue constant than the keeper be command that once again he provide the rack and strip he out of his clothes and put he either to the aforesaid torment or a worse viz after this manner the Protestant have his hand bind behind he and hang at the Pullie they bind both his thigh together with strong cord and so in like manner his leg about the calf then put they betwixt the cord and his leg a short piece of wood wherewith they wrest the string so stiff till they be so deep sink into his flesh that they be past sight a very extreme and a terrible torment and much worse than any that he have yet endure in this pitiful plight the poor soul lie for the space of two or three hour abide the inquisitor pleasure who nevertheless cease not to flout he all this while orinstead thereof they practise as they think best another kind of torture which albeit it be use upon offender in other place as well as in that yet fo^ one especial point of cruelty add by they we may just ascribe it to their holy court as a devise of Antichrist the name of it be Buri or and the manner of it be this there be a great bench make out of whole timber wrought hollow in the upper part like a trough so large that a man may lie open in it on his back and thereabouts as his midriff lie there be a sharp bar go cross overth wart whereon the party back rest that it can settle to the bottom because he shall have no ease his heel also lie high than his head and his arm thigh and leg bind with small cord strain till they settle into the flesh and pierce almost to the very bone in so much that they beclean out of sight and then come in a new devise of their own viz they take a piece of linen cloth and overspread the party mouth there with as he lie upright so as it may stop his nostril also that when the water be pour into his mouth he shall take in no air at his nose then pour they water upon the cloth not by drop but in the manner of a long stream which bear down the cloth into the further part of his throat so that when they pluck it out of the bottom of his throat as many time they do the cloth be so wet with water and blood together that a man will think the very entrails come out of his body to conclude some be torment there in another sort viz: they take a pan full of hot coal which they set against the sole of protestant foot before he go to the aforesaid rack and to the end that the fire may have more force to they they baste they with lard or bacon lo here you see what grievous torment the papist use to bring man to their pretend catholic religion and yet our popish recusant forsooth be grow so delicate that neither religion nor obedience may be force on they for the f f doctor hill his quartron of reason of Catholic religion pag. 182. word be now out of their bloody hand they complain of rigour and cry out that we do great offend God here in England in force people to go to the church contrary to their conscience but the time be when they care little for drive we to sin against our conscience the strange torment they devise and practise on see fox act. mon. lib 11 Rogers sanders hooper Tailor Tomkins Bradford Ridley Latimer and diverse other of our country man to compel they from the confession of the true Catholic faith without any regard have of their conscience can witness the same now what reason can they bring that they may enforce other and none must enforce they to conclude this particular it appear also by ^ revel 17. 6 this tragedy that the whore of Babylon be drunken with the blood of saint and with the blood of the martyr of jesus god almighty stir up the heart of christian prince that they may not only hate the say whore of Babylon but also according to the prophecy of the holy ghost v v revel 18. 9 reward she even as she have reward the saint of jesus and give her double according to her work and in the cup that she have fill they fill she the double the 8. semblance Mahomet be as sundry 10 10 Vincont li 23 specul hist Zigaben writer testify a great magician and keep a dove that reveal as he inform the people sundry thing so be some of your pope know necromancer and sorcerer to cyprian in Benedict 9 insist in some particular Benedict the 9 alias the 8 be wont in wood and mountain to sacrifice to the devil and by magical art to allure woman unto he and to make they follow he up and down like cade he keep also a sparrow that bring he news from all quarter and as it be in the spanish proverb Perque of a evil crow a evil egg for the say pope z have two cardinal namely Laurentius and that be such necromancer as that they know what pass in the east west north Platina in sylvest 2 Sabellic Enead 9 lib 2 Volateran lib 22 Bergomas lib 12. johan. de Pineda part. 3. lib 19 cap 15 cyprian Valera in sylvest 2 and south and we read in sundry writer that Sylvester the 2. even from his youth give himself to enchantment and witchcraft and that the better to effect his enchantment he make a covenant with the devil and be take himself both body and soul to the devil conditional that the devil shall help he to great preferment and that by his wicked art he come first to be bishop of Rheims and afterward archbishop of Ravenna and in the end pope of Rome and not to rake any long in this dunghill of pope all the pope from the say Silvester to Gregory the 7. be know necromancer the 9 semblance b b vincentius lib 23 hist Mahomet be a whoremonger and give to all kind of impurity so have many of your pope be to begin with Alexander the 6. he not be content with other strumpet which he keep by who he c c in Alex and. 6 have four bastard son and two bastard daughter commit incest with his own daughter Lucretia as witness johannes jovinianus Pontanus in his epitaph upon Lucretia the daughter of the say pope the epitaph be this d d Pontan Tumul lib 2 in that be here lie Lucretia in name indeed a shameless whore the daughter of Alexander her father and brother harlot adjoine hereunto Paulus the 3 who e e Sleidan in com. commit incest with two of his nice prostitute one of his sister to Alexander the 6. to get a cardinalship and poison another because she affect some other of her lover more than himself and who not stay here in these vile lust which be not yet against nature fall into unnatural filthiness even into the sin of Sodom of sixtus also the 4. it be say that he be a filthy sodomite and that to incite and encourage other to the same filthiness he m m agrippa cap. build a sumptuous stew in Rome appoint it to be both masculine and feminine and give licence as n n 2 vesselus Groninigensis track indulgent Gronningensis say to the cardinal of saint Lucy and to all his family that they may in june july and August free use sodomy and it be o o Herman contract and Paralip Urs record that Clement the five be a public fornicator and keep a certain beautiful countess as his paramour Gregory the seven p p Pizarrus in Hist gennen be also very familiar with another countess in his time and innocentius the eight be such a common whoremonger as that he have sixteen bastard by several strumpet as these verse give sufficient testimony q q Marul Innocent. 8. that be innocent beget eight son and just so many daughter Rome therefore may just call he father I omit John the twelve who r r Ticinenfis lib. 6 cap 7. Martin Polon in 986. give order in his stable among his horse abuse his father concubine and make his palace a stew put out his ghostly father eye geld one of his cardinal drink to the devil and at dice call for help of jupiter and Venus I come to John the three and twenty of who a whole counsel say thus f f Concil. constant sess 11. a that be John the five and twenty from the very time of his youth have evermore be a man of a evil disposition unshamefast unchaste alyar unobedient to his parent and give to many other vice and such a one and for such a one be he common name hold believe take and repute of all that know he and still be he name hold believe and repute such a one and for such one add hereto pope Nicholas the three who beget t cyprian Valera in nicol a child by his concubine which in nail and hair be like a bear which some impute to the picture of bear that he cause to be make in his house and therefore Martin the four who keep the same concubine after he fear belike the like mischance cause the picture of the bear to be take away but I will not warble any long upon this untuneable harsh string neither set down of the hundred part of what I be able to justify out of credible writer for to use the word of one that be afterward pope himself v v Aeneas Concil: Basil lib: 1 if time will permit I may bring forth very many example of roman bishop that be find either to be heretic or else defile with other vice the 10 semblance albeit Mahomet be as have be show very vicious yet make he the arabian believe that he be 10 10 Breidenbach de Peregrin cap. 3. a prophet and a messenger of God so albeit the pope be that man of sin speak of in the 2. chap. of the 2 epist to the Thesla verse 2. yet bear he the world in hand that he y y johan. lib. 2. eccles. cap 26 be Christ vicar upon earth the 11 semblance Mahomet z z Lonicerus and Breidenbach peregrin profess himself to be both a priest and a king and challenge to himself the power of both sword so do Boniface the 8. when he a a vspergen cause the two sword to be bear before he in a year of jubiley thereby to show his power and when he b b obed. cap. sanct. allege that place in the gospel where one of Christ disciple say behold two sword the pope favourite also in these day do solemn dispute that c c r Cupers pag. 251 num. 62. the empire or temporal rule as well as the priesthood or ecclesiastical dominion be translate unto the successor of Peter the 12 semblance Mahomet boast that he have receive d d Zigaben in Elench. tas cleis the key of paradise so do the pope boast that he be e e Dist. 22 cap the keybearer of eternal life and albeit it be avouch by the scribe and not deny by Christ that f f Marc 2 7 none can forgive sin but God only yet do the pope take upon he to forgive sin and to give heaven to who it please he yea one of the pope suffer the ambassador of Sicilia to lie prostrate on the ground and thus to cry unto he as if it have be unto Christ g g lib 7 thou that take away the sin of the world give we peace the 13. semblance Mahomet not only to gratify his companion but also the more easy to allure all nation receive all religion as for example to allure the jew he exalt h Azoar 12 16 Moses and retain circumcision not to estrange the mind of christian he confess Christ to be i i Alcorani azoar 16. a prophet and the word of God to please the arrian and cerdonians he k k Alcorani azoar 9 11. say that Christ be not the very son of God to win the pelagian he l l Alcorani Azoara 18 41 teach that man may merit heaven by their work in a word m m Bibliander in prefat in Alcor Mahometisme be patch together of old heresy so be Papisme like wise patch as I show you in our first second and three day conference the 14. semblance Mahomet compose of the tradition of the hebrew and other such like fable his Alcoran that be a certain book wherein be contain all those turkish mystery and ceremony that have no ground in the word of God so have your pope make you a Alcoran of tradition constitution tale and decretal the 15. semblance the turk make more account of Mahomet Alcoran than of the sacred scripture so do you make more account of the pope constitution and tradition then of the word of God for you hold with Melchior Canus that n n Melchior Canus Theol lib. 3 fol. 98. for confound of heretic there be great strength in tradition than in the scripture and with Silvester that o o Silvester Luther iudulgence be warrant unto we not by the authority of the scripture but by the authority of the church and of the pope of Rome which say he be great the 16. semblance the turk p p ben. in Elench. Ishmael Vincent hist. lib. 23. cap. 36 believe that Mahomet confer with the angel Gabriel and receive their Alcoran from he so do you labour to make simple people believe that you receive your tradition q q Concil. trident Sess. 5. from Christ and his apostle the 17 semblance the turk as the forename writer report bear the world in hand that their religion be confirm by miracle sign and wonder so do you the 18. Semblaeuce the r r Alcorani Az^ 10. turk account some sin venial so do s s sum. virtut Tom 2. cap. 20 you the 19 semblance the t t Alcorani Azoara 23. turk take whoredom to be either no sin at all or if it be a sin to be a very small sin so do your popish shaveling as appear by these word of Erasmus u u Erasmus in Enchyrid mil. Christiani cap. 14. a great part of those who the common sort take for perfect and incorrupt man do not a whit aborre simple fornication and a sober use of pleasure reckon it to be but a petty fault yea you account it to be so small a fault indeed as that you hold that no priest ought to be depose from his benefice for single fornication these be your express word in your own gloss upon the decree 10 10 distinct ^^ presbyter they say that for single fornication no man ought at this day to be depose and lest you shall miss trust your gloss to be corrupt it be also thus note of purpose in great letter in the margin no man now a day ought to be deprive for fornication and that because our body be frail than they be wont to be Panormitane also your great canonist say thus z z Extrau affinit abb. the law of man ought to be alter according to the change of time and therefore now a day no priest be depose for single fornication and archer the jesuite as your secular a a in their relation pag 47 ^ priest testify defend this proposition viz. that the stew be as lawful at Rome as the pope himself or any order of religion the jesuite Weston likewise defend the same against doctor Bagshaw the 20 semblance the b b religion turcic cap 15. turk ' pray to saint and have certain peculiar saint for peculiar purpose so have you as hereafter God will shall be large show the 21. semblance the c c menavin Turcar turk pray for the dead so do you and that especial when you go over any churchyard say d d orat. funct in come suffrag fol. 132 the 22 semblance the e e Alchorani Azoara 10 21 25. turk dream of a purgatory after this life so do your dream f f Bellarm. lib. 1. cap. 1. lib. 2 cap. 6 rhemist in mat 12 sect 66. doctor that there be a certain infernal place in the earth call purgatory in the which as in a prison house the soul which be not full purge in this life be there cleanse and purge by fire before they can be receive into heaven the 22. semblance the g g septemcastr Relig. Turc cap. 15. turk honour and reverence the sepulchre of their saint so do your h h Bellarm. lib. 2. cap. 21. council Trident. sess. 25 doctor teach you that the relic of saint that be their body and bone and sepulchre where they be bury be to be honour and reverence the 23 semblance the i i septencast Relig. Turic cap. 14 Anton Menavin cap. 15. not cap 3 turk use to go on pilgrimage to certain suppose holy place so do some of you usual walk on your bare foot with a Peregrine staff in your hand and with a scrip about your neck to saint james of compostella to the lady of Lauretto and to sundry other such like place the 24 semblance the k k Septemcast^ relig turst cic. cap. 13 ri^her lib 2. Turcar. turk be strict command by Mahomet to pray five time a day so be you masse-mongring priest l l innocent in cap. 1 cele brat missar enjoin to observe their canonical hour the 25. semblance they Turk think their priest sufficient learn if that they can read their Koran and their form of service so do you account those priest sufficient m Anton Genfreus lib 2 Relig. learn that can read the mass book witness one that be once the pope scholar who thus report of the italian priest n n John Nichols in his recantation the priest in Italy for the most part be altogether unlearned I demand of some of these italian priest in the italian tongue whether God the father and God the holyghost have body they answer yea the scottish priest also as their own countryman report of they be find to be so blockish in the last reformation of religion there that the very o name of the new testament be much offensive to they they think it to be new devise and invent by Martin Luther and ask for the old again yea there be then a bishop of Dunkelden there in the time of popery that reply thus one a minister which say he have read the old and new testament p p johan fox in histor 1540 1543. I thank God I never know what the old and new testament be but what need I relate the ignorance of your priest q q Alphons Castro lib. 1. cap 4 to use the word of one of your own side it be well know that many of your pope have be so utter void of learning as that they know not the principle of their grammar to conclude you be great behold to i in that I do resemble you to the turk for in some thing you be worse than they the recusant be we catholic worse than the turk in some thing the minister yes for there be that I may use his majesty word no other sect of heretic not except Turk Jew nor pagan no not even those of Calicute who r see his majesty speech in the late session of parliament adore the devil that maintain by the ground of their religion that it be lawful or rather meritorious as the romish catholic call it to murder prince or people for quarrel of religion and although particular man of all profession of religion have be some thief some murderer some traitor yet even when they come to their end and just punishment they confess their fault to be in their nature and not in their profession these romish catholic only except now sir what say you to this speech of the king majesty the recusant sir I dare not say what I think the minister s s Eceles. 10 20 curse not the king no not in thy thought for the fowl of the heaven shall carry thy voice and that which have wing shall declare thy matter the five dialogue wherein be show the lawfulness of the punishment that be late inflict on some of the traitor the heinousness of who crime be lay down in the precedent dialogue the minister sir I come to tell you news the recusant what news I pray you the minister the traitor that you tell i of be late arraign condemn and execute the recusant execute I hope not the minister what! do you hope that such notorious malefactor shall escape unpunished the recusant yes I be in good hope that the senate of parliament to who the king refer the judgement of the crime will have pardon they the minister sir it will have be a wonder to all the world if that they have pardon such a viperous intend parricide it be report that a norman gentleman confess to a franciscan friar that he have once a thought to kill Francis the first of France be for that very thought albeit he have change his mind repent and ask pardon condemn to die by his high court of parliament at Paris to who the king refer it now then if that parliament of Paris condemn he to die for think treason only how can you think but that his majesty and the state will condemn these your romish catholic to die who not only think treason but contrive it prepare for it and be ready to execute it if they condemn he to die albeit he have change his mind and repent shall not his majesty and the state condemn these to die who be so far from change their mind and repent as that a a Guido fawkes they repent only with Mutius Scoevola there fail in the execution thereof the recusant well what punishment be inflict on they the minister true they be punish just as I wish they may be at our last conference for first they be draw on hurdle from the prison to the place of execution to show how they have be draw by brutish and cassian affection second they be hang up to show that they be man unworthy to tread upon the earth three they be no soon turn off the ladder but the rope be cut and they let fall down to show the sequel and effect of treason viz how that they dig a pit for other and fall into it themselves four they be no soon fall down but the executioner snatch they up lay they on a block cut of their secret and cast they into the fire to show that traitor be unworthy to be beget or to beget other fifty their belly be rip up and there heart tear out and throw into the same fire because they be the fountain of such a unnatural and unheard of treachery six as they though to have cut off the head from the member in the civil body so be their head cut off from the member of their body and their wickedness turn on their own head seven their head be cut off their body be divide into quarter as they be divide from the find member in the civil body last their quarter be set up upon the gate of the city that as their graceless attempt be a ill example to other so their quarter there expose to the eye of all man may be a good caveat to other the recusant I pray you sir what warrant have you for these bloody ceremony which you use at their execution the minister sir our warrant be the word of God for we b b ester 7. 9 read that treacherous Haman be bang on a tree of fifty cubit high the recusant yea but where read you that it be lawful to tear out their heart they be alive the minister we read in the second of Samuel that when that unnatural trey Absalon be hang in a oak by the hair of his head c c 2. Sam 18 14 joab take three dart in his hand and thrust they through Absalon or as it be in the original text in the heart of Absalon while he be yet alive in the mid of the oak from which word I gather that as traitor heart contrive treason and have a time of pride and presumption so shall they also have a time of woeful pain for their contrive of treason and for their proud and presumptuous sin the recusant what though joab pierce Absalon heart while he be alive be you sure that this fact of joab be lawful the minister yes it be no doubt the just judgement of God on his heart for breed and bring forth such a horrible treason the recusant yea but which of the ancient father say so the minister Ignatius a very ancient father have these express word d d Ignatius epist. 2. add tr^^ian Absalon a pharricide by God judgement be hang on a tree and his heart that have think evil be thrust through with a arrow but what do I speak of thrust the heart of traitor through with arrow or of tear they out of their body David a man after god own heart grate the very flesh and rend asunder the bone of such like enemy to GOD and their country with e e 2 Sam 12 31 iron harrow saw and axe of iron and thus you see how that there be no punishment inflict upon traitor in this land which be not agreeable to the word of God and less than they deserve the recusant yes you punish not the traitor only themselves but their wife their child yea their whole posteririe for you take from they their land their house their office and what not the minister this be also agreeable to the word of God f f 2 Sam 16. 4 ziba have false accuse Mephibosheth to David until the truth be find out have mephibosheths land and all that pertain unto Mephibosheth give unto he by king David and g g ester 8 1 2. king Ahashuerosh give the house of treacherous Hamon unto queen ester and queen ester give it to mordecai as a reward of his loyalty as for office it be h h 1 king 2. 26 27 35. record of Abiathar that albeit Solomon spare his life because he have bear the ark of the lord God before David his father and because he have suffer in all wherein his father have be afflict yet cast he he out from be priest unto the lord and place zadocke in his room yea the Persian rook not their house their office their land and their live only from traitor wife and child but their life two for i i ester 16 18 Haman be hang at Susis before the gate with all his family as the apocryphal story have it but what need I allege the apocryphal the canonical say that k k ester 9 14 they hang Haman ten son upon a tree at Shusan now to apply this if the Persian so detest treason as that they punish both the traitor with death and every one of his family two I see no reason why you shall complain of rigour and accuse his majesty of more than scythian cruelty nay you shall rather commend his clemency in spare their child life and punish they only in land and live and sometime not in that neither the recusant well to leave this how many I pray you be execute be there any of the lord execute the minister no but I do not doubt but that they shall be in the same l l to predicament short if that they be find guilty the recusant what do you think that they shall be behead the minister be behead they may thank God and the king if they escape so the recusant thank the king sir he may not inflict any other punishment upon such great man the minister yes if it please his majesty he may as lawful cause they to be hang draw and quarter as he cause their inferior but you tell i that they be great man what though Haman be a great man a honourable man yea the very next person unto the king as appear by these word of Artaxerxes m m ester 16 11 he be call our father and be honour of every man as the next person to the king and yet be he n n ester 7. 9 hang on a tree of fifty cubit high Haman seven son be great man yet be they hang before the gate of Shusan and that which i think be a pitiful case for their father fault Bigthan and Teresh be great man yet because they seek to lay their hand on king Ahashuerosh o o ester 2 ^^ they be both hang on a tree together king sauls seven son be great man yet king David p p 2 Sam 21. 9 deliver they into the hand of the gibeonite which hang they in the mountain before the Lord q q Ro Gagwin in reg. franc. lib 5 1 ibid. hebert earl of vermendoy be a great man yet because he invite Charles surname^ the simple king of France to lodge at his castle of Peron and slay he there Lewes the five with the lord of his privy counsel assemble in the city of laon cause he to be carry as Robert Gagwine record to a hill without the city of laon and there to be truss at the gallows and strangle with a rope but before the hangman have full strangle he the king turn to he say r Gagwine and say thou hebert be the same countryman that make away my lord and father and thy sovereign in prison and bond now according to thy desert suffer thy deserve death lord Harkeley earl of Carlisle be a great man yet for treason against his sovereign Edward the second s s fabian in an. 12 24. Polidor hist Angl ay i^ he be hang draw and quarter and his head send to London and set on the bridge tell we how that he be first disgrade his spur hew from his heel his sword break over he and then disgarnish of the robe of his estate and after torture for his treason as be afore say Bertopus be a great man yet for his treason Lewes surname the gross king of France * * ro. gag reg. Franc lib 6 appoint that he shall be hang at the gallows and by he a mastiff dog alive who when the hangman smite he snatch at the traitor body hang by he rend his flesh and so be he bait to death queen Brunchild wife sometime to Sigisbert king of Mees or Austrachia be a great woman yet because she have be the death of ten prince of the royal blood king clotare take she in the field v v Robert gag in reg franc. lib. 2 after she have be well beat with a cudgel four time command she to be set on a horse and to be carry about all the host and then by the hair of the head and arm to be tie to the tail of a wild horse and so to be trail and draw to death and no less strange judgement and execution be that which Frotho a king of Denmark inflict on two of his chamber convict of treason against he he cause they to be tie to two great main stone and to be throw into the sea and so to use the word of a a saxon Grammaricus in lib. 2 histor danic saxon the writer of the story of the dane with weight put to their body he punish the weighty sin of their soul but not to insist any long in this enumeration of particular example God command Moses b b 25 4 to take the head of the people that be the chief of the malefactor and to hang they up before the lord against the sun that the indignation of the lord wrath may be turn from Israel and why must Moses take the chief of they true because they have not corrupt themselves only but also other and do more evil by their evil example then by their sin for the force of example be very great to draw to similitude and the great the example be the great force it have to induce likeness of manner the crime therefore of those great man that have a hand in the late horrible treason be a great crime a exemplar crime and consequent a c double crime and deserve more than a single punishment I speak not this God be my witness as hold it a main point of piety to be in this case quite without pity but to stop your mouth that scandalize the king majesty and the state of cruelty in their just severity and to show that it behoove all man to be more compassionate to the life of the commonwealth then to the life of a man pagano-papismus or a discovery of popish paganism wherein be plain show that the papist do resemble the idolatrous heathen in above sixscore particular and that in many thing they be worse than they and be whole depart from the very principle of philosophy reason and outward sense make dialoguewise in a most plain and familiar manner the minister if any sheep say saint Chrysostome go out of the right way and leave the a chrysost Sacerdot lib 2. plentiful pasture graze on barren and steep place the shepherd must somewhat exalt his voice to reduce the disperse and straggle sheep and to compel they to the flock the consideration of this my duty move i to come unto you that leave the plentiful pasture and graze on the steep place of popery and to do my endeavoure to bring you into the right way again from the which you have a long time stray the recusant sir I be in the right way already for I keep b b jeremiah 6. 16. the old way which be the good way and walk therein the minister sir you keep not that old way wherein the patriarch and prophet walk but that wherein the pagan and ethnic walk the recusant do we catholic walk in the way of the old ethnic the minister yes i find that the ancient heathen be indeed the the true anti quity of the romish religion first inventor of your religion and that the forename heretic borrow it from they and you from they both the recusant be our catholic religion borrow from the ancient heathen the minister yes as may appear by these semblance which I have observe betwixt they and you the 1. semblance the heathen have a multitude of god as be apparent in the second of jeremiah verse 28. so have you likewise as appear in your common calendar where for every day in the year you have either a he saint or a she saint the second semblance the heathen have several god for several country for the chaldean and assyrian a a judg. 8. 33. Baal be find out for the zidonian b b 1. reg. 11. 5 ashtaroth for the ammonit c c verse 7. Molech or Milcom for the d d ibid. Chemosh for the syrian e e 2. reg. 5. 18. rimmon for the philistine f f judie 16. 23. Dagon and for every nation that come out of ashur to inhabit Samaria there be a several God appoint for the man of Babel g g 2. reg. 17. 30 succoth-benoth for the man of cuth h h ibid. Nergall for the man of Hamath i i ibid. ash for the anim k k ibid. vers. 31. Nibeaz and Tartak and for the sepharvim l l ibid. Adramelech and Anammelech the god of sepharvaim the like may be say of the inventor of your romish superstition for they have assign several country to the patronage and protection of several saint s George be for England saint Patrick be for Ireland s Martin be in ^ come suffrag ^ fol. 138. for Germany s Peter and saint Paul for Italy s Michael be for France and saint James be @ the light the ornament and the lord protector of Spain the three semblance the heathen have protector for their city Venus she be for Troy and Pallas she be for Greece and Jupiter Stator for Rome and in like sort have popish country * Heshus Pontif. Loc 28 protector for their city saint Peter be for Rome saint Roch for Venice Ambrose for Milan saint genovefa for Paris saint Stephen for Vienna saint Vlderick for Augusta and for Colleyne be the three king and saint Ursula with her eleven thousand wait maid yea we may say as jeremy say of the idolatrous jsraelite according jerem. 2 28 to the number of thy city be thy god the four semblance the n heathen have their household saint and tutelar power so have you the five semblance the heathen find out god for their art and science so do you for you have saint Gregory for scholar Luke for painter saint Crispin for shoemaker etc. the six semblance the o o August lib. 4. cap. 21 heathen have god for several disease so have you for saint Anthony be for ulcer and gangrene and saint Fracrius for quartan fever saint Petronel for ague saint Otilia and saint Raphael for soar eye saint for the stone saint John for poison saint Quirine for the fistula and Dominicke and Francis for the french pock and other disease the seven semblance the q q August lib. 3. cap. 17. and lib 10. and orph. in aesculap and Plaut Curcul act. 2. orat. in come suffrag fol. 138. heathen when they be visit with the plague and pestilence pray to Aesculapius so do you to Roch say or thus s s missal and Breviar sarish in s Rochi in a pest defend and before the t t circa dom. 1300 albert. Crantz Metrop lib. 9 cap. 25. birth of Roch your forefather pray to Sebastian when they where visit with the plague as appear in your missal the 8 semblance the heathen erect 10 10 fanum Aesculap temple in honour of Aesculapius so do your forefather erect temple chapel altar and image in honour of saint roche as be apparent by Baronius y y Baronius in martyrolog. rom. aug. 16. u u missal the. 9 semblance the z z aesculap a in com. Suffrag heathen also pray to Aesculapius when they have the tooth so do you to apollonia say the 10 semblance the heathen join Apollo and Aesculapius together b b Apollo Aesculapius August civet lib. 4. ca. 21 and implore their joint help when they think that the one of they alone be not able to help they so do you join fourteen saint together and pray unto they all joint when your danger be such as that you think one alone not to be able to deliver you from it their name be these c c missal 14. George blaze Erasmus Panthaleon vitus Christopher Dennis Cyriacus Achacius Eustachius Gyles Margaret Barbara and Catherine the 11. semblance the d d August civet cap. 18. heathen have a god to deliver they from danger by fire so have you Laurence for the same purpose the 12 semblance the e e August civet lib. 4. cap 11. heathen have their god Summanus and their god jupiter to preserve they from thunder and lightning so have you f f in come suffrag fol. 26. god and saint Sotheris the 13 semblance the g heathen give more worship to Summanus then to jupiter so do you give as much honour to Sotheris or rather more than you do to god himself as be apparent in your old popish h h in come suffr fol. 86. litany the 14 semblance the heathen worship Hymeneus as a god and i i seru in Aeneid 1 call upon his name because in time of cruel war he deliver certain virgin from the peril of the sword and for the like cause have you deify saint George and do call upon his name blasphemous say k k Georgio Antiphona in fol. 71. the 15. semblance the l l August civet lib. 4. cap. 11. heathen commend their warrior to Mars and Bellona and you will have we Englishmen to commend our warrior to saint George as appear by this speech of Stephen Gardiner m m Stephen Gardiner in his book against George joy fol. 58. we Englishmen to who god have give many victory under the banner of s. George may not we say god and saint George as they say under Gedeon and Gedeon the 16. semblance the heathen commend their seafaring man n n horat. lib. 1. earm odd 3. to the mighty goddess of cypress and the two brother of Helen and the father of the wind that be to Venus and the two twin Castor and Pollux and Aeolus and you o o 28. commend your seafaring man to saint Nicholas and saint Christopher the 17. semblance the heathen commend their wayfaring man p p Adeonae Abeonae August civet lib. 4. ca. 21 when they go from home to Abeona when they come towards home to Adeona and when they stand still to Statilinus and q q in beat johan. evang. in come suffrag fol. 69. you commend your wayfaring man to the virgin Mary and saint John the evangelist the 18. semblance the r r Fessonia Augustide civet lib. 4 c. 21 @ in come suffrag fol. 86. v. in come Suf frag fol 60. heathen commend those that be weary with travail to Fessonia so do you commend they to wilgefortis the 19 semblance the t heathen when they lay they down to sleep commend themselves to Cuba so do you commend yourselves to the virgin Mary say the 20. semblance the 10 10 4 c 8 heathen have one god for their door another for the henge of their door and a three for threshholde of their door so have y you Protasius and Geruasius to keep your door and to guard you from thief Heshus the 21 semblance the z z jugatino aug. civet lib 4 cap. 8 heathen have one god for the mountain and another for the valley so have a a in come fol 86 you Barbara for the hill and Agatha for the valley the 22. semblance the heathen have one goddess for their b b Pomonia apple and another for their honey so have you Polyoron for your bee and Polycarpe for your apple tree c c mellona August civet lib 4 cap 24 34. in come Calend the 23. semblance the e e Augst ciu. li 4 cap 11 heathen have their goddess Diana for their wood and forest so have f f in come suffr fol 85 you saint Silvester the 24 semblance the g g August civit lib 4 cap 11 heathen have Minerva for learning so have h h Hesh errorih pontif. 28. you saint Katherine the 25. semblance the heathen have Bacchus for wine so have you i i Heshus ibid. s. Urban the 26. semblance the k k August civet lib 4 cap 11 heathen have Castor for health so have you l l Heshus 28. saint Valentine the 27 semblance the heathen have their m m 28 god for wealth so have n you saint Erasmus and saint Anna the 28 semblance the heathen pray to honorius o o August civet lib 4 c 21 that they may be honour so do Guido fauke and the rest of the traitor I warrant you pray to their idol that they may be place in the room of our honourable noble but their god praise be our god have deceive they they have therefore best imitate p p Licinius Euseb: constant lib 2 cap 15 Licinius who when his old god in who he put his trust have deceive he he seek out new one to worship the 29 semblance the q q August civet lib 4 cap 11 heathen when they stand in need of connsayle pray to consus so do yond to the virgin Mary say r r co^ fol. 128 the 30 semblance the heathen that their child may prove acute and sharp witted commend they to s s i. August ciu. lib. 4 c. 21 so do you commend you to saint Nicholas for the same purpose t t Stephen Gardner in his book against Georg joy fol 59 the young boy say Stephen Gardiner that in the entry to learn his letter be teach to say Christ cross i speed and saint Nicholas be for so much teach no error at all but saint Nicholas well name as one by Christ cross advance here to learning and virtue and now by power of the same cross place in felicity where he may pray for other to be holpen as he be the 31. semblance the heathen commend their child u u no vagitante Cuninae su. August civit lib 4 cap 2d when they do cry to Vegetanus when they do lie in their cradle to cunina and when they do suck to rumina so do you in like sort commend your child to saint Erasmus say 10 10 sanct Erasm in come suffrag fol 137 the. 32 semblance the y y junolucina far in Andria ci lib. 4 cap 11. heathen commend their woman when they labour of child to Juno Lucina so do you commend they as z z Heshus de^er rorib pontif. 28. Heshushius report to saint Margaret the 33 semblance the a a August civet lib 6 cap 9 parta^ heathen commit the care and keep of woman in childbed to pilumnus and deverra so do b b in come suffr fol. 85 and 86. you commend your wife when they be in childbed to mary Anna Susanna saint Perpetuasaint felicitas Paraxedis Winefride Frideswide Gertrude and sundry other the 34 semblance the heathen teach their young man that want the c c Pier in hire Hierogli phick of man to pray to Fortuna barbata as this speech of saint Austen give sufficient testimony d d August civit lib. cap. 1 ^ and I make no question but that you have likewise your god for you have god for far base matter as shall be show hereafter the 35 semblance the heathen have their e e aug. ciu. lib 6 cap. 9 so have you your deas virginense as apparent by this prayer of you to your eleven thousand suppose virgin the 36 semblance the heathen have their and when they join g g August civit lib 4 cap 21. any together in matrimony they enjoin they to pray to h jupiter Juno Venus and Diana and that you have your nuptial god it be not unknown to any that have be at your marriage the 37 resemblance the heathen when they solemnize matrimony light candle though the sun shine never so bright so do you of which heathenish custom I will god willing speak more hereafter the 38 semblance the i heathen commend their mind to their Goddess mens and their will to their god Volumnus and their goddess Volumna so do you commend your mind your will yea your soul and body and all the implement of they both to the virgin Mary say k k Aug civit. lib. 4 cap 21 l virg Mariam in consuffrag fol 60. in augnstsde civet lib. 6 cap 19 the 39 semblance the m heathen when they be at the point of death commend their spirit to their gentile god so do you commend your spirit into the hand of the virgin Mary Asdruball may be prove by a certain form of prayer which be to be find in all old english book wherein you be teach to pray thus at the hour of death o bless Mary holy mother of Christ grant that I may end my life in the true faith of holy kirk and i commend my soul to thou etc. this may also be prove by another prayer of you wherein I find these express word orat. advirg in come Suflrog fol 167 the 40 semblance the o o August ciu lib 6 cap. 9 heathen beseech and to give to give they food and raiment so do you beseech Erasmus say p p orat. add sanct Erasm in com-suffrag fol 137 the 41 semblance the q q Aug civit lib 4 cap. vlt donatus in phorm heathen commend themselves when they do eat to and when they do drink to Potina so whether you eat or drink or what soever you do you do you commend yourselves to one saint or other there by rob god of his honour and give it to his creature the 42 semblance the heathen commend the keep of their sheep to their god Pan so do you to Wendeline that 43 semblance the r heathen have bubona for their ox so have you August civit lib 4 cap 24. Pelagius for you the 44 semblance the heathen have a s s Stercarius god for dung their land and the base thing that can be imagine a t t cloacina goddess for draught-house so you which be in deed as base jdolatrye commend your goose to Gallus and your pig to saint Anthony the 45 semblance the u u August civet lib 4 cap 21. heathen pray to their god that their land may not be overgrow with thorn and thistle so do 10 10 in come suffrag fol 85 you to saint the 46 semblance the heathen have god for their y y cur genio etc. pradent lib 2 stable and for their horse so have you eulogius and Ludovicus for the same purpose the 47. semblance thief also amongst the heathen be not leave without their patron no more be they among the papist for turseline a popish Jesuit in his four book Turselin lib. 4. cap. 19 and 20. of the lady of Lauretto say that the lady of Lauretto sometime break the halter when man be in hang and when they be in hang she preserve their life till they be take down-were i worthy to give advice there shall be strong halter provide for Guy fauke and the rest of the traitor lest the lady of Lauretto shall chance to break they and because the say lady do if we believe turseline often preserve thief life till they be take down I can wish that their flesh shall be grate and theite bone rend a sunder with saw iron harrow and axe of iron as the people of Rabbah be 2. sam. 12 31. deal with for their traitorous and unnatural stratagem the 48 semblance yea so endless be superstition with the heathen as that they have a god as saint Austen do observe for every thing yea many oftentimes for one thing as for their corn seia segetia Entelina nodotus Volutitina Patelena Flora lacturnus and Rancina z z August lib 4. cap. 8. nou say he speak of the gentile this superstition of the heathen may be five parallel by the practice of you superstitious papist at this day in find out a god for every thing yea many oftentimes for one thiug as for your corn jodocus and other one for it under the ground another when it be spring up this when it be in the blade that when it be in the ear and one other for it when it be in the barn the 49 semblance the forename god of the heathen have diverse name according to the place where they be worship as for example Baal be sometime call Baalzebub and sometime Baal-Peor because he be worship in the hill peor the like may be say of your romish god for you sometime call the virgin Mary the lady of Lauretto sometime the lady of Mounteferratte and sometime the lady of Walsingham the 50 semblance the false god of the heathen be of two sort b b aug. lib 7. c ^ Varrone some be superior god other inferior their superior false god be these c c ibid. Janus jupiter Saturn genius Mercury Apollo Mars Vulcan Neptune Sol Orcus Liber Tellus Ceres juno Luna Diana Minerva Venus and Vesta their inferior false god be these d d aug. civet lib. 4. cap. 8. volupia e e ibid. libentina f f ibid. cap. 11. Diospiter g g ibid. mena. n opis levana venilia Agenoria stimula numeria Camaena h h ibid. cap. 21 i i cap. 32 pallor febris terminus k k l. 6. c. 9 Subigus Drema Partunda Priapus naenia and the rest before mention with many other now take a view of your popish l l E^kius in Enchir sanct and Bellar min: Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 15. writer and you shall find that herein they just jump with the heathen for they make the virgin Mary by their give to her a m high kind of service than they give to the rest a superior god and the rest of the saint they make inferior god give unto they a low n kind of service as hereafter o o james 4. 15. if the lord will shall be show more at large I proceed now to other particular the recusant Sir i have hitherto hear you patient therefore I hope you will now give i leave to speak a little and to interrupt your speech the minister with all my heart the recusant you have make mention of a number of our saint and with all you have term they our god but you do great wrong we herein for we acknowledge there be but one only true god and that the rest who we pray unto be god creature and man that excel in gift so that there be great difference betwixt we and the heathen the minister the 51. semblance I see no difference at all for the learned among they know that there be one chief and true maker and governor of heaven and earth and all thing therein and that the rest who they pray unto be man that be famous for their excellent gift I will acquaint you with their very word god say p p a Cicerone Plutarcho Clement alexand. and Cyrillo Pythagoras be but one not as some thing without government of the world but all in all he be the orderer of all age the light of all power the original of all thing the cresset of heaven the father mind quickener and mover of all and the infinite power from whence all other power flow and Architas one of the same sect say that he q esteem no man wise but he that reduce all thing to oneself same original to weet unto god who be the beginning middle and end of all thing join hereto the testimony of Trismegistus r r Trism^gist in pae^and we call they god not in respect of their nature but for honour sake Socrates also who Apollo by his oracle deem to be the wise of all Greece confess one only god and as both Aulus Gellius and Ap^leius do report be condemn to drink poison for teach that the god which be worship in his time be but vanity and for that in scorn of they he be wont to swear by a oak by a goat and by a dog thereby give the people to understand that he think there be as much godhead in the one as in the other and Plato Socrates his scholar lay down this rule that his s Plato Dyonis follower may thereby discern his meaning when I write in good earnest you shall know it hereby that I begin my letter with one god only and when I write otherwise I begin they with many god the same rule be also observe by jamblichus and the rest of the platonist but let we leave the academic and come to the peripatetic t t Arist. this world say the pince of philosopher and the order of all thing be preserve by god and that which be high in the world be the seat of god and there be nothing in the world that be sufficient of itself to preserve itself and that can be without his help to the same truth subscribe his scholar theophra say there be onedivine Theophrast beginner of all thing whereby they have their beginning and continuance so do Alexander Aphrodisaeus also but to come 10 alexand. Aph^odis provident to the stoic y y zeno. there must needs say the chief of they be but one god for else there shall be no god at all because it behoove he to be singular good and also almighty which be utter impossible if there be any more but one add hereunto the testimony of Epictetus the stoic z z Epictetus in A^phag the first thing that be to be learn be that there be but one god and that he provide for all thing and that from he neither deed nor think can be hide and of the same mind be Seneca who say that a a Seneca beat and in lib. consolat. from thing discover we must proceed to thing undiscovered and seek out he that be ancient than the world of who the star proceed yea all the ancient poet be like mind b b Sophocles Cyrill julian. certes say Sophocles there be no more god but one and Aratus acknowledge as that place allege by saint Paul give sufficient testimony that we be the generation of god but not to c act. 17. 28. stand in quote of any more even Orpheus who open the gap to the plurality of god in his hymn unto Musaeus which be call his last will and testament recant his former folly say thus d d Orpheus in lift up thy eye to the only maker of the world he be but one breed of himself and of that one be all thing he be all in all he see all and be see of none he sit in heaven govern all thing with his foot he touch the earth and with his right hand the uttermost shore of the sea etc if you listen to be further satisfy read the ancient father who have faithful relate the opinion of the heathen to begin with Lactantius he speak of the heathen in his time say thus e e Lactantius lib 2 cap. 1 when they swear when they wish when they give thanks they name neither jupiter nor god in the plural number but the only one god so great do nature constraive they to acknowledge the truth and Tertullian testify the same f f Tertul apol. cap 17 as whole as their soul say he speak of the heathen be bring in bondage to false god yet when they awake as a drunken man out of his sleep they name but one god and the speech of every man be as it please god they call upon he as their judge say god see it I refer myself to god god requite it i and in utter these word they look up to heaven and not to the capitol of Rome for they know that heaven be the seat of live god saint Austen also bring in the heathen speak thus g g August Civit. lib 4 cap 24 lib 8 cap 26. why sir think you that our forefather be so foolish and blind as to believe that Bacchus Ceres Pan and such other be god it be not possible nay they believe but in the only one god who gift and function they honour under diverse name and whatsoever be more be but superstition and thus you see that the heathen do acknowledge there to be but one true god as well as you the recusant but I see not that they do worship the true god as well as we the minister the 52. semblance yes the very heathen worship the true god aswell as you for h h Lactantius lib 2 cap 1 Lactantius report that when they do swear when they do wish any thing when they give thanks they name not jupiter or the other god but god special in the i Tertul. apol. cap. 17 fear of war and other danger and Tertullian say that the heathen be bring in bondage to false god use nevertheless to name god and to say that god will give this or that @ athanasius also show that the gentile worship athanas one god unbegotten and many god make or create the recusant if the heathen worship the true god as well as we why be they then condemn of idolatry the minister the 53 semblance they be condemn of idolatry because they give divine or religious honour to their suppose god in their exercise of religion for to use Lactantius his speech it can be that the true god be worship and other god too because if his honour be give to other he be not worship l Lactantius lib 1 cap. 19 at all consider his religion be to believe that he be that only true god now because you do the very same when you canonize saint and give unto they divine honour I must needs herein also resemble you to the heathen and say unto you as Lactantius say unto they it can be that the true god be worship and other god too the recusant sir although we worship other beside god yet do m in Enchirid. lib. 2 cap. 15. we not give unto they the same degree of worship which we give unto they for we give (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to god (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to the virgin Mary and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to the rest of the saint the minister the 54. semblance sir this your distinction be borrow from the heathen for they give the high degree of honour to the true god the next to Pallas and the low degree of honour they give to the rest of their false god for proof hereof I refer you to these word of the heathen poet. n n horat. lib. 1. Carm odd 12. it be he say he speak of the high god that govern the affair of man and god which rule the sea and land and the whole world with diverse season so that nothing be bring forth great than he neither be there any thing like he or second to he yet Pallas receive the next honour to he thus you see how that heathenish idolatry and your idolatrous worship of saint be for substance both one the recusant sir you be deceive for we worship saint for God cause or god in they that be we a door they in respect they be the minister of almighty God but the heathen worship not their inferior god in this respect the minister the 55. semblance yes the very heathen do the like as witness Paulus orosius who speak of they say thus they confess that they follow not many god but that they worship 1. under one great god many inferior god as be his minister the recusant yea but the heathen worship jupiter Saturn Mercuric Mars Venus and other that be know as saint p August civet lib. 3. cap 3. and 17. Austen report to have be adulterer and notorious male actor the minister the 56 semblance so do you worship Patrick Cuthbert Modwen Foilanus Gertruide Erkenwald Becket and other that be know to be whoremonger and lewd person the recusant sir you do great slander these holy saint the minister no sir i will verify what I have say to begin with Patrick the great apostle of Ireland it be report by credible q q in Polychron lib. 4 cap. 29. and johannes Capgravius in writer that he have a boy wait on he that call he father he not deny it and that one Modwenna a irish woman be very familiar with he and so cruel be Cuthbert unto woman after he become a saint of you that none may come within his sanctuary at doylwem carve and Mailros in Scotland nor yet at Durham Tynmouth and lyndefarne here in England under r John Balein his act of english votary dedicate to king Edward the six pain of death their chamber and sellar exempt always yet be the say Cuthbert very familiar in his time with Ebba Elsteda and Verca three holy nun and build for his pleasure a solemue nunnery at Carliel final for the special good love he have unto Verca above all other he command in his testament that his body after his depart shall be wrap in a fine linen cloth that she have give he as for saint Bridget s s johannes Capgravius in S^nct. when she be at the point of marriage she steal away privy with her three maiden and wait on bishop Machil and saint Modwen after such a other sort t wait on bishop Hiber and his brother saint also asleep scottish hermit u u John bale in his act of english votary have as master bale say so great malice unto woman that he plague with the foul evil so many of they as come the precinct of his monastery and saint Foilanus be as John 10 10 Capgrau in catalogue sanct. (@) Capgrave report very familiar with your saint Gertruide and her nun at Nigella and your saint erkenwalde do as the same y y ibid. writer report build a nunnery at bark and because there be at that time in England no nuns to his mind he send over the sea for a old acquaintance of his call Hildelitha and make her abbess there and such like saint be your saint Godrycke Aldelme etheldree Wilfride Drithelme o sith petrocke and sundry other of who act you may read at large in z z (@) ^^dam G^stis Ang^nun galf^id M^n^methen B^^tonun Alphred Beuerla^ens in Chronolog. and ranul^h in Polychronic^ book extant to your view I come now to Thomas Becket who a a see fox act and mon. pa 225 because he die in the pope quarrel which like a traitor he maintain against his sovereign Henry the 2 be canonize for saint by pope Alexander do 1180 and appoint to be pray unto by the name of saint Thomas of Canterbury and according do you pray at this day blasphemous say by the blood of Thomas which he for thou do spend make we Christ to come whither Thomas do ascend by this it appear that ethnick-like you make those your intercessor which be know to be whoremonger traitor and notorious malefactor and that you honour those as martyr which die as traitor like the follower of Alexander of who b b Euseb lib. 5. hist. cap. 17. Eusebius make mention show that they do honour their master as a martyr though he live as a thief and die just for his offence but be it grant that all those who the pope have canonize be saint indeed I see no reason why you shall therefore make they your intercessoure and mediator the recusant yes there be great reason for as he that have a suit to the king have need to make way for the same by the fanour and mediation of some great lord who be employ near about his person even so he that have a suit to the king of heaven have need to request the angel and saint to admit they into presence and to bring they to speech with god the minister the 57 semblance sir this your reason be borrow from the heathenish idolater and therefore i will answer you as saint Ambrose c Ambrose in epist. rom. cap. 1. answer they when they be ashamed say he speak of the pagan of have neglect God they be accustom to use a certain pitiful excuse say that they have access unto God by these god as by the lord or carl about the court subject have access unto the King but I beseech you be there any man so foolish and so retcehlesse of his own preservation as that he will give that honour unto any such earl which be due unto the king see that to do that be a point of treason and these man shall not they think themselves guilty of have transgress who give to the creature the honour due to god alone and which forsake he to adore and pray unto their companion with service as though beside that there be nothing reserve for god for very in that man make way to have access to king by tribune or earl it be because the king be a man and know not to who to trust in matter concern the commonwealth but to make god favourable incline unto he from who nothing be hide who know what every man want and wish a man need not any to speak for he but only a devout mind for in what place soever he will speak with he he be ready there to give he a answer among the work also of saint Origene be find the self same oblection of the pagan viz: that none e Origen cell lib. 8. dare to approach the person of a earthly prince for any suit but by the intercession of some courtier or other about he therefore it shall be so on our part towards god unto who mighty majesty we must use the mediation of some which be in his favour the absurdness of this comparison be there in like manner answer that the reason be most unlike because prince be man and know not of themselves to who to commit the commonwealth he mean that the multitude of their business require large audience than the ear of any mortal man can afford and that prince have their power and presence and understand limit must be help by the information of such as be their eye ear and hand as Xenophon write in his institution of Cyrus that be their subordinate counsellor minister and assistant by who they discharge the burden of their place but god need not to be help by the information of any for as the poet say kai epakove god eye see all thing and god ear hear all thing and as there be no defect in his hear so be there no danger in his person for he ride upon the cherubim and make his enemy his footstool but there be great danger in the person of prince for though they lie in bed of ivory deck and trim with the lace and carpet of Egypt yet over their head hang a naked sword the point downward by a small horsehaire threaten their continual slaughter so that it be very necessary that they shall have warder and porter and master of request to admit suitor into their presence and to receive and commence their request but the lord be porter himself at the gate of heaven and whosoever ask receive and ^ math. 7. 8. he that seek find and to he that knock it shall be open and that without any intervention of time for g g 145 18. the lord be near unto all that call upon he yea to all that call upon he in truth the 58 semblance the heathen worship a a Origen lib. 4 and 5. angel b b 2. reg. 23. 5. and all the host of heaven so do you say the recusant c orat. angelos and sancto^^n come suffrag fol. 62. we worship angel indeed but it be only because they be the minister and messenger of almighty God but the heathen worship they not in this respect there be therefore great difference betwixt we and the heathen the minister the 59 semblance no sir you do herein also resemble the heathen for saint Austen record their speech say that the heathen d aug. in Ps. 96 worship not wicked spirit but angel the virtue of the great god and the minister of the great God and to adjoin one answer more e e Orig. cell lib 5. we be not bid to adore the angel or worship they with divine honour although they bring the gift of God unto we for all vow all request prayer and thanksgiving be to be direct to god who be the lord of all thing by the chief priest who be great than all angel that be the live word and god the 60. semblance the heathen thought f f Euclid that every one have from his nativity a angel for his custody and patronage against the wicked angel so do you as appear by this your prayer to your proper angel g g angel in come suffrag fol. 69. Angelo i defend etc. the 61. semblance the heathen worship h h amos 5 26. the star of their god which they make to themselves so do you worship the i in come suffrag fol 60 star of your god say and again k k ibid. the 62. semblance the heathen consecrate for god the son of man and that whilst they be live of which foolish idolatry Theocritus one of their own sophist speak thus in derision l Theocri^ in Clem Alex protrept mine sir be of good courage since god die before man in like sort may we deride you who consecrate for a god the bishop of Rome and say unto he m m in triumph six 4 that be thou govern the world by the oracle of the voice and worthy be thou believe to be a god upon earth yea n n christophorus Marcellus in council Lateran sess. 4 thou be another god upon earth the recusant albeit it please some to call he their god upon earth yet do his holiness neither take that title to himself nor bid any call he so the minister the 63 semblance yes Christopher Marcellus as I have show say to the pope in the counsel of Laterane thou be another god upon earth and the pope take it to himself yea we read that pope Nicholas produce the testimony of the godly emperor Constantine to prove himself to be a god and consequent not to be judge by any secular power his word be these o Nichola^s Papa epist Michael and dist 96 cap and his argument be this God can be judge by any man but the pope be god therefore the pope can be judge by any man thus you see that the pope both take unto himself the title of god and also call himself so he may therefore i think five be resemble to the emperor Domitian who as Eusebius report charge all man to call he lord God Domitian and to sapor the king of Persia who will needs be call king of king brother to the sun and moon and partner with the star to conclude this particular as Hanno teach his bird to cry Hanno Hanno be a god so do the pope teach his p p in Extrau and obedient canonist to cry Papa the pope be our lord God the 64. semblance the q q Anius Virgil Aeneid 3 heathen poet make mention of one Anius who will needs be both a king and a priest in like sort do the pope favourite solemn dispute that the r r Cupers Eccles: pag 251 num. 62 empire or temporal rule as well as the priesthood or ecclesiastical dominion be translate unto the successor of Peter and that the pope be both the s s Paulus 4. in duel red Cupers pag. 42 num: 39 king of king and t t c^pers pag. 25 num. 62. prince of priest yea u u Gregor^^3 ^3 as the heathen call their god jupiter the 65. semblance the heathen emperor think that their will and commandment be warrant unto they enough for whatsoever they enact ancord to that of the satire so I will so I command my will must stand for reason and this kind of masterless and lawless will have your pope challenge to their chair at Rome for howsoever the pope behave himself no man may inquire into his action neither may any man say unto he sir why do you thus for the proof hereof I refer you to those word of your popish lawyer Papa 10 Extrau translat Episc. in and Felin that be the pope be say to have a heavenly judgement therefore in such thing as he will his will stand in steed of reason neither may any man say unto he sir why do you thus because as a law may be make by the only will of the pope so may the same law be dispense withal only by the will of the pope yea your canoniste be not ashamed to say that y if the pope do carry with he innumerable people by troop can. Papa dist 40. into hell no man in this world may presume to reprove his default because he be to judge all and to be judge of none unless he be find to err from the faith which say you as he be pope he can do the 66 semblance the scholar of Pythagoras a heathen philosopher usual allege the yea and nay of their master in their disputation for all the reason and answer whatsoever so do the pope scholar allege the yea and nay of the pope their master and depend as much thereupon as the pythagorean do on Pythagoras his opinion z z Silvester Luth a Heruaeus whosoever say rest net on the doctrine of the romish church and bishop of Rome as the infallible rule of god from which the holy scripture draw strength and authority he be a heretic the pope say another have authority so to expound the scripture that it be not lawful to hold or think the contrary yea b b johannes lib. 3. c. 64. say a romish cardinal or as Nemo the c c in c. 9 q. 3. gloss read sententiaret if the whole world shall determine against the pope we must nevertheless stand to his sentence the 67. semblance the heathen tyrant d d Casigula Pom Seneca de benefic lib. 2 and zonaras in Caligula will hold forth his foot to be kiss of those over who he do tyrannize so the pope cause king and emperor e e lib. 1 sect. 5. cap. 3 and lib. 3 sect. 1. cap 3. when they come into his presence after obeisance do in three several distance to fall down before he and kiss his foot even as Mantuan say of he nay he will f f 40. set his filthy foot on the neck of emperor and say unto they it be write thou shall walk upon the asp and cockatrice and shall tread upon the lion and the dragon it be great pitiy that emperor have not the sting of asp and cockatrice to thrust forth against he and to conclude if it be his holiness pleasure to be carry aloft on man shoulder he will cause the g g lib. 1. sect. 2 and 5 emperor king and prince that be present to put under their shoulder and help to carry he and thus whereas king in former age do ride upon ass now ass ride upon king the 68 semblance when the pope be to travail abroad he h send the eucharist on horseback some three or four day before accompany with muletor and horse-keeper and with the scum and baggage of the roman court afterward follow the pope attend with cardinal bishop and potentate and when he come near the place whether he travail the eucharist that be Christ their maker be bring to meet he on the way that it may be carry before he into the town as his attendant the pope herein do imitate the king of Persia who when they be to travail abroad usual send a horse before they carry a little altar upon he whereupon i Alciat emblem page 17. among a few ash shine a small flame of holy fire which the Persian worship as the papist do the eucharist and as the king of Persia be more reverence than that holy fire so be the pope more reverence than the eucharist and carry with far great magnificence than then the eucharist be and this be a forcible argument to prove that the pope be that man of sin which advance 2 thes 2 4 himself above the that be the thing which be worship as God in the romish church the 69 semblance the heathen plant fir tree and after cut they down l l isaiah 44 15 16. with some part thereof they warm themselves with a other part they roast meat and of the three part they make themselves god and worship they so do you sow your corn and afterward reap it carry it into your barn thresh it grind it and bake it of one part thereof you make food for yourselves and of another part you make Christ your breaden God and m m Concil. try sess 13 decree that it shall be worship with the high degree of worship what gross idolatry be this so to worship that which in show be bread in taste bread and in feel bread and what be it be else but bread the. 70 semblance you do also worship cross which be likewise gross idolatry and popish paganism as appear by this speech of saint Ambrose n Ambros error Helena find the cross of our lord she adore she King he mean Christ and not the wood because this be a error of the heathen and into this error be you fall for you call upon the cross and say o o Breuiar hebdom 4 quadrag all hail o cross our only hope in this time of the passion increase righteousness to the godly and give pardon to guilty person which word be direct not to Christ but to the very wood of the cross as appear by these word in the hymn immediate go before bless be that cross on who arm the prince of the world do hang it be make a beam to weigh his body and take the prey from hell the 71. semblance the idolatrous israelit learn of the heathen a a jerem 2. 27 to say to a piece of wood thou be my father and to a stone thou have beget i so have you learn of they both b b o pie crucifix redemptor etc. orat. crucifix in come suffrag fol 67. to say to a crucifix of wood thou be my redeemer and to a piece of mettle c c bell arm imagine lib 2 cap 23. thou be my reconciliator the 72 semblance it be also jdolatry to swear by angel saint or any other creature as may be prove by these word of the prophet jeremyah q q jerem 5 7 thy child have forsake i and swerve by they that be no god where he show that to swear by any thing then by god be to forsake he and to commit idolatry and this kind of idolatry do the heathen commit when they swear by Hercules and say r r 20 so do you commit the same when you swear by the mass by saint Mary etc. and say as god i help and our lady not consider how that the lord have threaten s s Zephan 1 5 to cut they off that swear by the lord and by Melchom to conclude this semblance with the word of a ancient writer t author in math homil 12 2 hierony mi. behold it be command in the law that a man shall swear by none but by God whosoever therefore swear by heaven or by the earth or what soever else it be by which he swear he make it a God therefore every one that swear by any thing beside god albeit it be lawful for he to swear yet make he himself a idolater because he perform not his oath to his lord god but to creature and so he sin two way first because he swear and second because he make he a god by who he swear that 73 semblance the heathen u u rom 1 23 turn the glory of the incorruptible god to the similitude of the image of a corruptible man and of bird etc. so do you when you paint God the father in the form of a old man and the holy ghost in the form of a dove the 74 semblance the heathen as ancient 10 10 Ambros in Psal 118. cyprian idol gregorius Neocaesar in Concil. nicen. 2 Act: 6. and euse histor Eccles. lib 7. cap 17. writer report be the first inventor of image your imagery then be but a heathenish devise and yet be you so in love therewith as that you set up image in church in window and upon the wall of your house yea you fasten they to your bed and carry they privy in your bosom as y y Gen 31. 34 Rachel hide her father idol in the camel straw the 75 semblance the image of the heathen be but the invention of their own brain very unlike their original Praxiteles make Venus to the likeness of Cratina who he love all the painter of Thebes paint she after the image of Phrine a beautiful but a notorious harlot all the carver in Athens cut Mercury to the imitation of their Alcibiades the like may be say of your suppose imaginary god for they be but Pygmalion picture work of your devise as unlike the original as Cratina and Phrine be to Venus and as Alcibiades be to Mercury and your suppose relic of saint be also but forge thing and device of your own for example sake Peter brain at Geneva be find to be a pumice stone and Anthony arm be find to be a heart pisle and the blood of Hales in England be descry to be but the blood of a drake you be also deceive in make of your crucifix for the cross be make with three piece of wood whereof one be fasten uprighte in the ground to the which the body and back lean the second be fasten to the top of the first overthwart to the which the hand be nail and the three be fasten to the bottom of the first to the which the foot be nail a sunder with two distinct nail but your popish carver and painter do make the cross of two piece of wood and do nail the foot to the very body of the cross and that one upon another with one nail the 76 semblance the prophet David speak of the image of the heathen say thus they have mouth and speak not they have eye and see not they have ear and hear not they have no a Psal 115 5 6 7 say and smell not they have hand and touch not they have foot and walk not neither do any voice pass through their throat so have your image eye ear nose hand and foot but they neither see with their eye nor hear with their ear nor smell with their nose nor handle with their hand nor walk with their foot neither do any voice albeit they gape wide pass through their throat the. 77 semblance albeit the image of the heathen be without sense and motion yet the heathenish priest thereby to deceive simple people use certain engine to make they move so do your popish priest as your legend of saint james give sufficient testimony for we read there that a certain image of Christ do lift up his foot and cast off his slipper to a poor pilgrim that stand devout before he and will have offer somewhat but b in fox act. and mon. page 1188 that he have nothing to offer we read also that there be a certain idol in king Henry day call the rood of grace which be make so with wire and engine that one stand within it can make every part of the idol to move and if a man bring but a small piece of silver to offer it will hang down the lip as be not please but if it be a good big piece than will his jaw go merry this abominable idol be break down by the lord Cromwell mean and the engine and part thereof be show at Paul cross thereby to bring man to a detestation of your imagery and to acquaint they with your double deal to add one example more there be at Chester in queen Mary day a image of saint Nicholas which be make with such a devise as that if one stand behind it do pull a certain string that be in the back part thereof it will move the hand as if it bless the people this image with many other be burn at Chesterby the appointment of doctor Downame then bishop there as his own c c d. Downam in his treatise of Antichrist pag 112. son who see they burn report the 78 semblance albeit the image of the heathen have mouth and speak not yet will some heathen d d Titus Livius lib. 5 and Valerius Maximus lib. 1 cap. vlt. writer have man believe e in Severin and act s. Hyacin thy lib. 1 cap. 13 that the image of juno speak unto a soldier that say unto it so will your popish writer have we to believe that a image of the virgin Marie speak unto Hyacinthus and say o hyacinthe etc. the 79 semblance the heathen carry their f f Baruch 6 3 god of silver and of gold and of wood on their shoulder so do the pope clergy g Baronius in Martyrolog. rom. assemble in the city of Constance carry the image of Rochus on their shoulder in the time of the plague there the 80 semblance the reason that move the heathen to carry their god on their shoulder be h h Baruch 6. 3. to cause the people to fear so do you carry your god on your shoulder in your procession thereby to make simple people fear they but we may say unto they as Baruch say unto the heathen i i Baruch 6 21 22. the owl swallow and bird fly upon their body and upon their head yea and the cat also by this yea may be sure that they be no god therefore fear they not the 81 semblance the heathen put golden k k Bar ch 6 9 crown on the head of their god so do your popish priest set coronet on the head of your idol god the 82 semblance the heathenish priest l l Baruch 6 9 10. convey away the gold and silver from their god and bestow it upon themselves and upon their harlot so do your popish clergy as Bernard a man of your own side report m m Bernard in serm. clerun in Concil. Rhemens. congreg with the patrimony of the cross of Christ you say he speak to the archbishop bishop dean archdeacon priest and monk of that age feed whore in your chamber you fat your flesh you furnish your horse with pectorals and headestalle of gold the 83 semblance the heathen u cover their idol with clothing of gold n Baruch 6 12. so do you cover you with purple and scarlet as you be enjoin in the o o Concil. trid. sess 7. council of Trent the 84. semblance the heathen p p Baruch 6 12. place their image in their temple so do you not consider that the ancient father who you pretend to be on your side do utter condemn this heathenish practice to insist in some of they q q Epiphan Hiero solym August epiphanius flat avouch that to place image in church be contrary to scripture and religion and saint Austen account it to be a wicked thing to make the image of God and in temple and to place it in the temple of god yea the whole council of Eliberis as have be show heretofore decree s s council Eliber tin can 36. that picture ought not to be in church the 85 semblance the heathen can not t t Baruch 6 12 keep the face of their god clean from dust so when your god to use Baruch hisword Baruch 6. 16 be set up in your temple their eye be full of dust by reason of the foot of those that come in the 86 semblance the heathenish priest 10 10 Baruch 6 17 keep their temple with door and with lock and with bar lest their god shall be spoil by robber and such be your god y y Baruch 6 57 they can neither defend themselves from thief nor robber for they that be strong take away their gold and silver and apparel wherewith they be clothe and when they have it they get they away yet can they not help themselves we may therefore say of your god as saint Chrisostome say of the god of Laban z z chrysost in Gen cap 31 bomil 57 Tales dii be thy god such that a man may steal they be thou not ashamed to say wherefore have thou steal my god the 87 semblance when their come any war or plague upon the babylonians a Baruch 6. 48 their priest consult together where they may hide themselves with their god so do your romish priest otherwise they do not as the image of the virgin Mary teach as b you say Hyacinthus to do in the time of Mary the 88 semblance albeit the god of the heathen can neither defend b Severim themselves from war nor from plague yet be they make as though they can have defend themselves c c ul: act anon hyacinth lib. 1 cap 13. Baruch 6 13. hold weapon in their hand so do also your romish god one hold a sceptre as though he be a certain judge of the country yet can he not slay such as offend he another d have a dagger or a axe in his right hand yet be he not able to defend himself from battle nor from thief the 89 semblance we may also say of your god as Baruch say of the babylonish god e e Baruch 6 54 when there fall a fire upon the house of your god of wood and of silver and of gold your priest will escape and save themselves but your god burn as the balk therein how can it then be think or say that they be god the recusant sir there be no catholic so simple as to think that image be god you do therefore great wrong we in resemble we to the heathen therein the minister the 90 semblance sir no more do the heathen think they to be god and yet for all that they be condemn of idolatry to verify what I have say say Celsus in Origen who but a very fool will account f Orig. lib. 7. they to be god I worship say another pagan in saint g aug. in Psal. 113. 2 Ansten neither the image nor the devil but in a bodily figure I behold the sign of that which I ought to worship h h lib: 2 cap. 20. and we fear not image say they but they after who likeness they be figure and to who name they be consecrate the 91 semblance albeit the heathen do not think that image be god in deed yet do they i i Baruch 6 5 54 call they their god so do your popish priest for upon easter day in the morning the k k Conrade ca. 17 priest take the image of the crucifix out of the sepulchre carry it about the temple and knock at the gate be shut say at lift up your head oye gate and be you lift up you everlasting door and the king of glory shall come in and to one within ask who be this king of glory the priest answer etc. the lord strong and mighty in battle the lord of host he be the king of glory and upon the feast of the Pentecost l l Conrade ibid. there be a dove let down in your idol temple and with it fall fire and water together with a great noise the priest cry out and say receive the holy ghost the 92 semblance albeit image be as the prophet call they m m Habak 2 18 teacher of lie yet do the heathen say that they be n element or letter to know God by so say you that image be layman book the 93 semblance the o o lib 2 cap 21 heathen pass not by their image without bend of their knee and salute of they no more do you as be apparent by this caveat which you give to p com. suffrag Maria fol 167 they that pass by the image of the virgin the 94. semblance the idolatrous israelite after the manner of the heathen q q 1 reg 19 18 13 2. kiss their image so do you use to kiss your image and the r r with Missale rom: riticele pax the 95 semblance the Hea then Baruch 6 29. bring gift to their god of silver and gold and wood so do you offer gift to your idol god t Baruch 6 32 five see the history of Bel and of the dragon verse 15. the 69. semblance their priest take away that which they offer so do your priest take away that which you offer yea as the Babylonish priest do eat and drink up all that be offer to Bel the idol of the Babylonian so do your popish priest eat and drink up that which you offer to your idol the 97 semblance the heathenish priest 10 10 Baruch 6 31 roar and cry before their god so do your popish priest before your god the 98. semblance the priest of Baal cut themselves as their manner be 1 18. 28 with knife and lancer till the blood gush out upon they so do your popish priest whip themselves till the blood run down their back and side the 99 semblance the priest of the heathen have their z z Baruch 9 head and beard shave so have your romish priest a add the 100 semblance there be certain priest of the heathen call hierophante who because they be forbid to marry make themselves chaste as saint b b Hieron lib. 2 jovinian Hierome testify with the use of hemlock and of they say a learned c c Clemens Alexander inlib 3 father do the first heretic learn to condemn marriage and of who I pray you have you learned to condemn marriage in priest but of they sure i be you have not learn it of god for he tell you that d d heb 13. 4 marriage be honourable among all and the bed undefiled and that it be ^ Tim 4 1 a doctrine of devil to forbid any to marry the 101 semblance the f f in decad 4 heathen have their vestal virgin who they forbid to Mary so have you your nuns to who you likewise forbid marriage the 102 semblance the heathen priest be forbid to marry burn in lust and live unchaste as appear by these word of Arnobius g g Arnob lib 8 where do these priest more willing commit their whore dome and fornication then in their own temple then in the midst of their altar where do they contain their bandery where do they be think themselves of their adultery but there and that your romish priest come not short of the heathen priest herein I prove it by the report of man of your own side Bernard speak of the priest of his age say thus h h Bernard in in in council Rhemenscongregat how keep they the ornament of chastity which deliver into a reprobate sense do that which be not fit it be a shame to name those thing which the bishop do in secret but why shall I be ashamed to speak that which they be not ashamed to do yea the apostle be not ashamed to write man upon man wrought filthiness etc. and Robert Holcote speak thus of the priest in his time Beelphegor the priest of our time by their luxury and lechery i holcot in lib sapient lect: 18 be like the spirit call and the priest of Priapus or Beelphegor and the angel of the pit of Hell and it be no marvel that your priest be become so abominable in their do for you have devise a special praemunire to embolden they in fornication and to free they from all danger of any of your law make in that behalf your praemunire be this k k Caus. 2 quest 7 laic if a lay-man by the instigation of the devil accuse a priest of incontinency he be straightway thrust back and put to silence again l l Dist 84 a lay man may not accuse a priest of fornication and m m in decretal Petrus Ramires one of your famous canonist say thus n n cause 11 quaest notwithstanding handle and kiss in lay person be the occasion or beginning of incontinent behaviour yet in priest it be far otherwise for a priest be presume to do these thing of charity and of good zeal it be also note in your gloss n n cause 11 quaest if a priest embrace a woman a layman mu^^ judge of it that he do it to the iutent to bless she the 103 semblance and not the priest only among the heathen but the common people also because they give themselves to spiritual fornication be in the judgement of God O O rom 1. 14 give up to their heart lust unto uncleanness and to defile their own body between themselves so be the people of Rome as appear by these word of one of your friar p p Mantuan lib 2 the the whole city be become a stew yea Cornelius one of the bishop that be present at your late council of Trent open q q epist in council try babit complain of the filthiness and uncleanness both of the priest and people the 104 semblance Socrates in r r plat dial ^ Plato commonwealth say that conjunction of man and woman and procreation of child s s Caus 12 qnaest 1 ^ ought to be common so do your decree report out of Clemens his decretal epistle that a amongst christian all thnge onghte to be common even wife and all these be your express word in a common life brother be necessary for all man for a common use of all thing that be in the world aught to be common to all man and in all thing no doubt be wife contain the 105 semblance the heathen be much give to witchcraft sorcery and necromancy as both the sacred t t Isai 47 9 Dan 2 2 scripture and profane u u tul divi nat. lib. 2 Tacitus hist lib 1 lib 6 Herodot lib 5 Virgil 8 writer give sufficient testimony and this 10 10 jerem 10 2 way of the heathen to use the prophet phrase have many both of your pope and cardinal learned and profess as i show at large in our four day conference the 106. semblance the heathen put great sanctity in odd number and when they be to use charm for some purpose they usual make as the poet show three streak and three picture of a man and give this reason for it Numer Virgil Eglog 8 o impair God delight in a odd number and herein do you full agree with the heathen for in your blind devotion you stand much upon odd number and have three Credoes for such a matter five noster for this and seven Maries for that and lest you shall fail in your reckon you have your bead for that purpose for which cause i may also fit resemble a Pharisaical fellow you to one Paul who as z z Sozomen histor Eccles. lib. 6. cap 29. Sozomen report seem to dedicate his whole time to prayer so that every day he say three hundred prayer and because he will not fail in his account he put three hundred little stone into his lap and at the end of every prayer he cast out one by which mean he know when his tale be up the 107 semblance the heathen also put great sanctity in the bare rehearsal of word and think that the bare repeat over of certain word be of force to save they from peril and danger as appear by these word of the poet concern the witch Medea ^ Ovid lib. 1 Metamorph. and thrice enchant word she speak which cause quiet sleep which still the surge ocean lake and the roar deep to this enchant witch may we fit resemble you who be of opinion that the bare rehearsal of certain name together with the cross of your forehead four and forty time will assist you in all your need and necessity defend you from all danger both bodily and ghost lie and keep you from all evil pass present and to come that i slander you not it may appear by this your magical form of prayer which I have find thus prescribe in a old popish book b b in come suffr fol. 149. @ Messiah @ soter @ Emmanuell @ Sabaoth @ Adonai @ @ Via @ @ manus @ homoousion @ @ Alpha and @ ary @ Leo @ @ creator @ @ redemptor @ @ Clemens @ @ Otheothecos @ @ and defendant and and and assistant etc. the 108. semblance it be the manner of the heathen to @ observe time and season that be to make difference of time in respect s. Paul reprove the ga^ians for observe of time after the manner of the heathen gal 4 10 of god or bad success so it be the manner of your popish prognosticator and i will it be but their manner only to put difference of day in their almanac as though some be lucky unto we some unlucky according to the course of the star they do also and I will they only do so observe planetary hour critical day climacterical year and the horoscope or time of a man birth and the constellation of the heaven at that time yea they dare presume and so dare other beside they to take the place of the star for certain sign of accidental event to come of the change and variety of weather for every day in the year and thereupon determine before hand this day will be fair this foul this frosty this rainy this hot this cold this windy this calm but we may say unto th^m as the prophet isaiah say to the blind idol d d Isai 41 23. declare the thing to come and so we^ shall know that you be god for be it not proper to God only to foretell thing to come and be there any among the vanity of the jereme 14 22 gentile that can give rain or can the heaven give shower be it not thou o lord our god be it not thou that send rain sometime for a blessing and sometime for a plague how then dare man ascribe this to thy creature how dare they then set down what day will be rainy and what windy but they will say that f f the prognosticator poesy in their almanac art have no great adversary than the ignorant I answer that the learned father be adversary to this their heathenish practice the g g in cap. vlt council of Toledo hold in the year 400. decree that if any man do think that astrologer and mathematician they mean prognosticator of weather famine plague war treachery etc. be to be believe he shall be hold accurse and the h h can. 16 council of Venice which be hold in the year of our lord 460 decree that if any man do study astrology or take upon he to foretell thiag to come or give credence to any such thing if he be a minister he shall be deprive and whatsoever he be he shall be excommunicate this act be also afterward confirm in the council of Agatha and after that again in the k k can. 32 council i can. 42. of Orleans and not to omit Tertullian he tell we plain that l l Tertul in apol cap 35 astrology be invent by evil spirit and forbid by the lord and that christian ought not to use it though they may have benefit by it and to the same truth subscribe saint m m Homil. 19 in Ephes. Chrysostome saint Hierome saint o o Eccles. lib 4. cap 21 and confess lib. 4 cap 3. Austen and the rest of the orthodox father but what n Comment. in Isaiam cap 27 need I allege the writing of man against they their particular conjecture which be gather from the position of the heaven of the change of the weather for every day of famine earthquake war conspiracy treachery and such like be flat forbid by the word of god p p jerem 10. 2 learn not say he the way of the heathen and be not afraid for the sign of heaven though the heathen be afraid of such in which word God forbid his people to give credit to or fear the constellation and conjunction of star and planet which have no power of themselves but be govern by god and their secret motion influence and operation be not know to man and therefore there can be no certain judgement thereof in any accidental or casual thing to conclude reason itself may teach you that it be impossible for man to know the operation of the star for their light and operation be all mix together in all place upon the earth therefore no observation can be make of this or that star and thus much concern your observe of time or season now let we take a view of your observe of year which the q q gal. 4 10 apostle also condemn the 109. semblance your jubily be either borrow of the heathen who r r plin. lib 7. cap. 40. have every hundred year their play so call to which your play and pageant may fit be resemble or of the jew who every fifty year celebrate a jubilee and this jewish manner of observe of year be condemn by the apostle the 110 semblance the heathen have their at the first every hundred year but afterward they have they with in that compass of time so have you vary much your devise of the jubilye since it be first take up for t t Extran common lib. 5. tit 9 cap 1 ibid. cap. 2. and 3 Boniface the eight appoint the jubilye every hundred year @ Clement the sixr abridge it afterwards to every fifty year Vrban the six bring it after that again to every thirty three year Paul the four bring it to every twenty five year julius the second bring it to every ten year and the pope now adays will when they please grant extraordinary jubilye and as great pardon as be grant the very year of Jubilye the 111 semblance your fantasy of purgatory spring first from the heathen and be receive of they in that time of darkness long before the come of Christ as may be prove by sundry heathen 10 10 Homer Odi^ Plato lib lib 10 Repub: in Timilo Virgil Aneid 6 o^id lib 15 metamorph writer and hereat no doubt s Austen aim when he say that y y August civet lib 21 cap 13 purgatory be one of Plato doctrine the 112 semblance z z Bellarm. lib. 1 cap 1. lib 2 cap 6 rhemist in math 12 sect 6 you say that in this purgatory as in a prison house the soul which be not purge in this life be there cleanse and purge by fire before they can be receive into heaven the like dream we find in the heathen poet who in the person of Anchyses his ghost talk with his son Aeneas sing thus of soul depart a a Virgil lib 6 etc. some hang abroad endure the pierce blast of sharp wind and thus be purge at last the 113. semblance the heathen feign that soul in purgatory do b b ^e lousin Plato in lib cry for help and deliverance from thence so do you feign that a soul in purgatory do cry c c Heshus errorib Pontif. 34. the 114. semblance the heathen feign that man upon earth d d etc. plat gorg. may help soul out of purgatory so do you feign the pope by his indulgence be able to deliver thence so many soul e Antoninus part 3 tit 22 cap 5 ^ 6 ^t 7 as it please he @ the pope say the archbishop of Florence in respect of his absolute jurisdiction by communicate his indulgence may absolve all that be in purgatory from that pain yea t some monk at this age say a noble Frenchman have teach that the soul which be in purgatory do f Du plessis miss lib: 3 cap 10. leap at the sound of the money when it be cast into thou basin for they the 115 semblance the heathen g g Homer ody 11 offer sacrifice for the dead and have a sacrifice which they call h h a^g civit lib: 7 cap 7 a purgatory sacrifice so have you a eucharistical sacrifice which say you be propitiatory for the dead as well as for the live the i council trident sess. 9 soul in purgatory say the council of Trent be thence deliver by the suffrage of the faithful but chief by the acceptable sacrifice of the altar and to the same heathenish and hellish doctrine subscribe gue^ne^us say k k Gu^rnerus valour ^arad 12. l August civit lib 7 cap 7 Plutarch in Romul the 116 semblance the heathen have a certain time especial assign they when they be to offer their purgatory sacrifice so have you a certain day in the year appoint when you be to pray for all soul and to offer sacrifice for they the. 117 semblance the heathen n n prin^ip page 84 feign that there be nine mansion in hell appoint and prepare for the soul of man the first place be for young infant the second for idiot the three for they that kill themselves the four for they that be torment with love the five for those which be find guilty before judge the six for strong man and champion the seven where the soul be purge the eight where the soul be purge do rest the nine be the pleasant field Elisius the like fiction have Georg Douly and the rest of your popish writer o o George Douly priest in his plain instruct on of christian religion pag 13 in hell say he there be four place one of the damn a other of purgatory a three of child that die without baptism and the four p Aug in hypognostic lib 5 which be call Abraham bosom and now be common term but this heathenish fiction be condemn by saint Austen there be but two place the first place the catholic faith by God authority believe to be the kingdom of heaven the second place the same q Aug verb apost serm 18 Catholic faith believe to be helll where all runneagate and whosoever be without the faith of Christ shall taste everlasting punishment as for any three place we utter know none neither shall we find in the holy scripture that there be any such and in a other place there be two inhabitation or dwell place the one in fire everlasting and the other in the kingdom that never shall have end the 118. semblance the heathen feign that Hercules descend into hell and fetch thence Theseus and Pirithous and bring with he in a chain Cerberus the dog of hell have three head so do r r Georg don in his instruct pag 14 canisius sect 13 you feign that Christ descend into hell fetch thence the saint and holy patriarch of the old teststament and vanquish there great red dragon s revel 12 3 have seven head and ten horn and seven crown upon his head you bear we also in hand that Gregory the t cyprian Valera in Gregor. 1 first bring back from hell the soul of the emperor traian and the soul of a idolater call Falconilla but we know this to be but a pagan-popish fiction for the scripture teach we that @ none can come from thence v Luc 16 26 the. 119. semblance 10 10 justin martyr in Apel 2 the heathen as witness justine martyr and other when they enter into their temple do sprinkle themselves with water so do you sprinkle yourselves with holy-water Theodoret lib 3 cap. 15 16 Hypocrates Virgil as you common call it the 120 semblance the heathen have a peculiar and proper form of make the holiwater dip there in as a a Athaenaeus lib. 9 athenaeus tell we a firebrand take from the altar whereupon they offer their sacrifice so have you like wise apeculiar form of make your holy water b b durand lib 4 cap 4 exorcize the salt first and then the water and after that they both tother the 121 semblance the heathen thought that their holiwater do purge c Hipocrates away sin in go say Hypocrates we sprinkle ourselves with this water to the end if we have any sin we may be purify and make clean and Proclus say that it be d Proclus sacrif make not only of fresh water but of sea water too because salt be detersive and to this heathenish error subscribe your popish doctor e e August steu^hus Eug in cap 19 say Steuchus quoth a it it be no vain invention that we hallow water with salt and prayer that by the sprinkle thereof our sin maybe forgive the 122 semblance the f f turn in lib. 13 cap 21 heathen use holliwater not only for the purge and cleanse of man but for the purge also of city temple and other thing without life so your divines of lovaines have teach as g g Copus in dia log 1 page 18 one of your Jesuit report that in India holy water be very wholesome to drive a way mouse and to make barren woman to conceive yea h h John Nichols in his recantation the poor roman say the pope scholar bring their ass to the church and cause the pri^est to say a few prayer over they and to sprinkle holy water upon they the 123 semblance the heathen i i Baruch 6 18 light up candle before their idol so do you for which cause we may fit say unto you as Tertullian say to the heathen in his time who force you to play the male content and to light torch at highnoon k Tertul in Apol: let they that have no light light candle daily the 124 semblance the pagan say in the begin of February do celebrate the feast of Proserpina with burn l Tertull idololat taper so do you like wise in the begin of February celebrate the feast of the purification of the virgin m Rhenan in Tertull Mary with burn taper torch and candle and do call that day Candlemas day n Lactantius lib 6 cap 2 the 125 semblance the heathen offer candle to their god so do you to you we may therefore say unto you as Lactan say unto they be he well in his wit that unto God the maker and giver of light will offer up the light of candle and taper for a present the 126 semblance burn also of incense be so common a custom among the heathen as that julian the to the end that he may cunning bind the christian to the same o o Theod lib. 3 cap. 16 and Sozomen lib 5 cap 17 ordain that when any come unto he according to the custom to receive any gift at his hand they shall burn incense before he and in his step tread pope Leo the 3. who be the first that ordain that incense shall p Polydore virgil. invent lib 5 be use in mass the. 127 semblance the heathen brag much of their miracle q q Cornelius Tacitus lib 4 hist Tacitus say that Vespasian make the blind to see and the lame to walk and Valerius Maximus tell we that a certain virgin vestal draw water in a fine s s in lib. Livy also make r Val max. lib 8 cap 1 mention of another virgin call Claudia who as he say draw a ship to the haven with her girdle which can not be draw by any source of man or beast and t t Cicero lib. 1. Cicero mention a certain soothsayer who cut a whetstone with a razor with these heathenish miraclemonger do you full agree as be apparent by that fabulous discourse of you which you call to insist in some particular in the legend of saint Patrick we read that on a time a sheep be steal saint Patrick admonish all the people commit to his charge that whosoever have steal it he shall within seven day restore it to the owner the seven day be expire the sheep be not restore then say your legend saint Patrick command by the virtue of god that the sheep shall bleat in the belly of he that have eat it and so it happen that in the presence of all the people the sheep bleat in the belly of he that have steal it in your legend also of the annunciation of the virgin Marie we be tell of a noble knight who betake himself to a abbey and because he be unlearned there be a master assign unto he but the knight be so dull that in a long time he can learn no more but these two word maria. which word as he have always in his mouth while he be alive so they grow out of his mouth when he be dead for these word say your legend he have so sore imprint in his heart that always he have they in his mouth wheresoever he be at last he die and be bury in the churchyar of the brother it happen that after that there grow upon his grave a right fair flower and in every flower be write in letter of gold maria. at which miracle all the brother marvel and they do open the sepulchre and find that the root of this flower come out of the mouth of the say knight and anon they understand that our lord will have he honour for the great devotion he have to say these word these and a thousand such heathenlike miracle be to be find in your lie legend concern all which I say with saint Ansten u u August tract 13 in johan against these miraclemonger my god have make i wary say there shall arise in the last day false prophet work sign and wonder that they may bring into error if it be possible the very elect the 128. semblance the heathen give credit to vain and foolish apparition and vision of phantasm of spirit and of soul come as they feign from a other world 10 10 Plutarch in Brut Plutarch telletth we that when Brutus be determine to transport his army out of Asia into Europe be in his tent about midnight he see a terrible monster stand fast by he wherewith he be sore afraid venture bold and demand of he what he be unto who the monster answer and say I be thy evil ghost which at Philippos thou shall see again whether when Brutus come be vanquish by Auguflus Caesar he remember the word of his foresee vision and to escape the hand of his enemy slay himself the same y y Plutarch in Tbes writer also report that certain man which be in the battle of Marathonia against the median affirm that they see the soul of Theseus arm before the host of the Greek as their chief general run and set they on the barbarous median and we read in Suetonius that when julius Caesar stay in a maze at the river rubico in Italy muse whether it be best to pass the water or no there appear a comely tall man pipe on a reed about who Caesar soldier flock especial his trumpeter from who he sudden snatch one of the trumpet and leap forthwith into the say river and sound alarm wherewith Caesar be move and say good luck mate let we go where the god do warn we we read also in Virgil that Palinurus and Deiphobus appear unto Aeneas the one be his shipman the other his brother in law and that their wander ghost never cease until such exequy be do unto they as Aeneas have promise and Cicero report that Romulus z lib 1 appear after his death walk up and down by Atticus his house unto julius Proculus charge he to erect he up a temple in that place where he walk and say that he be now a god and that his name be Quirinus Rhemus likewise Romulus his brother be report to have appear unto Faustus and his wife complain of his miserable death and desire they to procure that the same day wherein he be slay may be account among their holy day and Lucan tell we how that the soul of Sylla and Marius be ever walk and appear unto man until they be purge by sacrifice now to make application of all this as the father of lie do make the heathen to believe that the spirit of dead man appear unto they when the devil themselves appear like man tell they that they be the soul of such man as they appear like unto so do he deal with you likewise as may be prove by the writing of one of your own a a johannes pine part. 3 lib. 19 cap 17. friar who report that after the death of Benedict the seven there appear a horseman on horseback or rather on the devil back to a certain bishop that be the say pope very friend the bishop be amaze thereat demand say what be thou pope Benedict that late die the same that thou say say the horseman father say the bishop how do thou Grievonsly torment answer the pope but I may well be holpen go then and tell my brother that now be pope that he must needs give to the poor the treasure that be hide in such a place and appear unto the pope himself he say oh will God that will pray for i you do also tell we in one of your popish legend that the bless virgin appear after her death to a certain priest and say unto he if thou will cause a festival day yearly to be celebrate upon the eight day of December in remembrance of my conception thou shall be crown with i in the kingdom of i only beget son and to add such another fable of you albeit the sacred scripture teach we that b b act 3. 21. heaven must contain Christ jesus until the time that all thing be restore which god have speak by the mouth of all his holy prophet since the world begin yet one of your popish doctor tell we that Christ be see walk upon the earth since he ascend into heaven and appear to his apostle s. Peter his word be these c c smith in a sermon preach in queen Mary day in Whitting ton Collledge church in London master you be in a great error as concern that bless sacrament and all your trust be in Cranmer Ridley and Latimer as for Latimer he say in a open disputation in Oxford that he have no learning in that matter but out of cranmers book beside this I dispute with Latimer 20. year ago then he have no learning he belie that learned father as for Cranmer he say that his learning come from Ridley as for Ridley I dispute with he myself at Oxford the other day and I prove my argument thus a weak argument to prove so weighty matter at that be be who Christ meet at Rome be at Rome but Christ meet Peter at Rome therefore Peter be at Rome by this I prove two thing and singular mystery of our faith first that Petr be at Rome against they that chatter that Peter be never there second that if Peter meet Christ bodily as Abdias report and which I be sure be true or else such a ancient and holy father will never have write it than consequent he may aswell be bodily in the bless sacrament as he be meet bodily to this as this slanderer report Ridley stoood like a block and feeling himself convict answer nothing then say I cur do not I handle it well then deny he the minor which I prove thus Christ meet Peter go out of Rome and say good morrow Peter whither go thou Peter answer good morrow good man whither go thou then say Christ I go to Rome to suffer what say Peter I trow unless I take my mark amiss you be jesus Christ good lord how do you I be glad I have meet you here then say he to Peter go back and suffer or else I must prote i and thus I confute Ridly in the audience of a thousand that he have not a word to say yet you say that Christ be not on earth since the ascension bodily believe with i that he be under form of bread and wine this tale of doctor Smith be both heathenish and heretical and much like that of the haeritick Polycranius who affirm before the whole d d council Constant 6 act. 15 council of Constantinople that a certain beautiful young man appear unto he and teach he to say that there be but one will in Christ and give he this for a sign that he shall lay the schedule of his confession upon a dead body and so raise it to life the council hear this immediate cause a dead body to be bring but Polycronius mutter over the same a great while can do nothing and so be condemn by the whole council for a liar and a heretic and so may you because you labour to confirm your doctrine by vision and apparition as he do the 29 semblance the e e Ovid lib metamorphic heathen make mention of sundry strange metamorphosis so do you to produce some example for the verify hereof in the life of your saint Babara we read that when her father have draw his sword to slay she she be miraculous take up in a stone and carry into a mountain where two sheepharde be feed their sheep and when one of they bewray she to her father she curse he and present his sheep be turn into locust and he in to a stone the 130 semblance the f f arist. in heathen teach that a natural man have free will in action mere moral and of they have g g council trident Sess 6. c. 5 you learned to maintain a freedom of will not only in natural and moral action for that we deny not but in spiritual and supernatural but the Apostl teach you in plain word that h h Cor 2 14 a natural man perceive not the thing of the spirit of God much less will they he do also tell you that the flesh lust against the spirit the spirit against the flesh and they be contrary one to a other now then if the flesh contrary to the spirit it follow by a necessary consequent i gal 5 17. that a man have no freedom of will in spiritual action before his conversion for he be then whole flesh and want the spirit of God and the flesh be contrary to the spirit and one contrary have no power at all to bring forth the effect of his contrary the 131. semblance k k Bellarm. lib 3 Grat cap. 14 Bellarmine your archpapist affirm that the l l viz eternal life end be not proper the object of the will but the mean tend to the end and and of who I pray you learn he this doctrine but of the m m Arist Ethic lib 3 cap 2. heathen philosopher the 132 semblance the heathen boast much of their outward action of civil virtue as namely of their justice temperance gentleness and liberality and they do indeed the thing of the law as the apostle Paul testify say n n rome 2. 14. the gentile that have not the law do the thing of the law by nature that be by natural strength and he say of himself that before his conversion he o o Phil 3. 6 be unrebukable touch the righteousness of the law now with these gentile do you boast of your virtue and I deny not but that some of you have far more civil virtue than our impure puritan and that you be more unrebukable touch the righteousness of the law they they but I deny that you have any true virtue for as saint Austen say b b August Ciutt lib 19 cap 25 there can possible be any true virtue where there be not the true religion nay your civil virtue be nothing else but gorgeous sin the 132 semblance the heathen be of opinion that those that live well c Plato Euseb lib. 11 Euangel. cap vlt lib and virtuous do thereby merit the elysian field so be you of opinion that those that do good work do thereby merit eternal life but we hold with the apostle Paul that we be so far from merit heaven by our good work d 2 Cor 3 5 as that we be not sufficient of ourselves to think any good thing as of ourselves but from the spirit of god who work in we both the will and the deed so that our deed be indeed God work in we and therefore be not we but e August in Psal 120 he we can merit nothing by they at the hand of God and hereunto agree that of Austen he crow thou because he crowu his own gift in thou and not thy merit to conclude f f August in cap 2d all my hope be in the death of my lord his death be my merit and my merit be his death and i will daylyesay unto he g g August in psal 142 lord thou will quicken i in thy righteousness not in i not because I havo deserve it but because thou have compassiou the 134 semblance the heathen hold that a man may merit not only for h Plato in Gorg in lib himself but for those also that be cast as they say into burn flood so do you hold that i i rhemist in 2 Cor 8 sect 3 the fast and satisfactory deed of one man may be available to other yea and that holy saint or other virtuous porson may in measure and proportion of other man necessity and deserve allot unto they supererogation of their spiritual work as those alm of their superfluity to they which be in necessity and herein i think you ascribe more to the righteousness of sanctification than you do to the righteousness of imputation that be more to that righteousness which make we righteous before man then to that which make we righteous before God for albeit you hold that a man satisfactory deed may be available to other and that his righteousness may make other yet deny you that a man can be make righteous by the righteousness of Christ impute unto he as if the lord will accept the righteousness of man which be k k Isay 64 6 all as filthy clout l l Phil 3 9 and not that which be through the faith of Christ even the righteousness which be of god through faith the 135. semblance it be the usual manner of the heathen to justify themselves and evermore to m m Tertul in apol except against the christian as man void of all good work so it be your usual manner both in private conference and in your public writing to inveigh against we protestant and to convey in withal a secret apology of your own justice yea n n bellarm'de lib 5 cap 8 Binsfeldius de Justif m ersect 4 m they 5 15 rhemist in Annot in Luc 14 1 in apocal 3 5 you do notorious slander we bear the world in hand we teach that none ought to do good in respect of reward for albeit we flat deny that good work be the proper causof reward yet do we I speak only of we Protestant constant affirm that we ought to encourage animate excite and stir up ourselves to the performance of all good duty by set before our eye the reward which be promise to wit the crown of glory which we be to receive after this life yea be it know unto you that we be so far from teach that a man ought not to do good in respect of reward as that we exhort servant with saint Paul that o o Coloss. 3 23 what soever they do they will do it hearty as to the lord and not to man know that of the lord they shall receive the reward of inheritance and we still show it to be the duty of all the saint of God p p ^ 9 24. so to run that they may obtain and to move they the rather to the performance of this christian duty we beseech they to set before their eye the practice of the saint of God as namely of q q Heb. 11. 26. Moses who esteem the rebuke of Christ great riches than the treasure of Egypt because he have respect unto the recompense of reward and of Abraham who r r Heb: 11. 9 10 abode in the land of promise as in a strange country as one that dwell in tent etc. because he look for a city have a foundation who builder and maker be god the 136 semblance the heathen except against the old christian not only as man void of good work but full of evil work s s Tertul. in apol they call they say Tertullian Infanticidas host incestuous manslayer killer of child church-robber most wicked most hurtful the public hatred the enemy of mankind guilty of all kind of wickedness enemy against the god against the emperor against the law against good order against nature itself and in like sort do you slander we protestant and call we t t Harding in Confut. fol. 75 lecherous Lurdanes u u fol. 323. sacrilegious church-robber 10 10 fol. 114. profane hellhound y y fol. 256 devilish villain z z fol 131. the devil child a a fol 24. the devil bondslave b b fol. 131. the devil clawback d d fol 81. sathanist e e fol. 69. Satan scholar f f fol 111. satanical spirit g g fol. 338 Satan brood h h fol. 342. Satan captive i i fol 202. limb of Antichrist k k fol. 195. minister of Antichrist v fol 288 l l fol 48. the head of Antichrist m m fol. 212. the synagogue of antichrist and Lucifer n n fol 323 apostate o o fol 155 thief p p fol 131. despiser of god q q fol 81 caluinist r r fol 222 turkish huguenot s s fol 114 wicked Cham brood t t fol 121 curse canaanite n shamelesse heretic 10 10 fol 42 zue lians rabble y y fol 207. mad dog b Atheismis z z fol 1. axe a a fol. 1. ass atheist and what not yea which all the world know to be a most vile slander c c Andraea lib tit evangel protestant say you protestant hold not one article of the apostle creed the 137. semblance the heathen repute christian to be the very cause of all god plague and punishment d d August civet lib: 2 cap. 3. say saint Austen it be become a proverb among the common people our rain fail we because of the christian so it be become a proverb in my native country as a learned e e master Leygh Pastor of Standish in Lancashire in a postscript to the papist join to his soul solace against sorrow preacher that dwell there report it be a good world when mass be up for then all thing be cheap the 138 semblance the heathen despise the religion of the old christian because it come not from Rome Athens or some other such like place f f Orig lib 1 say saint Origen speak of the pagan Celsus Celsus affirm that the of the christian have it beginning from barbarous people that be from the jew to this pagan may you fit be resemble for you despise our religion because it begin g Harding in his confut of the apol as you usual say not at jerusalem but at Wittenberg and be deliver unto we first by a and not a apostle but one that be julium a jewel in his time have answer full to this your vile cavil and wicked slander the 139 semblance the heathen be at great strife among themselves and some be of one sect some of another so be your thomist and scotist at great strife about the distinction of merit of congruity and condignity and your canonist and schoolman be by the ear together about auricular confession the h one sort conclude it to be the other there be also great contention between your nominal and realiste and between your jesuit and secular priest so that we may say of they as saint Basil say of the like wrangle sophister in his time k k Basil in Hexam we we need not contend against they see that they themselves may suffice to overthrow their own doctrine by their dissension one with another the 140. semblance albeit the heathen be at strife among themselves yet do they upbraid the old christian from their strife and contention l l Clem alexaend lib: 7 strom Christiani you christian dissent among yourselves m and condemnat albeit all claim the title of Christian religion yet one sect ourse and condemn another your religion therefore be not true neither have it beginning from god yea n n chrysost in act homil 33 and the heathen man come and say I will be a Christian but I know not who I shall follow there be many quarrel sedition and tumult among you I can tell what doctrine to choose and what to set before other for every one of you say I say the truth so do you come and say we will be protestant but we know not who to follow there be much strife and contention among you for some be protestant some puritan some brownist some familist and some be mongrel in religion to day with the protestant tomorrow with the puritan and constant in nothing so much as in inconstancy it be true indeed there be some harebrained inconstant and fickle-headed fellow among we that be much like the sophist of Constantinople who as Socrates ^ Socrates histor eccles. lib 3 cap 13 report before Julian be emperor carry himself as a earnest christian under julian he become a and a pagan and after Julian he will be a christian again there be also some hote-braind inconsiderate and giddy-headed fellow among we who be still scald hot in desire of their pretend reformation and consider not that it be very decent and become their duty to apply themselves to the custom of the place where they live and not to divide themselves in matter of ceremony from the unity of the church when Christ himself be upon the earth he accommodate himself to the custom of the country where he converse and observe their common custom for the avoid of offence p p math 17 27 lest we shall offend they say he to Peter go to the sea and cast in a angle and take the first fish that come up and when thou have open his mouth thou shall find a piece of twenty penny that take and give it unto they for i and thou and in his step tread the apostle Paul when he q q act 16. 3 circumcise Timothy r r act 21. 24 shave his own head in Cenchrea and s purify the man that have make the vow and contribute with they that they may shave their head but these man decline the path which the bless entitle the picture of a Puritan apostle tread and renew the way of the curse anabaptist as I have show at large in a book extant to the view of the world by this than you see that we that be protestant do abhor they that be the author t t see his majesty speech in the upper house of parliament march 19 1603 of contention in our church and do hold their sect to use his majesties word unable to be suffer in any well govern common wealth let v 1 Cor ^ 10. i therefore entreat you to join with we that be 10 in Octavio peaceable protestant and be @ knit together in one mind and in one judgement as the apostle have command we the 141 semblance the y y doctor hill in his quartron of Raysens heathen contemn the religion of the old christian and will not come to their place of devotion because forsooth they want altar so do you contemn our religion and refuse to come to our church because we have no altar but we answer you as Clemens alexandrinus answer they z z Clemens alexand lib 7 storm we have a altar and what manner of one the earthly congregation and company of those that bow themselves in prayer etc. or as s. Origen answer Celsus a a Orig. lib 8 our altar and our temple be the spirit of good man which smell as sweet incense together with the vow and prayer of a good conscience what comparison be there betwixt those of thou and these o Celsus the 142 semblance the heathen look for a day and this day be the destruction of the christian and the set up of altar and idol b b Aug in Psal 70 these christian be but a while fall they shall and that short then shall our idol come again and it shall be as it be before yea Aug ibid. Christiani it a behold the day will come when all these christian shall have a end as they have a time to begin so shall they have a time to continue in like sort do your resolute and high aspire catholic look for a day and this day be the late intend dismal day and their set up of idol and altar again in our church but in stead of idol and altar which they look to have they shall have gallows and halter which they deserve to have the 143 semblance themistius a heathen philosopher go about as c c Socrates lib. 4 cap 27 Socrates record to persuade Valens the emperor that the variety of sect be please unto God while he be worship in sundry sort so do you exhibit supplication unto the king most excellent majesty for a toleration of your romish religion and therein d d in a suppli exhibit to the king majesty you go about to persuade his highness that it will be acceptable to god grateful to all catholic prince and honourable to his majesty but give i leave to reason with you a while do you think that the toleration of more religion than one in one kingdom be a thing acceptable to God why then do e e revel 3 16 God threaten the church of Laodicea to spewher out of his mouth be it not because she be f lukewarm and neither hot nor can in religion and will he not as strict examine this church of England whether she be hot or can zealous or remiss in his service why do the g g revel 2 14 lord reprove the church of Pergamus be it not because she h tolerate they that maintain the doctrine of Baalim and they that maintain the doctrine of the nicolaitans and will he not as sharp reprove this church if she tolerate they that maintain the doctrine of the romish revel 2 20 baalite and nicolaitans why do the i lord blame Thiatyra be it not because she k k ibid. suffer the woman jezabel which call herself a prophetess to teach and to deceive his seruaent to make they commit fornication and to eat meat sacrifice to idol and will he not as great blame this church if she suffer the whore of Babylon which call herself the vicar of Christ to teach and to deceive his servant to make they commit spiritual fornication with she and to be drunken with the wine of her fornication why be the l l 25. 3 lord wrath kindle against Israel be it not because m m ibid. Israel worship the idol God of the moabite which be in the hill peor and will not his wrath be kindle against we if immunity be give to serve such god as like ourselves and to deal in his service otherwise than he have prescribe oh no his jealousy burn like fire and we be to think that he that execute his fierce wrath upon those that offer but strange fire will much more execute his fierce wrath upon we if we offer to strange god in a word eliah rebuke king ahab and the commons of Jsrael and say n n 1 reg 18 21 how long halt you between two opinion if the lord be God follow he but if Baal be he then go after he he say not to the king and commons of Israel why permit you not those that will to the lord and those that listen to Baal but if the lord be God follow he forsake all other for he will not surrender any piece of his glory to any other but be so jealous of it as that he will be serve alone without any corrival with all our heart soul and strength as he have often enjoin and thus you see that your wish for toleration be not acceptable to God now let we see whether it will be grateful to all catholic prince as you pretend it will be but admit it will be so what though do you think that a king furnish with so rare gift of wisdom learning and virtue will displease God to please man and break the very first of God moral o o exod. 20 3. precept to content they I deny not but that his highness may lawful content foreign prince in some thing as namely he may though some puritan have p p in my hear say the contrary make a league and covenant of peace with they upon even and just condition as appear by these place of scripture rom. 12. 18. if it be possible as much as in you be have peace with all man Heb. 12. 14. follow peace with all man Deuteronomie 20. 10. when thou come near unto a city to fight against it thou shall offer it peace and if it answer thou again peaceable and open unto then let all the people that be find therein be tributary unto thou and serve thou but if it will make no peace with thou but war against thou then shall thou besiege it thus Abraham make a league of peace q q Gen 14. 13. with Eshcol and Aner king of the amorite and r r gen. 21. 24. with Abimelech king of the Philistine and thus Isaac make a league with s Gen 26. 31. Abimelech and jacob with Laban and Heber the ^ gen 31 44 45 u u judge 47. 17. with jabin the king of Hazor and in like sort do 10 10 joshua 9 16. joshua make a league with the gibeonite David with y y 1. Sam 27 Achish king of Gath and Solomon with hiram king of Tyrus z 1. king 5 it be not then to be deny but that his majesty may lawful make a league of peace with king that be different in religion and thereby gratify they but he may not gratify they by reverse that heavenly decree^^f the king of king a a mat. 4 10. thou shall worship the lord thy god and he only shall thou serve with establish two religion in one kingdom the one authorize by Christ jesus and bequeath in his last will and testament to the church the other devise by Antichrist and flat repugnant to the verdict of the sacred scripture and to the judgement of the ancient church but you say in the three place that to tolerate your pretend catholic religion will be a thing honourable to his majesty i answer that herein you be both deceive yourself and also labour to deceive his majesty for the lord have promise to honour those that honour he and threaten to despise those that despise he his word be these b b 1. Sam 2. 30. they that honour i I will honour and they that i shall be despise to draw towards a conclusion in the end of your supplication to his highness you say thus the free use of our religion we request if not in public church at least in private house if not with approbation yet with toleration without molestation I answer with the word of a reverend bishop c c b. bilson in his book entitle the true difference between christian subjection and unchristian rebellion part 1 pag 36. the privateness of the place when the fact be ill neither acquit the doer from wickedness neither excuse the permitter from negligence no corner be so secret no prison so close but your impiety there suffer do offend God infect other and confirm your own frowardness if your religion be good why shall it lack church if it be nought why shall it have chamber a christian prince may not pardon or wink at falsehood this reverend bishop may fit be compare to s. Ambrose who when Valentine be request to wink at the renew of a altar for the pagan in Rome dissuade he in these word d d Ambrose lib 5 epist 3 all man serve you that be prince and you serve that mighty God he that serve this god must bring no dissimulation no connivance but faithful zeal and devotion he must give no kind of consent to the worship of idol and other profane ceremony for god will not be deceive who search all thing even the secret of our heart but i forget myself very much in speak thus much against toleration of more religion than one in this king doom for God have give we a king who be so far from grant a toleration as that he have make this solemn protestation I do protest before God and his angel that I be so constant for the maintenance of the religion public profess in England as that I will spend my dear blood in defence thereof rather than the truth shall be overthrow and if I have ten time as many more kingdom as I have I will dispend they all for the safety and protection thereof and likewise if I have any child that sholdyeld either to the popish faith or faction i desire of God that I may rather see they bring to their grave before i that their shame may be bury in my life time never to be speak of in future age the 144 semblance the athenian as Diodorus a a Sicul Bibl: lib. 13 siculus record threaten to kill those that speak any thing against their heathenish religion so there be five of your romish or rather roguish catholic that have vow and bind themselves by the sacrament to kill the honourable earl of Salisbury b b ester 16. 13 the earl of Salisbury in his answer to certain scandalous paper our preserver which have do we good in all thiug as Artaxerxes say of mordecai but his honour have vow that he will not so much @ as once entertain a thought to purchase a span of time at so dear a rate as for the fear of any mortal power in his poor talon as it please his honour to call it he sing to his soul with the sweet singer of Israel d d Psal 27 1 the lord be my light and my salvation who shall I fear the lord be the strength of my life of who shall i be afraid yea e e Psal: 3 6 I will not be afraid for ten thousand of the people much less for five that shall beset i round about good luck have you with your honour we wish you prosperity the last semblance the f f Socrat hist Eccles lib 3 cap 12. julian be very eager to get money from the christian by his poll exact and oppress of they but when he command the jew to build the temple of jerusalem in spite of Christ who have foretell that it never shall be build again it be certain that he spare no cost at all to further that vain work in like sort may we say of you popish recusant you be not now so liberal to the poor I speak what i know to be true of many of you both in the northern and western part of this land as you have in former time be in steed of hospitality heretofore maintain now hedgehog lie under your wall and we sell dwell in your parlour and Martin breed in your window you remove your household to London and take a chamber there where you may live private and no man call you to account whether you be protestant or papist but albeit you be straight-handed enough in do good to those that be of the household of faith yet stretch you out your hand to the Jesuit and seminary priest who you keep in g close loft without either window or door that can be espy for proof hereof beside my own experience I refer you to your own writer the Jesuit say your h h in their discovery pag. 19 secular priest become our collector or rather not we but their own to who for their account the false steward in the gospel may give place one jesuite have take up at time above five hundred pound that be give to the imprison priest then at Wisbich viz employ the same at his own pleasure Piercy the jesuite escape from Wisbich take fraudulent from benefactor abroad fifty seven pound seventeen shilinge and in the year after he steal twenty seven pound of the common money by the consent of other his fellow jesuit they have also so fleece their favourite as that over and above their own expense which be exceed great they have be able to send out long since two thousand and two hundred pound to the low country yea the jesuite holt and his companion gather as the secular priest report in a other i i in their abstract pag 75 book against they such a infinite mass of money from the catholic in England for dispensation or under colour of expend it to their own use as many credible affirm it to exceed the sum of fifty thousand pound English which make two hundred million of italian scute not to omit your vault-enginers h h see Thomas winter confession sir Euerard Digbie towards the maintain of the popish pioneer and the buy of powder to blow up the parliament house with etc. promise fifteen hundred pound master Francis tresham promise two thousand pound and master Percy promise all that he can get of the earl of northumberland rent which be about four thousand pound and to provide many gallop horse and thus as the l l mat. 26. 15 chief priest offer judas thirty piece of silver if that he will betray Christ unto they so do the chief of these your traitor offer to their fellow judass some fifteen hundred pound other two thousand and other four thousand towards the betray of the most Christian king and the most carefuil nurse father of the church of Christ but what need I extravagate from my theme what need i wander from the gentile to the jew do they not resemble the heathen herein yes very for the forenamed m athenians put forth a proclamation that sicul. Bibl lib 13. whosoever it be that can kill Diagoras one that speak much against their heathenish superstition and their false and feign god he shall have a honourable reward that be a talon of silver for his labour and thus you see how that papism be flat paganism and that you come not behind the pagan in above sevenscore several thing now it remain that I set down some thing wherein you go beyond they and be worse than they 1 the heathen know that every true body be circumscribe that be to say limit and bound and that to be a body and not to be circumscribe import contradiction for if the dimension be essential to a body and if it be necessary that the dimension be terminable which be never deny of any of the heathen than it follow of necessity that it be circumscribe and if this necessity do accompany all body in general how much more do it accompany a human body which be not mathematical neither compose only of matter and form but which be organical compose of unlike part now then n n August we must believe to use saint Austen word that the son of God according to his deity be incorporeal and incircumscriptible but according to his human nature corporeal and local and we also believe with o o aug. Dardan and Tract. 50 in Johan he and with the stream of the p p Vigilius Eutichet lib 4 cap. 4. theodor. dial. 2 fulgentius Thrasymund lib: 2 cap. 5. Origen Tract. 33. in math. Ambrosolib 10 in luc. 24. doctor that this circumscription agree with the body of our lord who be above clothe with heavenly glory but not spoil of his human nature to conclude then it follow hereupon that you assign to Christ such a body as be not circumscriptible in the sacrament be indeed the far worse than the heathen who grant that every true body be circumscribe in a place 2 the very heathen know it to be impossible for one body to be in more place than one at one time but you deny this true principle of philosophy when you fond imagine that the body of Christ can at one time be in heaven in earth yea in as many place upon the earth as be the sacrament 3 the heathen accknowledge it to be a apparent truth that no natuarall body can at one and the same time have contrary and diverse quality but you deny this when you teach that the body of Christ can be in one place local in a other place not local in one place with quantity in a other without quantity in one place finite in a other infinite 4 the heathen grant that every natural body be subject unto the natural dimension of a natural body viz to height breadth and depth but you deny this when you assign to Christ such a body in a sacrament as have not the say natural dimension 5 it be hold for a axiom among the heathen that no accident can be with out his subject but you hold that accident may be with out their subject when you teach that the roundness sweetness whiteness and the relish of bread can be with out bread 6 the heathen hold that a argument draw a from testimony of the outward sense be of great moment say the heathen a a Cicero 2. academic orator whereunto agree that of the poet b b Lucretius etc. yea this kind of reason be so forcible as that the very angel of heaven have use it for the enangelist testify how that the angel of the lord which descend from heaven at Christ resurrection do draw a argument from the sense of see to prove a article of the faith c c math. 2 8 5 6 I know say he to Marie Magdalen and the other Mary that you seek jesus which be crucify he be not here he be rise as he say come see the place where the lord be lay and again d d verse 7 behold he go before you into Galilee there you shall see he nay Christ himself use this kind of reason when he prove the truth of his body by a argument draw from the evidence of the out ward sense e e Luk 24 39 behold say he to the eleven and they that be with they my hand and my foot for it be I myself handle i and see for a spirit have not flesh and bone as you see i have and the same argument may we fit use against you that hold that the bread and wine in the eucharist be transubstantiate and change into the very body and blood of Christ behold may we say unto you the bread and the wine in the eucharist for it be not the very real body and blood of Christ for see smell touch and taste it for by see smell touch and taste thereof you shall find that they have neither flesh blood nor bone as Christ have the very heathen shall rise in judgement against you and condemn you for very they be not so void of sense and reason as you be 7 the heathen hold it as a principle among they that one disparate can be predicate of another from whence I reason thus one disparate can be predicate of another but bread and she body of Christ be disparate therefore the one can thus be predicate of the other except a tropical predication be admit and consequent you do very absurd in take that proper which be to be take tropical 8 the heathen do not privilege any man from err as appear by these their common speech 1 2 3 f f Bellar lib 4 pontif. rom. cap 13 greg^ride va. Cathol. lib 8 cap 2 3 Rhemis annot. in Luc 22 sect 11 bellarm lib 4 pontif. rom. cap 52 but f you privilege the pope from err and hold that he by himself alone decree any thing concern faith can be deceive and that in precept of manner also prescribe to the church by the pope there be not any fear or danger of error but I show you at large heretofore that many of the pope have err both in matter of doctrine and of manner and that your own writer have be drive to confess the same i will only at this time acquaint you with a wo^s then heathenish heresy of one of your pope take a view of the council of Constance and there you shall find that pope John the 23. deny the immortality of the soul the resurrection of the dead life everlasting nay any life at all after this life the word of that council be these h h council sess 11 hereunto I will adjoin one of your own writer definition of a heretic and so prove by a invincible argument that this pope John be a blasphemous i i George Doulie in his instruction of christian religion pag 2 heretic a heretic say one of your priest be he which be baptize do wilful deny any article of the catholic roman faith or believe any thing that be contrary to the same but I assume pope John the 23 be baptize do wilful deny the article concern the resurrection of the j j Hermes in Paemand Plato lib. Cicero lib Scip Ovid lib 1 Metamorphos Plutarc Vindicta dead therefore he be a heretic a heretic nay he be worse than a very pagan or ethnic for the very k ethnic believe that the soul be immortal and that there be a life after this life and that they shall gay phaos' come again out of the earth into light as say Phocilides 9 the heathen l l Arist Topic lib 1. cap 1 philosopher hold that to be probable which either all man hold to be a truth or the most of the wise sort so that he prefer the judgement of many before the judgement of one but you prefer the judgement of the pope before the judgement of the whole m m or rod. Cupers Ecles world and yet it be well know as I show heretofore out of one of your own writer that many of your pope have not understand their grammar 10 n n Asphonsus a Castro lib. 1 cap 4 I will they be as wise in one thing as Sibylla a heathen prophetess be who in one of her book of oracle lay down a oracle for truth say o o Sibyl lib 8 Oracul pelas pont there shall be a king with many head which be either to be understand Synechdochechally for the succession of pope or metonimychal for his triple crown have a name near to Ponti that be 11 in your mass which you account the very marrow of your matin your priest have more apish trick and histrionical gesture than the very heathen mimic or tragedian use upon the stage yea they do nothing else almost but make a dumb show which I take to be the cause why the people in Italy do not say to their nichols when they be go towards the church let we go hear a mass but let we go see a mass and indeed they do nothing else there but see a popish shaveling first bow his body second arise in histrionical manner and kiss the altar on the right side then bow again and look towards the host join his hand wipe his finger lift up the host after that bow again lift up his eye and lift up the host above his shave crown then he set it down uncover the cup and hold it between his hand keep his thumb and forefinger together then he bow and lift up the cup a little then to his breast or above his head this do he set it down again wipe his finger spread his arm a cross bow his body kiss the altar on the right side smite his breast then he uncover the cup make five cross with the host twice beyond the cup on each side under the cup and before it then he lay his hand upon the altar and the deacon reach he the paten which he put to his right eye then to his left and make a cross with it kiss it and lay it down this be end he break the host in 3 holdeth two piece in his left hand and one in his right over the cup which with a cross he let fall into it the priest than kiss the the deacon take the pax from the priest give it to the subdeacon and he to the queer then bow himself he first take the body than the blood and so go to the right horn of the altar then the subdeacon pour in wine and the priest rinse the cup wash his hand turn himself to the people come again to the altar and turn himself to the people the second time then bow his body and close his eye he pray to himself after that he rise again make the sign of the cross and so bow again he go from the altar and the people go home have see these popish trick which be fit to mock ape withal then to edify the flock of Christ jesus which he have purchase with his precious blood 12 there be some of the heathen that see the vanity of their religion Seneca say to this effect p p August lib 6 cap. 6 we will do worship yet so as we remember that this worship be rather for fashion sake then for any thing else and Lactantius speak to Tully on this wise q q Orig. error lib 2 cap. 3. thou do worship to these earthly thing make with hand thou do the same thing which they do which thou confess to be the very fool of all to apply this Seneca and Cicero shall rise in judgement with you popish recusant and condemn you for they albeit they be heathen see the vanity of their religion but you albeit you be christian and may have the bible in your mother tongue among you yet do you not see nay you will not see the vanity of those popish trick and toy before mention 13 the r r Cicero the earl of Salisbury in his answer to certain scandalous paper heathen hold that craft in a oath do not attenuate but aggravate the perjury but you hold as have be already show that a pretend catholic be he be convent before any of our magistrate may lawful swear by a equivocation and deny all truth under a mental reservation this your new trick of answer by a equivocation have the right honourable s chancellor of our university late show to be a strange and gross doctrine a irreligious principle yea a dissemble trick of the priscilianheretick 14 the t heathen hold that covenant of peace be to be keep albeit they be make to a enemy but you hold it for a good Catholic doctrine that as you interpret it but this your opinion I have heretofore touch and refute 15 the very heathen perceive and confess that king shall meddle in matter of religion for Aristotle write of the first institution of king show how many thing they be by office to meddle with u u Arist in P^lit lib 3 cap 11 stratego say he Dicastes ho prostous theous that be a king in old time be the leader in war pronouncer in judgement and overseer of religion and again basile divine thing be commit to prince how far do you come short of Aristotle who 10 10 Cor 14 16 bellarm pontif. lib 1 cap 7 hold that prince have no authority to give voice deliberative or definitive in matter of religion nor to make law ecclesiastical concern the same 16 Themistocles a heathen say that he have rather die then bear arm against his country but your holy y father have teach you yea command you to take arm against your sovereign 17 z z in his speech before allead ge last the very pagan to use his majesty word do never maintain by the ground of their religion that it be lawful to murder prince or people for quarrel of religion but you and all other ground papist do hold it lawful to murder protestant princess and people and that the pope be the right a a Papa li. um etc. Ioh regin Papali cap 5. lord of the temporality so as he may take from any man that which be his own and by hold these two dangerous position you make yourselves unable to be tolerate in his majesty dominion and thus I leave you wish first of all your conversion if that can be have my next wish be that his majesty will deal with you as a skilful surgeon deal with his patient a part of who body be putrefy and eat on by degree threaten the loss of the whole if it be not stay in time Hieron Alphons just a lib. 2. cap 12.