



Meditations of Death. THE FIRST PART. Of the remembrance of Death.
CHAP. I. How God calleth men to remember Death.How God is sayd to wish, and the efficacy of this wish. (a) Three Songs of Moses, and the arguments of them to reach men their end. (b) in Paradise man called to remember death, before, in, and after the fall. (c) The dayes of man shortened by halves at foure severall times. (d) Why since Moses his time they continue at a stay. (e) The multitude of violent and untimely deaths in the old world, the middle world, and this last age of the world.O That they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end! Deu. 32.29. O what love and tender mercies doth the blessed God declare in this affectionate speech concerning miserable man! Though to speake properly, God be without affections and passions; for whatsorver he willes in heaven or in earth, that he doth, and that he hath, Psal. 115.3. 1. Chro. 29.

11. he needs not wish for any thing he wants: yet to shew us what we most wa^t, what we should chiefly wish for, and what most pleaseth him in us; he speakes as men, according to their sense and capacity. He useth a passionate phrase of longing and wishing, which in propriety of speech agrees not with the Deity; to shew there is an unspeakable matter in it, which proper words cannot expresse to our understanding: and therefore stooping downe unto us, and as it were putting on our humanity, speakes after the manner of men and propoundes his wish, to shew thereby what is principally to be wished for, and what men would desire if they had the minde of God.Looke what respect God shewes for the keeping of all his Commandements, by wishing men had a heart to observe them alwayes, Deut. 5.29. such respect he sheweth, and by the like wish expresseth for the remembrance of their latter end, as being the way and meanes to bring them to a more diligent observation of them all.He sayth not simply, Oh that they would thinke on their end: but withall he sheweth their wisedome and happines

if they hearken, by wishing that they vvere wise to doe it. And by such an argument of comming to be accounted wise in the sight of God and men, he labours to draw his people even unto all obedience, Deut. 4.6.7.8.Neither is the Lord content to speake once, but doubling and trebling his words, with a loud voyce he calles them, to be wise, to understand, to consider; as if he had sayd, be wise, be wise, be wise; remember, remember, remember your latter end. As the sheet was thrise let downe from heaven to shew the vision more plainly, and to imprint it more deeply in the minde of Peter, Act. 10 16. so is the call of God inculcate upon Israel in this place. Neither is the act onely, but the object of this consideration is likewise repeated and poynted at by the finger of God with a double demonstrative, even this, their latter end.(a) Three speciall Songs were written by Moses the man of God; The maine argument of each of them is a remembrance of the latter end. The first at the red sea and entring into the wildernes shewes the latter end of their enemies, both from whence they came, Pharaoh

and the Egyptians perishing in the waters; and to whome they went, the Canaanites and others melting away for feare; with the latter end of Jsrael to be planted in the mountaine of Gods inheritance. Exod. 15. 1-20. And this triumphant Song was heard againe from heaven, and sung by them that had got the victory of the beast, whereunto the remembrance of our end may bring us also, to rejoyce among the^ that have the harpes of God. Rev. 15.1.2.3. The second Song shewes the vaine estate of all, the shortnes of this present life, how they hasten to their end, that all might number their dayes, and apply their hearts to wisedome. Psal. 90. This is probably supposed to have bene written when Israel being come to the borders of Canaan for their murmuring were turned back againe into the wildernes, till their carcasses were fallen, and their dayes consumed by the wrath of God. Numb. 13. and 14. This third and last was Moses Swan-song, spoken and written that selfe same day that he was commanded to goe up and dye in the mount Nebo, for his farewell when he had one foot in the wildernes and an other in heaven. Deu. 32.48.49.^0. and is by many arguments

commended unto us, both before it was set downe, Deut. 31.14-30. and in the preface, Chap. 32.1.2. and after at the conclusion of it, vers. 46.47. And yet above all the sentences of this Song, this streyne especially that calles us to the remembrance of our latter end, is comme^ded unto us by the most earnest wish of God himself. And therefore if either the wish of God, and such a wish as is made for keeping all the commandeme^ts together; or if the finding of true wisedome; or if so many repetitions like so many knockes of the Lord upon our breast, be of any regard in our eyes, let us hereby conceive our owne blindenes and negligence in this poynt: let us awaken at this loud call, and double and treble our care in the remembrance of our latter end, to finde that comfort, which the Lord sees is to be gotten thereby.(b) If we had no other call, such a divine wish might suffice to make us remember our end. And what godly heart would not answer to this call and say, Lord it is enough: I will never ceasse to thinke of my end? Yet the Lord sees it is not enough, and therefore besides this his wish, he calles againe an hundred wayes

by his word, his workes, his ordinances, and proclaimes this lesson, Remember your latter end. And first of all, Man was called of God even in paradise to remember his end before the fall. Death was set before his eyes in the Tree of Death, as well as life in the Tree of life. Gen. 2.17. The first day he was called to thinke on the last day. So soone as sinne was forbidden, death was shewed before it was, to keepe from sinne; and the tree of death was a visible frontlet hung before the eyes of man to preserve him in the feare of God. Jf in the state of innocency, a law of mortality was made and a memoriall of death was needfull before it came; how much more in the state of corruption when death is come into the world, and walkes on every side, have we need now to remember it and to watch?In the fall, while Evah yet stood she resisted the temptation by remembring of the death that was threatned. Gen. 3.3. but when the serpent insisted and removed the reme^bra^ce of death out of her minde then she fell. The voyce of the serpent was, Ye shall not surely dye, vers. 4. they remembred not their latter end, and came downe wonderfully. So the very

fall it selfe being on this manner, serves for an other Call to warne every one that would stand in the evill day, never to forget their latter end.After the fall, then God calles againe by a Sentence of mortality which he pronounced on man, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shalt returne, Gen. 3.19. to make men with new care to thinke upon death. And this was a generall day of judgment in the beginning of the world, as there shall be an other Generall judgment in the end of the world. Then were we all in Adam and Evah presented before the Tribunall and judgment-seat of God and receyved the sentence of the first death universally pronounced upon all men, righteous or unrighteous, elect or reprobate; as there shal be a sentence of second death pronounced on the reprobate at last.After this Sentence, the Lord calles againe by the execution thereof from time to time, while death being entred into the world reignes among men, devouring all and bringing all to dust: yet so, that the execution of this Sentence is revealed in manifold and diverse degrees, according to the great patience and long
(...)

their language, but cut of their dayes from foure or five hundred to two hundred and od yeares. Gen. 11.18-32. And so with the ruine of Babel, the life of man was ruinated. The lofty tower of mans age that before ascended to so great an height by the steps of so many yeares, was now throwne downe and made lower by the halfe. The noyse and crash of this downefall sounded through many generations from Peleg to Terah, warning all to be more watchfull because the execution of this sentence of death with double speed was brought upon them.After this in the time of Abraham and the generations following, from two hundred and od we finde the yeares of the Patriarkes brought to an hundred and od. Gen. 25.7. and 35.28. and 47.28. etc. So was the reprive of man shortned againe. And whe^ the Lord called Abraham and his seed into his covenant, he withall called both him and the world by a new summo^s, as by sound of trumpet, to repentance and amendment of life by remembrance of their latter end, which now pressed upon them with double hast to that it had done.And lastly in the time of Moses the

Lord being provoked by a new rebellion did againe halfe the age of man and reduced the number of his yeares to seventy or eighty, Psal. 90.10. Then was the execution of the Sentence of death hastned more then ever before, and thereby the Lord called them and still calleth us to remember our end. Lord let thy call be effectuall unto us: bring our hearts to true wisedome; establish thou the worke of our hands and fill us with thy mercy in the morning that we may seeke thee early and be glad in thee all our dayes.(d) If God should once more have halfed the age of man as he did before, then can we not conceive how the world should have subsisted. If our dayes upon a new provocation had bene shortned from seventy to five and thirty: if weaknes of old age had prevayled as much upon us at thirty, as now it doth at sixty: if at fifteene yeares men should have bene at their full strength, and then have begun to decline as now many doe at thirty, being then in the height and vigour of their age, how manifold defects in learning and practising would the^ have ensued? what wisedome and experience could men have learned in so short a time? how could liberall

or mechanicall arts and sciences have bene learned, or what continuance of stre^gth could have bene to have wrought and exercised such trades and sciences? what a world of children and old folkes; yea what a world of fooles and impotent persons should we have had? though it be so already, yet how much more then? But the Lord will not conte^d for ever, though he be now provoked as much as ever before, for the spirit would faile before him, and the soules that he hath made. Esa. 57.16. Therefore hath the terme of mans age continued at this stay from Moses to our time for about three thousand yeares together, so as it was never settled in the former generations. And therefore in speciall is this worke of God to be considered of us, as being the last call and warning of God in this kinde, to make us remember our latter end.Now though God doe not againe shorten and halfe the dayes of man by such certaine and determinate limits as formerly he hath done; yet after another manner he doth not ceasse to cut them off and prevent the course of nature for our warning as effectually as in the former judgeme^ts. For still the Lord being provoked by the

wicked cutts them off before their time, they are brought downe to the pit, and they live not out halfe their dayes, Psal. 55.23. the number of their moneths is cut off in the middest. Iob, 21.21. as the vine shakes off his unripe grape and the olive his flower, Iob, 15.33. And not the wicked alone, but the elect, the beloved of God (as Henoch, Gen. 5.23.24.) are also taken away in the midst of their dayes: though sometime they live to seventy or eighty yeares, and come to their grave in a full age, as a shock of corne commeth in, in his season, Iob, 5.26: yet oft they are taken away before, Esa. 57.1. in infancy, childhood, youth, middle age, etc. Vpon every step of life death waites, and thousa^ds are dayly translated on every yeare of mans life, some the first yeare that they are borne, some in the second, some in the third, and so forward, every yeare thousands and ten thousands even to the last; and so a thousand calles hereby we receyve from God to remember our latter end with greater hast.(e) The multitude and number of these uncertaine and untimely deaths are innumerable. We may observe it in three worlds. The old world perished all together
(...)

strong men with their women and children were smitten with the sword of Ioshuah, Ios. 11.4. How many did the sword of Gideon, of David, and other Kings of Israel devoure? Who can recount how much flesh those foure beasts or Monarchies devoured? Dan. 7.3. etc. Not to speake more of the heathens, what untimely deaths did overtake Israel? their infants were drowned in Egypt. Exo. 1.22. Six hundred thousa^d of their carcasses fell in the wildernes. And as the childre^ especially were before destroyed in Egypt; so now in the wildernes the me^ especially. A decree was made, and a bound set unto the murmurers, that they which were twe^ty yeares old should not live longer then sixty yeares, and accordingly for the rest; whereas their childre^ might live to seve^ty or eighty yeares. Num. 14.29-33. How many were slaine in the time of their Iudges and Kings? In Ahaz his time an hundred and twe^ty thousand valiant men were slaine in one day, and two hundred thousand captived. 2. Chron. 28.6.8. In Ieroboams time five hundred thousand chosen men fell downe slaine at once. 2. Chro. 13.17. And by innumerable such examples hath death raigned and raged in those times. In this last age of the world

viole^t and bloody deathes seeme to have abounded more then ever before, both on Iew and Ge^tile, Paga^ and Christia^. What destruction and massacre from the beginning of the world unto that time might be co^pared with that of the Iewes by the Romanes for the contempt of Christ and his Gospell? Mat. 24.21. How many rivers of Christia^ blood have bene shed by Romane authority of Heathenish Emperours, and Antichristian Popes? The Harlot drunke^ with the blood of the Saints is still blood-thirsty. Rev. 17.6. The Kings of the earth drunke^ with the wine of her fornication, do give their strength and power unto her even to this day, and are become her butchers to kill and slay for her. Rev. 17.2.13. Whereas there are foure beasts mentioned in Dan. 7.4.7. a lyon, beare, leopard, monster with ten hornes; the beast, Rev. 13.1.2. is compounded of all foure, and so devoureth as many as all the former* what should we speake of Turkes and Tartares, and other Barbarous nations among whome and by whome death reignes so stro^gly? Rev. 9.17 18. This all is well knowne, but not well regarded. In all this we have a cal fro^ God to remember our latter end. But we have eyes and see not, eares and yet heare not his call.
(...)
resist sinners, by threatning death and by executing death on malefactours, Gen. 3.24. with Rom. 13.4. The Princes and Iudges of the earth are as Angels of God, set to keepe the garden and watch the city of God and to cut off the workers of wickednes, Psal. 101.8. and so become the messengers of death unto wicked men. Prov. 16.14. Every Iudgme^t Hall is the Tabernacle of death: there Death dwelles; there he oft shewes his terrible countenance, and from thence utters his voyce and roares as a Lyon. There be the monuments of death in many already dead and in others threatned. Every such place is a pillar of remembrance whereon Deaths name is engraven.
And if in time of peace the house of Iustice be such a monument of Death, much more is the Campe in time of War, as Hazarmaveth, the Court of Death. There Death displayes his banner: the sound of Drumme and Trumpet are the proclamations of death: the Mounts, Bulwarkes and Batteries are the scaffolds where Death actes his part: the Trenches, Approches, Galleries and Mines are the vallies of the shadow of death: and all the weapons and warlike Engines are so many

darts of death, whereby the dead are multiplyed. And seing by divine providence, besides the many armies marching abroad in other countries; the Camp is now prese^tly so neere unto us, in our borders, by s' Hertogen-Bosch, our duety is to observe this Alarum of death from the^ce, and to hearken unto the speciall calling of God for remembrance of our latter end. The Lords voyce cryes unto the City, Heare the Rod, and who hath appointed it, Mic. 6.9. and not onely to the City beseeged, that it may shake off the yoke of Antichrist, but unto us and our cities that are within the sou^d, that we may walke more worthy of Christ and his Gospell which we professe. He that regards not this call of God shall beare his iniquity.
(b) In the calling of Ministers we have an other Memoriall of death, and that many wayes. Ministers are called of God to call others to remember their latter end. And this is noted as a maine worke of their calling, Esa. 40.6.7.8. A voyce sayd, Cry. And he sayd, what shall I cry? All flesh is grasse, and all the goodlines thereof is as the flovver of the field. The grasse withereth, the flovver fadeth: because the spirit of the Lord blovveth upon it: surely
(...)

drawing out and shaking that sword against the breast of sinners: by making life or death to be evermore the foot or burden of their song. and the effect of all is, they are the savour of life or the savour of death to all that heare them. 2. Cor. 2.16.
(c) And this which hitherto we have heard of Angels, Magistrates, and Ministers, is spoken of the good: come we now to speake of the evill. The Lord calles us as lowd by them, to remember our end, that we may gather good out of evill. Evill angels, what are they els but professed murderers, and murderers from the beginning, going about as roaring lyons, seeking whome they may devoure? Ioh. 8.44. 1. Pet. 5.8. They have power of death, Heb. 2.14. and dayly bring thousands to death of body and soule for ever. Wicked Magistrates and persecuting rulers that compell men to Idolatry and false religion, and force men to take the marke of the beast; as also the false teachers and blinde guides that bring in damnable errours, even both these are like the serva^ts that dance on the threshold, and fill their masters house with spoyle and prey. Zeph. 1 9. Both these are the blood-hounds of the Divell, by which he hunteth soules.

Hos. 5.1. Both these are as ranging beares and ravenous woolves that wory yong and old, and drive them into the slaughterhouse of Satan. Prov. 28.15. Mat. 7.15. These help him dayly to thrust sinfull men into the ditch, into the bottomles pit of Hell. All these therefore are the Grand-champions and standard-bearers of death, and have Death written in their foreheads. The sight of these or the mention of them and their enterprises should cause men with horrour to thinke of death. And seing the world is full of these, how many are the calles and warnings that God by them gives us to thinke of death, and to stand upon our watch?
(d) As for the times, severall also are the warnings, which are thereby given us to remember our end: sometimes by the red horse marching in our borders, trotting, galloping, and rushing into battell; sometimes the pale horse ambling up and downe in our streets, Rev. 6.4.8. both warre and pestilence bringing massacre upon massacre, calamity upon calamity, Ier. 9.21. Ezek. 7.25.26. are as so many proclamations of death in our eares, sounding at some times more louder then other, according as these judgments are

more grievous and universall. Who doth not see the axe layd unto the root of the tree in these dayes? both the bloody axe of warre, and black axe of pestilence, in some times and places continued, in others threatned. Besides, time it selfe is a sythe, an axe: Night and day are two axes at the root of our life, when one is up the other is downe, without rest: every day a chip flyes away, and every night a chip; and so our bones ly scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth or heweth wood on the earth. Psalm 141.7.
Though every day giving us so manifold examples of death do thereby serve to put us in minde thereof: yet in a speciall manner is the Sabbath-day set apart by the ordinance of God, that on it we should consider the latter end of man. That is the time especially, when the voyce cryeth in the Congregation, All flesh is grasse, etc. And therefore in the Psalme, that is entitled, of the Sabbath. Psa. 92. title. wherein the exercises of the Sabbath are described, there God calleth and teacheth his people to reme^ber the latter ends, both the end of all the workers of iniquity, who though they spring as

grasse, and flourish for a season, shall yet in the end be destroyed and perish for ever: ibid. vers. 7.9. and againe the latter end of the godly, whose horne, though it be abased to the dust for a while, yet in the end shall be exalted like the horne of an unicorne; their heads anoynted with fresh oyle, etc. vers. 10. etc. On the Sabbath therefore are we called of God to sit downe and consider and talke, and sing of our latter end, and mutually to exhort and comfort ourselves with the remembrance of it.
(e) Now for the place where we live, this whole world and every part thereof doth fitly represent unto us our transitory estate: for the fashion of this world passeth away, 1. Cor. 7.31. and we passe away with it. The mooveable heavens that are above us are tossed and swong round about the world every day, both the firmament of the fixed starres, and the spheres of the seve^ planets one under another are rolled about with their manifold variety of motions. The Sunne in the middest of them goeth forth as a giant to runne his race from one end of heaven to an other. Psa. 19.5.6. Eccl. 1.5. the circle of the earth which he dayly compasseth
(...)
(f) And as the heavens, so all under the heavens runnes on wheeles also. The comets and fiery meteores in the highest regio^s of the ayre are caryed about the earth according to the motion of the Sunne. The wind whirleth about continually, and returneth according to his circuits. Eccl. 1.6. The waters of sea and rivers run their courses as in a circle, from land to sea, and from sea to their springs againe: vers. 7. and the sea in it self is tossed up and downe, ebbing and flowing according to the course of the Moone, or violence of the windes. The earth though it remaine in her station and change not her place, yet is it changed in estate more then the rest: insomuch that God hath made the sundry rankes of the creatures therein to be so many mappes of mortality, pictures of our vanity, and similitudes of our transitory estate; that by the sight of ech of them he might call us to reme^ber our latter end. And which way so ever we turne us, the monuments of our vanity are presented unto us of God.
(g) Stay we in the house and sit by the fire side, the sparkes that fly up and are presently extinct, Iob, 18, 5. 2. Sam. 14 7. the smoke that goes out of the chimney and suddenly

vanisheth, Hos. 13.3. the ashes that remaine and are streightway cast out on the dunghill, Iob. 13.12. Gen. 18.27. are ech of them appoynted of God, to shew us what we are, and how soone we come to our end; while he hath compared our lives to ech of these. The candle that is set upon the table to give light unto them that are in the house, is also ordained of God to represent our life, that shines for a time untill it have co^sumed our native moysture, and then goeth out of it selfe. Iob, 18.6. And as we see the oyle of this lamp decaying, the more are we to seek that oyle of grace, that will not decay before the comming of the Bridegroome. Matt. 25.4. The earthen pots wherein our meat is sod and prepared at the fire; the earthe^ pots and dishes out of which we eat and drink at the table for preservation of our life, are noted by the holy Ghost to be types and similitudes of our brittle and fraile life, Ier, 19.1.11. Lam. 4.2. that so oft as we use them and eat and drink out of the^ we might remember our end. The shelfs or benches wheron women for ornament of their kitchin do set up these pots and dishes are like faire pourtraiturs of humane fragility, the whole houshold it self and all the persons
(...)

Esa. 37.27. hath thereby bound them as in a bundle for a wholesome posie or nosegay, that from thence we might learne to smell our mortality.
Go we forth againe from the garden into the corne-fields, looke upon the corne and every part of it; by the roote that comes of seede, which is not quickened except it dye, God teacheth us to thinke of death, and to looke for death before true life be found. 1. Cor. 15.36. Ioh, 12.14. By the top of the eares of corne cut downe with sickles, the Lord calles us to consider of Death, by whose sickle we are all cut downe in like manner. Iob, 24.24. Rev. 14.15 By the stubble, which is the middle of the stalke betwixt the roote and the eare of corne, as being a most vaine thing, easily scattered by the winde, Ier. 13.24. Esa. 40.24. and devoured by fire, whereunto it is reserved, Ioel. 2.5. Esa. 5.24. the vanity of man perishing as stubble is often described unto us. And above the rest, when the Lord calles sinners to thinke of their end, he takes the light chaffe upon the graines of corne in the eare, and shewes that unto the^, affirming that they also are but as chaffe before the whirlewind or the fire; Psa. 1.4. Iob, 21.18. Esa. 17.13. yea

and the multitude of them and their princes as the chaffe of the summer threshing-floores, where it most abou^deth. Da. 2.35.
(i) From the lesser plants let us go to the greater; from herbes to trees. The trees of the orchyard, and those in speciall, that were in election above others to reigne as kings over the rest, Iudg. 9.8. etc. are called of God to call us to think of our latter end. In them and by them the Lord teacheth us how we passe away: as the vine shakes of his unripe grape; as the olive casts of his flower, Iob, 15.33. as the figtree casteth her untimely figs, being shaken of a mighty winde, Rev. 6, 13. as the bramble or thornes in the hedge of the orchyard, greene or dry are taken away by force, Psa. 58.9. as the crackling of thornes under the pot, a flash and presently out, Eccl. 7.6. Psa. 118.12. so is the life and glory of sinners suddenly at an end: and these plants are memorialles thereof unto us. From the trees of the orchyard proceed we on to the trees of the forrest: and by the way consider the mists and morning cloudes above our heads, and the morning dew under our feet, both suddenly vanishing away; Hose. 13.3. by them the
(...)

swift when she hasteth to the prey, serves by the counsell of God herein to represe^t the swiftnes of our dayes, and how we hast to our end, to be a prey for the grave. Iob, 9.26. The Moth as little and weake as the Eagle is great and strong, serves yet to teach us the same lesson as well as the king of birds. Though the moth be so fraile that by touching it is co^sumed, and the substa^ce left behinde upon the fingers, yet mortall me^ are crushed before the moth, Iob 4.19. even their beauty consumes away like the moth. Psa. 39.11. the moth of consumptio^ eates them up. Esa. 50.9. and 51.8. Hos. 5.12 As the Lord rides upo^ the Cherubims and flyes abroad upo^ the wings of the winde: so upon the wings of the moth used for his service and made his Embassadour to deliver unto man a message of his mortality, that he might remember his end.
(l) Thus doe all kinde of creatures made for man, serve to warne him of his vanity: And it is not simply the mere volubility of the heavens and instability of the earth, that give us this warning; but this whole globe of heaven and earth is created and give^ unto us of God for a Watch or Clock, whereby we might learne to number our times, and our passing away in them. The

severall lights of the firmament are ordained of God, for signes and for seasons, for dayes and for yeares, Gen. 1.14. The Sunne by his height and motion doth plainely declare the time of the day, being looked on to that end; and by the variation of his shadow in the degrees of the diall, as in that of Ahaz, Esa. 38.8. doth more exactly distinguish and determine the houres unto us. Yea the window in every mans house sta^ding against the Sunne, serves for a diall to shew the houre of the day more or lesse: and to them that are abroad in the streets or field in the sunne-shine; eve^ the shadow of their owne persons, the stature of their owne body serving for the gnomon of a diall, doth shew the difference of houres according to the variety of the shadow stretched out and declining in divers degrees, Ier. 6.4. Men that have bene a while intent unto their work and eftsoones looke up and see the declining of the shadow, the sight of this declination is as the sound of a voyce unto them, saying, The Time passeth; The end draweth on; Man walketh in a shadow; and sleeth away as a shadow: Iob, 14.2. Psa. 109.23. and so giveth him occasion to try himselfe and his wayes, what good he hath bene doing that while.

And as plainely doe the starres also by sundry wayes declare the houre of the night unto us, and teach us the same lessons.
Neither doe the lights of heaven declare unto us the houres of the day and night onely, in regard of their diurnall motions; but the planets by an other oblique motion entring into the signes of the Zodiak successively, and finishing that course some in a moneth, some in a yeare, and of the superiour planets the highest in thirty yeares, the next in twelve, and the next in two yeares, do hereby very plainly distinguish both the moneths of the yeare and the yeares of longer periods of time, for which we have no proper names. As the Greeks of old had their Olympiads with other reckonings; and as the Prophets described their stories not onely from the raigne of their Kings after one reckoning, but from many different poynts and termes of time in respect of Gods judgments or mercies, or mens defection or repentance. Exod. 12.41.1. Kin. 6.1. Ier. 25.1. Ezek. 1.1. and 4.5. Amos. 1.1. Hag. 2.18.19. so the Lord in his unsearchable wisedome hath given unto us many heavenly dialles and instruments of numbring our dayes; all of them witnesses

how our time passeth: and God calleth us by so many, that if one or two signes would not prevaile with us, yet more might, Exo. 4.9. one comming into our sight after another, and teaching us to examine our selves and our estate both for shorter and longer times, and to be prepared for the worke of God, as the Angels, for an houre, and a day, and a yeare. Rev. 9.15.
But that which is yet more wonderfull, these coelestial bodies doe not onely declare and signe out the times unto us; but they alter and change the times and make the seasons to differ one from another. As the cartwheeles on the earth where they goe, leave a track or furrow behinde the^; so the wheeles of these planets and stars in their conversions make a deep impression upon the earth, according to the diversity of their motions: and some of them bring the spring, some the summer, some autumne, and some duely draw on winter as with bands and cords. Iob. 38.31.32. and 9.9. This their operation is manifested in great variety, and in such manner that thereby they produce many new reall dialles upon the earth. And from hence in divers flowers we have a plaine distinction of the houres in the day; while some

still turne their face unto the Sunne, from the rising to the setting, as Heliotropium or Turnsol; some declare the approch of the evening by shutting their flowers before, as the Daysies, Marigold, Dandelion and others; some are so strangely affected that they shew it to be high noone by closing up themselves just at that time, as we see dayly in the flower that is called Goates-beard or the starre of Ierusalem. Others againe distinguish the moneths of the yeare, some springing and flourishing in one moneth and some in others successively in order, as we see in the Primerose, Violet, Rose, Gilloflower and others which follow even unto the winter moneths. Thus the pla^ts of the earth together with the planets of heaven become monitors of the time passing away.
Neither is this to be observed in the plants onely, but in the sensitive creatures also, the fowles, fishes, and fourefooted beasts: the birds shew us the time of the day; some sing at a certaine houre of the night before day; Mar, 13.35. some little birds at the day-break; Eccl. 12.4. some at noone, and some nightbirds in the evening. They distinguish also the times of the yeare; sometimes revived, sometimes

drooping and decaying againe in great variety. They know the times of their comming and going, some in one moneth and some in another, as the Stork, the Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallow. Iere. 8.7. and the fishes likewise have their appointed seasons, as is dayly observed by the fishmongers. All these shall rise up in judgement against them that know not the acceptable time, nor learn to redeeme it, though the Lord call them so many wayes, and shew them the time passing by so many devises.

CHAP. III. Monitors of Death in and about a mans ovvne selfe.His Breath. (a) Pulse. (b) Dayly food, the necessity, and preparation of it, in the earth; (c) by the death of the creatures. (d) Apparell, the originall, matter and necessity of it. (e) Labour in generall, and sundry vocations in particular. (f) Sleep, a lively image of death. (g) Sinne, the cause of death, feared of some, desired of others. (h) Extreme dangers threatning death. (i) Age and the changes thereof manifested by the face, and stature. (k) Old age described by the decay of strength, (l) of sense, (m) and of health.HItherto we have heard the call of God sounded out unto us in and by other creatures, by heaven and earth and the things therein that were made for man; now we are to consider how God comes neerer unto man, and from the state of mans owne person, calling, and condition, calles him by the sight of himselfe to remember his latter end. And first, the Lord having made man of the dust of the earth, Gen. 2.7. and thereupon after his fall shewed him his readines to return to dust, Gen. 3.19. Eccl. 12.7. doth yet further call us to consider our frailety by

ordaining that this house of clay is to be held upright by a puffe of the ayre continually breathed in and out, and that this being stopt the house must presently fall downe. Hereby our life hangs as it were loose before us, going in and out every moment: therefore is it called the breath of life, Gen. 2.7. and 7.15.22. our life being carried in and out upon the breath, and depending upon it. And as God tyed life to our body by such a slender and weake thread, so he calles us oft to mark it and think on it and to remember our mortall estate by the breath of our nostrils so easily departing. Esa. 2.22. Psa. 146.4. and 104.29.(a) An other fraile band of life, like unto our breathing, is the pulse, which ariseth from the heart and the arteries or beating veines, and this by a double motion of contraction and dilatation, whereby they are drawne in and out, both for the expelling of noxious fumes through the insensible pores of the flesh, and for the drawing in of coole ayre to refresh the heart and to feed the vitall spirits. From the variety of the pulse are taken many signes of health and sicknes, life and death: it is the character of our strength or weaknes, and
(...)

are we provoked to watchfulnes.And as in the necessity of food, so in the quality thereof is our corruptible estate made evident unto us. Our food before it come into the body is diversly prepared; and the principall fruits for nourishment of man and comfort of his life, as corne, and wine, and figges, and the like, are ripened and made to grow more abundantly by the dung and excrements of beasts cast upon them: Luke. 13.8. from the juyce of the dung is the fatnes and sweetnes of the fruits increased. And from hence is the strength of our corruptible life: hence we may say to corruption, Thou art my father. As once the meat of the miserable Iewes in their distresse was prepared with dung; Ezek. 4.12, 13.15. so is our food dayly in the growth of it, as it were seasoned, baked, and concocted with dung. The earth accursed for our sinne is brought to this base condition that the fattest increase thereof is from excrements, and it yeeldeth fruit unto the mouth of ma^ from the tayle of the beasts. After it is in the body a great part of it by the alteration there, is turned into corruption, and receyved into divers lothsome sinkes and channels within the body till it

be againe expelled. By this perishing food, Ioh. 6.27. God doth admonish us of our perishing estate; and shewes unto us, that meats are for the belly and the belly for meats, that he wlll destroy both it and them. 1. Cor. 6.13. Thus the staffe of our strength and the very pillars of our life do carry in them the remembrance of destruction and corruption for our warning.(c) But this is not all: Our food is not onely of corruption, but we feed even of death it selfe, and that by the allowance of God, Gen. 9.3. in taking away the life of other creatures to maintaine our owne; especially in these last times when he hath said unto us of them all, Rise, kill and eat, Act. 10.13. Whatsoever is sold in the sha^bles, that eat, asking no questio^ for conscience sake. 1 Cor. 10.25. herein we see death dayly prese^ted to us and set before us on our tables. This is seriously to be thought upo^ as a wonderfull work of God: by the death of other creatures our life is preserved: our living bodies are sustaind by their dead carcasses: in their blood swimmes our life; and from their pangs of death spring the pleasures of our life, our feasts and ordinary food. As the savage Ca^niballes eat the flesh of men; so we eat the flesh of beasts that
(...)

that which any creature may serve to be a witnesse of for convincing of sinners, that doth the Lord declare to be their cry and a denunciation of woe from them. Habac. 2.11. Iob. 31.38. Iam. 5.2.3. and in like manner that misery which the creature enthralled by sinne doth endure for man, that doth the Apostle expressely call their groaning and travelling together in paine vvith us, etc. Rom. 8.22. These groanes and cryes are then especially to sound in our eares, while we are eating of them: as the Hare newly taken cries in the mouth of the greyhound; so should we be affected as if the same cry were made when we eat thereof, and have their flesh betwixt our teeth. The Gentleman that sits at his table above in his dining chamber, and was not present in the kitchin or butchery, to see the execution, the convulsions of death, the sprinting and gasping of the slaughtered creatures, is yet by remembrance to represent the same and to make it present againe in his eating: for eating and burying of them in our bellies is more then killing of them, and a further meanes to strike the heart with thought of death, procured for the eater. Our

stupidity and blockishnes must needs be very great, if we consider not this fearfull and wonderfull providence of God: and we shall be worse then the beasts themselves, if we hearken not unto the call which God by them gives us, to awaken us out of our security, and to make us remember our fraile condition.(d) An other helpe to preserve our fraile bodies is our rayment and apparell which God hath given to cover and defend the body without, as food within. And from hence we have a double or treble memoriall of Death; considering that our apparell was then first given unto us, when by our sinne we first came into the state of death, and not before, Gen. 2.25. with c. 3.7. And then when God first gave our garments unto us, he tooke them out of Deaths wardrobe, they being made with the death of the creatures from whence they were taken. God made coates of skinnes for Adam and his wife and his posterity: Gen. 3.21. Heb. 11.37. The skins of the poore creatures were pluckt over their eares and torne from their backes to cover the shame of our skinnes, and to hide the nakednes of our hydes. And what was sayd of Ioab in another case,
(...)

are swifter then a post, Iob. 9.25. that we ride post as on dromedaries that runne by the way in all hast to their journeyes end. And the travell that men have by sea in the most swift ships is mentioned of God to represent the swiftnes of our time that carries us night and day, sleeping or waking to the haven of death. Iob 9.26. And according to this wisedome of God and his example should men make right use of other trades and their labours therein, to set their latter end continually before their eyes thereby.(f) As labour and toyle in the day, so sleep and rest from labour in the night season, is also a necessary help to preserve this mortall life. This sleep is a lively image of death. For in sleep men ly downe as dead men, without sense and motion, ceassing from their workes and taking no knowledge of the things that are done by others: and therefore the holy Ghost often describeth death by the name of sleep, or lying downe to sleepe. Genes. 47.30. Deuter. 31.16. 1. King. 2.10. Iob. 3.13. and ch. 14.12. Psalm. 76.5. Matt. 27.52. Iohn. 11.11. Actes. 7.60. 1. Corinth. 11.30. 1. Thessal.

4.13. By this marvellous work of God in breaking off the course of life, and making Sleepe like an Half-death to invade us continually, to come upon us like an unresistable Giant every day and to throw us downe; and then by his manner of speech in calling death a Sleepe, he calleth us by consideration of our sleepe to consider our death; and by the sight of our bed to remember our grave, to looke upon it as a Tombe or Sepulchre, and every night before we goe into it to labour for reconciliation with God, and at the end of the day to seeke new sense of his love in Christ as we would doe at the end of our life, that so we may lie downe and sleep safely. Had any man some speciall disease, as of the falling sicknes, Apoplexie, Palsie, Lethargie, or the like terrible passion, whereby at a certaine time of the day he should duely fall downe like a dead man, and ly snorting at the gates of death for an houre or two, untill the malignant humour were discussed and the force of the fit were over; would we not thinke that man warned of God, thereby to remember his end
(...)

7.8.9. but with the faythfull there is another remembrance of death by occasion of sinnes, as comfortable to them, as the former is terrible to the wicked. For in sight of sinnes that greeve them they call to minde what shall quite free them from those sins; and what is that but death? Thereupon they set death before their eyes, and are taught of God so to doe, longing for their redemption, and desiring to remoove out of the body, which is by death. Rom. 8.23. 2. Cor. 5.8. And how many wayes then is death propounded unto us? which way can we looke on the right hand or on the left, before us or behinde us, but every way the memorialles of death are before us? Transgressions past, sins present, feares of the wicked, desires of the godly, all lead to the thought of death, and to the remembrance of our latter end.(h) Againe the afflictions, sicknesses and dangers, wherein death is threatned unto men, are likewise meanes of death, and by them also we are called of God to remember our latter end. It pleaseth God for the warning of secure men, to bring men to

the gates of death before they enter: Psal. 19.13. and though he bring them back againe, yet is this done of God for a memoriall of death. God brings men into such extremity that they make full account to die, they receive the sentence of death in themselves, and despaire of life, 2. Cor. 1.8.9. and are free among the dead in their owne and others judgement; Psal. 88.4.5. and this many times, they are in deaths often: 2. Corint. 11.23. and such things God worketh oftentimes, that men might renounce the world, Iob. 33.22-29. and set their house in order, and their heart in order to die, that being delivered they might then remember what thoughts and desires, what prayers and purposes they had in their soules, and recall them often, for their preparation against the time of their finall departure out of this world. Esa. 38.1.15. etc. As Iehosaphat having cryed out in the danger of death, 2. Chron. 18.31. was bound to remember that very cry and disposition of his heart afterward: so forasmuch as there is almost no man which hath not seene the face of Death and his dart shaken against him in
(...)

being pale, withered and wrinckled, and the shadow of death sitting upon their eye-lids; and some in divers degrees betwixt both: and especially in the sight of friends long absent and changed in that time, we are called to thinke how the fashion of this world passeth away.As the face so the stature of man growing up as a plant, according to the divers measures and degrees of his growth appointed of God, Psalm. 144. 12. Luk. 1.80. and 2.52. is another testimony of his changeable estate, even from the childe of a span long unto those that have their full growth. Lam. 2.20. Though some be of low stature, as Zaccheus Luke. 19.3. and some againe higher then the common sort by the head, as was Saul; 1. Sam. 10.23.24. yet even in these compared with themselves the proportion of their growth is an evidence of their age to such as know them. Though men being come to their full stature stand at a stay, and loose not their stature by such degrees as they attained unto it in their youth; yet many times we see in experience that crooked old age bowing downe their heads more and more to the earthward,

they doe hereby after a sort loose their stature by degrees, and grow into the ground againe. And thus the wheele of mans age visibly and sensibly turning about according to the variation of his stature is another admonition to remember the latter end approching.(k) Beside the face and stature, the Lord hath set sundry other markes upon the bodies of young and old, for memorials of their time passing away at the changes of their age. The younger people have the time of love described of God by divers markes and tokens thereof: Ezech. 16.7.8. but especially old age hath the tokens of neere-approching death imprinted upon them, whereby they are warned of God to prepare for it. The decay of strength, the decay of sense, the decay of health, are all forerunners of death, and summon them to their end. Through decay of strength the armes and hands, the keepers of the house, beginne to tremble. Ecclesi. 12.3. and the legges that are as pillars thereof do bow themselves; and the help of a staffe as a third legge to rest on, is sought of the aged person, Zach. 8.4. and with that woodden legge at

every step he goes, he strikes upon the earth and raps at the gate of the grave, untill it be opened unto him. By this weaknes death comes and puts his manicles upon their hands, and his shackels upon their legges, for remembrance of their end. This weaknes is further signifyed by the ceassing of the grinders in the mill, Eccles. 12.3. both the upper and the nether milstone, which are called the life of man; Deut. 24.6. These teeth fayling, life begins to fayle. From this weaknes the doores of the lips are shut without, the sound of the grinding is low, and the voyce hoarse: and so whether the old persons worke with their hands, or walke with their feet, or eate with their teeth, or speake with their lips, the memoriall of death is in each of these set before them. And as in the outward parts of the body, so the like weaknes and decay of strength is to be observed in the inward parts, and as a cause of that which is in the outward. The silver coards of the sinewes, which carry the faculty of sense and motion from the head, in old age are loosed: Eccles. 12.6. that cable of the marrow in the backbone, which was wont so firmely to hold and stay the fraile

barke of our body tossed with so many motions, and by those many conjugations of nerves like so many paire of oares on each side did row the gally up and downe, begins now to dissolve. The head which is the golden bowle, wherein is emboxed the brayne that ministers that faculty of sense and motion, through age is broken and becomes crazie. The many pitchers of the veines, which carry the nourishing blood from the well of the liver unto each part of the body, become like unto broken vessels. And the wheele of the arteries, which by the reciprocall motions and pulses doe convey the vitall spirits from the cisterne of the heart into the furthest coasts of the little world, for the quickening of the whole flesh, even to the toes and fingers ends, through languishing age begins to turne and returne slowly and weakely. And all these faint operations are so many memorials of death, and doe plainely portend the approch of our latter end, and every one of them admonisheth us to watch. Againe from this weaknes and decay of strength both in the outward and inward parts, ariseth an other memoriall of death, to be seene in that which is esteemed no
(...)

taste what he eates, or what he drinkes: 2. Sam. 19.35. old Isaac by his touch cannot feele the difference betwixt the hands of his son and the skinne of a beast: Gen. 27.16.21.22.23. old David is covered with clothes, and feeles no heat: 1. Kings. 1.1. concupiscence departs; Eccle. 11.5. Abishag the faire virgin lies in his bosome and he knowes her not. 1. Kin. 1.4. Yea the inward senses beginne to faile also; memory decayes; the understanding is diminished, and old men some times in their decrepite age come to be little children againe, not able to discerne betwixt good and evill. 2. Sam. 19.35. How inexcusable are they that live securely, and thinke not of death, whereof they have so many warnings before hand?(m) With decay of strength and sense comes the decay of health. Old age is many times a continuall sicknes, and when the dayes of man are multiplyed, they are but labour and sorrow, even the strength of them. Psa. 90.10. Then is the time when the evill dayes approch, and the yeares of which man sayth, I have no pleasure in them. Eccle. 12.1. Then is the light of Sunne, Moone, and starres obscured: and then the clouds returne after the raine;

one infirmity after another. v. 2. Through decay of naturall heat ariseth indigestion and crudity of stomack, and thereupon follow rheumes, and catarrhes; and from thence comes ach in the bones, and manifold paines and diseases, whereby the Lord as with an yron pen writeth our lesson, and engraveth this sentence deep in our flesh and bones, Remember your latter end approaching. In all the paines of old age the finger of God nippeth and pincheth men, to make them think of his call and prepare for death.
(...)
upon. God shewes that then he exspects a speciall act of humiliation, when at our end he visites us with such paines; that we are to mourne for sinnes committed in the world before we depart out of it, when he sends such sorrow unto us at that time especially. Then are we called to stirre up the grace of God within us, and to rayse up our spirits with all love and reverence to meet the Lord, that we may receyve his blessing, and enter into his gates with joy and into his courts with thanksgiving.
(a) Againe this paine prevayling at the approch of death, causeth men to ly downe and to fall flat along upon their beds, Iob. 33.19. Act. 5.15. and to let all the affaires of the world alone, with the works of their calling. Through infirmity of the body God forceth them to stoope, and calleth them to remember their frailety and their end; as if he should command them to couch downe before him, and require them to prostrate their soules at his footstoole in seeking his favour and mercy in Chirst, even as their bodies are prostrate by his hand. This very position of the body represents unto us how the grasse withers and the flower falls,

and admonisheth us in our soules to worship and fall downe before the Lord our maker; and by faith to enforce our bodies also leaning on our staffe, to worship upon the beds head, Heb. 11.21. Gen. 47.31. and 48.2. that he may straightway lift us up for ever. As Iacob bowed himselfe to the ground seven times, at the approch of his brother Esaw: Gen. 33.3. so the Lord himselfe by sicknes thrusts us downe seven times; we are often up and downe; we lift up our selves, but cannot hold up our heads: God teacheth us there by to come submissively creeping into his presence, and humbling ourselves under the mighty hand of God that he may exalt us. 1. Pet. 5.6.
(b) An other warning to thinke of the end at hand, is that distast of meat and want of appetite in sick persons; when their life abhorreth bread, and their soule dainty meat. Iob. 33.20. When the staffe of bread failes and the stay of naturall life is withdrawne, then God calles the sick persons to remember their end, to double their care for eternal life, to seeke the hidden manna, unknowne and unregarded of the world, Rev. 2.17. to feed upon the bread of God which commeth downe
(...)

for their end. This yron sleep is a black cloud of death, a night-shade and a particular darkenes, of which in its measure is verifyed that more generall saying of our Saviour, The night comes, when no man can work: Ioh. 9.4. and therefore while there is light and liberty of minde in the time of health, the end is to be remembred and provided for, before the houres of oppression doe come upon the minde.
(e) Sometimes in sicknes, though sleep oppresse not, there is a kinde of raving distraction, caused by phrensie, or melancholy, or other distemperatures, which doth overwhelme the minde, as Nebuchadnezzars once was by the stroke of God, Dan. 4. so that it is unfit to thinke of death, or to seeke any comfort against the danger thereof. And fro^ hence therefore it doth likewise appeare how unwise they are that deferre the time of their repentance unto the time of death, when it is uncertaine whether they shall be masters of their owne wits, and naturall understanding, not to speake of supernaturall grace which is further above the reach of man, and yet necessary to salvation.
(f) Sometimes the very vehemency

and extremity of paine doth trouble and disturbe the minde, and disables it that it cannot orderly and quietly dispose it selfe unto godly and comfortable meditations; but being overcome with impatie^ce frets and murmures and is tossed up and downe without fruit. Therefore are these extremities of anguish compared to a cup of intoxicating wine, making men as it were drunken with greefe, Esa. 51.17. 21.22. Lam 4.21. and even mad with woe and sorrow, that they know not what to doe. Deut. 28.34. Ier. 25.16. Eccles. 7.7. And what folly is it then for men to be unprepared through forgetfulnes of their latter end, and to remaine drunken with security all their life till they be drowned in a gulfe of misery? Perplexity and extreme anguish may justly come as a snare upon them that abuse their present peace and ease, promising themselves liberty and power to dispatch all that is needfull for their salvation in one moment of their last distresse.
(g) And commonly when death approcheth, our adversary the devill, that prince of darknes, that hath gone about as a roaring lyon watching to devoure us at all opportunities before, doth the^ especially

rage, knowing that his time is short, Rev. 12.12. and withall seekes to take advantage by the present infirmitie of the sick persons, insinuating himselfe into each of the former troubles, adding fearfull dreames to their slumbers, strong fancies to their distraction, aggravating their paines with divers terrours. Experience shewes what great temptatio^s many have undergone upon their death-bed. And therfore the consideratio^ of this last great combat should warne every one betimes to arme the^selves, to gather stre^gth every day against the last day, to furnish the^selves with grace, to seek truth and righteousnes, faith and patience, store of comfortable promises out of the word of God layd up in their hearts and kept in readines, to nourish themselves in hope, to watch and pray uncessantly; that having concluded this last combat and obtained the victory, they may then be translated from a state militant to a state triumphant for ever.
(h)
THese forewarnings are such as serve chiefly for the instruction of those that feele them, and on whose persons they are inflicted: but beside these forewarnings the dead leave unto the living many afterwarnings

of their mortality, which admonish the succeeding generation that they must follow their praedecessours. And here first of all observe, how it is ordered by divine providence, that in death the soule and body be separated one from the other. In this separation the Soule is carried away invisibly; no man knoweth how nor whither. No humane sense ca^ discerne the spirit of man ascending. Ecc. 3.21. The Lord in his unsearchable counsell would have the opening of the gates of the second world to be kept secret and close from us. If godly parents should see the soules of their children carried away to destruction in the clawes of an hellish dragon, and crying unto them with a lamentable and desperate voyce, what horrour and woe would this be unto them, to make their dayes more uncomfortable so lo^g as they should live on earth? God in great mercy conceales it from them. If wicked and ungodly men should see their children or companions soules haled away by evill spirits after they were separated fro^ their bodies, and withall should heare the^ shrike and cry and curse their co^pany, what a stroke of terrour might this be unto them? but God in justice hides these things from the^

and will not satisfy the curiosity of profane men, that despise his Gospell and the means of life revealed therein. This secret manner of translating the separated soules in carrying some close prisoners to Hell, and transporting others in covered wagons and invisible chariots unto Glory, serves to warne and admonish us by the very forme thereof, so much the more to remember the other evident monuments of our frailety. When secret things are restrayned to the Lord, the things revealed are immediately thereupon the more enforced upon us to observe the same. Deut. 29.29. When the Spirit recordes how some persons, men or angels, have vanished out of the sight of those they had spoken withall, we are to observe how they were occasioned thereby to thinke the more of that which they had seene and heard from such, and not to prye into that which was withdrawne from them. Luke, 24.31.32. Act. 8.39. Iudg. 6.21.22. etc. Yea the Lord appointed that they should not be suffered to live, which went about to talke with the dead soule or to rayse the spirits. Levit. 20.27. 1. Sam. 28.8 9. etc. But by all this we are so much the more

led to observe the common visible memorials of mortality shewed unto us in them that die before us.
(i) It is further to be observed, that when the spirit is carried away presently to God that gave it, yet the body remains behinde and returnes to dust from whence it came. Eccles. 12.7. If God by death had taken away both the soule and the body together at the same time; if it had pleased God to take away all men as Henoch and Elias were; Heb. 11.5. Gen. 5.24. 2. Kin. 2.11.17. or to bury all men so as Moses was, Deut. 34.6. namely so that their bodies should be seene no more among men; yet even then, there were cause enough to remember that wonderfull great and finall translation: but now seing every man departing this life leaves a peece of himselfe among his friends on earth, yea the one halfe of his person, and that halfe which is the visible part, even the body that was best knowne among men; the Lord by this fragment of man that is left, gives us occasion to thinke what is done with the rest, and to keepe in memory the death past, to prepare us for death to come. As Elias ascending to heaven let his mantle fall, for a remembrance
(...)

so much care for our bodies as we doe for the soules; according to this example of God, who shewes more love and respect to the soules, taking them first into his heavenly Kingdome and glory, when as he suffers the body so long a time after, to lodge in dishonour, and to remaine in the pit of corruption. 1. Cor. 15.43.
(l) The sequestration of the body from the place where the soule is, and the corruption of it being separate, are memorialles wrought immediately by Gods owne hand: beside these there are other after-warnings of death effected by the providence of God mediately by the services of men, that seeke the honour of the dead and comfort of the living. For honour of the dead, holy men of old have shewed great care to provide sepulchers, tombes, and monuments for them. Such were the cave of Machpelah purchased by Abraham; Gen. 40.30.31. and 23. the pillar on Rachels grave that Iaakob set up, Gen. 35.20. that continued so many generations to Samuels time; 1. Sam. 10.2. the title on the sepulcher of the man of God, that prophesied of Iosias; 2. Kin. 23.17.18. the sepulcher of David, that continued twise fourteene generations,

from David to the Apostles time, Act. 2.29. having bene preserved in the time of the Babylonian captivity, even then when both city and temple were destroyed, with many the like. These monuments are in Scripture called Memorialles, Mnemeia, Matth. 23.29. Iohn. 11.38. and 19.41. and 20 1. by which (whatsoever others intended) the godly are taught to remember their latter end. The garnished tombes and the sumptuous sepulchers are but so many scaffolds, stages and theaters of humane frailety, and so many pulpits out of which our mortality is preached: and all the common graves of the people are the coffers of death, the sight whereof should teach us to lay up our treasure in heaven. And thus, though the touch of a grave defiled the body with a ceremoniall pollution in the time of the Law; Numb. 19.16. yet the sight of a grave may serve to cleanse the soule by a spirituall consideration of our end, even as the sight of the Leviathan raised up, did bring men to purify themselves, fearing lest the whale might be their grave. Iob. 41.25. with Iob, 3.8.
(m) The grave being prepared for the dead corps, then men proceed with their
(...)

may obtaine.
(n) Having bene at the grave and performed the last duety to the person of the dead, we then returne and come from the dead to the living, to the friends of the dead, to mourne with them, to comfort them, and (as the kinred and speciall friends of old used) to eat and drink with them and give them the cup of consolation: Rom. 12.15. Ier. 16.7.8. Gen. 37.35. 1. Chro. 7.22. Ioh. 11.19. and in this action we have an other call to remember our end. While we minister consolation to others, we are to take an exhortation to our selves. The house of mourning is the schoole of mortification; and therefore better to enter into it then into the house of feasting: for there is the end of all men, which the living will lay unto his heart, and so be made better in his heart by the consideration of the dead and by the sadnes of the countenances waiting on that consideration. Eccles. 7.2.3.4.
(o) When the comforters of them that mourne are departed from the mourning house and gone every one to his owne; yet still the friends of the dead, even while they live on earth, so often as they misse their friends departed, and want the help

and benefit which they were wont to enjoy from them, so often are they called to remember death, that makes such separatio^s. La. 4.18-20. The widowes, orphanes, desolate parents, oppressed subjects, and scattered sheep, that are deprived of their loving husbands, parents, children, rulers, pastours, or any friend and neighbour that misseth the company of an other, are by this want called to remember both that death past which took away their friends, and that death to come which shall againe restore them and bring them together. 1. Thess. 4.13.14. 2. Sam. 12.23. And in this remembrance they are withal warned to make themselves ready for death, and not to be glewed unto this world from whence their comforts are taken away. When the shepheard takes up the young lamb, the ewe followes him of her selfe, and needs no more calling or driving: when the great shepheard of the sheep takes away the soules of young and old, and of dearest friends from one another, it is to make them runne after the Lord and to long after his presence, in whom they shall finde all and more then all that ever they lost in this world. So often as we thinke of a mother, a father, or other intire
(...)

serve to make a deeper impressio^ into the soule, and to keep the memory of it self in the minde more then a thousand other memorials beside. A strange thing it were, if a man that were to be judged the next day of life and death, and to receive sentence eitheir of a most cruell and shamefull death or of a rich and honourable estate during his life; if this man could not keep in minde the judgment approching untill the next morrow, without tying stringes about his fingers for remembrance, or writing some caveats upon the posts of the prison, or procuring some watchmen to come every houre whispering in his eare to tell him of the danger imminent, of life or death: And as strange or more is it, that these great and maine matters of Eternall Salvation or Eternall Condemnation should not by their owne greatnes presse the heart of man with the weight thereof unto a continuall remembrance of them, without other warnings; when as we know not whether we shall have one dayes respite before they come.
(a) The last end of the godly is eternall life. This life consists especially in fellowship with God and the Saints. By fellowship with God men come to see

God; Matt. 5.8. even to see him as he is; 1. Ioh. 3.2. to see his face which living man was never able to see on earth; Exo. 33.20. to see him, before whom the glorious Seraphims doe cover their faces with their wings; Esa. 6.2. to see the holy Trinity, the blessed Father, Sonne, and H. Ghost, clothed with the sacred robes of their severall beauty and majesty, shining distinctly as the pure Iasper, the carnation Sardine, and the greene Emerald. Rev. 4.3. Then the Sonne will shew himselfe unto his elect, Ioh. 14.21. and they shall see his glory; Ioh. 17.24. and the Father shall be seene in him; Ioh. 14.9.10. and with them both the seven Spirits which are before the throne even that one and the same Spirit enlightning with his sevenfold graces and gifts that bright sevenfold lamp of his Church. Rev. 1.4. with. 4.5. 1. Cor. 12.11. With this vision shall the soule be satisfyed whe^ they awake Psal. 17.15. The pleasure of this surmounts the joy of all pleasant things seene by any eye. If all the pleasure that all the most ardent lovers receyved at any or at all times from all the most beauteous and amiable countenances of their dearest spouses and fairest loves in
(...)

and the like promises. Therefore is that end ever to be reme^bred and longed after. The^ especially shal it appeare how the elect remaine as lambs in the bosome of the Lord their shepheard. Esa. 40.11. The^ will it be further revealed how God dwelleth in the^ and they in him; 1. Ioh. 4.15.16. and therefore need not feare being kept far off, as me^ on earth that were kept from the bodily presence of Christ being in the house, because of the thro^g at the doore. Mar. 2.2.4. The incomprehensible Lord filling heaven and earth, Ier. 23.24. is himself a house where they shall dwel, and they a mansio^ wherein he will make his abode: Ioh. 14.23. By this heavenly conjunction and cohabitation with God shall the elect be one, even as the Father and the Sonne are one; Christ in them and the Father in him, that they may be perfect in one. Ioh. 17.22.23. This thrise blessed and most glorious union is that greene bed of Christ and his Spouse, Sol. song. 1.16. an eternall paradise of comfort and garden of pure delights. Oh what madnes is it to forsake that greene bed for any bed of pleasure in the world! By this communion the Lord embraceth his elect with both armes of his love, and putteth them in his

bosome; Sol. song. 2.6. and 8.3. and in this divine embracement there is felt more happines and heavenly joy, then all the love and fruits of love, or whatsoever went under the name of the te^drest and stro^gest affection in this world, could ever yeeld unto the heart of man. For if the first fruits of spirituall joy now at this present, in the middes of tribulation, be an hundred fold more then all the pleasure of houses and lands, fathers and mothers, wife and children, the most desirable things of this world; Mark. 10.29.30. then how can it be but more then an hundred thousand fold pleasure to enjoy the beauty and face of God in heave^, to inherit the fulnes of joy in his presence, and pleasures for evermore at his right hand? If the infinite blessednes of the glorious persons in the holy Trinity doth appeare in their mutuall union, so that they were an allsufficient and eternall delight unto themselves, in enjoying one an other continually before the world was, before men or angels were made; Prov. 8.30. then may we well think, how our vessels shall be filled and overflow with heavenly comfort, 1. Ioh. 1.4. when we come to drinke of that divine fountaine, and enter into our Masters
(...)

able to bring to passe. And therefore as in the transfiguration of Christ, his face did shine as the Sunne; Matt. 17.2. even so shall the righteous shine forth as the Sunne in the Kingdome of their Father. Matt. 13.43. As the raiment of Christ through the brightnes of his body, did shine as the transparent light; Matt. 17.2. and was exceeding white as snow; Mark. 9.3. and withall white and glistering: Luk. 9.29. so the whole person of the elect made whiter then snow in their transfiguration, shall shine and glister and sparkle with a radiant beauty and heavenly brightnes: yea then shall the Moone be abashed and the Sunne ashamed before the Lord and his ancients, when the Lord shall reigne in Zion; Esa. 24.23. when he shall be glorifyed in the Saints, and made marvellous in all them that beleeve. 2. Thes. 1.10. If the face of Moses, while he was yet clothed with corruption, when he had seene but the back parts of the Lord, and that but for a moment in one vision, did yet shine so gloriously, that men fled away amazed from him and durst not behold the brightnes of his countenance; Exo. 34.30. with c. 33.23. what then shall be the glory of the faithfull,

when being clothed with immortality, they shall see God face to face, and that in a perpetuall vision for evermore?
(d) From this transfiguration of the Saints made so glorious by the sight of God and fellowship with him, ariseth the glory of their fellowship one with another, which is also an unspeakable felicity of the second life; to enjoy all the beauty and all the love of all the glorified soules and bodies in heaven. As Ionathan seing the grace of God in David, and his worthines, was knit unto him and loved him as his owne soule; 1. Sam. 18.1. so here the Saints beholding the glory of God revealed in each other, shall be linked together in the neerest bonds of intire affection. They that first give themselves to God, doe then give themselves unto one an other by the will of God. 2. Cor. 8.5. They are all one in Christ Iesus. Gal. 3.28. There is one body and one spirit: Eph. 4.4. all are gathered together in one, under one head, whether things in heaven or in earth, men and Angels, whether they be thrones, or principalities, or powers. Eph. 1.10.22. All things are the Saints; whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present,
(...)

of her and embraced in her armes for ever! The loving society of godly men even in their present weaknes, is magnifyed as a good and pleasant thing, as a precious oyntment, as the dew of Hermon and Zion: Psal. 133.1.2.3. how good and pleasant then is the heavenly conversation and cohabitation of the Saints? even as the dew of Paradise, where God hath appointed the blessing for ever to make those beauteous blossomes therein to flourish eternally. As oyntment and perfume rejoyce the heart, so doth the sweetnes of a mans friend by hearty counsell; Prov. 27.9. and what then is the sweetnes and joy of that communion, where every heart is a severall closet replenished with al store and variety of divine oyntments and perfumes for the mutuall delight of the Saints? The consolation of Christ is there most perfect, the comfort of love and fellowship of the spirit are compleate and full; and so the joy of every one is fulfilled in being like minded, having the same love, being of one accord and of one judgment: Phil. 2.1.2. there is no crying nor complayning; Rev. 21.4. no curse, no angry word; no countenance of dislike or disdaine; no evill, no occasion

of evill, no appearance of evill, no suspicion of evill; no want of good in themselves, no envy of good in others; but every mans joy doubled for anothers salvation, and glorifyed in anothers glory. The principall delight is that God is found in them all; each being the temple of God, and his love the fire burning upon the altar of every heart: in each of them there is a vision of God and an image of his glory: he is seene in each and shines in them, and so at every turne they meet with God who is all in all and in every one of them. 1. Cor. 15.28. And they never powre out their hearts to one another, but withall they powre out prayse unto God with streames of pleasure to themselves. And how infinitely manifold are their pleasures, where there are so many spirits of just and perfect men, Heb. 12.22.23. so many millions of Angels, thousand thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand standing before the Lord? Dan. 7.10. Rev. 5.11. If Peter thought it so good to be there where but two of the Saints, Moses and Elias appeared in glory with Christ; Luk. 9.30-33. how good is it to be there where all appeare together in glory with Christ, where the glory

of every one shall appeare more clearely and be better discerned, where every one shall be the precious jewell and treasure of another? O who are they which remembring this end, will not be content to make an end of their sinfull courses to enjoy this communion? How unworthy a thing is it that the thoughts of vanity should thrust out of our mindes these pleasant remembrances of our latter end and the comforts therein? If I forget thee O Ierusalem, let my right hand forget it selfe: if I doe not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roofe of my mouth; if I prefer not Ierusalem above my chiefe joy. Psalm. 137.5.6.
(e) It is further to be considered that in all the maine parts and acts of Christian life we are taught every day continually to reme^ber this our latter end. All dueties both of doing good through faith, hope and love, or of suffering evill for doing good through patience, are so many memorials thereof. The end of faith is the salvation of our soules, which it beleeveth 1. Pet. 1.9. the object of hope is life eternall, which it embraceth: Tit. 1.2 and 3.7. and 2.13. the comfort of love is translation

from death unto life, whereof it assureth us: 1. Ioh. 3.14.18.19. the reward of patience is rest in the kingdome of heaven and an eternall weight of glory, which it looketh for. Matth. 5.10-12. 2. Cor. 4.17. And thus the comfort of this blessed end is ever carried in the eye of faith, in the armes of hope, in the bosome of love, and borne as it were upon the shoulders of patience. And as all that is done by me^ being well considered, should bring this latter end to their remembra^ce; so all the works of speciall grace that are wrought by God for his children, before this world, in this world, or after this world, if we looke upo^ them with a right eye, they doe every one carry in them a remembrance of this glorious end and provoke us to thinke thereof. We cannot be assured of our election, but we see it as a booke of life wherein we reade our happy end, Phil. 4.3. and behold the kingdome prepared for us before the foundation of the world. Mat. 25.34. We cannot rightly thinke of our calling, unles we behold that marvellous light and glory where unto we are called. 1. Pet. 2.9. and 5.10. 2. Pet. 1.3. We doe not conceive sufficiently the co^fort of our justificatio^ by faith, u^les
(...)

eye on this end, and for the joy that was set before him endured the crosse, and finished his course and the work committed unto him. Heb. 12.2. Oh let us not breake the band that drew on Christ himselfe. Oh forgive us Lord that we have bene so profane and carnall to forget this end so often: from henceforth keep it in our mindes and fix it in our memories that it never slip away.


CHAP. VI. The latter end of the faithfull compared vvith the primitive estate of the old vvorld.

Of the communion which man had with God, being created after his likenesse. (a) The image of God in the soule, though perfectly beautifull and excellent, (b) yet inferiour to the image of Christ in the faithfull, the perfection and perpetuity thereof in the world to come. (c) The body at first though naked, yet without shame and pain, erect and upright,

in all the senses fitted for communion with God; (d) but hereafter endued with more noble and heavenly qualities, spirituall, transparent, light, agile, ever vigilant in feeing and communicating with God. (e) The dominion over the creatures given at first, illustrated by the remnants thereof yet apparent. (f) not to be compared with that which shall be, in regard of heaven and earth and all that is therein.
Of their mutuall fellowship with one another. (g) Marriage the first band of society and ground of all other, and to that end instituted and honoured of God for their mutual comfort: (h) yet nothing like the glorious bands of communion with Saints and Angels in heaven. (i) What blessed communion Adam and Evah might have had with their posterity living to this day, if neither had sinned: (k) In a right line descendent viewing the long race of their progeny, with great joy to themselves, (l) and no lesse happines to their childre^, who though living at greatest distance, might then with ease, and abundance of comfort have visited them and communicated with them: (m) In the collaterall line extended on each side to brethren and sisters, all rejoycing in one another, in their loving, easy and pleasant visitations: (n) Yet all this comes short of the heavenly communion in the world to come, the love of Christ, the manifold rivolets of sweet fellowship, the free and glorious motions in the kingdome of heaven.

THat we may the better comprehend that happy communion, wherewith the latter end of the faythfull shall be glorifyed, let us somewhile leave our speech of the world to come, as also of

this present world, and let us looke back into the world that is gone and past; let us behold the glory that is lost, that by the greatnes thereof first considered in it selfe and then compared with this to come, the glory hereof may more evidently appeare. That we may the better observe the difference, we are to set ourselves as it were in a middle gate betwixt two worlds, the old and the new, where we may have an open and free prospect into them both; and from thence we are to cast a look first into the old world, then into the new; with one eye to behold the first paradise in Eden, and with another the second paradise in the third heavens; with one look to view the first Adam, his gifts and his children, and with an other look to behold the second Adam, Christ Iesus, his gifts and his children, and so to compare the glory of their estates together. In such a middle gate or tower of prospect into these two worlds, the Prophets and Apostles did often set themselves when they compared them together, as appeareth in those texts, Old things are past away, behold all things are become new. 2. Cor. 5.17. Behold I create new heavens and a new earth: and the

former shall not be remembred, nor come into my minde. Esa. 65.17. The first man Adam vvas made a living soule, the last Adam vvas made a quickening spirit. 1. Cor. 15.45. so v. 49. etc.
(a) The glory of the old world in the primitive estate thereof, consisted also in a blessed fellowship with God and fellowship with men. This blessed fellowship of God with man appeared first in that he communicated his image and similitude with man, the beauty of which image shined especially in that wisedome holines and righteousnes, which God imprinted in the soule. Gen. 1.26.27. with Eph. 4.24. Coll. 3.10. Eccl. 7.29. By that wisedome he knew God and saw his glory, by that holines he did cleave unto him and embrace him with love, reverence and confidence, and so in both communicated with God. At the bestowing of this image, each Person in the holy Trinity did work together, and each gave precious and excellent gifts unto man, for the beautifying of his soule with variety of graces, such as might make him a lovely creature, in whom the Lord himselfe might take delight: Rev. 4.10.11. with Ioh. 1.3. Coll. 1.16. Iob, 33.4. and

therefore is the Trinity described consulting about this work, Let us make man in our image, after our likenes; all are noted with the title of creatours or makers, Eccl. 12.1. boreecha. Iob. 35.10. ghnosai. As upon the losse of this image, when Adam begate a sonne in his owne likenes, Gen. 5.3. all hatefull and ugly deformity of sin succeeded and every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was onely evill continually: Gen. 6.5. so had he reteyned the image of God, every imagination of the thoughts of his heart should have bene onely good and gracious continually, without any inclination to evill or the least looking awry to any thing that might have bene displeasant in the sight of God. And this image of God had bene such a beauty as the eye of man never saw in this corrupt world; such a perfect beauty, such a symmetry and harmony of grace as that Gods owne judicious eye should have found no fault or dislike in it.
(b) And yet even this perfect beauty given at the first creation, was farre inferiour and not to be compared with the glory of the world to come: even that which was made glorious had no glory

in this respect, by reason of that which excelleth. 2. Cor. 3.10. The first man is of the earth earthly, though made perfect, yet in a lower degree of perfection: the second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthly, such are they that be earthly; and as is the heavenly, such are they that be heavenly. As we have borne the image of the earthly, we shall also beare the image of the heavenly, 1. Cor. 15.47.48.49. and shall be made conforme to the image of the Sonne of God: Rom. 8.29. and that pleasant image of Christ is the highest degree of perfection, the sweetest mirrour of beauty in heaven or earth, stayning the glory of the former image. The innocency of Adam was a white robe and a glorious ornament unto him; but the righteousnes of God in Christ is a white robe more pure and precious, of a finer threed, of a brighter white, of a more divine fashion to adorne the soule; and by that righteousnes put on, the Lord himselfe becomes a diademe of beauty unto his people, Esa. 28.5. and 62.3. Kings use to give gifts according to the state of kings, great, and royall; Esth. 2.18. and so did the heavenly King at the first creation: but the
(...)

have bene no distemperature of the ayre as is felt now adayes, no afflicting stormes or tempests, no excesse of cold or heat, but that the naked body unclothed without any paine or trouble might well have endured the same. Now both the shame and paine of nakednes is very great; Esa. 20.4. 2. Sam. 10.4.5. Reu. 3.18. and 16.15. 1. Cor. 4.11. 2. Cor. 11.27. and such that men strive to cover the whole body so farre as necessity will permit, the hands and face being therefore excepted; the face left uncovered, lest the eyes should be blindfold and the breath stopt; and the hands lest the manifold works of man in his divers callings should be hindered; and yet even they also so muffled sometimes with maskes and muffes and mittens, that with great cumber and trouble they are often in the day covered and uncovered and covered againe to avoyd the injury of the weather. A great freedome it was to have bene without care what to put on; when as they needed no such exhortations as are since given to us thereabout. Matth. 6.25.31. Againe the speciall forme of mans body erect and upright with his face upward, whereas other creatures are made with their heads hanging

downward and with their faces prone to the earth, doth shew that man is called to fellowship with the Lord dwelling on high. As the Lord when he still exhorts us to lift up our eyes and looke up toward God, doth in that phrase call us to communion with him, to trust in him, to love him and to aspire unto him: Psal. 123.2. Esa. 17.7. and 45.22. so when he made Adam in such a forme with his head and eyes lift up, even in that manner of work the Lord called him to looke to his Creatour, and to embrace him the author of all his good. Besides this what are all the senses of the body but so many instruments of our communion with God, or so many doores of the soule by which both the Lord enters in to shew himselfe, and the soule goes out to behold him? By them his praise is heard, his glory is seene, his goodnes and gifts are tasted, his sweetnes smelled, yea and groaped or handled of us. Actes. 17.27. By them both faith and love and feare of God is learned. As by the senses of the body God communicated his goodnes with Adam, so by the members of his body he was to communicate his heart with God, to serve the Lord, to render thanks unto him, and to glorify him;
(...)

at first, could not without a change have inherited the kingdome of God, 1. Cor. 15.50.51. His eyes had never seene nor could have seene that face of God which is in the light unapproachable. 1. Tim. 6.16. with Exo. 33.20. If the eyes of holy men have fayled in waiting for the comforts and deliverances promised in this life; Psa. 119.82.123. how much more should our eyes wait and our flesh long for that end, where even in our flesh we shall see God, so as Adam in paradise could not doe? Iob. 19.26.27. Oh that the remembrance of this end were printed deeply in our hearts! that it might ever be retained, as the words that are written or plowed and the furrowes engraven with an yron pen filled with lead in stead of inke, and in the stony rocke in stead of paper, all firme to endure; so as Iob wished that his hope of this same glorious end might be recorded. Iob. 19.23.24. etc.
(e) Looke we back againe into the old world, and behold how God further communicated his image with the whole person of man, in that dominion and lordship which he gave unto man over the earth and all the creatures in it. Gen. 1.28. Thereby

Adam was crowned with honour and dignity; set over the works of Gods hand, all things being put under his feet, sheepe and oxen, beasts of the field, fowles of the aire, and fish of the sea. Psal. 8.5.6.7.8. God brought them all before Adam, as it were to doe homage unto him as unto their king, and in signe of subjection to receive their names from him. Gen. 2.19.20. Even after the fall and since the rebellion of the creatures thereupon, the service which they yet performe unto man is very great. The oxe knowes his owner and the asse his masters crib. Esa. 1.3. The husbandman hath taught the strong horse to be obedient unto him; to draw his plow and his cart, if he say goe, he goeth; if he say come, he cometh; at one word the horse goeth right forward, at another he stands still and stirrs not; at one word he turnes to the right hand, at another he turnes to the left hand. The silly sheepe are taught to know the voyce of their owne shepheard, to follow him and to distinguish betwixt his voyce and the voyce of a stranger which they will not follow. Iohn. 10.3.4.5. Experience shewes how the doves are taught to carry letters for men. The birds great

and small are tamed and taught to come at the call of man; eve^ the ravenous hawkes at the voyce and call of the faulconer. The dogs are taught many arts of hunting in divers kindes. It is strange to heare and see how the waterfoules in Freeseland, Waterland and elswhere are taught to entise other wild foules and bring them into the snare, and then to give a watchword unto their master to sease upon them. If thus farre they be subdued unto man, eve^ after the fall, what is that service which they should have performed before the fall, when both man should have had more understanding to teach and governe them and they a more inclinable and tractable disposition to have obeyed? As Iehosaphat witnessed his fellowship with the kings of Israel, when he professed, My people are as thy people, and my horses as thy horses; 1. Kings 22.4. and 2. Kings 3.7. so hath the Lord hereby declared his communion with man by making his creatures our servants, his horses our horses, etc.
It cannot be conceived or knowne of us how great pleasure and delight man should have had in this dignity communicated unto him of God. The earth it selfe and

all the increase thereof was also subjected unto man: Gen. 1.28. paradise and all the pleasant fruits thereof; Gen. 2.8.16. whereas otherwise every one might have bene as dangerous and pernicious to be eaten and tasted of as was the forbidden fruit: the greene grasse diversifyed with sweet flowers of sundry colours and shapes was spread as a pleasant carpet for man to tread upon; and by a speciall providence the ground was greene, a colour wholesomest for the eye-sight of man: the firmament above beautifyed with so many spangles of shining starres was spread out as a canopie over the head of man where ever he goes, Esa. 40.22. more glorious then those carried over the heads of Popes or Emperours. Even those heavenly bodies are communicated and distributed unto man for his benefit and comfort, Deu. 4.19.
(f) And yet notwithstanding all this, if we cast our eye into the world to come the glory thereof will be found far to surmount all this. That which is now above our heads shall then be found to be under our feet. The visible heavens that now are, are not thought good enough nor pleasant enough for the elect: but they shall passe away with a noise; 2. Pet. 3.10.
(...)

into singing; Esa. 44.23. the sea shall roare and the floods clap their hands, the field shall be joyfull and all that is therein. Psal. 96.11.12. and 98.7.8. And yet all this is not enough; if every twigge of all the trees in the world were a flute or sapwhistle; if every stalk of corne in the field or reed by the waters side were all pipes, blowne by the winde; yet all would be too little to resound this incomprehensible glory. And in the meane time untill this glory be revealed, untill the sons of God be manifested, they wait and hold up their heads in exspectation, they groane and travell in paine, longing for this blessed end: Rom. 8.19.22. and so doe they that have the first fruits of the Spirit, groane and sigh within themselves, waiting for the adoption, the redemption of their bodies. vers. 23. This is the desired end which God calles us so oft to remember; how can men thinke of it without desiring it? how can they desire it aright without praying for it? how can men thinke they pray aright for it, unlesse they prepare themselves thereunto by denying the world? What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godlines, whiles we looke for this end?

with what care and diligence should we labour to be found of him in peace, without spot and blamelesse? 2. Pet. 3.11.14.
(g)
BEsides the fellowship with God in the old world, if we againe looke back into it, we may behold an other happines of men in their mutuall fellowship one with another. The first conjugation of humane society was that of ma^ and wife by marriage; this was the originall and ground of all other societies: from hence sprung the names and estates of father and mother, with their sonnes and daughters: out of this society in family sprung all the societies in Church and common-wealth. When God could have made men of new clods of the earth so as Adam was made at first, Gen. 2.7. and so have multiplyed them abundantly, according to the abundance of spirit that was in him; Mal. 2.15. yet he thought it good to create not onely one woman for one man, which he might have done in many couples of them, but also to make onely one couple of them, and from them to draw all the lines of consanguinity and affinity, which should be so many bandes of love to unite and binde all mankinde
(...)

new. Cast we our eye that way againe, and behold how in the resurrection they neither marry nor give in marriage but are as the angels of God in heaven. Matt. 22.30. All the comforts of marriage shall be as it were swallowed up and overwhelmed of that heavenly glory, and vanish away in the sight of it. There shall be more glorious bands of communion with Saints and Angels, then is the matrimoniall covenant; sweeter knots of loving fellowship, and faster then the knot of marriage; the bond of the Spirit uniting hearts and mindes in one more then all the cords of consanguinity or affinity. All the faithfull soules shall be presented unto Christ as pure virgines: 2. Cor, 11.2. they are and shall be ever his loves, his doves, his undefiled: Cant. 5.2. and he shall be their bridegroome, Matt. 25.1. fayrer then the children of men; Psal. 45.2. white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand, wholly delectable and lovely: Cant. 5.10. etc. far above the first Adam. The heavenly paradise shall be an eternall wedding-chamber, and all the Angels of God shall rejoyce for them to whom such honour is vouchsafed. Luke 15.10. What remaineth to be done of us untill we come to

that immortall and undefiled inheritance, but that we aspire unto it dayly, that we have this end before us as the loadstarre of our comfort and direction, that we be carried forward amaine toward this price of our heavenly calling? one would thinke this should be a spurre sharp enough, to make us runne the race of godlines set before us, while we have such glory propounded and the call of our Bridegroome inciting us.
(i) From Adam and Evah come we to their children, and looke into the old world againe. Had not sinne come into the world by the transgression of Adam; had he and his posterity continued untill this time in their uprightnes, in the image of God wherein they were created; what a glorious and blessed communion should man have then enjoyed even upon the earth? If sinne had bene kept out of the world, then had not death entred: Rom. 5.12. with Gen. 2.17. and 3.17.19. then might Adam and Evah have bene alive to this day, and seene their childrens children, not unto the third and fourth, but to the thirtieth and fourtieth or hundredth generation, and all of them faire and without blemish either of soule or body, without any
(...)

had thirty renowned sonnes that rode on thirty asse colts and ruled over thirty cities; Iudg. 10 3.4. of Ibzan having twise as many children, thirty sonnes and thirty daughters, living to see them all married; Iudg. 12.8.9. of Abdon that had fourty sonnes and thirty nephewes, all honourable, riding on seventy asse colts; vers. 14. ibid. then what must the honour of Adam and Evah have bene in all their innumerable sonnes and daughters, being all Lords and rulers of the earth and all the creatures therein subdued unto them; to have seene all these come about them by course, and that with bowed knees to honour them; with stretched out armes to embrace them; with loving and cheerefull countenances to rejoyce them; with obedient hearts to serve them; such children as had never offended them nor any besides such as never had give^ any occasion of greefe to them or of complaint to others? According to the proportion of the cause both in respect of their number and of their excellent graces, their joy must have bene a thousand times greater then the joy of other parents, that yet have counted themselves happy in their children. Their dayes without decay should

have bene lengthened, and their yeares drawne out with comfort; their eyes never dimmed with age like Isaac that could not know one sonne from another: Gen. 27.1. etc. but their youth should have bene renewed more then the Eagles, by eating the tree of life in the midst of the garden, and so with a quick sence and fresh memory ever have enjoyed a deligtfull conversation with their posterity.
(l) To come from the joy of parents to marke the childrens happines; consider we againe the love ascendent, by which the posterity of Adam should have had comfortable communion with their elders from the next parents upward for an hundred generations unto Adam: for according to the phrase of Scripture a man that lives an hundred yeare is said to see his children unto the third and fourth generation: and so according to this speech we may well reckon an hundred generations and more from Adam to our time.
Now as childrens children are the crowne of old men; so the glory of children are their fathers: Prov. 17.6. and every one of the last generation having had an hundred fathers, one older then another to Adam, and all living together

and all of them holy patriarkes, the oracles of God unto their children, full of wise counsell, holy instructions and divine consolations, and as full of love and tender affection, which could not but have yeelded pleasant words, like the hony combe, sweetnes to the soule and health to the bones: Prov. 16.24. what joy then in this state of innocency should have bene to the children in such a communion; where every one should have had an hundred crowns of glory and more; every one of their fathers being better unto them then any crowne of the finest gold of Ophir or Vphaz? That we may the better conceive of this, let us suppose that which might have bene according to the first foundation of the world, and let us set before our eyes Adam dwelling in paradise in Eden as in the center of the habitable world, and all his children placed round about him; in this order that the next succeeding generations should inhabit in the next circle or climate, a little more remote from him, and the next ensuing generations should be planted yet a little further off, and so the next following still further and further unto the hundreth generation,

reaching to the ends of the earth. And to speake now even of those that were furthest off, of the last generations, when they at any time should have desired to visit their first parent Adam and to have communicated with him; oh what comfort, what pleasant recreation and refreshing of their soule might that have bene unto them! Suppose it had bene an hundred dayes journey and more, yet no labour before the fall was painefull; no travell should have bene wearisome; no danger should have molested them in the way: in passing through an hundred countries a man should have met with no barbarian, while there was no confusion of languages in the world; every one they met should have blessed them in the name of the Lord, and have bene ready to goe with them a mile or more, and brought them on their way if they would. Matt. 5.41. Vnder every tongue there should have bene hony and milk of gracious speech and of pleasant discourse, and their lippes should have dropped as an hony combe. Cant. 4.11. At the end of every dayes journey a man might have come to lodge at the mansion place of his owne naturall father or

grandfather, though every day still with him that should be by one generation older then the former. Every harbour in each country should have bene a delightfull paradise, and their deare parents, their noble progenitours should there have entertained them with all the pleasantest fruits of their garden, rejoycing over the^, putting them into their bosome, and powring out their hearts unto them; and above all materiall food, their sweet conferences, according to the work of Gods Spirit in his children; Psal. 44.1. and 78.3.4. their stories of old matters which they had seene, workes of divine providence, the yeares of Gods right hand, and all of mercy and benefits, while no sinne had bene in the world; their narrations of divine visions, and their talke with God, according to that course which God had begun with Adam before the fall; these conferences should have bene a spirituall banquet and their best cheare, more pleasant then the juyce of the pomegranate and above any spiced wine to rejoyce the heart. And thus as they proceeded in their journey they might still at every harbour have drunk older, sweeter and mellower wine of consolation, and still

have bene entertained by their more ancient fathers, which could tell them of things done before that patriark was borne with whom they had lodged the night before. And when they had thus in order passed on along by an hundred patriarks, their owne fathers, and in every station from day to day had bene filled with more and more comfort; then at last comming to their first parent, old Adam, the patriark of patriarks, to his garden in Eden, and finding him there in his integrity without any decay of Gods image in him strong in body and minde, flourishing as a greene olive tree, and encreased abundantly in wisedome and in all the gifts of holines and righteousnes; oh what joy should it have bene to have come before him, and seene him eye to eye, to have bene heartily welcommed by him, and with all joy to be owned by him as his children, to have had him layd his ha^ds upon them and blessed them; and in like manner to have saluted their most deare mother Evah, and to have bene embraced and kissed by her! But especially it would then have bene a principall comfort to have receyved the Sacrament with him; to have gone into the midst of the garden with him, whiles
(...)

aire: as God brought these to Adam to see how he would name them; Ge. 2.19.20. so might Adam shew them to his childre^, and according to the wisedome given him at the first, co^ferre againe of their natures and the reason of their names with those his childre^ created in the same image of God with him and taught of God, that he might rejoyce in them also as they with him. Though Solomon spake of trees, from the cedar in Lebanon to the hyssope on the wal; also of beasts and fouls, creeping things and fishes, and was wiser the^ all the philosophers in the degenerate and corrupt world: 1. Kin. 4.29-34. yet was his wisedome but ignorance in comparison of that primitive estate and the wisedome given to Adam at the first. After this and a multitude of other pleasures they might have returned loaden with blessings, and filled with comfort as much as their heart could hold. And if at any time Adam and Evah would in like manner have gone abroad on progresse to have visited their children, what comfort should this have bene unto their children to have entertained that most royall and honourable person above all others, that right Catholick King or universal Monarch and father of the

whole world, with Evah their Queenemother, and therefore to have bene reverenced, loved and obeyed by all? How would they have receyved him as an angel of God to the unspeakable joy both of him and them mutually?
(m) And as the glory of this communion might thus be observed in the persons allyed in a right line, both descende^t and ascendent; so also in the collaterall line extended on each side both farre and neere to brethren and sisters, and an hundred other degrees of kinred further off: among all which (if man had continued in his estate wherein the Lord placed him) there should then have bene a most loving and pleasant conversation, more then can be imagined. It had bene as easy for these to have travelled a thousand miles to embrace their friends, as it is now for us to goe one small dayes-journey. While there was no evill of sinne, there should have bene no evill of paine or trouble in any of their labours. And besides in the state of innocency, great help and comfort should have bene afforded unto man by the service of other creatures, as hath bene shewed before. Even in this corrupt and degenerate estate of man and beast, all kinde
(...)

2. Cor. 6.18. behold my spouse, my wife, my bride. Ioh. 3.29. Rev. 19.7. and 21.2. All the speciall bands of love and union, whether in the root of marriage, or in the branches of kinred, whether in the degrees ascending, descending, or any way extending themselves, either in the right line or in the side line, they are all found in Christ, all meet together and are combined in him. He alone, the new Adam is instead of all the fathers and mothers, brethren or sisters, sonnes or daughters; the comfort of all and more fruits of love then all the kinred of the old world could have afforded unto us, is to be enjoyed in the kingdome of Christ. And looke how Christ esteemes of his elect, so shall they be esteemed and loved of all others there where his word requiring it must needs be performed. Ioh. 13.34. and 15.12.13. And therefore looke how many Saints and Angels there be in heaven, so many sweet fountaines of loving communion there be for every soule to drinke at, farre passing all the love of friends ever tasted in the lower world. From every one shall flow rivers of water of life, Ioh. 7.38. Christ Iesus being the headspring of all; for then shall that

and all the rest of his promises be fullfilled in the highest degree. It is matter of more joy even now to sit at the table of the Lord, to receive the Sacrament of the New Testament, then it was to pluck apples from the tree of life in paradise; greater benefits are sealed, even Christ is herein exhibited unto us, a gift more excellent then all those that were confirmed unto Adam by the tree of life: but then especially shall the difference appeare, when the faythfull shall partake in the marriage supper of the Lambe in heaven; when they shall be brought before the Lord, the ancient of dayes, the everlasting God, before whom Adam, though alive at this day, should be as a child of yesterday, a thousand yeares being but as one day in his sight; when they shall heare him speake and tell of his eternall love of us before the world, in his decrees of election and predestination so often poynted at in Scripture, and the like precious thoughts of his grace to us ward, this shall be the fullnes of joy infinitely exceeding all the supposed delights of the old world. As for the pleasant journeys and motions, we may not thinke that the godly shall be there as in a prison.
(...)

together in heavenly places in Christ Iesus. Eph. 2.6.

CHAP. VII. Hovv God calleth men to remember the latter end of Reprobates.The fearfulnes and greevousnes of the second death set forth by (a) The deserving cause, Sinne, which is especially aggravated by the wisedome, authority, goodnes, and other attributes of God: (b) The inflicting cause, the wrath of God, from which the whole misery and all the circumstances of the second death have their denominations; (c) compared unto fire, yet different from common fire, unquenchable, most piercing, largely extending it selfe, and taking hold on the greatest in the world: (d) This fire and the fiercenes of it made plaine by the observation of sundry fires already kindled in the bowels of the earth, in vegetative and sensitive creatures, in the body of man, in the aire and firmament, in the angels, (e) but chiefly in the course of Gods just indignation against sinners, seriously to be considered of all that

desire to escape it. (f) The effects, dolefull cryes and lamentations of the tormented, of the Devils themselves, yea even of our blessed Saviour in his sufferings. (g) Particular manifestations of Gods wrath against particular sinnes and transgressions of every commandement, both of the first and second table.THe end of all flesh hath bene represented unto us of God by a basket of summer fruit, ripe for the harvest, ready to be gathered. The blessed end of the godly hath bene shewed in the basket of good figs, very good: there remaines yet the basket of rotten figs, very naught, to be marked of us; for that sight is also propounded unto us of God and he calles us to remember the end of the wicked thereby, whiles that basket was in vision also set before the Temple of the Lord. Ier. 24.1. It is an hideous and fearefull sight to ope^ the graves where the greene carcases of dead men doe lye, to behold the grieslines and lothsomnes of death in them, and who doth not flie from it? But much more horrour it is to looke upon the dead soules in Hell, their torment and lothsome estate being an hundred times more and worse to be endured then the sight of any rotten carcasses in the grave: Yet are we called of God to remember
(...)

same offences of striking or cursing committed against others were not so, though some childre^ might happily have as much wisedome as their father and mother, yet their authority alone being despised, brought such woe. Now the authority of God the heavenly father over his creature being infinitely greater then the authority of any earthly father over his children; the contempt thereof doth accordingly procure an infinite woe unto those that disobey God, that reject his Law and make their owne lust their law, and prefer the doing of their owne vile wills before the obedience of his holy and heavenly will.So in like manner the infinite evill of sinne appeareth distinctly in this, that it is committed against the infinite goodnes and mercy of God. There are in creatures manifold degrees of love and kindnes: and the love of one doth an hundred times exceed the love of some other, both in tendernes of affection and in multitude of benefits. And in such case the treachery of such as deale falsely and wickedly against their cheefest friends, becomes an hundredfold greater evill then the sin of some others. Now the Lord is love it selfe; 1. Ioh. 4.8.16. and herein is love, not that we love God,

but that he loved us: vers. 10. his grace and the gifts of his eternall and free grace doe infinitely exceed all other love; he gave himselfe to be our God and portion, his Sonne to be our ransome. And therefore to sin against this high and immeasurable grace; to conte^ne this love and to love that which is vanitie of vanities more then God, doth make the sin of such to be out of measure sinfull, and deserveth an infinite hatred and misery to ensue thereupon.And thus the greevousnes of sinne is to be considered and conceived in respect of the other divine attributes; whereby we may see as it were, ten infinites in one and behold many windowes of contemplation opened before us, through which we may have a huge and vast prospect of the endles and unsearchable woe of sinne, that is to be felt in the second death. Though there be many other aggravations of sinne, yet this so farre exceeds the rest as if they all were nothing in comparison of this: therefore doth the Spirit often urge this consideration upon men, saying to the sinners, Ye have lyed, not unto men but unto God: Act. 5.4. and he that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, vvho hath also given us his holy Spirit, 1. Thes.
(...)

and it containes more then a world of bookes can expresse.(c) This fierce wrath of God is often in Scripture compared unto burning and devouring fire; Deut. 32.22. Ier. 15.14. and 17.4. Ezek. 21.31. and 22.21. and 36.5. Zeph. 1.18. and accordingly is the torme^t in hell described unto us by the name of hellfire. Matt. 5.22. and 18.9. The smarting paine caused by fire is well knowne by the common use thereof among us: And yet above the nature of common fire, which is made for the comfort of man, to cheere him and to make him laugh, Esa. 44.16. this dolefull fire of hell is propounded unto us of God by many strange descriptions. It is a fire not like unto ours that may be quenched, but an unquenchable fire; Esa. 66.24. Mark. 9.44 Rev. 14.11. an everlasting fire, Matt. 18.8. and 25.41. which so burnes the wicked as that it doth not consume them, but keeps them alive in death, that they may burne for ever and ever. It is a fire that will not onely burne stones, melt yron and brasse, but a subtile, piercing fire, that burnes even the spirits and soules of men; being a fire prepared for the devill and his angels, which are

spirits, Matt. 25.41. Rev. 20.10. and therefore farre more terrible then our fire by which tyrants burne the bodies of martyrs, but cannot burne their soules. Mat. 10.28. For the greatnes of it, it is a bottomlesse pit; Rev. 9.1.2. deep and large; Esa. 30.33. a lake or sea of fire, Rev. 20.14.15. for the names of lake or sea are sometimes in Scripture indifferently put one for another: Matt. 8.24. with Luk. 8.23. and this burning sea is withall called a lake of brimstone, Rev. 19.20. and 20.10. which makes the fire to burne more cruelly, to choake and strangle such as are plunged into this lake. And for the forme of it, it is sometimes compared to an oven, or furnace of fire, Mal. 4.1. Mat. 13.42.50. in which the fire being kept close and strait, may be made seven times more hote and fierce then it was before. Dan. 3.19. To make this fire yet more abhominable, it is compared unto Tophet, Esa. 30.33. where children were burnt in horrible and lothsome manner, being sacrificed unto devils: Ier. 7.31. with Psa. 106.37. and so and more horrible would it be to see the soules sacrificed in Hell-fire. Were there now but a witch to be burned at a stake, how many

thousands would flock together to behold the sight? how many would loose a dayes work and be content to misse their dinners, rather then to misse the sight of it? But if it were to see a King or an Emperour burnt; to see a Pope or a Cardinall, which having burnt many martyrs should at length have their owne flesh burnt with fire; how many farre and neere would run and ride and spare no cost or labour to become spectatours of such a judgment? how long, how often, how earnestly would men talke of it afterwards? And yet this fire of the second death is for such: by faith we see it; faith makes us spectatours thereof, if we beleeve the Scriptures, which shew us how Tophet is prepared for kings; Esa. 30.33. how the beast and the false prophet, the Popes, are to be cast alive into the lake of fire and brimstone; Rev. 19.20. and 20.10. and with them the multitude of their idolaters and other abhominable persons Rev. 21.8. And how are men bewitched that they forget this latter end of sinners; that they more regard the light and momentany judgments of men, then the eternall and severe judgments of the

everlasting God? This lake of fire is so forgotten and contemned of many which stand dayly at the brink of the pit, ready to sinke downe into it for their sinnes, as if that fire were already quenched: yea the very common knowledge and confession thereof by all sorts, hath quenched the thought of it and extinguished the memory and mencion of it with many, as if it were so well knowne, that it needed no more to be spoken of. And for this cause are many tumbled into it and overwhelmed in the depth of it before they be aware of it.(d) The power of Gods wrath in kindling this fire may further be perceived, if we behold the great variety of strange fires which God in his works of creation and providence hath already kindled and set before us, to shew what he is able to doe. In the bowels of the earth below, the Lord hath as it were, sowne the seeds of fire in the divers minerals thereof, as in the mines of coales, in the veines of vitrioll, of salt-peter, of lime, and divers other things whereby from under the earth is turned up as it were fire: Iob. 28.5. and to shew a most wofull burning it is sayd, The people shall be as the

burnings of lime. Esa. 33.12. Above upon the face of the earth the Lord hath planted divers growing fires in sundry hote herbes; some burning and blistering the skinne outwardly by the very touch thereof, as the nettle with some other kinde of thistles and venomous thornes, whose innumerable prickes shew the infinite power of God to curse the wicked; some other herbs being taken inwardly, as Hellebore, Coloquintida (or the wild gourd that brought death into the pot, 2. Kin. 4.39.40.) Euphorbium and the like doe cast the body into miserable paine and distresse, burning, exulcerating, gnawing, grating and tearing the intrals, tossing and tormenting the body with vomits, purges, with swooning and fainting, with violent convulsions and fearfull symptomes. In the sensitive creatures God hath kindled many kindes of living and going fire, walking to and fro in the earth, in the divers poysons of sundry serpe^ts, some creeping under our feet, some flying over our heads, as in the hornet, the snake, adder, aspe, cockatrice, and those fiery flying serpents that sting and burne men to the death. Num. 21.6. Esa. 14.29. To come neerer ourselves, in the body of man God

kindleth many strange fires in the sundry diseases thereof, both by painefull inflammations of particular parts, both outward and inward, and especially by that universall fire of the burning fevers flaming out of the heart into the whole body: Deut. 28.22. and this in great variety, some inflaming the spirits onely; some the blood also; and some consuming the very substance of the solid parts also: some burning with a simple excesse of heat; others consisting in rotten and corrupt humours doe burne the body more cruelly: and of these againe some burning continually, night and day without intermission, as the fire in glasse houses and the furnaces where yron is melted; others by fitts comming at appoynted seasons and after certain periods of time, either every day, or each second or third day, like fire raked under ashes and kindled againe upon occasion: some others againe consisting of a malignant and poysonous fire, as in the pestilentiall fevers that burne more cruelly and deadly then the rest, these are like going or running fires through their contagion spreading abroad, walking in darknesse, destroying at noone, and flying as poysoned arrowes by their infection, and breaking

out in boyles and carbuncles like so many fiery furnaces or ovens comming up in the flesh. Psa. 91.3.6. Esa. 38 21. And by these with their compounds the Lord kindleth a burning lake within the body, maketh the veines which containe the inflamed blood and humours to be like so many rivers of pitch and brimstone, and so causeth an unquenchable thirst and an intollerable paine that followes it. In the aire and clouds above our heads God kindleth terrible fires by thu^der and lightnings, divideth the flames and shooteth abroad his fiery darts to consume his enimies. Psa. 18.12.13.14. Above the clouds in the firmament, God kindleth another fire by the Sunne and some other starres, and smites the earth and her inhabitants with the beames thereof, so that they are scorched with heate and faint in themselves. Psal. 121.6. with Rev. 7.16. and 16.8.9. Ion. 4.8. To goe higher into the third heavens God hath there also kindled many fires; he maketh his Angels to be flames of fire; Heb 1.7. to be horses and charets of fire; 2. Kin. 6.17. and 2.11. to be burning Seraphims, Esa. 6.2. expressed by the same name that is before given to the fiery serpents. Numb. 21.6. he maketh

his Cherubims like coales of fire, as the appearance of lampes and as the flashes of lightning; and from them are scattered coales of fire over countries and cities for their punishment. Ezek. 1.13.14. with cha. 10.2.7.(e) But above all these, the Lord himselfe is a consuming fire; Deut. 4.24. and 9.3. Heb. 12.29. and an everlasting burning: Esa. 33.14. when he riseth up to judge the world and to plead with secure sinners, how can they stand before his angry face? His throne is a fiery flame, his wheeles as burning fire; and a fiery streame issueth and commeth forth from before him, and consumeth round about: Dan. 7.9.10. Psa. 97.3. his face is burning; Esa. 30.27. his eyes flaming; Rev. 1.14. his nostrils smoaking; Psa. 18.8. his tongue a devouring fire; his breath an overflowing streame, and as a river of brimstone to kindle Tophet: Esa. 30.27.28.33. from his loynes upward and from his loynes downeward all as the appearance of fire: Ezek. 1.27. and when he shall be revealed from heaven, he is to come in flaming fire with his mighty angels round about him, all of them like so many shining beames of his glory, pointed with

indignation and sparkling with wrath against the sinners that are frozen in their dreggs. 2. Thes. 1.7.8. Iude. 14. And yet further to shew the greatnes of this wrath, we are to remember that each person in the H. Trinity burneth with a distinct flame of wrath against the wicked: The Lord from the Lord raines fire and brimstone; Gen. 19.24. The Son comes in the glory of his Father; Matt. 16.27. The holy Spirit is a spirit of judgment and a spirit of burning: Esa. 4 4. as the Spirit mooved upon the waters in the beginning of the world, Gen. 1.2. so shall it moove upon the fire of Gods judgments in the end of the world for the consuming of sinners. All other fires in the creature are but sparkles and lesse then nothing in respect of this infinite wrath of God.This is the latter end of wicked men, never to be forgotten. When the Lord warned the Iewes of their destruction and of their end that was comming, it is wonderfull to consider how earnestly he cryes unto them, and how many repetitions he useth, worthy to be numbred and counted exactly of every one, whiles he calles upo^ them, An end, an end is come; the end is

come: An evill, an onely evill, behold it is come: An end is come, the end is come, it vvatcheth for thee, behold it is come. The morning is come unto thee; the time is come, the day of trouble is neere, and not the eccho of the mountaines etc. Behold the day, behold it is come, the morning is gone forth, the rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded etc. The time is come, the day dravveth neere etc. Ezek. 7.2.3.5.6.7.10.12. Thus doth the Lord spread out his hands unto sinners, to warne them of their end: and they are worthy to feele the smart of that eternall fire, that neither by the terrour of his wrath propounded, nor by the carefull love of God in admonishing thereof, will be drawne to looke in this burning glasse and to thinke upon this last end. Were we wise, we should run oftner to warme our soules with this fire by the meditation of it, then we bring our bodies to any other fire; to heate ourselves with zeale of the Lord, and to drive away that lukewarmnes of our soules that is so abhominable in the sight of God. Rev. 3.16. The Apostle teacheth us to make this use of the aforesaid considerations, for the change of our conversatio^ unto all holines and godly life. 2. Pet. 3.11. And from hence may we learne patience

in suffering as well as obedience in doing the will of God, as the Spirit teacheth us: if the Lord be at hand; if the end of all things be at hand, and such an end, why should not our patient minde, our moderation and sobriety be made knowne unto all upon all occasions? Phil. 4.5. 1. Pet. 4.7. Though injuries be done vnto us, great and dayly and in extraordinary manner, both unchristian and inhumane dealing, yet seing the comming of the Lord draweth nigh, the Iudge is at the doore, at the threshold and entrance of our house, and there is but a step betwixt us and him, but an inch of time betwixt our sufferings and his judgement, therefore he requireth of us that we be patient and establish our hearts in him. Iam. 5.8.9. Have we other losses and troubles in the world, whether we winne or loose it skilles not much; whether we purchase and buy with increase of gaine or whether we sell for necessity, whether we be rich or poore it is no great matter, seing the earth and all the works thereof are in a moment to be burnt up; 2. Pet. 3.10. and seing the end hasteneth and the world passeth away, let not the buyer rejoyce nor the seller

mourne. Ezek. 7.12. All the happines of man stands in being delivered from this everlasting fire, kindled by the fierce wrath of God against sinne. We have enough and may well be content while we have our soule saved as a prey from this great destruction.(f) If yet we be dull of hearing and cannot see the dreadfulnes of this death in the causes thereof, the sinne of man deserving it and the wrath of God inflicting it; if yet we desire a plainer evidence thereof let us then looke upon the effects thereof and consider how the smart of this second death shall make the children of hell to crye and waile and take up eternall lamentations without any measure or end. By the effects of sorrow Ieremy thus describeth the affliction of Ierusale^ in her captivity, that of a princesse being become a desolate widow, she did weep sore in the night, that her teares were on her cheekes; that they ra^ downe as a river night and day, the apple of her eye never ceassing; that her elders and her infa^ts, young men and virgines, did mourne together; that the priests and prophets did sigh, their eyes being dimmed and fayling with teares, their bowels troubled, their liver powred
(...)

thus roare and faint in themselves under this burden of sorrow, how can any men or Giants that are but flesh undergoe the same? When the Lord shall pleade against the proud and covetous, and cause his wrath to smoake against hypocrites and dissemblers, against profane men, drunkards, adulterers and malicious men; how can their heart endure, or their hands be strong? Ezek. 22.14. Though they were as stout as the devils, they shall be crushed and broken together with them. Now many skorners make a mock of religion: now the epicures make a sport of sinne: now the obstinate persons despise admonition and hate to be reformed; they set their faces as Adamants in their obstinacy: But though their bones were brasse, and their strength of stones, and their heart as hard as the nether milstone; yet shall they be ground to peeces with this wrath of God that grindes the very Devils to powder and makes them to howle and yell before him.Above all other, the most terrible effect of Gods wrath, was that which was shewed upon Christ Iesus, the Lord of men and angels, when as he being become our surety and bearing our sins; did groane

under the burden; when he cryed out with strong cryes and teares; Heb. 5.7. when in the trouble of his soule, with great astonishment and feare he sayd, What shall I say? Ioh. 12.27. as if he had felt a sorrow not to be uttered; when in the sense of Gods anger due unto us he not onely cryed day and night, but even with words of roaring; Psa. 22.1.2. and finally uttered the most sorrowfull voyce that ever sounded in the world, My God, My God, vvhy hast thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.46. If all the dolefull complaints and lamentations of all miserable men were layd together upon the ballance, they would be found lighter then this complaint of Christ; because the iniquities of us all were layd together upon him; Esa. 53.6. and he bore the curse of them. Gal. 3.13. If we could see into the bowels of Hell, or could lay our eare to any low vault to heare the howling of the spirits in that prison; yet no wofull voyce ought to moove us so much, as these cryes of our Saviour in his agony. No weeping and gnashing of teeth by those reprobates can so expresse the power and fiercenes of Gods wrath, as this weeping and sorrowfull teares of the
(...)

in the second commandement, the Lord threatens such a change that they shall be most ashamed of that which they adored; and shall cast their Idoles to the Moles and to the Bats, Esa. 2.20. creatures that love darknes, the one for place living under the earth, the other for time comming abroad in the night. The Idolaters shall wish their idoles were hidden in utter darknes for ever. But as Moses once despited the Idolaters by burning their Idoll, grinding it to powder, strowing it on the waters and making them drinke thereof to their further shame: Exod. 32.20. so shall the Lord force the Idolaters by remorsefull remembrance evermore to drinke the powder of their images and of their owne inventions. The Lord through a secret antipathy of nature doth sometimes worke such a strange terrour in some men (as experience shewes) that at the sight of some creatures or dishes of meat set before them on the table, though the creatures be good in themselves and lawfull for use and to other men comfortable; yet these men quake and tremble, and sit astonished with gastly countenances, full of perplexity and anguish, gaping and sweating at the

sight; their haire standing upright on their head, their spirits appalled, not able to speake a word nor to stirre out of their place, but like men confounded remaine bound in the chaines of amazement, as terribly affrighted as was Belshazzar when he saw the palme of a hand writing his destruction upon the wall. Dan. 5.5.6. And hereby we may conceive the power of Gods wrath for the torment of idolaters by representing unto their mindes those unlawfull images which they worshipped, to their eternall affright and horrour. The Lord knoweth how to engrave all the sinnes of men with the point of a diamond upon the table of their heart, for their vexation and woe; and so in speciall to pourtray their images and idoles upon the broad plate of their consciences, and to hang them as in a map before their eyes upon the wall of their memory, for an everlasting confusion and torment unto them. The name of God that is fearfull, Deut. 28.58. shall in the end be fearfull to them that have taken it in vaine by swearing, blaspheming, or light usage of it.Though in their desperate torment
(...)

before all by their evill words and actions, the fruits of their envy. And if the sight of so small good either outward or inward as is to be seene in this life, doe yet stirre up such a painefull envy; what then shall be the paine of that envy in the wicked, when they shall behold the eternall glory and good things enjoyed by others in heaven? Looke how much the heavenly prosperity exceeds the earthly; so much shall the paine of the hellish envy exceed al that ever hath bene on earth. When the godly are exalted, their enimies shall see it; Rev. 11.12. the world shall know how God loves them; Ioh. 17.23. the wicked shall see and greeve and gnash with their teeth and pine away; Psal. 112.10. they shall be mad for the sight of their eyes; Deut. 28.34. yea their eyes shall consume in their holes and their tongue in their mouth; Zac. 14.12. and the^ shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when they see others in the kingdome of God and themselves thrust out. Luk. 13.28. There is a bitter end threatned unto them that follow harlots; Prov. 5.3.4.5. their dolefull song at last shall be, Hovv have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproofe? etc. vers. 12. etc. and

the like wofull ditty is for them that follow wine or strong drink, whereby they are inflamed unto more sin: Esa. 5.11.22. their unlawfull pleasure in the midst of their ungodly company shall at last bite like a serpent and sting like a cockatrice. Prov. 23.32. Then shall be woe to the mighty oppressours that oppresse a man and his heritage, whereby they spoile themselves of their inheritance with God: they joyne house to house on earth, till they leave no place for the poore on earth, nor any place for themselves in heaven. Mic. 2.1.2. Esa. 5.8. and the like woe is due to the unmercifull rich men, who as they would not give a crumme; so they shall not obtaine one drop of water from the tip of any finger to refresh them being tormented in the flame. Luk. 16.24.25. The false witnesse shall not then goe unpunished; Prov. 19.5.9. the railers and slanderers shall then be excluded out of the kingdome of God: 1. Cor. 6.10. the lips of the flatterers and backbiters shalbe cut off, Psa. 12.3. and their owne words shalbe a snare for their soule: Prov. 18.7. they shall then reape that which they have sowne, they have
(...)

CHAP. VIII. Of the visible signes and memorials of Hell, whereby God calleth men to remember the end of the ungodly.The vaine curiosity of the^ that desire to be informed of Hell-torments otherwise then by the word and works of God, which compared together afford us sundry Memorials of Hell, (a) In each of the foure Elements, Fire, Aire, Water, Earth: (b) In the country of Eden: (c) In the land of Canaan, both in the foure borders of it, (d) and within the land on both sides of the river Iordan; (e) In the Iewes themselves, in the state of their rejection: (f) In the country of Italy: (g) In the Torrid or hote Zone of the world, the condition and actions of the inhabitants: (h) In the frozen Zones, the extremity of cold and other occurrences in those parts: (i) In the temperate Zones, in the publick state of Antichristian and Romish religion with the appurtenances thereof; (k) In private houses, haunted with evill spirits, inhabited by witches; disordered innes and tavernes: (l) In particular persons, possessed, excommunicate, terrifyed in conscience: (m) In particular sinnes, in thoughts, words, and actions.IT may be some will say or thinke in themselves, we heare many fearfull things touching Hell-torments; if we might see the same and take a view thereof it would doe us more good. To such I

answer, they know not what they desire. When the bottomlesse pit was once at a certaine time in especiall manner opened very wide, there arose such a smoak out of the pit as had almost choaked the whole world: the Sunne and the aire were darkened therewith; poysonous locusts came out of that smoak and tormented men that they were weary of their lives and sought death that fled from them. Rev. 9.1.2.3. etc. It were not safe for curious men to looke with their carnall eyes into that bottomlesse pit, nor to wish that hell and destruction were naked and open unto them for their warning; neither should it be for their edification so much as the due remembrance and spirituall meditation thereof by help of the Scriptures. They that will not beleeve Moses and the Prophets would not be perswaded though one rose from the dead. Luk. 16.30.31. If Abraham or Noah, the ancient preachers of righteousnes should come againe into this world, clothed with angelicall glory, and with a heavenly voyce should call men to repentance; or if Angels should come and preach the kingdome of God: yet could we not
(...)

world, doe every one of them containe a vast gulfe of destruction within them, insomuch that each of them hath seemed unto some to lay clayme unto Hell, as having that prison within their bounds. The Fire by which Hell is so often described, is of a consuming and devouring nature: this operation of it is often compared to eating, and the fewell put unto it is the meat thereof; Esa. 9.19. the more it hath, the more hungrily it eateth, by burning more fiercely: it hath an insatiable belly and never saith, It is enough. Prov. 30.15.16. And so it is like unto Hell, which enlargeth herselfe and openeth her mouth wide and without measure to devoure the wicked. Esa. 5.14. Whether we conceive it as the highest and greatest element, encompassing the aire on every side, as in the proper place that is commonly assigned unto it, or whether we looke upon it in the dayly effects thereof on the earth, in those few sparkles and coales thereof scattered among us here below for our use, it carries in it both wayes a resemblance of Hell, to make us remember the end of the wicked in the sight of it.The Aire is noted as the seat or station

of wicked spirits, where they soare over our heads as the ravenous foules over the chickens, still ready to seaze upon us. Therefore is the Devill called the prince of the power of the aire, Eph. 2.2. and his angels are spirituall wickednesses in high places; Eph. 6.12. and Satan is sayd to fall downe like lightning from heaven when his works are loosed. Luk. 10.18. So often as we looke out into the aire, so oft doe we passe by the gates of Hell, by the Castles and Towers of the enimy from whence he shootes his fiery darts, from whence he watcheth his advantage to oppugne us and to make a prey of our soules. 1. Pet. 5.8. Wheresoever the Devill and his angels be there is an Hell; they being still at our right hand, Hell is in a manner alwayes about us. Zacch. 3.1. So long as me^ converse and walke in this aire, so long doe they remaine in that park or chase where the Devill with his hellhounds is continually hunting of soules to bring them to a miserable end for ever; which end therfore is dayly to be thought on that they may prevent the enimy and escape the snares of the hunter, by putting on the whole armour of God and praying incessantly. Eph. 6.13. 1. Pet. 5.8.The Watry Element and Sea is another gulfe of destruction, wherein multitudes have bene and are dayly drowned and swallowed up. The dragons of the deep and the manifold uncouth monsters of the sea doe well declare what hell is there: and the great Leviathan according to that strange description of him, Iob 41. may well appeare as Beelzebub, the prince of the devils in that hell. And if Ionas being swallowed up of one of them did account himselfe in the belly of hell, Ion. 2.2. then must there be many hells in one sea. Yea the very torments of Hell which our Saviour endured for us are represented by the deep whereinto he was plunged, and by the waters that entred into his soule: Psa. 69.1.2.15. and further the Abysse or bottomlesse pit, whereby Hell is named, Rev. 9.1. and 20.1. is the same word whereby the deep sea is commonly expressed. And thus is Hell resembled and set before the eyes of men both in the name and nature of this destroying element of the water.The Earth also being the common grave of all mankinde, while they are dayly resolved and turned unto dust, becomes another insatiable gulfe to represent Hell.

As in Corahs time the earth opened her mouth and swallowed many at once; Num. 16.31.32.33. so doth it still every day; the difference is onely in the manner, that there it opened of it selfe, here it is opened by the grave-maker. Yea and further the deep pits of mire and clay in the earth are likewise chosen by the holy Ghost to expresse the descending of our Redeemer into Hell, and the sorrowes of the second death that he endured therein: Psa. 40.2. and 69.2. insomuch that many doe conte^d that the proper place of Hell is within the earth; which though we neither affirme nor deny, but reprove their presumption which without warrant will peremptorily maintaine the same; yet in the pits of this earth we have an hell resembled unto us even by the Spirit of God in the Scriptures. And thus in every one of the elements there is a mouth of Hell gaping upon sinners to make them remember and consider what shal be the latter end of the wicked.(b) After the materiall parts of the world we are now to consider of the divers places thereof in respect of their different situation and estate. And here againe the memorials of Hell and of the latter end

of the ungodly are either such as be more peculiar for some particular nations, among whom he hath set his signes and wonders, as in Egypt, in Israel, in divers others; Ier. 32.20. or such as be more common to the world and to many nations therein. Among other particular nations and countries and above them all as the head and crowne of the earth, let us in the first place looke upon Eden and the paradise therein, from whence man was banished for his sinne. The Lord as he had at first even in the state of innocency, planted a tree of forbidden fruit within the garden, as a memoriall of death, eve^ of the second death, and consequently of an Hell provided for transgressours; Gen. 2.9.17. so after the fall, without the garde^ in the border thereof he placed there on the East side a flaming sword which turned every way to keepe the way of the tree of life. Gen. 3.24. This flame of destruction was like another visible Hell in the eyes of Adam and his posterity, by the dayly sight whereof they were warned not to presume against the commandement of God as they had done. This present fire was unto them a monument of that eternall fire which should consume the transgressours.

As David was afraid when he saw the Angel of the Lord stand betweene the earth and the heaven, having a drawne sword in his hand stretched out over Ierusalem. 1. Chron. 21.16.30. so the children of Adam here seing the fiery chariot of the Cherubims, Ezek. 1.13.14. and the flaming sword brandished and shaken about the garden, were taught to feare and remember the latter end threatned to the presumptuous offendours, over all whose heads there hangeth continually a sword of vengeance ready to fall upon them, Iob, 19.29. Ezek. 21.9.10.(c) From the country of Eden, let us come to the land of Canaan, another Eden, the pleasant land, Dan. 8.9. where God planted another paradise, and set the second Adam to dresse the same, for his Church is the garden of God. Cant. 4.12.16. And here in like manner God gave speciall warnings to Israel, and set his markes in the holy land more then in others, both round about in the borders thereof and within the land also. In the borders on the East side along the coast of the tribe of Iudah God placed as it were, a visible
(...)

on sinners, whose latter end was set before their eyes for a warning to avoyd the sinnes that kindle such wrath. From the East border come we to the South, which was the border of Edom. Iosh. 15.1. Num. 34.3. and this land of Edom or Idumea is propounded by the H. Ghost, as another Hell visible to the eye of faith, being considered in the curse which God denounced against the same, that the rivers therof should be turned into pitch, not to be quenched night nor day, the smoak ascending for ever; that it should be an habitation of dragons and Satyres, and scritch-owles, Zijm and Jijm, etc. Esa. 34.5.9.10.13.14. etc. In that South coast was also the wildernes of Zin, and Maaleh-hacrabbim, or the ascent of the Scorpions, and Kadesh-barnea, Ios. 15.1.3. Num. 34.3.4. by the sight of which places they were called to the remembrance of Gods judgments both by the fiery serpents and scorpions in the great and terrible wildernes, Deut. 8.15. and by their turning back from Kadesh when they were ready to have entred into the land. Numb. 14.25. Deut. 2.1. Their Westerne border was the great Sea, the store-house of Gods judgements, compared

unto the great deep. Psal. 36.6. Their North coast was Lebanon and Hermon: Iosh. 1.4. with 11.17. and 12.7. and 13.5.6. and there were the dens of the lyons, and the mountaines of the Leopards. Sol. song. 4.8. which creatures the Lord useth as instruments of his wrath, Ier. 5.6. with Dan. 7.3.4.6. and by them the Lord describeth his owne anger against sinners: Hos. 13.7. and so from every coast roared upon them, and by a flaming sword on every side called them to reme^ber his judgme^ts.(d) From the outward borders of the holy land teturne we to the inward parts; and these on both sides of the river Iordan. On this side, above many other places Ierusalem the city of the great king offers it selfe to our consideration, which though it were a type of heave^, Gal. 4.26. Heb. 12.22. yet round about it there were signes set of the fearfull judgme^ts of God, and of the last end of the wicked. And first of all by the entry of the East-gate, they had the vallie of Hinnom, and the high places of Tophet therein, as it were a visible Hell, Ier. 19.2. with Iosh. 15.8. They there burned their children in the fire unto Baal and Moloch with great impiety against God and cruelty to
(...)

hornes, their hoofes and their haire: and well might that lake be this same pit. As by the descent of an Angel into the poole of Bethesda, those that first entred after the stirring of the waters, were made whole of what disease soever they had: Ioh. 5.4. so no wonder if after the stirring of these waters in Gadara by a legion of uncleane spirits together, they were made unwholesome and caused disease to those that drank thereof. So often as men beheld or thought upon this devilish lake they had a spectacle of Hell before them, and they tooke the name of God in vaine if they did not learne hereby to watch and fight against the wicked spirits, to seeke the helpe of Christ that conquers them and not to love their swine more then Christ, nor to become as swine by wallowing in the mire of sinne; 2. Pet. 2.22. left they also by the Devils should be carryed headlong into the lake of brimstone prepared for those that hearke^ not unto the call of God.(e) These were the markes and tokens given to the Iewes; but the Iewes themselves are given for signes and warnings unto us: for whe^ these and many other memorials of the latter end were give^ unto

the Iewes and despised of them, then at last they themselves by the righteous judgment of God were made as signes and wonders unto the beleeving Gentiles called into their place, and to this day they remaine as memorials of Hell, under the power of darknes, their hearts being hardened, their eyes darkened, and covered with the spirit of slumber. Rom. 11.7.8.10. Their state of rejection wherein they presently are, is described in such phrase as the estate of those in Hell: they are now in utter darknes, while they are without Christ; and if they knew the misery of their estate, then should they weep and gnash their teeth. Matt. 8.12. In this hell of utter darknes have they continued now these sixteen hundred yeares, and are scattered abroad among all nations for a warning unto them. So often as we meet these obdurate Iewes in our streets, and consider how they are broken off from their olive, the kingdome of God being taken from them and given to others; Matt. 21.43. so often are we to be mooved with compassion to the^ as if they did weep and howle before us: and as we are to pray for the day of their visitation; so are we to worke
(...)

the whole earth and turning round about it continually, even as the first flaming sword was about the garden of God in Eden. This middle Zone though in comparison of Tophet it be an heaven, yet in respect of other temperate Zones inhabited by us, it is in many things like unto Hell. As Hell is described by the burning heat that is therein: Esa. 30.33. Matt. 25.41. so in this Torrid Zone men are grievously afflicted and tormented with heat; men dwelling there under the Aequinoctiall line and the climates on each side neere the same, the Sunne burnes them by day and the beames thereof beating directly upon their heads doe strike them with a vehement heat round about the world, even from the East unto the Westerne India, and in Aethiopia betwixt them both, insomuch that some of them curse the Sunne every morning that it riseth. As Hell is described by the blaknes of darknes that is there reserved for reprobates; 2. Pet. 2.17. black being the colour of sorrow and feare, Psa. 38.6. in the orig. which make all faces to gather blacknes: Ioel. 2.6. so under the hote Zone there dwell the black Moores, the Aethiopians or burnt-faces,

as the word which the holy Ghost useth for them doth signify. Act. 8.27. Their bodies and visages are blacker then a coale, and some have bene frighted at the fight of them as if they had come out of Hell. As in Hell men are under the vexation of the Devill that is called the prince of darknes, Eph. 6.12. and hath the power of death: Heb. 2.14. so it is generally testifyed that the Indians both East and West, and the Guineans betweene both in this hote Zone doe both worship the Devill that often appeares personally unto them, and are often beaten and tormented by the immediate hand of the Devill in those visible apparitions, with many other vexations to their unspeakable misery: and therefore in this regard there is not so much a shadow of Hell, as a very Hell it selfe and a kingdome of darknes. As the state of those in Hell is described by a worme that torments them and never dyeth: Esa. 66.24. Mark. 9.44.46.48. so those that live in this Torrid Zone in Guinea have often and ordinarily a worme of strange and incredible length that breedeth in their flesh, as those that travell thither have both seene and felt, and in their flesh have brought home
(...)

apparitions are imagined to ascend up out of the earth: 1. Sam. 28.13. even so a man that should see these all-black naked impes come swarming up out of their holes from under ground, each of them both at mouth and nostrils breathing out the smoake of that Indian herb which is a part of their ordinary dyet, it were no wonder if he thought the picture of Hell to be before him. In fine as many for Ma^mon or riches doe sell themselves and loose their soules and goe downe to Hell for ever: 1. Kin. 21.20. even so many for the love of that treasure that is to be found in this hote Zone, are content to adventure their lives in travelling thither, and in this journey there be multitudes that from time to time doe loose their mortall and temporary lives; and so in this regard also there is some consimilitude betwixt these two places. And now if we doe well observe this strange work of God, we shall therein perceive how unsearchable his judgements are and his wayes past finding out, in permitting this forlorne people that are so black in their bodies and more black in their soules through their worship of the Devill, to lye so long enthralled under the dominion of Satan and

that for so great a compasse round about the whole earth under the Aequinoctiall circle. Seing the Lord hath made this visible Hell like a broad black belt or girdle to environ the very heart and middle of the world; how ought this to warne all the inhabitants of the earth on every side to tremble at this judgment, to awake out of the snares of the devill and to seeke a redeemer by whom the workes of the devill may be loosed, and they delivered from the tyranny of these wicked spirits in the everlasting Hell? If in this life there be such torments for sinners then what is that woefull distresse and anguish which in the world to come waites for them? In this Torrid Zone though their miseries be great, yet have they many comforts: for the body they have sweet springs of water to refresh them, goodly rivers to bath in, great and pleasant trees for shade, fruitfull trees that yeeld both meat and drinke, they have spices and sugar-canes, the cordiall joyce of limons to quench their thirst, and the coolest fruits in the hottest countries; and for their soules their case is not desperate, while there is a time of repentance afforded, yea
(...)

seas they have huge mountaines of yce which dashing together make a fearfull noyse like the roaring of an hell to the astonishment of strangers that heare the same. As the black Zone aboundeth with serpents; so these snow-white regions doe abound with horrible and fierce white beares that roare about the country for their prey; and for a shield against the cold the inhabitants covering their skins with the beare-skinnes and muffled with other furres, doe appeare as if they were all Beares. The Sunne every yeare hideth it selfe from them for divers moneths together, and then have they no day but continuall night; their land is like that which Iob speakes of, a land of darknes and of the shadow of death, a land of darknes as darknes it selfe. Iob, 10.21.2^. But that which darkens it most of all and makes it to be a more lively image of Hell, is the great rudenes and ignorance of God that is among them, and in speciall their familiarity with the Devils and abundance of witches and wizards that by generall testimony are sayd to be among them. Oh that those which are frozen in the dregges of their sin, Zeph. 1.12. could duely consider the unsearchable judgments

of God in this frozen Zone. Extremity of cold doth sometimes rotte off the flesh and outer parts of the body and extinguish the sparkle of naturall life as well as fire. As in Island the mount Hecla and Helga are at the same time oft covered with frost and snow on the outside, and yet burne within casting out cynders and flames of fire many miles from the place: or as in the same Ague God sometimes afflicteth men both with a cold fit that crusheth the bones and maketh the teeth to gnash, that first makes the body to quake and shiver, and then kindles a burning heat therein; that first makes the lips and the fingers ends to be blew with cold and afterwards red with an hote inflammation: so God can as well torment sinners with an intollerable cold, with a freezing Hell, as with a hote frying Hell. It is no more wonder to see men live a painefull life being frozen in the midst of an yce, then to see men live ever in the midst of a flaming fire. If Hell be described by the gnashing of teeth, Matt. 13.42.50. then this frozen climate where there is such continuall cause of the teeth hacking in the head for cold may well serve for remembra^ce of the latter end of reprobates
(...)

Devils and the cup of Devils; 1. Cor. 10.21. and seeing every habitation of the Devill is a kinde of Hell, it follows that their Churches and Temples are mere Helles and houses of Devils. As it is with the places of their worship; so is it with the places of their jurisdiction and governement; the spirituall courts of their Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Deanes, Chancellours, Commissaries and Officials, with their Doctours and Proctours, being so many swarmes of locusts that oppresse, persecute, vexe and sting men to make them weary of their lives. Rev. 9.3.5.6. And when the power of the seduced civill Magistrate is assumed unto them, like Pilate joyned with Cajaphas, then their authority becomes as the Throne of Satan, Rev. 2.13. who by these instruments casteth me^ into prison and killeth them. vers. 10. Hereby the Harlot becomes druncken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Iesus: Rev. 17.6. and thus their glorious Cathedrall Churches and holy places, Courts and Consistories are made Hellish Slaughter-houses of Satan, and Babylon becomes the habitation of Devils, the hold of every foule spirit and a cage of every uncleane and hatefull bird; Rev.

18.2. and so are to be esteemed of all that passe by and looke upon them. Thus also are all the assemblies and meeting-houses of Mahometists, Arrians, Anabaptists, and other Heretickes to be accounted of in respect of their pernicious errours, and that by the verdict of Christ himselfe, who pronounceth such to be the Synagogue of Satan. Rev. 2.9. Hence may we conceive how many thousand intemperate Helles are to be found in this our Temperate Zone.(k) After these more publick Helles, if we search into private houses, we may there finde many habitations of Devils. Some houses, as experience shewes and rhe Lord hath threatned, are haunted with evill spirits that affright those that dwell therein: Ohim and Zijm doe lodge there and the Satyres or devils doe dance there. Esa. 13.21.22. with Lev. 17.7. orig. Hereby God calles men to thinke of the future Hell and of the terrours that shall come upon the wicked in their end. Another worse Hell then this is to be observed in the houses of witches and wisards which have familiar spirits, and doe willingly entertayne them, call for them and make a covenant with them. Levit. 20.27. 1. Sam.

28.7. etc. for whereas the other were haunted with them against their will and to their great greef; these voluntarily and eagerly seeke them and keepe them, and so their houses become like the Oracles of the Devill that men sought unto in old time. 2. Kin. 1.2.4. Such houses were and are wheresoever they be like so many porches and portalles of Hell, or mouthes of the infernall pit, which how abominable soever they be, yet doe they serve for a conviction of atheists and desperate wretches, which either thinke or live as if they did thinke there were no Devill, no Hell.With these devilish houses are to be joyned the disordered Innes and Tavernes, that are the nurseries of all impietie and wickednes, the very staires and trappes by which men descend into Hell. For though there be a lawfull use of Innes for the commodity of strangers and passengers, and for the necessity of some others: yet the disordered Harbours and inordinate ordinaries, which are the ordinary Rendevouz of drunkards, of blasphemers and swearers, receptacles of skorners and mockers, of gamesters, of riotours, of wantons, of idle persons and unthrifts, of theevish robbers

of their owne families, and the like; of these is verifyed the common saying, that Ale-houses are Hell-houses. There haunt the clamorous Ohim and Zijm, and there doe the lascivious Satyres daunce together; thither doe the Gobbelines resort, the schrich-owles, the night-rave^s and night-walkers together; and make a cage of uncleane birds. When men passe by such houses they are to looke upon them as the very Types of Hell and the dennes of destruction where many are dayly overthrowne. They are as deep pits that swallow up soule and body, goods and good name of their bewitched guests; both health of body and wealth of estate, credit of name and salvation of soule doe there consume and perish together. And therefore with many pluckes doth the Lord seeke to divert men from such places, Enter not into the path of the vvicked, and goe not in the way of evill men: Avoyd it, passe not by it, turne from it, and passe away. Prov. 4.14.15.(l) From private houses come we to private and particular persons, to see how many Helles may be found among them. If we looke upon Gods judgments for sinne, we see some possessed with Devils
(...)

persons that procure these judgements of God, in them also there are many Hells to be seene. Their thoughts, their words, their deeds and practises doe represent the same unto us. The large heart of man and his capacious thoughts are like unto a huge vessel, wide and deep, greater the^ the whole Globe of the earth, which ca^not fill the same. The eye is not satisfyed with seeing, nor the eare filled with hearing. Eccles. 1.8. Though a moate in the eye doe trouble it; yet the world cannot fill it. The reason is, because the minde of man is an immeasurable gulfe; and the outward senses are but tunnels or conduits leading into it. Immoderate desire, whether it be the lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh, or the pride of life, is an insatiable whirlpoole that is still gaping and devouring, but never satisfyed. Eccles. 5.9.10. Hab. 2.5. Esa. 56.11. The ignorance that is in the minde makes it to be as darke a dungeon as it is deep, Eph 4.18. Matt. 6.23. wherein the thoughts doe blindely range and roame up and downe with pernicious wandrings. The violence and fervency of inordinate lust inflames the heart and makes it to burne, Rom. 1.27. like the bakers oven that is overheated,

till it burne as a flaming fire. Hos. 7.6.7. And to shew that the wicked heart is a more compleat Hell, it is sayd that Satan enters into it, Ioh. 13.27. and filles the heart, Act. 5.3. and dwelles in it, Matt. 12.45. and reignes in it as a prince over his subjects, Ioh. 14.30. or as a God over his people. 2. Cor. 4.4. The mouth of a wicked man is like the mouth of Hell, whiles the envy, hatred and lust that is kindled in the heart doth breake out in the words, and as it were, flame out at the mouth. The slanderous and evill tongue is a fire, and is set on fire of Hell, and setteth on fire the whole course of nature. Iam. 3.6. The body and the whole person of wicked men is as it were the shop and work-house of Satan, wherein the uncleane spirits doe worke in the children of disobedience; Eph. 2.2. and all their members are the instruments and tooles of the devils to worke all manner of sin and unrighteousnes therewith. Rom. 6.13.19.And now seeing the Lord hath set so many visions of Hell before us in this life, whereby he calles men to remember the latter end; let him that hath an eare to heare, hearken to the call of God: let him that hath an eye to see, come and open his
(...)



(...)the godly would sometimes have him to be more severe: He is more desirous of the salvation of them that are saved then they themselves.AS God calles us many wayes to remember our latter end; so the due remembrance of our end calles us to remember God: and the thought of death serves to urge and admonish us of seeking the way of life. True life is to be found with God alone. He is the living God. Iosh. 3.10. Ier. 10.10. Hos. 1.10. He giveth unto all life and breath and all things. Act. 17.25. With him is the well of life. Psa. 36.9. From this well doe flow a thousand rivers of life; of life naturall; of life spirituall, of life eternall in the heavens.(a) With him is the fountaine of naturall vegetation, and the rivers of vegetative life are all propagated from him. In every pla^t and in every least seed of tree or herb, God hath planted a vitall juyce and digged a welspring of life, from which spring life floweth out and flourisheth and is spread abroad; Gen. 1.11.12. Psa. 104.14. and the living things are multiplied according to their kinde in such unspeakable abundance, that the increase thereof throughout

the world might in few yeares serve to replenish an hundred worlds. The seeds that one garden in one yeare affordeth are so many as might in short time serve to fill an hundred garden-plots, while some one herb oft yeeldeth more then a thousand seedes at once. So a thousand akehornes that fall from one Oake, might serve to plant a whole grove of oakes. The apples of some one tree yeeld more then a thousand kirnels: and therfore the kirnels, together with the rootes and graffes or shootes that one orchard affordeth in one yeare, might well serve to be the seminary of an hu^dred more. Thus have we yearely the matter of many worlds layd before us: though more new worlds be not dayly formed, yet the living God shewes us hereby how easily he could doe it.The glory of this well of life is to be considered not onely in the abundance of life which gusheth out and floweth from it, but likewise in the excellency thereof, while the living things, the herbs and fruits that are thence produced, doe not onely live themselves, but serve to sustaine and uphold the life of other creatures, both man and beast, both in the maine and dayly
(...)

Gen. 1.22.28. as by a seed of seeds hath multiplyed life, and as from a well of life hath made the streames of naturall life to flow forth and with a continuall current of succession to runne freshly from the beginning of the world unto this day. Hereby we see how the Lord powres life out of his treasure: at his word life swimmes in the waters; flyes in the aire; walkes on the earth, and scralles in the dust turned into living creatures at his command. Exo. ^.16.17.A cleare vision of this power of life that is in God, is shewed unto us even in the least sort of creatures, in the Bees, the Flyes, and in speciall in the manifold swarmes of innumerable Gnattes in summer-time suddainly produced in some countries, as if they were so many drops of life flying abroad round about us, as if the whole aire were dissolved into living creatures: and not onely living, but all endued with a most lively life, all nimble and active, mounting above our heads, and every one of them carrying with them a Trumpet wherewith they humme aloud and sound an Alarum to us, to awaken us unto the praise of their Creatour, the living God. And because we are so blinde

and dull to discerne and acknowledge the living God, the author of this life, therefore they approach neere unto us and bite us; though it cost them their life for it, they will have us by the face or hands, sleeping or waking, night and day; and they will tast of our blood: and this by divine providence, that by these little monitors we might be rowsed up out of our senseles behaviour, to looke unto that welspring of life from whence they come. Though these creatures be small and contemptible in the eyes of many, yet doe these small things carry in them the glorious evidences of the living God and as effectuall for our instruction as are to be found in the great Oxe, Elephant or Leviathan. Psa. 104.25. Exo. 8.18.19. He that rayseth these living soules out of the ditches and rotten ground, and sometimes maketh many of these lives to spring from one dead carcasse; how easily can he rayse our dead bodies out of the grave, and restore one life to one body, yea quicke^ the soule from the mire of sinne? He that longeth after life let him looke to this fountaine.(c) Besides this ordinary flood of life flowing from that generall word and com-
(...)

mall spirits, and with them the faculty both of sense and motion over all. To preserve our being, he hath made the liver a fountaine of blood and from thence drawne the veines, and dispersed them over the whole body to carry abroad the blood and the naturall spirits therein to the nourishment of every part. With these living threeds more precious then any golden wires, the^ fine twined linnen, blue, purple and scarlet, the ornaments of the Tabernacle, hath God beautifyed the body of man, which is also compared to a Tabernacle. 2. Cor. 5.1.4. 2. Pet. 1.13.14. With these feeling, mooving and nourishing strings hath the Lord covered and embroydered and curiously wrought the vaile of our flesh. Psal. 139.15. Iob, 10.11. And each of these life-strings doth the living God still hold in his hand, maintaining their faculties and inspiring life and quickening vertue into them. And besides this, in the very tunicles or coates of each of these hollow strings hath the Lord wrought a curious network and woven together another sort of subtile threeds and thousands of them, more fine and small then haires; some of them drawne right along, of an attractive power; some round and circular crossing

the other with right angles, of an expulsive vertue, others drawne athwart both the other with oblique angles, of a retentive faculty, and all for the service of life in great variety: some draw, some hold, some drive out superfluities of nature; and all these held and upheld in their severall functions by the finger of God, extending his quickening power unto every one of the^. Neither are these particular streames and waves of the river of life flowing from God to be neglected of us, the workes of God are to be sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. Psal. 111.2. Distinct knowledge and consideration hereof brings clearer comfort: and it is great sinne, unthankfulnes and contempt of Gods glorious wisedome to looke co^fusedly over those things that God propounds distinctly in many severall formes and particular acts.To proceed therefore from these faculties and functions of life sensitive common to the brute creatures with man, we are to behold another well of life in that reasonable soule which God hath placed in men, when as he formed the spirit of man within him. Zacch. 12.1. The stirrings, motions and acts of life flowing
(...)

with vers. 30. the Lord even then offered unto him to have opened his well of life as wide for him, and to have made of him a greater and mightier nation then Israel was. Num. 14.12. Oh how great are the treasures of life which God hath in store for them that love him! even worlds of life to give to every one of them. Well might the Psalmist say of this God, With him is the vvell of life: and in his light we shall see light: Psa. 36.9. In which words David pointeth at two glorious workes and gifts of God specially noted in the six dayes of the creation. In three dayes God beautifyed the world with light: the first day he created light; the second day he created a pure and transparent firmament, or an expansion through which the beames of the heavenly light being diffused and spread forth might so come to us; and without such a meane or middle passage our sight and the light could not have met together: the fourth day God created heavenly lights, the Sunne, Moone and starres gathering abundance of light into them and by their motion distributed that light unto the divers parts of the world successively for the greater benefit thereof. Gen. 1.3.6. etc. In three other dayes God

created life in the divers degrees thereof: the third day God opened a box of life and powred out that vegetative life which appeareth in the growing plants, herbes and trees; the fift day God opened another box and powred out a streame of sensitive life, such as appeared in the foules and fishes; the sixt day God opened againe another box, and beside the sensitive life in the beasts and cattell, powred out the treasure of an intellectuall life which appeared in the reasonable soule of man which he then created. Gen. 1.11.12.20. etc. And from that first week unto this day both the beames of light and the streames of life have flowed out incessantly to his praise and the comfort of man.(f) And yet all this is but the little finger of God in respect of his mighty arme: all this is but the power of life naturall vouchsafed even to his enimies, to the reprobats. There is a new life, a more high and precious life to be found in God; even a well of spirituall life, opened by him immediately after the fall. Then was made the promise of this life and of victory over death by breaking the serpents head: Gen. 3.15. that word was the Gospell of Salvation preached instantly to Adam upon
(...)

the kindes of life natural are made to serve as shadowes of the life spirituall which God giveth to his elect. See it in the plants that doe live a vegetative life. As the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden causeth the things that are sowne therein to spring forth: so the Lord God will cause righteousnes and praise to spring forth before all the nations. Esa. 61.11. The Lord doth as easily make men to be trees of righteousnes, as he maketh thorns or briers to grow. Esa. 61.3. with ch. 55.13. Yea the plants that exceed others in growth, the tall cedars, the flourishing palme, Psa. 92.12. the greene olive, the fruitfull lillies, Hos. 14.5, 6. the willowes by the water-courses, Esa. 44.4. the flovving spices, Sol. song. 4.16. and the trees that bring forth new fruit according to their moneths, Ezek. 47.12. are all but shadowes of this grace of life flowing from the Lord. See it in the creatures that live a sensitive life: The sheep that are sayd to bring forth thousands in our streets, Psa. 144.13. and doe cloth the pastures with their multitude, Psa. 65.13. are made types of the flock of God that multiply by his blessing, Ezek. 34.11.31. and doe every one bring forth twinnes,

none being barren among them. Sol. song. 4.2. They are also likened to the doves that bring forth almost every moneth, and come by flights unto their windowes. Esa. 60.8. See this also in the shadow of mankinde endued with a reasonable life: As the fathers and mothers are called the fountaines of life from whence the children doe flow: Psa. 68.26. Esa. 48.1. so the Lord communicating spirituall life to his children is sayd to beget them againe, Iam. 1.18. and they are the dew of his youth; Psa. 110.3. and he is the living father of many children. Ioh. 6.57. Heb. 2.10. Yea God is able even of stones to raise up children to Abraham; Matt. 3.9. as once of old and at first he hewed them out of the dry and hard rock of Abrahams decayed body and Sarahs dead wombe, Esa. 51.1.2. Rom. 4.18.19. and after that againe tooke the stony heart out of their bodies; Ezek. 11.19. and as in time to come he is yet once more of the stony-hearted and obstinate Iewes to raise up a new and holy generation. Rom. 11.7.8 24.25.26. And hereby it is evident what a power of life is in God and that the well of life is not elswhere to be sought or found then in him alone.
(...)

be with men, and he will dwell with them, and God himselfe shall be with them and be their God. Rev. 21.3. He will rejoyce over them with joy and quiet or rest himselfe in his love; he will joy over them with singing or shouting, as the word also signifies. Zeph. 3.17. And what cause have they to sing and shout and clap their hands for joy eternally, for whom the Lord doth sing and shout joyfully? Esa. 12.6. Psa. 47.1. how honourable are they whom the Father doth honour, Ioh. 12.26. whom the Sonne doth confesse before the Angels for ever? Luk. 12.8. And if these promises have their beginning here and be made unto men in their pilgrimage and be in part enjoyed in this life, what shall their complement and full performance be when they come to the wel-head of all this life and glory hereafter, which for the present is hidden with God? Coll. 3.3.
(i)
What then remaines for us to be done and what doth the Lord require of us, but that we come to this well of life? It is therefore shewed unto us that we might desire it and in desiring seeke it and in seeking finde it to our everlasting happines.

And before we come unto it, even in the meane time by dayly and comfortable meditation, we may behold and looke upon it, yea tast it, walking upon the bankes of this river of life and sometimes as it were sayling upon these waters, being carried with the Spirit of God blowing upon us by faith. If any despise this call of God and contemne the infinite felicity that is herein revealed unto them: if any will forsake the Lord, the fountaine of living waters, and dig unto themselves cisternes, even broken cisternes that can hold no water; if they will rather runne to the stinking puddles of sinful pleasures: marke what the Lord sayth concerning their madnes, O ye heavens be astonished at this and be horribly afraid and utterly confounded or very desolate, sayth the Lord. Ier. 2.12.13. And what then is that unspeakable astonishment, horrour and confusion that shall come upon the despisers of this grace, when heaven and earth together shall be so affected at the sight of their miserable folly?
And if any fearefull hearts doe either despaire or doubt they can never obtaine such a divine and glorious estate in respect of their basenes and unworthines; if they
(...)
(k) If any fainting spirits be still afraid, and though they will not speake it out, yet think thus within themselves: Not our poore and meane estate, but our wickednes and our sinnes that are both great and many, doe deprive us of hope and take away our heart that we cannot looke for a portion in that grace of life that is so great for many others: Let these consider how great and pernicious an errour hath ensnared them; and let them labour with all care and speedy diligence to have this black cloud of death and infidelity hanging over their heads, remooved from them. It is indeed the uncomfortable estate of the greatest part of the world, and even of those licentious persons that seeme to boast often of the mercy of God, yet not to beleeve his mercy; Esa. 53.1. Luk. 18.8. Psa. 78.22.32.35.36. they feele it not in their hearts when they glory outwardly of it: for had they faith, it would soone have purifyed their hearts and changed ther lives and filled them with peace and joy unspeakable and glorious. Act. 15.9. Rom. 5.1. 1. Pet. 1.8. Let such consider that through unbeleefe men are broken off from God; Rom. 11.20. and they doe him the greatest dishonour that may be in not beleeving: 1. Ioh.

5.10. and for the healing of this sore, let them set before them the rich and precious promises of God, by the meditation whereof they may be quickened and have faith wrought in their hearts. Psa. 119.25.28.49.50.93. Though their sins be many, that they cannot answer for one of a thousand, Iob, 9.3. there is mercy with God to blot out their sinnes as a thick cloud, and to take away their transgressions as a mist. Esa. 44.22. When the Lord proclaimed his glorious name, he manifested himselfe by this mercy, and used twise so many titles to expresse it rather then his justice, saying, The Lord, the Lord God mercifull, and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodnes and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and sinne; that surely will not cleare the wicked, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children and upon the childrens children unto the third and fourth generation. Exod. 34.5.6.7. For though the Lord in regard of himselfe be equally infinite in respect of all his attributes, yet is it harder for men to beleeve his mercy then his justice; and as the event shewes, it is a work more above the power of nature by true faith to apply the mercy of God
(...)

with spirituall fornicatio^, being carried away to dumbe Idoles; 1. Cor. 12.2. when they turned from Idoles to serve the living God, 1. Thes. 1.9, presently of most foule harlots they became the fairest among women, even the Churches of God and his most beauteous spouses: Sol. song. 5.9. They found mercy for all their sins which they confessed, and being baptised into the name of the Lord they arose up out of the water, and looked forth as the morning, faire as the Moone and pure as the Sunne; Sol. song, 6.9.10. they shone in glory as the great wonder in heaven, like the woman cloathed with the Sunne and treading upon the Moone with her feet and crowned upon her head with the twelve starres. Rev. 12.1. Manasses that was not onely an idolater but in the grossest manner, worshipping all the hoast of heaven, and setting their altars and his graven image in the house of the Lord; that was not onely a witch but defiled with many kindes of witchcraft, leaving the Lord and flying to the devill, leaving the Prophets and running to wizards; that was not onely a murderer but abounding in murders and filling Ierusalem with innocent blood which he shed from one end

thereof unto another; and all this after the education under his godly father Hezekias with contempt of many admonitions and godly examples; yet whe^ he was humbled in his affliction and sought the Lord, he was not barred fro^ the well of life, but he found mercy with God, who was intreated of him and forgave his sins. 2. Chro. 33.12-16. And so also those that committed yet a more horrible murder in killing and crucifying the Lord of life and embruing their wicked hands in his precious blood, Act. 2.23. and 3.15. when they were pricked in their hearts and sought grace, they found that which they sought, and obtained remission of sinnes and the gift of the holy Ghost, being united unto the Church of God, and were filled with unspeakable joy and glory. Act. 2.37-47. And as the Lord dealt with these when they turned unto him: so hath he promised to deale with the wickedest alive whosoever doe seeke him. Thus saith the Lord of hostes, Turne ye unto me saith the Lord of hostes, and I will turne unto you, saith the Lord of hostes. Zacch. 1.3. In this divine and comfortable promise the Lord doth three times interpose and pawne the authority of his name to confirme his word, that it might
(...)

1.1.2. and 2.20. etc, and 2. Sam. 7.15. Our Saviour telles Peter that he is to forgive his brother not seven times, but seventy times seven. Matt. 18.21.22. And immediately after in the parable next following he shewes how farre the mercy of God exceeds the mercy of men, and how many times the Lord forgiveth us more then we forgive men. And this he doth, by comparing our sinnes or debts unto God to ten thousand Talents, vers. 24. and the offences of others against us to an hundred pence. v. 28. Now that we may the better conceive the love of God in the pardon of many sins for the comfort of sinners taught in this parable, these two summes and the difference that is betwixt them is duely to be considered of us. And to this end it is to be observed that our Saviour speakes of the Romane coyne, such as was then in use among the Iewes at that time subject to the Romanes, as appeareth in that peny which Christ required the Herodians to shew unto him, having upon it the image and superscription of Caesar the Romane Emperour. Matt. 22.19.20.21. And though our Saviour spoke in the Iewes language, and the Evangelists wrote in the Greeke tongue,

then most common in the world, yet the word that is here used for a peny, (denarion, Matt. 18.28. and 22.19.) is the Romane or Latine word, to shew that he spoke of Romane coyne. The Romane Talent (as our writers witnesse) contained seven hundred and fifty ounces of silver, and the Romane peny was but the eight part of one ounce. Hereupon it followes by just computatio^, 750. being multiplyed by 8. that one Talent contained precisely six thousand pence, and consequently te^ thousand Talents contained six thousand times ten thousand pence, which is the great summe representing the many sinnes that God forgiveth unto men. And though our Saviour by a definite number intends an indefinite, yet is the proportion to be observed and while he hath chosen so exceeding great a number, he would thereby have us to conceive the infinite grace of God in pardoning innumerable sinnes and millions of transgressions, which the elect and faythfull do dayly commit, even after their conversion. The Lord is still ready to forgive the repentant, and will abundantly pardon, or as the words in the text are, will multiply to pardon. Esa. 55.7. His mercies faile not but are renewed
(...)

sired they might be consumed with fire from heaven. Luk. 10.54.55.56. The spirit that is in man lusteth after envy, and even Ioshua repined at the mercy and grace of God, and the gifts of his Spirit upon Eldad and Medad. Num. 11.27.28.2^. Ionas in speciall was strangely vexed and fretted with an exceeding displeasure, being angry even to the death, and was therefore so hasty and swift to anger because God was so slow to anger and so mercifull in sparing the Ninevites. Ion. 4.1.2.3. And though this seeme strange to those that read it, yet is the same passion common among men. What godly man is there at this day which doth not in some measure overrunne the Lord to judgment in wishing the destruction of Antichrist, as though the Lord were too slow to anger? If they might have had their will, the Lord should not have waited with so great patience in calling them to repentance.
But further, God is more mercifull to men then men would have him to be even towards themselves. For all those that are saved, God is more willing to save them, then they themselves are to be saved. His willingnes to give doth

exceed ours in receyving by many degrees. First he had a will to save us, when we had no will, nor being at all; he loved us first and ordained us unto eternall life before the foundation of the world. 1. Ioh. 4.19. Act. 13.48. Eph. 1.4.5. Againe when we came into this world being borne in sinne, and had a will indeed but no will unto that which is good, a will onely unto evill, Gen. 6.5. the Lord prevented us and called us and of unwilling made us willing, and gave us a minde and will to know him and seeke him, as he did unto Paul in the middes of his wickednes. Actes. 9.1.3. etc. And we should never have had a will to come unto the well of life except we had bene drawne by him. Ioh. 6.44. And againe, being called and made willing, it is he that of willing doth make us more willing and constantly willing, and dayly gives unto his elect both the will and the deed of his good pleasure. Phil. 2.13. Our will and wish is bent unto evill, and we desire we know not what: Matt. 20.22. Our will is often eagerly set upon that which would wound our soules and be an hinderance to our salvation and comfort; Iam. 4.3. but the Lord by his gracious will keepes away the evill

we faine would have, and gives the good that we had no will unto. He beareth up and supporteth our will in good, which els presently declines unto evill: He holdeth our soules in life and suffereth not our feet to be mooved. Psa. 66.9. And therefore his will is better to us then our owne. Unto this living God that is so good and so farre exceeds our desires with his good will, let us ever runne and flye unto him and we shall surely finde the well of life with him and drink of the river of his pleasures. To him be praise for evermore.



CHAP. II. Of the sure and onely way to the Well of life.

No way to life but onely by Christ. In the knowledge of Christ we are to consider (a) His calling unto the whole work of Redemptio^, and the gifts wherewith he was abundantly furnished for this calling: (b) The offices laid upon him for this work, when he became our Prophet, to teach and instruct, both in his owne person and by his ministers; (c) Our Priest, in his sufferings and obedience on earth, and intercession for us in heaven; (d) Our King, to bring us unto the possession of life, subduing all his and our enimies: (e) The visible signes and seales of his grace, Baptisme and the Supper of the Lord: (f) The dignity of his person, being both very God and true man, requisite unto the discharge of each of his three offices. (g) The comforts arising from these considerations, specially when men thirst after life, and are carefull to have in store a select number of the promises of salvation. (h) A direction how to apply the promises unto ourselves by the due consideration of Christ his natures and offices.

I Am the way, the trueth and the life; no man commeth unto the Father but by me, saith Christ, Ioh. 14.6. He is the Lambe that leades unto the living fountaines, Rev. 7.17. and the good shepheard that gathers the lambes with his arme, and carries
(...)

was called thereunto of his Father. Christ is the signet of his Fathers right hand, and him hath God the Father sealed by designing and appointing him to be the Mediatour* Ioh. 6.27. He is the elect of God, Esa. 42.1. fore ordained before the foundation of the world, 1. Pet. 1.20. and againe manifestly called in time, chiefely at his Baptisme and Transfiguration, when that glorious voyce came from heaven, This is my beloved Sonne in whom I am well pleased, heare him. Matt. 3.17. and 17.5. This calling of Christ is especially noted in the Gospell of Iohn and more the^ fourty times in exact number, under the phrase of sending him; Ioh. 5.23.24.30.^6.37.38. etc. and yet fourty times againe in other equivalent phrases of being sealed, and given, and comming downe from heaven, and come in the Fathers name and the like. Our Saviour himselfe doth ever and anon repeat this calling and rejoyce in it and teach others to comfort themselves in it; and therefore the afflicted conscience that seekes to be strengthened in faith should often remember this calling of Christ: yea fourty and fourty times to runne unto it and after the example of Christ never to have done with it, that so the meditation

thereof may lead them to the well of life.
Christ being thus called of his Father is thereupon also furnished with all gifts meet for his calling, anoynted with the oyle of joy and gladnes above his fellowes, H^b. 1.9. with the spirit above measure, Ioh. 3.34. that of his fullnes we all might receive, even grace for grace, or grace over against grace, grace renewed in us according to his image; grace according to our need of grace and according to his abundance able to supply all our wants. Ioh. 1.16. All his garme^ts smel of myrrhe, aloes and cassia out of his yvory palaces whereby they have made him glad and whereby he hath made us glad, giving the oyle of joy for mourning and the garment of praise for the spirit of heavinesse. Psa. 45.8. Esa. 61.3. His name is an oyntment powred out; therefore the virgines love him: Sol. song. 1.3. and they sing lovesongs of him and their heart boyleth out his praise. Psal. 45. title, and vers. 1. Being thus anointed and called of his Father, he comes promptly at his call, Lo I come to doe thy will O God; Heb. 10.7. with Psa. 40.7.8. and he is as willing as he is able, to be a
(...)

ver have found the well of life, for there is none that understandeth, Psa. 53.1.2. but he is the light of them that sit in darkenes and in the shadow of death, he maketh the eyes of the blinde to see out of obscurity and darknes. Esa. 29.18. In his breast is that Vrim and Thummim by which the counsell of God was made knowne unto men: Exod. 28.30. Num. 27.21. for he is the substance of the shadowes that went before. Coll. 2.17. As from the Oracle; (debir, 1. Kin. 6.19.20.) the inmost place of the Sanctuary, God was wont to speak of old and to send forth a voyce; Exo. 25.22. Num. 7.8.9. so now hath he spoken unto us in his Sonne, that is in his bosome. Heb. 1.1. Ioh. 1.18. There is no labyrinth of errour but he gives a threed of direction to come out of it. There is no perplexity or difficult case of conscience but he resolveth it. God hath given him the tongue of the learned to know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary. Esa. 50.4. He leades the simple in a way that the fooles shall not erre therein. Esa. 35.8. Many complaine of the many religions and opinions in the world, and that they know not which to take; but such are

not acquainted with this Prophet, who teacheth the humble and revealeth his secret to them that feare him. Psal. 25.9.14. Christ is not like a sterne austere master, of whom the poore schollers dare not aske a question: but he is gentle and loving and calles them to learne of him and perswades them to come to him because he is meek and lowly, and shewes them how to finde rest unto their soules in all their doubts and difficulties. Matt. 11.29.
And further as in the dayes of his flesh he was a minister of the circumcision, Rom. 15.8. going about all Galilee teaching in their Synagogues and preaching the Gospell of the kingdome; Matt. 4.23. so now by his ministers and servants, Eph. 4.11.12. the maidens of his wisedome, Prov. 9.3.4. he calles all nations to the knowledge and fellowship of his grace. Mat. 28.19. As of old he preached to the spirits now in prison by Noah a preacher of righteousnes; 1. Pet. 3.19. so still at this day he preacheth peace to the^ that are afarre of. Eph. 2.17. Hereby his voyce is as the sound of many waters, Rev. 1.15. a souud that is gone out into all the earth unto the ends of the world* Rom. 10.18. And thus the spirit (...)

even in the waters of the great deep: Exod. 14. Esa. 51.10. so there being a burning lake and a red sea of wrath prepared for sinners, our holy high Priest hath made a way for us, he wading first through the same and the waters therof entring into his soule and overwhelming him that we might be delivered. Psal. 69.1.2. His suffering and satisfaction is become a strong bridge of translation to carry us out of the state of wrath and condemnation into the state of grace and salvation, and to transport us safely over this gulfe of destruction and curse in which for our sinnes we had deserved to have bene plunged and drowned for ever. Gal. 3.13. Col. 1.13.14. To bring us on in this journey to the well of life whe^ we like wandring sheep had gone astray perniciously, he sought us and found us and laid us on his shoulders: 1. Pet. 2.25. Luk. 15.4. He hath borne our griefes and carried our sorrowes, Esa. 53.4. he bore our sinnes in his body on the tree, 1. Pet. 2.24. and under the burden of our iniquities he was bruised, Esa. 53.5.10. he was sore amazed, he groaned, Mark. 14.38. and cryed out with strong cryes and supplications, Matt. 27.46. Heb. 5.7. he did

sweat great drops of blood that trickled downe to the ground: Luk. 22.44. and there was no remedy but that to save others he must goe downe to the gates of death, he was abased unto the death of the crosse; and as Moses lift up the serpent in the wildernes, so was our Mediatour lift up; Ioh. 3.14.15. and as men deale with a toad or serpent so they hanged him upon a stake (stauros) and set him upon a pole and he became as it were a monster unto many, Psa. 71.7. and 22.13. that he might make us glorious by deliverance and bring us unto life.
He was further abased when he was left for a time under the condition of death, free among the dead, Psa. 88.5. while he made his grave with the wicked, Esa. 53.9. and hereby was as it were swallowed up of the whale in the heart of the earth. Matt. 12.40. And yet above all this and before his buriall he descended into Hell, to the gates of the second death, into the deepest degree of humiliation, in his agony both in the garden and upon the crosse: Matt. 27.46. Psal. 88.6. there the sorrowes of hell compassed him about, there he drunk the cup of the red wine of the

wrath of God, Matt. 20.22. and 26.39.42.44. a cup whereinto all our vile and deadly sinnes were grated, God laying upon him the iniquities of us all. Esa. 53.6. At the tasting of this cup his strength was powred out like water, his heart did melt like wax in the middes of his bowels; Psa. 22.14. a greater matter then if the whole world beside had melted away to nothing for ever. The very thought of this filled the heart of our Mediatour with perplexity and feare long before it came, I have a baptisme (saith he) to be baptised withall; and how am I pained untill it be ended? Luk. 12.50. And how was he then pained in the finishing of it? But hereby are many sons brought unto God and delivered from the bondage and feare of death for ever. Heb. 2.9.10.14.15.
Having passed himselfe and led us through the first gate of justice by suffering, there remained a second by fulfilling the law for us, and this also necessary for our entrance into life; and therefore besides the sacrifice of his death, he also offered up himselfe in a holy life unto God, and sanctifyed himself for us. Ioh. 17.19. For being made under the Law, Gal.

4.4. he fulfilled all righteousnes, Matt. 3.15. and was an immaculate lambe, 1. Pet. 1.19. holy, harmelesse, undefiled, Heb. 7.26. whom no man could convince of sinne: Ioh. 8.46. and even in the midst of his sufferings his active obedie^ce and willing subjection to the will of his Father, Phi. 2.8.9. Ioh. 10.17.18. and 18.6.11. was for us a sacrifice of sweet odour, as well as the suffering it selfe, and so led us through the second gate of Gods justice. Thus by the obedie^ce and righteousnes of one many are made righteous, eve^ partakers of the righteousnes of God in Christ. Rom. 5.17.18.19. 1. Pet. 1.2. 2. Cor. 5.21.
And further, as all that he did then on earth was for our comfort; so all that he now doth in heave^ is also for the increase of our comfort: for he is still a priest and sacrificer in heaven. As Aaron bore the names of the children of Israel both upon his two shoulders ingraven in two Onix stones set in ouches of gold, Exod. 28.9-12. and likewise in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, in twelve other precious stones, when he went into the holy place for a memoriall continually before the Lord: vers* 17-29. so our Mediatour hath not onely carried us on his
(...)

of the promised inheritance in Canaan, we see what enimies in the way rose up against them to hinder them and to destroy them. Pharaoh and his host with charets and horsmen pursues after them to bring them back againe into bondage or to destroy them utterly, Exod. 14.5.9 and 15.9. Then Amalek when Israel was faint and weary in the way, came out and smote the feeblest and hinmost of them. Deut. 25.17.18. Exod. 17.8. Edom their brother denyed them passage. Num. 20.21. King Arad tooke some of them prisoners. Numb. 21.1. Balak the King of Moab calles Balaam the southsayer to curse Israel. Numb. 22.4. and 23.13. The Midianites vexed them with their wiles and brought thousands of them to destruction. Num. 25.4.9.17.18. Sihon and Og the giant with all their forces came out to stop them in their way. Deut. 2.32. and 3.1. And the Kings of Canaan with an host like the sand upon the sea shore in multitude, were gathered together to fight against Israel and to keepe them from their inheritance promised. Iosh. 11.4.5. And in like manner to stop and hinder the faithfull in the way of life armies of enimies

rise up on every side. The world generally hates them. Ioh. 15.19. Matt. 24.9. The nations rage and the princes conspire against the Lord and his anoynted. Psal. 2.1.2. The mighty men, the Giants of our time cease not to warre against them. The Romish Balaam much worse then the old southsayer curseth them incessantly. The Babilonian harlot is drunken with the blood of the Saints. Rev. 17.6. The manyheaded Beast blasphemes God and his Tabernacle; Rev. 13.6. and the second Beast forceth men for feare to receyve his mark. vers. 16. The Dragon and his angels fight. Rev. 12.3.7. The Devill goes about like a roaring lion seeking whom he may devoure and cast out from the inheritance of the Lord. 1. Pet. 5.8. And our owne flesh like a serpent in the bosome lusteth and fighteth against the soule. Gal. 5.17. 1. Pet. 2.11. Now for the resisting and conquering of all these Christ is given unto us as a victorious King and Prince of peace: He is exalted above every name that is named in this world or in the world to come* Eph. 1.21. He hath overcome the world; Ioh. 16.33. cast out the wicked spirit
(...)

confirme his afflicted people in their exspectation of future glory and dignity by Christ the Branch, God appointed his Prophet to take silver and gold from them of the captivity and to make Crownes, to set them first upon the head of Jehoshua, and then to keepe them for a memoriall in the Temple of the Lord: Zach. 6.9-15. so in the use of these ordinances of Baptisme and the Lords-Supper given to his Church and left for memorials of our glory in Christ, we ought to be affected as if there were two golde^ crownes hung up in the congregation before our eyes, and sometimes set upon our heads as witnesses and pledges of the glorious kingdome to be enjoyed hereafter. In Baptisme is represented both the washing away of our sinnes, Act. 2.38. and our fellowship with the holy Trinity, whose names are put upon us: Matt. 28.19. The names of the Father, Sonne, and H. Ghost are set like three pearles shining in our crowne of glory set upon our heads. Esa. 28.5. In the Supper of the Lord being called unto his Table and to the participation of the body and blood of Christ, we are thereby set together in heavenly places with him, Eph. 2, 6. like olive plants

round about his Table, as a crowne of glory in the hand of the Lord, Esa. 62.3. even a crowne about our head Christ in the middes of his Church. As the children of Israel in the wildernes to guide and support them in the way were led by a pillar of cloud, and fed with manna and water out of the rock; so by a like favour for the same spirituall use hath Christ our King given us the Sacraments of the new Testament: 1. Cor. 10.1.2.3.4. and therefore looke what joy and comfort the most faithfull in Jsrael had, when they saw the cloud of the Tabernacle going before them; such joy and comfort ought we to be filled withall at the administration of Baptisme: and looke with what joy and thankfulnes they went forth to gather Manna, with as great ought we to be affected in going to the Table of the Lord, giving thankes unto Christ for such a staffe of comfort to quicken and strengthen us in our journey and way unto the Kingdome of Heaven.
(f) But for a further view of this unspeakable grace and comfort exhibited in these three offices of Christ, we are to looke upon the dignity of his person whereupon depends the vertue, power and
(...)

33.15.16. When for sinne the Lord threatned a departure of this presence, and yet offered to send an Angel with them to destroy their enimies; Exod. 33.2.3. that would not content him* no presence of prophets or angels would serve the turne without this divine presence united to the Tabernacle for their guidance. And even so according to this type, when the word was made flesh, he dwelt among us as in a Tabernacle, as the word signifyes: Ioh. 1.14. escenose. His body, was the true Tabernacle which the Lord pight and not man. Heb. 8.2. In him dwelt all the fulnes of the Godhead bodily. Coll. 2.9. Out of this Tabernacle he spake; Heb. 1.1. and wrought miracles; Matt. 4.23. Act. 10.38. and remooved up and downe, and conversing among men led his sheep in the way of life. Ioh. 10.27.28. No man nor angel had bene sufficient for this worke: but he being very God as well as man, and bearing up all things by his mighty word, Heb. 1.3. caries along his sheep unresistably and safely unto the glory exspected. He is Lord of all, and at his right hand we may see all his blessed angels attending, to whom he hath given charge to

watch over his sheep in this way and to carry them in their hands that they dash not their feet against a stone. Psal. 91.11.12. At his left hand he hath the Devill and his angels in a chaine and bindes them at his pleasure, Rev. 20.1.2. 2. Pet. 2.4. so that they cannot hurt a swine or any uncleane beast without his permission, Matth. 8.31. and much lesse can they hurt them that are washed in his blood: and he having given commandement to prepare the way of his people, to cast up an high way, to gather out the stones, and to remoove the stumbling blockes; Esa. 62.10. and 57.14. they shall goe in the way of life, as Israel marched out of Egypt, with an high hand; Exod. 14.8. a dog shall not moove his tongue against them, Exod. 11.7. further then is for their good: Rom. 8.28. and in due season they shall come to the Lord the wel-spring of all glory, life and comfort in heaven.
(g) The comfort which ariseth from this consideration of Christ is marvellous great for all the faithfull and in speciall for afflicted conscie^ces that desire to be established and confirmed in faith.
(...)

fort out of his fullnesse. Thus the soules that come dayly to Christ as their Prophet may dayly be refreshed by him.
(h) If any through weaknes of faith cannot lay hold on the promises of God touching the pardon of sinne and the free gift of salvation set before us, let them bring these promises to the ground of them even to Christ, applying them first to Christ and then to themselves: for in him all the promises of God are Yea and in him they are Amen; 2. Cor. 1.20. not onely in their owne nature and truth, but also in respect of our apprehension. He that cannot assent unto the promise, looking on the promise onely, may better assent and sooner beleeve, when he lookes on Christ the ground of the promise: for example, God promiseth unto the repentant that their crimson and skarlet sinnes shall be taken away, and they made white as snow and wooll: Esa. 1.18. now the troubled soule that cannot say Yea to this promise by particular application, let the same looke upon the sacrifice of Christ bearing their sins, satisfying the justice of God, and behold his blood powred out to wash them, and so they shall sooner conceive and apprehend their sins to be done

away and their soules to be cleansed and made white as snow.
There is a promise, that where sinne abounds, there grace aboundeth much more: Rom. 5.20. The perplexed consciences that faine would but cannot say Amen unto this promise by applying it unto themselves; let the same looke upon Christ, and behold the dignity of his person, his deity and divine majesty, being the brightnes of glory, the character or engraven forme of his Fathers person, his equall and his fellow; Heb. 1.3. Phil. 2.6. Zach. 13.7. when they see his eternall Godhead and almighty power, to whom nothing is hard or impossible, and withal consider how he stoops downe to help and puts his hand to this work, to give worth and price unto the sacrifice for sinne, to make the blood of redemptio^ more precious and meritorious to redeeme the vilest sinners; then shall they more easily receive the promise of abundant grace, and with more faith say Amen unto it.
There is a promise that God will be mercifull to the sinnes of his people, Heb. 8.12. and receive them with everlasting kindenes, Esa. 54.8. and pity the^ as a father
(...)

merit of life to justify us; v. 54. the spirit of life for our sanctification, Rom. 8.10. and the crowne of life for our glorification. Rev. 2.10. He is all in all; Coll. 3.11. and therefore we are to be nothing in ourselves but all in him, and wholly renouncing ourselves and our owne righteousnes we are to cast ourselves altogether upon him for the hope of eternall life. To him be praise for ever. Amen.



CHAP. III. Of Mortification or the death of sinne.

The nature and necessity thereof in generall. (a) Six speciall degrees of mortification: 1. In severall passions of the minde troubled at the apprehension of sinne; 2. In resisting and refraining of sinfull actions, 3. of wicked purposes, 4. tickling desires, 5. wandring imaginations, 6. habituall concupiscence. (b) The sayd acts of mortification like so many battels in our spirituall warfare, and as many parts of that contrition which is acceptable unto God and hath the promises. (c) The example of David mortifying sinne in each of the particulars afore named. (d) The chiefe evils of sinne that are to be mortifyed, The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of life. (e) By these Satan workes his temptations, and by the mortifying of these he is conquered, as it is shewed in the examples of Adam, (f) Christ, (g) Antichrist.

HAving heard of the love of God, which is the spring of life, and of the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, who is the way unto that life; it remaines that we seeke the communion of the H. Spirit, as the conclusion of our comfort for the assurance of that life. 2. Cor. 13.14. Hereby we know that we have fellowship with God, that he abideth in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit. 1. Ioh. 3.24.
(...)

shall be comforted. Matt. 5.4.
II. After this followes an other degree of Mortification, whereby the faithfull according to the measure of grace given, doe turne from the practise of sinne which they have bewayled. They doe not live any longer therein, Rom. 6.2. they cease to doe evill, Esa. 1.16. and eschew evill: Iob 1.1.8. they forsake their owne wayes and courses, and breake of their sinnes, Esa. 55.7. and refraine their feet from every evill way. Psalm. 119.101. By this resisting of wicked actions men are sayd to mortify or kill the deeds of the body and thereupon is life promised unto them. Rom. 8.13. They therefore that love life everlasting must every day die this death also in casting off the workes of darkenes. Though it be a death to the flesh to leave them, yet must this death also be undergone; els is there no hope of life, no assurance that God dwelleth in us by his Spirit.
III. An other death of the old man is when not onely the outward act of sinne, but the will and purpose of sinning is mortifyed. The will of the flesh and the will of man is noted as a

thing opposite to God and his Spirit, procuring his wrath and making men the children of wrath; Ioh. 1.13. Eph. 2.3. 1. Pet. 4.2.3. and many that want the power to performe many evils, doe not yet want the will thereunto; and therefore this will is to be mortifyed. If he that had no staine in his will, could yet say unto his Father, Not as I vvill but as thou vvilt; Not my will but thy will be done: Matt. 26.39. Luk. 22.42. and againe, I seek not mine owne will, but the will of him that sent me; Iohn. 5.30. and 6.38. how much more should we make it our dayly exercise to break our owne corrupt willes, to cast away our owne purposes and to wait on God all the day long, saying and praying continually, Not my will but thy will be done? At the first act of Pauls conversion, so soone as Christ was made knowne unto him, we see this mortification of his will which he renounced, and resigning himselfe to the will of God sayd, Lord vvhat vvilt thou that I doe? Act. 9.6. When the will is thus mortifyed, though men doe sometimes the things that they would not; yet then is this comfort afforded; it is no more they that doe it but sinne that

dwelleth in them. Rom. 7.15.16.17.19-20. It shall not be imputed unto them.
IV. Besides this it comes to passe many times that when the will is subdued and restrained from some evill, yet the affections are not mortifyed: though a sinner in the purpose of his will, will not consent to the practise of some evill, yet the heart is tickled with delight therein, and could wish it were lawfull, and it is a paine unto them that they may not consent to seek it. This evill concupiscence and lust of the heart, these affections of the flesh are distinctly condemned, and we are commanded to mortify and to avoyd such inordinate passions; even as they are lusts, though consent of the will be not with them. Gal. 5.24. Coll. 3.5. Rom. 7.5. Exo. 20.17. In the killing and abandoning of these lusts the faithfull endure many deathes from day to day, and the acts of Mortification are multiplyed according to the strength of the spirit ministred unto them.
V. Againe the minde of man is dayly annoyed and pestred with evill thoughts and wandring imaginations arising partly from the flesh and partly from the suggestion of Satan; and these though they neither

be delighted in nor approoved of, yet the very entertainment of them and their residence in the minde though for a short while, doth pollute the soule with sinne. For God requireth the whole soule and the whole minde with all the strength thereof; Deut. 6.5. Luk. 10.27 he requireth a pure heart, free from all stragling conceits. Matt. 5.8. Our eyes should ever be towards the Lord and his glory: Psal. 25.15. Lots wife for looking backward was smitten of God and turned into a pillar of salt; Gen. 19.17.26. and though more evill might be in her minde, yet that very look alone being forbidden of God made her culpable: and so for a side look unto vanity, when the eye of the minde rolles up and downe we become guilty of condemnation. These idle thoughts take up the place in the soule, even the seat wherein God should sit; and while they keepe out the thought of God, though but for a moment, they are in that respect condemnable. And therefore these motions of the minde are to be resisted, repelled and mortifyed. As Abraham hushed away the foules that came downe upon his sacrifice; Gen. 15.11. so are these flying thoughts to be dispelled

and driven away from our mindes. God requireth that the wicked should forsake his imaginations; Esa. 55.7. God would have his children to cast downe imaginations and to bring every thought captive unto the obedience of Christ, 2. Cor. 10.5. which cannot fully and perfectly be done without this mortification of them. By mortification of them the heart is purged, and then the promise of mercy multiplyed. Iam. 4.8.
VI. Lastly the faithfull doe yet in a further degree die unto sinne, when as that habituall concupiscence which is the seedplot and root of all other sinnes is mortifyed and subdued within them. For besides all the motions, affections and other fruits of sinne before noted, there is in man a corrupt disposition, whereby he is enclined to all evill. This disposition and pronenes to sinne, considered apart from the fruits thereof, is condemned in the Scripture, and is called the old man, the body of sin, the law of sin and the law of the members; Rom. 6.6. Eph. 4.22. Col. 3.2. Rom. 7.23. it is called the flesh which lusteth against the spirit, and therefore is to be crucifyed as well as the lusts and

affections thereof. Gal. 5.17.24. This is that hatefull and poysonous Cockatrice egge, to be crushed before serpents creep out of it. The godly therefore knowing this their owne corrupt disposition must labour to have it changed and weakened dayly within them: and to this end they are to watch their heart with all diligence, Prover. 4.23. and even before they feele any stirring or motion of the flesh, to be exercising of themselves in all godlines and in all holy meditations and prayer, to keepe under their rebellious nature, and by the help of the Spirit to bring it into subjection, 1. Corint. 9.27. to binde the very stumpe of this tree with an yron band of mortification, that the forbidden fruits doe not bud forth.
(b) The life of a Christian in this world is a continuall warfare, in which they fight the battailes of the Lord every day and houre. 2. Cor. 10.4. 1. Tim. 6.12. These spirituall combates according to the actes and degrees before named, are six in speciall. First they conquer the Adamantine Rock, Zach. 7.12. when their hard hearts are softened to
(...)

againe by the banishment of wandring thoughts and motions; and most of all broken whe^ the sinfull disposition of the flesh is broken and mortifyed. All these contritions and breakings are so many pleasant sacrifices of sweet odour unto God: and to them that undergoe so many deathes he hath made many precious promises; that he will revive the spirit of the humble, and give life unto the contrite ones; that he who is high and excellent, inhabiting eternity on high will dwell here below with him that is lowly; that he whose name is the Holy One, will dwell with the contrite sinner: Esa. 57.15. and 66.1.2. and therefore if the presence and conversation of God with us be of any regard with us, if the glory and life that God gives be of any account in our eyes, let us give ourselves dayly to these workes of mortification, that by these foregoing deathes we may be made ready to leave this world, and may in the end finde him and with comfort come before him that is the well of life.
(c) For the illustration of this poynt, to omit others, consider we the example of David alone, how he was exercised in all these acts of contrition and thereby dyed

unto sinne. The divers degrees of mortification were so many steppes of the staires by which he descended into the death of sinne, dying as it were a severall death upon each one of them. 1. After knowledge and conviction of sinne committed, as for the numbring of the people, his heart smote him for it, 2. Sam. 24.10. and that was a blow or stroak of mortification which the spirit gave unto the flesh; he mourned exceedingly, and in a revengefull indignation against his owne sinne was content and desired that the hand of God might be against him and against his fathers house, that he might beare the smart of his owne transgression. vers. 17. this was a death of sinne in him. And so it was also with the sinne he conmitted in the matter of Vrias, for which his bones were broken, Psal. 51.8. and for which he made himselfe a publick example, by the confession of his sinne and making a dolefull song thereof to the shaming of himselfe and warning of others. The title of Psal. 51.11. David went a step lower, when he mortifyed and resisted the act of sinne, though occasion and opportunity of revenge was given unto him, though counsell was given him by others to that
(...)

If I say, I vvill judge thus: Behold I should offend against the generation of thy children. vers. 15. VI. Lastly David came downe to the lowest step of the staires, when in the mortification of his sinne he stroke upon the root thereof, by bewailing his originall corruption and seeking to subdue that sinfull disposition received from his parents, while he complaineth, Behold I vvas borne in iniquity and in sinne hath my mother conceived me. Psalm. 51.5. This old nature he labours to mortify, when he desires to be renewed in the spirit of his minde; vers. 10. for as the Apostle reasoned in respect of the covenant, Heb. 8.13. in that he mentioneth a new estate he desires the abolishing and decay of the old. Thus true mortification never ceaseth till it bring men from and by the hatred of actual sinnes to finde out the original, the cause and mother of all, by which all men together are become unprofitable and filthy; Psal. 53.3. vvith Rom. 3.12. that they may kill and crucifye the same. This mortification of the old man is also comprehended in that speech of David when he saith, I kept me from mine iniquity: Psal. 18.23. for though it be true that he kept himselfe from his wickednes and from

his sinne that dwelt in him by bewailing sins already committed, by resisting the present actions, by breaking his will, by renouncing his affections, by casting downe his imaginations; yet in speciall manner he kept himselfe from his wickednes, by mortifying his very disposition to evill, while he laboured to change his nature and to have a new disposition created within him. These are the deathes that David dyed; and these are the deathes to be undergone of all that would not dye eternally. This dayly dying unto sinne by so many lesser deathes, is a maine preparative unto the great day of our translation out of this world which ought evermore to be remembred of us.
(d) After the actes of mortification and the divers degrees thereof, it is expedient that we consider the speciall enimies or evills of sinne that are to be mortifyed. These the holy Ghost informes us to be the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life; 1. Ioh. 2.16. that is to say, voluptuousnes, covetousnes, and ambition or vaine-glory. To these three may be reduced the principall workes of the flesh or old man, considering that for these and from these doe arise the contentions, hatred,

envy, lying, slandering and manifold other iniquities, Iam. 4.1.2. which are therefore noted and described as companions waiting upon the forenamed lusts, which are the three seditious captaines and leaders unto all mischiefe. Gal. 5.19.20.21. Col. 3.5.8.9. Eph. 5.22.31. These lusts are the root of all evill, not onely of all wrong, injustice and cruell dealing towards men, but of all irreligion and impiety against God. The cares of this world the deceitfulnes of riches, and the lusts of other things as the pleasures of this life, choke the word of God and make it unfruitfull: Mark. 4.19. Luk. 8.14. the fruits of holines and righteousnes are blasted and destroyed thereby. And some through these lusts have erred from the faith, being insnared with foolish and absurd conceits, noysome also and hurtfull in respect of all graces weakned by them, piercing the heart with present sorrowes, and finally casting men into eternall destruction and perdition. 1. Tim. 6.9.10. These are of the world and not of God, and if any man be a lover of the world and of these things of the world, then is not the love of the Father in him; 1. Ioh. 2.15.16. then is he made the enimy of God, for his entertainment

of these lusts and his amity with them; Iam. 4.4. and consequently cannot looke for the fruits of that blessed friendship with God: but for such remaineth a fearefull exspectation of judgment and death in the day of Gods wrath. Therefore men die for ever because they live after the flesh and doe not die betimes to these sinfull lusts. Rom. 8.13.
(e) As the world, so the Devill also, by the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of life both worketh his chief temptations and by the mortifying of those he is co^quered, and by mens yeelding unto the^ he overcommeth and devoureth them. This appeareth in three most memorable examples, of Adam, Christ, and Antichrist. At the temptation of our first parents the Devill used these three baites and thereby ensnared them. The forbidden tree by his suggestion appeared good for meat, Gen. 3.6. to bring them to covetousnes not content with all the other trees of paradise, as though there had not bene meat enough for the^ without this also; it appeared pleasant to the eyes, to kindle the lust of false and vaine pleasure in them; and by his suggestion it appeared as a tree desirable
(...)

by which the Devill workes so effectually in him and in others by him, are those three forenamed lusts: for by these three is Antichrist often described. In respect of the lust of the flesh, the habitation and denne of Antichrist is a spiriruall Sodom, Rev. 11.8. abounding with lusts of monstrous uncleannes; the Romish city is compared to a great Harlot and the mother of harlots, having in her hand a great cup full of abominations and filthinesse of her fornication, Rev. 17.1.4.5. and living deliciously in pleasures. Rev. 18.7. In respect of the lust of the eyes and love of riches, she is decked with gold and precious stone and pearles: Rev. 17.4. and 18.16. and for increase and maintenance of that wealth her servants and ministers through covetousnes and with fained words doe make merchandise of men. 2. Pet. 2.3. And as for the pride of life this man of sinne doth exalt himselfe above all that is called God and shewes himselfe that he is God; 2. Thes. 2.4. and hath a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies, and is wondred at and worshipped throughout the world. Rev. 13.3.4.5. And when he is crossed in any of his lusts then he makes warre with the Saints and overcomes them and is drunken

with their blood. Rev. 13.7. and 17.6. and suffers them not to buy or sell that will not receive his marke. Rev. 13.17. Hereby it appeares that the spirit of Antichrist and the breath of his life is lust: these worldly lusts are as it were the bridle and saddle wherewith Satan rides upon him: with the spurres of these lusts he drives him on to commit so great abhominations. By lust is the greatest sinne wrought in the world; and therefore is every one to be warned hereby to fight continually against these lusts that fight against the soule and make it a slave to Satan. 1. Pet. 2.11. They must either mortify these lusts of the old man, or els for ever be a spoyle and prey unto the old serpent that worketh by them.


(...)

Holy Ghost, they are againe taught upon the new consideratio^ of this honour done unto them, and in reverence of this divine guest, to proceed unto a further degree and care of their mortification, to cleanse themselves from all filthines of flesh and spirit, to subdue the old man with his lusts and affections, lest they grieve this Spirit that is come to dwell with them. 1. Cor. 6.19.20. 2. Cor. 6.16. and 7.1. Eph. 4.30.
(a) The manner how the Spirit doth mortify sinne is by bringing the sinner unto Christ and by him unto the Father. As the Father for communicating of life unto men hath sent his Sonne to merit life, Ioh. 7.16. and 3.16. and both the Father and the Sonne have sent the Holy Spirit for our assurance of that life: Ioh. 15.26. so the Spirit againe bringes us both to Christ and to the Father and first teacheth us to embrace Christ; he testifies of Christ and glorifies him and takes of his and shewes it unto us. Ioh. 16.13.14.15. The manner how the Spirit bringes us unto Christ is by working in us the graces of Faith, Hope and Love of Christ. These are the most sweet breathings of the Holy Ghost: and by each of these he workes mortification in them that are so brought unto him.
I. Faith in Christ serves to kill sinne in us many wayes. First of all by the death of Christ there is merited for us not onely the pardon of our sinne, but also a power of subduing sinne; by his death he hath merited the gift of the spirit, even of the spirit of sanctification. Of this gift we are made partakers by faith, which engraffes us into Christ and into the fellowship of his death and of all the merit thereof. Therefore is it sayd that we are planted together with him into the likenes of his death; and hereupon we know that the old man is crucifyed with him, that the body of sinne might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. Rom. 6.5.6.7 8. Thus being by faith united to Christ, the spirit of mortification as well as the gift of reconciliation is bestowed upon us: and in this regard should we the more earnestly seek that precious faith which procures so great grace unto us. Therefore did Christ beare our sins in his body on the tree, that we might become dead unto sinnes; 1. Pet. 2.24. that by the merit of his death sinne might be mortifyed in us. And hereupon we come to say with the Apostle that we are crucifyed with Christ, Gal. 2.20.
(...)
we may stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free. Gal. 5.1.
IV. Moreover as our Mortification depends upon that which Christ merited for us; so that which Christ by his death obtained for himselfe doth further lead us thereunto. For to this end Christ both dyed and rose againe, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. Rom. 14.9. And as we beleeve that he is becom our Lord, so we are to beleeve that we are become his servants, being bought with a price, to wit by his blood; and therefore are not our owne but his, 1. Cor. 6..19.20 and 7.23. and therefore may not doe our owne willes nor follow our owne affections and lusts but are to mortify them that we may doe his will. Thus the faith of Christs dominion over us purchased by his death, doth serve for an help of our mortification, while it apprehends that the redeemed of Christ are redeemed from the earth, from among men to follow the Lambe, being the first fruits unto God and to the Lambe. Rev. 14.3.4.
V. Againe, being in part mortifyed and contrite for sinne, by another act of faith we doe further apprehend that in Christ we shall be accepted notwithstanding the

weake measure of mortification that is in us. And this faith of acceptance is a great encouragement for us to proceed further in the subduing and mortifying of the flesh with the lusts thereof, and to abound dayly therein, when as we know that our weake labour in the Lord is not in vaine; 1. Cor. 15.58. when this perswasion abides within us, that the day of small beginnings is not to be despised; Zech. 4.10. that the Lord doth both accept the willing minde notwithstanding many wants, 2. Cor. 8.12. and will also in due season perfect and accomplish that which he hath begun in us. Philip. 1.6.
(b) That we may the better apprehend the comfort of this acceptance through faith, there are divers poynts to be observed touching the nature of true Mortification which is yet acceptable to God.
1. First, that it is still imperfect in this life even in the most excellent servants of Christ, who co^fesse themselves wretched transgressours of the law of God, feeling in themselves another law and power of sinne rebelling against the law of their minde, and leading them into captivity to the law of sinne that is in their members.

Rom. 7.23.24.
II. Secondly, true mortification of sinne as it is imperfect, so it is nnequall; every man having a portion of grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Eph. 4.7. The same measure of the spirit is not to be exspected in all. All have not the same measure of sorrow for their sinnes that some others have; yet it may be true and unfained, and so accepted of God. The fruits of repentance are in some thirty, in some sixty, in some an hundredfold. Matt. 13.23. Though every true beleever have the spirit of God, Rom. 8.9. and be a spirituall person; 1. Cor. 2.14.15. yet some truely spirituall are so weake that in comparison of others they are not spirituall. 1. Cor. 3.1. And therefore ought not any for this to be discouraged if they finde themselves inferiour unto others.
III. Thirdly, true Mortification as it is unequall, so it is in some respects unlike in the faithfull: as there are divers measures thereof, so are there divers manners of it. The gifts and graces of God are not onely many but manifold or divers and of different kinde in divers persons: 1. Pet. 4.10. and therefore some that have not

mortifyed the outward actions of sinne may have striven more in the mortifying of their inward lusts and affections. Some that have not mortifyed the more hainous sinnes, but have sometimes fallen into notorious scandals, may yet in their ordinary course of life farre exceed those in true mortification which yet never fell into such grosse outward offences. 1. Kin. 15.5. 2. Sam. 24.3.4. etc. And some that proceed further unto dayly mortification of the actions of sinne, may yet want that great contrition and sorrow for sinne which is in others that fall oftner and doe lesse abstaine from the ordinary practise of sinne. It is hard for any to determine whether it was greater grace in Ioseph a servant resisting the temptation and not committing adultery with his mistresse; or in David after his fall to humble himselfe so farre as being a glorious king to shame himselfe by publick confession of his adultery. Psa. 51. title. For as God magnifies his mercy by sinne in forgiving it, more then if no sinne had bene: Rom. 3.4. and 5.20. so the godly may sometime manifest their grace and godlines by open and effectuall repentance, more then if that speciall sin had not bene committed by them. Luk.

7.38-34.
IIII. Fourthly, that Mortification which ariseth from the liveliest faith and feeling of Gods favour in Christ is most acceptable unto God; rather then that which hath the extreamest griefe, feare and terrour joyned with it, or then that which hath a greater restraint of sinfull actions. For as by faith men please God; Heb. 11.5.6. so according to the measure of faith in any action men doe more or lesse please God therein. Though the degrees of mortification be many; though the working of faith be sometimes revealed more at one degree then at another; yet whatsoever is wrought at any degree, is still by faith; whether it be at the cha^ge of the disposition, the motion, affection, will, or action, or in contrition after the sinfull action; whether it be in divers men according to their different measure of grace, or in the same men according to their divers assistance at severall times, it is all by faith. Faith is the root of other graces. Col. 2.7. and every act of mortification is a branch springing from this root; and no branch may boast against the root that beareth it. Rom. 11.18. This is the victory that overcommeth the world, eve^

our faith: 1. Ioh. 5.4. by it mortification is wrought; and by it each act of mortification becomes most acceptable to God. And therefore above all things we are to labour that this blessed grace of faith may be stirred up within us; that though it have as it were slept at one assault of sin, it may yet be awakened at another degree of mortification in the progresse of our spirituall combates. And seing the spirit of God is the spirit of faith, 2. Cor. 4.13. therefore should we seek to be filled with the spirit, Eph. 5.18. that by it we may both become strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, and may withall in the middes of our weakenesses be comforted and encouraged through this faith of being made acceptable unto God in Christ.
(c) Furthermore besides this working of faith for the mortification of all kinde of sin in generall, there is yet also a more particular consideration of the power of faith for the mortification of some speciall sinnes against God and man. By faith the spirituall pride of nature is subdued, and confidence in a mans owne selfe is overthrowne: whiles such a way of salvation by free grace, without our owne works and merits is taught us by faith. Thus is humility

and utter denyall of a mans self wrought in the soule, as the Spirit declareth by that threefold emphaticall interrogatio^ and the answer thereof, when as he saith, Where is boasting then? it is excluded. By what law? of vvorkes? Nay; but by the law of faith. Rom. 3.27. And so also in respect of men it may in like manner be dema^ded. Where is hatred and revenge? it is excluded. By what law? of workes? Nay; but by the law of faith. Faith teacheth men to be kinde, mercifull, tender hearted, forbearing one another and forgiving one another, if they beleeve the pardon of their owne sinnes, and that God in Christ hath forgive^ them. Eph. 4.32. Col. 3.13. Though the law of workes require both humility in respect of God and meekenes in respect of men, though it condemne both boasting and revengefulnes; yet it is the law of faith that workes these graces required and mortifyes the contrary sinnes.
(d) Having heard how the Spirit by faith bringes us unto Christ for the mortification of sinne, it followes that we consider how the same is done by Hope also, through the assured exspectation of the glory that is to come. Christ is our Hope and the Hope of glory. 1. Tim. 1.1. Col. 1.27.

And fro^ this Hope there ariseth a double act of mortification by two especiall graces of Sobriety and Patience that are exercised therein.
Sobriety is an act of mortification which consists in the subduing of inordinate joy and delight of all earthly pleasures, honours and profits wherewith so many are as it were drunken and overcome. By looking for that blessed Hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Iesus Christ, we are taught to deny ungodlines and worldly lusts, and to live soberly and temperately in the moderate use of all outward comforts. Tit. 2.12.13. The godly doe know that when the Lord shall appeare in glory they shall be made like unto him, when they shall see him as he is. And every one that hath this Hope in him purifyeth himselfe as he is pure. 1. Ioh. 3.2.3. This purification of the soule from uncleane pleasures and lusts is the mortification of them. As a greater light doth obscure and dimme the lesse, and both the starres in the firmament and the candles lighted on earth below doe cease to shine when the light of the radiant Sunne doth arise upo^ them: so all the brightest lampes of worldly pleasure are as it were extinguished
(...)

suffer with joy the spoyling of their goods knowing in themselves that they have in heaven a better and an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34.
(e) After the consideration of Faith and Hope it remaines that we proceed to the third grace of Love, whereby the holy Spirit doth worke a further mortification in the elect. And first of all, by the love of Christ men are brought to the love of death, having a desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Phil. 1.23. This desire of death cannot be in a man untill he be dead unto the world, and untill the love of the things that are in the world be dissolved within him. Vntill a man be content to depart from all other vanities he cannot desire to goe unto Christ. And therefore ought the godly to labour to finde in the^selves this desire of being translated out of the world to be with Christ, that thereby they may finde more assurance of their mortification. We see how the tender and fervent love of some friends makes them willing and desirous to die with their frie^ds and doth after a sort mortifye the world unto them. Iacob having lost Ioseph refused to be comforted and resolved to goe downe mourning into the grave unto his

sonne: Gen. 37.35. and fearing the losse of Benjamin, both he and others thought he should die with him, his life being bound up in his sonnes life. Gen. 42.38. and 44.22.30.31. It is recorded by divers historians touching the barbarous Indians in some parts both of the East and the West, and some Black-Moores in Guinea in the midst betwixt them both; that many of the subjects doe willingly die with their kings and many women with their husbands: that the Prince being drowned many of the people have willingly drowned themselves with him: that some men give their wives, some their childre^, some their serva^ts to be buried alive in the grave with their king, to serve him in another world: that some women doe cheerfully and by the encouragement of their friends cast themselves into the fire, wherein according to their manner of burial in some places, the dead bodies of their husbands are consumed together. If these so wickedly and resolutely leave this world before they be called, and blindly cast away their lives for the love of a wretched creature; what shame is it unto Christians if the love of their glorious prince and heavenly bridegroome doe not mortify them
(...)

declared, it remaineth yet to be shewed how the Spirit having brought us to Christ doth bring us thereby to the eternall Father: for in Christ through the Spirit we have accesse or entrance to the Father; Eph. 2.18. and are reconciled to God and saved; and not onely so, but we also joy in God through our Lord Iesus Christ. Rom. 5.11. And then all the attributes that are in God absolutely considered, besides the other comforts to be had by them, doe in speciall serve for our mortification by the Spirit of Christ teaching us the right life of them. God is light: 1. Ioh. 1.5. and all his glorious attributes are so many divine beames of light, whereof every one of the^ by shining upon us doth further our mortificatio^. The eye of Gods infinite wisedome looking downe upon us may well strike us with shame of our vaine behaviour and forgetfulnes of God, and make us mourne as Peter, when at his third denyall Christ turned and looked upon him. Luk. 22.61.62. And therefore are wicked me^ the further from mortification, because they say in their hearts, Tush, God seeth not; Psal. 10.11. Iob 22.14. and the eye of man restraines them more then the eye of God. Iob 24.15.17.

The sight of Gods infinite power may well cast us downe and make us seeme lesse then grashoppers in our owne eyes, when Israelites were so stricken with the sight of the mighty and tall Anakims. Num. 13.33. His infinite goodnes and mercy communicated with us should affect us more then Davids did Mephibosheth, and cause us rather to say, What are we that the Lord should looke upon such dead dogs as we are? 2. Sam. 9.8. His infinite wrath against sin, before which the mountaines quake and melt, Nah. 1.5.6. may well strike us with godly sorrow for the same sins which in the reprobate are punished with unrecoverable destruction though they be pardoned in us. The incomprehensible majesty and glorious beauty of his face cannot be looked upon by living men; Exod. 33.20. and some sparkles thereof appearing have brought men to the feare of death. Iud. 13.22. His unmeasurable eternity being duely thought upo^ may well mortify the love of this transitory world that passeth away; 1. Cor. 7.31. he alone being unchangeable and abiding for ever the same. Iam. 1.17. Psa. 102.26.27. His unconceivable ubiquity or presence in every place may well serve for an

hedge or wall of mortification, to keepe us in awe of him and in the denyall of ourselves for him, seeing we can goe no whither from his spirit and presence. Psa. 139.7. etc. And thus all the rest of his attributes being reverently thought upon, may serve to subdue the vanity of our mindes and worke a death of sin within us by the help of his Holy Spirit. By this meanes we may be prepared for our latter end, to leave this world with comfort. The Heremites and Anachoretes that shut up themselves in walles or wildernesses, and doe every day with their owne ha^ds digge and with their fingers scratch and rake up the mouldes, making their owne grave aforehand and lying downe therein, doe not in so right a manner thinke of their end, as those that thus doe mortify their sins; making their owne spirituall meditations the graves wherein to bury their lusts.



CHAP. V. Of the outward meanes of Mortification,

The ordinances and the workes of God. (a) The primary ordinances, the Word, Prayer, Sacraments and Discipline. (b) The secondary ordinances, Fasting and Watching. (c) Ordinances of a third degree, Vowes etc Covenants. (d) The Sacraments and Sacrifices of the old Testament. (e) Legall purifications: there was more pollution by the touching of an uncleane or dead man then by the touch of any uncleane beast in seven respects. (f) The Law of the Nazarite. (g) The workes of Creation both in generall and particular. (h) The workes of Providence: all the good that is done for us or performed by us: (i) all the evils either of sinne committed by ourselves or others; (k) or of punishment suffered by our selves or others, (l) The due consideration of Death serves to mortify all kindes of lust.

THe Spirit of God working inwardly is the principall meanes of our mortification; yet ordinarily he chooseth those times for this his work, when as we observe the outward meanes which he hath appoynted to this purpose. These meanes are either the use of his ordinances, or the consideration of his workes. The primary ordinances of God whereby the Spirit killes sinne are his Word, Prayer, Sacraments

and Discipline that he hath appoynted. These are the weapons of our warfare, not carnall, but mighty through God to cast downe strong holds. 2. Cor. 10.4.
(a) His Word is the Hammer of Mortification, that breakes the stony heart and makes it contrite. Ier. 23.29. As he himselfe is, so is his word, lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two-edged sword, that pierceth deep and cuts the soule and spirit, Heb. 4.12.13. and hewes the old man in pieces, as Samuel once hewed king Agag in pieces before the Lord. 1. Sam. 15.33. This sword of the Spirit is to be taken into the hands of every Christian, that would obtaine the victory over the world. Eph. 6.17. This word is to be heard publickely, to be read privately, to be meditated upon continually: and out of it a store of divine sentences, commandements, promises and threatnings is to be gathered and kept in readines, Col. 3.16. and according to every mans necessity and speciall temptations so to be applyed against the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of life, for the mortification thereof. These divine testimonies and words of God are like so many sharp nayles, Eccl. 12.11. to be fastened into the

hands and feet of the old man, that so he may be crucifyed. As it was the honour of Iael, and she was blessed above women, because she put her hand to the nayle and her right hand ro the hammer, and smote Sisera and stroke through his temples till the enimy of Gods people was slayne: Iudg. 5.24.26.27. so shall they be blessed above other men and women that having furnished themselves with store of divine oracles, doe then put their hands to the nayles and hammer of the Spirit, and so strike downe every lust and sinful motion as soone as it beginnes to lift up the head and to stirre within them, by applying the counsell of God against the same.
By Prayer the spirit of mortification is obtained both when it is desired by petition, according to the precept and promise, Luk. 11.13. Matt. 26.41. as also by the very act and exercise of prayer, though this grace in particular be not desired but other things; in as much as the very comming into Gods presence and the very presenting of the soule before him doth strike downe proud thoughts and set the soule in a way of mortification. Gen. 18.27. Psa. 59.2-7.
The Sacraments being due ly administred

and received serve also in speciall manner to mortifye the old man. In Baptisme there is as it were a grave of mortification, when being baptised into the death of Christ we are buryed with him by baptisme. Rom. 6.3.4. Col. 2.12. 1. Cor. 15.29. The reverent and due meditation of this ordinance and the beholding of the administration thereof is more effectuall for the mortifying of sinne, then travelling to Ierusalem to behold the sepulcher of Christ, as many have done. In the Supper of the Lord the body and blood of Christ is so lively represented unto us, that with Thomas we doe put our fingers into the hands and side of Christ, into the print of the nayles and speare; Ioh. 20.27. and in the due consideration thereof we cannot but crucifye our owne flesh with the affections and lustes.
In the exercise of Discipline, by admonitions and rebukes for sin the heart is humbled and broken; Psal. 69.20. with Zech. 13.6. and the censures are administred for the destruction of the flesh and shaming of the offendour, 1. Cor. 5.5. 2. Thess. 3.14. that by such meanes he might be truely mortifyed. They serve also for the mortifying and humbling of the persons by

whom they are administred, giving them just cause of mourning and bewayling both their owne and others miseries by reason of sinne: 1. Cor. 3.2. 2. Cor. 7.8. and 12.21. even as under the Law he that did that which tended to the cleansing of others became uncleane himselfe. Num. 19.7.8.10.21.
(b) The secondary ordinances of God are such meanes of mortification as serve to help and further us in the use of the former; as namely Fasting and Watching, that we may be better prepared to pray, to meditate, to heare the word, to receive the Sacraments, to performe other religious dueties. By fasting we understand either abstinence from meat altogether, for a shorter time; as in David and others, 2. Sam. 1.12. and 3.35. or abstinence from pleasant meat for a longer time; as in Daniel, Dan. 10.2.3. vvith vers. 11.12.13. The use of both is to humble the soule, that it may be better fitted for the exercise of mortification: to this end are we called thereunto of God, Ioel 2.12. and for the same purpose are the examples of the Saints that have bene frequent therein, commended unto us in Scripture. Dan. 9.3. Psa. 35.13. and 69.10. 2. Cor. 11.27. and
(...)

either to cast off their sins or themselves to be cast out of the Church: they say in that covenant conditionally as Ionas sayd when he offered himselfe to be cast into the sea, Ion. 1.12. binding themselves at their entrance into the Church either to beware of offences disturbing the peace thereof, or to yeeld unto those courses whereby themselves deserve to be troubled.
(d) Having considered the ordinances of the New Testament and the subordinate helpes whereby we are furthered in the exercise of mortification, let us now see what may be observed to this purpose from the ordinances of the old Testame^t. Though the practise of them cease in the ceremony, yet not the meditation of the^, nor the practise of those dueties which are signifyed by the ceremonies. And all of them in speciall manner preach mortification unto us and call us thereunto. The ordinary Sacraments of the old Testame^t were Circumcision and the Passeover. In circumcision there was a painefull cutting off of the foreskinne, and a marke for the mortification of the flesh printed in the body of man, for a perpetuall memoriall of this duety: so that the Holy Ghost under

the phrase of circumcision doth oft describe our mortification unto us, as Deu. 30.6. Ier. 4.3.4. Rom. 2.28.29. Col. 2.11. Godly sorrow is a knife of mortification to circumcise the heart, to cut off the foreskin and superfluities of sinfull lusts. In the passeover, the separation of the lambe from the tenth day unto the fourteenth day, the killing of it and sprinkling of the blood, the rosting of it, and eating it with sowre herbes and unleavened bread, Exod. 12.4.6.7.8. etc. did represent the deadlines of sin purged in such manner, even by the blood of Christ the undefiled lambe slaine for us, and to be applyed unto us and sprinkled upon us, to be eate^ with sowre herbs of godly sorrow for sin, and a purging out of the old leaven of maliciousnes and putting off the old man and his workes that we might be a new lump. 1. Cor. 5.7.8.
That which the Sacraments represented unto them was in like manner signifyed by the Sacrifices of the old Testament; by laying handes upon the head of the beast that was slaine and burnt for sacrifice, Lev. 1.4.5. etc. and these of many kindes and in great number every day, upon divers occasions, and especially upon their feast dayes, when many thousands were sometimes
(...)

sprinkled him with water to make him cleane; Num. 19.14.21.22. but a dead beast did not defile all that came into the tent or stable where it was. IV. Not the carcasses of all beasts, but onely of those that were uncleane beasts did defile men: not the carcasses of sheep, oxen, goates, doves, harts, hindes, roes, etc. but the carcasses of swine, camels, vultures, etc. Lev. 11. but for men the carcasses of all men whosoever, cleane or uncleane, good or bad, did defile all that touched them. Num. 19.11. V. The bodies of uncleane beasts did not defile but onely when they were dead; otherwise it was lawfull to ride upon horses, mules, camels and asses, as Christ did according to the prophesy: Zech. 9.9. with Matt. 21.2-7. but the bodies of uncleane men, while they were living did defile other men many wayes; as we see in the lepers and such as were defiled with other naturall uncleannesses: Levit. 13.46. and 15.5. etc. 2. Cor. 6.17. To have touched a venomous toad had lesse defiled then the touch of a most glorious king, or the touch of the fairest woman, though but the hemme of their garments, and without the least motio^ or lust of evill, when they were but ceremonially polluted.

VI. He that was defiled with the carcasse of an uncleane beast was not required to wash more then his clothes: but he that was defiled with the carcasse of a dead man or some other uncleane persons was required to bathe himselfe in water also. Num. 19.19. Lev. 15.13. VII. Those that touched the carcasses of uncleane beasts were purged with common water: Lev. 11.25.28. those that were defiled by touching of the dead were not to be purged but by water and blood; to wit, by a speciall water of purification made with the ashes of a red heifer. Num. 19.2-9.17. By all this it appeares how marvellous great the pollution of mans sinne is, which God would have him so many wayes to be put in minde of, to avoyd the tent and company of wicked men, that by so many exercises of mortification he might learne to touch no uncleane thing. As David in detestation of himselfe sayd unto the Lord I vvas as a beast before thee: Psal. 73.22. so we are here taught to consider and confesse that we are worse then beasts, as it is also elswhere noted for our mortification. Esa. 1.3. Ier. 8.7. Prov. 6.6. etc.
(f) Moreover whereas it is a speciall
(...)

very sight of the creation which way soever we turne us might serve to abase and humble men before the Creatour. To this end are they propounded by the Spirit of God unto us; the height of the heavens, the depth of hell, the length of the earth and bredth of the sea. Iob 11.8.9. The terrour eve^ of some creatures is such, that man is ready to die and perish at the sight of them. The sight of an Angel made the watchmen and keepers of the grave to quake and become as dead men. Mat. 28.4. When the Disciples thought they saw a spirit, they were troubled and cryed out for feare. Matt. 14.26. At the sight of the Leviathan men are cast downe; and when he rayseth up himselfe the mighty are afraid, and because of breakings and terrours beginne to purify themselves, to confesse their sinnes, to pray for the pardon of them and to seek reconciliation with God. Iob 41.9.10.25. This hath God ordained for the mortificatio^ of sinners, that hereby they might conceive how unable they are to stand before him. Whe^ the Lord would make Iob to be vile in his owne sight and to abhorre himself in dust and ashes, he sets before him the glory of the creation and his majesty shining therein, and leads him

along in the spirit to behold the cheef of them ranked in order before him. Iob 38. and 39. and 40. and 41. ch. with ch. 41.4. and 42.6. And even unto this day God doth sometimes speak unto us as it were out of the whirlewind and by the sight of the heavens, the earth and the seas doth call us unto mortification. The Lord sometime giveth dayes of darknes and gloominesse, of cloudes and thick darknesse; Zeph. 1.15. he clothes the heavens with blacknes and makes sackcloth their covering, Esa. 50.3. and in their mournefull countenance they call us to thinke what cause of mourning we have. Yea in them the wrathfull countenance of God is as it were pourtrayed before us; a smoak is sayd to come out of his nostrils and devouring fire out of his mouth, when he thunders from heaven and sendeth forth his lightnings, for the terrour of sinners and for the mortification of their corrupt and wicked lusts. Psal. 18.8-14. and 29.1. etc. and. 97.2.3.4. 1. Sam. 12.16.17.18. By the sight of the raging and roaring sea bounded within the sands the Lord cals me^ to feare before him and to tre^ble at his presence. Ier. 5.22. And whereto serve the storms upon the sea, if not for the mortification and contrition of heard-hearted
(...)

serve to humble them, and call to their minde their owne unworthines, which then especialy by comparison of Gods free love with their contrary deserts doth more appeare unto them. So it was with David, humbling himselfe before God in the consideration of his mercies, 2. Sam. 7.18.19. even as Mephibosheth had done to him in another case; 2. Sam. 9.7.8. and so did Elizabeth, Luk. 1.43. If Abigail might say of her marriage with David, Let thine handmaid be a servant to vvash the feet of the servants of my Lord: 1. Sam. 25.41. and David himselfe of his marriage with Sauls daughter, Seemeth it to you to be a light thing to be a kings sonne in law, seeing that I am a poore man and lightly esteemed; 1. Sam. 18.23. then what may we say of our exaltation and of the divine benefits bestowed upon us? All the mercies and blessings which we receive from God, if we compare them with our sinfull nature, are like so many coales of mortification, coales of indignatio^ heaped on our heads: Rom. 12.20. and therefore doth God let us know how good he hath bene unto us even when we were his enimies, that by that meanes we might be mortifyed, and burne in just hatred and indignation

against ourselves, Rom. 5.10. with 2. Sam. 12.7.8. Esa. 5.1.2. Deut. 32.6-15. And in summe, even the least good done to us should make us thinke how little we are, and ever lesse then the least of Gods mercies, and farre unworthy of them, Gen. 32.10. and so take occasion thereby of being humbled before the Lord.
As all the good that by divine providence is done to us; so all the good done by us should ever give us occasion of further mortification and of abasing ourselves in the sight of God. Thus it was with David in his free offerings for the Temple, 1. Chron. 29.14. and Solomon when the Temple was built. 1. Kin. 8.27. Such is the greatnes of the Lord above our works, that in respect of the infinite reward we may say as Barzillai to David, Thy servant will goe a little way with the King, and why should the King recompense it me with such a reward? 2. Sam. 19.36. All that we have and doe for God, is of his owne that he hath first given us, 1. Chron. 29.14.16. and these gifts of his in our best use of them, in the best workes we doe are still so polluted, that we have ever cause to acknowledge with shame the filthines of our righteousnesses; Esa. 64.6. Phi. 3.8.9. and ever
(...)

have a gracious respect unto them that sigh and cry for the abominations committed by other men. Ezek. 9.4. This was observed by Lot; 2. Pet. 2.7.8. by Moses; Exod. 32.19-32. Num. 16.4. and others with him; Num. 14.5.6. by David, Psal. 119.136.139.158. by Ezra, chap. 9.2.3. by Nehemiah; ch. 13.7.8. by Paul; Rom. 9.1.2.3. 2. Cor. 11.29 and 12.21. by Christ Iesus, Mark. 3.5. Luk. 19.41.42. And the contrary is made a signe of a wicked man: no man is truely greeved for his owne sinne, that is not touched with greefe for the sins of others; for seeing God is dishonoured and our neighbour wounded thereby, it must needes be a signe that such have neither love of God nor pity of their neighbour. Ier. 36.23.24.25. Prov. 14.9.
(k) Thus doe the evils of sinne call for greefe and sorrow: besides these the evils of punishment, the afflictions, calamities and tribulations in the world doe also lead unto mortification. Thereby God breakes the pride of man and withdraweth him from his evill course: Iob 33.16.17. by his chastisements God humbles the heart of men and makes them submit unto his yoke: Ier. 31.18.19. and the^ is the case most miserable when they are least regarded. Prov. 27.22.

Men are warned of God to mortify sin not onely by greater afflictions but even by the lesser sort also; for there are two kindes of them, a light touch and a heavy hand. Esa. 9.1. There is a wonderfull variety in Gods dealings this way: sometimes the touch is so easy and gentle that it is scarse felt; men are scarse able to say whether there be a paine in it or no; they have such light aches of the head, the belly, the bones, such small reproches and losses that they are hardly sensible of them. As a loving mothersmites her child sometimes so softly and gently, that it doth not appeare whether she be angry or not; even so doth our most loving God deale oftentimes with his children; Iob 33.14.15. with ch. 7.14. Mat. 10.30. but though the stroke be most milde and gentle, yet they that are wise will make use of it. Prov. 17.10. Though there be an hundred degrees of difference in Gods visitations; some of them like a fillop onely, or a lifting up of the hand and yet no stroke; a striking but yet no smart or easy to be borne, as it were with a rod of rushes: yet all of them are a push or thrusting with the finger for our admonition, and at every such thrusting or pinching we are called unto the acts of
(...)

pride of life? Looke upon death, see how it layes the heads of the proudest men in the world; they that were before as starres the sonnes of the morning, have then the wormes spread under the^ and over them and become like broken vessels in the land of oblivion. Esa. 14.11.12. What availeth it to be praysed a while by the stinking breath of flatterers, when afterwards their names shall rotte among men? Pro. 10.7. like those bones of the great me^ in Israel that should be for dung upon the face of the earth: Ier. 8.1.2. or if they be praysed by men after their death in their writings and chronicles, what will this profit them when their sins are written with a pen of iron and with the point of a diamond? Ier. 17.1. when those bookes shall be opened in the seco^d death? Rev. 20.12. what though their sepulchers be paynted and covered with golden letters, when at the second death their soules shall be cast into the bottomlesse pit and into the oven of hell, where the proud and they that doe wickedly shall be burned up and consumed? Mal. 4.1.



CHAP. VI. Touching Vivification or quickening of the new man.

The nature and necessity thereof in generall. (a) Six degrees of vivification: 1. A new disposition or habit of quickening grace; 2. Motions of spirituall life in the understanding, judgment and memory. 3. Affections of love, joy, desire etc. 4. Renewing of the will; 5. Workes of righteousnes and true holines; 6. Ioyful thanksgiving in the apprehension of all the former graces of life. (b) The inward meanes of vivification: The Spirit of God bringing us unto Christ and working in us the graces of Faith, Hope and Love. (c) The outward meanes: The primary ordinances; the Word, Prayer, Sacraments and Discipline; (d) The secondary; a holy Feast and a holy Watch; (e) Ordinances of a third degree, Vowes and Covenants. (f) The workes of Creation and Providence.

FRom the Mortification of the old man come we now to the Vivification of the new man. It is not possible that these two can be severed: if any man be in Christ he must be a new creature, 2. Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15. borne againe of the Spirit, and by this new birth made partaker of a new spirituall life. Ioh. 3.3.5. The Lord that is rich in mercy through his great love wherewith he loveth his elect, quickeneth them

together in Christ. Eph. 2.4.5. The feeling of this new life is a preparative unto death and a preservative against all the terrours thereof, and leads men with comfort through the gates of death, overcomes the pangs thereof, ferries and conveyes men over all the floods of sorrowes.
(a) This grace of Vivification is to be considered in six especiall degrees, answerable to those six degrees of Mortification before noted, and each of them may better be understood when they are mutually compared together.
I. The first degree of Vivification is a new disposition or habit of quickening grace infused by the Spirit of God, whereby they are inclined to imbrace Christ, to glory in his merit and to live unto him. This new disposition is like a new borne babe, or at least as a babe newly conceived in the wombe of the soule, and is called the new creature, Gal. 6.15. the new man, Eph. 4.24. the inward man, Rom 7.22. the law of their minde, vers. 23. the newnes of spirit: vers. 6. and the consideration of this gift is cause of great joy and thankesgiving unto the faithfull, that doe therefore break out into the praise of God and blesse him that hath begotten them againe. 1. Pet. 1.3.

As it is matter of joy unto a mother to have a living childe borne, though for that present it lie bound in swadling clothes without stirring hand or foot; so it is great joy unto the regenerate to have this new habit of life, though they doe not alwayes feele it actually stirring within them. Yea this is a comfort that supporteth the godly in the midst of manifold temptations, when notwithstanding their great imperfections and present impotency unto good, they yet can remember this habit of spirituall life formerly discerned in themselves by sundry joyfull apprehensions and fruits of faith in time past. This is that seed of God which remaineth and abideth ever in those hearts where it is once sowne. 1. Ioh. 3.9. This is that heavenly drop of divine grace which being once distilled into the soule is never dryed up, but becomes a fountaine of living water springing up into everlasting life, Iohn. 4.14. This is that precious spark of spirituall life, which though it be sometimes raked under the ashes of worldly cares and feares, yet is it never extinguished, but upon occasion breakes forth and burnes more bright then before.
II. A second degree of vivification of

the new man consisteth in the motions of new life and in the stirrings of the spirit, which are a further comfort and demonstration of spirituall life. As the mother that hath conceived in her wombe and yet for a long time together feeles not her childe to stirre within her, doth then begin to feare and to doubt of the life thereof: so the godly having bene long without the lively motions of the spirit beginne to feare sometimes and to doubt of their estate. But upon the new motions of the spirit they are filled with comfort, and thereby feele their sweet babe, the new creature as it were to spring in their wombe againe. These motions are divine inspirations whereby the minde is illuminate to discerne and know the will of God, to give assent and approbation unto it when it is knowne and to remember it also when it is approoved Eph. 1.17.18, Phil. 1.9.10. Col. 1.9. Without these gracious operations of the spirit many having the truth propounded unto them doe not apprehend it; others apprehending the meaning thereof approove not of it; others approoving of it doe yet forget the same, and so it vanisheth and is lost. As the Spirit of

God is sayd to moove Samson at certaine times and to ring in his eare like a bell, as the originall word imports: Iud. 13.25. with Exod. 28.33.34.35. so these motions and impulsions of the spirit in the godly are as the sound of an heavenly bell ringing them many peales of consolation and exhortation for their warning night and day. These are the counsels of God and whisperings of the H. Spirit, like divine cymbals and high sounding cymbals tinckling and ringing in the eares of the regenerate; Psal. 16.7 and 51.6. Esa. 30.21. for which they give thankes to God that illuminateth and wakeneth their dead and dark hearts thereby, when as of themselves they are not sufficient to conceive or think any thing that is good and holy. 2. Cor. 3.5. Pro. 30.^.3. As wicked motions are the messengers of Satan to buffet us; so these are the messengers of God to quicken us, and therefore as welcome guests are to be welcomed and entertained with all thankfulnes.
III. Besides the motions of spirituall life in the understanding, judgement and memory, there is a third degree of vivification to be observed, when as this life is further spread abroad into the affections.
(...)

worship and care for the poore Saints, harmlesse life and innocency in respect of all men and bowels of compassion towards them in necessity. Esa. 5.2.4.7. Hereby men shew that they are not strangers from the life of God; but being rich in good workes, the workes of spirituall life, they doe hereby lay up in store for themselves a good foundatio^ against the time to come that they may lay hold on eternall life. 1. Tim. 6.18.19.
VI. Lastly, it is a further manifestation of spirituall life when after the former degrees of vivification the new creature beholding this grace of God in it selfe doth with all joyfull thanksgiving acknowledge the same co^tinually. As David and his people considering how God had opened their hearts and quickened them to his service rejoyced with great joy because they had offered willingly, and praysed God because he had mooved them to praise him: 1. Chron. 29.9.10.13.14.17.20. so the regenerate that are borne of God can rejoyce in the Lord and doe know the joyfull shout; they doe therefore againe rejoyce because they rejoyce. Psal. 89.15.16. And as one Rainebow by the reflexion doth often beget another, and that other

sometimes begets a third, so that three Rainebowes have sometimes appeared at once: so in the new creature one joy begets another, and one light begets another, and one grace is the seed of another, Rom. 5.4.5. When Paul saw the constancy of the Thessalonians it quickened him; when he saw their faith and joy in the holy Ghost, it made him give thankes for them and to conceive great joy; 1. Thes. 1.2.3.6. and when he considered the comfort of his owne joy for them, it made him give new thankes againe unto God for that joy. 1. Thes. 3.8.9. And thus is spirituall life propagated and multiplyed in the faithfull whe^ as both by the sense of quickening grace in themselves, Coll. 1.12. and by the sight of it in others, they take new occasion of glorifying God for his unspeakable gift. 2. Cor. 9.12-15.
(b) The meanes whereby this grace of vivification is wrought in the elect, is principally the Spirit of God which quickeneth and giveth life. Ioh. 3.5. Rom. 8.10.11. 2. Cor. 3.6. By it we are brought unto Christ, Ioh. 16.14.15. and 15.26. and comming unto him as unto a living stone we also are made living stones, full of life. 1. Pet. 2.4.5. We come unto him when we
(...)

quicken us further by applying unto us the merit of his sufferings. Then as the childe neesed seven times, so the new creature, the converted soule doth manifest the truth of life received by severall degrees; at the first neesing a new disposition appeares; at the second new motions; at the third new affections; at the fourth new will and purpose; at the fift new fruits and workes; at the sixt new thankesgiving and praise in joy of the holy Ghost and so much in this life: at the seventh neesing the old man is utterly abolished, the flesh shaken quite off, and the spirit caryed into a heavenly kingdome, clothed with a white robe of perfect righteousnes in Christ the fulnesse of spirituall life. Therefore all is to be sought principally in Christ.
(c) The outward meanes whereby the Spirit quickeneth, are the ordinances and workes of God. The primary ordinances of God are his Word, Prayer, Sacraments and Discipline. The word of God is the word of life, Deut. 32.47. Ioh. 5.25. and 6.63.68. Act. 5.20. a tree of life, Prov. 3.18. the immortall seed, 1. Pet. 1.23. that quickeneth the soule which cleaves unto the dust and melteth for heavines. Psa. 119.25.28. By prayer men finde life for themselves,

Ioel. 2.32. Rom. 10.13. Esa. 38.2-5. and give life to others. 1. Ioh. 5.16. Baptisme shewes us the laver of regeneration or new birth; Act. 2.38. with Tit. 3.5. Ioh. 3.5. and the dead-harted are quickened by meditation of the grace represented and sealed thereby. By the Table of the Lord the fainting spirits are relieved and revived, through that spirituall food which is there exhibited. 1. Cor. 11.24. The admonitious of Discipline are the corrections of life, Prov. 15.31. and therein is consolation for those that are ready to be swallowed up of sorrw. 2. Cor. 2.7. By these things men live, and in all these is the spirit of life and vivification: Esa. 38.16. and therefore as we would have the life of the new creature to be dayly increased within us, so are we to attend upon that word of life night and day; to pray incessantly and to watch thereunto with all perseverance and thankesgiving; to sanctify ourselves for an holy use of the Sacrame^ts from time to time, to submit unto Discipline for mutuall edification, and so to wait for spirituall life thereby to be ministred unto us.
(d) The secondary ordinances of God for vivificatio^ of the new man, are an holy Feast and a holy Watch unto the Lord. As
(...)

mirth is compared to the song in the night when a holy solemnity was kept. Esa. 30.29. Paul and Silas sang together at midnight: Act. 16.25. and till midnight did Paul continue his speech unto the disciples at Troas Act. 20.7. And such meanes are the godly still upon occasion to use for their quickening in their spirituall life, sitting under the shadow of him that is the true vine, Ioh. 15.1. drinking the wine of his promises and plucking the grapes of his consolation, co^forting the poore and heavy hearted, communicating their joy one to another, and using his gifts in all sobriety and thankfulnes for their mutual support in this time of their pilgrimage.
(e) After these, follow the tertian ordinances, so to speake, meanes of an inferiour order and rank, to wit, Vowes and Covenants for the helpes of spirituall life. As a religious feast and watch serve for the quickening of the soule in the use of the first and primary meanes; so these in the third degree serve to binde us to the use of the secondary, each supporting an other. Vowes and promises to God serve to binde us to the observance of other godly exercises at a certaine time: and we see how the godly upon occasion vowed to offer unto

God a bullock, a ramme, a lamb or goat, male or female, more or lesse; insomuch that the sacrifices are sometimes called by the name of vowes; and the Lord accepted that vow of so small a matter. Lev. 7.16. and 22.18. and 23.38. Num. 15.3. and 18.14. and 29.39. Psa. 116.12-19. Mal. 1.14. with Act. 5.2.3. and ch. 21.23.24.26. And so now when men vow unto the Lord and binde themselves unto any particular work of mercy towards the poore, or to keep a love-feast, or any watch, or to performe any labour of love unto the Lord for the quickening of themselves and others, the same is a sacrifice of sweet odour unto the Lord. Phil. 4.18. 2. Cor. 8.4.5. Heb. 13.15.16. In like manner the covenants and promises made unto me^, whereby they binde themselves to one another for the performance of some dueties of religion or mercy together, are also approoved meanes of mutuall comfort and vivification. David bound himself by covenant to Ionathan; 1. Sam. 18.3. to the Elders of Israel; 1. Chro. 11.3. and to other worthies. cap. 12.17.18. And what his covenant was with the man of his covenant that profaned it, we see in the Psalme of his complaint, namely to be as guides to one another, to take sweet
(...)

of this way and application of the former truth, the Lord hath in his word given further light and direction by certaine peculiar workes which himselfe hath co^mended unto us as having pregnant and special reference to our latter end, to procure some more distinct and certaine comfort by the particular observatio^ and practise of the^. And therefore whereas some godly and christian friends doe mutually desire of one another some directio^ and counsell for their preparation to their end: to such, besides a general and resolute purpose to have respect unto all the commandements of God and in al things to keep fayth and a good co^scie^ce, I would co^mend these dueties following.
I. In the first place a dayly invocation of the name of God for his help and assistance in this particular poynt, that they may be prepared to die, to leave this world and come with comfort into the presence of God and to stand undismayed before the throne of his grace. The comfort of a happy end is worthy a speciall prayer every day for that particular benefit. The maine blessing that Paul could wish unto Onesiphorus that had so oft refreshed him, was this, that the Lord would grant unto him that he might finde mercy of the

Lord in that day, 2. Tim. 1.18. And this he prayes for the Thessalonians, that their hearts might be stablished unblameable in holines before God, eve^ our Father, at the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ with his Saints. 1. Thes. 3.13. and againe, that their whole spirit, soule and body might be preserved blamelesse unto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. 1. Thes. 5.23. Now that which Paul so earnestly desired for his dearest friends, that is also worthy to be desired of us for ourselves every day. If Paul prayed night and day exceedingly to see the faces of his godly friends, 1. The. 3.10.11. and that by any meanes he might have a prosperous journey co^ming unto them, for their mutual comfort; how much more cause have we to pray night and day with exceeding longing to see the Lord face to face, to behold the glory of all his angels and to tast of the pleasures of his right hand? If David prayed so often and so earnestly that he might enjoy the presence of God in his earthly sanctuary, to behold the beauty of his ordinances there; Psa. 27.4. and 42.1.2. and 84.1. etc. how much more ought we to pray constantly for our entrance into his heavenly sanctuary, to enjoy the glory that
(...)

5.7. Lev. 5.16. Every man therefore that would have comfort in death and peace in his conscience at his latter end, must labour according to his utmost power to make cleare with the world by restitution and satisfaction for wrong done, for debts undischarged, for fraudulent bargaines and overreaching of his neigbour, for any other injuries by word or deed against the person or credit of his neighbour. He that would finde his soule reconciled to God must labour betimes and without delay to see himself reconciled with men.
III. As there is a needfull Reconciliation, so there is a holy and zealous Revenge necessary to be sought before death, that men may die with more comfort. Neither let it seeme strange that seeking of reve^ge should be reckoned among the speciall preparatives unto death. Though to take the sword for carnall revenge, to satisfy the private lust of the flesh, be oft forbidden of God; Rev. 13.10. Mat. 26.52. Rom. 12.19.20. Pro. 25.21.22. and 24.17.18 and 20.22. yet is there a just and glorious revenge of sin commanded of God, both upon others and upon ourselves. Moses a little before his death is commanded to avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites,

that then he might be gathered unto his people. Num. 31.1.2. One of his last workes was to be a work of revenge: that being done he was to die with more comfort. The remembrance of that revenge wrought by Phinehas could not but comfort him at his last houre. Num. 25.11.12.13. Saul therefore had extreme anguish and discomfort in death, for not executing a revenge upon Amalek; as it was told him of the Devill, because he would not learne it of God. 1. Sam. 28.15-20. with ch. 15.1-35. David on his death-bed could not die quietly, till he had co^me^ded that work of revenge unto his son upon Ioab and Shimei, which himself had deferred and omitted in his life time. 1. Kin. 2.1-9. And all Magistrates having the sword committed unto them of God shall die with more comfort when according to their power they have so used it, and besides common justice have on some special occasions manifested some speciall zeale for the suppressing and rooting out of the maine evils raigning in their times. They that have the sword of the Spirit committed unto them of God are to have revenge in readines against all disobedience, by admonitions, rebukes and spirituall censures of sin,
(...)

the^, Now I know that thou lovest me, because thou hast not spared thy wealth from me etc. And therefore besides dayly and common workes of mercy, the H. Ghost comme^ds unto us some extraordinary workes of mercy upon speciall occasion either of mercy received by us or afflictio^ layd upo^ others. Whe^ the kingdome of heave^ was opened after the ascension of Christ and the Spirit powred out and many converted and spiritual joy abounded, the comfort thereof produced extraordinary fruits of love, as when Ioses or Barnabas and others that had la^ds and houses sold the^ and distributed to the poore Act. 4.34-37. such gifts could not be give^ every day; yet though it were done but o^ce in their life, the co^fort thereof might well last so long as they lived. Zacheus that in the day of his joyfull conversion and calling stood forth and gave at once the half of his goods to the poore, though he could not every week make such distributions; yet the comfort of that one act approoved and accepted of Christ as a fruit of his faith and token of his salvation could not but be a perpetuall consolation to be thought on even to death. For earthly blessings received speciall offerings were to be made at sole^ne times appointed of God: such were

the feast in Abib, of the first fruits of barly harvest, the feast of weeks, of the first fruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of tabernacles or of gathering in the fruits of the land in the end of the yeare: Exo. 23.16. and 34.22. Lev. 23. to teach us that new blessings call for new expressions of thankfulnes, that we may honour God with our substance and with the first fruits of all our increase. Prov. 3.9. And as upon occasion of speciall comforts we are to be mooved unto the workes of mercy, so also at the consideration of the speciall afflictions and wants of others. In the time after the captivity, when the necessity was great and the bondage heavy upon the Iewes, then did godly Nehemias forbeare to take the bread of the Governour, the stipend of former rulers, and shewed extraordinary love and compassio^, in which he comforts himselfe, praying the Lord to think upon him for good according to all the kindnes that he had done for his people. Nehem. 5.14-18.19. When with extreme need there appeare in persons lively tokens of faith and godlines, the^ especially should take place the counsel of Iohn Baptist, that we should abridge ourselves of our food and rayme^t rather the^

see others want. Luk. 3.10.11. Such good workes cannot but follow the godly to the grave and minister comfort at the last. Rev. 14.13. Act. 9.36.39. It is a shame unto the disciples of Christ that so many and great purgatory-gifts have proceeded fro^ the false faith of merit-mongers; when the faith of his most glorious Gospel doth not work the like in true beleevers: a shame that an idle dreame and servile feare of imagined purgatory should doe more then the assured and certaine persuasion of the love of God in Christ.
V. With the work of mercy is to be joyned the work of humility and meeknes, as a speciall preparative for a comfortable death and translation out of this world. For as with those that are translated out of this world into heaven there is no respect of persons; poore Lazarus is carried first in the bosome of an Angell, and then in the bosome of Abraham the Father of the faithfull: Luk. 16.22. so those that would beginne a heavenly life here and in the end with comfort be translated, are in like ma^ner to make themselves equall with them of lower estate, Rom. 12.16. to converse with the poore, to cary them in their bosome; not onely to give a few pence of

silver, but to powre out their heart and their love unto them. Esa. 58.10. This was prophesyed of as a fruit of Christs kingdome; Esa. 11.6.7.8. and such correspondence with the poore Christ commends unto us with promise of a large recompence, Luk. 14.12.13.14. We are to walk by faith and not by sight: 2. Cor. 5.7. now by faith we see the Angels ministring unto them who shall be heires of salvation; Heb. 1. l. Rev. 22.9. and therefore if we performe the like offices of love and respect unto the poore servants of Christ we shalbe fitter to goe with comfort into the society of Angels. They that thus goe out of the world beforehand by leaving the fashions thereof and become childre^ againe, shall have a more comfortable entrance into the kingdome of heaven. Matt. 18.3. As new borne babes here on earth are first taken up by one and then by another, and are delivered from one friends armes to another, every one striving to have them in their armes to kisse them: so the souls that are borne into heaven, are translated by death first into the bosome of Angels carying the^, then into the bosome of Abraham and the Saints receiving them, every one imbracing them with kisses of heavenly

love, and above all into the bosome of the Lord of glory, there to be satisfyed with his love in fulnesse of joy for evermore. Esa. 40.11. Psal. 16. l.
VI. Another work whereby men are prepared to die with comfort is the visitatio^ of the sick and others that are in misery. For the promise is that he that considers the poore or visits the afflicted shall himself be preserved and delivered in time of trouble: the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; he wil make all his bed in his sicknes. Psal. 41.1.2.3. By visiting the sick men both minister comfort unto others and receive comfort themselves. First they give comfort and minister a blessing unto those that are in distresse. Thus to visit the fatherlesse and the widowes in their affliction is pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father. Iam. 1.27. Onesiphorus is comme^ded for this, and Paul prayes heartily for him, because he sought him out when he was in prison, refreshed him and ministred many things unto him. 2. Tim. 1.16.17.18. Iob noteth the excellency of this whe^ he joineth him that co^forteth the mourners with a king, even in the army, when he useth greatest authority. Iob 29.25.

Whatsoever is done unto the least member of Christ in this kinde, he takes it as done unto himself; and therefore such shall be remembred and honoured by him at the last day. Matt. 25.34-40. Secondly by visiting those that stand in need of comfort men doe also receive instruction and comfort unto themselves. Eccl. 7.2.3.4. 2. Kin. 13.14.15. etc. Though we may not inquire at the dead, Deut. 18.11. yet at the dying we may learne many wholesome lessons, as of repentance from their complaints of their sins bewailed, of faith from their joyfull professions of their hope and the examples of their constancy, and of our owne mortality and frailety from their strength languishing, their pale countenances, their dimme eyes, their faltering tongue, their ratling throat, their panting heart, their short breaths, their painfull convulsions, the last pangs and sneckes of death; all the symptomes of death are so many warnings unto the living to watch and prepare for their end. Whosoever would be well prepared for death, let them often repaire to such mourning houses, let them so visit others in these cases that withall they see and learne themselves that which God doth there so plainely teach them. That which

Elias sayd unto Elisha, whe^ he had prayed for a double portion of his spirit, If thou see me when I am taken from thee it shall be so unto thee: 2. Kin. 2.9.10. may in some measure in another respect be sayd unto us, whe^ seeing others taken away, that very act with the circumstances of their departure is a meanes to increase the spirit in us, yea to double our care and comfort in looking for our end.
VII. Lastly, it is also a work preparatory unto death to have our testament and Wil in readines, that we need not be troubled therewith at last. When the message of death was sent unto Hezekias, he was called upon to set his house in order. Esa. 38.1. Abraham was carefull to settle the affaires of his house and family before his death, as appeares by his disposing of Isaak in marriage, Gen. 24.1.2. etc. and his giving gifts to the sonnes of Keturah his second wife and sending them away. Gen. 25.6. But the cheef part of testaments and legacies are godly exhortations, charges and blessings which parents give unto their children. This was Isaaks care long before his death though he forgot the oracle that had assigned the blessing unto the younger. Gen. 27.1-4. Isaak was then an hundred yeares old,

Gen. 25.26. with ch. 26.34. and he lived in all an hundred and fourscore yeares, Gen. 35.28. so that his testament, his blessing was give^ fourescore yeares before he dyed. Iacob gave speciall charges and blessings unto his sonnes before he died. Gen. 47.29. and 48. and 49. ch. Thus did Moses with the children of Israel: Deut. 33.1. etc. and Ioshua: Iosh. 23. and 24. ch. Thus David also in a solemne assembly exhorteth the people and especially his sonne Solomon to feare the Lord, and encourageth him unto the work that was to be done after him. 1. Chron. 28.1.8.9.10. Solomon had also received instructions from his mother to the same purpose, which he himself hath recorded, Prov. 31. ch. In speciall the more to affect children and friends by exhortations, promises and comforts, I would commend unto fathers and friends the example of Elijah the Prophet, who in his life time made a writing which he procured to be delivered unto Iehoram after his death: 2. Chron. 21.12-15. with 2. King. 3.11. thus there may still be a prophesying after death, though not by way of foretelling things to come, yet by charges, admonitions and consolations, which being left with executours or speciall friends together with other devises
(...)

noted in the Scriptures, together with the grounds thereof, their faith, hope and love. Simeon rejoyceth at the approch of his end* Luk. 2.29.30. where we may observe the reasons before named mooving him thereunto; his faith, in having seen the salvation of the Lord, which was grounded upo^ the word of promise and produced peace of conscience; his hope, when he calleth death a departing or loosing fro^ bonds, for it is the same word that elswhere signifyes to loose or release a prisoner; Mat. 27.15.17. his love of God when he calles himself his servant. Paul also had a desire to depart upon these three grounds; his hope, Phil. 1.23. his faith and love. 2. Tim. 4 6.7.8. And as these, so other faithfull servants of Christ have also for the same causes earnestly desired to be absent from the body and to be present with the Lord. 2. Cor. 5.1.2.8. 2.. Tim. 4.8. with Rev. 22.20.17.
(a) Yet for the better understanding of this poynt somewhat must be further co^sidered to prevent a double danger, both of some that seeme not to feare death and of others that confesse they feare it. The first sort are those that despise their life and cast it away without being calld of God. These deny the Lordship of Christ, because that

as no man should live to himself, so none should die to himself but to the Lord, that whether we live or die we may be the Lords. Rom. 14.7.8.9. This murder of a ma^s self is a grievous sin, of which are guilty not onely such as lay violent hands on themselves, but even those also that rashly expose themselves to unnecessary dangers; combatants, rash adventurers, such as without a calling or any necessity goe to infectious places, which are as the shadow of death. As souldiers set to keep watch may not leave their station till the time appointed of their Captaine: no more may we offer to depart hence untill we be dismissed or called away of our Commander. Every man is bound to preserve life so long as by good meanes he can doe it, or els he breakes the sixth co^mandeme^t. In like manner doe many offend by impatience and vaine wishes of death: Ion. 4.3.8.9. whether they doe it without sense having obdurate and feared co^sciences, or with extremity of se^se without faith, as in thoughts of despaire.
(b) Secondly this poynt of doctrine touching the feare of death is wisely to be considered in respect of many weake and infirme persons, which have true faith, hope and love, and yet are not so ready to
(...)

selves, feeling some present unpreparednes, and for the recovery of their strength, that they may in better manner be fitted to appeare before God. Psa. 39.13. As a faithfull and loving wife having had her husband long absent in a farre countrey, or a spouse her bridegroome, though she cannot but long for his returne; yet if it should so fall out that about the time of his returne she should have the yellow jaundies or some greevous sore and deformity in the face, would wish that her bridegroome might stay a week or two lo^ger, till her sores were healed and her strength recovered; or as a Nobleman that unfainedly desires that his Prince should come to his house, may yet in respect of some want of reparations in his house desire and wish in his heart that the Kings comming might be deferred a while till his house were repaired: even so the spouse of Christ and his faythfull servants though they love him dearely and desire nothing so much as to enjoy his presence to the full; may yet sometimes wish that his comming might be prolonged for some space of time, till they be in better plight to entertaine him. Secondly they may be loth to depart this life in respect of others and for their benefit; insomuch

that though for their owne part they have an unfained desire to be dissolved, yet for the good of others they are content and desirous to live, as a parent for his childrens education, a Prince for the reformation and a Minister for the instruction of the people in dangerous times. Thus it was with Hezekiah, Esa. 38.18.19. and Paul. Phill. 1.21-24.
(d) And yet even in all these distresses, when death approcheth and God calles me^ away, there is comfort against every want: Christ makes supply of all; if there be any blemish, sore or deformity, he is such a bridegroome as suddenly heales all and presents us to himself without spot or wrinckle or any such thing: Eph. 5.27. He is the father of the fatherlesse, the great Shepheard of the sheep: Heb. 13.20. he will gather, feed and defend his flock, he hath abundance of spirit whereby to fulfill all his good pleasure, he is all in all. Hezekias had great desire to live to see his children and to teach them: and yet behold when God had prolonged his life and added unto his dayes fifteen yeares, presently he offe^ds and heares a woeful threatning of judgme^t, Esa. 39.6.7. Yea Manasses his sonne whom he got three yeares after his recovery, and

who entred into the kingdome when he was twelve yeares old, Hezekias his fiftee^ yeares being expired, became a most abominable Idolater, murderer, witch, etc. 2. Kin. 21.1.2 etc. Had Hezekias knowne so much whe^ he desird to live lo^ger to teach his children, it is not likely that he would have bene so desirous of life. Therefore if God call us away we must be content to depart, whatsoever inconveniences be in the way: and consider how great a fault and sin it is to be unwilling to goe at his call.
(e) To this end it will be profitable to think often of the greatest hindrances and encumbrances in death, yea to consider of them as if we were now upon our death-bed and lay presently a dying and gasping for breath; that we may learne to arme ourselves against all lets and difficulties that make men unwilling to leave this world. For example:
Obj. I. Some are happily loth to leave the world because of their friends, kinred, children, acquaintance etc. whose company they still desire to enjoy.
Ans. For one friend whom we leave here we finde a thousand in heaven. For I. Of men in this world we see but one, as it were, our owne generation; and of this

generation not the thousandth person: we never saw all the countries of the world, scarce heard of them, much lesse their cities, townes, particular persons. II. Of those we have seen we know not one city, much lesse are we acquainted with all the inhabitants; there are many from whom we receive no love nor any fruits of love, yea some that proove our enimies and from whom much evill is received. III. For that small number of those that are our true friends indeed, how weake are they in comparison? not so amiable in soule or body by an hundred degrees as those to whom we goe. IV. If men on earth were as gracious, vertuous and unblameable as in heaven; yet in this earthly condition our communion with them is most imperfect defective and lame, in respect of present necessities layd upon us, as 1. Our drossy nature, whereby we are like snailes and cannot travell about the world in such swift and glorious motions as in heaven. 2. Our many trades and vocations binding men like prisoners to sit the whole week at their work, and confining them to their severall imployments. The world is like a Rasp-house or Bridewell, where by the rod of necessity men are made to work; the twigs

or cords of this whip are hunger, thirst, cold and nakednes; the smart and shame of these doth scourge and force men to labour: thus it is with men here in respect of heave^, where there is no hindrance from continuall making of acquaintance. 3. Our wearines and sleepy nature making us spend our nights in the shadow of death, as dead men; whereas in heaven there is no night, no shadow of the earth, which reacheth little further the^ the sphere of the Moone; and therefore is farre from causing any darknes in the third heave^s, in the paradise of God. What darknes or night can approch thither, where al the righteous shine as the Sun for ever? Matt. 13.43. 4. The weaknes of our senses and bodily communion, whereas here two soules sitting together ca^not impart their mindes to one another without the outward organs and instruments of sense; there the spirits without the body are like angels, goe without feet, embrace without hands, see without eyes, heare without eares, and speak without tongues, for al these we leave in the grave. But above all friends, we then see God face to face, whom here we could not behold: Exod. 33.20. here we are as in a dungeon, then we begin to looke about us. Is there

any losse in this change?
Ob. II. Others are troubled to thinke that they must leave house and lands.
Ans. He that teacheth bees to make such cabines and closets for themselves, will not suffer his owne children to be destitute of comfortable mansio^s: nay the Lord hath promised and they know it to be so, that glorious pavilions and chambers are provided for them. Ioh. 14.1.2. 2. Cor. 5.1 Every heart shall then be a pavilion and chamber of rest and delight unto each other: yea the Lord himselfe shalbe their house and mansion for ever, 1. Ioh. 4.15.
Ob. III. Another sayth happily, I care not so much for any outward things, as to see the good of Gods Church in the acco^plishment of his promises. Among these there are three special things which a Christia^ might wel desire above all other things to be seen and enjoyed in this world: viz. 1. The fall of Babylon and destruction of Antichrist; Rev. 18.20. 2. The destructio^ of Gog and Magog, the Turkish monarchy; 3. The full conversion of the Iewes, as a new Ierusalem comming downe from heave^, as a bride trimmed for her husband. It may wel be counted a happines to waite and come unto the sight of such dayes. Dan. 12.12.
(...)

1. Cor. 15.56.57. II. The freenes of Gods grace unto infants is applyed by the H. Ghost unto men of yeares, that they also may depend on the same grace through faith. Rom. 9.11.16.30. III. Many are called at the eleventh houre, and God doth by such meanes greatly set forth the freenes of his mercy in pardoning sinners. Matth. 20.6-9. Rom. 5.20. The sight of Christ by faith gives title unto all comfort and happines. Luk. 2.30-32. And therefore the theef on the crosse seeing Christ at last, was suddenly tra^slated into glory. Luk. 23.43. Neither let any say, That is but one example; for in effect there are many very like unto that even in the conversion of many theeves in prison, in the hands of justice, yea after they have received the sentence of death; when they die better and give more signes of true repentance then multitudes that die in their beds. And besides, every mans conversion is in a certaine houre or moment, suddainly as well as the theefes on the crosse, though it be not marked: and it is as great a work and the same in substance, to be translated out of the state of nature into the state of grace by true conversion, as to be translated out of this

world into heaven, the one following infallibly upon the other. So Pauls suddaine conversion from a blasphemous persecutour of Christ to be a member and minister of Christ, was as great as the theefes translation from the crosse or gibbet to paradise, or rather greater. The same may be sayd of those thousands of murderers of Christ, suddainly converted at Peters sermon: Act. 2. the conversion of each of these was as great as that of the theef, and may as well serve for the comfort of sinners. Christ is the doore: whosoever knockes by faith and whensoever, is sure to enter.
Ob. VI. Besides this the paine and pangs of death are objected by many as a cause of their feare and why they are loth to die.
Ans. I. We have commandements, comforts, and promises from Christ, to arme us against such feares. Iohn. 14.1. Revelat. 2.10. The feare of death is one of the greatest paines in death and yet a feare not to be feared. II. If the paine of death be sharp, yet it is quickly over: it is but one stride, and at one leap it transports a man over the gulfe of all sorrow into everlasting glory. III. To
(...)

God. Our Samson teares this Lyon as a kid, destroyes death, and out of the carcasse of death brings life, honye and hony combes of eternall comfort. Let us therefore be cheerfull in the exspectation of this happy conquest, and with comfort entertayne the signes of death drawing neere unto us, as dimnes of sight, deafnes of eares, weaknes of limmes, whitenes of head and hoare haires: Oh how welcome should these and the like be unto the faithfull? As the children in our streets, when they first see the stork, the messenger of the Spring, doe welcome thesame and testify their pleasure with manifold and joyful acclamations: so should the godly congratulate themselves when they see the forenamed messengers of their Winter past and Summer approching; or els both children and the very storkes in the aire, knowing the times of their comming, shalbe witnesses against us. When the fig-tree putteth forth his leaves the Summer is nigh: Matt. 24.32. when the almond-tree flourishes, the^ it hastens the comming of other fruits: Eccl. 12.5. Ier. 1.11.12. when the heralds of death approch; then is it time for us to lift up our heads, knowing that our redemption is neere. When the eyes of the body, the windowes of our

prospect into the world beginne to be dark, then must we so much the more open the eyes of our minde, the windowes of the soule for our prospect into heaven, to see things otherwise invisible. When the daughters of singing are abased, then especially we should labour to open the eares of faith that we may heare afarre off the songs of the virgines that have the harpes of God, ready to entertayne us into the fellowship of their sweet melodies. When the grinders are flow and beginne to cease, let us then be more frequent in grinding the wheat of heaven, chewing the cudde and ruminating the manna of the Evangelicall promises: that should be the old mans milk and the old mans wine, sweeter then that of the muscadell grape, to warme his cold breast and to revive his decayed spirits. Having thus entertained the messengers of death, we shalbe the readier to welcome death it selfe. The neerer we grow to our journeys end, the greater will be our desire and longing to arrive at that Rendevous of friends after a long march, that generall meeting-place after a wearisome vvandring over hilles and dales in this our pilgrimage. As the diligent husbandman

plowes and harrowes, sowes his seed and waites for the first and latter raine, is glad when it begins to grow, when the blade, the stalk, the eare appeares, and gladder whe^ it is ful growne, when the regio^s are white unto the harvest, when sithe and sickle are taken into the hand; but is then especially filled with joy when the last load of corne is brought home with shouring and singing, like to the custome that seemes to have bene in Israel in their harvest and vintage: Esa. 16.9.10. so in like manner they that have broken up their fallow ground, have sowed in righteousnes, have not been weary in well doing, but stedfast and unmooveable, alwayes abounding in the work of the Lord, shall then know and see that their labour hath not been in vaine in the Lord, shall then have cause to shout and sing for joy, when the Angels, that are called reapers, Matt. 13.39. shall gather these wheat sheaves into the heave^ly barne, where the righteous shall shine foorth as the Sun in the kingdome of their Father. O that we were wise, that we understood this; so should we ever with comfort remember our latter END.


