




You who will heare some newes worth admiration,
List to Sir Leonard Lacke-wits Promulgation.


IN the times of Yore, some 4. dayes since, in Christmas holy dayes, when pease beganne to bloome, about the midst of November, when the signe was in Shrovetuesday; and the Moone in May-day, I met King Janus leading a band of Butter-flies, against the Tartars in Tower street, but with a blast from Bosomes Inne, the three Kings of Cullin were sent into Pater-noster Row to buy Parsnips, when by the intercession of Morpheus, Muld-Sacke was metamorphosed into an Ale-house. The Bull of Phalleris broke out of the parish Garden, and flew three Pigeons in the Poultry Counter. Alexis inraged (with silence broke out) into a great fury against Painters, while poore Tom of Bedlem broke the head of Cerberus with the
 Ore of Charon. Atlanta and Hipomones plaid at foot-ball in Tuttle fields: The petty-foggers of Virginia set Hercules and Caucasus together by the eares, about the drinking of fryed Hartichokes. The blue bores of Islington Forrest leapt over Pancrasse Church to invade the Turkes Army in Bosworth field: these things (with diligent negligence) were told to the Emperour of Pyramedes, who sent foure dripping pannes to tell great Tamberlaine, that London had never a Cuckold in it. King Priam hearing this ioyfull newes, tooke two quarts of scalding Gun-powder, and dranke a health to the sixe Wind-mills in Gracious street. Aesculapius gave a glister to Aristippus, and made him vomit as much horsbread as served to feed Bucephalus eight hundred yeeres and fifty foure moneths; the South wind seeing things to be so carryed at Totnam Court, sent out a warrant to catch the River of Severne in a mouse-trap; all the Shoomakers shops on Salisbury plaine were (without hands) removed to the toppe of Grantham steeple. Pandion Prince of Athens sent Grobendunke the Grasier to the signe of the three Pigeons in Cowcumber Alley, to enquire for Raddle the Ratcatcher; while this hurly burly was in Crooked lane, there
 came a Post riding upon a Mackerill, that brought newes from Sparta, that Ganimede and Iupiter were gone to Ierusalem to eate steakes at Nicholas Shambles. All the Sopeboylers in Sandrocola made petition to the King of Sclavonia, to set up shop upon Madames Court hill. King Admetus of Thesaly sayling along the Coast of Shoreditch, met the Pinder of Wakefield at Saint Giles in the fields, betweene whom and the Carryer of Carthage was a cruell combate about the beating of Saint Thomas a Watering; the cryer of Constantinople was sent to Long Acre, and to cry a blue bitch that was lost at Shrewsbery; in the meane time foureteene ounces of Nutmegs, and tenne kilderkins of Ale, were controverting about the Pope and the Divell. The Turkish Sultan led an army into Plutarchs Morals; and being met at Coventry, by the Tinker of Turvy, hee was overthrowne at Canturbury, neere Harrow on the Hill, when suddenly the blind man of Hollowell turned starre-gazer, and made Almanacks as true as any of the fraternity: then with 93. yards of ell broad packthread, the King of Egypt led the Earle of Acherow over the oeconomical Ocean into Parnaflus ferry, and with a boat made of Whale bones hee
 sayled from Easter munday to Saint Albanes; the Prince of Plebeans invited Heliogabalus to a supper of Sprats, on Whitsunday in the morning. Tom Teltroth met with Aquarius at Stratford Langton, and broke his water-tankard against a snow-ball that lay on the top of Middleborough Castle; then with foure drammes of Hilarity, and eleven ounces of Lachrymae, the Duke of duplicity made a simple compounded potion, to give to god Bacchus, for a mornings draught after supper; all the pudding-pyes in Fleet Lane leapt for ioy, when they heard this Nuncius, for they ignorantly knew that when Fryer Bacon came from Trumpe Alley, the Sophy of Persia should rue his voyage to Peticoat lane; thus in a calme commotion the Peeres of Pye-corner ranne to Aleppo by candle light, and enformed the great master of Malta, what sport was at Sturbridge fayre. The fire-shovell and the tongs sate in consultation, and (with disparity) agreed
 upon the point, the summe of their calculation was this, that sea-coales being so cheape, whether the fault was in the Merchant, or the Woodmonger; when presently two Humble-Bees divided the controversie, that seeing an Asse is a beast, why should not an Owle be a bird? After this the Ace of spades in a merry (malecontent) went over into Ireland to talke with the Emperor of Russia, about the battell of Cressy, Propertius some eight yeeres hence, put himselfe apprentice to Pegasus; whereof Prometheus hearing, came presently to Duke Humphries (in Long lane) and vowed the death of all honest Brokers. Don Iohn of Austria married Pope Vrbans sonne at Alexandria on Candlemas day a weeke after Easter. Sisiphus threw a stone at Tantalus, who (in revenge) beat out his braines with a roasted apple. The Puritanes of Argeere having notice of Cheapsides honour, went dancing the Morris from Dover to Callis; while these things
 were in action at Brinigham, Will Summers frighted Cardinall Wolsey with an Oxe hide, and made him runne to Rome with a morter on his head. An invincible navy of Gnats sayled thorow White Chappell, and landed at Rotterdam; which so amazed Erasmus, that he turned over twelve leaves of his Booke: The Hungarians seeing this, sent post to Primrose hill to give notice to the Duke of Hellespont, what brave spiced Cakes were at Hogsdon; In the interim Rumny Marsh made preparation for the entertainment of Smithfield Barres. Haniball the Romane, and Scipio the Carthagenian wrastled in Moore fields, while the Tripewives of Braineford sayled to London in Cockle shells; all the Spider-catchers of Dublin were sent to Waterford to kill Adders. The Realto of Venice fell at ods with Saint Michaels at Coventry, about paying tythes to Doctor Story, which caused such a friendly commotition in Milford Haven, that the besiegers
 were afraid of the besieged. All the Bells in Woodstreet Counter rung merrily, when they heard that the King of Aethiopias Generall was slaine. Colbrand the Danish Dwarfe tooke advantage of Tom Thumbs victory, and led an Army of Broome-staves to the toppe of Bansteed Downes, and there hee encountred with Pericles the Prince of Tyre upo^ Bromly Common, and overthrew him in Lincolns Inne fields. The Pierian Valleys (betweene Europe and Gravesend) were strewed over with Primroses, for ioy that the Queen of hearts was returned from Quinborough. The Beadle of Bewmorris tooke Sardinapalus in Bloomesberry, and carryed him to the Bridewell in Barwicke, thinking hee had bin a common whore of Deptford. Michael Ioseph the Blacke-Smith stole a hammer and a paire of pincers from Vulcan, for which old Mulciber brought him before the Collier of Croydon, who committed his carkasse to the
 Mag-Pyes of Padington. The Burgomasters of Battersea learned out of Chaucers Dictionary, that rowing far passes either riding or running. Heraclitus laught to see Battle Bridge brought to Bilinsgate in a Boat: while newes was told to great Agamemnon, that Rocius should come to act, Wit, whither wilt thou, at the Fortune. The Scholers in Finsberry iayle gave great thankes to the Tombe of King Pharomond for giving relaxation to the Custards of Chelsea. Strange sights were seen at Cuckolds Haven neere Ludlow: three men had foure hands and five legs. The Post-master of Hockly in the hole, rode upon a greene Grey-hound from Greenewich Castle to Gaunt, in lesse than foure daies and forty eight houres, to the great admiration of the Caliph of Babylon. Though a man and a horse be of different qualities, yet tis knowne by experience throughout all Saint Georges fields, that a whore can drinke as good wine as an honest woman, and
 though a man were as chast as Leda, as honest as Meselina, and as constant as Clitemnestra, yet in the judgement of some, Lucretia, Penelope, and Peroe, shall bee counted the better men. A Stork is a strange bird, and so is a Duck, but by the counsell of King Cleopatra and Queene Antonia, no man ought to pay money before he hath it; nay, I dare avouch it from the authority of Silvius past honesty, that fifteene Partridges are better than seventeen redde Herrings and eighteene sprats to boot: but he that eats Frogs in the fields, must not scorne Hens and Capons at home; for tis very probable, that if Amphitrion should catch Iupiter in bed with his wife Alcumena, hee'd thinke hee is a Cuckold, though he be none: but did Anchises know that Niobe sold butter in Newgate Market; hee'd send to the Constable of Chester, and fetch her away, manger the Maior of Lutterworth.
Old Hobson the Hermes of the Muses,
 is gone to drive Charles his Wayne: but you must imagine that Mackarels are not sold twelve a groat al the yeere long: Though a man were as wise as Pamus, and rich as Irus, and as handsome as Aesop, yet a boy of two yeeres old may be as honest. In a moment of time, before a man could have gone from Barwicke to Bristow and backe againe, Fryer Francis had said Mattins, eaten his breakefast, kist his Lemmon, and was gone as farre as Mid-summer, before old Pentecost was aware. Some thinking Herostrates was but a Ninihammer for burning Dianas Temple; but in my conceit Icarus and Dedalus might have scapt drowning if they had caught hold on Windsore Castle. Telyphus King of Mysya had certainely but bad counsellors: for the crosse daggers in Monks Kirbie, would haue cured him better than all the rust upon the speare of Achilles: But if the Tanner of Tamworth come next Munday to Leaden Hall, it is a troublesome
 day to the mighty Miller of Newport pannell. By the report of old women and dogges, tis neede that makes the old wife trot. Thus with parsimonious and profuse Housekeepers, Sir Leonard Lackwit kept his C^stmas from Bartholmewtide, untill Saint Iefferies Eve, and then an Asse was sent to him in Ambassage from the ignominiall Emperour of Vtopia; by whom he was most fastidiously bid welcome, and with incomprehensible kindnesse cast into an invisible dungeo^, from whence being brought to offend and abuse himselfe against his excusers, hee made a long and insipient Oration in Oxhameter Verse, that for the quantity of their feet may out-trip Ladas the footman of Macedonian Alexander. But stay my Muse: we shal be betraied anon: therefore let us give place to Sir Leonard Lack-wit, and let him speake for himselfe. for should any sense be found in this Legend, all the sport were quite spoyled.

Therefore,
Silence my masters, while J do indever
Vnto you (in obscure termes) to deliver,
A Speech made to the Emperor of Vtopia,
Spoken in heathen Greeke, or Ethiopia.
Tis b^tter stored with rime than tis with reason
But if twere worse it now would come in season,
For tis against the Authors first intention,
If any wit be found in this invention
Stand further off, war shins, lest I shud wro^g you,
Whe^ these swift rimes come galoping among you.
To that most ignoble Icarion Idiot Mag-pye among men, and a Bull-begger among Birds and Beasts, Signior Anonimus Jgnoto, Emperour of Vtopia, great King of Fairy Land, Prince of the high and mighty Nation, called the Pigmies, Duke of Diomondo, Earle of Clappardudgeon, Governor of Greenland, and al the inhabitable Ilands in that waste part of the Terrestrial Globe, Sir Leonard Lack-wit his Masterships most sublime vassall, greeteth in this manner.
O thou who art the onely Dominator
Ore all these spacious bounds of Erra Pater,
Thou that dost rule even from the wals of Banta^

Vnto the very confines of Bizantam,
To thee great King of Crickets, geese and ganders
I that was once one of thy chiefe commanders,
Now to such honour by that meanes am risen,
That I have leave to famish in thy prison.
I that lived like a Lord among thy Laquies,
Now know not at what rate a pint of Sacke is:
I that with Beefe and Bacon fed my Carkis,
Now hardly know what kind of meat a Lark is,
I that thy Gardner was to dig and delve it,
Have never a sute but sattin, plush or velvet.
I that was wont to keep frogs from thy trenches
Am now enjoyn'd to keep but just ten wenches.
I that have heretofore danc't many a merry Iig,
Am now at last constrained to weare a periwig:
Yet know, great mongril, that J do not feare thee,
Nor would I have thee think that I do ieer thee.
If thou tell me that I want understanding,
To have the Ile of dogs at my commanding,
I tell thee plainely I conceive great ielousie,
That thou thy selfe art but a foole aswell as I,
Although my name be Lack-wit, yet it may be,
That I have wit enough to please a Lady,
Ide have thee know that I a man of note am,
My father once was Alderman of Gotam.
I have observed by my neglective knowledge,

That al the wise men come not from the colledg,
And I have known a dunce (as was thy grandser
Demand a thing which Doctors cannot answer,
And tis apparant both to good and bad men,
That those who have no wit are fools or madmen
Yet I have seene a drunkard oft goe reeling,
Whe^ yet his head hath hardly toucht the seeling.
The Proverbe sayes, Plain dealing is a iewell,
And I in Lent am glad of Watergrewell.
Wert thou as mercifull as was Busiris,
Yet to have iustice of thee my desire is.
Nay hadst thou as much ease as hath Ixion,
Yet may a Mouse run safely by a Lion;
Nay more, wert thou as true and iust as Simon,
Yet may thy Table serve for men to dine on.
These things have oft tane up my contemplation
Me thinkes a Hangman's no good occupation:
And though my teeth within my bosom chatter
Be't known to thee, I came not here to flatter:
It glads me more to heare a Carman whistle,
Than to smell thee when thou dost fart and fistle.
The fals of great me^ through ambitious climing
To poore men oft occasion gives of riming,
Yet should blind Homer see what here I utter,
Tis ten to one but he'd against me mutter.
And Ile be sworne on Ciceroes Epistles,

One sheafe of wheat is worth a load of thistles.
There's many travellers find newes to brag on,
That are as true as Trundles Sussex Dragon:
But whe^ the wandring Iew coms to Westchester
He'l tell at Coventry what's done at Leister,
If I should say I was at Leipsitch battle,
J doubt some men would think 'twer idle prattle.
but thers rare wonders told in kentstreet garison
Your weekly newes to that maks no comparison.
I oftentimes have heard my Grandam wonder,
Why sheep and wolves should live so far asunder
I did resolve her doubt, yet I said nothing
Wolves be not known fro^ sheep clad in sheeps clothing.
Yet I confesse, tis more fit for King Priam,
To talke of these things than such fools as I am.
Wel though these lofty matters are past my sense
The proverbe saith, losers may speak by licence.
And now great Monopoly having vented
My empty vessell, I am well contented,
What saist thou to me? why didst thou convent me
To tel the news for which thou maist torment me
Tush I regard thy spight lesse than a token,
For thou canst take no hold of what I've spoken:
I nonsence spoke on purpose to deceive thee,
Now farewell: as I found thee, so Ile leave thee.
This witlesse and eloquent Oration, being
 uttered with loud taciturnity, the whole Court of All-draymen rose up every one with a most virulent aspersion giving reprobation to the same. The mightlesse Emperour hearing Sir Leonard speake so ill in his owne offence, though before hee was egregiously exasperated, and highly pleased with him, yet now he so overcame his infections, that love was changed into inveterate good will; while this cause was betraied at Westminster Hall, the Turkish Gallies landed at Totnam high Crosse, and encountring with the sumptuous Crosse at Abington, were overthrowne at Dunstable, and carryed prisoners to the great bed in Ware. Newes was brought to the King of Morocco that Vlysses and Aiax were to play a set at Maw for the Armes of Patroclus. Thus with friendly combates and tragicall imbracings, the Soldan of Saint Omes at the Sarazens head in Carter lane, went to the signe of True the Taylor in Thred-needle street, where having dined about foure of the clocke in the morning, they sayld from thence in a boat on dry land, to the top of Marlborrow Castle, and arrived at Peckidilly hall in Amsterdam, on the
 forty foure of December, twenty eigh^ houres after midnight, Minos and Pasiphae were married in Queenes Street, and soone after they fell at variance about the Bull at Bishopsgate. Thus tis for great men to marry their Chambermaids by the opinion of squint-eyed cur-dog. Marriage and hanging goes by destiny, hee that had lived three hundred yeeres, and seen never a merry day, I know no reason why antiquity and his owne experience may not teach him to see as farre into a milstone as a younger body. But as Elenor Rumming sayes, What will not people doe to get money for strong Ale? so there is no creature so able to master a man as a shrew. Though London and Yorke bee a great way asunder, yet man and wife may fall out and be friends againe. You would think it were a great wonder to see a mouse catch a cat, and truely so should I; but were the King of Clubs of my mind, all the world should bee goeurned by the foure elements. Diogenes was but an asse to looke for an honest man in Athens, for if hee would but make a steppe to Westminster in the terme time he might finde a million, nor can it be
 otherwise imagined, but that if Sir Ignis Fatuus had not been wiser than Phaeton, all the world had been burnt to Pyecrust; for the siege of Ierusalem was but as Schollers shut out their masters against Christmas, in comparison of Hollands Leager: but of all trades that bee, Coblers and Botchers come most neere to the practice of goodnesse, for they are still of the mending hand; and of the two the Cobler deserves precedency, for hee mends the sole, and the Botcher only repaires the body. When egges were sold for twenty a penny, a man might have filled his belly for sixe pence: but now adayes, there is no lesse than your three penny Ordinary, that can give a mans stomacke satisfaction. Old Histeron et Proteron the Carter, went to Smithfield to fetch a load of Hay, to feed Equiculus the huge and mighty horse of Bacchus, but being met at Scandroon by (swiftfooted) Saturne, his Cart was overthrowne upon Braineford Bridge, and his hay was carryed (away in a whirle wind) to the top of Bow steeple. Castor and Pollux ranne at tilt in Cuckold pound, with speares made of Cantharides, for the love of pudding Pye
 Doll. Queene Hecuba kept an eight penn^ Ordinary in Bethlem, and Hellen sold milke at Hackny. While Wat Tyler and King Guendolina went a fishing in a Leaden boat over the Ale Anticke Ocean into the forrest of Dean in Asia Minor, thus with contaminous and dulcid favours the inhabitants of Green land putrified and perfumed their unparalelled palace for the entertainement of the greasie and most horrible Emperour of Vtopia (before mentioned) a white Raven was sent on an errrand to Castle Angelo, to tell the Pope and his Cardinals, that Easter day happens on a Sunday. A mouse came swimming over the River of Rhine, with an Elephant on his backe, and told the Burgers of Basingstocke, that good Ale and Beere may be made of Barly; which they incredibly beleeving, gave testimony to the Fryers minoritis at Vienna, that Lemmons are good sawce to mutton; then by the advertisment of Primrose hill, an agreement was made betweene Dove-houses and salt-Peeter men forever: The Articles being written with a Spiders feather. The blacke dogge of Newgate hath lately brought strange tidings out
 of Tripiloe, among the rest, that Mahomet is preferred to be Chaplaine in ordinary to Pluto the Prince of Avernus. King Thomiris and Queene Cyrus very lovingly ranne at Barly breake, upon Horse-head downe neere Redding. The Blinde begger of Bednall Green, seeing the constant mutability of this permanent age, put on a paire of new shooes upon his shoulders, and a long staffe on his heeles, hee went with remisse and carefull heed to the Vice-Roy of Naples, and raised a hue and cry against the Hogges of Doctor Faustus, for rooting up the corne upon Rochester bridge. The Fishwives of Feversham came in rage to Billinsgate, and tooke away the Cucking stoole, and carrying it into Saint Christophers Iland, burnt it in the River of Nylus, neere Hartlerow. Palmirin of England wandring over Blacke Heath to finde out his mother Rowland (who dyed in Armenia the great) chanc't to finde a Phoenix nest wherein were foureteene old ones, and fifteene young ones, with great leasure and much speed, hee brought them (as a present) to the King of Numidia, dwelling at Durham, who very currishly accepted them,
 and to shew his gratitude, preferred him to bee the Pinder of Pancrasse. Tis a madde world when a Drunkard must breake his nose through want of a post to run against. Thus promiscously, very certaine and ambiguously, the Scullers of Barnet taught Aeneas Silvius, the way to goe to Dunstable by water, while Ware and Wades mill went to Hounslow Heath, and robbed a naked Indian in New England. An Army consisting of 600000. Frogs, tooke shipping at Fathering Castle, and sayled to Constantinople, won the City, and tooke Gogmagog the Pigmy that was Governour, whom they brought into Marow-bone Park, and there throwing him over boord, drown'd him on Dunsmore Heath. Thus as Sir Leonard Lack-wit beganne his Legend with a band of Butterflies, so by the shallow profundity of his inscrutable and incapable destruction, he hath fitted his marvelous and most uncertaine true relation, to finish in the midst with an Army of Frogs. Now if any Readers shall question the truth of it (as questionlesse some will)
Let them survey the wonderfull aad incredible
 true Histories of Garagantua, Tom Thumbe, Bevis of Southampton, with a thousand more, and they shall finde that unlesse there bee lyes in them, this must needs bee true. Yet the Authors who published those, thought they had wit enough: but I in my Title confesse lacke of wit; and therefore I hope I am the more excusable; but howsoever tis not my purpose to ravish your beleefe, and to bee plaine, I hardly give credit to't my selfe.



To the criticall Readers.
YOu who with over-curious Survey looke,
To finde the smallest faults in any booke;
Now looke your hearts out, here, you know your wages
J have prevented you in all my pages,
You looke for nonsense where none can be found,
So seek for sense, where nonsence doth abound.



Lastly to the truely intellectuall Readers.
FRiends, doe not think that alwaies I lack wit,
Though for this once I seem to publish it.
Know that more wit's required in seeming so,
Than of small wit to make a glorious show,
Let your acceptance my endeavours pitty,
And for your loves Ile strive to be more witty.
FINIS.



