


BABEL, OR, MONARCHOMACHIA PROTESTANTIVM.
NOT manie yeares since, Reasons for the match vvith Spayn. vpon the divulging of a letter vvritten by mayster Aldred, against the match with Spayne: and of that scandalous libel against the embassador Count Godomer; as also by the instigation of some whote-spoors in therpulpits, (men oft of more feruor, then iudgment:) The people of London, vvas much incensed to snarle and murmur, euen at the verrie name of Spayne: and euerie artificer presumed, as an Aristarchus, to censure the king for that negotiation, as for an error of state, vvch vvear like to cast the vvhole: bodie of the kingdome into a distemper. As yf the kings Zeale to the realm and to his issevv, had bean vnnaturallie frozen, and his iudgment had fayled hym, and that those

great planets of the counsel, had also lost ther light and erred in ther course. Whearupon I vvas vrged, by diuers of my good fre^ds, to vvrite the Apologie of that actio^, and proceading: bycause somme of them had hard me, deliuer, not onelie a full ansvver to all the objections of the contrarie faction, but also diuers reasone in defenc thereof, fovvnded vpon a rock and growndwork subiect to no battrie, nor vndermining.
And to speak trevvlie and freelie: the benefites, vvhich the realme may reape by that match, ar so maine and so aduantagious; as I vvish yt rather doon, then disputed on. For it setleth a firme peace betvvean, both the kingdmes; and aliquid amplius then they apprehend, vvho oppugn yt: Traffick shal therby be establisthed and encreased; the seas, by a concurrens of bothe the kings, may be purged and cleared, from Turks and pyrates. The kingdome shal also be again stored and enriched, with threasour and coyne, (yf it be locked vp infraquatuor maria, and not stil offred to that Idol of Cambaia.) The crown shal be disingaged, from a burdensome vveight of debts, and consequentlie the subiects ar like to be much eased of contributions and taxes.

And is the renevving and confirmation of the treaties, vvith the house and Princes of Burgondie, to be accompted, as a Cypher? or is it nothing to haue so great a Monarch, as the king of Spayne, a firme allie and frend, vvhome England knoweth, what it is to haue an enemie? It is trew, that England was neuer so full of moonie, as it was by spoyles and depredation, betwean the yeares 1576. and 1590. but how dearlie had that prochase bene bought, yf god (who had predetermined, to dispose the crowne of England, to her issew, who had suffred deathe and disgrace for his glorie,) had not mayd the wynds, and sea fight for England.
Virginia (a Colonie now, to be tenderlie regarded) shall hearby, setle her staples and mart, with more securitie: and aduanc ther traffick, both by a fafer passage, and entercours with the Ilands. But aboue all arguments, nothing mooueth me more, then that is for the honor, Safetie, and commoditie of Prince Charles (the darling of England) which euerie trew Patriot, is bownd in co^scienc, to further and aduance. But so we shall be sayd to leaue Holland in the briars, (an old and assured frend, and of powre to assist the realm, vpon all occasions.) god grand the prince may neuer

stand in nead, to vse them: and remeniber, how small furthernas, nay rather hovv great hindrance, they haue bean to the traffick of this realme: and vvhat great losses and dammage, by ther meanes our merchants haue sustained in the Indies, Moscouie, and Groenland. In ead not tell yow, how chargeabl a neighbour, they vvear, and how vnsure a frend; euer preferring france; and for England, cum nemini obtrudi potest, i^ur ad me. And not vvith standing vvise men may easilie discern, vvhat fauor they may yet reap, at his maiesties hands: yf they deserue not the contrarie, by inconsiderate courses.
But, vvhat cavvse can they instlie pretend, that repyne and murmur, at the name of Spayne? They obiecte the sin, the curse, and the disparagement, to match vvith a Catholick. What is the reason for that barr? bycause the Ievves might not be tollerated, to match vvith the Ammorites; nor religions persons, vvith the prophane. That opinion taisteth too much of Iudaisme and the Tabmud, the barr is remooued, for now vvear vnder the lavv of grace; bothe Ievves and gentiles; circumsision and vncircumcision, ar all vnited to Christ by faith and Charitie, and incorporated into his bodie and Church.

The Ievves might not marrie vvith of ther trybes, for the promise was mayd to Abraham and his sead, which was not to be stayned vvith vnpure blood, and a commixtion of paganisme: but novv the promise is alreadie performed, and the iudicial lavv is abrogated. Yea, but that showeth, that god disliketh, that his Children, should be defiled vvith the mixture of a superstitious people. Trevv, but, who ar the superstitious, and which is the trew religion, is an other quaestion. Bothe ar Christians, both ar baptized in that name, bothe laye hold on the promises, testaments and the gospell, bothe saye one Pater noster, and one Credo; both reuerenc the 4. first general counsels but vvho is the Catholick, is filius Christs, of the surer syde, by the moother Church. And of the elder howse. Besides, is it so strainge, to heare that a protestant should match vvith a Catholick? To passe ouer Quene Elizabeths treatie with Monsieur, ded not Henrie the king of Nauarr, the protector of the reformed churches in France, marrie with the french kings sister a Catholick, in regard of bonum publicum, and yet the Elders and consistorie of Geneua, ded not condemne that, nor reprooue hym for that. Ded not the same king

aftervvard, match his sister (a famous protestant,) with the Duke of Lorraine, (one of the Champians of the Catholick churche? Ded not Levves the Prince of Conde, (the Archipiller of the french church) apprehend vvith great applavvse, the overture of a marriage, vvith Marie, Quene of France and Scotland, which certanlie had bean performed, yf the Admiral for his own particular, had not layd a block in his vvays. But aboue all others, it is memorable, and worthie to be remembred, vvhat a bloodie quarrel it vvas mayd, that king Edvvard the sixt, (the first protestant king in England, might not marrie Quene marie of Scotland, (vvho was euer honored and esteamed a Catholik), and yet the protector vvould haue mayd no scruple of Conscienc in that. Caluinisme and Lutheranisme, ar as opposite as Antipodes; and yet they haue matched oft together, and ther Issews ar the records thereof. And was it then tollerable in the reformed churches, and is it intollerable vvith Spayne? what then is the cawse of this great scrupulositie and feare? Is it for the state of the kingdome, or feare of alterations? The husband is head of the vvyfe, and tho the Infanta vvear born in familia Imperatrice, yet ther is no soverainetie

invested in her, she can maik no mutation of State, without the censent of the state. And yovv haue the les cavvse to distrust that, hauing a president before of king Philip, vvho being king of England, yet neither could nor, vvould attempt anie alteration. And yf the protestants ar sure to hould ther religion; it is inhumanitie to repyne, that she shall be suffred to enioye hers. No man of honor vvil offend a ladie of such honor, for a quarrel to her sovvle, to her faithe, and her vvorship of god. What then is the reason, vvhy this match is so distaist full? Is it for the hate and odiousnes of the name and qualities of a Spanyard? surelie, ab initio non fuit sic, that is neither an ancie^t quarrel, nor a naturall impression in the English. For in the tyme of king Edvvard the 3. Ther vvas a firm and fixed amitie betvvean England and Portingal, and of Lancaster ther king ar discended. And for Castil, they matched Constance the Daughter and heyr of king Peter to Iohn of Gaunt, by vvhose right, the crovvn appertained to hym. And his daughter Catharin married vvith Henry the third king of Castil: and therby, the vvhich remaineth in the Sauoye records, resignation of that crovvn, vvas mayd by Iohn of Gannt, and so all the controuersie vvas ended,

betwean them; and the kings of Spay^ne as floorishing brainches of the tree and stock of Lancaster haue peacablie possessed that kidgdome. So as Prince Charles shal by this match, vvarme his bedd with his own blood.
I may add further that king Henry the seuenth, married his sonn^, to king Ferdinando his daughter, to continew the succession of amitie. I, might remember, the treaties of 1505. betvvean k. Henry the 7. and king Philip, for the preseruation and noorishment of that league and frend ship. And hovv much, and hovv tenderly Charles the 5. embraced and esteamed yt, vvell appeareth by the Treatie arctioris amicitiae 1543. And by the renoumed treatie of Callice, (the greatest honor that was evver doon. to the crovvn of England:) and by the treatie 1507. bevvean Maximilian the Emperor, Charles king of Spayne, and king Henry the 8. by the treaties for entercourse 1515. and 1520. by the treatie of Cambray 1529. and by that famous treatie, 1542. Thus the tvvo kings and kingdomes still renewed, and noorished mutuallie, and vvarmelie, a perfect frendship, and kind correspondencie: till the schisme of Henry the 8. the diuorce, disgrace, and dishonor of Quene Katharin:

and the co^federation therupon with France, cooled the zealle of this seruent affection. So as ther vvas at that tyme no such cavvse of hatred, disfauor or vnkindnes; bevvean these tvvo kingdomes. nor anie national dislike or contention: vvhich first, brake out end appeared in England in Quene Maries tyme, principallie for the quarrel of a new religion (then fiuee yarres old.) For ther vvas no pretenc but onelie that to maik the breach, which Wyat desired. Yet this is not the trevv and sole motiue of the grudg: ther is and impostume vvhich can not be cured, till it be lanched. The hatred and remembranc of 1588. Manet alta mente repostum. It is trew, Hinc illae lachrimae. But let vs be indifferent, look vpon the wrongs doone to them, aswel as ther attemps for reueng. And vnpartially consider who gaue the cawse, and forced them to taik armes? The Moonie intercepted, which the king had sent to the Duke of Alua: the Assistanc of the princ of Oreng, by Gilbert, Morgan and others (ther seconds): the first voiage of Syr Frances Drake: the inuasion and sacking of S. Domingo; the protection of Holland, by the Earl of Leicester: the infinite depredations and letters of mart, (to the wnspeakable dammage of Speyne): the Philippicae and

inuectiues in euerie pulpit: ballets and libels in euerie press against king Philip; wear such prouocations, as flesh and blood, nay crovvnes and scepters could hardlie disgest. I speak nothing of the Portingal vorage, of the surprize of Cales, nor of the Iland viage: and can anie vvise man imagin, that the king of Spayn, vvas not sensible of such indignities? vvas it not probable, that he vvould send a futie, to Kinsale to reuenge that?
Yet for all, this hostilitie, vvhen his maiestie: cam to the crovvne: how frendly and quicklie ded the king of Spayne alter his course, and send the high Constable of Castil, as the doue owt of the Ark, to see yf the flood of mallice vvear fallen, and vvith an Oliue brainch in his hand, to seak for peace: to maik an Amnestia, and perpetual obliuion of all vnkyndnes past: to couer all offences, to burie all quarrels, and to reconcile the two crovvnes, and the subiects thereofs. And surelie Cursed vvil he be, vvho shal seak to violate that peace; and vnder the coolor of religion, to banish peace and Charitie (the badges of religio^.) a malicions Cayn he is, that maiks all contentions perpetuall: and searsehe can he be holden loyal, that reme^breth onelie the sudes and quarrels vvith Scotland,

and not what, and how dear wnto vs it is now, and so should be euer embraced and esteamed. Furthermore, the Crovvn of England, shal hearby, be thus more, beautified and magnified. But staye. My pen shall intrude no further, into the secret Cabbienet of counsel, wthowrt warrant. Bycause I kow not, whether it be agreable to the kings pleasure: or whether it be sit, to be discoursed: and speciallie bycause I hold it impossible, forme to satisfie so profovvnd a Iudg, vvithovvthis ovvn instructions, and directions. For I consider vvel, hovv vnsearchable the secrets of princes art, vvhich lie oft in abisso, and ar too deape to be sovvnded by euerie shallow discourser. And I remember also, both what praying and preaching, vvas vsed, against the match of Quene Elizabeth vvith Monsieur, (in the like case, and for feare of alteration, and afterclaps): and yet some, vvho ded then most impugn it, vnder pretenc of religion: ded in dead, least of all other counsellors regard religion. Syr Philip Sydnie, like a noble and vvourthie courtier) laboured by a short treatise, to present to her Maiesties iudgment, the vntfitnes, disproportion, and inconuenience of that match, bothe to her self, and the realme: but he ded it,

priuatelie, and with discreat circum spection. Stubs, like a professor of an vnseasoned zeal) took the question in hand? and as a punishment of his presumption, for feited his hand for that, (being rather published, to incense and corrupt the people, then to aduise and inform the Quene). And tho some of the greatest and vvisest consellors, ded earnestlie sollicit, and seake to further the match, bycause it vvas like both to vnithe the kingdome of france to England: and was sure, that the possession of the Netherlands, wold also be offred vnto the^ by the prince of Oreng and the states, whearby England was like to be a most potent Monarchie: yet was the whole bodie of the kingdom cast into much distemper, onelie which bare conceapts and iealosies. Some vpon partialitie and faction: some for distrust of the practises of France: some for ther own or ther frends, sinister ends and ambition: as Iam perswaded, euen in this case ther ar men posseded, with the same diseases and humors. And yf I ded not wel know, the nature of the multitude, (a beast of manie heads, and mad braynes: I should wonder, how they durst oppose the desseins of a king of that experienc, and iudgment, who haith managed this busienes, with so great warienes, caution,

and prudence, that this great Coniunction can portend no other effect, then honor, confort, and prosperitie. He is the sittest to iudg of his own cawse: and his own cavvse, being the Commonwelths cawse; yf anie priuate Man, should arrogate to hym self, either more vvisedome to controll his proceding; or an opinion of more affection to the state: or more prouidenc to foresee and preuent, daingers therby: I see not which waye he can avoyde, not to fall into the custodia of the court of wards, till he come to hym self again. But to leaue this matter, as a deliberatiue, which requireth a Crassus, or Antonius; I will come to that which, gaue the occasion, of this treatise.
Ther met at a merchants howse in London, The occasion of this ^^ea ise. (wheare merchants, for ther table, and hospitalitie, beare worthilie the bell aboue all merchants in Europe) diuers persons of excellent qualitie, met there, in a garden, before dinner, T. Aldreds letter, the pamphlet aforesayd, and some strainge rumors, and seditious practises from Amsterdam, being perused, examined and discussed; A fyne Chaplain to a great person, and one of the merchants acquanitance, cam into the companie, and hearing but a litl of this discourse (which at that tyme

vvas the subiect of all tabletalk) with much The ministers or ation. vehemencie, he ded affirm this match, to be like to bread great incombrance, and mischeafe to the kindome: bothe ni regard, of the encrease.
1. Of Catholiques in the Realme, and in respect of Spayne, (which he ignorantlie called an ancient enemie.)
2. Whearupon he took occasion, to rage and raile bitterlie against the church of Roome, (as the Seminarie of all commotions in Europe, and the Contriuer and plotter of all treason in England.
3. And (bycause he vvould shovv his Rhetorick in the ruff; and omit nothing, which might exasperate the companie against the Catholicks: he alledged in thunder and vehemencie, the death of king Edvvard, (and that sillielie:) the manie conspiracies against Quene Elizabeth: and speciallie that horrible proiect of the Gunpovvder treason, by a fevv priuate hotespurres, (vvhich in iustice is rather to be buried vvith the offendors; then obiected and imputed to innocent men, vvho generallie vvith great sorrow abhorr the memorie of it.)
4. Besides he vrged, that princes be bothe disquieted, and endaingered, by the excommunicats ans and bulls of popes, by

the Catechismes, and doctrine of the Iesuits. And that the subiects of England, ar withdrawen by them, from ther obedienc, to ther prince: and ar so full of treacheries, and disloyalte, as no nation can be paralleled with them.
5. Yow may think also, that he forget not, to arm hym self vvith the authoritie, of D. Murtons censure, (for vvhich I think he ded not studie much) VVe may novv asvvel expect a vvhyte Aethiopian, as a loyal subiect of that religion. He produced a book entituled. A discouerie of Romish doctrine, in the case of conspiracie and Treason. Whearin the Author playeth his maister prize, against the professors of the Catholick religion, vvith an Hyperbole of criminal accusations, and scandalous imputations, able to driue men into dispayre of the kings grace vnto them, and to bread in his maiesties Royal hart, a diffidenc of them.
6. He vrged parson vvhytes, vndiscreat vntruth, and vncharitabl sentenc, that all ther religion is full of doctrine, whence procead monsters of Conspiracies against the state, and that they teach men to murther the king, and blovv vp the parliement. And that since Bells tyme, ther was never such a raue nous Idol, as the preasts and seminaries.

7. He ded not omit the like allegation owt of Ormerode, the picturemaker, who vpon erroneous misconceauing, condemned that singuler and renoumed Doctor. Allen, for affirming, that princes might be slayne by ther subiects, by the 25. Numeri.
8. And so he concluded all, with that Rhetoritall sentenc, of monsieur Lewes baylie in his book of the practise of Pietie, pag. 783. vvhich he produced with such ostentation, as if it wear able to cast all the learned societie of the fathers, into a fitt, of a quartane.
Iesuits and preasts (saith he) ar sent to vvithdravv subiects from ther allegiance, to mooue inuasion, and to kill king^: yf they be Saints, vvho be Scithians? VVho ar Canibals* yf they be Catholicks? Which conclusion, for the art, and the witt, worthilie deserueth, both a praemium and a Plaudue, s^c pueri crepundia gestant.
After this, delicate oration they went to dinner: and presentlie after dinner, the minister departed in great haist. Therupon all the companie vehementlie desyred one gentlman of ther companie, (who ded well vnderstand the world, and was a freeman not obliged to anie religious orders, but as films Ecclesiae) to deliuer his opinion

of the ministers Inuectiue. Which he was, at last contented, at ther importunitie, and for the satisfaction of ther Conscienc, to vndertaike: and which with his license and information, I taik vpon me, as his Amanu^n^^s and secretarie, to set downe, and deliuer the same to yow.
After a long pavvse, quoth he; (lodius The trevv state of the Qu^stion. accusat Machos, Catalma Cethegum. Is not this ridiculus? who can endure to heare a Grace hus, complain against sedicion? I perceaue by the premisses, that the protestants set this down, as a Decree against Catholiks, and labor to imprint that, in the harts of the people, as a perpetual scandal and stayne, That the Catholik religion and doctrine, is daingerous and preiudicial to the safetie of kingdomes, and an enemie to Sooueraintie: and so they censure it, as neither allovvable, not tollerable in a vvel gouerned monarchie. Now this being a matter of so great importanc, as it is in dead to be esteamed (for Querelam Eccles^ae, quilibet Catholicus facit suam:) I will endeauor therfor, to fift owt the truthe, and vvhat is therin to be holden, for an infallible conclusion: aswel to instifie them, as to resolue my self in that poynte, which haith mayd manie good and vertuous men, in Engla^d, to stagger much.)

And that I may not wander in my discourse, nor leaue yovv in a laborinthe: I wil set dovvne, the trevv state of the quaestion, to be argued, (as they propownd it.
1. First, vvhether to be a Catholick, vvho professeth devv reuerence, to the church of Roome) and to be a trevv subiect to his Prince and Contrie, be incompatible or no?
2. Secondlie yf they be incompatible, vvhether that incompatibilitie, be generallie in all states, or but in some particular states, and kingdomes? vvhether originallie, and euer, or but at some tymes onely? and Whether simpliciter as malum in se, or acciden, tally onelie, as malum prohibitum, vpon consideratio, of particuler circumstances, and enacted by particular statutes and lawes, vpon occasion.
3. And Lastlie, VVhether I uteranism and Caluinism, be not more incompatible with loyaltie, more opposite, and almost contradictorie, and that ab origine? ffor the better deciding and manifestation of these high poynts: I wil maik my first discourse, vpon the last Quaestion: and wil examin, whether the factions and tumults, vvhich haue filled all the kingdomes of Europe, with blood and Calamitie, these hundred yearres; haue sprung from the opinions,

practises and procurement of the Catholiks, as an inseperable propertie alwaies to them: or ells rather, was this mischeafe, and the egg of this Cockatrice, layd first at wittenbergh (for the which they worthilie of late celebrated ther Iubilee,) hatched at Smalcald, and fostered and Nourished at Geneua.
And this poynt, I will argue, not as a deuine, (for I vvill not arrogate so much to my self) but historicallie, sincearlie, and legallie: as one that desyres, to defend the loyaltie of religious and innocent men, rather then ther opinions, and assertions, vvhich they can best mantaine them selfs, and vvhich so manie ages haue embraced with dew reuerence: and that plainlie, and vvith integritie, and truthe (vvhich is euer best graced, vvith her ovvn beautie, and neads no paynting and coolers.)
In the yeare of our lard 1514. The whole estate of the church, enioyed peace, and The peace of the Church 1514 ther ancient priuiledges: all princes vvith great deuotion vvear nurcing fathers and protectors thereof. No storm ded shake it, no schisme ded break the vnitie: ther vvas harmonie and good correspondenc, (for matters of religion and faithe) betwan the church of Roome, and the princes and common welths of all Christendome: and

till that tyme, thorough ovvt all Europe, speciallie in England from S. Augustines comming hither: this quaestion, was never mayd, nor proposed either in the schooles, or courts of common lavve.
Anno 1515 Martin Luther, an Augustin Luther. Friar, (a man of a turbulent spirit, learned, and yet no famous Clark,) vvas the first, that broke this long and setled peace: vvho hauing interposed hym self in that fatall busienes of the Indulgences, (sent by Pope Leo the tenth into Germanie) not properlie appertainning to hym, but as a proctor for the order; he begonn first to inuaigh against the iniurie do one to his fraternitie, His reuolt. against the abuses and couetousnes of the collectors, and against ther authoritie which ded nominate them, and required such a leuie of mooine in that nature. This was a popular, and plausible introduction, to vvin the vulgar sort, vvho can not endure the pressure of extraordinarie contributions; and alwaies hate, the rapine of such collectors. And therfor he quiklie fownd manie fauores: but much more, when he began to exclaym against the ambition of prelats, the riot and disorders of religious men; taxing some for tytannie, some for auarice, some for idlenes and ignoranc, and all for corruption and abuses.

Thus he stood in armes, and as a challenger for a fow yearres, onelie against the defects of the cleargie, and with owt much dainger, for diuers good men conceaued at first, that he had onelie intended and sought reformation of disorders, renouation of discipline, punishment of irregularitie, and amendement of lyfe. And that not with owt somme cawse, tho withowt good arder. For S. Hildegardis, had foretould, a storme to the church for ther sinnes: Sauonarola a Dominican had wakened Italie, vvith prediction of terror: friar Thomas of Guien, prophecied, a vae, vae, a scourge, a desolation to Bourdeaux, an inundation of miserie, to France and the vvorld.
So then after that Luther ded fynd, populo placere quas fecisset fabulas, (as noueltie is euer at first wel entertained in the world, and that the people applauded his actions and desseins, and that manie of the best wits (speciallie those, that wear bred and framed in Erasmus his school, wear inclined to second hym: and perceauing also, that some of the greatest Princ^s in Germaine, ded geue hym both hearing and harting, in his proceadings: The vayne glorie thereof, raised the ambitious conceipt of hym self, manie straynes hygher then he vvas in dead: all men encooraging

hym, who whear ticled with new fancies and conceipts, (which syde alwaies carrieth most voyces:) for natures most affected to leuitie and chainge, ar best pleased with innouations. Therupon, as a man sick in his spirits, and of a fierie disease, he begonn to raue, and defame all church gouernement. He abondaned his cloyster, cast of his habit, and renounced all obedienc to his superiors. For now he preacheth against the His seditions doctrine. vvhole cleargie, against the tyrannie and superioritie of the Bushop of Roome (whose authoritie in matters ecclesiastical, vvas then generallie holden for sacred): perswading the people, not to render anie obedienc to them. The Pope he tearmed Sathanissimum papam, messer Asino: the Prelates, he called blind guides; the religious, Porcos, and candles set vndet a bushel: thus seaking, non purgare abusus, sed tollere ordinem, Triticum cum Zizanio euellere studebat. And vvhy, ded he preach such homelies to the people? Bycause, so should they (sayd he) stil liue in darknes, and in the shadow of death, with owt the light of the gospel: and be fed, and missed by ignorant guides, and drie nurces, and stil remain in Aegipt (the hovvse of bondage) and in the captiuitie of Babilon. This Prologue, mayd attentiue auditors, by a fayre shovve and promise

of great matters: then he begon the Tragedie, acted with incredible sedition and insolencie. His whole studie was now to demolish the walls of the church, and abolish all ecclesiastical orders: and so (by participation) to shake the verrie foundations of the state.
In this humor, he fed hym self, with great hopes, to conquer the world with the sword of the spirit; and to subdew the Pope (whome he was the first that affirmed to be absolutelie, Antichrist, the man of perdition, and insignis praestigiator.
And the rather bycause now 1519. Maximilian the emperor was latelie dead, (whose power, and wisedome, he had great cawse, and worthilie, to feare): and Charles the fifth, vvas chosen to succead hym (a yong Prince not tvventie yeares of age) whome he hoped to persvvade, to ruine the Papaltie, to keap his court at Roome, and maik the castl of St. Angelo subiect to his commands. And then he dreamed, that he might easilie reforme the church and cast it in a nevv mould. Speciallie being assured, to haue the Duke of Saxonie, old Iohn Frederic the elector, his secret frend and patron: who for his riches, strenth, allianc, and abilities, was farr superior to anie Prince in the empyre.

What follovved then? obserue his course, I Luthers bul against the Bushops, and Bushopricks. and iudg vnpartiallie, vvheter it vvas modest and devvtifull, or seditious and arrogant. First he ptoclaymes open vvart against the Bushops of Germanie, endeuoring to suppresse ther authoritie, abrogate ther iurisdiction, and maik them odious and contemptible to the vvorld. Therfor in his booke, contra Statum Ecclesiae, and aduersus falso no minatum ordinem Episcoporum: emong his works printed at Iena, tom. 2. Latin. He fends ovvt his bull, against the sayd Bushops in these vvores. Attendite vobis Episcorum vmbr^. Doctor Lutherus, vislt nobis bullam, and edictum legere, non valde teneris vestris auribus placiturum. His lecture vvas worth the haring. First he vseth an exhortation: Secondlie, he geues direction what the godlie, auditors should doe: and lastlie his benediction, and the blessing wich shall follovv, by obeying his covvnsell. And this vvas his graue and modest counsel. Omnes, quicunque opem ferant, bona, famam and sanguinem in hoc impendunt, honoremque suum in hoc exponentes, vt ^^. Episcopatus Pompatici deuastentur. tam remo^^ and alieni ab omni functione Apostolica: totumque hoc Sathanicum regimen Episcoporum extinguatur: Ili sunt dilecti ^^lij Dei, and vere Christiani, obseruantes praecepta Dei, who soever will hazard ther liues honor and

fortune, in so Christian a work, as to root owt and destroye all Bushops and Bushopricks, Satans ministers: and pul vp by the roots all ther authoritie and iurisdiction: these ar worthie to be honored and esteamed the trew children of god, and such as obey his commandements. And in libro contra Siluest. Prieratem. tom. 1 Lat. witteberg. Si fures furca, latrones gladio* haereticos igne tollimus: Cur non magis hos magistros perditionis, hos Cardinal^s, hos Pap^s and totam istam Romanae Sodomiae colluniem, omnibus armis impetu^us, and eorum sangume manus nostras lauemus? So hear he will sight against the whole ecclesiasticall Hierarchie; and wash his hand in the blood of Bushops. But saith he obijci^nt periculum esse ne excuetur, tumultus: en respondeo, an ideo negligetur verbum Dei, and peribit populus? as yf Luthers doctrin with owt tumult coult not be preached. Martin Marprelat of England, and Iohn Marprelat of Scotland, wear not possessed with so wicked a spirit, and tho they wear mad enong, yet they camm not to the height of this surie. Let Brunus, Minsinger, and Gayl, iudg: whether thi, sermon and proclamation of Luthers, will beare an action of sedition and conspiracie: and whether it weare consonant, to the peace and lawes of the empyre. For hearby the

people was taught and animated, to pull down the principal pillers of the state: to overthrow the ecclesiastical regiment, the Archbushops of Ments, Coolen, and Trier, the Primate of Magdeburgh, the Archbushop and Princ of Saltzburgh, the great maister of Prussia, Wirtzburgh, and manie others, who haue voyce and place in the diet, and a povver full hand in the gouernment. Think yovv, that this can be avovved to be the act of a loyall subiect of the empyre, or vvarrantable by anie lavves or example in a ciuil gouernme^t: that a priuate man should thus insolentlie attempt of hym self against all authoritie, for a subiect against the cheafe magistrates; for a sheap to depose the pastor; and by such meanes and aduise, to stirr vp rebellion, and insurrection against persons of that qualitie, and inso high place and calling. Neither ded he euer cease, or geue over practising, til effectuallie he procured the expulsion and banishment both of the iurisdiction and name of Bushops, ovvt of Saxonie, Hessia, Wirtenberg, and vvhear soever he preuayled. which paradox I am assured the Lord Bushopes in England, vvill not allovv: nor patronise such seditious proceading, for ther ovvn safetie, and ther Baronnies.
But hear he stayed not, he proceaded further: 2. Against the

He took vpon hym to deface and Canon Lavves. burn, the Canon Lawes, Indulgences, and bulles of Popes, at wittenberg. Yf yow ask, Quo warranto? he ded that, by this own authoritie; his own priuate spirit, was his commission. And the pretenc of the gospell was his Apologie. But was that a sufficient warrant* Though most of the Canon Lawes, wear the constitutions of Popes, (whome he now both contemned, and condemned:) yet some wear decreed by prouinciall Synodes, some by generall counsells, and all of them wear ratified, bothe by praescription, generall approbation of that contrie, and the Imperial Lavves.
And so it appeareth, they could not be lawfullie, and orderlie suppressed in the empyre, withwt the authoritie of the empyre. But as he ded seak to abrogate the Canon Lawes; so he ded also vilefie, and abase the Ciuil lawes of Germanie, as shall more pertinentlie appeare hearafter.
Furthermore, as yf it weare to bring in 3. Againsts vniuersities. Barbarisme, and to pull owt the eyes of the Almains, that they might not see his follie, and errors: he endeauored, to abandon, deface, and ruine all vniuersities. Which Oxford and Cambredg wil hardlie beleaue, yf I could not produce his own vvords. Libro contra Ambrosium Catharinum, he writes

thus, Vt videatur ad Euangelium funditus extinguendum, nec astutius, nec efficacius inuenisse Satan commentum quam erigendarum vniuersitatum. Be vniuersities, then an inuention of the deuel? and a subtil deuise, to oppresse the gospell Is it not likelie? That no man might coolor and excuse this grosse paradox, vvith some fayre pretence; as they oft labor to doe: read his opinion, libro de Abroganda Missa; there he disswades the people, from sending ther children to the vniuersities, and generallie condemnes them all by these vvords Academias, per Idolum M^loch figura^a^ puto. Vniuersities, resemble the Idol Moloch. By wat reason? bycause saith he, Existo enim fumo, prodeunt istae locustae, quae omnes Cathedras occupant. Would he then haue all vniuersities, suppressed, onelie bycause therein the Catholick religion, and school diuinitie is taught? no in dead, for why ded he shut vp the schoole doores, formanie yeares together? why ded he neglect the teaching and education of yovvth, in his own religion, and profession? why ded he banish Tullie and Aristotle, who medl with no religion? why ded Carolostad go to the plough rather, then he would read a lecture more. Nay to conclude, his fidus Achates, Philip Melancton, in his book called Didimus saith.

Equidem sapient em virum, iudico fuisse vviclesum Anglum, qui omnium primus, quod ego sciam, vidit vnmersitates, fuisse Sathanae Synagegas. And this I wonder maister Philip Wold so generallie affirme, and aprooue vviclefs error, that vniuersities arr the Synagogue of satan, being so skilfull an artist hym self. But at the beginning they wear all vncertan, what to mantain for sownd and trew doctrine: and aboue all, Melancthon was euer an Academick, and never long co^stante: and that yow may see, by this, that libro ad waldenses, he recanted that opinion, and reuoked his error; vvhich Carolostade, never ded.
So as yow may, perceaue, that at therfirst rising, and preaching reformation, the spirit had not in manie yeares fullie illuminated ther vnder standing, nor directed ther iudgment, with full perfection: as he ded the prophets, and the apostles, and S. Paul. Hearby it appeareth, that at threblowes, Luther laboured to cut down, the thre great Cedars of the empyre, The Cleargic, The Canon ^avves, and the vniuersities. For vvith ovvt vniuersities, the cleargie covvld not be in structed: nor with owt Lawes be gouerned: and so being necessarilie chayned together, he could not break the link with owt subuerting all for he ded

not seak a reformation of them, but a totall extirpation and destruction, as appeared by the Bushopricks.)
And this I dare affirme, that all the Hundred His behaviour to Caesar and the Princes. Grauamina Germanie, presented to the Emperor Charles, at Norembergh: ded not containes, articles of that dainger, greauances of that loss, and such an oppression of the state, as the se thre had beane.
And yet a greater mischeafe, follovves. For novv I vvill lay dovvn his positions of state and declare to the vvorld a prodigious inciuilitie, and his arrogancie, disobedienc, and presumption, tovvards the Emperor, and the Princes of Germanie. Desiryng your patienc, that I may but a litl digress to maik his spirit more plainlie appeare in his likenes: and hovv immodestlie and vnreuerentlie he ded esteame Regiam Maiestatem, by the exampl of his vsage of king Of k. H. 8. Henry the VIII. of England libro cont^a Regem Angliae. He calls king Henry in his preface, An enuious madd fool, ful of Dastardie, and with owt one vaine of princelie blood in his bodie.
After that, he saith, He is a Basilisk, to vvhome I den^unc damnation.
And pag. 335. This glorious king, lyeth stowtlie like a king. (Note his moralitie, for which he is famous.) And again, he is

a lijng Scurra, couered vvith the title of a king, and a chosen vessel of the Deuel. And pag. 338. Thou art no more a king, but a sacrilegious theaf. And most sloouenlie and like hymself, pag. 333. Ius mihi erit Maiestatem tuam stercore conspergere, etc. I am ashamed, to procead, I wil omitt infinite, and these ar too manie: vvhich it wear incredible, to haue bean vttered by the Elias of Almaing, but that both his own books ar extant, and S. Thomas Moor, (the most famous Chancelor of England) recapitulates them, with a nomber more, in his lattin vvork against Luther, printed at Loouain, 1566.
And these places, I haue selected and cited: not onelie bycause they touched Henry the eight, as he vvas a king (and at that tyme, one of the most mightie and Renoumed Princes in Europe:) but bycause also, therby yow might discouer the modestie and Holie disposition of Doctor Martin, and how like a man he was, to preach and persuade obedie^c to magistrates
Novv note, how he ded behaue hym self, to the princes of the Empyre: and whether he ded geue to Caesar (his soueraine lord) that which is Dew to Caesar? It is worthie the obseruation, to see his religious and ciuil respect of an emperor. Libro

contra duo mandata Casaris, he vvrites. Turpe quidem est Casarem ac Principes, manifestis agere mendacijs. It is, a shame for Caesar, and the Princes, to lye so palpablie, and in the same book, and with the same spirit, saith he, Deus mihi dedu negotium, non cum hominibus ratione praeditis: sed Germanicae bestiae debent me occidere. (Meaning, that the Princes, the Sauages and beasts of Germanie, should murder hym.) But he showes therin, yet more gall and bitternes, Oro cunctos pios Chrisitanos, dignentur simul rogare Deum pro eiusmods ex^aecatis Principibus, quibus nos ma no trae su^ furore corripuit, ne vl^o pacto eos s^quamur, vel in militiam ire, vel dare aliquid contra Turcas: quod^quid^n. Turca decies prudentior* probiorque quam sunt Principes nostri; quid ^alibus fa^^^s, contra Turcam prospere euen^at, qui Deum tam al^etentant, and blasphemant? Was this but a Peccadilio, Caesar, and the Princes, to be censured with such scandalous comparisons, and reproches? but this is not all, in libro artic. 500. in articulo 367. Quid ergo boni, in rebus diumis, vel decernant, vel constituant, tyranni tam impij and prophant? Before they wear fooles, novv he ma^ks them tyrants: and then he goeth a degree higher still. For libro de seculari potestate, he deliuers his opinion of all princes and kings in general, and

how they ar to be esteamed: Sc^re debes quod ab initio mundi, raris^ma auis est prudens princeps, ac multo rarior probus, sunt communiter, maxime faiui, and nequis^imi nebulones in t^rra.
And there also, bycause his good meaning might more perspicuouslie appear, he interprets hym self planilie. Quis nes^^t, Principes esse carnem Ferinam in Caelo? As yf it wear, as great a dayntie as vennieson, to Head of y church. see, that a prince should be saued. And in his book de belio contra Turcas. Casarem negat esse Caput reipublicae Christiana, and defensorem fidei ac Eu^ngelij: and oportere sane Ecclesam, habere al^um defer sorem, quam sunt Imperatores and Reges. And mark his reason, Eos namque esse pe^imes hos es Christianismi and fidei. the which concludes my assertion, for he mantains doctrine, opposite to all king: and contemneth government. And as yf he would Vnking and depose them; he dothe encoorage the people, to dravv ther swords, against all crowns and scepters. Therfor lo. 1. contra Rus^icos, he sendeth this greating to the princes.
Sciatis boni ^omini, Deum s^c procurare, quod subditi, nec po^su^t, nec debent, nec volunt, ty^anniden^ vestram ferre diutius. Mark that debent, as a good encooragement to the Bowers.
Who can mantaine such Paradoxes, or

that they proceaded from the spirit of a prophet of God? can anie Lutheran iustifie these wild propositio^s, or coolor them with tolerabl glosses? Ded euer anie prophets, Apostles, or Martyes, vse such a barbarous libertie of speach, against Nero, Dioclesian, Iulian, tho the greatest persequutors? Ded Elias, rage so madlie against Achab, and Iesabel? S. Paul gaue hym a better exampl, who vsed Festus with more reuerenc a great deale. And with owt dowbt no Christian and trevv zeal can be so irregular, so rude, and so intemperately passionate. To geue the lye to Caesar his Soouerain, and the princes, was a personal, and an intollerable contempt, yet to proclayme hym and the princes, to be Sauages, Babons, and Fooles; Tyrants; blynd buzzards; and that the Turk vvas a vviser and honester man, then they; vvas a more horrible, scandalous, and seditious assertion. But to geue owt to the world, in print, and dogmaticallie to affirme, as it wear in skorn and hatred of Maiestie and royaltie, that a wise and good prince is as rarelie fownd as a black svvann; that commonly kings and princes, be the most. Dot^ing fooles, and reprobate knaues in the vvorld: that they ar a damned crevv, as yf ther vveare no place in heauen vouchsafed for kings: What is it, by such epithites,

disgraces, and execration, to annichilate and abase the sacred function of kings? to taik the crown from ther heads? to expose Regalitie and ther progatiues, to mallice and contempt of the people; yf this be not?
But it may be, he ded vse more ciuilitie, and reuerenc, to his frends of the howof Saxonie. Surelie for Duke Georg, of Leipswig, he calls hym, the Apostl of Satan: and skorn fullie entitles hym, Illustrissima mclementia vestra.
And fot his, respect, to old Iohn Frederick his protector; it appears by the commission, giuen by the Duke, to Iohn Plaumitz (a noble man) Hierome Schurffius (a lawyer) Philip Melancthon, and Erasmus Hawbitz; to maik a visitation of Saxonie, (then full of discorders:) for when they returned ther commission, together with the acts of ther visitation, Luther in contempt of them, T^otz (quoth he) eis visitato^ibus. An vvhy? onelie for ambition. How appears that? Nescio qua de causa, proterierit me in hoc negotio princeps. (Lo. in serm. Dommico, inuocauit.) And Lo. contra Ambrosium ^atharmum, saith he: Silicet mihi decretales Papae, Conciliorum decreta, Leges and Mandata Imperatoris, omniumque principum, pro libertate Christiana, nedum contemnere, sed and conculeare: vestras ne res gestas, praeclarae

visitationis, legum vice acceptem? What could dravv from hym so vayne and insolent a speach, but ambition? He maiks small reckoning of the emperors ma^dats, or the imperial lawes afwel as the Canon, pro libertate Christiana: and for that also, he hym self must and will be iudg, what to receaue and ratifie; neither the duke, nor his commissioners mist prescribe rules to hym.
I will alledg onelie one place, (locis com. class. 4. c. 30. to Spalatimus. Non s^ram quod ais, non passurum principem, scribi in Moguntinum, nec quod publicam pacem perturbare posset: potius te, and principem ipsum perdam, Si enim creatorieius Papae restiti, cur cedam creaturae^ and post. Pul^hre vero, non turbandum pacem publicam arbitraris, and turbandum pacem aeternam Dei? non sic Spalatine, non sic. What is this, but ambition? not zeale furelie, which as it should ever haue faith for a schoolm aister, so it haith Charitie for a guide, and humilitie for a witnes, whearof heare is verrie small proofe, and apparenc.)
And by the opinion of Spalatinus, (a famous Lutheran) and of his Lord (the Elector of Saxonie) yovv see, that Luther is disswaded and conselled, from writing against the Archbushop of Ments) an Elector Likewise; bycause it could not, but disturb and break the peace of the empyre:

and yet is it to be noted, hovv Luther reiects with contempt, bothe ther opinions: as yf the peace of God, and the peace of the empyre: the nevv gospell of Luther, and the old lavves and governement of the empyre, vvear not Compatible. Which concludeh the Affirmatiue of the Quaestion, now to be prooued.
For the present, I wil produce owt of the Cornucopia of Luther, no more of his irreligious and turbulent Propositions, (sufficient arguments, both of his vnquiet spirit and seditious doctrine.) For it is, fitter first to examin these exactlie; and to discern, hovv vvel the fruits thereof ded realish in the taist of the people, and what effects and operation they wrought.
After that the vvildbore, had thus violentlie broken down, the pale of order and discipline, and rooted vp the vinyeard: and that the vulgar people, had receaued so pleasing a new gospel, that they wear exempted from all the Canons, and iniunctions of the church, (mayd to restraine disorder and licentiousnes:) that trew Christians wear freed from the captiuitie of Babilon, and all co^stitutions and ceremonies, which cuthralled and snared the conscience: that ther was a more compendions waye fownd to heauen, by faith onelie, and freedome

from merits, and the heauie burden of good work: that Roome was Babilon, Bushops wear seducers, religious men Idolatours, and the princes wear tyrants, vvho protected them all:) and that God vvould not suffer, the poor commonaltie longer to beare so heauie a yoke, and subiection, vnder such oppressors. Vpon these seditious principls, the people begonn to rise, and committ ryots: each man vvas a drom to an other, each man ded strike an alarum, to root owt so corrupt a cleargie, and to depose so vnworthie princes. The Bowres Sue^ia. and paisants of all parts of Germanie, runn accoding to the byas of the tyme, and mayd a generall insurrection. First in Swaben, Then in Franconia, after in Alsatia, and in diuers imperiall tovvnes. They of Franconia, a pretended that they took armes, to expell all nobilitie ovvt of Germanie, to cutt down the Okes of the church, (the Degree of Bushopes:) to abolish the old lavv and establish a nevv religion and law. In these tumults, the heads and Tribunes of the people, wear Thomas Muncer, and his Camerado Phifer, and Christophor Schaplerus. Muncer, vvas an audacious fellow; and of a preast becomed an apostata some report, he was scholler to Carolostad, but Melancthon in his historic,

saith, that he cam to Luthers lectures. This man in Alsatia, preached against the Pope, and yet dissented from his maister Luthers doctrine: bycause as the Popes lawes wear too austeare, so Luthers gaue to much libertie. There he first preached against the Masse, and against the baptising of children (bycause it was not expresslie commanded in the scriptures:) and that Christ, ded not taike flesh of the Virgin Marie: and that Magistrates ded loose and forfaict all ther authoritie, yf they committed mortall sinn; and lastlie, that the people might correct princes yf they offend, (as appeareth by the Centur. 9. and 9. pag. 445. This Muncer, to maik his name powrefull with the people, he bragged that his vocation was extraordinarie, by the reuelation and perpetuall assistance of the holie ghost: and that he had receaued from God, Gladium Gedeonis, cogere vniuersum orbem, ad nouum Christi regnum instituendum: to fight for Israel and depose Idolatrous magistrates. Vpon these phantasticall suppositions, he drew the people of Fra^conia into the feald: he vvonn the town of Winspurgh: they slew Count Lodouic of Helphe^steyn; and ded either murder, or captiuate, all the noble men they could encounter. Besides, they sacked and destroyed all churches, and (as

Conradus VVimpin testifieth) onelie, in that one circle of the empyre, they pilled, pulled down, and spoyled neare thre hundred, monasteries, castles, and forts. And yet these reformers, pretended, that they took armes for edification; is it not licklie? But for vvant of victualis and other necessaries, (as multitud and furie, arr seldome prouident:) they vvear forced to deuide ther campes; and somme of them marched to vvards the Duchie of Wittenbergh, (vvho, by Truch^es, generall of the league of Sweuia, vvear all put to the svvord, or to flight:) but the greatest nomber remained in Franconia. And bycause these tumults, tended so directlie, to a deuastation of allstates, and lavves: therfor Iohn (Duke of Saxonie) vvho had before tollerated Muncer^ preaching in Alstadt: and his vncle Duke George, together vvith other princes, ioyned ther forces together (the emperor being in Spayne): and at frankhuisen, mayd a bloodie execution and slaugh terof all the Paisants in the camp: Whear Muncer and Phifer vvear taken, and executed; and aboue a hundred thovvsand men lost ther liues, in these tumults and rebellion.
Yet could not this feare full vvarning serue, to coole the heate, of those zealous

vvarriers; for in Alsatia, they mayd a nevv vproare: vvhear aboue tvventie thovvsand of them vvear slayne, by the count Palatine, and Anthonie Duke of ^orram. And after that, an other multitud put them selfs in armes, at Petersheim (in the territorie of vvormes:) vvho vvear likewise defeated and put to the sword. To conclude, no part of the bodie of the empyre, was cleare from that plague of conspiratie: for as the bowers in the contrie, so the common people in the imperial townes, conspired together to reforme religion, and to remoue such magistrates, as supported the old. At Erford, the people, degraded and committed all ther officers. At Frank-fort, with more furie, they spoyled the churches, banished the cleargie, and placed all authoritie and gouernement of the cittie, in tvventie fowre commoners, (to vvhome they gaue all command and rule^: they created all nevv magistrates: mayd new lavves; expelled the ancient senators and the whol cleargie, (not withowt terror, and menaces) and they selected and sett down fourtie seauen articles, owt of Luthers gospell, which they decreed should be religioustie obserued and obeyed: and which they imparted to ther fraternitie at Coolen, and Mentz, (wheare thre whole dayes, the people stood in armes together,

locked vp the gates, and mayd them selfs lords and maisters of the citties).
And the same spirit like wise mooued diuers priuate men, by ther own meand, to attempt reformation. So Frances Sicking, a Lutheran, owt of his zeale, (yet some geue owt, that he was incited by Bucer and Oecolampad, to that action) leuied diuers companies, inuaded and spoyled the territories of the Bushop of Trier; took by assalt a strong place, of the princes possessions, and marched with his armie to the verrie walls of Trier, (purposing to beseage that) withowt anie iust cawse of warr, or particuler quarrel. Whear yf he had preuayled, the riches of that place, and some others depending of that, would both haue encooraged and enabled them to greater attempts. But he vvas forced to retyre; and so being apprehended, he and his complices vvear iustlie attainted, and ther lands confiscated.
And to maik vp the totall some of all the miseries of Germanie, in full measure* this inundation of furie, was so generall, that they mayd all church goods a praye and bootie, broke Down Cathedral churches, ransacked all monasteries, and robbed and subuerted both Bushops and Bushopricks, as Magdeburgh (the seate of the

Primate of the empyre) Bream, Lubeck, and fourten moe (such is the furie, and deformite of sedition.) So as the Imperiall chamber at Spyres, vvas long afterward much disquieted, and trovvbled, vvith Actions, complaynts, and petitions, for these spoyles: And Charles the Emperor, hymself was maruelloustie perplexed, how to taik order for a cessation of these disorders; how to staye the violent course and torrent of these reformers; and how reparation and satisfaction, might be mayd. And therfor he ded appoint Commissioners long after (by his edict 1544.) to enquire of bona Ecclesiae inuasa; for before he could not, hauing had his hands full, and enough to doe, to defend, hym self.
All which things, arr recorded and testified by Cochlaeus, (whose writings vvear published, before Luthers death, and yet was never hither to challenged for anie false information) by Pontanus, Surius, Hortensius, Montfort, Flor, Raemond, Sleydan, and others. I protest and profess, I haue vsed sincearitie, in reporting and citing the euidenc I had from so manie worthie witnesses: and as the Romans vsed to say, at ther making of leagues, Ita me Iupiter, si sciens fallo.
But I feare, yow ar tyred, with hearing Liuius.

so much calamitie at once, and in one contrie; which was wrought partlie by Lutherans, partlie by such as had drawen ther doctrine, owt of Luthers fountaines (for how can the water be vncorrupted, when the spring was so poysoned, and infected at the head?)
I know heare will be great exceptions VVhether Luther may trevvlie be accused, to haue bean the Cavvs of all the^^ troubles. taken against me, that I laye these tumults to Luthers charge, (aswel the insurrection of the Anabaptists, as of the rest aforesayd) who writ vehementlie to reprooue ther actions; and gaue them neither occasion nor harting; and euer disliked the illusions and phantasies of M^ncer and his followers: and neuer was deseruedlie accused for anie doctrine of sedition, hauing oft preached in the defenc of magistrates, and ciuil gouernment, as Doctor bilson affirmeth.
Thouching these excuses, or rather fables; yf yow fynd them all sufficientlie disprooued: I leaue it to yowr iugment, how to censure D. Martin, and his Champions. First examin seriousslie, whether Luther, 1. was a cawse of these trowbles; and yow shall discern plainlie, that his positions and exhortation gaue the principall grovvnd and occasion of all: that his bull against the Cleargie, his inuectiues against all Ecclesiasticall

persons and orders, blew the coles that fyred all, and animated the people, vnder coolor of zeal and reformation to pull down all. For what man is so senceles, that would not be mooued to contemn all authoritie, and seak to enfranchise hym self, and fight vnder the banner of libertie? when he shall heare such a popular sermon, that princes ar tyrants, Bushops blind guides, Religious men Idolators; and that all Christians haue and ought to enioye the great Charter of free libertie, and ar not bownd in conscienc to anie mans lawes and constitutions? And yf he preached such doctrine (as before yow haue partlie hard he ded,) then was not he the Primatiue and cheafe Boutefeu of all?
Cochlaeus in his Miscellanea, citeth this one place of Luthers lib. 1. Exhortat ad pacem. In seculari regimine, nil amplius facitis nisi excoriatis subdito^, ad susimendam pompam vestram, donec diutius ferre non possunt. And afterward. non sunt (...) boni Domini, quisese vobis opponunt: ^^^us ipse est ad visitandam tyrannid^m ves ram. A man can no deuise, to geue the people better harting, to ronn into ryots; then owt of the puipit, to tax the princes for so cryng a sinn, as tyrannie: and to maik God the author to reueng that: speciallie being not bownd in conscienc, to

obey anie humain lawes. But D. Whitacre, 2. Resp. ad Campian ratione 8. saith, It neuer cam into Luther mynd, to pluck in peaces the authoritie of magistrates, which he ded all waies defend against the Anabaptists: and (as D. Bilson affirmeth, Luther ded hold, that the Gospel doth not barr the politick lawes of anie contrie.
I wonder these two great doctors, wold affirm this so confidentlie; knowing first, that though in some places of his books (to bleare the eyes of the world) he had perswaded subiects to obedience, (the contrarie wheareof, it had bean too grosse an error to mantaine:) yet that his practise, and actions vvear fullie contradictorie to that course. And knowing also, that Luther hym self, set it down as a deuine decree l. de captiu. Babilon. c. de baptismo. Ab omnibus hominum legibus exempts sumus, libertate Christiana nobis per baptismum donata. Was this onelie from the Canons, or asvvel from Municipall lawes? I know your Iewel of England, laboured to couer the deformitie of this proposition: which by a sleight euasion, he sought to avoyd, by comparing S. Pauls phrase with Luthers, Galat. 2. Litl to the purpose. But it vvas more fayrlie and conning lie shadowed, by D. whitacre, thus (loco predicto:) saith he. By fa^th men ar free, not that, they may not obey lavves, and

liue ouelie to them selfs: but that they may vnderstand, there consciences and mynds ar freed, from making the lavves of men to be religion (1. to bynd the conscienc.)
And after vvard he saith again, Mans lavves bynd not the conscienc, for then they should bynd in all places alike. And so he concludes in generall, The magistrate is to be obeyed for conscienc, but his particular lavves bynd not the conscienc: that is as in an other place he interprets it, VVe must obey humain lavves, bycaus they arr necessarie for peace; but vve must distinguish them from deuine, vvhich ar simplie to be obeyed, vvithovvt defferenc of tyme, place, or circumstanc, as mans lavves ar.
Thus he defendeth Luther, by interpreting his words: and his interpretation quite overthrovves bot Luthers meaning and words.
For so we ar not by D. withaker exempted from obeying mans lawes, but from obeying them simpliciter, and as deuine; (for it is not the quaestion, which lawes bynd most; secundum magis and minus, Gods lawes or mans, for of that, ther can be no quaestion, no man dovvbts it. But vvhether mans lawes bynd the Conscienc at all; and whether simplie it be a trew proposition ab omnibus hominum ^gib^s exempti sumus? And yf mans lawes doe not bynd the conscienc;

why ded yow think preasts bownd in conscienc, to obey the paenal lawes of England, or to be put to death, for not obeying?
But it is best and playnest dealing to maik Luther, his own expositor, and so trie yf he can be cleared; or yf he prooue not worse, and an enemie to humain lawes.
For in the same book, cap. de Matrimonio. S^io (inquit) nullam rempublicam, legibus faeliciter administrari: and in c. de sacris Ordini. Turpe enim est and iniquiter seruile, Christianum hominem qui liber est, alijsquam caelestibus, and diuinis subiectum esse legibus. In both vvhich places, he is quite contrarie, to D. whitacre, and maiks small accounpt of the statuts of common welths; but as a thing seruile, to be subiect and tyet to obey them.
And S. Thomas Moor, in his Latin book against Luther, affirmes that Tindal (one of Luthers principal disciples in England) in his book of Obedienc taught the same lesson: and he citeth a place from whenc it seams Tindal deriued his opinion. Sc. Dico itaque, neque Papa, neque Episcopus, Not. neque vlius hominum, habeat ius constitu^nd^ vnius sillabae, super hommem christianum, nisi sit eiusdem consensu.
So then obserue it well, and yow shall see, that it bothe cam into Luthers mynd and his penn, to pluck in peaces, the

authoritie of magistrates and lawes.
And the words of Luther litterallie import as much, els what english can yow maik of, ab omnibus hominum legibus exempti sumus? Is it against the Canon law onelie? the words omnibus hominum, teach yow the contrarie; is it to prefer Gods lawe, and religion, comparatiue, before mans? the word (Exempti) vsed simplie, showes the contrarie: and that as we ar freed from the law of the Pope, or constitutions of Bushops: so and in the same degree, we ar (as he holds) exempted from all mans lawes, so as neque vllus hominum, haith power to enact one sillable, wherto he shall be obliged.
Again, yf we be exempted from all lawes; and the magistrate but by lawe, can clayme no obedienc: what conclusion, can yow maik to defend Luther, but in a mood and figure bad enough?
Furthermore, I am perswaded all men of vnder standing will think the verrie words of Luther, plainlie, and in the litteral sence to be daingerous; yf they be not qualified, and bettered by such an interpreter, as D. whitakers. And the plain common people stand not to vvaigh vvords, but taik them in cortice, as the letter imports.
The Bowers could not wrest and straine

them by learning, and maik a gloss quite contrarie to the text: but they took hold of that exposition, which was best agreable to ther appetites, and serued most fitlie to open them a passage to libertie, (vvich was ther end and scope.)
And D. Whitaker hym self, seing he could not iustifie the words, sought to defend the meaning therof, by a deuise and sence of his own making, vvhich he inspireth into the words.
But Luther excellentlie expresseth his own meaning libro ad nobilit atem Germanie; for as of the Imperial chamber at Spyres, he had giuen this sentenc, Tribunal Camerae Imperialis, ecce quam diabolica est meretrix: so hear he saith, Ferunt nulium esse pulchrius regimen, quam apud Turcam, qui tamen neque Canonicum neque ciuile ius habet, sed solum Alchoranum. At nos fateri oportet nusquam esse turpius regimen, quam apud nos per ius ciuile and Canonicum.
Novv ballance and examin this vvel; end that vvil determin the controuersie; we accuse Luther, that he vvould abolish all lavves, and that men should be ruled onelie by the gospell, and that vpon such his doctrine the paisants wear incooraged to taik armes.
No saith maister vvhitaker, it vvas not

Luthers meaning (for the words he could not denie) to abrogate the authoritie of lawes; but his meaning was they ded not bynd the conscienc.
Now what Luther meant, appeared by seuerall places before, but now he explayneth all, and leaues no dowbt. For heare he reiecteth all lawes both ciuil and canon, and setts this brand of infamie vpon them, nusquam turpius regimen: and ioynes both the lavves sub eodem iugo, to dravv after the Alchoran, and come short of that: and so he reiecteth and disgraceth the positiue and politick lawes of Germanie.
For vvho vvould obeye lavves vvorse then the Alchoran? or obey magistrates, vvho govern by them, worse then the Bashavves? Novv seing no man can defend Luthers vvords, and the fruits and effects thereof (the conspiracie of the Bovvers) being inexcusable: I may vvell conclude, that Luther vvas much, yf not most to blame, for these the first tumults of Germanie. But I will yet maik that, a litl more playne, by the testimonies of learned writers. Hospinian, (in historia Sacramentaria:) Iutherus (haith he) belli Germanici causa non leuis.
O^ ander centur. 16 p. 16. Rustici iuramento confoederati seditionem excitarunt, contra

quosdam proceres Ecclesiasticos. Causam pretendebant quasi Euangelij doctrinamtueri, etc. and he adds this, that ad ^utheri iudicium prouocauerunt. (For they ded altogether build vpon his grownds, and writings; speciallie the bull; which no man can defend by law; how soever they may cloke that, by pretenc of the gospell.)
How Erasmus in Hyperaspite, condemnes hym for that, his words declare. Populus (inquit) iste Euangelicus, quos tumultus excitat? quoties, quam leuibus de causis procurrit ad arma* nesuis quidem Ecclesiasticis sat is obtemperans, nisi dicant blandia auribus.
And in an other place. Excussa est obedientia Episcoporum, which was onely Luthers work,) sed ita vt ne profanis quidem magistratibus pareatur. And Menno Simonius an Anabaptist, libro de cruce Christi. Quam sangumolentas seditiones, Luther ani, ad comprobandam doctrinam suam, annis aliquot proximis excitarunt. Which they alledged; aswel for the warr of the Bowers, as for the leaguers of Smalcald, both which he occasioned.
And touching that obiection, that Luther ded vvrite contra rusticos, and against ther vproares: and preached obedienc, perswaded them to that: and vehementlie condemned the Anabaptists; it is trew, he ded so. But it was onelie a fallacian, to avoyd

the scandal: for when he see, they wear not like to stand and mantain ther quarrel, he left them in the briars, though they appealed to hym: and bycause at that tyme, he was much condemned, as a medium and instrument of that sedition.
And ther for he reprooued Pacimontan (a principal Anabaptist) for diuulging, that he was ther frend, and fauoured ther proceadings: and reprehended them all, as yf they had transgressed his bull (ther commission) in committing owtrages against secular Princes and Magistrates, (though he hym self, ded most seditiouslie inuaigh against them also.)
Neither can yow think iustlie, that all (who ded rise with Muncer and caused the tumults after) wear onelie Anabaptists: for what was Fra^ces Sicking, and his fellowers? Lutherans. What wear those of Frankfort, Mentz, and Coolen, Lutherans.
The Bowers also, vsed for ther defenc, Luthers Homelies, and sermons: they wear all for reformation, and noueltie: all against the Church of Roome, and ther own Bushops: all for Libertie: and ther watchword, was viuat Euangelium, as yf it had bean, a feald fough for religion, and the Church.
And this confirms me stronglie against Luthers praesumptuons intention, to abrogate

all lawes; bycause he took vpon hym to enact new lawes in disgrace of the ou^d, as yf he had bean the head of the Church, and Christ; vicegerent. For after he had burned the Popes Canons, and abolished the Mass: he mayd a new form of the Masse hym self; and ded institute new ceremonies propria authoritate* which before he denied that the Pope could doe.
And what was his pretenc? Libro de formula Missae, Coactus sum (saith he) propter leues and fastidiosos spiritus, sc. his own fellowers, qui sola nouitate gaudent, atque statim vt nouitas desijt, nauseantes; alios Canones, aliamque missandi formulam perscribere.
Of which Erasmus, gaue this opinion. Interim constitutiones humanae, constitutionibus humanis (imo parum humanis) mutantur Titul is modo mutatus est, vocantur enim verbum Dei Luther, ded chaing and maik voyd the Constitutions of men, by new constitutions of his own, (which had litl humanitie in them.) The title onely was chainged, for he gaue them the name of Gods word.
But all this, quo vvarranto, was it doon? Is it tollerable, for Luther a priuate man, withowt anie euident authoritie, or express commission, to disanull all lawes, and maik a Metamorphosis of the world, at

his pleasure? but his vocation, his ministerial power, his iurisdiction, was extraordinarie: he was sent, as an Elias, to discover and confwnd Antichrist. I think in dead he was sent, and God permitted hym to visit his church: as he permitted Satan to visit holie Iob.
That so by haeresie and tyrannie, he might awake the world, reuiue deuotion, and be a mean to punish sinn, and purge ill humors, (which could not but a litl infect the natural bodies of the visible church, after so maine hundred yeares, of peace and plentie.)
It may be, that he fownd the lights in the church burning some what too dimm. Yet tho he ded snuff it, he had no povver either to put owt the candl, or remooue the candlstick. For haeresies doe oft geue fitt occasio^s, to stirr vp the churchment to more discipline: to open and explain the senc of scripture: and to exercise the patienc, wisedome, and pietie of the Church.
And so Luther may be sayd to haue preserued religion, as the Romans sayd, that Anseres seruabant capitolium.
But of Luther, and Elias, his vocation and Apostleship; I shall haue occasion much fitter, to discourse hearafter and to Canonise hym in a Calender more proper

for his holienes: being now desyrous to declare the Catastrophe of this miserable Tragedie, he set foorth in Germanie, rather to be lamented then discoursed.
The former attempts, wear vndertaken against the cleargie, and the princes: but I will now relate, an enterprise against both the Empyre, and the Emperor hym self, and by the mightiest princes of Almaine whear in Luther, was causa sine qua non.
Old Iolm Frederick, Duke of Saxonie, together with the Lansgraue of Hessen, and diuers others (all protectors of Luther, and his gospell,) first entred into a league at Smalcald, (a town in Henssia, vpon the fronters of Saxonie) onelie for ther own defenc, and the maintenanc of ther religion and liberties, (for bothe of these ioyntly ar now mayd the vsual cloke, of conspiracies) against all men, that should in vade, and seak to persequute them. (And in this league weare comprehended the Duke of Wirte^berg and diuers Imperiall tovnes.)
The which league, was again renewed at Frankfort; and confirmed with generall and solemn protestation, (vvhearupon there and at Auspurgh the name of Protestants, was deriued originallie.)
After that, anno 1536. fearing least the Emperor should either preuent, or circumvent

them, they prepared to come into the feald, with a mightie armie whearof the yong Duke of Saxonie, Iohn Frederick, (his father being dead) and the Lansgraue wear ganeralls: vvho resolued by armes to fynd right; or to maik right. The Duke of Wirtemberg assisted them.
The Imperiall towns, Auspurgh, Vlm, Strasburgh, and Frankfort sent them ayd.
The Count Palatine, leuied two hundred horse for them, (but wiselier reuoked them, being on the vvaye:) the Duke of Brunsvvig and his sonnes, the Duke of Lunenburgh, the yong Marques of Baden, the Princ D'Anhald, the Counts of Furstenbergh and Mansfeald, ioyned vvith them, in person and povver.
So as the armie contayned abovvt threskore and ten thovvsant men (vvheareof ther vvas 7700. horse,) and 112. Cannons and feald peaces, vvith infinite prouision, and almost the hope of an assured victorie.
The eyes of all princes, vvear fixed vpon this action: and all Germanie trembled, expecting the event, and success of this great armie, (prepared to svvallovv vp the Emperor, vvho had onelie king Ferdinand, the Duke of Bauier, and the Duke of Cleaue, assured to hym:) (for tho Duke

Maurice ded follow, the Emperor, yet was he sonn in law to the Landsgraue, and might be suspected also for his religion.)
I will not tell yow, a tedious tale and impertinent, the event was this.
The emperor (for all this huge preparation,) became maister of the feald and Conqueror: the tvvo generalls (a rare accident) vvear bothe taken prisoners, and ther armie defeated.
The Duk of Saxonie (an honorable man) and much pittied, had his lyfe giuen, and conniuenc for his religion. but his impregnable fort of Gotha vvas Demolished, Ne^. and the electorate and the lands therto belonging, wear bestowed by the Emperor vpon Duke Morrice.
The like mercie for his leyfe, was showed to the Landsgraue. The Duke of Wittenbergh (for two hundred thovvsand Duckets,) and the Imperial townes, vpon ther petition and submission, by the mediation of Angels and Duckets, sollicited and mayd ther peace with the Emperor.
And so by the prouidenc of God, and prosperitie of Cesar: the Empyre was preserued, and keapt in statu quo prius: and the Electores Ecclesiasticall and Prelates, wear still continued, and ther dignities mantained.

Tho by all probabilities, it may well be coniectured, that as these great princes had in ther own prouincies, extinguished, and buried, the title, state, and Iurisdiction of Bushops: so yf they had wonn the glorie of the daye, and had bean conquerors, they vvold haue vsed the same deformation in all the empyre.
Yf yovv ask, hovv this vvarr of the That this vvar vvas vulavv. full. Princes ded concern Luther, of Lutheranisme? Or hovv he, or his religion, vvear to be condemned as the motiues of that? Or whether the Actors them selfs, could be iustlie accused, for that rebellion! I must ansvver, that Greathes, and Innouation; never vvanted patrons to defend them, not vvitt to coolor ther falts.
D. Bilson, in his book of the difference 1. D Bilsons opinion. betwean Christian subiectio^ an vnchristian rebellion, to palliat the falt, and excuse both Luther, and the Confaederats, affirmeth that the lawyers of Germanie (but he nameth none in particular) ded permit Resistance: coninglie insinwating that the Lawes ded permitt and tollerate the protestants to resist. And secondlie, that the States of Germanie, wear not absolutelie subiect to the Emperor, but Conditionallie. And therfor he concludes with a quare, why should not the states of Germanie,

enioye the same liberties, and securitie ther forefathers ded: and so he concludes that, wheareof no man mayd quaestion; and is nothing, to the matter in question.
The Deuines of Magdeburg, held 2. Osi^^der Centur 16. this opinion. That yf the magistrate passe the bownds of his authoritie, and comma^d things wicked and vnlaw full he may well be resisted, and not obeyed.
And Sleydan l. 19. fol. 263. saith, vve 3. may resist Caesar, vvith good conscience, intending a destruction bothe of religion, and libertie.
But Philip Melancthon, lib. Consil. 4. Euangelic. parte 1. pag. 314. confidentlie enableth, the inferior magistrate, to alter religion, and ouerthrow Idolatrie. And so they conclude this warr was lawfull and allowable, both by gods lavv, and mans, se defendendo.
Hear is a harmonie of fovvre parts, and yet all to mantain Discords, and impugn the magistrates authoritie: and they containe the substa^c of the reasons, alledged by the Duke and the Landsgraue, both vvhen the league vvas first mayd at Smalcald; and aftervvard, vvhen they proclaimed vvar against the Emperor.
Novv yf yovv examin vvel these seuerall

Doctors opinions, yow shall fynd therby, that it must first be prooued, 1. That Caesar passed the bownds of his authoritie, (or els it is playne they passed theirs:) 2. Secondlie that he commanded things wicked and vngodlie, and against gods commandement. Thirdlie that he went abowt to Destroye trew religion, and ther libertie; and all these must be doon, before it be lawfull to taik armes and resisthym, (for to resist onelie, is ther pretence.)
I wil first demand of them this quaestion. When Caesar or the supreme magistrate, commandeth anie thing to be doone, (which is not apparentlie, against the lawes of the Empyre, then in force) who is to be Censor, whether Caesar passeth the bownds of his authoritie? and whether the things he commandeth be impious ar no? They answer he ded absolutelie seak to ouerthrow ther liberties, and trew religion, scilicet, Lutheranism (which is fownded vpon the trew preaching of the word, and administration of the sacraments.) This surelie is not a sufficient answer, ad idem and to my question: and yet I may replie, that it is, and haith bean an old and vsual stratagem of Satan, to oppose religion against religion: that so, he might bring in Atheisme, and leaue vs no religion. Besides

they maik that ther principal argument, (the presumption, of the^ trew religion whearof Caesar at wormes, mayd the greatest quaestion, and so they infer ignotum per ignotius.
Add therfor to this, that they when they ded: presume to establish a nevv religion; ded passe them selfs, the bownds of ther authoritie.
The world might iudge Caesar a verrie simpl Prince, yf he wowld either haue changed his religion or tollerated theirs, vpon the bare credit, of Luthers priuate spirit and opinion, or vpon the protestation of the Confaederates.
For think yow them co^petent Iudges of the Cleargie; or to decyde what should be receaued in the Empyre, for trew religion?
Can religion lavvfullie, and orderlie be changed, by temporal magistrates onelie? and vvhen neither a general counsel, nor a national councel hath decreed it, nor anie Imperial Dyet, haith established it? May euer^ie elector or prince, frame for his prouinc by law, a religion of a nevv Cutt, withowt the consent of the Emperor and the states? Geue me an instanc, show a president, when anie such innouation was mayd in the Empyre, withovvt an Imperial Dyet; or els as ther taking armes

was withowt Iustice, so ther quarrelis withovvt lavvfull grovvnd. Further more, vvas it lavvfull for the Confaederates, to coyne a nevv religio^ and taik armes for the defenc of that: and vvas it not more lavvfull for the Emperor to fedenc the old receaued religion, and to reform them?
The Rustiks took armes vpon the same pretenc, for religion and libertie: and yet the Confaederates, vvith ther ovvn forces, and vvith great iustice and honor ded subdevv the Bovvers. Why then might not Caesar compell the leaguers to exercise the religion established, vvith a Quousque, and to obey the lavves not a brogated, and keap the peac of the common vvelth, vvithovvt disturbance? For the degree and dignitie of the persons: doth not maik the same case different.
But they obiect that Caesar intended and plotted to Destroye them, and ther liberties, for religion; and ther for they vvear forced to taik armes. Weigh this vvell and yovv shal see it vvanteth vveight. It vvas surelie inexcusable for Defendants, to leuie and lead an armie into the feald against Caesar, vvho vvas not in the feald against them, nor had anie forces readie a long tyme after. They marched to beseag the Emperor, and ded Driue hym to fortifie

hym self, and come into the feald vvith a handfull of men; and then vvith great furie set vpon his camp, vvho had much a doe, to Defend hym self: far from offending them.
But the Emperor (saith D. Bilson) is not to be obeyed by the states, which absolute obedienc, for they ar his subiects, but ex conditione. So then he maketh Caesar Emperor, but ex conditione. And yf maister Bilson meaneth therby to charge Caesar (as the Hollanders ded the king of Spayne,) with the oath taken at his coronation, to obserue ther lawes, and defend ther liberties: and so taik that for a condition: the like oath is taken, by all kings and princes Successiue, as wel as Electiue And yf yovv haue deuised a trick to vnking them, when yow think they performe not punctuallie, each article of ther oaths: surelie yow then may be iustlie tearmed a most learned doctor, to maik nullities. And yet I think, yf anie man preach this doctrine at Powles Crosle, he haith great luck, yf he answer not for it, at Towre hill.
But I wil leaue skirmishes, and come to the maine poynt. It may iustlie be affirmed, that Caesar ded obserue the lavve: and that the leaguers ded violate both the lavves, and liberties of Germanie. For

what prince so euer stands rectus in Curia, and haithe the ancient lawes to back and warrant hym; must neads be iudged to hold a better and lawfull plea, then subiects armed against ther prince with priuat opinions onelie, nouelties, and an Alchoran of ther own making.
But at that tyme, by lawe, Caesar was bownd rather to banish and extirpate Lutheranisme, then to tollerate the same: for yt is manifest, that he was obliged by the oath at his Coronation, expresslie and particularlie, to defend the Pope, the Catholick Church, and the religion thereof. This is a matter of fact, and can not be contradicted, as yowr own Coldastus knovveth and acknowledgeth.
Neither was yt a new oath: for the same in effect was taken, by Carolus 4. Otho 3 Otho 1. and Carolus Magnus, which is a praescription, for tyme good enough, and for reason vndisputable. And the like profession, yow shall fynd to be mayd, by the ancient reuerend Emperors, Iustinian, Theodosius, Gratian, and others bothe in the Code, and Nouel constitutions.
So then how could the Emperor either mantain or suffer anie other religion (as authentical) then that vvhich he fovvnd established in the Empyre, allovved by

all his predecessors, warranted by so manie councels, continued so manie generations, racified by the diets, and confirmed by his own oath.
Yet bycause D. Bilson averreth, that it was co^sonant to the opinion of the lawyers of Germanie: examin whether, the Duke of Saxonie and the Landsgraue when they wear taken prisoners, vsed anie such argument, for ther excuse. No, Syrabsolutelie they submitted them selfs, and craued his pardon at whose pleasure they wear, to stand or fall: to die or liue. There ill case, could not maik a good cawse ill: but ther ill cawse, mayd ther case ill and stand in nead of commiseration.
And what a ridiculous reason had it bean for them, to haue pleaded: that it was lawfull for subiects by the svvord to defend ther religion.
For yf it wear lawfull for the elector of Saxonie to taik armes of defenc of Luthe ranisme, bycause he was persuaded, ther was no other veritie, no other religion infallible, but Luthers: why might not the Count Palatine (with the same pretext) taike armes for Caluinism; and a Halbeistat for Epicurisme, and a Muncer for Anabaptisme? And so by an Anarchie, vnder coolor of ther liberties, and the prerogatine of

conscience, rend in peaces the Empyre, and open the ports of Germanie to let in the Turck. But to stopp the mouthes of school learned ignorance, I will discouer and laye Down the fowndation of this great quarrel, and the legall order and reason of Caesars procreading.
Anno 1521. The Emperor hauing conferred personallie with Luther at wormes: and owt of his speciall grace and benignitie, hauing required the Archbushop of Trier, and the Elector of Brandenburgh, to treat with hym, and perswade Luther to conformitie and peace: and perceauing his obstinacie, and insolencie, refusing to submitt hym self: and finding that all his course, his books, and his sermons ded tend to sedition: he mayd a Decree, with the generall consent of the states, not to put hym to death (such was his mercie:) but to banish hym owt of the empyre (wheatin he showed More lenitie, then prouidenc.) In which So God^astus and Cocleus. decree, after that at large he had set Down the cawses and reasons of the act, he concludes thus Mandates, de corumdem statuum consensu, sub crimmelesae Majestatis, ac omissionis feudorum, dommiorum, bonorum, priuilegiorum, a nobis ac sacro Imperio dependentium; ac proscriptionis and Banni, etc. Ne quis vestrum, prefatum, M. Lutherum, recipere, sustentare

praesumat, and vt libros suos seditioso^ ac haereticos comburatis, etc. And this edict, vvas directed, to the Electors, Princes, townes, and states. Now can yow imagin, that the Duke of Saxonie or the Landsgraue, wear exempted from this edict? or that the Emperor by vertue thereof, had not as full power to call them to ansvver for ther contempts, as anie inferior persons? Doe yovv taik the Princes electors to be such Ephori, or transcendents, that they may bridle and curb the Emperor in the execution of Iustice? as yf the Emperor wear but a shadow in Germanie, titulus sine re, and as yf imperium in imperio quaerendum esset: (which by Bodines leaue, I will maik appear to be an error.) But after this Decree, the Duke of Saxonie ded harbor Luther at Alstat (a town of his ovvn in Turingia, which Luther called his Pathmos, whear he composed manie reuelations and misteries:) and there he prouided for his rest and securitie, and in the interim setled and planted Lutheranism in all his dominions) (notwithstanding the decree: and entered into the league of Smalcald, for maintenanc thereof.
All which actions, that yovv may^ vnder sta^d how directlie they ar against lawe, and Iustice: Let Andrew Gayle deliuer his opinion.

Libro de Pace publica cap. 10. @. 36. Receptores Bannitorum, perinde puniantur, atque Banniti, Domini praediorum tenentur reos exhibere, and learned Brunus lib. 1. de haeres. c. 4. In excommunicatis, qui bannitis comparari solent, vnica receptio noxia est. Now Luther was both banished, and excommunicated. And Gayle in an other place, Qui bannito Commeatum and annonam suppeditat, paena receptorum ordinaria tenetur. Per aduenture, yovv may think, that the Duke (Luthers Mecenas) was not tyed with in this tedder: these lavves vvear in force, for meaner subiects: ther for that learned Gayle, shall maik his own comment, lib. 1. c. 1. @. 9. de Pace publica saith he, Conditio pacis publicae, omnes omnium ordinum status Imperij, maiorum and minorum ge^tium; cuiuscunque dignitatis personas aeque obligat, etsi contra Potentiores sit promulgata. So as the greater the person is, the more he is bovvnd to obey the lavve. But the Duke not obeying the law, and kovving that Caesar had oft vvritten ovt of Spayn, to haue the edict of vvormes strictlie executed: fearing Cesars indignation, intred into a league, took armes, and so ded aggrauate both his ovvn, and his fathers offenc, and thought them vnpardonable.
Yet after that league, the Emperors

Embassador, 1529. at Spyres, offred vnto the leaguers most aequall and moderate articles, viz. vtrinque ab omni iniuria, and damno, and conuitijs abstinerent: and quod transgressores contrahaec sint proscribendi. Who vvould not thing this a reasonnable offer, from the supreme magistrate, to the inferiors, that stood in dainger of lawe? the Catholiques could never hope for so much in Q. Elizabeths tyme. Yet vvas this refuled and reiected.
Again at Auspurg 1530. Caesar verrie graciouslie entertained the Duke, and receaued his petition exhibited, vvith as much fauor and indifferencie, as he might with his honor. And there againe he reuiued his Embassadors former motion, that no more innouations should be mayd: nor moe books to be by them published: but that all things, should stand quietlie and peacable, till 17. May next. So much ded he yeald, to them, for desyre of peace, and for the publick good of Europe (the Turk hauing so latelie before beseaged Vienna, and taken Rhodes.) Not vvith standing the Duke reiected the motion, and much displeased the Emperor therby: (vvho plainlie replied, that yf they obeyed not, they should repent it. And yet againe (tho thus prouoked rather to dravv his svvord)

at Spyres, he ded labor by persvvasion to ^reuayle quietlie vvith them (but thither the Duke, ovvt of I ealousie and feare, vvould not come at all) tho he was summoned.
By this course yow may iudg how vnwiling Caesar was, to disturb the peace of the ^mpyre, or to enter into an offensiue warr, ^eaking to winn the^ so oft, and so graciou^lie. So as it was the more inexcusable, for men that pretended onelie to defend ^hem selfs: to reiect peace, vvhen it vvas offred: and then to offend by taking armes, before they weare offended.
If I should relate the mallice and contempt they showed of hym? yow might conceaue, that they could never haue hoped, to haue fownd a spark of mercie in his hart, towards them.
For in all ther publick acts and letters, ^hey vouchsafed to geue hym no other ti^le, then Charles of Gandt, vsurping the name of the Emperor: wherby they renounced all obedienc to hym, and deposed hym, as farr as laye in ther power (which was an indignitie, which a wise prince could ^ardlie swallow with patienc.)
I may not forget, how the Landsgraue ingreat brauerie, both by letters and messagers, assured the citties and Princes of

ther confederation (perhaps therby, to procure a larger contribution:) and engaged his promise, that with in thre months they would force Charles to flie owt of Germanie, and abandon the empyre.
How then ded these things coheare? That this holie league was mayd onelie se defendendo, and to resist, for ther law full protection: and yet to strike the first blow, inuade the Emperor, offend first, and promise to expell hym owt of Germanie; before he offered anie toke^ of hostilie against them, or they had iust and euident cawse, to march into the feald. And long before that, they sollicited the kings of France, England, and Denmark, the Hans townes, and Swisses, to ioyn with them in league against hym: (whome they dishonored, and prouoked, vvith most infamous libells, and vnvvorthie aspersions.) France (tho an enemie) noblie denied them. Denmark lingred, expecting the succes: king Harrie was not forwars, tho Cromwel diligentlie sollicited ther cawse, and promised them 100. thowsand crownes for ther ayd. And at that tyme D. Thirlebie Bushop of westminster, and Syr Philip Hobbie, wear the kings Embassadors with the Emperor; and wear wituesses and spectators of the whole Tragedie.

Lastlie to disprooue these there proceadings by lawe: Remember first the decree at Wormes: read the edict of Maximilian the 1. anno 1495. and 1500. the words ar these. Consentientibus stautum and ordinum imperij votis, necessarium de pace publica constitutionem, landifrieden promu^garunt: quapacem publicam, armata manu violantibus, p^na proscriptionis, (quam bannum imperiale appellamus) irrogatur: Scil vitae, necisque. And to explain that, A. Gayl l. 1. c. 14. de Pace publica. Omnia bella (in quit) quae in^^^su summi principis Imperatoris, puta, vel sine eius licentia geritur, priuata quadam vindicia, in iusta sunt.
And afterward, cap. 5. he puts bothe Sleydan, Bilson, and the and by law, ouerthrowers all ther foundations. In crimen lesae maiestat is incidit, qui bellum in imperio sine Caesaris licentia mouet: quia vsurpat sibi ea, quae sunt solins principis, and mouere bellum ad solum imperatorem pertinet. So also Goldastusl. 1. tit. 190. cites this ancient law, Nemo intra imperis fines, suis alienisueditionibus, militem sollicito, nise de voluntate ducis isius circuli, caeueatque fide iussione statuum, nihil se, in Caesarem, principes, subditos, and clientes Impers moliturum.
And in tomo 2. he produceth a decree of Ludouicus Pius, against the king of the Romans, and his confaederates, guiltie of

high treason, for attempting against the Emperor (wherby the king was iudged to loose his head.) The like ded Henrie the first, against Arnulphus Duke of Bauier, who had rebelled against hym. And Otho the 1. ded asmuch, against Ludolphus king of the Romans. I will conclude all with one exemble, late, memorable, and to our purpose. Maximilian the 1. ded forbed all subiects of the empyre, to gene ayd to the french king in his warrs. Emicho, Earl of Lingen in contempt of the edict, went into France, and tooke paye of the french king for hym and his companies. The Emperor being aduertised thereof, proclaymed hym traytor, gaue the spoyle of his howse, and confiscation of his lands to the princes of the empire, irrecouerablie. Novv yf Maximilian, might thus punish Emicho by lavv, for going to ayd France, contrarie to his proclamation: what might he haue downe, yf he had taken armes against hym self, (as the confaederats ded against Charles.) And for the Imperiall townes, ther fault was most grosse, and deserued most punishment. for Ciuium Imperalium, solum Imperator Dominus est, non magistratus municipalis. And touching ther liberties, ans freedome, Gayle sayd trewlie and iudiciouslie, Germanicae libertatis iniqua est iactatio, against

the Emperor. So then I refer it to the Iudgment, of anie vnpartial Iudg, whether the action, and proceading, of these two noble and greate persons, for ther religion, and defenc of Lutheranisme, weare warrantable by lawe, or no: and speciallie, being directlie against the Emperor, and the religion established in the Empyre.
And concerning Luther hym self: bycause he was the primum mobile, of all these motions, in that Orbe: and the malus genius, that inspired the people and conducted and directed all; and for the defenc of whose doctrine, all these swords wear drawen: cann yow think, yf the Princes wear faultie, that he is free and innocent? Yf the flock ded err, that the shephard was not to blame? I omitt to charg hym vvith small falts, as with publishing vntruthe to defame Caesar: Wormaciam ingressus sum, etiam cum scirem mihi violatam a Caesare, fidem publicam. A fable, and fiction. I omitt that scandalous sentenc, in hatred and contempt of the empyre, Nouum imperium erexit Papa, transferens id a Graecis ad Romanos, quod inter caetera opera Antichristi, vel principale, vel maximum portentum est. (As yf the empyre, wear a new building framed by Antichrist, and the sacred Imperial crown, wear as odious and irreligions, as the Turbant of

Soliman.) I vvill recapitulate nothing of his misdemeanors vvhich, I haue alledged before, towards the Emperor and Princes: I will not accuse hym for vsurping the regalities of Caesar, and for making and publishing politick Lawes De communi fisco, (one of the greatest marks of sooueraintie:) and how the reuennues of the church should be employed, when the Abbeies wear pulled downe, (though that proiect wear as good, as an exhortation to ruine and pull them downe.)
1. Onelie I will lay to his charge, first that he counselled the Princes to taik armes, and resist Caesar (seing the extremitie, and that religion could not be othervvise defended.) The which Sleydan hym self confesseth to be trevv, and ther for neads no other proose.
2. Secondlie, his endeauor, perswasion, and co^spiracie, to suppresse the Ecclesiasticall Electors, subuert ther estate, and so consequentlie, to overthrovv the Aurea Bulla (which is a fundamentall lawe in the empyre:) vvas directlie either an action of treason, or in the highest degree of sedition. For seing the thre Ecclesiasticall Electors (the thre Chancelors of the Empyre) ar immediatelie subiect to the Emperor, in respect of ther regalities, so as ther is no

appeal from them to the Pope, but to the Emperor, and Spyres: Luther contriuing to ruine them, purposed to pull the fayrest flowre owt of the imperial crowne. Besides he could not suppresse them, but he must likewise overthrow with them, all the grownds of ther title and clayme: and so should he also for companie, abrogate all the authoritie of the temporall Electors, (who haue no other charter to plead, then the Ecclesiasticals haue:) and so should maister Whitakers, then haue sean that (which he would not beleaue that Luther had rent in peaces, all the vvhole state, lavves, and maiestie of the empyre.
3. And novv I vvill end vvith an intollerable trespass, recited by Cochlaeus in Miscellaneis. Either Luther, (vvhich by his style is likest) or a Lutheran (vvhich is aequiualent) thus confidentlie vvriteth, after the league of Smalcald vvas concluded. Atque vt ora cis obturem, ex iure ipsorum seculari: Papa and Caesar, non nati, sed electi sunt principes, and qui possunt deponi, id quod propter eorum male facta sepe factum est, etc. And shortly after, an non sunt in memoria hominum, reges and Caesares, etiam hoc modo, a suis subditis expulsi? And then he logicallie inferreth, Hunc ergo exactorem (meaning Caesar) hunc Moab, Phalarim, Neronem, sedibu^

deturbare, summum beneplacitum est Deo. May not I now iustlie conclude, that both the Doctor and the Doctrin ar seditious? For as his cawse, was not manifestlie good in se, nor quoad nos, and to our vnder standing (and surelie it is requisite that so great an innouation, should be evidentlie demonstrated,) before it be receaued and publicklie approoued; so was his course most irregular and turbulent, neither regarding lawes, nor reuerencing and obeying princes. Novv yf the Ancients and statesmen, well prouided, for the direction and managing of temporall affayres, that the priuate iudgment of Solon Licurgus, or Cato is but held as opinion, till by parliement it be enacted for a law: a fortiore, how can yovv hold it fitt, that in matters touching the sowle and saluation, the priuate opinion of Luther should be reuerenced and receaued as an Oracle, before it be decreed either by Councel or Synode? And therfor, by the lawe of nations, and reason of state, Mecaenas gaue this wise counsel to Augustus, as an axiome contra Nouatores, as Dyon recordeth. Libro 52. Eos qui in Diuinis aliquid innouant, od^o habe and coerce: non deorum solum causa (quos tamen qui contemnit, nec sane aliud quidquam magni fecerit: sed quia noua quaedam numina i^ tales introducentes,

multos impellunt ad mutationes rerum. Vnde coniurationes, seditiones, conciliabula, (res profecto minimum conducibilis principatui.) And surelie by such innouation ded Luther insinuate hym self into the fauor of the princes, and therby cast the vvhole empyre into such conulsions; as it will hardlie ever recouer the former strenth and vigor. But I will end this matter fayrelie, and condemn hym by his own mouthe, and by the sentenc he pronounced hym self in the like case, against the Sacramentaries and Anabaptists, (for some tymes this mad doctor, had lucida internalla, and could discern reason.) tom. 3. VVittenber. fol. 488. Enarrat. in psal. 82. saith he. Neque is (se sectarius) in quem animaduertitur, per magistratum, cogitur ad fidem etc. Sed prohibetur and opprimitur impia doctrina, qua illum, in caeti^ existens Christiano, contra Deum and doctrinam Christianam blasphemat, in summam perniciem Christianae religionis.

^at alias, quouis gentium, vbinon sunt Christiani, ibi effundat sup^entiam suam.


Nam vt sepe dixt, qui in aliqua ciuitate viuere
Nota.
vult, is ^^ri alligatus est municipali: neque ferendus est, si contra illud aget aut loquatur. Sic legimus quod patres in Concilio Niceno cum Arrianorum audirent dogma recitari, protenus ^oc explodendum s^n^ vlla cognitione duxerunt.

etc. Moyses etiam in lege tales blasphemos precipit lapidari. Sic etiam ibi, indicta causa and in audita damnandi sunt, etc.

Nam tales generales articuli, recepti in tota Ecclesia satis auditi, satis sunt approbati. satis fir^ati per scripturam, per miracula, per sanguinem martyrum, per scripta and confessionem totius Eccles^ae. Nec vl^o modo ferendus est vllus sapien^ulus, qui illos reuocare velit in dubium etc. and pag. 489. St T. Munceri audaciae, and Carolostadij conatibus cito esset itum obuiam, tunc cum in alienis Ecclesi^s and domibus, clanculum, and sine vocatione spargebant sua dogmata, minus publicarum calamitatum vidissemus. Now applie these, to his ovvn course, and his ovvn doctrine: and he must neads perish by his ovvn breath; and by his own verdit against his antagonists, he doth dravv an enditement against hym self, against Muncer, against the Princes, and against all those that taik armes for religion against ther soouerain Lords.

TITVLVS SECVNDVS OF CALVINISM.
I Will heare leaue Germanie, and launch of Caluin, and tho vvarres in France. owt into an Ocean of as great miseries in France: and examin there, vvhether

Caluinism doth prepare and dispose the harts of that peopl to mere obedienc, humilitie, and patienc, then Lutheranisme ded. The first author and fownder of this sect was vld. Swinglius, (whose Followers Luther Called Sacramentaries, the french named them Huguenots:) but now they haue ther title and denomination from Caluin, (who as a Transcendent, haith overshadowed and obscured the glorie and name of Swinglius; and is solie reuerenced, as the Patriarch of Geneua, and the Architect, that framed all ther state and discipline: and ordered all the motions of that Sphere, with much art and pollicie. For as Lutger was harsh, stearne, and violent, neither vsing modestie nor goot manners: so Caluin was more cautelous, of a more subtil spirit, and appeared at first to the world, in humilitie, and couered with the foxes skin. Luther was the original cawse; but Caluin glorieth that he gaue the perfection of all. So both of them weare glorious, both bred in the school of law and contention: both special frends to pleasure and the flesh, and neither of them commended much for pietie or deuotion.
For the description of the lyfe and conversation of Caluin; of his nature, behauiour, delicacie of diet, and physical epicurisme:

I referr yovv to one, that sat long by hym to dravv his picture, Viuis coloribus, Doctor Hierome Bols^k one that was vsed to feale his pulse, and know his humors.) A man not hyred, nor corrupted to doe that (as some withowt producing anie proofe haue affirmed, and ^o withowt credit may as vvell be reiected.) Speciallie considering, that Frances Baldwin concurreth vvith hym, both in the portraicture and coolors: who was a famous lawyer, one that liued with Caluin, and knew what blood was noorished in euerie vayne of his bodie. The like was doone by Florimond de Remond, a gentlman of qualitie, Claudius de Saincts, and diuers others who haue left vs the liuelie image of Caluin, and of fine maister Theodore Beza, who succeaded hym in his chayre and iurisdiction, like a vertuous man: a pastor vsurping an other mans parish, and the husband of an other mans wyfe: euer further in loue then charitie, and of better disposition to show witt, then pietie.
And as I vvill not medl with ther vertues and liues: so wil I leaue to the more learned there schoolpoynts and doctrine, intending onelie to deliuer ther seditious paradoxes, and demonstrate to the world, how much both ther r^fyned discipline and doctrine

doth derogate from Royaltie, and the soouerain authoritie of kings and princes: and how much it is more fau^rable to democracie and popularitie, as more consonant to the aduancement of there confisiorie and eldorship (vvherby they haue vvrought much confusion, sedition and mischeafe.)
I will beginn with Caluin, vvho goeth slilie to vvork, and by certan degrees; and not so bluntlie, and rudelie as Luther.
1. First he labors to commend Aristocratia, and abase Monarchies: (onelie and secretlie to preferr the reputation of his Consistorie and Sanhedrim) l. 4. Cap. 20. v. 10. of his instit. non id quidem per se sed hominum vit^o And vvhat is his reason? quia raris^me contingit reges sibt moderari: deinde tanto a^umine and prudentia instructos esse, vt vnusquisque videat quantum satis est. So he maiks yt, daintie, to fynd a vvise and temperate king, and therfor he concludeth, facit ergo hominum def^ctus, vt ^u^ius ^it ac magis tollerabile, plures tenere guberna^ula Sc. the defects of Princes is the reason, that I hold it it more safe, and more tollerable, for manie ioyntlie, th^n for one absolutelie to gouern and command. Atque vt libenter fatear, nul^um esse gubernationis genus is^o faelicius. For when manie govern, one supplies the defects of an other, both in counsell

and iustice. Thus with a politick reason, he Doth insinuate hym self into the harts of the people, to plaine his way to the discipline he propounded. Yow may err in thinking this a trifle, and a scoolpoint: for he applyed it to a further end. After the Geueuians had eiected ther Bushop, who had the supremacie in that state, as his predecessors had long enioyde it, sinc Frederic the first: then as Bodin noteth, ther Monarchie was chainged into a popular state yet gouerned Aristocratice:) and therfor Caluin confirmeth the peopl in that opinion, and geueth reasons to aprooue that act, which was the first fruits of the gospel in that cittie.
2. Hauing giuen this blow to a monarchie, (he forgets he was born at Noyon, and thinks hym self safe at Geneua) to preuent that yow might not obiect, that Princes haue alwaies graue and wise counsellors to aduise and inspyre them; and yf they be weak them selfs, to supplie ther defects He giueth this resolution, cap. 11. v. 26. vpon Daniel. Kings maick choyce of such men for ther counsellors, as can best fitt ther humors, and accommodate them sells to serue the appetites of ther king, scilicet, in Creweltie, and fallacians. So he maiks them rather worse then better, by hauing

counsellors, and stayneth the honor and reputation of a counsellor with a bleamish and scandal intollerable, as yf kings wear neither better nor wiser by ther counsell tables.
3. But yet he goeth on a degree further, for before he gaue the precedenc, by way of comparison, to Aristocratia, but now he both discrediteth and disgraceth Monarchies and Monarchs. cap. 2. v. 39. vpon Daniel. They ar (saith he) owt of ther wits, quite voyd of sence and vnderstanding, who desyre to liue in soouerain Monarchies. For ir can not be, but that order and pollicie shall decay, whear one man holds, so large an extent of Dominion.
4. And to maik this bad proposition seame good, cap 5. v. 25. Kings (saith he) forget they ar men, that is of the same mould, that others arr. They ar called kings and Dukes Dei gratia. To vvhat end serue these vvords? to shovv by ther title, that they acknovvledg no superior. And yet vvill they tread vpon God vvith ther feate, vnder that cloke. So it is but an abuse and disguisement, vvhen they vaunt that they raign Dei gratia. Is not this excellent doctrine to be preached in a Monarchie? and a fyne Deskant, vpon Deigratia? Yet he goeth an further. c. 5. v. 21. Kings maik ther boast that they raign Deigratia, yet they

dispise the Maiestie of God. Voila, quelle est la rage and forcenerie de tous Rois. Hear is no exception but a generall accusation: and to maik that good, he addeth this strenth to it, It is common and ordinaire to all kings, to exclude God from the government of the vvorld.
Consider wel that Caluin writt this, not as a Politician but as a Deuine, and in his prime and maister peace, his institutions: he deliuers these daingerous positions in his sermon, to the people, and in his readings vpon Daniel, not in priuat discourses: and as matters of discipline and doct^ine to be generallie beleaued: and so making a course against Nabugad nezzar, he run; the wild goose chace against all kings, and that rather owt of plea^, then owt of his text. For to what end and pupose tend these speaches so scandalous, and derogatoire to princes? certanlie, to disgrace scepters and sooueraines, both for follie and impietie.
And bycause yovv shall see hovv vvell Caluin and Luther doe symbolise in this poynt, that they speak one language, and both weare like coolors, and the same fashion. I will deliuer vnto yow how Luthers opinion of thes poynts, agreeth with Caluins, These knaues, of the nobilitie, tyrants,

tom. 7. fol. 441. Nebulones isti ex nobilitate,  tyranni, etc. qui inducunt animum, ideo Deum nobis euangelium dedisse, eosque ex carcere ponti^icio expediuisse, vt possent ipsi auaritiae suae litare. And in epistolis fol. 350. Principem esse,  and non ex aliqua parte latronem esse, aut non, aut vix possibile est, a Prince can not be, but a robber, and oppressor, and tom. 3. fol. 325. Non est Principis esse Christianum, paucos esse  Christianos oportet. And tom. 6. fol. 143. in psalm 101. Mirum non est seculares Reges, Dei hostes esse, eiusque verbum hostiliter persequi. Hoc ^psis a natura est insitum haec eorum proprietas.  whear it is vvorthie to be obserued, Nota. vvhat an Antipathia ther is betvvean Royaltie, and religion, by Luthers rules: and so betwean Lutheranisme and loyaltie, by as good consequenc, (vvhich is the mayn quaestion.) But procead. tom. 3. latin. fol 459 in psal. 45. Aulae principum, vere possunt dici, sedes and thronus diaboli, vbi tot sunt  diaboli, quot fere aulici. For such as the king is, such is the court like to be: and yf the courts be the thrones, kings must be the Deuels. Tom. 2. fol 81. De seculari magistratu.  Principes flagitiosissiminebulones. The reason he giueth, is this. Sunt enim Dei lictore^, and carnifices, quibus ira diuina ad puniendos improbos, and ad conseruandam externam pacem vtisolet, and fol. 190. Nullum neque tus, neque

fidem, neque veritatem apud principes seculares reperiri licet. And then yf kings and princes haue neither honestie, truthe nor Iustice, Quid ego principes doceam. and huiusmodi porcis scribam vvhy should I vvrite, and instruct such porck tom 3 fol. 149.
Who can not discern hovv these tvvo holie men iumped in vnitie, as led vvith the same spirit; (ay ming bot-at one end, which is to noorish a deadlie feud in all mens mynds, against kings and crownes, that will not subscribe, to ther superintendencie, and Caluins Institutions. And that yovv might more euidentlie discern that, read c. 6. v. 25. vpon Daniel. Saith he Darias by his exampl vvill condemn all those* vvho at this day profess them selfs, either Catholik kings, or Christian kings, or defendors of the faith: and yet not onely, they doe deface and burie altrevv pietie and religion, but they corrup and depraue the vvhole vvorship of God. Hear is in dead vvork, for the Covvper; not by a Marprelat, but by a Mar prince. The most Christian king must be again nevv Catechised and learn a new Christian Credo Hear is a new portraicture of a reformed Catholik, dravven for the instruction of the most Catholik king; and a nevv priuate spirit, to direct the Catholik.
The defendor of the faith, bycaus he

erreth in his faith; not hauing a sauing and iustifi^ng faith; must haue a nevv faith created, and inspiret into hym, by this great Prophet And so by this nevv model, all the old religion in the church, and all the lavves in the state concerning it, must be abolished. Thus presumed Caluin, to reform kings and government, and to build a nevv ark, to saue and preserue the vvorld, from an inundation of impietie, ignoranc, and irreligion; of vvhome I may trevvlie say, plus quam regnare videtur, cui ita liceat censuram agere regnantium. But of this, I shall more pertinentlie speak in the appendix. In the interim. Can a man sovv more seditious seads, yf he vvould seak to Cantonize a kingdome, into seuerall circles, as they haue doon ther french church? Yet shall yovv heare hym preach, more like a Svvisser; and Lutheranize, vvith the proper spirit of Luther. cap. 6. v. 3. 4 he toucheth kings to the quick; and describes, what kynd of beasts they ar, at this tyme. Les Rois sont presque tous hebetez, and brutaux: aussi semblablement, sont-ils comme les cheuaux, and les asnes de bestes brutes. And he giueth this reason; bycause they honor and preferr most, ther Bavvdes, and ther vices. What a seditious declamation is this, against the title, and maiestie of Gods anointed? Mark

the age, and tyme, when Caluin writ this book: and note in that age what renoumed kings, France had: Lewes 12. Frances the 1. and Henry the 2. what maiestie wisedom and magnificenc wear in the emperor Maximilian and Charles? vvhat state in Henry 8. of England, what hope in Edward, what vertue in Marie for Scotland, Iames the 5. raigned, and two such Maries, as at worthie to be Canonized. And for Castill and Portugal, there kings never floorished more, for government, greatnes, encreas of state, discoueries of a new world, peac, and plentie. Then what was his meaning, to affirm that almost all kings wear so stupid, and brutish? Surelie to bread and noorish, a contempt of hings; and to induce the people, that liue in free states, to despise and hate them; and conninglie to seduce them that liue in kingdomes, to be sorie for ther yoke and seruitude: to shake of ther fetters, and purchase ther libertie (Speciallie for religion). for at that he aymed most (the propagation of his doctrine): and he knevv, vvell, that in popular estates he might preuayle stronglier, and vvith bette hope of success, for all his religion is popularitie, and pleasing,) and as Swinglius fovvnd he could not induce Fra^ces the first, to applaude hym: So by the exampl of

Henry the second, Caluin ded perceaue that kings, and Deigratia, vvear blocks in his vvaye. And therfor to remooue them, that they might not empeach the course and current of his preachings, and proceading C. 6. v. 22. he speaks in a tune full of sharpes, and menaces. Abdicant se potestate, terreni principes, dum insurgunt contra Deum: imo indigni sunt, qui cons^antur^^ hominum numero. Potius ergo conspuere oportet, in illorum capita, quam il^is parere, vbi sic proteruiunt vt vel^nt sp^liare Deum ^uo ^^re. What a learned homelie is this, to teach subiects obedienc? Ioyne all these good instructions together, and so shall yovv best interpret and explain one by an other. D. Bilson in his book of Christian subiection, taketh paynes to expovvnd and vvrest Caluins vvords; and to saue his credit, sets the berst coolors on them he could. I. Caluin (saith he) in this place, Speaks not a vvord of depriuing princes, or resisting them vvith armes: but onelie shovveth, that Daniel ded rightlie defe^d hym self, for not obeying the kings vvicked edict, ioyned vvith the dishonor of god Secondly by Abdicant se, he meanes not they loos ther crovvnes, but that they loose ther povver, to command in thes things: but in lavvfull things, they retain ther povver. 3. For the phrase conspuere,

it seams something hard; yet the comparison so standing as he maiks it (whether it wear better, to contemn ther impious edicts, or to obey them:) Caluin vrgeth it in vehement wordes. And this is farr from Rebellion. An other excuseth it, that it was spoken comparatiue, not rebelliouslie: that is yf the king should contradict Gods lavv. A poor shift: but he sets not dovvn, vvho should be iudg of that, betwean God and the king. And so it is nihil ad rem. I answer to the first, it is idle and impertinent: what yf he vse not these words of depriuation and resistanc? (for then had he erred too palpablie:) ar therfor the other words he vseth, excusable? For Daniels right full defenc, it is not pertinent to the quaestion, D. Allen mayd. Besides what, was Daniels defenc, what arms took he? All with owt contemps of the king: humilitie prayer, and patienc. Not after the Geneua fashion so brauelie, as to spitt in Nabugodonosors face; nor alledging that he was not worthie to liue emong men.
And for the second, by (abdicantse) what meanes he, that kings doe loose? not ther Crownes, but onely povver to command. let vs speak plaine English, withowt halting. Yow confess, the king

looseth his authoritie and soouerain power, to command (and yow add obscurlie in thes things.) Yovv mean, in matters of religion, for so it is to be vnderstood, tho yow cast a cloke over the words, and cover the matter. Then I, desyre to know, what is a kings crown withowt power to co^mand? He that teacheth, they loose ther royall power, dothe he not mean, they forfeit it? and yf they doe forfeit it, who is tho challeng and taik the forfeiture, of a crown? but by such lectures, doth not Caluin stirr vp and arme against the king his trayterous subiects, yf they reuolt from ther obedienc, for religion? Is not that, the grownd of all the combustion, and ciuill warrs in France? Yea, but in other things lavvful, (yow say) kings retaine ther power. First these ar maister Bilsons words, not Caluins: for they contradict Caluin, whose proposition is indefinite, abdicant se potestate, they loose and forfeit all ther authoritie and power: absolutelie, not after a sort: and in all things, not in some particuler: and for altogether not for a tyme (for when kings ar dispossessed they seldome recouer ther hold againe.) Besides, what court, or what magistrates ar fitt to heare and determin whear in kings may loose ther power, and whearin not? and to decide and iudg the difference,

betwean these vnlawful matters yow speak of and the lawfull: tho Caluins words import no restriction, at all The vvhich doth playnlie appear by his harsh phrase (as yow tearm it) of spitting in ther faces: that is, as yovv interpret, to defye them to ther faces, to contemn them, and ther acts. But this yow say is farr from rebellion: trew, and yet nothing to the purpose. For rebellion is but one species of Treason, and therfor tho he teach not rebellion, he may teach treason. And so yovv help hym litl. Labor to extenuate the vvords as much, as yovv can: and yet, vvill they be reallie heynous and seditious. For he that, hould^th a king is not vvorthie to be or liue in hominu^ numero, dothe he not as it vvear eiect and excommunicate hym, from all goverment, and confyne and censure hym to liue vvith beasts as Nabugodonosor ded. Yf yovv teach, that insurgunt contra Deum, doe yovv not maik hym hatefull for his impietie?
But to conclude, this yovv grand in effect to be his meaning. That yf the king threaten Daniel, except he vvorship the Idolle: or yf the king of France seake to compell his subiects, to obey his lavve, and communicate, at the alter of the church: then abdicat se potestate; the king ought to loose

obedienc: subiects ar not bovvnd to obey hym, (but rather to spit in his face, vvhich is a conte^pt in the highest degree, (and that vvas the cavvse, vvhy Doctor Allen ded obiect that against Caluin, as seditious doctrine.
Besides, he mayd his ovvn quarrel, Gods quarrel: the defenc of Caluinism, as the defenc of religion: and so embroyled the king and the kingdome, in perpetual quarrell, for his doctrine.
But D. Bilson, ded knowe, or might haue knovven: that seditious doctrines, wear not so daintie at Geneua. For in hatred of the thre Q. Maries, of England and Scotland, he set abroach and defended that poyson and factious doctrin of Gunocratia: and by his inspiration, knox and Goodman, ded publish ther books, against ther lawfull princes.
Besides, look vpon the storie of Scotland, printed by Wautroller. p. 213. and yow shall fynd, that knox for an Apologie of his practises, alledged Caluins authoritie, That it is lavvful for subiects, to reform religion vvhen princes vvil not.
But Caluins opinion of that poynt, may be more manifestlie prooued, by the practise of his darling maister Beza: who sowndlie ded vnderstand his doctrin and ded brauelie

second hym in all his platts. In the preface to the nevv testament: dedicated to Quene Elizabeth. 1564. he vsed these vvords. Quo die, scilicet (19 december.) ante biennium, Galiica nobilitas, (illustrimo Principe Condaeo Duce,) tuis, and illustrissimorum quorundam Germantae principum, subsidijs freta: non procul vrbe Druidum fortissime praeliata: prima restunendae in Gallijs Christianae religionis fundamenta, sanguine suo, faeliciter consecrarunt. So then hear is bothe resisting with armes: and defijng ther king, in the face of his armie: and this I hope maister Bilson, vvill confess to be rebellion. And this act, vvhich others vvould shadow, Beza iustifieth so boldlie: that in the same place, (commending the good seruices at Meaux and Orleans, and that famous battel of Dreux, vvhearin he vvas a principal, not an accessorie, he addeth, Id quod eo liberius testor, quod istis tum Concilijs, tum etiam plerisque rebus, quando it a Deo visum est* interfui. To that place, (obiected to the Caluinists, as an argument to convinc them of seditious, both doctrine and practises) maister Bilson shovveth much care, and studie, to ansvver.
1. That batle, (saith he vvhich Beza speaketh of ar Dreux, vvas neither against the lavves, nor the king.
2. They took not armes to depriue the

king, or annoye the realme, but to saue them selfe, from the oppression of one, that abused the kings yowth.
3. The Duke of Guise, hating the nobles of France (hymself being a strainger,) and to tread down the professors of religion, that he might strenthen hym self, to taik the crovvn, yf ought should fall to the king (being vnder yeares) or to his lyne: armed hym self to the feald, etc.
4. The nobles of France, perceauing his mallice, and his iniustice, with priuate violenc to murder so manie innocents: gathered forces together to keape ther own liues, from the furie of the blood sucker. And in that case, yf they repell force, what haue yow to saye against that?
6. For the kings consent, he was yong and in the Guises hands; therfor his consent, vvas nothing vvorth (that a subiect should doe execution by the sword, vpon his peopl, withowt order of Iustice.) The king had neither age to discern it, nor fredome to denie it, nor lavve to decree it.
5. We know not the lawes of that land, nor the circumstanc of these warts?
7. Lastlie. Beza, saith he, alloweth, and exhorteth obedienc to magistrates. Libro confess. fidei. cap. 5. @. 45. in these vvords.

Quod autem attinet ad priuatos homines, tenere illos oportet, plurimum mter se differre, iniuriam inferre, and pati iniuriam. Iniuriam pati nostrum est, sic precipiente Deo, cum nobis illam viarcere non licet, ex nostrae vocationis prascripto, etc. neque aliud vllum remedium proponitur priuatis hominibus tyranno subicclis, prater vitae emendationem, preces and lachrimas.
At larg, I seth down his Apologie for Beza, and the reasons: bothe by canse D. Bilson, was at that tyme, a man selected and chosen to be the champion of that great cawse; and his book was published with so great applause, as yf he had batred down the seminaries of Room and Douay.
Touching the first poynt, he is confident, that the battell of Dreux, was neither against the law, nor the king: and yet in the 5. he corrects and contradicts hym self, confessing that he knowes not the lawes of the land, nor the circumstanc of the warr. So yovv see this great Doctor had a conscienc: to affirm the certantie of a matter, whareof he had not scienc. And so I might leaue hym bett, with his own weapon. But was that battel neither against law, nor prince? assuredlie against bothe, as yow shall fynd by the lawes of Charles the VIII. 1487. and of Frances the first 1532. and of Frances the 2. at Fountainbleau

1560. the wich lawes, I shall haue occasion more fitlie to pleade, in the case of Rochel and Montauban, in this discours.
But how doth D. Bilson, prooue that the battel of Dreux vvas not against the king? Bycause, the 1. Duke of Guise, ded  cawse that battel, and 2. armed hym self  into the feald, in hate of the nobles; 3. hym self being a strainger: and 4. the king being  in his hands? It seames this man was not  well instructed, or that his wise patron had not leasure to peruse and examin it: he tells so manie vntruthes together. First it is certan, that battel was not in king Frances his tyme, but in the raign of Charles the ninthe; and after the death of king Frances, all men knovv, (that vvear acquainted vvith the proceadings of that tyme) that the howse of Guise ded beare no swaye in the court: the Duke vvas mayd a strainger to the state, his vvings vvear clipt; the Quene moother, the king of Nauar, and the constable sat at the stearne and guided all. And so the king vvas not in Guines hands (as he surmised). And in that batle, the constable vvas the cheafe commander; he and the Marshall of S. Andrevvs, vvear the king liuetennants, and had the kings authoritie and sufficient commission to warrant ther actions. The

Duke of Guise led the Areargard; and tho it was his fortune to stand maister of the feald, and winn the glorie of the daye: yet had he not anie charge at that batl, but of his own companies. And so he fayleth in Not. See M. Ma^uisser in his commentaries, and, M. Lanovv, in his discourses. the verrie growndwork of his ansvver.
And whear he saith, that the protestant Princes took armes, onelie to saue them selfs from ther oppression by Mr. de Guise? it is a blind reason, for a cleare cavvse. For yf that onelie had bean ther reason: vvhen they see the Co^stable, marching in the vauntgard (vvhome none of them could accuse to haue abused the kings yovvth, or sought ther oppression): vvhy ded they not then, laye dovvn ther armes, and depart the feald? and yf it had bean onelie, to defend them selfs; vvhy ded they not staye at Orleans, or somme other nests of rebellion, till they had bean assulted; rather then to affront and assayle the kings armie? Why ded they sett vpon the Constable, the kings Vicegerent, and the the honor of the Admirals howse, (and the Admirals kinsman and great frend, when he was prisoner at Melun for his religion, by commandement of Henry II.) Yf ther end had bean only to saue them selfs, from the Duke of Guise; vvhy ded they fight vvith the Constable? No, this

is, bus a mask; for Beza hym selfs, playnlie confesseth, that the feald vvas fought, for this end, vvith ther blood to restore religion.
And wher as he inveigheth so hotelie, against the Duke of Guise, that he was a strainger in France: it seames he knew not, that the Duke was discended of the line and brainch of Charlemaigne, (who vvas no strainger in France?) or that he hym self was a peare of France: that he was coosen German to the Prince of Co^die; or that his moother was Anthonette de Bourbon: and that his predecessors, had long enioyed office and honor, in the court of France. Neither peraduenture had he hard, of the great seruices doone by hym, at Rome, at Mets, at Verdun, at Theonuille, and Callice (when all France vvas in Mourning and distress, after the Admiral had lost S. Quintins. (But that dreame, that the Duke of Guise aspyred to the Crowne, (yf the king and his issew fayle:) is to be pittied rather then answered: a fable (taken owt of the legend of Lorrain,) and the other libells of that tyme. Weigh and examin it, and see the leuitie of follie. The king was young: his brothers yonger: ther moother liuing; the king of Nauar, ther trustie and noble fre^d (and a brasen gate, betwea^ Guise

and the crowne:) and the nobilitie of France, as he saithe, mayd an association against the howse of Guise. Then was it not likelie?
Now it being apparentlie fals, that the kings was in the hands, and power of the Guises, I com to the proposition, that the king had neither age to discern it, nor fredome to denie it, nor lawes to decree it: it resteth to examin that proposition, that the kings consent, authorising that armie at Dreux was nothing worth, bycause he was not of age, nor at libertie.
What yf the king had not age, to discern it? was it therfor withowt warrant or law? A king haith two bodies: his bodie Politick, as it never dyeth: so is it never defectiue of authoritie and direction. The acts of the bodie politick, be not abated by the naturall bodies accesse: the bodie politick is not disabled to rule and govern by the nonage of the naturall, see 26. lib. assis. placit. 24. whear by iustice Thorps iudgment, the gift of a king is not defeated by his nonage, nor shall not embleamish the bodie. In the book of ass. see the case, tit. droyt. plac 24. anno 6. E. 3. f. 91. for a writt of right brought by E. III. of a mannor, as heyre to R. I. The exception of nonage against the king was not admitted. For yf the bodie natural

die; yet the bodie politick (which magnisieth the natural bodie,) is not sayd to die. So 4. Eliz. for leases of the Duchy mayd by E. 6. all the Iudges resolued, they vvear good, tho the king vvas in his minoritie. For the bodie politick extolleth the naturall, and altereth the qualitie of it. And so though the kings bodie natural in his minoritie can not discern and iudg: yet that disableth not a king, that the acts of his minoritie, ordered by his counsell, and by the Regent, should be of no validitie. Nay, your own Hottoman, in his Francogallia, will teach yow an other lesson, (tho he was Bezaes trustie Achates.) Resolume; would anie counsellor like it well, yf a Catholick in England should affirme, (as he might more trewlie) that the chainge and alteration of religion by king Edward VI. was not warrantable, hauing not age, to discern it; nor freedome to denie it, (being in the ha^ds of the protector and Northumberland: nor lavves to decree it, (till by his vncls authoritie and greatnes, new lawes wear enacted for it.) Yf yow approoue not this: why doe yow disprooue the same in k. Charles IX. of France? was the age of the one, a barr in law, and not the others? or was the one, an absolute king, and not the other? or vvas k. Edvvards co^sent, sufficient

to authorise his vncls doeings in spiritual matters: and was k. Charles his consent nothing worth, to authorise the Constable and his armie, to pursew, his rebells?
Now concerning the last poynt, touching Beza his opinion: I must turn that Canon against hym self; for yf Beza sayd trewlie, iniuriam pati nostrum est: nobis vim viarcere, non licet: yf it be certan, nullum remedium proponitur priuatis hominibus, tyranno subiectes, praeter vitae ^mendationem, etc. then surelie, maister Bilson is betrayed by hym, he seaks to defend: and Beza betrayed the Admiral and Prince of Condie, to draw them into the playnes of Dreux against the king, to fight for ther religion: when vim viarcere non licet.
I will not stand to refell that opinion and error of D. Bilson, that the Prince of Condie ded not ovve simple subiection, to the king of France, but respectiue homage, and so was not mearly a subiect: bycause it shovveth a palpabl ignoranc of the lavves and customes of France: and besides that could not excuse the Admiral, vvho at all could not plead anie such protection, or alledg anie such prerogatiue. For yf H. 2. might committ hym, to prison lavvfully: Charles the 9. as lawfully might cut of his head. But forasmuch as Bezaes sentenc,

is coninglie vsed, and cast as a mist to bly^d the eyes of the reader: I will disperse the mist, and let yow see what kind a man he vvas in his proper humor, and in puris naturalibus.
Read his positions, and Catechism of sedition, (the practise of his pietie) the book called, Vindicie contra tyrannos; whear he acts the part of Iunius Brutus, a noble Roman, (but the suppressor and enemie of kings.) First (pag. 15.) he propownds this question: yf subiects be bownd to obey ther kings, when they command against Gods lavve? and then pag. 22. he resolueth, vve must obey kings for Gods cawse, when they obey God. And pag. 24. as the wassel looseth his fief, (his lordship) yf he committ fellonie: so the king looseth his right, and his realm also. And aboue all other, this is notable pag. 65. a conspiracie is good or ill as the end is, at which it aymeth. which is a most wicked Maxime, fitt to mantain Rauillac, or Poltrot, or to be a buckler for the conspirators of Amboys. Yet this pag. 66. goeth a degree further. The Magistrates, and one part of the realm, maye resist the king being an Idolater: as Lobna reuolted from Ioram, for forsaking God. Doth not this stronglie patronise the battel of Dreux?

doth it not teach subiects, to rebell, and to plead, sic dicit Dominus, for ther defence? but note well how fynelie, he fortifieth this axiome. pag. 132. The government of the kingdome, is not giuen to the king alone: but also to the officers of the Realme. And again, pag. 103. France, Spayn, and England, ar customarily consecrated, and as it wear put in possession of ther charge, by the states, peares, and Lords, (which present the people.) And p. 199. ther is a stipulation in kingdomes haereditarie. As in France, vvhen the king is Crovvned. The Bushops of Beauuois and Laon, ask the people, yf they desyre and command, this man, shall be king. And vvhat then? surely it is no argument that the people, choose hym. It is an acceptation, no election: and a declaration, onely of ther submission, obedienc and fidelitie, as yow may euidentlie perceaue, by Frances Rosselet anno 1610. the ceremonies, at the coronation. When was ther euer an assemblie of the states, to elect, or consecrate a king of France? the kings, never count the tyme of ther raign, from the day of ther consecration, but of ther entrance: and Charles the. 7. (Gaguin and Giles can witnes,) was nether crowned nor sacred in eight yeares, after he begonn his raigne.

And for the Peares? what think yow, that they ar as Ephori. No they ar pares inter se, not co^panions to the king. They ar not states, as in Holland, to rule and direct all affayres: for in France and England all authoritie depe^ds vpon the kings; and yf they wear his consorts, they wear not his inferiors. What is the state, but the authoritie of the Prince? who onelie, by his letters patents createth the pears, disposeth all Offices, giveth all honors, receaueth all homages, (as the sole fountain, from whenc springeth nobilitie and authoritie:) and he that either would restraine that sooveraintie, or communicate it with others; maketh no differenc of the Crovvn of a kinst, and the la Beretta of the Duke of Venice. Manie such like rules, and positions, haith he published fitt introduction, for Anarchie, and mutinies: most of them false, and all wicked: vayles onelie to cover the face and name of treason, that it might not appear, in his proper and vglie shape.
I might heare trauel and wearye yow, with as Good stuff owt of the book de iure Magistratus, (a bird of the same nest, for if it wear not Bezas, as manie think, It vvas Ottomans his Camerado.) But I will leaue them bothe, for they touch the string of sooveraintie with too rough a hand: nay

rather they straine to breack it, when they teach so grosse treasons, that the states ar aboue the king; that the bodie is aboue the head (a monstrous doctrine: as yf anie man could (with iudgment) maik a quaestion, whether the people should be directed and commanded by the maister or the man; by the subiect, or the soouerain: by the Princ of Condie and the Admiral, or by king Charles. and king Philip had reason to cut of the head of the iustice of Arago^: and to teach the people, what was the trew meaning, of nos qui podemos tanto, come vos, etc. All which paradoxes, it wear easie to refell: but that I haue vndertaken onelie, to discouer, not to combate and encounter them: and bycause they ar learnedlie and religiouslie confuted all readie, by Barkla^e, Bauricau, and Blackwood.
Onelie by the waye, I must informe yow; that they deal politicklie and conninglie, and professe not openlie and bluntlie, to haue anie liking, to chainge the state, and depose, or ouerrule kings. But artificiallie they manage all. First to bread a dislike of Monarchs; then to show the inconvenienc, to depend vpon the edicts of one man: then may they much the better, magnifie the authoritie of magistrates, by whome they might reforme idolatrie; and why

the Creatures of a king suppresse the creator of ther power. And yet, be sure, the Consistories and elders muh rule all: and be iudges, bothe of the cleargie, lavves counsell, and king. They be the Rabbins, that owt of ther Sanhedrim, must govern both church, and kingdome, by the Oracles of Geneua.
I may not forget, how vureuerentlie Eusebius Philadelphus, (Sc. Mr. T. Beza) vsed king Charles in his book of Reueille matmattin: (whear vsuallie he calls the king Tyrant: and maiks his Anagramme Chasscur des^oyal. Read his rymes, and scandalous reproches against the Q. moother-Peruse the 40. Articles recorded in that book, for the better aduancing of seditious gouernment. As art. 25. that all cheafs and Generalls, must obserue ther, ecclesiastical discipline, ordayned by the Synodes. And art. 40. they ar bownd neuer to disarme, so long as religion is pursewed, (persecuted by the king, he meaneth.) So much patienc, haue these Saints: that seaking to reforme all others, can not reforme ther own affections But yf yow peruse the 14. and 15. art. yow shall discern the brauerie of ther irregular passions, intending therby onelie to ouerthrow the king, and the familie of Valoys.

These wear the holie articles of Bearn 1574. coyned with his stampe, and communicated at Millun to all ther Moschees, that they might he more stro^glie maik warr (as they Sayd) against ther enemies, till it pleased God to turn the hart of the French tyrant. Thus, ad gustum populi, principatus exigitur. At the same tyme, was framed, and dispersed abroad, the lyfe of Katharine de Medicis, Francogallia, the Toxsan of Massacreurs, and the Legent of Lorraine. (For that honor the howse of Guise haith long had: that no man professed hym self, an enemie to the church: but he was likewise, at deadly seud with them.)
Heare I might taik vp; and stay yow no longer, with the description of ther vertues and loyaltie: but that I desyre to present vnto yovv, vvhat opinion the graue and learned men of the church of England; and others also of gread iudgment, haue dad had of these Euangelists of Geneua.
1. Doctor Sutclif, in his ansvver to a libel supplicatorie p. 194. confesseth that the protestants of the french church, taught for 30. yeares violent reformation of religion, by the nobilitie, people, and priuate perso^s.
2. And in an other place, Beza (saith he) in his book de iure Magistratus, dothe arme the subiects against the Prince and he saith,

that book overthroweth in effect, all the authoritie of Christian kings, and Magistrates; and for the book of Vindinciae contra tyrannos, vvhich manie affirm to be Bezas, or Ottomans: It geues povver (saith he) to subiects, not onelie to resist but to kill the Prince, yf he impugn gods religion.
3. The same is also averred, by the late Archbush. D. Bancroft, (in his book of the Suruay of discipline:) a man, vvho exactlie had learned, examined, and obserued ther courses, and positions, and the great dainger grovving to the state, by the ministers either Scotising, or Geneuating, (for so he tearms them.) And the book of daingerous positions, pag. 192. dothe demonstrate also the same.
To these I may add the iudgment, of that famous Lawyer, Frances Baldwin, (vvho had familiarlie conuersed, vvith Caluin at Geneua:) in his book, called Responsio altera, ad Iohannem Calumum, Paris. 1562. pag. 74. Mirabar, quorsum euaderet inflammatus tuus quidam apostolus, (Sc. m. Theodore) qui cum hic concionaretur suis auditoribus, commendabat vehementer, extraordinarium illud exemplum Leuitarum, sirictis gladijs per casira discurrentium: and obuios quosque idololatras, trucidantium. Sed nunc audio, te vix contentum esse ^alibus Leu^is* And, pag. 128. I euiora

(saith he) sunt illa, cum statuis and sepulchris, and ossibus principum ac martyrum, barbarum bellum indictum videmus: cum ciuitates occupari, fana spoliari audimus, etc. But what nead I labour to prooue that Beza, and his followers, haue caused all these vproars, and commotions in France: when he hym serf Epistola 40. Christophero Thretio, confesseth, that they must fight it owt. Ego quidem pacem nullam, nisi debellatis hostibus, ausim sperare. Yf yow ask, who wear these enemies? he answers, Cacolycorum castra tra^s Ligerim sunt. Therby he means, the Catholiks and the kings armie. And a litl before, ab eo tempore. nostri (copiss foelicis^ime instauratis) Tolo^anum agrum infestarum; Inde ad Rhodanum vsque progres^i, occupatis aliquot passim oppidis and arcibus, in quibus praesidium reliquerunt. So they spoyled the contrie, disturbed the peace, surprised the kings townes, fortified, and oppugned the kings forces: and yet these men, Beza alloweth, and encoorageth. Therby yow see, how apt this holie man was, to ruffle in the world. But this seames to be morbus in natus in the Sacramentaries; and that malus coruus malum ouum: for Swinglius (the grand father of them all tom. 1. art. 42. Reges (saith he) quando perfide, and extra regulam Christi egerint, possunt cum Deo deponi. In defenc of

this Principle, D. Bilson, auswereth; first more wiselie and with discreation, I vndertaiknot (saith he) to defend each seuerall mans opinion (though Svvinglius was not euerie man; being the fovvnder and principall author of that sect.) Secondlie saith he, they may be deposed, vvhen they aduanc vngodlienes, as Saul was. Tirdlie, Swinglius showeth the cawse, why magistrates may be displaced: but he geues no priuate man leaue to draw the sword, or offer violenc, to anie princ, (though a tyrant.) And fourthlie (saith he) Swinglius speaketh of princes elected, not successiue and absolute: and yet he speaks of them also in that article, but allovves no force to be vsed against them. Is not hear two contradictories, in one sentenc? Transeat cum reliquis erroribus. But answer this, yf they may be deposed as Savvl vvas; who is to depose them hear is no Samuell, nor anie prophet. May the people? no saith he (blushing as asha med of the grossnes) no priuate man: is it then a secret reserued to the Eldors? no neither. Svvinglius hymself, deales plainlier, and art. 42. and 43. he expresseth his own meaning. Cum suffragijs, and consensu totius aut maiori partis, multitudinis, tyrannus tollitur fit Deo auspice. Hear is no exception, electiue and successiue, ar both concluded:

and the people, haue the sword put into there hands. And to maik, it more olaynne; see his epistl Conrado Sonnio l. 4. pag. 868. Permittendum est Caesari, officium debitum (but conditionallie) si modo fidem nobis permittat illibatam. Si nos illud negligentes patimur, negatae religionis rei erimus. So this, factious minister taiks vpon hym to determin, whether and vpon what tearmes Caesar shall hold his place, or be deposed. Gentlie, they will obey Caesar, yf Caesar will be aduised and directed by them: other wise what is ther course, they will taik with hym? l. 4. Epist. fol. 196. ad Vlmenses. Monet eos, vt coram auditoribus suis, sensim incipiant detrahere personam imperio Romano. Quomodo, stultum sit, agnoscere hoc imperium in Germania, quod non agnoscitur Romae, vnde nomen habet? Was not this Caluins course, for Monarchies? the verrie same. But hear hym further. Nimis amantes estis rei Romanae; quid Germaniae cum Roma? sed prudenter and paulatim agenda sunt huiusmodi, atque cum paucis, quibus credere possis, quod ardua sunt. Note, how this Swiz labours to vndermyne the empyre, and blow it vp with his breath: and what trayterous and seditious counsell, he geues for ther libertie. Sensim and paulatim, not openlie and grosslie, nor all at once: and coram adiutoribus; it is doctrine for a

pulpit, a sermon to the people (who ar likest to applawd it.) And how? incipiant detrahere personam imperio Romano, what haue they to doe with Roome, or Roome with them? This man speaks naturallie in his own language, and by hym the princes of Europe may see, vvhat they ar to expect of these reformers, vvhen they ar armed vvith povver.
Now, as I haue declared, the principles, and Aphorismes of the great Triumuirat of the french Church, Svvinglius, Caluin, and Beza; the tribunes of the people, and the boute-feux, and ringleaders of rebellion, (whome our learned Doctor of Oxf. would gladlie haue defended.) So it shall appeare ex effectis, that Geneua is the school of rebellion, and the seminarie of all the ciuil vvarrs in France. Neither vvil I blott ther names with anie false aspersions: for as ther practise is the best Commentarie of ther positions, and vvritings: so it is the best tryal of ther loyaltie: and can geue in best euidenc, vvhether they be (as they vvold seame to be) good Patriots, and trew subiects.
First therfor, call to mynd, both ther beginning; ther proceading; and ther continuanc, to this tyme. And in all these, thre things ar speciallie to be obserued, 1.

ther manie conspiracies, 2. ther manie and great batles against the king and his officers, 3. and the horrible owtrages, and attempts, both incomperable for crueltie, and incredibl for disloyaltie.
I will begin with Amboys, (whear they The Conspiracie of Amboys. begann to act the first Scene of ther Tragedies. And therof I will deliuer, a trevv and breafe Narration.
At the assemblie of Nantes 1560. Certan of the Caluinists conspired to Seaze the kings person, and surprise the court: and to apprehend and endite the two principal of the Guises, for seaking to invade and posses the crown, to ruine the princes of the blood, and to suppresse and banish religion. Which was whith great deliberation concluded in Ianuarie, to be executed at Bloys, the 10. of March after. The cheafe of this conspiracie, was Godfrey de Barry called de Renaudie, (who mayd the Prince of Condy partaker of his counsell, and acquainted with ther platt; which he disliked not, yf it might be performed by form of lawe.) This was straingelie discouered, first by the Cardinal of Lorrains secretarie; and after by the aduertisement of Cardinal Grauuellan.
And therupon by good aduise, the king soodainlie remooued to Amboyse, and so

disapointed the conspirators, both of the tyme and place. And by that meanes, the forces leuied and appointed for that seruice, vvandred vp and down, withowt head and direction: and so the Duke of Nemours, with the trowpes he had, apprehended manie of them, and emong the rest, the Baron of Castelnau: and Monsieur de Pardillan, slevv Renaudie, the general: and diuers others wear executed. And the Duke of Guise, prouidentlie took order for the safetie of the king and the court: and so assured hym self of the person of the Prince of Conde, that he had See the co^mentaries of M Mic. Castelnau. not power, to attempt anie thing to ther preiudice: and yet afterward, he was committed and condemned to loose his head: but enlarged by Charles the ninth, and for politick reasons, acquited and declared Innocent. And this was the first act, pretended by the Caluinists, to be doone, for religion, and bonum publicum.
The like was after put in practise, against 1. The conspiracie of Meaux. Charles the IX. at Meaulx, 1567. the which the king happilie escaped, by the ayd and noble seruice, of the Duke of Nemours and the Swissers. Ther purpose was, to haue possessed them selfs of the kings person, and of the Duke of Aniou, and to haue slayne the Quene moother, (but by

recouering Paris, they wear all saued:) and the Cardinal of Lorrain, (vvhome they principallie desired to entrap) was forced to flie speadilie, and secretlie, to Reames, for his safegard, (whear not long after he Dyed.)
I omitt the practises, at S. Germain in 2. S. Germain. Laye, against bothe the king, and Quene moother: which was so manifestlie discouered, that Mole and Coconas lost ther heads for it. And the error in the ill managing of Comment M. Castelnau. that matter, (so manie heads and hands being in it) bred the occasion of great trovvbles.
Further more, to informe yow of ther 3. Battels. open and actual rebellion, whearin they sought by the sword in ther hands, to compell the king, to Pacification. Remember first that furious and memorable battell, vpon the playnes of Dreux; the batle of S. Denis; the batle of Iarnac; the batle of Coutras: the batle of Moncontour: and the beseaging of Roane, (whear the king of Nauar lost his lyfe. At S. Denis the Constable was slayne: and at Iarnac the Prince of Conde: and at Coutras the noble Duke of Ioyeuse, ended his Dayes. The fealdes ar yet stayned: France was let blood too prodigallie, and straingers wear brought in as surgeons, to launch the wounds of it

(which haue left behing them greater cawse of lamentation, then remembrance.)
And for that of Moncontour, whear the Admiral stood alone, as the sole Champion of the Reformed churches the Missa-Pulta ded testifie, vvhat ther principal quarrel was; which by Bezaes deuise was aduanced, as a Basilisk, to beat down the Royal standard of France, and the Labarum and cross of Constantine.
Touching the Owtrages, and assassinates committed by these holie fathers, and ther disciples (who ar sayd, to be so innocent, for blood and murder.) Poltrot shall haue the first place in the Callender, (for killing the Duke of Guise the kings Lieutenant Generall, in so horrible manner.) who confessed before the Quene Moother, that Beza had Catechised, and encooraged hym, to that heroic all action.
2. Remember also how the protestants, in Valentia, vsed Seigneur de la Motte-Gondrin (the kings Lieutenant in Daulphine,) who promised them not to bring in the Gendarmerie to force them: yf they would liue peacablie vvith the Catholiques. But they assembled ther forces, surprised and ha^ged hym vp in cold blood, both in contempt of the king, and skorn of his office. (A villanie not tollerable in

anie common welth, speciallie, when such tolleration and conniuenc, was offred, and with so much fauor.
3. But greater and more inexcusable, was the enterprise of Simon Maye: who was induced by the same spirit, and owt of the same schoole, to kill the Quene moother, and Henry the third. But his purpose vvas discouered, and he was taken, and executed. And this fact, can not be excused nor shifted of by anie coolors. For he confessed it, and accused, Seigneur de la Tour, and Monsieur d'Auantigny (tvvo gentlmen of good parentage, and byrds of one feather,) to haue bean his counsellors, and abbettors. Who both wear apprehended: and yet afterward released by his Maieste. (not willing to search too deape, into that wound; either for the men, or the matter.)
4. Yet this ded not satisfie them; they seazed and took possession of the kings rents, and reuennues: they coyned monie: they surprised the cheaf citties of the realm, Orleans, Troyes, Poictiers. Tours etc. and put in garrison, and gouernors, of ther ovvn choosing, and for ther own ends: and deliuered one of the keyes of France, into the custodie, and government of forreiners. all which being doon, with owt the kings commission: prooued plainelie, that they

vsurped vpon the crown, the cheafe prerogatiues of sooueraintie.
5. Lastlie and most tirannicallie: Nicolas Froumenteau (a minister of the new edition) confesseth (l. des finances de france:) that in Daulphine onelye, the armie of the Huguenots, killed 265. preasts 112. monks and friars, and burnt 900. townes, and villages. And yet, bothe the Caluinists, and others, tell such a pittiefull tale of the massacre at Vassy, by the Duke of Guise: as yf no creweltie had ever bean comparable to that: which how small a matter, how farr from the liking and consent of the Duke it was; when yow heare it declared by Monsieur de Chasteau neuf in his commentaries, yow will say, Parturiunt montes. It was a toye, and trifle in respect, of these crewelties, or of that at Montbrison, that of Mornas in Daulphine, and manie other places. I will not tyre yow, with stories and discours of the calamities of the church in France: whear those that iustly deserued, and vniustly complayned against persecution; ded persequute ther neighbors most vniustly and tyrannicallie. Let the Monsieur Arnold, le Reueille Matt. in Francoys. world iudg it by this: In these ciuil warres, 20. thowsand churches, wear destroyed by the Protestants: and yet these mem vvear born (they say) to edifie the church, Is it

not likelie? Mahomet could doe no more, but plant his doctrine, and establish his Alchoran by his sword as they doe. Novv let them that ar most partiall, consider, (for tho I commend no fact of creweltie I may excuse it.) the Admirall being the principal moouer and instrument of all these perpetuall motions: who can iustlie blame king Charles, by a mean extra ordinarie, to cut of such an extra ordinarie member: rather then so pestilent agangrene, should corrupt the whole bodie, and endainger the head? he, who now in france, as the pettie king of a nevv common vvelth, ruled the peopl (reuolted from ther soouerain:) maintained war against the crovvn, sollicited and called in the ayd of straingers (vpon false and disauovved pretences:) he vvho leuied contributions, exacted tributs, coyned monie, seazed the kings reuennues, inuaded his tovvnes, vvaued all lavves, vvhat title or vvhat punishment doe yovv think his offenc deserueth? for he that vsurpeth the regalities, either seaketh to vvear the Crovvn, or command it. And bycavvs he vvas proclaymed traytor, 1569 I may call his offenc, treason.
But per adventure, yovv may dreame, ^hat this age is a refynor of all former errors ^nd transgressions: and that novv ther is

more ciuil and charitable proceading by the Huguenots. Ther for I will represent breaflie vnto yovv, the trevv state and condition, of the reformed churches, in France, at this tyme 1621.
I passe over, the infinit trowbles, labor, and charges, that king Lewes was forced to bear and endure, all that sommer and winter: I omitt the garboyles at Toures: and the practise of the Rochellers, to put in 6000. men into Saumur; therby to cut owt sufficient vvork for the armie therabowt, and so hinder ther march to Montauban. I will not delate, nor discourse vpon the reuolt and disloyall practises at Gergeau (who stood owt, against the Count S. Paul, governor of the prouince of Orleans: as Sancerre ded, against the Prince of Conde.)
I vvill not exaggerate, the treacheries and conspiracies of Vatteuile, in Normandie (plainelie prooued, by his papers and instructions intercepted:) whearupon the Duke of Longueuille, was constrayned to disarme them of Deape, Roan and Caen, to preuent the dainger, yf they should ioyn vvith Vatteuil. But I vvill beginn vvith S. Iohn d'Angely; vvhich held ovvt, and refused submission long, (the king, being there in person:) and though Monsieur de

Soubize vvas sommoned to render the tovvne, or stand to the perill and attaint of treason, yet they ded hold owt and defend it, so long as there remained anie hope.
How was his Maiestie defyed and despised, at Montauban wheare he continued at the seage a long tyme, vvith noble, and most expert soldiers, not with owt the deathe and losse, of manie gallants, and men of good desert and seruice (specially the tvvo brothers, the Duke de Mayn, and Marquis Villars, who wear generallie lamented.) Yet the Consuls wold not yeald, the commons vvear obstinate: and so the king by good aduise raised the seage. And after his departure, the Insolent Burgers, led (as in a triumphe) all the Cleargie of the towne, with skorn full indignities. And the Huguenots in Montpellier and Languedock, depriued Monsieur Chastillon from all gouernemens, by sentenc of the consistorie, and razed 36 churches.
Now as these reformers vsurp vpon the Royalties of the king: so ar they as bold with the inheritanc of priuate Lords, vvhen it may serue ther turns. They vvold not suffer, the Vicount Lestrainge, to enioye his lordship of Priuas, bycause he was a Catholik: and they put hym owt of his ovvn castel of Lake (vvhereof the Marshall

Memorancie put hym in possession,) and gaue it to Buson (one of ther fraternitie) as belonging to hym: tho it vvas none of the townes of Assuranc, comprised in the list at Brewet 1598. Neither would these good men, permitt the kings Iustices (being delegated thether, to compound the controuersies) either to heare masse, or haue anie vse of ther religion.
What societie, what common welth can stand and continew, yf this Anarchie stand and beare such swaye? Yf by pretenc of religion, they may disseise the right owner: and hold what they can compass, for the vse and assuranc of ther confaederates?
But why doe they ryot, and rage thus? what cawse haue they, to run such desperate and disobedient courses? the king is graciouslie content, they should quietlie and safelie vse and exercise ther own religion: yet this contents, them not; they will not demean them selfs, quietlie nor conuerse peaceable with the Catholiks: nor obey the kings lawes, in temporall affayres. yovv can neither dowbt, nor be ignorant of this.
For ded not the king assure them, at S. Iohn d'Angely, that he would protect all of the reformed religion, that wold obey hym, and obserue his edicts? ded he not

both promise and perform the like to St Malloret, deputie of the assemblie of base Guien? ded he not the like, to the Duke of Tremouille (sonn in law, to Monsieur de Bouillon) who cam to that seage, tendred his seruice, and protested his obedienc to his maiestie? ded not the king committ the government of that famous Saumur, to the Count de Sault, granchild of the Duc Desdiguieres: tho he knevv hym to be of the reformed religion? Ded he not long before 1615. ansvver the petitions of the Huguenots, that he meant not by his oath at consecration (vvhich vvas for repressing haeresies) to co^prehend therin, his subiects of the reformed religion, who would liue vnder his lawes, obedienc, and order?
And how graciouslie the king haith delt vvith Rochel, and hovv vvilling rather to regaine and reduce, then to destroye it: appeared vvel, by his employing of Monsieur Desdiguieres, to persvvade them to obedienc and conformitie: who accordinglie ded sollicit them by letters: and proposed diuers arti^les, vvhich he thought reasonable, but the deputies Ch^las, and Fauas refused them. What could a king doe more, then seak to vvinn his subiects? vvho not vvith standing, published a long and friuolous declaration, taxim hym for

vniust persecution, by the counsel and enducement of the enemies of the state, and ther religion.
To disprooue and discouer the vanitie thereof; I vvill deliuer the cawses of the kings proceadings, against these mal contents: and vvhat reason he had, by armes to mantain his royal authoritie, which they vniustlie by armes, sought to vsurpe. Ther for he was constrayned at Nyort, to proclayme Rochel and ther adhaerents, rebels against hym, and guiltie of treason.
1. For first it appeared by the Edict of Nants art. 77. that king Henry the fou^ht, discharged the protestants, from holding anie assemblies, generall or prouincial: and likewise from all vnions and leagues: and from houlding anie councells, or by them decreing and establishing anie acts. Also art. 82. he ordered, that they should forbeare, from all practises and intelligenc, with in or withowt the realme. And art. 32. that they should not hold anie Synods, prouinciall, withowt a licenc obtayned by the king. All vvhich they promised the king to obserue: and let France iudg, whether they hane broken ther promise or no.
2. Besides they intrude vpon the state, and both taik and fortifie places of assurance,

vvithovvt the kings warrant, and against the order set down, August 1612. whearas it is euident, it depends vpon the kings fauor and goodnes, to grant and assign the places of suretie, and not for them selfs, to choose and vsurp them.
3. Add to that, ther presumption and disobedienc, to introduce the reformed churches, of Bearn, and adioyn them to France, by an act of vnion both spiritual and temporall, in the assemblie at Rochel 1617. and they mayd an apologie therof, promising to assist Bearn, in case of oppression. and bownd them selfs by oath, 1. to obserue and execut all that should be determined in that assemblie: 2. and to employe, there liues and goods in maintenanc thereof: 3. and not to reueal the propositions, aduises, and resolution of the assiftants to anie person what soever, (not excepting the king.) And all this was doon contemptuouslie, knowing that the king had sent to all the prouinces, and ded expresslie for bed that vnion; and knovving that the king had set dovvn order in his councel to the contrarie, Besides how ded they vse ^egnard, whon the king sent commissioner for the church goods in Bearn? vvhat disorder they committed at Pau, against hym, it is skarse credible.

4. I vvil passe over the assemblie they mayd at Loudun, vvith obstinate disobedienc: I will only note and show yow, how they presume to encroach, vpon the kings graces and fauors to them, withowt, order or dispensation. The king permitted them, to assemble at Grenoble: and by ther own authoritie, they assembled at Nismes. The king suffered the^ to assemble at Chastelleraut, or Saumur, onelie to choose ther two deputies, (who wear to remain at court, and there to receaue and exhibit, all ther complaints and greuances.) But they co^trarilie mayd an act of ^nion: and for ther assemblies: and took the same oath, which the leaguers before had mayd: but vvith this differenc, that they protested ther seruice to the king, so long as he remained Catholik: but the Huguenots, contrarily, (le souuerain empire de Dieu demeurant tousiours ^n son entier.) So ther seruice vvas reserued to God; but none to the king, was expressed. And they shovved ther mynds most playnlie vvhen they sent to the camp at Sansay, to ioyn with them that ded oppose, the kings marriage. But this vvas not all.
5. They established in each prouinc of France a Councel, to heare of the affayres, orders, and government of the contrie:

and importunatelie vrged, to haue counsellors in the parliement, at Paris.
6. I will add yet one act, more odious, and of more presumption, and treason, then all the rest: which was mayd at the assemblie of Rochel, 1621. whear ovvt of ther own authoritie, they deuided the prouinces of France, into vij. Synodes, which they called circles, and added Bearn for the viij. And therin, wear orders sett down for governing the armie: and a general, and officiers for each circle, (as yf they meant, to cantonize France.) And they decreed, art. 11. that no treatie, nor truce should be mayd withowt ther assemblie: art. 35. that the general assemblie in respect of ther great charge, should arrest the kings rents, and moonie devv for tayles, aydes, gabells, etc. and appoint officers for collecting the same. art. 36. that they should seaze, and let to farme, all goods Ecclesiastical and profits of churches, and reuennues of personages. And art. 41. they took the like order for all the profits of the Admiraltie (vvhich articles vvear signed, by the President Combart.) And all this, is pretended to be iustice, and not disobedienc; and as fowle as the fault is: it is couered vvith the fayre shadovv, of Gloria Patri, and vvith the name of religion. And surelie, it

vvas vviselie, sayt of Tullie, Totius in iustitia nulla Capitalior, quam corum, qui cum maxime fallunt, id tamen agunt, vt viri boni videantur.
I vvill not declare the opinion of the Ciuilians, what a sect is, and which ar iustlie called conuenticles, and congregations, against the prince, and the ancient lawes in force: and hovv saction and Conspiracie ar defined, (vvhich ar practised and vsed for the propagation thereof:) and vvhether they be within the compass of treason or no? I refer yow to Farmacius parte 4. to Decius l. 7 c. 7. and c. 20. to Bossius, and to Gigas, who can with better authoritie resolue yow. I vvill onely alledg the municipal lawes of France, (which heartofore haue bean the bridle of Iustice, to curbe and break such vnrulie colts.)
And first this decree was mayd by king lewes 11. 1477. All treaties, against the kings person, or his estate, and the realme: wear decreed to be treason.
To the same effect, a law was enacted by Charles the VIII. 1487. By Frances the I. 1532. By Frances the II. at Fountainbleau 1560. And by Henry the II. 1556. all men wear prohibited to bear armes, or to entertain anie particuler intelligences, or to hold anie counsells, or assemblies for conferenc, but in town hovvses, or publik places. By

Henry III. at Bloys 1579. an inhibition vvas mayd, to assemble anie trovvpes vnder pretenc of particuler quarrels, or to enter into anie association: and it vvas enacted that to hold intelligenc; or maik leagues offensiue; or to haue participation within, or vvithovvt France: or to leure men of vvarr withovvt the kings licenc, should be iudged and deamed as High treason, and the offendores to be holden as disturbers of the state. All vvhich lavves ar set down in the Code of Henry the III. printed at Paris 1597.
And all lawyers, assirme the same by the common lawes of the land, Frances Rogueau, des droicts royaux: Bodin de repuclica: legrand Coustumier: and other. And, good reason. For as withowt order, ther can be no peace: so withovvt Iustice, no societie: and Caluinists differ (in that poynt) nothing from Anabaptists, yf they vvill not subiect them selfs, to the obedienc of lawes, and magistrates: (who as king Iosaphat sayd 2. Paralipum. 19. non hominis, sed Dei exercent iudicium.) And surelie, I may bodlie affirme, that Caluimsm haith cast the state of France, into a desperate disease, and such as requireth an Aesculapius: yf neither the maiestie, nor the forces of a king (the eldest sonn of the church:) nor

the vvisedom of his Counsell and Parliements: nor the authoritie of the, estates so oft assembled: nor the obedienc dew to Iustice; nor the peace and safetie of the kingdome, can mooue these owt lavves of Rochel and Montauban, and the rest, to yeald vp to the king them selfs and ther armes; and seak for that royall grace and pacification; vvhich all his other devvtiefull subiects of ther ovvn tribe, doe merciefullie enioye.


THE 3. TIT. OF THE REFORMED CHVRCHES IN SCOTLAND.
BVT perauentur, yf this fierie zeale, of The cavvs of the trovvbles in Scotland. these Rabbines of Geneua, wear transferred into Scotland, (a coulder Climate:) it would be quiklie cooled, and qualified, and procead vvith a better temper. No surelie* for it haith bean tryed by exampl, of an infamous Emperick: vvho, both inflamed, and corrupted the vvhole bodie of that kingdome, with his irregular zeal and such aboundanc of ill humors; as therby grew a pleurisie of trowbles in that state, which could not be cured withowt effusion of much blood.

The authors and actors of the alterations and tumults in Scotland, vvear as violent as whirlewynds; which blow down all that stood in ther vvaye, euen the crown it self, and royaltie. Iohn knox, Goodman Gilby, and Primo ther doctrine. Buchanan, (wear the principal instruments, and the legati a Latere, from maister Caluin.) who vvhear brauelie seconded, by mais. Dauid Fergusson (a learned shoemaker, and minister of Dundee) by M. Couerdale, Willox, Rous, Harriot, and Mongommerie: Victrix legio, and Nouatores strenui.
All of them Ministers, and such salt-peter men, as vvear fitt for fyre vvorkes, and to prepare matter for povvder, to blow vp the state of the cleargie of anie nation.
And by these rare men, vvas the Church of Scotland repayred, and reformed: according to the scantling of Geneua, and the Platforme of the Elders.
Knox, farr vnlike to Nehemias, both for course, and qualitie: yet he acted his part, how properlie, and piouslie, Langey his contrieman can tell yovv, vvho ded vvrite of his vertues.
For Buchanan, he vvas euer a rude and slouenlie Swiz, of a presumptious audacitie, and factious nature. he vvas one of them that in Edinborough, in the tyme of king Iames the fifth, ded solemnlie in Lent ear

the Paschal lamb: and being conuicted for that Iudaisme: which the king hym self examined: his partners vvear condemned and burnt for that haeresie; and he escaped and fled over into other contries, (as a man reserued to be a plague to his ovvne.)
But yf yow vvould discerne and trie ther spirits, ther peceablenes, ther patienc, and ther sanctitie read there Theoremes, and by the maximes of ther doctrine, yovv vvil fynd them extraordinarie Doctors, and skarselie matchable.
Knox libro, ad nobilitat. and populum Scot. beginus thus to instruct them. Neque promissum, neque iuramentum obligare potest populum: vt obediat, and auxilietur tyrannis contra Deum.
And in his Historie of Scotland, pag. 372. Princes may be Deposed by the people, yf they be tyrants against God, and his truthe: and ther subiects ar free from ther Oathes and obedienc.
And that yow may not think, that onelie, knox ded hold this opinion. his fellovv Good man also, in his book of obedienc, sings the same note owt of Exod. 17. Toti populo (saith he) hoc onus incumbit, vt animauertat in idolatram quemcunque nemo excipitur, siue Rex, siue Regina, siue Imperator. This is his Homelie, wherby he warranteth the people to punish anie Idolater, be he

king or Quene. And how, and by what order, is that to be doone? This is Gods commandement, to the people, vt in simili defectione, rectores suos, quia Deo ipsos abducunt, a^fu^cas abripiant and suspendan. Yf the gouernors fall from God, or with draw the people from the trevv vvorship of God: they may worthilie draw ther kings and rulers to Tiburn, and hang them vp.
Buchanan in his book de iure regni Scotiae, is not behind them in such graue and wholesom counsels. For he saith. pag. 61. The people is aboue the king, and of greater authoritie: they haue right, to bestovv the crovvn at ther pleasur: they may arraign ther princes, and depose them: to them it appertaines to maik lavves, and tho princes to execute them. These be the Prouerbs, of that Salomon of Scotland, as provvd vvith the concept of his ovvn iudgment in these misteries, as vvith his poetrie and ballets. This was a man vvelchosen to instruct a prince: but better to infect his auditors.
Yet is ther one aduise of knox, vvhich is to be recorded with admiration. fol 372. It vvear good, that revvards vvear publicklie appointed by the peopl for such as kill tyrants, as vvell as for those that kill vvolfs. Novv they all accoumpt those kings tyrants, who ar professors of the Catholick religion: and

so they know, what to trust to, yf the Knoxians can preuayle.
But yf yow will yet, haue a litl patienc, yow shal heare a most prophan dialogue of Buchanans, (whearin he neither shovveth diuinitie, nor humanitie.) They hold saith he) kings must be obeyed good or bad. It is blasphemie so to say. But God placeth oft euel kings, to punish the people: yea, and so d^th he oft, priuate men to kill them. But 1. Timoth. vve ar commanded to pray for princes: yea, so vve ar also to pray for theau^s. But Paul commands obedienc to kings: yea, Paul ded vvrite so in the infancie of the church, but yf he liued novv, he vvold say othervvise. As yf this tyme, ded affoord a more ripe and solide iudgment, then S. Paul could apprehend.
It is most trew, that great high-Soaring poeticall witts, haue ordinarilie, some taint and touch of frensie: for other vvise he vvould never haue vvritten thus madlie, vsteron proteron, setting the Cart before the horse, the people before the king, confusion to overrule Order, and Anarchie before a Monarchie. Thus the people is armed to kill tyrants, by ther doctrine; but by what lavve? for yf they doe it not by iustice, and order; it is an act of confusion, and impietie. Yea, but the zeal of Gods truth, and the light of the gospell, be the

sword of Gedeon, and the armes of Iudith; but who must draw and direct that svvord? the people, and euen against the king hym self? what is Anarchie, disloyaltie, and sedition; yf this be order, and government?
To procead. what nead I trovvble yow further: see the book of daingerous positions who giueth this sentenc of them: this nevv diuinitie, (saith he) is not holden by knox and Buchanan alone: but generallie for ought I can perceaue, by most of the Cheaf Consistorians beyond the seas. That is by Caluin and Beza, and all ther brood: (who haue bean heartofore abowt 1570. so much reuerenced and esteamed in England: that both the schooles, and the pulpits, ded magnifie them, as Oracles of the Church: for vvhose releaf and perseruation, publick collections, and prayers vvear mayd in the kindome.
And bycause yovv shall not err, and coniecture, that these books and opinions wear never approoued at Geneua: remember the precedent discourse of the reformed churches in France: and call to mynd that maister Whitingham, (in his preface to the book of obedienc,) testifieth that the same was allowed, and commended by the cheafe deuines of that cittie (1. Geneua.) And Caluin hym self, epist. 305. to

knox. Doth applawd and encourage hym to procead. And Bucchanans works, ded passe as current in Scotland, and cum priuilegio; till (long after the impression of them) the king ded prohibit them to be printed, or published.
So as yow may see it was not one Goodman, nor one knox; that taught and defended these impious paradoxes, but the whole congregation of Puritans: and not in one contrie, but vniuersallie: and not latelie or newlie, but originallie, and as ther peculiar and proper discipline. Nay, ther holie Geneua bibles prooue it: to be so: whear in ther notes vpon the 2. Chron. c. 15. @. 16. they allow, the Deposing of Quene Macha, by her sonn king Asa, for idolatrie: and yet reprehend hym, for want of zeal, that he put her not to Death by fyre. The like axiomes, ar not allowed at Doway: nor the like notes, arr fownd in the Reames testament.
But all this, though it be baed enough: yet ther practise and the execution of ther decrees is vvorse. The Bushop of Ross, Leslaeus in the. 10. book of his storie. Eo (in quit) knoxij prorupit audacia, vt publice pro concione nobiles perstrinxerit, quod Iesabelem ex medio non sustulerunt. Yet these weare but words, now blowes follow.
He and thirtie of his compaine begon

ther reformation of religion, by surprising the castl of S. Andrews, withowt warrant or commission:) and murdering the Cardinal Betun, 1546.
The Quene regent summoned hym to appeare, and answer for these owtrages; he refused it. she proclaymed hym traytor: he contemned it. then she sought to apprehend, and restrain hym: but he sollicited the burgesses of S. Iohnston, and Dundee, to suppresse the frieries, to pull down images, and to overthrovv the Abbeis of Skone, and S. Andrevvs, vvhich they effected. And yet they left not so for they  keapt the feald two monthes; they took the coyning irons into ther custodie; and (as commanders) ded what they thought fitt for ther purpose, withowt resistance. And this ther furious disorder, ded break the hart of that noble, and religious Quene Regent.
But stay a litle: I will relate vnto yow a 2. A parlieme^t. 1560. storie, of the greatest and most disloyall Barbarism, that euer vvas committed by Christians in anie nation.
In the yeare 1560. (the Quene being in France;) by the instigation of knox, they enacted this as, a perpetual and fundamentall law of the state, to abolish the Catholick religion: and they decreed, that whosoever

defended the popes authoritie in Scotland should be banished: and further they repealed all former acts, of the ancient kings mayd to the contrarie.
But by whome, was this law mayd? the words of the act show. The thre estates vnder standing, that the iurisdiction of the pope, hes bean contumelious to God, etc.
Quo vvaranto, was this parliement, summoned and ratified? for hear is showed no commission, from the Quene, expressing anie authoritie giuen to them for that end: nor her consent is produced to confirm such an act. So hear is a parliement of the thre estates, withowt a king: and disanulling the precedent acts of all former kings. a thing incredible, in a kingdome: ther soouerain liuing, and obeyed as king. and to maik that seame good by order of lavv, which of it self vvas most disorderlie and defectiue: they procured an other parlieme^t 1567. Earl Murrie being rege^t, and the king skarse owt of his cradle) to confirme the validitie of that parliement 1560. and therin cap. 9. was an oath drawen to be giuen to all succeading kings, to mantain that religion then receaued: and to establish the confession of that church. and for the defects of this second parliement; I forbear to vrg them, they ar euident.

Had not the Quene then reason, to send the french forces into Scotland: to bridle such vsurpers, and so seditious practises of her subiects? But yet a greater mischeaf followes.
By the Instigation of these Caluinists, and by the ambition of some noble men. 3. The Quenes depriuation. They depriued the Quene from her government; and dishonored her vvith the most capitall and criminal accusations, that slander and mallice could deuise: and cast her into prison not vvhithovvt, dainger of her lyfe. All vvhich vvas furthered by Beza, (the Tibullus of Geneua) vvho Epistola 78. ad Bucchanan. prouoked them to it, calling her Medea, and Athalia: and nullum illius sceleribus idoneum nomen inuenio. And hovv vn merciefullie he pleaded against her, (after she was prisoner in England,) for the hate he hed beare to the hovvse of Lorraine: it appearith by his book of Reueille-matin.
And tho I am apter to burie old quarrels, them to renew ther memorie: yet to Iustifie Innocencie, and to discouer perfectlie the practises of Puritanisme, and to detect the iugling and craftie conveyanc of these conspirators: I hold it necessarie, to declare exactlie vvhat inducements vvear pretended, for so heynous an offence.

They alledged, that it was doon for the zeal to iustice, for the honor of the realme, for the satisfaction of forrein nations (who much detested so crijng sinns as Murder, and adulterie:) and ther for they wear forced, to keap her in prison, till she could cleare her self, for procuring the death of her husband; and purg her self, of that intention to marrie Bothwel.
Touching the Murder. It was vnlike to 4. For the murde of her ^usband, be trew: for her sex was not fitt for such a butcherie: and a royal nature, could not harbour such a dishonorable treacherie, (though she had iust cawse of offe^ce against  hym.) And yf she would haue vsed means to put hym to deathe: he was her subiect;  and she might haue doone it, openlie and legallie, by course of iustice. Bycause he vvas of the Confederacie, to kill Dauid her secretarie (in whose bodie his dagger was fownd.) And further the E. Murton, being fled into England for that offenc; vvithowt the Quenes konwledg, and allowanc, her sayd husband reuoked hym. But they obiect, that Dowgleish (E. Botwels main) was executed for it. trew. But what then? It was he that brought a box of letters of the Quenes to Bothwell, which he receaued (to carrie to his maister) of St Iames Balfour at Edinborow: and by the

intercepting of these, all ther packing was reuealed. Lyes haue ever one leg short, to maik them halt.
1. First was it like, that either the Quene or the Earl wold repose such confidenc in Sr Iames, and so great secrets? knowing hym to be at the deuotion of the contrarie faction?
2. Or was it like, that she would send them at all, hauing giuen commandement in the letters, to burn them: which she might haue doone at home, withowt sending them to hym?
3. Besides the Quene denied the letters to be hers, (tho her hand was counterfeited) as some tymes before it had bean.
4. Further more ther was neither superscription, endorsement, seal, nor date of them: so as they wear liker to be copies, or proiects, or fictions of her ennemies.
5. Add also, that he (vvho deliuered them, could never be fovvnd ovvt, to discouer the pack: and Dovvgleish who vvas accused to carrie them) protested at his deathe; that he never knew of anie such letters: and ther for to stopp his mouth, he was executed by the Lords of that faction, owt of the waye.
6. Lastlie, yf the Quene had sent them, yet was ther contained in these fictions,

no expresse proofe of anie vnlawfull act, or attempt, or practise, to charge her vvith: And yf ther had bean pregnant proofs, that she had endeauored to haue her husband murdered; and to marrie Bothwel, (which is the worst of the case:) doe yovv taik that to be a sufficient and lavvfull cavvse for subiects to taik armes against her, and depose her? Holie king Dauid was in the like case, and yet for his trespasses against Vrias, and Bersaba, he ded not forfeit his crown, nor endure so hard a censure, as Quene Marie ded. S. Iohn Baptist reprooued Herod for his adulterie: but ded neither counsell nor exhort the peopl to depriue hym, tho he vvas an I dumean, and an vsurper. neither was Edward the IV. threatned deposing, for keaping an other mans wyfe: nor Henrie the eight, for cutting of the heads of so manie his own wiues, and committing as great sinns spectante populo: for mihi vindicia, is Gods prerogatiue; subiects ar not competent iudges of ther soouerains.
And surehe these boute-feux, while they presume to punish ther kings for sinn: precipitate them selfs, into haeresie, (euen that which Wiclef, and Muncer haue bean, by general counsells condemned for.) Such is the furie of vndiscreat zeale, like a sword in

a madd mans hand. But to return to the matter, what probabilities, what vehement presumptions, ded they produce against her? 1. she mourned fayntlie for his death, (which was a sign she was wearie of his lyfe.) and 2. again, she acquited Bothwel for his death, and ded not punish hym. What a Nugipoliloquides, vvas Bucchanan? must princes be deposed vpon probabilities? or vvear these signes, anie evidenc matterial? for her mourning, and the funerals; the bodie was embalmed: he had the honor to be enterred, besides king Iames her father: the Lord Traquare, Iustice Clark, and others attended the corps to the graue: most of the Counsel being protestants, would not admitt the Catholique ceremonies: neither is it the custome in Scotland, to reseru the corps 40. dayes: and lastlie, it vvas not decent for her to be there and mourn personallie, as a subiect, but as a soouerain and yet his vvyfe: and that she performed so long, till both her counsell and phisicions dislwaded her, (as Syr Henrie kiligrew might witnes, vvho vvas sent from England, to condole, and confort her. What could be required more of a wyfe?
Now touching Earl Bothwel; the Iugling Touching E. Bothvvell. of Murrie and his faction, is worthie

to be reuealed; was not Bothwel acquited for this cryme by his peares? euen by Murton,  (who best knew it) by the lord Lindsie, the lord Semplie, and ther adaerents, who procured his purgation. Ded not also  the same parties, procure some of the nobles to ioyn with them, and sollicite the Quene to marrie Bothwel, and taik a hustand to defend her, (to which in a manner, they forced her?) and ded not they also  by ther handwriting, bynt them selfs to obey hym, yf he wold marrie her? and ded they not futhermore (of ther own motion) procure the diuorce of Bothwel, for that  purpose onelie, from his wyfe the Earl of Huntlies sister? these, ar all vndowbtedlie trew, and a sufficient proof of ther double dealing.
And touching the Murder, the Lord Harris, accused Murrey of it: and the reason was, bycause at Cragmillar castel, he, Murton, and Bothwel, consulted, conspired, and determined the kings death: and ther wear indenturs mayd, and subscibed for the effecting of it. And that yow may not stagger and dowbt of this. Powrrie, Paris, and Hay wear all executed for the murder; and at ther death, they ded call God to witnes, that these tvvo (Murrey and Murtan) wear the principall contriuers

of that assassinate. And Iohn Hepburn, Bothwels seruant, ded the like at his execution, for the same fact, protesting that he had sean ther articles and writings.
And yet is it mayd more manifest by this, and ther cryme and practise more odious: for to blind the world, first they took armes, as they sayd, to apprehend Bothwel; and after they sent owt shippes to pursew hym at sea Both, wear fallacians: for they never meant it. for yf they wold haue apprehended hym: vvhy ded they dismiss hym? and why ded they send the Lord Graing, to aduise and will Botwell to depart, and promised that none should follow, and pursew hym? and so in dead no man was haistie to doe it, (tho he stayed two months till Murries return:) for they knew, that by taking hym, they should be bewrayed them selfs; and therfor they meant to betray and ouerreach hym; and offer hym vp, as a sacrifice to the mallice of the world, for ther own purgation.
So then these two Catelines cawsed the king to be slayne, and vsed Bothwels assistanc and help in it: and then accused bothwel, and the Quene, as the conspirers and contriuers of it. (tho till her emprisonment, she ded never know, vvho wear the accessaries, or who wear the Principals.)

Now to diue to the bottome and deapth of the cawse.
The E. Murrie never loued trewlie the Lord Darlie: he was once in armes and in the feald to haue kild hym; and therupon fled into England (wherby appeared his good disposition.) Also he perswaded the Lord Darlie, to haue a hand, in killing Dauie the Quenes secretarie: at which tyme, they set a pistol to the Quenes bellie, being then great with child, to terrifie her (whearby she might haue bean in dainger to miscarrie.) After ward the lord Darlie, then king) seing his own dainger, craued, and obtained the Quenes gracious pardon: and yet fearing least Murrey might misinform the Q. against hym, resolued to kil Murrey, and discouered his intention to the Q. abowt it, who would not suffer nor endure to hear it.
This comming to Murries knowledg; as he had before practised to estraing the Quene from her husband; and offerd to procure and sew ovvt her diuorce from hym (vvhich she vtterlie condemned:) so novv he resolued to haue hym mayd avvaye, (and yet conninglie before the murder) he went from the court, and after into France, that he might be thought innocent, in the matter.

And trewlie all thes things appeared, plainlie to the Quenes commissioners, who hard the cavvse at york: as it seamed by the notes of Syr Raphe Sadlers (touching that busienes: vvhich I haue sean:) but it vvas mayd aftervvard as cleare as the sonn, by the execution of the E. of Murton.
Now vpon these false and treacherous fowndations, they grownded ther disloyal conspiracie and seditions, at Ca^barie hill; ther slanderous libells: ther imprisoning her at Lough leuin: and the act of parliement for her deposition, as appeareth by the vvords of the statute 1567. (bycause yf she liued still Quene, she might taik reueng of her vvrongs:) and lastlie the resignation of her crovvn, (vvhich they stowtlie affirmed at york, to haue bean voluntarie, and of her own seaking.) But whether it vvas voluntarilie resigned, and by her ovvn election: ther course of proceading vvill maik it manifest. For first (when they had conspired, that she should be forced to resign, or to loose her lyfe) they drew a forme of resignation, fitt for ther purpose. Then Athol, Liddington, and the rest, sent Sr Robert Meluin, to signifie her dainger: and to persuade her to yeald, to ther motions for the resignation. and subtillie, they alledged (as owt of ther dewtie, and

welwishing) that it could not preiudice her being extorted.
Also Syr Nicholas Throgmotton, arriued at the same tyme in Scotland, (but vpon other pretences:) and was a fitt man to further the contriuing of that busienes, (and what wynd soever ded blow hym thither: he ded his work, like a conning artificer, and deserued well to haue bean created lord Hurlie.)
Afther thes preparations, cam the lord Lindsey with commission from the counsell, (whose hand had bean washed before in Dauids blood:) and with stearn and grim looks, tendered the writings vnto her: vvith fearfull threatning, yf she ded refuse them* and therupon she subscribed them being a prisoner; and to saue her lyfe, lost her crown.
Call yovv this a free resignation? The act of parliement in dead calleth it so (1567) and she gaue power to the l. Lindsey and Ruthen, (as her dearest frends, and so in dead they wear) in her name to renoune the government, and to appoint, Murrey the Regent, (which he had long, and earnestlie gaped for.) and in Cap. 12. they decreed she should remain prisoner till her tryall: and Cap. 19. her enditement was drawen most scandalouslie. The cavvses

alledged for her resignation wear these. First she vvas vvearied: then, she was notable in bodie and spirit to endure the paynes: and that she might in her lyfe tyme, see her sonn setled in the gouernme^t, (then vvhich, nothing could be more ioyous to her.) and it is trew, I think she was vvearie of such tyrannous disloyaltie: but in the flovvre of her age, ther vvas no likelihood either of her disabilitie to gouern; or of her weaknes, and such infirmities, as that she could not endure the paynes. but for her sonn, in his cradle; that was the way to be ridd of them both. But Domini est salus, euell^^ de laqueo p^des suorum.
And to conclude after the Quene straingelie escaped, at Hammilton (the hous of a noble familie, and well affected:) she reuoked all, and protested, and confessed, the force and violenc offred to her: so as ther was neither formall, nor orderlie proc^^ding in procuring it. besides the noble earls of Hontlie, and Arguyle: the lo. Harris, and others never consented to it. and in that parliement, ther was not aboue 4. Earls, 6. lords, one Bushop, and 3. Abbots.
Could not religion be planted in Scotland, withowt such treasonabl shifts? ded yow euer read of such impostors, or men of

so large conscience, to maik show of reforming religion, and to abuse the world with the name of pietie? The Apostles obeyed Nero, (a tyrant and a monster:) and suffred death, rather then they would geue exampl of disobedienc. Te ancient fathers, obeyed Dio^letian, and Iulian (tho an apostata.) Elias reprooued Achab; but ded not sollicit the people to commotion. D. Bilson, alledgeth manie reasons, to disprooue such conspiracies, (as directlie contrarie to gods words, vpon anie surmises what so euer, all which yow shall see hear after.) and surelie not withowt sound reason.
For warr mayd by a subiect against his king, is vniust though the cawse be iust: and why? the iustnes of the cawse can not geue lawfull power. A iust cawse; a good intention: power and iurisdiction, must concurr, to maik such publick actions warrantable. so yf a king hym self taik armes, for an vniust cawse: though his intention be good, the warr is bad. Yet ar not subiects warranted properlie to taik vpon them, the cognisance and iudgment thereof: they must leaue that to the high tribunal of heauen, and to the kings conscience. But these commotions in Scotland, wear popular tumults, and conspiracies against ther soouerain: and had no good cawse, nor good inte^tion:

and no authoritie at all. Now bycause I am vrged to discouer the trew and principal motiues, that induced these men, to cast them selfs into such a Goulf: as they must either neads perish: or runn the whole state vpon a rock, and wrack it. I vvill tell yow, owt of Aesopes fables, a tale, to diuert, and refresh yow.
In Affrica ther wear two great forests, near adioyning. in the one a Lyon gouerned the beasts, in the other a Lyones. The Lyon (being rich, and full of praye and booties:) feared least the Lyones should seak a forrein mate, and growe of greater strenth, and inuade his forest: and therfor called a councel of his beasts, to aduise, how he might rest quiet and assured. The bull (presuming of his strenth, and vsed to gore, all the forren vvolfs that cam in his vvalk) together vvith the bore, and the beare, contemned these vayne feares. An old Ape, that liued in the forest, and was vsed to counterfeit, perswaded the Lyon to fayne kyndnes, For great harts, vvear soonest vvonn vvith fayr semblance. Reignard (the fox) disliked not that: but knovving that the Lyones, had manie hongrie and rauenous wofs, and wilie foxes abowt her: aduised the Lyon, to send the goat, (a graue bearded personage,) to visit the Lyones, and

renew frendship: and vnder that coolor, to Deale both with somme of the wolfs and foxes: and bread in them a iealousie of the lyones, and fear of her creweltie: and therfor to perswade them, to stand vpon ther gard, and maik them selfs a free state, and so liue at libertie and vnder no command.
The Goat performed the seruice wiselie. Now emong the beasts vnder the lyones, ther was a Mongrel in greatest fauor: he hearing the motion consulted with his brethren, and vndertook the busienes; but sayd he, we haue emong vs crevvel beasts, what yf they shall dislike this, and seak to deuowr vs? fear not that, sayd the Goat, we will send vow mastifs to gard and defend yow. Yea, but sayd the Mongrel, what shall we be the better, or the fuller fedd by this: oh sayd the Goat, all the pray is his, who is maister of the feald: get yow the Lambe, and leaue them by th' eares for the purtenance. Thearupon, the Mongrel, with the wolfs and foxes that wear his frends: conspired, entraped the Lyones: and drew her to fall into a deape pitt, owt of which she neuer recouered.
Raignard hearing of this, sent vnto the Mongrell, to gett also into his custodie, the Lyones whelp: and so he should be sure, presentlie to rule and haue all; for I haue

fownd, said he, by experienc, that a present morsell is euer svveatest: and possession is the cheaf poynt in lavv. And aftervvard either the whelp may die; or it shall liue at your pleasure and dispose. This is the fable: the moral I leaue, til I can haue tyme to expownd it and moother Hubbars, tale together. For Heare I would gladlie end, this description of the Puritan church of Scotla^d, the beginning, and the progress thereof: but that I perceaue, yow desyre to know also the trew cawse of this fierie distemper, and the incredible contempt of all authoritie, (which is an accident inseparable to them;) vvhenc it springeth, and vvhy it is more peculiar and proper to a Caluinist, then to anie other sect. I will show yow breaflie my conceipt. Caluin, vvhen he vvas (after his expulsion) inuited home againe from Strasburg, wheare he liued with Bucer, and sucked long of his milk: by the perswasion of his frends, he was content to return to Geneua; vpon condition that he might establish his new discipline, (the Idea wheareof he had apprehended in Germanie.)
So by general consent, he returned: and shortlie after erected his consistorie: which is the Quintessenc of Puritanism, the Oligarchie of Elders, and the Inquisition of Geneua. A strayne of pollicie, farr

aboue Luthers grosse reach. For so he ded foresee, he might become the Dictator of the church at home, and abroad: at Geneua speciallie, to censure all offendors, bridle all oppositions, and perpetuallie invest the eldors (by that authoritie) in the soouerantie and gouernment, bot he of the town and church (which of an Episcopal Hierarchie, they mayd now a perfect oligarchie.) And that it might be receaued abroad with more reuerenc, and be obeyed more religiouslie, and be plausiblie entertained in the world (tho it wear the Idol of his own phantasie.) They set it dovvn as a mark of the trew Church of Christ, and ioyned it, in aequal rank: vvith the preaching of the word, and administration of the sacraments; necessarilie, fundamentallie, and inseparablie.
So then this great Soldan of the Lake, sending his Mammalucks, into euerie prouince of France, planted the first reformed churches there, after this modele of Geneua. Therby the synodes, and assemblies of France, impatronized them selfs vpon the principal townes in the kingdome: negotiated with the nobilitie and commons; and had mutual intelligenc to hether. And making ever (politick^ie) the people partakers of ther eldership, and share authoritie

and command with them: they weare sure alwaies of perpetuall and strong support, and by all probabilitie they hoped, at last to pul down the huge pillers, of the Catholick Church, and to convert all into Caluinism, and set vpp ther throne, ther consistories, and Sanhedrin. This vvas that Medium, whearby in France, in Scotland, in the Palatinate, the puritans mayd them selfs supreme heads, iudges, directors, and commandors of all: and whearby princes, and nobles ar mayd ther wards. Hearupon proceaded such violent courses, such intollerable irregularities: such indiscreat zeale, as I haue allreadie declared. Ded they not at Rochel refuse to speak vvith Monsieur de Bi^on the kings ^^baslador directed vnto them? ded they not so tyre Monsieur Lanoue vvith ther inciuilitie, that he was content to forsake them? And in the articles of Bearn, artic. 25. A^ cheafs, and generalis, ar entoyned to obseru ther Ecclesiasticall disciplin. ordained by ther Synodes.
And see vvhat course they took latelie in the assemblie at Loudun: remember how they of Rochel deuided France, into Circles and prouinces, appointing generals, creating officers, making counsellors, (as yf they had bean the 12. peares of France:) and shooting owt the bolts of ther

exco^mmunications, euen against ther greatest frends, (yf they offend them:) vvherby Monsieur Chastillon, had cawse to discern both ther insolencie, and ther indiscreation, of late, vsed against hym.
Such is the violenc and furie of Caluinism: vvhich, some call the discipline of Gracchus: some, call, the pollicie of the church; some more properlie, the school of faction: but zeale and religion, no man calleth it, but them selfs. And heare it comes fitlie to my mynd, that in the conferenc at Hampton court; a Bushop recited to his maiestie, maister Butlers definition of a Puritan, scil. a Puritan is a Protestant, ovvt of his vvitts. (Which, vvas not so merielie; as trevvlie and substantiallie spoken.) for yf yovv vvould dravv his pettigree, and declare his originall, and of vvhat familie he discended, he is (a Protestant:) ther is his generation. Yf, bycause he comes of a yonger and later howse, yow will assign hym his differenc, and distinguish hym from the rest of his sect: (owt of his witts) is his coonisanc, and badg. Novv, vvhy this differenc is assigned as proper to a Puritan, I will show yow the reason.
We fynd by experienc, that caeremonies and solemnitie, haue ever in the Church stirred vp and bred a reuerenc and deuotion,

in the harts of the vnlearned: and doe eleuate the sowles of the godlie, from mudd and earth, in the tyme of prayer. And so also that order, and grauitie of Bushops and Prelates vvear euer wont to fynd respect and estimation, vvith the people. Novv ask a Puritan, his opinion of, Surples, corner-cap, and the habit of a minister (which distinguish them from the laytie:) he calls them the raggs of Antichrist, the badges of superstition.
For the Communion book; he calls it, the Portes and breuiarie of Satan: and that such sett prayers, extinguish trevv zeale. The Ecclesiasticall courts, he calleth the Synagogue of the Deuel, and the excrements of a corrupted discipline. And what opinion of Bushops, haith he? surelie, the same that Luther had. for vvilliam Ames, saith, Hunc Episcoporum ordinem, e medio tollendum, vel denuo Papam reuocandum ab orco. And the like opinion the English at Amstardam hold, in ther book called confessio fidei anno 1607.
Read the censure they geue of the Cleargie and ministers of England; whome they disgrace to be a multitud, of forlorn Atheists, soldiers of Antichrist, and a bastardlie, ministerie, pag. 16. 11. and 14. and the like is auouched in the book of daingerous

positions, c. 12. From this fountain sprong, the libels of Vdal, Penrie, Martin Iunior, anie work for cooper, supplication to the President of wales, and manie moe: offensiue to the Quene, and trowble some to the state. The spring head of all this was Caluin; who Epist. 305. acknowledged magis sibi placere, reformationem Scoticam quam Anglicanam. and why? Epist. 126 ad Cranmerum. Corruptelis Papatus, audio relictam esse congeriem, quae non obscuret modo sed prope modum obruat purum and genuinum Dei culium. Therupon in Quene Maries tyme, the English church at Geneua was Antagonist to the English church at Frankfort (by whose meanes and endeauors, the authoritie of Bushops, was then defended) which they knew to be the onelie vvay to suppress, Puritanism. so yow see the Puritans ar men that stand vpon ther pantaples; and poynts of honor, for ther disciplin: and vvill not learn of ther prelats, nor be subiect to ther canons and iniunction: vvhearby a man may coniecture they ar not verrie vvell in ther witt. But what meant maister Butler, and what solid reason had he for his definition? Surelie he had hard of the garboyles of France: of ther horrible desseins in Bohemia: and of ther hurlie Burlies in Scotland: he had reade Basilicon Doron,

(written by a pen, sensibl of ther discease and disorder:) he had read the book of Philip Nicholaus, de regno Christi, superintendent and cheaf of the Lutherans at Wirtenberg, full of fearfull predictions of the powr, attempts, and plats, to aduanc the raigne of the consistorians.
He had bean aduertised of the sentenc of Iohn Schuts, (a learned Lutheran, who described them to be men, that in brachio seculari confidunt, and plerumque sunt homines seditiosi, causamque suam ormata manu iueri volunt. Libro 50. causarum. He had hard, the kings opinion of them, in monitoria prefatione ad Imperatorem, thus. Ego a puritanis, non solum a natiuitate, continue vexatus fui, verum etiam in ipso matris vtero, propemodum extinctus, antequam in lucem editus sum. And doe yow think he ded not vnderstand, how the ministers, wear in feald at Starling, vnder  the conduct of some of the nobilitie: and forced the king most presumptuouslie, to yeald his person to them; and how they put a new gard vnto hym, and remooued  the old. And that the ministers Maister Patrick Galloway, Pollard, Carmichel,  Andrevv Meluin, vvear the trumpettors that sownded the Alarum: And fled into England afterward for it. yes verelie, he was not ignorant thereof: nor how Iames

Gibson, called the king Hieroboam, and persequutor, and threatned his extirpation: nor hovv scandalouslie Lawson opposed and affronted the king: nor, how Pont and Baquanquel, by open proclamation, and in the presenc of a publick notarie, wear so hardie as to censure hym, and to withdraw the harts and loue of the people from hym.
Yet this is not all, that may be auerred to disanul these seditions and popular consistories: they ar condemned by ther half brethren (the Swinglians, which is a thing much to be noted. Hear the voyce of Gualtherus, minister of Zurich, Tigurinus, how bitter a sentenc he pronounceth against them, in Comment. in 1. Corinth. cap. 5. saith he, Galli habent sua seniorum consistoria, penes quos, est omnis potestas, and iurisdictio Ecclesiastica: and in quibus omnium bellorum contra regem, and consilia acta, and subsidia collecta sunt. The french ministers haue ther consistories of Eldors in vvhome resteth the supremacie in all cavvses Ecclesiasticall: and by these both all counsells and resolutions ar taken, and all impositions appoynted, to mantain the vvarrs against the king. And vvhat estimation, Musculus holds them vvorthie of; appeareth locis commun. cap. 10. tit. de officijs ministrorum. So yow see, neither of them

bowe the knees, to this Baal, nor magnifie Caluins Idol.
But yf yow would look thorough (with a pearcing eye, the absurdities of the Disciplinarians; read Schulting his Hierarchica Anacrisis, lib. 15. cap. 19. 20. and 22. Whearby yovv may perceaue how all kings ar mayd subiect to ther excommunications, (the trevvlie Brutum fulmen) of these Eldors, and what confusion it breadeth in the ciuil state, (which learned Hooker, wiselie noted:) and gow both nobilitie and commons must assamble at the summons of the pastor (as the head of the parish, the President of the Counsell:) and then, vvhat conclusions they determin and decree, arr rules, and of sufficient authoritie, to bynd the Parish to obedienc.
So euerie parson, is a demi-Pope in his parish: the elders ar suprem magistrates: and Caluin, really Papa and cheaf pastor: though ovvt of his humble pryde, he vvill not vouchsafe to be, nor be called Doctor.
Besides maister Butler, knevv: that vvheare Philautia and Phantasia arr conioyned, and raign as matches predominant. in the breyneand bodie: ther must neads be a hart svvelled and blovvn vp vvith singularitie, and vvith a conceipt, that they onelie knovv the truthe, and the trevv

vvorship of God; and that onelie they stand in grace, as men predestinated to glorieand blesse.
Vpon this dreame, they contemne all others for ther defects and imperfections: and being transported vvith strong passions, and inflamed vvith the feruor of a provvd spirit (more then of charitie, and sober zeale:) they ronn into desperate actions, as furies that regard neither Maiestie, iustice, or gouernment. And in dead ther be some diseases that ronn in a blood, and arr almost hereditarie to some of ther familie (as frensie oft doth:) vvhich leaueth alvvaies a taynt and a spice, of the staggars in ther vitall spirits, as yf they had bean bitten with a mad dogg.
And therfor maister Butler knovving the sumptomata of ther disease: might with skill, and iudiciouslie sett it dovvn as an Aphorism, That a Puritan, vvas a Protestant ovvt of his vvitts. And so I leaue hym, till it please God to cure or convert hym, speciallie in Scotland.



TITVLVS QVARTVS, TOVCHING HOLLAND, AND THE VNITED PROVINCES.
VVE ar now to arriue, by course, at Holland, and Zelland, that horrible The 4. proof of disloyaltie. By exampl of Holland. Akeldama, and feald of blood; and the theater of tragical and lamentable stories. Whear I will rather declare, then delate, with what furie the Lutheran faction begonn, and with what violenc the Caluinists proceaded; and with what calamitie they both continued, (for as yow haue hard ther axiomes and positions before at large: so the practises and tyrannie of ther followers, ar hear best, to be discouered.)
And aboue all the actions of ther conspiracie, the Vnion of Vtreght, vvas the most capitall and infamours. A deuise, (according to the rules of Iunius Brutus:) an imitation of Swiz, and the Cantons: and a strong argument, to conuince them of rebellion, (though they euer marched vnder the name, of Religion, and bellum sacrum.)
This Vnion was mayd by the states 1578. The form^ of the vnion of vtreght. who seing the fortunate proceadings of the Duke of Parma, and the course of the Malcontents;

entered into a perpetual league, comprised in 20. articles, for ther mutual support and succor.
First they of Holland, Zelland, Frize, and Gelders, ded ioyn, Contra omnem vim, quae sub praetextu nominis Regij, aut religionis inferetur.
After that, the contriuer and ringleader of all, the Prince of Orenge, and they of Anvvarp and Gand, cam vvith into the league, and subscribed it, the 14. Februarij 1579. the vvhich vvas after ward again confirmed at Haghe, 20. Iulij 1581. and the scope of all this was, to abandon and expell ther leage lord, the King of Spayne; and to depose hym from his ovvn dominion and inhaeritanc.
Therfor vpon that, they established an edict, que le Roy d'Espaigne est descheu, de la Seigneurie du Pays-bas. And to maik it more authenticall, they deuised a forme of Abiuration, from the king, and a particuler reuocation and dispensation of ther former promise and oath of obedience, in these vvords. I. W. N. Svvearanevv, and bynd my self, to the prouinces vnited, to be loyal and faithfull to them, and to ayd them against the King of Spayne, comme vn bon vassal du Pays.
And when they had taken that oath, they broke all the kings seales; pulled dovvn his

armes; seazed and entred vpon his lands; rents, customes, and all other haereditaments, and took the same into ther own hands. And as absolute lords, they coyned moonie in ther own names, placed and displaced officers of the state, banished all the kings counsellors, published edicts, possessed the church liuings, suppressed Catholick religion, beseaged Amsterdam, and vsed all the marks and notes of sooueranitie, in ther own names.
Whearupon Raald, a counsellor for frizeland, hearing this new oathe, which was generallie tendered to all men: vpon the horror and greaf thereof, he dyed soodainelie, (as of an Apoplexie.)
The reasons, they gaue, why the king of Spayne, had forfeited his title and right, wear these: For 1. suppressing ther religion, 2. for oppressing them vvith tyrannie, 3. for abrogating ther priuiledges, and for holding them in bondage and seruitude: for such a magistrate, they ar not bownd to obey, they said, but to eiect hym as a Tyrant.
An example and president of daingerous consequenc, and which deaplie concerneth all princes to look vvel to. For yf subiects may depose ther prince: and maik them selfs iudges, when he shall forfeit his crown and dignitie (vvhich praerogatiue the Rochellors,

may challenge as lawfullie, as the Hollanders:) qui stat, videat ne cadat, kings had nead to maik ther seat sure, and sit fast, for these men maik it, but a slipperie hold. And in dead ambition and treason, can neuer fynd a fitter cloake for ther wearing, then that which is mayd of the Holland fashion, by religion.
Now, that yow may the better iudg of The general quarrell. the particuler quarrel of the Hollanders: I will set down the trew grownds for the defenc of the general, and why they took armes at first. The original and principal cawse, of this long and crewel warr, was the spring of the new sects, in the low contries: and vnder the shadow of religion, all the factions in the state and all discontentements wear masked, singulare commodum, and priuatum odium. And as the peoples natural inclination to noueltie, ded set it much forward; so ther wanted not a concurrenc of forreiners, who serued (as bellowes to blow the coles, both owt of France and England.)
Charles the fifth, owt of his wise prouidenc, remembring what a peace of work Luther had cut owt for hym in Germanie; and with what dainger, charge and difficultie he overcame it: Intended for the quietnes of this contrie, and for his own honor

and interest, to preuent the propagation of the Martinists, and other nevv sectaries, latelie sprong vp in these contries. And he could deuise no better remedie, then to establish the Inquisition there. (vvhich he ded anno 1550.) Wheareof Marie Quene of Hongrie then regent, to her great honor, procured both a mitigation, and an explanation. But he resigning all the gouernement to his sonne: retyred hym self from the world, (whearin he had bean long tyred,) and in a most memorable manner, consecrated the last act of his lyfe to God and deuotion.
Afterward king Philip likewise finding, The Inquisition. 1. how largelie the brainches of Anabaptism, Libertines, the familie of Loue, and others, ded spread abroad, and grovv vp vvith Lutheranisme, in Flanders: and vvhat dainger might ensevv vpon it, to the state, yf no good order vvear taken to preuent a further ancrease of mischeafe: he follovved his fathers counsell, and at large renevved, the commission, instruction, and articles for the sayd Inquisition, anno 1555. vvhich vvas a thing most fearfull and discontenting to the inhabitants of the Netherlands: vvho alledged that in regard thereof, all straingers vvould depart the contrie, and by consequence all traffick vvould decaye,

(vvhich is the gold myne, and maintenanc of these prouinces.) But in dead, they knew best ther own disease, and what affliction and scourge they should be subiect to: being for the most part inclined to innouation. and this they apprehended, as the first cavvse of ther commotions.
2. Besides an other prudent and politique act, added more fevvel to the fyre, and an encrease of discontentment: vvhich was the erection of the nevv bushopricks.
3. Thirdlie the authoritie and povver of the Bushop of Arras, vvas much disdained: and his Cardinals hat mayd hym more odious, as a man too supereminent in a state so popular: and the greater his obligation was to the Pope for his honor, the more vvas the mallice of the nobilitie, and the hate of the peopl encreased against hym.
4. Furthermore, the better to cloke and couer ther intentions, vvith the vayle of bonum publicum, they vrged to enioye ther ancient liberties and freedome: and that no strainger might beare office and rule emo^g them, and that the Spanyards might be discharged from all residenc in these lands.
5. Lastlie and speciallie, they desyred toleration, and libertie of conscienc. So as in effect, the names of religion, and the Commonvvelth, vvear mayd the standard

bearers of all these commotions. Novv concerning, these greauances: the first is a name of more terror, then in dead it is. Not so fearfull to good men, but a rack to offendors; deuised vpon necessitie against the Moors in Spayne: and continued, vpon experienc, of the vse and benefit of it: and tho I can commend no sign of crevveltie, yet can I not condemn this: bycaus, it addeth nothing to the punishment of heresie, (more then the law before inflicted:) but exacted onelie, a more strict and seuear execution, and course of examination, by the inquisitors: it shovveth a more care of the gouernor; when he fyndeth abuses and dainger in an offendor. And also. bycawse it was the sole Antidot, whearby onelie Spayne, is and haith bean, so wel and so long preserued, from the infection of sects, and the contagion and tumults, which innouation vsuallie ingendreth (whearwith all the kingdomes in Europe, haue bean embroyled.) And the Spanyards them selfs, neuer complayned of it; not felt it ever as a yoke or burden vpon them (who ar not verrie apt, to beare burdens.) Neither is it, in se, a more bloodie lavv, or a more fearfull execution of iustice, then the consistorie of Geneua, and the seuear commissions and proceading

of some other contries, (as shall hear after appeare, by the comparison.) Besides, as is vvas a curse, zealouslie at first propunded: the execution was likewise as wiselie afterward suspended. So as the iealousie and fear of an act, more then the action, drew all this blood.
And for the second, it was a politick and prudent inuention. a suaffle, to bridl sectaries; and a sicle, to cut dovvn the vveads growing vp in the church. For setting in each prouinc, graue and learned men, to stand as watchment and sentinells, to foresee, ne quid in commodi respublica and Ecclesia patiantur: they might better, and more prouidentlie, with ther authoritie either preuent, or cut of the heads of that Hydra, vvhich ded then spring vp vvith much terror. Neither vvas the matter and motion new, for Philip the wise Duke of Burgondie, had long before desyred, byt could never effect it: knovving it to be a thing neadfull, bycause at that tyme, almost all the 17. lands (except Arras) wear vnder the diocese of Bushops, who wera straingers, and the subiect of forrein princes, (which was a thing not conuenient for the state.)
And vvhat good this chaing haith wrought, experienc perfectlie and daylie showeth. for novv euerie diocese is more

carefullie visited: and the Bushops, being of the same nation and language: as they haue a more naturall compasion; so likevvise haue they more knovvledg and care to instruct ther contriement, and to vvead owt the disorders and abuses grovving vp emong them; then anie strainger, vvould or could haue. And that vvas the cavvse, why it vvas alovved and ratified by the bull of PIVS IV. anno 1559.
Novv touching Monsieur d'Arras: albeyt his vvisedome and experienc in affayres both of the church, and the state, vvas sufficientlie knovven to the kings: yet bycause the Prince of Oreng, and the Counts of Horn, and Egmont, ded ioyntlie write to the king against hym: his Maiestie (tho to the great hinderance of his seruice,) was content to remooue hym, for ther satisfaction and contentment: and vvhen he vvas called avvaye, neither vvas the contrie quieter, nor they ceased from practising.
As for ther liberties and franchises, ded not the king at the Ioyfull entrie, confirm them all? then hovv, and when ded he after violate them? vvas it for preferring the Spanyards? there wear few of them left in ahe Netherlands, and fevver cum imperio. Was it, for the offices of state? the king

distributed all the gouernements emong them selfs, (natiues of that contrie:) so great trust and confidence, he reposed in them. He mayd the Count Egmond Gouernor of Flanders and Artois: the Prince of Oreng, Gouernor of Holland, Zelland, Vtreght, and Burgondie: to the Count Arenbergh, he gaue the gouernement of westfrizeland, and over Isel: to Count Barlaymont, Namur: to Count Mansfeld, Luxemburg, and Chinay: to the Marques of Berghen Lile and Douay. So as the nobilitie, could not iustlie taik offenc, nor haue expected more honor and command, then was fauorablie, giuen them. And for the further assuranc of his good affection to them, he left his sister, the Dutches of Parma, Gouernor general: a woeman, of a peacable spirit, and who was like to bear the bridle with a mild and gentle hand, and to be aduised by ther counsells.
So then, what was the original of these commotions; All was actuallie quiet; the fyre laye couered, and as dead vnder the Ashes: till the tyme that the Baron of Brederode, deliuered in his supplication to the Dutches, with demands neither reasonable for them to ask, nor safe for her to grant. The furtherers of chaing of religion.
1. In the mean tyme the Martinis encreased ane grevv strong in the contrie:

first by ther matches with Germa^s and Lutherans. The Earl of Culenbergh married one: Horn matched vvith the sister of Count Harman: the Prince of Oreng, by his moother vvas allied to Count Solmes; and his vvyfe vvas sister, to Morrice Duke of Saxonie: and the Graue of Scherenberg maried his sister.
2. Then, Count Ludowick, the Princes brother, a soldier, a man of a great spirit, and a Lutheran vvas a powrfull instrument, both to maik a partie, and to back it.
3. Besides Flaccius Illiricus (whome they sent for from Germanie) and other ministers dispersed in all corners, ded incense the people much. But after the quick siluer of Caluinisme was brought in, the fyre ever after was vnquenchable.
Then ded the flame burst ovvt. The people, as in spight of all lawes, begonn to mutine, broke down the kings arms, and grevv so vvild, as in a rage, they pulled dovvn image, sacked the churches, spoyled the monasteries, and contemned all magistrates, that soughr to appease the trovvbles. So as the Duches of Parma, fearing ther furie, and distrusting ther violence: determined to retyre, yf she had not bean disvvaded and stayed by some of the nobles.

4. And yet had she dailie more and greater cavvse of dislike, and distrust: by the priuate conuenticles, preachings, and insolencie of the people (openlie now Lutheranising:) and speciallie by the manie secret meatings and assemblies of the nobilitie, vvhearof she complayned much.) For she ded vvell consider, that as the people could vvork no noble effects vvithovvt a head: so the nobles vvanted forces and powre to compass ther desseins, withowt the assistanc of the people (who by ther inducements, appeared now in ther own likenes, and attempted that alteration, they most desyred.)
Heareof the Prince was the cheafe capten, tho he playd least in sight, and would never shovv ovvt-vvardlie to fauor anie chainge of religion: for all that he ded practise, he pretended to doe for the commonwelth and the general good.
He was assisted by the Marques of Barghen, Montignie, and Florenc Montmorancie Count Horn, who was now grown a perfect malcontent, not so much for religion: as for his own perticular respects and occasions; his debt; the reiecting of his suit for the gournment of Zutphen; and aboue all, the execution of his brother Montigny in Spayn.

By meanes of these noble and populer persons, diuers assemblies wear procured (as the nurces, that fostered the conspiracies.) First at Breda, whether emong others Egmond was inuited, (who had the greatest power and swaye with all militarie men in that cont^ie:) and shortlie after, as the fruict and effect of that Assemblie, Brederode deliuered his petition to the Duches for the religions Vried. Afterward they had meatings, at S. Trudon, at Hoocstrat and at Osterweal. Whearby that noble Count Egmond was vndoon. For at his arrainment, he was charged with this article; that he was priuie to the confaederation and agreement, at these assemblies. And  furthermore, that fatallie, vpon the same daye, that the petition was deliuered by Brederod to the Duches,) he Oreng, and  Horn, cam to the great banquet, at the Count Culenberghs hovvse in Brussels, (whear 300 of the confaederates wear.) and that they dined all together with them: at which tyme, the name of the Geuses was first giuen, and mayd knowen. and that  afterward he sent his secretarie Backersele, to offer his ayd, to those of that crew. and in dead, he confessed hym self at Barr; that he offred his assistanc, to hinder the Duke  of Alua his comming, and empeach his

passage: and that he ded neither dislike, nor dissvvade the proceading of the confaederates.
And of the same articles vvas Count Horn endited, adding this further, as a particuler charg, to hym, that he threatned to leuie 50. thowsand Men, by violenc to reskew his brother, and reduce hym home.
And vpon the proof of these accusations, they weare both condemned: as by all law, by reason of state, for exampls sake, for the Regents safetie, and the honor See Syr Roger VVilliams storie. of iustice it was necessarie. Albeyt it is certan, that Count Egmond was conninglie circumvented by the Prince, and drawen to his own confusion by plats and pollicie: for which at his death he was repentant, (being a man of a playne, magnanimous, and noble disposition.)
What Prince could endure such indignities, The cause of reaucing the Spanyards. and not seak both to preuent the like offences, and to taik reueng of the offendors? was it not high tyme to arme, when the people contemned religion and gouernement; and the nobler, wear ther patterns: when the citties wear in vproare, and the whole frame of the Commonwelth was shaken? had not the king reason, to send Alua with his forces, aswel to represse these present conspiracies; as by the sword to

subdew such rebellious spirits, which could not be reduced by lenitie to obedienc. Yow may see, it vvas high tyme, to encounter Oreng, who had almost vndermined the gouernment: as he had discooraged the gouernor.
And touching the companies conducted hither owt of Spayn (against which the Prince had taught the contrie to repyne:) was it lawfull for the Prince to bring in the Reistres, and for his brother Count Lodowick, to bring in the frenchmen to inuade Heynault: and was it not tollerable for the king, to send his armie, to defend his own inheritance? vvas it lavvfull to surprise Mounts by force, and vvas it not more lawfull to expel them by force? and seing it could not be doon withowt force, surelie yf the Duke of Alua had not bean so neare, to encounter and bear dowen ther mallice, the king by all probabilitie had lost his footing in the Netherlands.
And let no man dreame, that yf the Duke had not comed at all, the fyre had bean more easilie quenched, and the people less prouoked to furie. For these confaederations of so great persons, ded portend the generation of some great monster; and the manner of the birth, and first appearanc of the Geuses, by the encooragement of the

gouernors of the state, ded prognosticate a crewel storme, to all men of vnderstanding: neither wear they like men, by anie bitt in a woemans hand, to be brideled: so as of necessitie, the king was, to send Alua.
And the rather, bycaus he could not hut know, that M. Chastillon, the Admiral Iohn Pettit. of France, ded send to baron Brederode, perswading and incensing hym, not to accord with the Dutches of Parma, (for so they would be deceaued:) and offring hym in case of necessitie, to assist hym, with 4000. gentlmen. And Count Ludowick, after his defeat at Mounts, ded lye at Rochel emong the Caluinists: and the Prince went to France of purpose to prepare for a future inuasion. And the same Admiral shortlie after sollicited vvith great earnestnes Charles the 9. to diuert all his warres into Flanders, and taik vpon hym the protection of that contrie. And Aldegond, in Germanie as carefullie ded sollicit a partie, to combyne with them. so then they laboured vpon all sydes* to offend the king: and yf he seak to defend hym self, must he be taxed for tyrannie and creweltie? surelie that state must neads be owt of order: that presumeth to censure a king, for seaking by his ministers to punish disorders, and reduce all into order.

The Duke of Alua, could becawse of none of these disorders precedent, (the lenitie and mildnes, of the merciefull Regent, mayd them insolent: and yet the verrie name of the Duke before he gaue anie offenc, mayd them seak to forreyners to oppresse hym.
And after his arriual heare, who can blame hym, yf he mayd vvarr vvith rigour; perceauing the generall impression of mallice, in the peopls harts against hym? speciallie being aduertised, that the protestants had combined in the passion vveak to kill hym, at the monasterie of the grean vallie, in the forest of Sauue near Brussels; (whether he vsed to go manie tymes for his deuotion.) It was well knowen, that Monsieur Rifot, Carli and Villars vvith 700. horse, and 500. foot, conspired vvhen the Duke, and the nobles, and his followers vvear at M^sse in the church; to beset the place, and with fyre and deuises, to burn both men, church, and Monasterie, good and bad, frends and enemies: (the vvhich, the two Guidons confessed.) and the like execution, was intended at Brussels against the Spanyards, as Pettit, Mendoza, and Michael of Isselt testifie.
Neither ded they cease ther mallice, and mischeafe when he was recalled: for that

noble and wise Duke of Arschot, aduertised Don Iohn, that Oreng endeauored to seaze his person, to disposses the king of the sooueraintie: and to establish libertie in the low contries. I ask not who set Ratclif, and Gray on work to kill hym, at Namur, for latet anguis in herba. And ded not the Caluinists, as fynelie contriue at Antwarp, to haue blowen vp with gunpovvder, the famous Duke of Parma: as he was to pass in the high streat, vvith the state of the whole contrie attending hym. So as it appeareth, as coye as they maik it, they ar not so free, and cleare: but that protestants may be charged, with treasons assassinats, and povvder plats: nay more; to be the first inuentors of it, as long ago in Scotland appeared, and the king haith good cawse to remember.
Now for the authors and actors of this The authors of thi. vnion. vnion: the States, and the Prince vveare the Contriuers of it. And touching the Prince, he vvas a man politick, popular, ane a greate hovvskeaper: (both vvhich qualities stood hym in good stead.) The hovvse of Nassau, in Germanie, vvas ^ncient, and honorable: but vvas aduanced in this contrie most by marriages; this vvilliam, (bycause his father turned Lutheran) Charles the fifth ovvt of his princ^lie

affection, took hym from his father, and commended hym to the care and education of the Quene of Hongarie, his sister. And afterward admitted hym into his own chamber for manie yeares. Then mayd hym general of his horse: and after raised hym to the honor of his Liuetennant generall. And to maik his obligation the greater to hym, he mayd choyce to send by hym, as a man of most trust, the Imperiall crowne to his brother king Ferdinando: and ded like Vise commend hym highlie to king Philip (tho diuers forewarned hym, to taik head, that he ded not noorish a snake in his bosome.)
Add to these fauors, the Emperors furtheranc of his match, with the Count of Burens daughter and heyre (whearby he was highlie aduanced:) and speciallie, aboue all other things, he procured Renatus of Challon, Prince of Oreng, to maik this william his heyre, (when the President Schorus was wholie against hym.) And forget not the honor, king Philip ded hym, to committ so manie, and so great gouernements, to his charge, and sidelitie. was it possible, that anie thing could corrupt this man, and diuert hym from thank fullnes, and allegiance? Ded they after geue hym cawse of alienation and hatred, or he took a cawse?

When the king was to depart into Spayne. The Prince (after the Death of his first wyfe) aspired to marrie the Daughter of Christierna Duches of Lorrain, (coosen germain to the King.) And therfor he laboured to haue her mayd gouernor of these prouinces: and so he should in effect by that allianc, swaye the whole gouernment, (for which he had gaped long: and vvas a competitor for it, with the Count of Egmond.) But the king, preferring the Dutches of Parma, the Prince lost bothe his hope and his vvyfe: and therrupon grevv his hatred both to Alua, and Granuellan, by whose meanes he imagined that Parma, was preferred: and the other reiected.
So ambition was the trew internal motiue, of all this rancour: but religion was mayd the owtward cawse, and the mantel to hyde it. Ambition is a passion, that can not rest and sleap, withovvt dreaming of a reueng: and therfor he first married in the hovvse of Saxonie (the sanctuarie of Lutheranisme;) he incited Brederode: he set a pike and quarrel betwean Egmond and Granuellan (who had stood his best frend before, in manie matters of importance:) he studied and practised to hinder the comming in of Alua, (purposing a certan reueng, for a supposal of that he ded not certanlie

knovv.) He neuer after shovved hym self vvell affected to the kings affaires nor content vvith anie fauors. aftervvard, he inuaded Frize, directed Lumay to posses Bril, and what he could in Holland: he gaue order to his brother Seherenbergh to maik hym self maister of Zuthphen: and placed Saras gouernour of Flushing, that the world might see the error of Alua, in neglesting so long, a place of that importance.) So as I may vvell seye, he vvas the great vvheale, vvhearupon all the state vvas mooued and turned.
I will conclude, that after he sought to be reconciled with the king. (by intercession of the emperor, and the Duke of Bauier,) and could not compass it, modo and forma, as he desired: he grevv desperate, in all his attempts hauing ill succes; and fovvnd no harbor so safe for hym as Holland, the best nurce to mantaine his decayed estate; a receptacle of all religions; and a fortification stro^g enough by nature and art, wheare he might safelier write Apologies then fight; encoorage faction, and plant a nevv religio^, (wheareof it seameth he was not at first fullie resolued:) for tho when he was at court, he went to Mass: yet from his childhood he was thought to haue had some seads of Lutheranism, (which was euer after

his being in France, transplanted into Caluinisme, yf to anie certan sect.)
And these, and all his courses, being wel discerned at last, by the states of Artois and Heynauld (anno 1579.) when they wear reco^ciled to the king: with the assent of the most honorabls Duke of Arschot, (who neuer much affected the Prince,) articulo 5. they ded bynd them selfs, to prosequute warr against Oreng (as a general enemie of peace) and to fynd at ther own charge, eightene thowsand men for that purpose, and will anie man imagin: that so noble, so religious, so valiant men, (peares to the Prince for nobilitie, and wisedome,) either could err in ther iudgments of hym they knew so well, and (who had acted his part, so long vpon the stage, in the face of them all:) or would haue mayd such an offer, yf they had esteamed hym a Good patriot or his cause, and proceading iust and warrantable?
Now touching the people of Holland, I acknowledg they ar a people verrie industrious? and skilfu^l to maik vse of ther labors; and as a learned censor of them well noted, nec totam libertatem, nec totam seruitutem patiuntur. Frends to chainge, seldome content with the present state: in prosperitie a litl insolent; most addicted to traffick and ther profite; and iealious of anie, that

would empeach ther gayn or libertie. And the Prince being well acquainted with ther nature: to bread and fead ther iealousie more, discouered to them, the secret counsell and combination of king Henry the 2. of France, and the Duke of Alba, to suppresse the protestants, and to erect the, 17. Prouinces into a kingdome. (the vvhich he sayd that king discouered vnto hym.) But surelie, non placet commentum: (it is not like the Duke of Alua vvould discouer his maisters greatest secrets, to an enemie so latelie reconciled.) and his fiction of other fables; maiks it more probable, that to haue bean a fable also. For he gaue owt, that the Emperor and the king affected a monarchie ouer all Europe: which yf it wear but a coniecture, (was deuised by hym self, and not vpon certan intelligenc vnderstood:) and vpon knouledg) from them selfs it could not be; for the Emperors overtoyled age, his end, his cours and the harbor of a religious hows he be took hym self, into; convinc the contrarie. Yet these inventions and forgeries, serued hym to good purpose, bothe to terrifie the Hollanders (that they might still relie vpon hym:) and to procure, the distrust and mallice of forrein nations to the hovvse of Austria. And vvith such baites, ded he long both

entrap and feald, that contrie people.
Now yow haue hard the whole charge, and all the trespasses obiected to the king, (both generall, and particuler: now, and ab Origine;) and the actors, that followed the busienes, and what exceptions may be taken iustlie, against ther estimation, integritie, and testimonie, (speciallie in ther own cawse.) It remaineth therfor now, to examin first, whether the king stood guiltie of these crimes, of Iniustice and Tirannie. For yf he be innocent, then is ther vsurpation The king of Spayn, his desyre of peace. His court not tirannous. vnlawful; and yf he weare guiltie: an other quaestion is, whether his error, geues them title, and his offences free them from subiection.
I will maik it manifest to the world, that the king euer desired peace; and with great care sought to avoyd, the desolation of his people, and contries.
1. And to maik this euident. It may please yow to call to mynd, the course taken, by that excellent, and most loyall Prince the Duke of Arschot, and by the states generall at the Pacification of Gand, 1574. whearin it was thought requisite, to decree an Amnestia, and obliuion of all things past, on both sydes: and to taik order, for discharging the Spanyards, and sending them home. And notwithstanding that in this

pacification, all things wear referred ad arbitrium ordinum: (vsing, nor mentioning anie reseruation to the king: yet Don Iohn ded ratifie it, and procured the kings consent, and confirmation of all, as appeareth by the perpetual edict. And altough this pacification was agreed vpon, by all the rest of the states general (owt of a zealous affection, to general vnitie:) yet would not the Prince of Oreng, nor Holland and Zelland subscribe and accept it. And they disswaded the states general to accept Don Iohn for gouernor, till the Spanyards should be dismissed at a tyme limited: and yet would not they dismisse the forren forces they had in Holland; but being at libertie them selfs, would tye Don Iohn to perform his promises. but vvhy ded the Prince and Holland, refuse to subscribe? was it for religion? no for in these articles, Holland and Zelland wear as well prouided for, as they could desyre. for therin vvas this article, vt sola in ijs prouincijs, Romana religio toleretur and exerceatur, excepta Hollandia and Zellandia. tho these prouinces, never esteamed nor respected, that peace, nor that prouision for ther indemnitie. and for the Princes person and safetie, his ovvn guiltienes, and his precedent offences, wear buried in this Amnestia (the states preuayled

more for hym then the Emperor could.) What then caused the differenc? mallice and Ambition, blinded and transported hym. for all men may see, the king desyred peace, and the Prince altogether was inclined to warr (tho thearin he vvas no excellent Hannibal.)
2. And that appeared more playnlie 1575. by the colloquie of Breda, whear the king offred reasonnable conditions: and the Emperor sent the Count Swartzenburgh, to induce them to concord and vnitie. And yet would the Prince listen to nothing, and the treatie was fruitles. the cawse is worthie to be knowen. At that tyme, they of 10. Pettit. Holland deliberatelie determined to submit them selfs to some other Prince, and offred them selfs secretlie to obey the Quene of England hy Aldegond and Douza. The proiect vvhearof, and the reasons I haue sean.
3. Yet ded the king, show, still how great his patienc, and mercie was: and how farr from the basenes of tyra^nie; that knowing all this, and much more: yet would he not proclayme Oreng a traytor, till 1580. when his mallice appeared to be irreconciliable, and his courses desperate: and after they had finished the fabrick of that vnion of Vtreght; abowt fiftean yeares

after the beginning of these trovvbles.
4. The fouth argument, to prooue the kings inclination to peace, and his detestation of tyrannie, taiks away all quaestion from men indifferent.
When the Emperor sollicited the treatie 1. The persons. of Coolen 1579. and mayd choyce of most honorable persons for that purpose, the tvvo Princes electors, the Bushop of Wirtzburgh; the Count Svvartzenburgh, and Doctor Lawenman. the king of Spayne was as forvvard, and sent thither, the Duke de Terra noua. and the Duke of Arschot (euer readie to aduanc peace, and the commun welth) with diuers others, wear commissioners from the states, with commission signed by the Archduke Matthias. So as the persons, on all sydes, vvear like to deale with integritie and iugment.
Note also, vpon what motiues, was the The moiues. Emperor content to employe these co^missioners. The states by ther letters to the emperor dated S. Iun. 1578. ded promise, and assure hym, that they wear, ar, and so would continew constant, vt in Belgio colatur religio Catholica, and regi sua constet authoritas. And before that, at vvorms in the general diet holden 1577. the agents of the states submitted and referred ther cavvse to the Emperor, as likevvise the king of Spayn ded.

And therfor, both parts, being so conformable, and concurring in eodem tertio. a general peace might well be expected with good probabilitie.
Now obserue hovv this vvas performed. according to agreement, the Emperors commissioners cam to Coolen in the beginning of April. but Dauus pertur^at omnia, the states sent not thers till the 4. Maij, and then with a commission insufficient, and restrained the tyme of ther treatie to six vveaks, and no longer. So it seamed, the states could not agree a long tyme of ther instructions, to ther agents. and ther for the Imperials took it as an error, that when they them selfs could not in manie months agree of that; they would notvvith standing limit ther deputies to so short a tyme, for the handling of a busienes so weightie and intricate, as this was: and whearim so manie seueral men, had seueral ends. Besides in the articles, which the deputies exhibited, they propounded extrema, non media, contrarie to promise. furthermore, by the articles and media of peace, proposed by the Duke de Terra noua, all seueritie was lenified and mitigated, for the case of religion. as the Emperors commissioners ded testifie by these words. Vt nemo iuste conqueri posset, regem pretextu religionis,

vel seuire in corporae subditorum, vel bona eorum confiscare, vel conscient tis vim inferre. So as the Imperials finding the dallijng and de layes of the states, such, as in 16. weaks, they could get no answer; and that by ther letters they renewed all old greafs and quarrels: they broke vp the treatie, and departed
Hearupon Bolduc, and Valencen receaued and incertained the articles. Ouer Isel, and Turnay, refused them not. Artois and Heynault guided with the bonus genius of the Church; and Em. Lalain, that valiant and religious Marques of Renty, together with Monsieur de Capre, Heze, Baize and the rest: condemning the course of the Prince of Oreng, offrerd ther obedienc to the king, and mayd peace with the Duke of Parma. In this interim, what ded they of Holland? they wear now further of, the case was altered. They published discourses against the treatie; they studied how to defend ther vsurpation, and how to perfect the Frame of ther vnion; and how to increase discord and diuision emong the rest. (vvhear there ministers and agents, fayled not to serue ther tvrn.) But they vveare principallie busied, abovvt a nevv proiect. For by the mediation of the Prince of Oreng, and the counsel and assistanc of England, and for ther better abilitie and more

strenth, they capitulated vvith Monsieur the Duke of Alleneon 1578. whome they created Duke of Brabant, and Prince absolut of the Nether lands.
2. Secondlie, touching the kings tyrannie. Touching the kings oppression of them. first exaction, and impositions: then disanulling ther priuiledges: also the too seuere gouernme^t, of his ministers, (whearby he broke his oath solemnlie svvorn at the ioyefull entrie) wear the cawses of making this vnion. The end vvas, to preserue them selfs, and ther contries from vtter ruine and destruction.
Hear is ther Clayme, and the foundation of ther Vnion, and of ther Dominion, and sooueraintie. And first touching the exactions and tyrannie, and seueritie of Gouernous, which the deputies of the states ded aggrauate so much at Colen. Surelie, so long after the Duke of Alua his tyme; and vnder the temperate gouernement of the Duke of Parma: and after so oft and manie offers, and signification of the kings gracious disposition to ease ther burdens: it was rather to be iudged as a Cauil to shift of peace, then a desire to beridd of warr.
For first touching these greauous exactions, they complaine so of, v^delicet, of the Tenth pennie, imposed by the Duke of Alua.

It is necessaries to Draw the Curtens, whearwith they shadovv and obscure the truthe. Necessitie and not his own will,  forced Alua, to exact that, which neither he would haue Doon, nor the king haue suffred it: but being driuen to extremitie, for setisfijng the soldiers (vvho allvvaies grow wild withowt paye:) and so to avoyd a greater mischeafe, he was driuen to incurr an inconuenienc.
Some of the counsell in Englant, in the Quenes name, seazed in Hampshyre 600000. Duckets, (sent from Spayne to paye the Armie, vvithovvt anie charg at all to the contrie:) tho she had giuen a passeport, for the safe conduct of it, as is reported. Vpon what pretences, or how iustlie, I wil not argue, (hauing beane before debated at larg, in a treatie.) But these politique men who conselled her, to extend her authoritie, for staying the moonie: as they well knew it was none of hers: so wear they also sure, it would driue the Duke of Alua into such strayts, that he would be compelled to commit error, and increase the hatred of his gouernment, and arme the peopls furie to sedition. (which vvas the thing they most aymed at.) Besides the king of Spayn hauing sent the Duke de  Medina, (a man of a milder nature) to succead

Alua (who partlie by misfortun, partlie by his stearnnes, partlie by some errors, and by forren princes disfauor, was grown odious) he brought vvith hym, 200000. Duckets: which the Zella^ders, intercepted vpon the seas; and as his stewards, took it as pure Almes into ther charge, to disburse it withowt accoumpt. So hauing lost his moonie, and ships: lost also his hart to staye near them; and therfor returned back to Spayne, fullie resolued, neuer to haue further dealing, with such sharking Cormomorants of that Nest and crevv. And so was Alua further both plunged, and perplexed. But hearby it appeareth, that it vvas neither the kings pleasure nor purpose, (vvho furnished hym, so largelie and liberallie as vvas intended) but the necessitie of his present vvants, vvhich compelled Alua to that demand, and exaction. And so it vvas rather an occasion of scandal and offenc reflected vpon the king, then deserued by either: and a quarrel rather mayd, and contriued, then giuen.
And these popular orators that plead so earnestlie for the ease of the commons: and seam so carefull to procure the exoneration of the impositions, and taxes layd vpon the people: vvhy doe they not now inueigh asmuch, against these nevv magnificos

of Holland? who ar so fart from laying dovvn and diminishing these subsidies and excis^s, that they haue raised and augmented them in duch so^t: as at this daye, no common vvelth in Christendome groneth vnder the like burden.
And it can not yet be forgotten, that the gend to ther of the people, (as they called hym.) the Prince of Oreng, ded propovvnd and labor to vvrest and vvring from them of Holland, the Sixth pennie, tovvards his M. Issolt. change and maintenanc, anno 1584. this vvas a note aboue Ela, a strain farr higher, then the Duke Aluaes; and yet tho the people denied it, and murmured much: yet still vvas he in Holland paeter patriae, so smoothlie he could manage his busienes.
Barneuelt in his Apologie, confessed: that he fovvnd 1586. the order of the gouernment ovvt of all Frame, manie preachers protestants vvould not acknovvledg the states (for after the french fashion, they had no command, nor discipline:) the commons quite opposite: the towns and magistrates wished for peace; the expenses of the state, exceaded all incoms and reuennues by tvventie six millions: and that (which I maik this note for) west frizeland in the beginning ded contribute skarse, Decies octies centena millia florenorum; and

now they ar charged, to paye quadragies centena milua librarum, and duos milliones. I vse his own words bycause I will not be challenged for mistaking hym. Who is therfor now the tyrant and the exactor? tho the peopl haue chainged ther Lord, they ar not eased of ther oppression: and wheare before they complayned they had one, now ar they subiect to the command of manie tyrants, who fleace them, nay vnskin them. Alua bett them, with whips; but the states, with scorpions. Examin ther excises, and impositions, how they ar increased, vpon meat, drink, fewel, men, servants, wages: besides lones and beneuolences. Henry Cuickius chargeth them, to exact the fourth part of ther reuennues, that ar Hollanders and liue owt of the contrie: Si in prouincijs nostris, venia eorum degunt: semissem iubent soluere: si secus bonis exuunt.
And to answer that inuectiue, against the Duke of Alua his Creweltie (which was so much obiected at Coolen, and since haith bean aggrauated by D. Baudius, in his orations:) call to mynd what occasions wear giuen hym: by the opposition of the Nassouians: by the warr at Mounts: by the practise to empeach his entranc to Brabant: and by contriuing his death. Yet these wear venial sinnes. But, vvhen he

fownd the nobilitie, so farr ingaged in the conspiracie with the Geuses; that the kings authoritie was despised, the religion established was prophaned and derided; that the towns in Holland, and Zelland reuolted; H^^le^, Alcmar, and the rest excluding the kings authoritie and power: what stranger and man vnpartiall, vvould not think; when the blood of the bodie was so corrupted, that it is not fitt both to vse cauterism, and violent purgations to clense it. for violenc is never necessarie, but when lenitiues, wil not remedie and work a cure. And when Alua vvas reuoked: remember how litl, the peacapl nature of the Commendador preuayled vvith so rough and harsh natures, who was forced to crie owt, Dios libera nos de estos estados. And hear I pray yow read the opinion of Syr Roger Williams, a soldier of good note, who had serued an both sydes, and knew the natures of the peopl. in his storie, of these warres, he condemned the reuocation of Alua as an error: bycause nothing but rigor, could reduce these violent spirits into order: neither can anie man maik them obedient, but he that can pull them vpon ther knees; and carrieth the sword drawen, in his hand, allwaies readie vpon such inflammations, to open a vayne, and let them blood:

though I conffess a gentle hart will much ever relent vvith compassion, when it seeth blood shed.
Concerning the breach of the kings For the kings oath oath, (which they obiect hauing svvorn to obserue ther priuiledges: yf they will decide the matter by course of iustice, it must first be mayd playne, and appeare; that the king haith broken his promise, and not performed his oath: and in what case. and in ther own causes, it is not agreable to common reason, that the Playntifs should be bothe accusers and iudges.
Again, yf he had broken his promise: manie things may happen after his oath, to excuse hym from periurie. or tyrannie. for by law, euerie absolute pact, and promise doth implie tacitam conditionem, to procead, rebus sic stantibus, as they wear at the oath taken. But what yf such difficulties followe, that he can not keap his promise? What yf that which was then promised for the good of that prouince? can not be obserued withowt the great domage of that prouince, and of all Europe? As the cawse, so the case must be altered.
But procead further, yf the king had broken his oath: yet wear not the states inabled and authorised therby, to choose a new prince in his stead; much less, to inuest

them selfs. for in the articles of the Ioy full entrie, this is a clawse, vt si in omnibus, aut in vno quo^iam articulo, pacta ista Dux Brabantiae violassct: denegare ei, tantisper subdus possunt, consueta seruitia: dum id reuocetur, vel corrigatur, in quo controuersum. For otherwise, withowt that dum, ill disposed subiects, should continuallie haue the aduantage to pick quarrels against a good Prince.
And the world can witnes, how oft the king haith offred to the Emperor, to forrein princes, and to the states generall either to reuoke, or amend, what could be prooued to be amisse.
Besides the states and courts of Brabant, ar more properlie to decide that quaestion, then Holland, (who can clayme those priuiledges, but by participation.) Add also, that the states of Brabant, Flanders, Artois, Heynault, and the rest haue conformed them selfs, like dewtiefull, vertuous, and noble persons, to obedienc of the king: and to all Lawes, and gouernment. (And yf Holland could learn by ther examples, so to doe, the quaestion wear then ended.)
Furthermore, the like oath all kings taik at ther coronation; and it is the greatest honor to them religiouslie to performe it: but yf they break it, what then? shall he be deposed? that is a doctrine onelie sitt

for the schools of Conspiracie. Besides ther is a great differenc, betvvean a couenant, and a condition, in the common lawe: and yet neither of them tye a Prince, so as the breach implyeth a forfeiture, (as hear after appeareth.)
But to conclud, who ded first, create and grant these priuiledges? ded not the Prince, ex gratia spectali, and mero motu, to gratifie good subiects? how vnthankful subiects then ar they, who will seak to depriue ther soouerain Lord; yf he be forced to break a clawse, or an article, or a couenant, vpon vrgent cawse? What would they haue obiected, to Philip Duke of Burgondie, and of the Netherlands, who resumed into his H. Berland. own hands, and by his own authoritie, all the Priuiledges, and immunities of Gandt? and detayned them all his lyfe tyme; teaching them to acknowledg, by whose grace they held them. And what remedie? when his sonn Charles, cam to Gand; the people in a rage compelled hym to restore them. But, to ther cost, for they weare forced to seak his pardon, and to cast them selfs, and ther charters, at his feate, and stand to his mercie.
And the like he ded at Machlen, (which he determined to haue razed, and destroyed:) yet he restored them to ther

liberties, vpon great suite, and vpon such conditions, as he thought good.
Neither of these great citties, obiected to the Dukes, ther breach of oath, at ther entrie, or that they had forfeited ther estates: they wanted the cloke of Holland, and such a conductor as Oreng. Yet it is worthie also, to be considered, why the Prince vrgeth so much the kings keaping of his oath: and yet he maiks no religion to perform his own. For when he was to taik vpon hym, the government of Brabant, he took his oath to mantain the Catholick Michael Barus do vnione stat. religion in Brabant. And haith he performed it? when he retyred into Holland, he professed and protested publicklie, he would chainge and alter nothing: nor disposses the Cleargie of ther liuings: and the like he ded at Amsterdam, and bownd hym self with a solemn oath: and yet he performed none of these. So to serue his own turne, he taketh hold of the kings oathe; and for his own oath, religion and bonum publicum, geue hym a dispensation which Caluin ded confirme vnto hym. Libro 4. c. 13. @. 21. Aman (saith he) illuminated vvi^h the truthe, simul vinculis omnibus obediendi legibus and Ecclesiae solutus est: he that once haith perfect knovvledg of the gospel, is absolued from oath, and all such suares. Is not this a holie

gospel, and a blessed lesson. But yet, I see no particularitie alledged, wherby it may appear, that the king ded break his oath: was it for exactions? it is answered. was it. for bringing in the Spanyards? it was tyme, and necessitie, that mayd the king, to his great trowble, to his greater charge, to his greatest greafe: to taik armes, to defend the Cleargie, to defend the religion of his ancestors (according to the lawes and lawble customes of these prouinces:) and to force them to acknowledg that he was ther Prince.
Was it for religion? In dead it is trew, ther is a clawse in the vnion, that they ar therby to defend them selfs, contra omnem vim, quae sub pretextu religionis aut nominis Regij inferetur. At first, the Prince, Horn, and Montigny, offred to Ioyn vvith the people, against the Inqusition: they assisted comforted, and encooraged Brederode: they desyred and vrged the Religions Vried, and published books to defend it: mayd liberal promises to be content vvith the vse of ther own religion, and not to preiudice nor offend the Catholick.
And with much art, they hid and dissembled ther intentions, the better to draw on the Catholicks to ioyn with them, for the general good of the state. For by that

deuise, they wonn manie prelates and men well affected in religion, to cooperate with them, for the furteranc and defence of the Archduke Matthias, with ther bodies and goods: and still vnder the fayre names of liberties and religion.
Now that religions Vried being granted, it was a supersedeas to the inquisition, and a prohibition of all violenc, and seueritie. and what could they desyre more? Besides Holland and Zelland, ever since the pacification of Gand, haue bean offendors more then defendors: and haue enioyed ther Religion, liberties, and denique quid non? so as they had no iust cawse, to maik this vnion and conspiracie, (speciallie when all other prouinces submitted them selfs to the king.) But faction and haeresie is ever humble, till they can get the svvord of povver and authoritie in ther hands. For novv, they of Holland, ar in Gloria Patri, and sing an other tune: they haue expelled all the Cleargie, seazed ther lands and liuings: emprisonned, those that vvil not be conformable, to ther Synodes holden at Dort 1574. and at Midlborough. 1581. they haue vsed much crevveltie both in drovvning and executing men for religion: but no toleration they vvill permit; nor more fauor, then to the Puritans, Anabaptists,

an semi-Arrians, emoug them.
And for the matter: of Religion, at the making of that vnion; they mayd them selfs cheaf gouernors of religion and the church, by these words. Quant au poinct de religion, ceux de Hollande and Zellande s'y comporteront comme bon leur semblera: and les autres, selon le placcard de l' Archiduc Matthias.
So then, by this, belike the States of Holland and Zelland ar aduanced to be head of the church in those prouinces: for all must be touching Ecclesiasticall matters, comme bon leur semblera. They ar now, the Regula Lesbia, to square iudg, direct, gouern, and order all: and what religion they will allowe, that must pass for currant: and in that manner, and for so long tyme, as they please.
Now this authoritie being in the states generall; then that church must be gouerned by manie, not by one: one spiritual bodie by manie temporall heads, and most of them artificers, (merchants of Amsterdam, brewers of Delft, Staplers of Dort, seamen of Horn, etc.) An anarchie, vvithovvt learning: and (vvhich is pittie) a forenoon head, better then an afternoon: too manie for vnitie, too ignorant for veritie, and skarselie able too determin with iudgment, vvhether the Gomarists or the

Armenians, should be Doctors of the Chayre. And that appeared well, by ther edict published at Haghe 1614. that no man should preach, Deum aliquos in exitium creasse; which sentenc was afterward retracted, bycaus the heads of the church had erred therin, (for they admitt not the ministers, as in France, to sharewith them anie part of ther iurisdiction.)
Now to draw, to an end: yf the king had taken armes to introduce anie nevv religion (like a Mush-rump growen vp in a night) and to compell the consciences of his subiects to obeye that: I must neads saye, he had much encroached vpon the liberties of the contries, and had incurred iustlie ther mallice.
And I can not but saye also, that the Hollanders, taking armes against ther soouerain, for defenc of such a religion, and innouation: can neither, by law, reason, not religion, be excused and defended. Now yf the Hollanders be so precise in vpholding ther religion: yf the Elders of Geneua will permitt no toleration: yf the french church insult and oppress the poor humble Catholicks, that liue emoug them: yf Romulus by his law enacted, Deosperigrinos ne colunto: yf Numa would not heare Lib. 4. de repub. of anie noueltie: yf Socrates ded wiselie

aduise, that people should reseru and refer all mutations and matters of religion to Apollo: yf nature and all nations concurr in this: had not the king of Spayn reason, to endeauor to preuent, that confusion of opinions, and that multitud of sects, which had so daingerouslie infected the west part of the world?
And yf they of Holland, think it necessarie for the peace of ther state: is not the case a like for hym? yf for ther conscienc sake, they will barr ovvt the Catholick and ancient religion: should he be bard for his conscienc sake, to taik the same course against the Caluinists? hovv doe ther beginning, and ther proceadings differ? and how doe ther profession and performanc agre? for at first they mayd that a cavvse of ther rebellion that the king vvould force ther consciences: and yet they will not novv permitt the same freedome, to those that liue vnder their command.
But novv to come to the Mayne poynt. they Challeng by the vnion, to be absolute Lords of these prouinces: and haue renounced all title, and obedienc to the king of Sayn, as Earl of Holland and Zelland. I ask, quo titulo ingressi sunt? they  alledg, in ther letters to the Emperor 1608. this grovvnd vvork. Post tractatum pacis

Coloniae, qua Hispani potius ad opprimendam, quam subleuandam Belgium vsi sunt: Hispani, Mercurius Gallob. libro 32. tanta tyrannide, in prouincias, vrbes, ac ciues omnes Belgij, procul^atis omnibus priuilegijs grassabantur: vt ad conseruandam, quod ei imminebat, ab extremo exitio patriam: pleraeque Belgicae prouinciae, quae in vnione perstiterant, regem eiurarunt: and certam quandam, ac liberam reipublicae formam constituerunt. It a pro liberis, a multis regibus accepti. per 32. annos. Hear is the fowndation of ther free state: and the reason is tyrannie: and the tyme is sayd to be after the treatie of Coolen, (tho in dead this vnion, was mayd before.) Besides in the same place: they vse an other argument: that the king of Spayn  and the Archduke, acknowledg them, as free prouinces, in quas ipsi nihil iuris praetendant; cum omnibus, generalibus, and particularibus renunciationibus. At the making of that vnion, they alledged, that the king  had forfeited his estate, by oppressing them vvith tyrannie, by infringing ther liberties and his ovvn oath, and for suppressing religion. And at Coolen, the states deputies added, that they took armes, not onelie for  religion but to 1. auoyd exactions intollerable, 2. and to cast of the yoke of too seuere gouernors. So then 1. religion, 2. tyrannie, 3. exaction, 4. abrogation of ther

priuiledges, and the kings own renunciation of his title: arr the pillers of this vnion. It remaineth therfor, after hauing mayd a breach with this long battrie, to geue the assault vpon ther title: and discouer how seditious the positions and principles of that religion ar, which imprinted in them such disloyaltie to vsurp that title.
If it could be prooued by them, (which is necessarie first to be:) that the king ded oppress the contrie by tyrannie, and abrorating ther priuiledges: then is it yet a question of importance, whether therby he haith lost his authoritie ouer his subiects? and yf he had lost it, by what law haue they fownd it? by what ciuil order or president, ded they abiure ther obedience? Surelie it vvas, certam quandam ac liberam reipublicae formam constituere. That vvas ther end, and ther presumption: but it vvas neither order nor cawse. Neither is the kings tyrannie, a sufficient vvarrant for ther tyrannie and vsurpation. for a soouerain can not loose his soouerainetie: it doth all waies carrie vvith it a nonobstante, to difpenc with errors and irregularities.
And for ther priuiledges, vvhich the king never intended to maik voyd, (and so they build vpon a false grovvnd, vvhich vvill fayle them:) yf it had bean so great

an offenc, for the king to abrogate theirs; is it not a greater offenc for subiects, to vsurp his? and so to maik them self parties and iudges, and by ther own authoritie to punish ther prince. Which is an insolencie and indignitie incredible to all posteritie; and such as neither the Svvizzes, nor the Amphictiones (the confederate cantons of Grecia:) ded ever match, nor come neare. for so they maik, regna, occupantium ius, qui potest capere, capiat. A pretenc opposite to all lavves: a portall to let in confusion. but yf the king ded loose and forfeit all his authoritie and iurisdiction: yet I see not, vvhy or hovv, they could also challeng his lands, and priuate inheritance: for that must neads discend by law. Besides yf the king could for feit his sooueraintie, how can he forfeit it to his subiects? but say they, wear now no subiects; we haue waued and renounced the same. and is that inough? It is trew; a subiect, may maik hym self ciuis alienae reipulicae: but yf he stay in his own contrie, he can not of a subiect maik hym self no subiect; (for tho he doe rebell as the Hollanders ded, yet he is a subiect:) but it is admirable, how of a subiect he should become a sooueraine: that is scientia scientiarum, a supernatural skill aboue my capacitie,

Yet yf the kings should for feit his earldome of Holland; it is not to them, but to the cheaf Lord of the fee, that is to the Emperor (for it can escheat to no other, either by the Imperial or municipal lawes.) Yf yow ask me the reason: I saye it is manifest, that Holland vvas erected into an Earldome, by the Emperour Carlous Caluus qui cum audiuit, Hollandiam terram Imperatoriam, a Danis spoliari, rogatu Iohannis Papae, principatum eius contulit Theodorico. Berland Meyer. Anno 863.
So yf it be not in the king of Spayn, (to whome it is lineallie discended from Theodoric:) then may the Emperor geue a nevv inuestitur thereof, as a fief Imperial, to whome he pleaseth, as he ded to Theodoric. (for it is a phantastical imagination, that it is fallen by lapse to them of Holland.) the Emperor taketh no notice of ther Stateships, (being a priuate order for ther better government.) But yf it be fallen in laps, it is rather fallen to Oreng and the nobilitie, (who can Better govern) then to tradesmen, and mariners. And yet vndowbtedlie to none of them, except they plead, that as conquerors they wonn yt by the sword, and so they will hold it: which is a Tenure, neither knowen to Litlton, nor summe Rurall, not Ius feudale: a tenure

fitter for forosciuti, or the Hoords of Tartarians, then a commonwelth of Christia^s.
A certan Hollander, in his third defenc, of the vnited prouinces, calleth the king of Spayn, Raptorem, and haereticum notorium, rudelie and vnciuillie; and therupon inferreth, An non potius regem Hispaniae, quia haereticus notorius est, ex suo regno omnibus omnium Euangelicorum viribus, expellere oporteret? either this man was much distempered, or his religion infected hym, and mayd hym a Catelin, and so seditions.
These Ar fearefull paradoxes, and such as all princes haue interest in; and had nead to haue ther swords drawen to confute: yf for pretenc of religion, for errors in gouernment, for restraining ther priuiledges, for punishing sedition and ryots: subiects may thus sit in iudgment vpon ther princes, and taike armes and expell them owt of ther territories. Thus ded ket, and Iack Straw in England, rise for bonum publicum: the Bowres in Germanie, and Ziska in Bohemia mayd ther insurrections for religion: and so euerie Gracchus, may taik vpon hym the reformation of the church and the state.
Now yf they obiect, ther case is ill fitted with a comparison, bycause manie princes in 32. yeares haue acknovvledged and

vsed them as a free State. Yf they hold onelie by prescription: I may iustlie saye, that tyme will not serue ther turne: except they can therwith plead a title, and bona fides: for tyme may co^firm a title, but creates none. and the opinion of forrein princes, maiks not ther bad clayme better, but geueth onelie, a reputation to the vsurper: and in so bad a quarrel, brauelie defended, not the cawse, but the success: not ther right but ther prosperitie haith doon them honor. Besides it is nor trew, that they haue bean so reputed of Princes. to negotiate with princes vnder that title, and that so princes confirm ther title, be different things.
I grand that they offred to Quene Elizabeth the sooueraintie of these prouinces, and laboured that she vvould entertain them: but the counsel (speciallie the L. Treasorer,) ded not vvelcome the offer. both in regard of ther title, for nemo potest plus euris transferre in alium, quam ipse habet: they could not geuer her that, which vvas not ther owne: and in respect of the safetie and honor of the Quene, who could not hold and mantain such a tile, withowt the censure of the world; and withowt geuing forrein princes, and her own people a president against her self.

Although for her own priuate ends, afterward she was content to protect them: and he who furthered most that protection, was as glad so clenlie to be rid of the sonn: as the Marques of Winchester was, to be deliuered of the father.
And therfor, the Quenes commissioners at Burborough, (as I haue hard) affirmed trewlie, Auersata est Regina delatam sibi saepius illarum regionum summam potestatem. Neither was Syr Noel Caron, in Quene Elizabeths tyme, esteamed as an Embassador, but as an agent.
But to ioyn issew with them: yf they can maik good ther hold and Clayme; it By lavv. must be either, by the Gospel, and patronage of religion: or it must be by lawe, (for yf by neither of these, they leane vpon a rotten stake.) first, the lavv is directlie against them. For at the Ioyfull entrie, they wear subiects absolutelie, and the king was soouerain, and to Oreng he committed the liuetennancie of these contries, Ouem lupo. Oreng, and the people. withdraw ther obedienc (vpon surmises,) defended ther townes against the king, depriued hym of his inheritanc, and mayd them selfs sooueraines. Whether wear these men guiltie by lavv, of Treason or no? this is the case, trevvlie. Dambouderius your

contrieman, in prax. criminal. cap. 132. haith drawen your proces. saith he. Seditiosi sunt, 1. qui moluintur conspirationem, 2. aduersus rectores and admmistratores regionum, 3. il^^citas congregationes populi cogunt, ^iues commotionibus turbant, etc. This compared with ther dealing against Alua, Don Iohn, and the Duke of Parma: with ther manie meatings, at Breda and Osterweal; with ther incensing and encooraging the Geuses: with ther defenc of Harland, and Alcmar: is as good as a comment, to explayne the law. But cap. 82. Vi b^^^a sint insta, requiritur 1. iusta causa 2. recta intentio, 3. personarum idoneitas, 4. and authoritas principum, sine qua est laesa Maiestas. Now yf the states mark that sine qua; they may hold down ther heads, and blush. for, in all ther warres, they neither had good coolor, nor iust cawse. they wear secured for ther religion, by the pacification of Gandt, by the perpetual edict, by the articles of the treatie at Coolen, and by enioying all withovvt disturbanc: and yet would they not ioyn vvith the states generall, and accept the same.
Also ther vvas not recta intentio, for it was to noorish discord. they pretended euer religion, and the peoples safetie; but the Prince perswaded them to armes and the

vnion, not for the loue of them, but for his own preseruation. Ambition and dispayre wear his motiues and counsellors: and reueng, and dispossessing the king wear his ends. And he was the more disloyall, seing he being a person of honor betrayed the trust of so great a charg reposed in hym. And touching that sine qua; it was a warr (on ther parts) mayd against the king, and not by his authoritie: and not onelie his sword was shaken against the king, but his penn and Apologie, (which was a great error bycause they wear not aequallie matched, and of one degree.) He had in the low contries, neither office, nor command, but vnder the wings of the Aegle, or authoritie of the Lyon. And he held all his Belgick lands in fee of the Duke of Burgondie, (as of his Leage Lord: and ded homage, and fealtie for the same, and he knew also that a soouerain, geues law to his subiects, aswel as offices, and haith power of lyfe and death: and as a learned man noted, Eo^in. the law signifieth the power and command of hym, that haith, the sooueraintie.
Besides, Claudius le Brun, in his book of proces ciuil and criminal: addeth this. Whosoeuer surpriseth, tovvnes Castles, and forts, vvithovvt order of his soouerain (as the Prince ded cawse Count Lumay doe in Holla^d;

and Vorst, and Barland ded Flushyng.) VVhearby the peace of the contrie is broken: or vvho attempteth against the lyfe of the soouerains liuetennant, it is treason. And these, all Europe doe hold, as iudgments, decrees of reason, and principles of state which ar not to be called in quaestion. and yf the states in Holland doe not obserue, hold, and practise the same: they can never expect, either peace, order, or obedienc in ther contrie.
So as it is manifest, that the Hollanders, in the beginning ar to be charged with sedition, and in the progress with rebellion and treason. And then being traytors by law; they haue admirable luck, and art to maik them selfs also Lords by lawe. and it will be a good encooragement, to ther soldiers; yf men may winn dignities by offences, to share the novvnes of Holland emong them, or to induce them to a bellum pyraticum, or sociale: and cantonize that prouinc by ther own example.
They haue yet one euasion, (which is rather of consequenc, then of substanc to prooue ther title:) a playster they think to salue all sores: that the Archduke haith renounced his right: and the king ar knowledgeth them to be now, liberas prouincias, and in quas ipse nihiliuris pretendat. though it

is no aenigma, no ridl, nor such an argument as will pose a lawyer to answer it. yet bycause, I vvill not doe hurt, whear I would doe good, I leaue it to the consideration of that honorable, and learned Chancelor Peckins: who can best in a fitt tyme, satisfie the world, that it is but a sharcrow, and thunder withowt a bolt.
So then by law, yow haue hard in what state they stand, for procuring the effusion of so much blood, and breaking the peace By diuinitie. of Christendome: so now I desire all both Gomarists, and Armenians, to heare the opinion of Doctor Bilson, a great Piller of the church of England, and who was chosen to write of this argument, by the greatest Statesman of that tyme: and he vvrit cum priuilegie, and the generall allowanc of the church of England.
Saith he shall a king be deposed, yf he break In his book of Christia^ subiection. his promise and oath, at his coronation? in anie of the couenants, and poynts he promiseth? He answers, in the margent, the breach of couenants, is no depriuation. And he geues this reason. The people may not break vvith ther Princes, tho ther Princes break vvith God. And aftervvard. Subiects can not depose ther Princes, to vvhome they must be subiect for conscienc sake. This is a sermon quite contarie to the Aphorisms of Holland,

and the diuinitie of Rochel: and yet it standeth vpon inuincible reason: for as yovv may not by Gods lavve, depose your prince, so yovv ar for bidden to taik armes against hym. And vvhy? D. Bilson, vvil satisfie yovv. For (saith he) he that may fight may bill: and vvar against the Prince, and murdering the Prince, ar of consequenc incuitabl. Aftervvard he addeth this, (to stopp the mouth, of such a Polipragmus, as called the king, raptorem, and haereticum, and a suo repellendum.) The Apostles obeyed the tyrants, that commanded all things against religion. And in those things, vvhich vvear cammanded against God, they ded submit them selfs vvith meakenes, to endure the Magistrates pleasure, but not to Not. obey his vvill. Lastlie and most to the purpose, he concludeth; yf the lavves of the land appoynt the nobles, as next to the king, to assist hym in doeing right, and vvith hold hym from doeing vvrong: then ar they licensed by mans lavves, to interpose them selfs: but in no case to depriue the Prince, vvhear the scepter is inherited. Novv it is certan, that the lavves of the Netherlands geue no such authoritie to the nobles: and yf they ded, yet in no case to to depriue ther Prince, or to abiure ther obedienc: and maik that as a bridg to pass ouer to the sooueraintie. And bycause some of good accounpt and iudgment, haue

bean led into that error, that the Dukes of Burgondie, hold not full power, and sooraintie in the Netherlands: I will send them to schoole, to all lawyers, records, stories, and (that which is most infallible) to the practise and common lawes of that contrie; to Bodin; and to that ancient and honorable Counsellor, the Lord Chancelor Egerton, in his oration for the post nati, pag. 71. The Dukes of Burgondie (saith he) vvear absolute Princes, and had soouerain povver in ther contries. and king Henry the S. ^ad as absolute sooueraintie, vvhen his style vvas Lord of Ireland, as vvhen he vas king. for the difference of styles marks not the differenc of soouerantie.
So then to conclude, yf this warr, begonn for religion, vvas against all the rules of religion: I may dewlie inferr, that as ther vsurpation is withowt warrant either of law or the gospell, they continew to hould it withowt conscienc. and haue no other title but force, and the canon. And all forrein soldiers that doe assist them (knowing the iniustice of the case, and that the warr is so vnlawfull) incurr the penaltie of mortal sinn, and dainger of damnation: and may as iustlie be reprooued, as king Iosaphat for helping and assisting Achab. Look to the end, for it is certanly

fearefull to all those who know that, (...).
I write not thus much, as an enemie to the contrie, (I hould a peareles countie, for the goodlie townes, welth, traffick, strenth, and fertilitie, in so small a circuite:) nor for anie personall quarrels: nor for anie corruption, or assentation (in regard of the match with Spayne:) but, onelie the truth of the storie; the dainger of ther president, and the cawse of religion haue induced me. for tho I remembred, the dislike had of ther manner of gouernment, ther dealing with the Quenes officers, and of ould how vnkyndlie my lo. Willoughbie had bean hearto fore vsed by them, as his Apologie can witnes: and of late what complaynts our merchant adventurors (in ther books) had mayd for ther ill vsage at Mosko, and the east Indies by them: what contempt they showed, when the devvtie of Size Herrings was demanded in his Maiesties right, for fishing on the coast of Scotland, (in presuming to imprison the demander.) and manie such like matters. yet why should these mooue me when the state vvas not mooued (And vvhen I saye the state, I mean not the people, but the king, (to whome Holland is and was most bovvnd, for 2. high and bynding fauores,

wihch require a reciprocall obligation and thankfullnes on ther part: and such as ought to bread in them good blood and ambites and respectfull toungs. first in restoring vnto them the keyes that ded open and lock ther provinc; (not for anie remuneration. but restitution of a part of his devv.) As also for the free permission of ther fishings vpon the Englih coast: whearin they haue yearlie employed, aboue 30. thowsand persons, set to work by it, and aboue 4000. Busses, Doggerbotes, galliots, and pinks, to ther admirable benefit. which is onelie a permission of grace, and no priuiledg, by law, (for Grotius may withowt contradiction prooue mare liberum, as the kings high waye is for euerie mans walk. But he can not prooue, that fishings vpon an other Princes coast be permitted to the^.) this is a digression (to a good end.) And therfor I will return to the matter.


THE V. TITLE. OF THE TROWBLES IN BOHEMIA AND THE PALATINATE.
BOhemia Onelie now resteth, as a stage The trovvbles and sedition in to present the last Scene of all forren

tragedies, and tumults for religion. and I Bohemia for religion. will taik the Palatinate in my vvaye. An vnfortunate prouince of late, (vvhich in a hundred yeares, haith chainged religion, fiue tymes: and never leatned in all that tyme, the rules of obedienc.) Wheareof I nead not maruel, when I think of Parreus, Cracerus, and the schools of the new discipline.
Parreus in his Comment. vpon the 13. Romans. teacheth, that subditi possunt suos Reges deponere, quando degenerant in tyrannos, aut suos subditos cogunt ad Idololatriam: Scil. Subiects may depriue ther Princes, when they degenerate from a royal gouerneme^t and become tyrants; of yf they compel ther subiects, to Idolatrize. (And his meaning is: yf they establish the Mass, and the sacrifice of the Church, or anie other religion, then Caluinism:) then eiect, excommunicate, and cast them owt of all authoritie. so terrible a sentenc he giueth, both against the Emperor, France, Italie and Spayn. But stay, this is but his first peale, vvhich he ded ring as the Toxsan, the Alarum bell to Bohemia: but he addeth, an other article, as a iust cawse of depriuation, Quando pretextu religionis, quaerunt propria commoda, when vnder pretenc of religion, they seak to maik ther own profit.

Which had bean a lectur not verrie plausible to king Henrie the 8. nor in Cromwel, or the protectors eares. and surelie, yf a man should ask whether Murrie and Murton in Scotland, vvhether Oreng and Horn in the Netherlands; vvhether the Admirall and the Princ of Conde in France; whether the Protector and the Duke of Northumberland in England, had anie politique respects, anie odd ends of ambition and auarice; other then religion: yow will fynd them guiltie, and subiect to this censure. An other cawse he assigneth for deposition of Princes, quando grauant conscientias subditorum.
And after ward, in an other place, to show his constancie in that opinion, and to expownd his own meaning, saith he subditi, aduersus superiorem magistratum, se and veram religionem, possunt etiam armis iure defendere: si aliter in conscientijs incolumes esse nequeunt, with which I think ther is no Counsellor, or vvise man, but vvould be iustlie angrie, yf it should be thus translated. the Catholik subiects in England, Scotland, Denmark, or the Palatinate, may with armes, by law defend them selfs against ther superiors for defenc of ther religion, yf they can not other wise quietlie enioy the freedome of ther conscienc.

For it is not enough and a sufficient replie, to say ther religion is irreligious; bycause that is the question.
And in his commentaries in Iudices. Magistratus minor potest occidere maiorem, (and expresseth his meaning in that Case) quod tyranni domestici, magis sunt reprimends. As yf a man should saye baylifs, sherifs and Constables, (for religion) may kill kings and counsellors; bycause tyrants vvith in our doores, ar most to be feared and cut of, (vpon the former conditions before alledged.)
But was Parreus the onelie protector of these paradoxes, and the onelie Doctor that poysoned the Palatinate vvith this infectious doctrine? no in dead. Gracerus his pewfellow taught, that coercenda gladio est Antichristi malitia. and in cap. 13. of the Apocal. Benedictus Aretius, laboureth to stirr vp the people, to hate the name and authoritie both of the empyre and Emperor, with this lecture. Draconem (ait) dedisse imperio potestatem suam. the deuel errected, and authorised the Empyre. why? In Imperio habitare plenitudinem diabolismi. for in the Empyre, dwelleth the fullnes of the Deuels Impietie. But these opinions I nead not to condemn, and aggrauate the dainger thereof; yf it be trevv, that I haue hard? that

in Powles Churchyard, the fyre confuted them, and that worthilie.
And yet be not so gross, as to imagin that onely Parreus, Gracer, and Aretius taught this doctrine: for it is the practise of ther churche. Doe not look so stearnlie, vpon me for saying so: bycause I will iustifie it with euident proof. Ther own neighbors, and ther elder brothers; they haue vsed with this vnciuil and turbulent inhumanitie. ask Giesekenius (a man of learning, and accoumpt emong the Lutherans.) how they behaued them selfs at Emden (a Lutheran state.) he showeth first ther act, 1. Emdenses illustrem Dominum suum mota seditione, fere tota ditione pepulissent. The subiects of Emden had almost driuen ther Lord owt of his dominions. 2. Then ther force and viole^c, Pactietiam sunt, ne illustrissimus Comes, habeat potestate^, vllius religionis nisi Caluinisticae exercitium, subditis suis, concedere Emdae. They articled with hym, that his excellecie should not haue powre to grant to his subiects at Emden, the exercise of anie religion but Caluinisme. 3. Lastlie ther grace They hate and persequute the Lutherans. and kyndnes to ther soouerain. Et tamen liceat ei in aula habere concionatorem, qui sit Augustanae cenfessionis. They will notwith-standing tolerate, that he shall be suffred, to haue a preacherin his court of the confession

of Auspurgh. A great fauor. subiects will tolerate ther Princes religion; and frame it for them selfs after ther own cutt: they will direct ther gouernor, and he must obey.
Some curious man, will suppose this was a tumult; and that the church of the Palatinate, ded not warrant anie such proceading against Lutherans ther brethren. then mark, and consider this. Anno 1602. ther wear 20. poynts, established in the church of the Palatinate. And the first articl was totus Lutheranismus, and omnes libri eorume ^edio tollentur. They decreed, that all Lutheranism, and ther books and writings should be prohibited, and abolished. and in the same Synod diuers opinions of the Lutherans, ar recited and condemned, as yow may see by Schulting, in Hierarchica Anacrisi. libro 15. pag. 98. whearof certanlie ther is great reason: for ther is an impossibilitie, that Lutherans and the ministers of the Palatinate should quietlie liue tother, in one Ecclesiasticall government; they ar incompatible, in respect of ther discipline, ther consistories, ther elders (to say nothing of ther doctrine.)
For these ar the barr that hold owt all ciuil societie, and concurrenc betvvean them: these ar the cawse, why they eiected the Lutherans ovvt of the Palatinate; ovvt

of Brandenburgh; and owt of Emden. these ar the cawse, why the Lutherans wiselie prouide that they shall haue no footing in Saxonie, Hamburgh, and the Hans townes. And these vvear the cavvs, why that great Synode of Torgaw, (convented by the meanes and procurement of the protestant Princes, ded testifie, that Caluiniani, Christianas Ecclefias omnes, academias, regna, turbauerunt ac vastauerunt. And yet neither ar Caluinists, comprehended vnder the peace and protection of the Empyre: and the religions vried is no vvaye permitted to them. As appeareth by the edict of Charles the 5. de compositione pacis cum protestantibus anno 1532. not in his sentenc de confessione Sueuica 1530. nor in the interim 1548. nor in the constitution, de pace publica. And touching the acts mayd by the Emperor Ferdinand, at Passau 1552. the verrie words exclude them from all benefit of the pacification, as a thing not intended vnto them, viz. Intereatemporis, nec nos, Electores, Principes, etc. quempiam ex Augustanae confessionis statibus, propter religionem vicogere, bello etc. volumus: sedsuae religioni fideique, quiete stare, cadereque sinentes. And he declareth and explaneth hym self, 1555. at Auspurgh. Propter Augustanae religionem confessionis, nullam violentiam Ecclesiastici inferant, sed liberum

eius exercitium permittant, vsque ad controuersae religionis compositionem. I may hear fitlie alledg, the conclusion and agreement of the states of the confession of Auspurg, the thre Electors, and the rest of the Princes, and Citties. Postquam Deo it a permittente, praeter nostram Christianam religionem and confessionem, haereses sacramentariorum Anabaptistarum, Osiandrinorum, etc. irrepserunt: (quae omnes a pace religionis exclusae sunt,) volumus vt contra illas, in communi mandata edantur, vt eiusinodi haereses eradicentur, and this was enacted 1557. so it is most playne, that Caluinism is ther iudged an heresie (by the protestant Princes them selfs, and banished the Empyre.) and anno 1566. Caesar, and the Princes in the Dyet, decreto publico, scripserunt ad Fredericum Palatinum, vt errorem Caluini deserat: nec in templis and scholis doceri permitteret. and this decree was intimated to Frederic the Elector, in the presenc of the Bushopd of Ments, Trier, and Coolen: and of Augustus Duke of Saxonie, and the Embassadors of Ioachim of Brandenburgh. but the execution was differed till his death (perhaps to saue his honor.) yet his sonn Lewes obeyed it.
And the same year, in ther replie to the Emperor; the same Princes, ordered, permittere se nolle, vt vlla secta, cuiuscunque nominis,

in Ecclesiis illorum, ipsorum voluntate locum inueniat, quodque eodem modo, and non minus de Svvingliana and Caluiniana opinione sentiant. and long before 1555. in recessu Imperij, the same was decreed. So yow may wel infer, that Caluinism before was not tollerable in Germanie: and much less now when the Bohemians, haue mayd it intollerable. And worthilie, they ar quite exempted from the protection and benefit of the lawes, liberties, and peace of the empyre; who ar so factious and busie in the Empyre, both to extirpate the Lutherans, and to suppress the Catholicks, (by popular furie and such seditious Aphorisms as Parraeus and the puritans of the Palatinate hold.)
These wear the fyrebrands of Bohemia, that haue seduced the people; set Princes at Variance; and the kingdome in Combustion.
Shall I nead to report the case aright? no for the originall, of this warr in Bohemia, and the progresse; the stories of Mercurie Francois, Mercurius Gallobelgicus, and diuers others relate, so as I forbeare to touch it, (and my hart greaueth and groneth, for the fatall misfortune of some, that had interest in it.) The long, manie and secret plats and practises wear discouered after the batle of Prage, by intercepting

the papers rolls and records thereof. First by secreta principis Anhaltini, Cancellaria, printed 1621. which certanlie was no inuention and fiction, (as the Satirical Catholicon in France against the leaguers was:) but a serious admonition, dull, playne, and withowt affectation: and as a treatise rather to deliuer the truthe, then to show art. And thereof Lundorpius (an historiographer of Frankfort, by his book called acta publica) is a good confirmation, who setteth, down the letters and records, of the whole proceading for a tyme. and Cogmandolo, in an other litl treatise, called secreta secretorum; is a fortification of the truthe and credit of that Chancerie, and taketh away all iealousie and suspicion of deuise. Vpon this rock then, will I build my relation.
This great vnion, ded beginn 1608. and The beginning of the vnion. the Cheafs thereof wear, the Count Palat. Christian Prince of Anhalt, and the Marques of Onoltzbach. Count Mansfeld, was a principal agent, (who 1618. sent 2000. men to ayd the Bohemians, against the Emperor, in contempt of his proclamations and letters.)
Afterward they admitted Ioachim Marquis Ther assistants. of Brandenburgh, (as Vicarius and Liuetennant of the generall:) and they

drew in, the Marques of Baden, the Duke of Wittenburgh, the Landgraue of Hess, Duc Du-Ponts: Strasburh, Norimbergh, and other citties. all which ded contribute so largelie to these vvarres, (that the Emperor never had the like contribution granted against the Turck.) the particular taxes, yealded by each of them, Cogmandolo setteth dovvn, (vvhich a mounted from 1608. to 1619. for so secretlie and so long was it concealed, to the some of 4176917. flor.) This concurrenc of so great princes, showed a mightie force: which was much encreased, by the negotiation of Mansfeld, and Nomarus in Italie (scil. Baltas. Newwen cheafe secretarie of Onoltzbach:) and of Volrad Plessen with the Hollanders, Bohemians, the Duke of Bullion, Bethlem Gabor, and the rebells of Hongrie. (for they conceaued no hope that the king of England, would enter into ther confederation: for such weightie, and solide reason, as he alledged.) besides, they hoped of the Grisons assistanc: they gaue owt, that the Hanstownes ded fauor the vnion: and they ded earnestlie sollicite the Venetians, to enter into the league (who euer wear desyrous to keap in aequall ballanc the princes of Europe, as fauourers of Ostracismus, and

iealious of the too potent supereminencie, of anie particuler prince.
Hear I am to open an other gate, and to The pretences and reasons for the vnion. show yow the scope and end of this vnion: and whether they stood vpon the tearms of a pure defence, or to offend also: whether onelie to resiste, or to offer violenc also and hostilitie: and whether for religion onelie, or for matters of state and religion (for it can not seam probable, that d'Anhalt would again taik armes for conscienc, having bean for it in France, so well beaten both owt of his honor and fortune: and speciallie Mansfeald, who desperatelie and like a Cheualier errant, braueth the world with his running camp.)
The end, they showed openlie to ayme most at, was the defenc of ther priuiledges, and the protection of ther religion. but this was not the full drift, for they meant to offend the Catholiques. and that doth well appeare pag. 121. of the Cancellaria: whear Achatius a Donau writes to Anhalt 15.  Nou. 1619. That the intention of Bethlem and the correspondents is, pied a pied, to extirpate the Antichristian Papaltie,
And tho the vnion yt self (fownded vpon 21. articles,) was sayd to be vndertaken, as a bukler against the plats and proiects of the Catholiques; yet articulo 8. they confess,

that ther intention was, to expell papisme; to preseru them selfs from the yoke and seruitude of Spayne: and to preuent all forrein governement. And Bethlem Gabor in his letter to the Turk saith plainlie, that he must now labor, vt rasa pontificiorum cohorse medio tollatur. So then, this is assured, that yf they can preuayle; all Catholicks know ther doome, ther suppression, and oppression.
But this is not all; though it be euer one. for pag. 43. Ecclesiasticorum inuasio, is set  Down for a cawse. and therfor pag. 67. we must say they, earnestlie labor and spare no cost, to possess our selfs of Augusta Treuirorum, (Trier.) for so they should be commanders of a Prince Electors contrie, and triumph over the cleargie.
Neither yet was this all: for ambition,  shooting at the highest and fayrest markes, took order for her maintenanc pag. 131. vt aduersae part is Prouinciae inuadantur, to inuade ther contries, that should taik armes against them.
But ther noblest proiect, was: to inuest them selfs in Bohemia and Hungaria. Two crownes wear goodlie booties, and temptations fitt for high spirits. and why ded they first, and so earnestlie, affect Bohemia? The reason is giuen pag. 25. for therby, in

Collegio electorum, compos erit votorum duorum, he should haue two voyces; and he was sure of the consent and concurrenc of Brandenburghs suffrage.
And ther for the Count Palatin in his letter, to the Elector of Saxonie, saithe. The cawse why he ded taik vpon hym the Administration of Bohemia, was this that, 1o therby this kindome might not be longer restrayned and detayned from the vse and exercise of ther religion; and 2o that they might enioye ther priuiledges, and not be mayd hereditarie: or fall into the hands of Spayne, to the preiudice of the Electors. and 3o that hearafter the election of king of the Romans might be in the povver and Choyce of the Protestant Princes, by the pluralitie of voyces. (So he thought, they should not be forced to hould the stirrop; while the Popes wear mounted, and Papists ded gouern all in the Empyre.) And peraduenture for that end purposed, yf they could: to hinder that Ferdina^d, might not be chosen king of the Romans. For so Anhalt ded vvrite to Donau, in May 1619. that it wear better, the Turk or the Deuel should be chosen and preferred to vvear that crown, then Ferdinand. and B. Gabor by his letters certified the Turk, that the Pal. and Brandenburgh

vvear resolued no longer to endure Ferdinand: and that all these Prouinces, vvho vveare in the league, Sultano, and tot^ationi Mahumeticae corde and animaomnia officia f^delissime prastabunt: and that Ferdinand shortlie should be expelled Germanie to seak his succor in Spayne. Is not this a holie league? Be not the ends charitable, and the media most Christian?
But the truthe is, Ambition vvas Hongrie:  they consulted who should haue the beares skinn, before the beare vvas taken: they conspired to share emong them the spoyle of the Cleargie of Germanie, and to maik a praye of the hovvse of Austria. For by the rolls of ther Chancerie it appeareth, that they intended to aduance the Palatine, to Bahemia, Alsatia, and a part of Austria: and to enlarg his dominion, by the Bushoprick of Spyrts, and a part of Mentz. Bethlem Gabor, should be assisted to keap Hongrie, the vvhich (he hauing no issew) might also happilie fall to the lott of the Palatine (Too manic crownes so purchased, to expect anie in heauen.)
Onoltzbach gaped for two fatt benefices, the Bushopricks of Wirtzburgh, and Bambergh, (his next neighbers) and therfor it vvas agreed that there should be the Rendeuous of the armie.

The Marques of Baden, thirsted after Brissack; and to be inabled, to continue his vniust possession of the vpper Marchionate; and to owt face the Count Eberstein (who had endured much wroug at his hands.) Wirtzburg was a mote in the eye of Brandenburgh, it laye near and fitt for hym: and therfor his dessein vvas to haue a share in it.
Anhalt, hoped to supplie his wants, by a part of the spoyle, both of Ments, and Bambergh; and by some lands and lord ships, which wear like to escheat in Bohemia.
And yf the Venetians would ioyn in this Association, they might with so good assista^ce easilie maik them selfs Lords of Istria, and friuli. and by this meanes, Oceanum, cum Adriatico, sayd they, posse coniungi. A great conquest surelie: and it showed a deuowring stomach, that could swallow so great morsells, and sowell digest and dispose them, before they had them.
It resteth novv to demurr vpon these poynts; and to examin, what Apologie, and what arguments can they alledg strong enough, to defend a proiect, and a conspiracie, so pernicious to the whole state of Christendome, and so directlie against the law of natio^s, and the peace of the Empyre.

All the pulpits in England, and the churches ^ Reason. (called reformed) ded generallie and lowdelie sownd an Alarum, against treason and rebellion of the league and leaguers of France: and yet that ded not extend it self, beyo^d the Alpes or the Maze, as this dothe.
And yt was at first vndertaken quietlie, withowt anie sedition or insurrections in the state. And vvas for defenc onelie of ther ancient religion, (withowt anie temporall respects:) and confirmed with the kings oath and allowance: and afterward it was continned in reueng of Murder, and actions of tyrannie.
Now consider what was ther scope? Monsieur de Villeroy, in the relation of his seruices maiks it euident. they ded not seak the extirpation of the king of Nauarr, but his reformation: and yf they might be assured of his religion, he should be assured of ther obedienc.
But this vnion runneth a wilder race. It is not onelie a new religion, but the lands of the old religion they gape after: and the affection they haue to the latter, maiks them more greadie, to suppresse the former. And yet all must be sayd to be doore for religion, though it be doone most irreligiouslie, hauing neither, the order, nor the media, nor the end religious. hovv

could it then succead add prosper well, that begonn so ill and hovv could it beginn worse, them to march vnder too such standards, as ambition and auarice.
And therfor most wise he, ded that excellent 2. Ratio. Duke of Saxonie, as a frend of peace, adui^e the Count Palatin to renounce Bohemia, and seak for pardon: bycause this warr ded open the gates of the Empyre, to let in the Turk, which of it self was a sufficient cawse to condemn ther vnion. for yf ther quarrel had bean good; yet the effects yt ded work, wear bad.
Moreouer, plessen confesseth in his letters 3. Ratio. to Anhalt, that which is most trew, the actions of Holland, and Bohemia, eodem fundamento niti: so Holland is the pattern. Bohemia the imitation: suits of one cut: lessons of one schoole. And seing that of Hollond is sufficientlie disprooued, all readie, I nead not vse anie new argument to refell this, but referr yow to the precedent discourse. for they took armes against a king lawfullie elected, solemnelie crowned, and by consent of the states established in possession, vvhat could be more orderlie* and so hortlie after, to depose hym; and vpon so weak surmises, to show so much leuitie: neads better arguments then yet y could ever heare.

And it was mayd the more odious, by nominating the Duke of Saxonie, as a competitor and a stale; to maik hym suspected to the Emperor, as reum affectati imperij: knowing that he had refused ther offer, when they employed Count Slick to perswade, that he would imbark hym selfs, in the busienes, and accept the crown of Bohemia, which in dead they never intended to a Lutheran prince.
An other reason, doth much exaggerate 4. Reason. the offenc. By ther president, Austria vvas corrupted (see hovv stronglie examples vvork vvith a multitud. The people, (saithe the Register of the Chancerie) by the correspondenc of the Turk and Gabor, took coorage; and told Ferdinand, that yf he would not grant them toleration of religion, and freedome of conscienc: they vvould ioyne vvith the Bohemians and Hungarians, and renounc ther obedienc to hym. And they vvear maisters of ther words: for in August 1620. the lower Austria, abandoned ther Lord (the ancient inheritor of that noble patrimonie,) quitted ther obedienc, and accepted a new protector in his stead. I am sure the subiects of England would condemn the Catholicks, (and so they might iustlie) yf they should sta^d vpon the like tearmes, and ther ancie^t

tisle; and in defenc of that, seak to expell ther soouerain, and invest a strainger in the government, to serue ther turn. And surelie ther cases, ar matches: yf the one might by law, the other maye: and yf yow, condemn the one, yow must vnpartiallie condemn the other.
But nothing maiks this action more offensiue, 5. Reason. more scandalous, and more infamous, then that Anhalt and Onoltzback, (in sc^s electoribus,) ded confederate them selfs vvith straingers: and dispose of the succession of the Empyre, vvithovvt the warrant of the Empyre. and this fawlt is dovvbled, by combining vvith Bethlem Gabor; Christians, vvith the Turks vassal, a reprobate, a monster.
This is that B. Gabor, vvho to hold hym self in the Turks grace, deliuered vnto hym, the town and fort of Lipp, and the townes of Solimos Tornadg, Margat, and Arad (vvel fortified) in Hungaria.
This is he, vvho treated vvith the Hungars, 1607. to deliuer vp Vaccia (a town Episcopall) into the Turks hands; to the great preiudice of religion, and oppression of Christians. This is he, that svvore alleagianc to Gabriel Batthori his soouerain Lord, and Princ of Transil^ania, and afterward trayterouslie murdered hym and

vsurped his state. This is he who mayd a league vvith the Emperor Matthias 1615. not to attempt anie thing against the liberties and peace of Hongrie: and afterward practised with the rebells of that state, invaded the kingdome, took vpon hym the crown 1620. led Andrew Dockzy the kings Liuetennant (catched in his nett by frawd) prisonner into Transiluania, and banished all the state Ecclesiasticall (that he might fead his soldiers vvith the spoyles of the church.)
And this is he, who hauing entered Poson, prophaned the Cathedral church of S. Martin, placed there his nevv Chaplains, and aftervvard vvith his own hand certified the Turk; that at last he had vndertaken that worthie exployt, to the vvhich the Turk had oft incooraged hym: and that most of the nobles of Hongarie, wear his, and had submitted them selfs to hym: and that now he was determined for the cleargie, seing they gloried to shaue ther crownes, he would glorie to cutt of ther heads. whearupon in Iun afther: the Turk mayd peace vvith Tartaria, and promised to assist Gabor, at his nead vvith 40. thovvsand Tartars.
What tare vertues can be expected, from such a man, whose anatomie yf it vvear to

be mayd, vvould shovv such a leaprousie such a corruption of blood, and so loath some a bodie; as Europe haith not oft knowen. I nead no other reason against this league, but to subscribe his name, (as a principall in the co^tract) whome the world must neads iudg vnlike to be a fitt instrument to aduanc the Crosse of Christ, and to reforme religion.
Yet this vvas the man vpon vvhose head the vnion ded agree to set the crovvn of Hongarie; and to carrie the practise vvith more secrecie, they intertaind his nearest kinsman at Heydelbergh; vnder the govvn of a scholler, to hyde all ther intelligences, and conduct ther busienes.
Novv, doe I vvish, that a partiall reader, 6. Reason. would look vpon Germanie, and see the picture of Troye on fyre; see the image and horror of vvarr: and hovv vvell it vvould please them to see the face of London, and Midlsex so disfigured with wounds and desolation. And that puritan, vvho novv is most forvvard to blovv the coals of discord and sedition, and inflame a state vvith furie and quicksiluer: may quake and trembl vvhen he shall consider in vvhat devastation, all that contrie of the Empyrelyeth mourning and groning.
The Prouinces abovvt the Rhine ar

waisted, disturbed, and empouerished by the soldiers on both sydes (specially vvorms) tillage^s suspended, traffick is decayed, trades ar ceased, taxes ar imposed, new fortifications charge the contrie, men ar not maisters of ther own goods, and aboue 100. thowsand men ar acco^ppted to be slayne* thes ar the fruits of ciuil warres; which ar bitter and lovre to them that taist them, (as I pray g^d England may neuer.)
And there ar the fruit of Caluinisme: which (though it was directlie prohibited by the lavv, and tolerated onelie by the mercie of the state;) seaketh novv, to suppresse both the Emperor and the states, withowt anie toleration of there religions, an vncharitable requital: ans vvithovvt the feal of anie religion. for your iustifi^ng sole faith can never iustlie (vvithovvt yt bring charitie in her bosome:) and the trew marks of Charitie being patienc, humilitie, and zeal conioyned stronglie in a link: your litl patienc, and humilitie, convinc your zeal to be counterfeit, and your faith to be fruitles. for charitie would not direct yow, to inuade the Duke of Bauier his territories, yf he refused to stand Neuther: charitie ded not counsel Anhalt, in his letters to Donau 1619. to haue an auaricious eye, to surprise a cittie, which would be

vvorth vnto them 32. millions. Charitie doth not vse to direct Christians to sollicit the Turks assistance (as pag. 80. Cancellariae:) nor to set down such plots, as they intended p. 42. and 32. and 66.
Now touching the lawes of the Empyre, 7 Reasons. I referr yow to that I haue deliuered before, against the commotions of the Lutherans: which ther is iustlie condemned Onely I will add this, touching Bohemia, Carolus 4. in act. de confirmatione regis Bohemo^um, setteth dovvn this clause, as an essential part, of that kings authoritie and approbation. Volentes, vt quicunque in regem Bohemorum electus fuerit, ad nos and successores nostros, Romanorum reges and Imperatores accedat, sua a nobis debito modo and solito, regalia accepturus, non obstantibus iuribus, and legibus municipalibus quibuscunque, etc. And in the Aurea bulla. cap. 4. Curia Nurenberg. act 7. Iubemus and volumus, vt omnes Principes, Electores, etc. and art. 8. Si quis autem Princeps Elector, aliusue feudum a sacro tenens impeno, supra and infra scriptas Imperiales constitutiones adimplerenoluerit, aut eis contrare presumpserit: ex tunc caeteri Coelectores, a suo ipsum deinceps excluda^t consortio, ipseque voce Electoris, dignitate careat, and iure. Wherby it is mayd manifest, what the law requireth to be doone? and what order and manner it prescribeth

for the doeing thereof: and what paenaltie and forfeitur is sett doone against offendors and transgressors of that lawe. And good reason. for take away or neglect Iustice; pretend what yow will, your great glorious attempts, your inuasions, your intrusions, be but magna latrocinia, and violent oppressions. as appeared vvell, by the supplication of Leopold king of the Romans, to his father Otho I. who bycause he had broken the peace of the Empyre, and called forreiners (and yet not Turks) to his assistanc. saith he, membrum Imperij appellari non debeo, quigentes ext^rnas and barbaras in mediam Germaniam immisi sorrowing for his fault, and acknowledging his error.
But these Minyeons of Geneua, bring 8. Reason. Religion to plead for the defenc of ther vnion: and that they endeauored onelie to punish Ochosias, for consulting vvith the Idol of Accharon, and to root ovvt superstition. Hear in dead is the voyce of Iacob, but the roughnes of Esau: vvords of pietie, but action of Babel. can yovv shovv as good a vvarrant as Elias ded? ded God call yovv, ded God authoritie yovv, to depriue your Princes? per me Reges regnant, vvas Gods proposition: and S. Peter 1. Epist. c. 2. v. 13. be subiect to euerie humane creature for God, vvhether to a king as excelling, or to rulers.

His counsell and yours varie much for he willed them to fear God, and honor the king: but yow direct your auditors to degrade and depose the king. S. Paul Rom. 13. v. 1. Let euerie sowl be subiect to higher powers, for ther is no power but of God: and he who resisteth that povver, resisteth Gods ordinanc, and purchaseth damnation. and v. 5 not of necessitie, but for conscienc sake. But this matter, neads no disputation: grace and pietie can best decyde it.


TITVLVS SEXTVS.
AT last by a long trauel, we ar retourned Touching, Q. Marie, and the practises against her. home to England, vvheare no such paradoxes, ar novv holden by the Cleargie, and prelates. and it is no maruel. for now, they haue the wynd with them, and liue in a calme: so as ther patienc and obedienc (of late dayes) neuer cam to probation: and no tryal could be mayd of ther spirits, having no crosses, nor other combate, then with sinn and Martin Marprelate: and in so great peace and prosperitie, he wear not compos mentis; that vvould not preache against disloyaltie, and tumults.

But yf yow look back to the tymes past, and call to mynd, what spirit raigned in them, during anie storme, or tempests: yow will fynd them much differing from them selfs, and that they wear not allwaies so peacable and regular, (as now they ar,) since they appeared first in the world, as Antagonists to the church of Roome, and with that singularitie, and title of Reformers.
For yf maister Fox ded trewlie register his martyrs, and yf the Wiclefists and Waldenses wear rightlie inserted in Catalogo testium veritatis; then may yow fynd cawse enough to dovvbt of ther humors, and quiet disposition. and yf yow ask my reason. Bycaus they ded hold (as the knoxians yet doe in Scotland.) That the people might correct Princes, yf they offend: contrarie to all the Theoremes of Catholicks schooles. And therfor Philip Melancton, in his comment vpon Aristotels politicks, saith, Miras tragedias, excitauit Wiclefus, qui contendit eos, qui non habent Spiritum sanctum, amittere dominium.
And in his book, de iure magistratus, Insanijt VViclefus, qui sensit impios, nullum dominium habere. As yf Princes, should forfeit ther crownes; yf they lost grace, and Gods fauor.

And Osiander witnesseth the same, Centuria 9. And yet maister Fox, calleth hym, stellam matutinam in me lio nebulae, and lunam plenam in die us illis. A morning starr, in the midst of a fogg, and yet the full moone, of that tyme.
How plausible he was, in those dayes, no man will maik a Quere, that can Remember, how Syr Iohn Oldcastel (Lord Cobham) and Syr Roger Acton, (wiclefs disciples) leuied 25. thowsand men, intending to destroye the monasteries of westminster, Powles, and sainct Albons, and all the howses of friars in London; whearof that actiue king Henrie the fifth, being aduertised in good tyme, (by the confession of some of ther partakers:) with great diligence he preuented them at S. Gyles fealds (appointed to be ther Rendeuous:) and incountring those straglers, who weare there attending the generals comming: apprehended, condemned, and executed 37. of the principalls, for exampl and terror to the rest. And he aftherward hunted ovvt and fownd Oldcastel, and Acton, and put them to death, being attainted of Treason, and Haeresie, as by the records appeareth.
All vvhich maister Fox laboureth to extenuate and falsifie, and disprooueth them as calumniations and slaunders. but

with no success; as yow may learn by Iohn Stow pag. 550. and by Doctor Hapsfealds Ecclesiasticall storie, latelie published by a worthie man of our nation.
For it is euident that 1. Henry 5. the Wiclefists sett schedulles, on powles Church door, publishing that ther vvas a hundred thowsand men, readie to ryse against such as wear ennemies to ther sect. And in a synod holden at London, for diuers poynts of doctrine touching the Sacraments, Oldcastle was committed to the towre, (from whence he broke owt.) and afterward one Bennet was executed, partlie for harbouring Oldcastle, partlie for seditious libells against the king: whearupon, (as also for some practises at kenelworth against the king) Oldcastl was endited in the Parliement, before the Duke of Bedford, (as an enemie to the stathe.) he answered them with contempt, accompting it as a trifle to be iudged by them, (belike bycause they wear sinners: and bycause (he sayd) he had no iudg emong them, so long as king Richard liued.
And at his deathe, he spake like a man frantick to Syr Thomas Erpingham; that yf he sawe hym rise the third daye, he wold procure quietnes, and fauor to those of his sect.

And surelie yf yovv look into VViclefs ovvn lyfe tyme; yovv shall fynd it no maruel, yf his doctrine ded so far seduce Oldcast: hauing procured therby, so great patrons and frends in the court, at his first rising: and such applause in the vniuersitie of Oxford (the place best able to iudg of his learning, and illumination.)
Iohn of Gand, Duke of Lancaster, ded much fauor: and patronize, this martyr Wiclef: in so much, that he being summoned, to appeare before the Bushop of London: the Duke ded hym so much greace, to go with hym thither for his better protection, assisted with Syr Henrie Petcie (the Marshall of England.) to discountenanc the Bushop, to encoorage Wiclef, and to animate and encrease his fectaries and folloaeers in ther course.
And it was worthie the noting, that Religion was euen then vsed, as a fayre vestement, to couer manie fowle practises. for the Duke and Wiclef had seueral ends. the Duke graced hym, bycause he was so generallie plausible: the better to ouerthrovv both the liberties of the Church, and the Charters of London: bot which laye as blocks in his waye, to hinder the course of his aspiring desseins.
And this appeared playnelie, by Ihon

Lattimor (an Irish friar) who accused the Duke of manie practises, speciallie of his intention to vsurp the crown. (which mayd hym so popular.) But Latimor being committed by the Dukes meanes to the custodie of Syr Iohn Holland, in the night before he should come to his ansvver: the poor man, vvas strangled by Holland and Grean.
But to come nearer, to the present age. In Quene Maries tyme, examin how obedient these Reformers wear, to that magnanimous Quene, and the Crown. and it is worthie to be noted: that in fiue yeares, (the too short tyme of her raigne:) she had defacto, more open and violent opposition and rebellion by her own sudiects; then Quene Elizabeth had in 45. yeares. (for the treasons of Preasts, and religious men; weare but skar crowes in dead; fictions, mayd faults by law: deuised by pollicie, and mayd offences, rather then being so of them selfs. (How playne was her gouernement, and how farr from triks? a litl seuear (to which ^he was oft forced:* for thoughe she was a great Iusticer; yet withall how merciefull she was, appeared manifestlie by her gracious compassion to the Dutches of Sommerset, to Syr Iohn Cheak, to Syr Edward Mountagevv (the

cheaf Iustice,) to Syr Roger Cholmlie, to the Marques of Northampton, Syr Henrie Dudlie, Syr Henrie gates, the Lord Robert Dudlie, (who stood attainted) and to the Duke of Suffolk: whome all she knew, and had before fownd to be enemies of her religion, and no frends to her title, and yet she released them all ovvt of the tovvre, whear they weare prisonners.)
Notwithstanding all this: the Protestants wear never quiet, nor suffred her to be quiet. Some ded libell against the regiment of voemen: some picked quarrels to her marriage: some published discourses and invectiues against her religion: and some conspired her depriuation, to aduance her successor (by vvhose aduancement euerie Caluinist expected a golden fleace.)
The grovvnd of all these seditious actions, vvas the religion they professed (then nor fullie six yeares old) a religion of more libertie, more pleasing to the gallants of a court; and voyd of these austerities and mortifications, which the ancient Catholiques obserued with reuerence.
But emong manie others, that book of obedienc, prepared most the vulgar, to insurrections and mutinies. for pag. 94. he affirmeth, that Quene Marie deserued to

be put to Death, as a tyrant and monster. Ded euer anie Catholich write so? or ded the pen of anie seminarie man blot the paper with so barbarous a sentenc? Yet knox libro, appellat. ad nobilitatem and popul. Scot. ioyneth hands with a Goodman, and backeth his opinion. Illud (inquit) audacler affirmauerim, debuisse nobiles, rectores, iudices, populumque Angl^anum non modo refistere and repuguare Mariae illi Iesabeli, quam vocant reginam suam, verum etiam de ea and Sacerdotibus eius supplicium sumere. and these, yet vvear not all. Procead Syr Thomas VVyat, is worthielie chronicled for his: rebellion: vvho marched as a Cyrus, ouer Shooters hill with his armie: threatning both court and cittie, Prince and people. Yet this holie Goodman, cap. 14 in his Obedienc, commends hym, and saith, he ded but his dewtie: and that it was the dewtie of all that professed the gospell, to haue risen with hym. and pag. 43. He affirmeth, that it is lawfull to resist the superior powers, and vrgeth all states to taik armes against her.
But whear ded Goodman and kno^ suck this sweat doctrine? at Geneua, (the school of Monarchomachia whear Buchanan, ded learn the same, and all for one end. and maister VVhitingham in his preface to that book; confesseth that it was approoued to

be a good and godlie treatise, by the principal of that cittie, that is Caluin and Beza. And albeyt in Qurne Elizabeths tyme, Goodman is said to haue recalled that opinion: yet it was neuer publicklie recalled by hym, and disalowed: and besides it showeth in Quene Maries tyme, vnder the cross and affliction of what spirit, he end his faction weare of.
Yf yow dowbt, vpon what pretenc wyat ded rise, (bycause some maik quaestion thereof:) surelie it was partlie for religion, partlie for bonum publicum, to hinder the Quenes marriage: (for both ioyntlie concurred, as Stow and Hollinshead agree.) He that shall presume to defend, that it was not for religion; Quene Marie in her oration at the Guildhall in London, doth refell hym: for she declared, that she had sent diuers of her counsell to wyat, to demand the pretences of his insurrection: and she sayd it appeared to her counsell, that it vvas a Spanish Cloke to Couer religion.
It is trew, that wyat vrged, to haue the Towr deliuered to hym: and to haue powr to nominate and choose new counsellors: and that he would not trust, but be trusted.
Wear these in different demands af a subject? Or regalities fitt to be offred to his mercie? was this to preseru the Quene?

Surelie Violenc, and the Svvord, be vnfitt keapers of a Prince person.
And touching Religion, Fox hym self saith. that for religion they co^spired emong them selfs, and mayd vvyat ther Cheafe: the reason was, that by forren marriage, the Quene vvould bring a seruitude vpon the realme, and establish popish religion ther in.
Vovv vpon these premisses, mark vvhat ensevved. VVilliam Thomas, conspired to kill the Quene: and at his execution, he gloried, that he dyed for the good of his contrie.
Doctor Pendlton preaching at Povvles Crosse, one discharged a peace against hym. and at the same place, an other daye: one threw a Dagger at maister Bourn (being in the pulpit:) wheare the lord Maier could skarselie appease the tumult: so as the lords of the counsell, the next sonday after, together vvith the Garde, vvent thither to preuent, or to punish such disorders (yf anie should there happen againe.)
And at vvestminster, vpon an Easter daye, a desperare fellovv, wounded a preasts as he was saying Masse, in saint Margerets Church.
So great vvas the distemperature of these inflamed puritans; vvho complayne so

much against the persecution of that tyme, and yet they prouoked it: and hauing no powre to command, yet had they no humilitie to obeye: and when they might haue liued quiet them selfs, yet vvould not suffer others to liue quiet, in whose authoritie it laye to disquiet them.
But I will mount to offences a degree higher. William Fetherston (a counterfet king Edward) was brought vpon the stage, as a Parkin Warbeck, to disturb both the Quene and the state.
What strains of inuention and pollicie; wear these against a Prince, for her religion? but hear they stay not. for One Clebar (sometymes a Paedante) remaining at yakeslie in Northfolk, vvas put to death, for a conspiracie against the Quene. Vdal, Stanton, Peckam, and Daniel, wear committed both for conspiracie, and haeresie, and for attempting to robb her threasure, and the Exchecquor, (for which they had there dew punishment,) To let passe the treason of Dudlie and Ashton (who wear sett on, and stirred vp by the French:) Syr Peter and Gawin Carse, (great protestants) together with Syr Thomas Dennie, took armes in Deuonshyre, to hinder and empeach the king of Spayne his arriual in England: possessed them selfs or Excetor Castl:

and afterward perceauing ther own weaknes, and less assistance then they expected; they fled into France, (which was then the harbour for the malco^tents of his nation.)
Thomas Stafford, (comming vvell instructed from Geneua) mayd proclamations publicklie in seueral places, that Quene Marie, was not lawfull Quene, and vnworthie to be Quene. and so abuse the people, he gaue owt boldlie and falselie, that twelf of the strongest houlds in England, and best fortified, wear committed to the custodie and command of the Spanyards, (to maik them the more odious; whome they hated onelie for ther religion and povver, and no other particuler quarrel.) and therfor, he Bradford, Procter, and Streatchlie, took Skarborow castle (a fort then of some strenth, in yorkskyre, to hould against the Spanyards: and in recompenc, of so great a seruice, they worthilie lost ther heads.
Henrie Duke of Suffolk, (to vvhome Quene Marie had once before giuen his lyfe, being father to Ladie Iane, a priuie counsellor to the treasons of Northumberland, and her prisoner in the towre:) he flijng into Leicestershyre vvith the Lord Gray; in his iournie he likewise mayd proclamations against the Quenes marriage

vvith Spayn (for that vvas then the greatest obiect of the Protestants mallice:) and finding his disabilitie, to leuie a commanding armie, he fled, and lurked in corners; till the Earl of Huntingron, discouered his hole, apprehended and brought hym vp to the towre (his old lodging,) whear he mayd an vnfortunate end.
I might vrge the practises of Syr Nicholas Throgmorton (a man of great witt and pollicie,) who was endited of high treason, and arraigned at Westminster, vvith Arnold, Warner, and Others. And though the case vvas playne, the Iurie acquited hym, but to ther constand trowble.
Albeyt he had cawse to thank God, that it vvas not in a tyme, vvhen the Aduocates vvear so skilfull to triumph at the barr vpon calamities, and vvilling rather that the prisonner should loose his head, then they vvould loose ther Oration, and the glorie of the daye. Thus vvas Quene Marie tossed in a sea of trovvbles, tantae molis erat, Romanam Condere gentem.
But some haue obiected, that no Ministers, had a hand in these tumults: nor vvear the trompettors of sedition, at that tyme. yes surelie both ther heads and ther hands ded cooperate. Doe yovv taik Goodman and Gilbie to haue bean no ministers?

Ievvel preached at Gloucester, against the Quens proceadings: D. Sands vvalked vvith the ragged staff, and being vicechanlor of Cambredg, assisted the proclaymers of ladie Iane. Hooper, Rogers, and Crowlie vvear enrolled as frends of these actions: and diuers others vvho in Quene Maries tyme, after vvyats fall, ded forsake the realme.
And what think yow of the tvvo Apostles of that tyme, Cranmor and Ridlie? wear not they instruments of the Quenes trovvbles? A great Doctor, vvith great subtilitie laboureth to excuse Cranmor and Ridlie, that they committed no trespass against Q. Marie, nor in her tyme. Syr though the tyme, doth not excuse ther offence (yf it had bean fullie committed in kings Edwards dayes) being actions of iniustice, and against the rules of common reason and conscienc.
Yet y may say, uon bene diuisa sunt haec temporibus. D. for it is euident, that Ridlies sermon was after king Edwards death, and so could haue no shelter vnder his authoritie; bycause all men of vnder-standing know that the raign of a Prince commenceth not at the tyme of his coronation, but actuallie vpon the death of his predecessor. Now it is certan, that the Sondaye after

king Edward dyed, D. Ridlie (being Bushop of London,) sayling vvith the vvynd in his sermon at Powles crosse, (like an Other infamous Shavve) magnifiet and defended the title of the ladie lane, to the crowne of this realme; perswaded the people to accept and obeye her, as Quene: and so impugned the inuincible right of both king Henries Daughters, against his ovvn conscienc and knovvledg, and directlie against king Henties will. and ther: for he vvas iustlie convicted and attainted of treason.
As for Cranmor, he was a counsellor and oracle in the busienes: and therfor was arraigned and condemned, with the Ladie Iane, and Guildeford Dudlie, as a contriuer and principall assistant, of that treasonnable practise, to disherit bothe the Quenes: and to graft the princelie roses vpon a crabtree stock. (as appeareth by the records in the kings bench.) and I may trevvlie affirm of that Proteus, that in all his actions, he showed hym self ever seruilie plyable to anie humor of the kings.
First a principall instrument of the diuorce, (whearby the court gates vvear set open, to welcome Ann Boodein.) then afterward, to serue the kings appetite, he and Cromwel wear the cheafactors, employed

for her condemnation and deathe. (as appeareth, by the statut, 28. H. 8. c. 7. whear Cranmors sentenc is recorded iudiciallie as of his own knowledg convincing her of that fowle fact.)
So as Quene Elizabeths frends had no cawse to fauour hym, either for dew respect of her, or of her father: or for kyndnes to her moother. and all vnpartiall men vvill condemn hym of inexcusable iniquitie, that being a counsellor of strate, primate and Metropolitan, and pretending to be a reformer of religion; he would betray his maister (whose creature he was) vvould frustrate and voyd his will, (wheareof he was cheaf executor:) would subscribe to extinguish and root owt his issevv, his tvvo daughters, two Quenes, to set vp Ladie Iane in there places.
And all this baselie, and against his ovvn conscienc: and all to pleas a subiect, all for feare of affliction, against which he was never vvell armed (as appeared by his so manie chainges, relapses, and periuries: offences, which I leaue to God, as faults of frayltie and batges of humain vveakenes.) But to come to the matter. All these aforesayd being overt acts, and treasons in se, and simpliciter, and by the common lawes of the realme, and by the statut of

25. Edw. 3. I think I may, vvell conclude that Caluinism, and the nevv religion, ar most daingerous to princes: and haue bean the greatest cavvse, of all the vvarrs, seditions, and depopulation in Europeever since Luther (a man of vnhappie me, morie.)
And yet I can not but commend that religion, M^tonimia. bycause it is semper eadem, yovv may allwaies know it, by the coonisance, by the operation, and fruits of it.
It is the same that induced them of Geneua, to expell ther Bushop and Lord: the same that mooued them of Sweueland, to depriue ther lawfull king: the same that procured Holland, to depose ther soouerain: the same that sollicited subiects to deposeth' Emperor, king of Bohemie. the same that emprisoned, the vertuous martyr, and Quene of Scotland, and cast her into that calamitie, vvhich haunted her euen tho deathe: the same that authorized Rochel, and Montauban, to stand at defianc against ther king the same that begot so manie monstruous conspiracies against Quene Marie of England, (as yow haue hard.) So as, in 60. yeares, mo Princes haue bean deposed by the Protestants for ther religion: then had bean by the Popes excommunication, or the attempt and

meanes of Catholicks in 600. And yet foall this, I perceaue all these action, haue some Champions: at least, some men of note, seak to excuse them. as, vvhen vve obiect Svvedia; maister T. M. defends it, and geues reason, that it vvas the demand of the vvhole state, for defenc of ther priuiledges and liberties, and fruition of religion.
A writ is brought de eiectione firmae, against Sigismond king of Svvecia, by hys ovvn subiects; the king is eiected therupon: and T. M. allovves it, bycause it vvas the demand of the vvhole state, etc. Consider better, first doe yovv talk of a vvhole state, and maik the king no part of it? the head no part of the bodie? can ther be a monarchie vvithovvt a king? yovv harp to near knoxes tune, and a Scots gig.
The vvhol state, id est, the people, (either sollicited or disposed to aduanc Duke Charles, vvithovvt the kings consent to vvear his crovvne) ded elect Charles ther king, and depriued Sigismond.
This was yow say for defenc of ther priuiledges and religion. So then yow think for the se two cawses, they might iustlie depose ther king: and so the kings maistlie knovveth, vvhat assurance he may haue of you, and vvhat a sure stake yow ar for kings to leane on. can yow defend

this fact? it is the same, that Holland and Bohemia committed? then against whome is rebellion, against the people or the king? The law is playne, no warr can be mayd, withowt the authoritie of the prince, sine qua est laesa maiestas: and that is a fundamental law in euerie monarchie; (which yovv turn to a Democratie by leauing the bridle in the Peopls hand.) Yf yovv will vouch safe to hear S. Augustin, he saith l. 22. cap. 75. contra Faustum, ordo naturalis, mortalium paci accommodatus hoc poscit, vt suscipiendi belli authoritas atque consilium, penes Principem sit. and he geues a reason, for non est potestas nisi a Deo vel iubente vel sinente. and bycause yow think they ought by force of armes to resist ther king, for religion: c. 76. he answereth your obiectio^, by exa^pl of the Apostles, Isti sunt resistendo interfecti sunt, vt potiorem esse docerent victoriam, pro fide veritatis occidi. Martyrdoome.
Iam sure yow like not this, Occidi, for few perfect Caluinists, prooue perfect martyrs.
Valentius, degreed to banish Eusebius from Samosata; the people resisted, but Eusebius appeaseth the sedition, disswaded the people, and obeyed the decree. Theodoret l. 4. cap. 14. Valentinian, sent Calligonus his chamberlain, to threaten S. Ambrose, and terrifie hym, from his opinions, by the name

of deathe and torments. he ded answer in an other tune, Deus permittat tibi, vt impleas quod minaris. Ego patiar, quod est Episcopi: tu facies, quod Spadonis.
Christ hym self, resisted not: but commanded Peter tu put vp his sword: it vvas no proper vveapon to defend his quarrel. Daniel and the Children of Israel, Captiues in Babilon: when the king commanded them to Idololatrize; they resisted not, they reuiled not, they ded not offer to spit in his face, (as Caluin brauelie defended they might.) but refusing his command, they layd them selfs at his feate, to endure his pleasure.
But to touch yow a litl, nearer. I nead alledg no other authors then your ovvn, either to condemn wyat, or the subiects of Swetheland.
Doctor Bilson holdeth it, as an articl of  offaith, that Princes ar not to be deposed: and that the Apostles endured the magistrates pleasure, but performed not his command. and how much he condemned, warr against Princes; his opinion haith taught me; that he who may fight may kill, and to fight with the Princ and murder hym, be of ineuitable consequenc.
Besides, maister Beza, some tymes (when  he was not transported vvith passion) affirmed.

Nullum remedium proponitur hominibus tyranno subiectis, preter preces and lachrimas. Parson whytes own argument against the fathers of the Catholick religion; (that  they teach nothing but treason, to murder Princes, and to disturb states:) I must reflect vpon them, that either defend wyats rebellion, or the fact of the Svvecians. What nead I alledg, L. Baylie, Ormerode, or suke like men: dij maiorum gentium:  all your greatest Doctors, haue wiselie and neadfullie, defended that position for 50. yeares. And yf it wear trew, iust, and lawfull  in the raign of Quen Elizabeth: I see no reason, why it should not be so taken in Quene Maries case? for the differenc of Religion, doth not alter the authoritie and power of Iudisdiction.
And yf Princes should for feit ther authoritie, when they err in faith. Then vvho should taik the forfeiture thereof? and who should be iudg whether he haith forfeited yt? I know yow ar not so gross,  as to think the people maye, (that is an opinion generallie reiected:) nor that officers share authoritie vvith the king; that is also cast owt of the schools.
Xiphilin, in the lyfe of M. Antonius, saith, Solus Deus, iudex Principum. Belloy, in his Apologie Cathol. part. 2.

Orationibus pugnandum, armes against Princes haue no warrant. Quis est iudex, si^^ ex transgreditur conditiones regni? Solus Deus. @. 21. and how farr we ought to obey princes, and Quatenus: see sainct Augustin serm. de verbis Domini in Matth. And common reason will and may teach euerie  man the misterie of this thesis. For the king, is anima corporis, spiritus vitalis, caput membrorum, vinculum per quod cohaeret respublica: sine quo nihil respublica ipsa futura, nisi onus and praeda, si mens illa Imperij detrahatur. This was Senecas opinion, and a sownd proposition. for yf the sowle offend the bodie, the bodie can not punish it vvithovvt participating of the punishment: neither is it a proper facultie of the bodie, to iudg. but of the sowle, and vnderstanding. Examin, what the law meaneth, by bodie politick; and yow shall better discern,  all my growndwork.
It is a dignitie Royal annexed to the naturall bodie, whearby he is mayd Lord Paramount, and is not surnamed as others ar, but stiled by the name of the bodie politick declaring his function, as Iacobus Rex. and to show the nature, qualitie maiestie and prerogatiue of that bodie, 1. It can not hold lands in ioyntennancie, (nor endure a partner:) 2. it can not be seazed

to vses, (and so limited:) 3. it is not bovvnd to geue liuerie and season of lands, (nor tyed to the circumstances of a naturall bodie:) 4. it can not doe homage hauing no superior: 5. and that bodie is so precious, as the imagination onelie to compasse his death is treason, (tho ther be no attempt.) 6. and that bodie vested in a blood, ought to discend: and tho the natural bodie be attainted of fellonie or treason before, yet by access of this body politick, he may taik his inheritanc, for that dignitie purgeth the blood, as it ded H. 7. and H. 4. (for this bodie was founded vvithovvt letters pattents, by the Common lawes, and for the defenc of the people.)
And yf criminal cawses can not disable the discent, it can less when it is discended. for the crown of England is independant (for his iura regalia) holden of no Lord, but the lord of heauen: so it can not escheat to anie being holden of none.
What then? from this fowntain is all authoritie, and honor deriued. Iudges at created, and haue ther commission to iudg from the king, for criminal and ciuil cawses: the Constable and marshals court for armes and honor: the Chancerie for equitie: the Checkor, for reuennues of the

crown. So to conclude, the king giuing, and appointing all iudges, who in his realme is to iudg hym? or to censure his counsells of state, and politike temporall actions? and yf be he iudg, they ar vvithowt iudgment, that attribute it to the states; but they err most that arme the people vvithe that authoritie. For tho I know what a parliement means; and what power it vvoorthilie carrieth: yet as it is euer summoned by the king; so ther acts must be iudged, allowed, and confirmed by the king, before they be lawes.
In the senate rests consilium: but in the king is the powre, and Maiestie of the realme, and he is iudg to allow, or disallow what he liketh. and by the coniunction of these, Foskevv sayd trewlie, no state is berter tempered, nor more temperatelie gouerned: nor by more excellent municipall lawes, then England is.
So to conclude, what reason can be pretended for wyats insurrection against his soouerain the bodie politick. was it for matching with Spayne? that was no stra^g motion, for her father had once before de^seigned to match her in that familie. besides the conditions vvear honorable: and profitable to the crovvne (yf God should bless them vvith issevv:) the person most

noble; and the reasons allowed by all the counsel.
But the Quene ded not obserue the lawes of the realme, she abrogated the statuts of 1. E. 6. (which all the kingdome approoued:) and the vvord of God by Moyses commandeth, that Princes should obserue the lavves. and those Princes dishonor them selfs, vvho doe not acknowledg that of Theodosius, tantum tibi licet, quantum per leges licet.
Well, aliud ex alio malum. As Moyses prescribed vvhat a Prince should doe, so Samuel, what he may doe: Moyses tould hym his dewtie, Samuel his power: and it is trew, and a Christian profession of kings, legibus se subiectos esse profiteri. But yow must consider, the lavv haith two properties, the one to show what a man should doe: the other to punish them, that doe it not. To the first the king is subiect; but tovching the second, for criminal cavvses; I know no court, aboue the kings bench, nor no iudg aboue the king.
Moreouer yf Quene Marie shold be tyed to her brothers lavves: vvhy vvas not Quene Elizabeth to hers? vvhy vvas not king Edvvard to his fathers lavves? but that religion of Quene Marie was corrupt, vnpure and superstitious. So still hear is

philautia and presumption, yow will censure your iudg; and yow (a lay man) wil iudg, of his religion. that is the Quaestion yet, and not decided by anie orderlie Councels, or Synodes on yovvr part. and S. Austen, libro vbi supra, Si vir nistus sub rege sacrilego militet, iuste posset illo iubente bellare: 1. ciuicae pacis ordinem seruans: 2. cui quod iubetur, vel non esse contra Dei praeceptum certum est, vel vtrum sit, certum non est. Tho the king be sacrilegious, yet he is to be obeyed; and hovv 1. ciuicae pacis ordmem seruans, (that is the course; and that is the end, for indiuidua bona sunt pax and libertas; vvhich is to be noted for them that plead so stronglie for ther liberties:) secundo, yf the kings commandements be not directlie against Gods vvords, yf vel non esse certum est; vel vtrum sit, certum non est. Novv tho all Catholicks, knevv the certum est, in ther conscienc: yet the protestants, for the vtrum sit, vvear vncertan, bycause both the lavv of the realme, the general counsels, the vvhole state of the Churche Militant, was against them; and they had onelie the testimonie of priuate spirits, to oppose against publick authoritie. But, vvhat yf Quene Marie had erred in some superstitions; what yf the present king ded err in his gouernement, in his courses, in his

iudgment, or in matching his sonn, withowt the consent of the realme: should either of them, be censured or excommunicated by the ministers: or depriued, or committed and emprisoned by a vvyat.
Salomon, ded fall into greauous sinnes, ad profundum Idololatriae lapsus atque demersus (saith S. Austen:) and ded directlie against Goods commandement, (to keap and marrie straing voemen of the gentiles) non ingrediemini ad illas: besides, he worshipped Moloch, and Astarthes (the goddes of the Sydomans.) yet neither Preasts, nor people ded rise against hym, or depose hym: they left it to the proper iudg of hings, who in his wrathe ded appoynt and raise vp Hieroboam to ruine his sonn: and yf wyat could haue showd such an immediat warrant, he had bean excusable.
Iulian prooued in Apostata: yet tho the Doctors of the primatiue Church, as G. Nazianzen and others, sharply reprooued, and detested his impietie: yet they never perswaded nor taught the people to depriue hym.
He that proclaymed the prerogatiue of kings, vos estis d^: he taught the world, that as Gods haue summum imperium; so the people ar to obey, and therfor called subditi, for ther subiection. and yow neuer

hard of anie but Gyants, that wear fayned to fight with the Gods; and they perished, for all ther greatnes: for that hand must neads vvither, vvhich toucheth Gods anoynted: for he that taiks armes against hym, doth prouoke the king to the feald: and when the flame rageth, who can tell whear the sparks will light. Some limitations ther ar: and those neadfull. For I ascribe not: an infinite, vnlimited diuinitie to kings, nor a powr to tyrannize, and liue as atheists: he that gaue the that glorie, vos estis dij: ded likewise geue them, this caueat that for iniquitie and impietie, transferam regna de gente in gentem. He is the Iudg of Princes, and his audit is dreadfull; and to that we must leaue them.

FINIS.



THE SECOND PART.
HIERVSALEM, THAT OBEDIENCE, AND ORDER, BE THE EIRENARCHAE OF CATHOLIQVES.
HAVING allreadie trewlie, King Henrie tho eight. and liuelie Drawen and presented vnto yow the Image of the Churches called Reformed, vvith a face so full of frownes and stearnnes, that by the Phisiognomie yow may iudg it, vnquiet and turbulent: It remaineth in like sort to paynt owt vnto yow, the portraicture, of a Roman Catholick, by the infallible characters of deuotion, order, obedienc, and the humilitie of the professors thereof.

What they weare in this land, in the tyme of king Lucius, and the Britons, I shall not nead to expresle: but refer yow, to the ecclesiasticall stories of that tyme: which euen Fox and the Centuries doe honor: labouring rather, to commend them, as members of ther ovvn Churche, then to acknowledg them ours.
For the tyme of the Saxons, I vvill maik no relation of ther vertues, and how amiablie the Church and common welthe ded sping vp together. And though the prelates wear highlie reuere^ced, and ded beare great swaye in the state, yet how dewtiefullie they obeyed ther princes: Venerable Beda, and the stories of that tyme. M. Lamberts Archaionomia, the old Saxon Lawes, and the monuments yet vpon record, can witnes and testifie.
From king Edvvard the Confessor, Down to king Henry the VIII. ther is no man so blind, that will affirme ther was anie other religion, professed and priuiledged in England, but that which was planted heare by Gregorius Magnus; who as D. whitacher noteth l. 5. contrae Duraeum, pag. 394. ded vs a great benefit, and vvhich vve ar euer most grate fullie to remember.
In all which tyme, though the Cleargie mayd Canons, by ther own authoritie, for

ther ovn particuler gouernment: yet the kings of this realme, ded euer fynt them obedient, and readie, hymblie and dewtifullie to obey them, and to affoord ther best assistance, to support the estate Royal (euen oft vvhen they weare much troden vpon, and heauilie burdened.) and albeyt sometymes, they weare forced to whote contentions, for external matters of iurisdiction, and ther immunities, (as the commons and Barons weare:) yet they neuer passed the rules of order and obedienc, nor stirred vp sedition, or commotions. And who soeuer shall obiect, and call in quaestion, the opposition of some prelates vnder Henrie the II. King Iohn, and Henrie the III. shall neither doe great honor to the kings, nor dishonor to the Churchmen for ther zealous defenc of ther immunities: and perhaps he may reuiue such matters, as wear more conuenient, to be buried in the records.
But the first king, thar euer gaue effectuallie cawse in this kingdome, to trie in the face of the vvorld, the admirable patienc, Order, and loyaltie of the Catholiques, was King Henrie the VIII. (flagelium Dei, to the Church of England, and yet of ther own religion.) First, by aceusing the Cleargie, to be fallen into the danger of a

premunire, for mantaining Caridnal VVolsies legantine power: Secondlie by the statut of Supremacie: Thirdlie by the Suppression of Abbeis. Which vvear the thre first breaches; wherby he threw Dovvn, the foundation, strenth, and glorie of the Church of England. The first leuelled the waye, for the second: and the second enabled hym with power and authoritie, to compasse the third. The first was a burden, the second a bridle, and the third a terror.
By the first he fownd ther weakenes: by the second, they perceaued his greatnes: and by the third, he mayd them dispayre, of anie recouerie or reparation of ther estate. by the first onelie the Cleargie smarted: the second laye heauie both vpon the spirituall, and temporall: by the third, the whole realme was again in a sort conquered.
And all this was doon, to be reuenged against the Pope, (touching his marriage) to abandon his iurisdiction, and to aduance his ovvn greatenes, and royall power: that so no man might afterward controll his action, or restrain his appetites (vvhich lawleslie rainged, in hym and prooued verrie inordinate.) And ther for he bard owt of the realme, all forrein power: and at home, he subdewed them, and mayd them of no power.

Such is the imperious nature of domination in irregular mynds, which hauing once broken owt of his circle, can not indure limitation and bownds, but must and will rainge at libertie, in the wide and wild feald of his humors; and not being able to geue law to his appetites: vvill maik lawes as champions to authorise them, and reason (as a parasite) to glorifie them
Now to examin all these thre. The first 1. The premunite. was a quarrell, he ded pick onlie against Cardinal VVoltie; and yet afterwards sett vpon the tentors, and extended against the vvhole cleargie. Which being summoned into the kings bench, the kings learned counsell, vrged and exaggerated the matter, so vehamentlie: that in the Conuocation howse, they concluded to submit them selfs, to his pleasure. and to obtain ther pardon, and recouer his fauor, they wear content to offer and present vnto hym a hundret thowsand pownds: wherevpon ther Pardon was signed by the king, and confirmed by parliement. and by a deuise there, they wear also Drawen, to acknowledg hym supreme head.
This vvas a course, at that tyme thought neither agreable to Iustice, nor honor: for Cardinal Wolsie, had the kings licens vnder his hand, and the great seale of England,

sor his warrant to vse the legantine power, and aftervvard by reason thereof, the king hym self employed hym to exercise the same, and sit vvith Campegius, and examin the matter. And yf the diuorce had bean allowed: ther should neuer haue bean quaestion mayd, of the legantine povvre.
Touching the Supremacie, All the hings 2. The supremacie. subiects euer acknovvledged, that the crovvn of England, quoad temporalia, is independant of anie other povver, but that great and Transcendent Maiestie, vvho proclamed to the vvorld, Per me reges regnant; that kings knovving, vvho vvill taik ther audit, may be more carefull to rule vvith Iustice and keape ther accoumpts streight; and subiects, knovving there tye, and vvho layd vpon ther necks this suaue iugum, and withowt encroachment, may obeye vvith more loyaltie and affection.
The Question, vvhich king Harrie mayd (first of all kings, in his parliement,) concerneth his povver and iurisdiction quoad spiritualia.) And whether that new and highe praerogatiue, vvear euer properlie and essentiallie inuested in the crovvn of his realme heartofore: or whether it wear the creation of a nevv right by parliement, iure Coronae or the establishment of an old.
And hearupon grovveth an other quaestion

(novv both in England, and other kingdomes so much debated,) vvhether the Controuersie for Supremacie in spiritualibus, be a quaestion onelie proper to Religion, and so subiect to the sentenc and censure of the Church onelie (as emong the Romans it vvas to the Collegium Augurum, and Pontifex Max.) or proper to Pollicie and the state onelie, and so subiect, to the iudgment of lawe: or Mixt, and a participle, vvhear of either of them may hold plea.
Of both these, I shall haue fitter both Occasion for the matter; and Opportunitie for the tyme, to declare my poore opinion, in my discourses vpon the Ecclesiastical Historie.
And for the suppression of the Abbies; 3. The Supression of Abbies. the Cleargie (by that fact, and the supremacie,) stood as in captiuitie, and at the kings pleasure and mercie: ther possessions wear seazed, ther goods forfeited, ther Churches prophaned and sacked. And the augmentation court was erected, vpon the spoyles of the Churche, and the sale of ther mooueables, vestiments, challices, bells, and all. for when the king fownd, that the Cleargie (thorough the humilitie of ther zeale) yealded so much vnto hym: he never thought, he had power sufficient, till he had more then enoughe. and vpon that

aduantage, his conscienc being inlarged; broke owt of those ancient bownds which the lawes of the Church had prescribed to hym.
Therfor anno 27. he appointed Cromwel and Doctor Leigh, to visite the Abbies; and by vertue of the kings commission (which had then a chymical powre to maik sacriledge, vertue) they took owt of the Monasteries ther cheafest Iewels, plate, and Reliques, to the kings vse. and dismissed all such religious persons, vnder the age of 24. yeares, as desyred to walk at libertie in the wyde world, and were wearie of Cloysters and spiritual exercises.
Anno 28. to loose no tyme: all small religious howses of or vnder 200. pownds per annum, with all ther lands and haeteditaments (of vvhich there vveare 376.) wear giuen to the king by parliement: and these vvear able to dispend aboue 3200. povvnds per annum, of old rents of Assise. and the mooueables of these howses (being sovvld at vndervalevv) amounted to aboue, 100. thowsand pownds.
The religious, and ther dependants, vvear all voyded, and left vnprouided of habitation: so as moe, then ten thowsand persons, weare turned owt of ther own doores, to seak ther fortunes. Which mooued

the common people to much compassion: to see them forced to liue by almes, vvho by ther bountiefull hospitalitie, had releaued so manie.
Anno 30. Battel Abbie in Sussex: Martin, in Surrie: Stratford in Essex: Lewes in Sussex, wear suppressed, and converted to the kings benefitt and vse, (for all things wear doon politiquelie, and by degrees.) At last, anno 32. and 33. generallie all other monasteries, of what valew soever: and all the lands of S. Iohns of Hierusalem, wear giuen to the king, and the corporation of the knights was dissolued, and to satisfie them with some contentment, they had pensions distributed emong them, of 2870. pownds, during ther liues.
So hear was left in England and Ireland, no care of the general good of the Church to mantain anie succors, assistanc, or fortification of Europe against the Turk; nor no nurceries of deuotion, and prayer, again sinn, and the deuel. And to conclude, all Chantries, Colledges, and Hospitalls for the releafe of the poore: vvear offred and bestowed vpon the king, and left to his order and disposing, anno 37.
The valew of all the Church lands in England, at that tyme, amounted to aboue 320180. pownds, 10. per annum. wheareof

the king took into his own possession, and appropriated to the crovvn, 161100. per annu^. The which was so great a bootie, that an offer was mayd once in the parliement, as Howse reporteth, in preface to H. 8. to create and mantain with those reuennues, fortie Earles, 60. Barons, 3000. knights, and 40. thowsand soldiers: and also, that so the Commons should never after be charged, with anie more subsidies or impositions.
The like motion and proiect was commended The Cavvses of the Supression. and offred, at the lay mans parliement, in the tyme of king Henrie the fourth, by some that loued Wiclef better then the Church, and wear better frends to ther lands, then to ther Religion. but Thomas Arondel Archbushops of Cantorburie, ded stowtlie and vertuouslie resist ther motion; and preuayled with the king, to preuent there platts, and the mallice of auarice.
The Lutherans in England, ded reuiue, and set on foot again the same motion, by ther book called the supplication of Beggars: which was opposed by the supplication of Sovvles, endited by the vertuous and learned penn of Syr Thomas Moor. yet at last, they fownd a patrone, an vnworthie Thomas of Cantorburie, to geue waye to

ther de^uises, and to fead the kings humor. and so, he vvho should haue bean the cheafe protector and intercessor for the Cleargie, prooued the Cheafe Cateline that betrayed the Church, and conspired ther oppression.
Add to this, the kings own inclination to vayn-glorie, which begot his auarice: whose prodigal expences, could not be mantained vvithovvt such extraordinarie support.
And think yow, that the Lords and courtiers disliked the proposition? no, they knew what a rich praye it would prooue, (whearof each man hoped and thirsted, to haue a share, and speciallie maister Cromwel, who knew no better ladder to climbe to greatnes and welth, then by an innouation so full of spoyle (whearby one might easilie rise, by the fall of so manie:) who being a man of experienc, and bred vp in a forge, knew the better which way to hammer and frame his busienes, in some good forme, that the king might vndertaike the action, and stand stowtlie to a matter of his domination and profitt, (knovving well that his conscience was all readie buried in Ann Boolens tomb.)
And tho maik: he waye playner, and remooue all blocks: the thre principall Abbots,

Glastenburie, Reading, and Burie, thre Barons of the parliement, stowt and religious men, and likest to crosse and empeach these practises: wear executed for denijng the supremacie, bothe to discoorage the Bushops from mediating for them: and to terrifie the rest of the religious, that they might not withstand the king, who was now armed with suffieient powre to bring them vpon ther knees (all forren intercession being cut of.)
But quo iure, quo titulo, vvas this suppression The titl of the religious hovvses. compassed? The Abbies hold these lands in frank Almoine, and in see: they vvear possessed of them by the donations, of Saxon, English, and Norman kings and subiects: continued legallie by prescription, established by law, and confirmed by the Charters of kings: and so they held ther inheritanc, and immunities, by the same, lawes, the temporall Lords hold ther Baronnies, and the king his reuennues. What nead I remember the Charters of the realme: the magna charta 9. H. 3. or the confirmation thereof 28. Ed. 1. vvhear it is granted, that the Church of England shall be free, and haue her liberties inuiolable. and cap. 2. iudgment against them shall be held for naught. and 4. Bushops wear authorised to excommunicate those, that

shall seak to vndoe ther charters. And 3. E. 1. the Bushops ded accurse those, that attempted to spoyle the Church, or by force and craft to diminish ther liberties or the charter of the realme; and all those that either should maik statutes, or obserue them being mayd, against the sayd liberties. for (which is to be noted) by one and the same Charter, both the Church, and all the subiects hold ther liberties: so as king H. 8. might as well break the one, as vndoe the other: and yf the parliement could geue powre to abrogate the one, that is a president to dispence with the other.
But in Peterbo^ow Ledgerbook, yow shall fynd king Iohns grants, more at large and fullier then anie printed book setteth down. What nead I remember, sententia lata super confirmatione cartarum, by E. 1. or 42. Ed. 3. cap. 8. yf anie statut be mayd contrarie to magna charta, it shall be voyd.
Or the confirmation of all these, 1. 6. 7. 8. of R. 2. and 4. H. 4.? Which all wear intended, to preuent tyrannie, to secure the Church then being, visiblie knowen, and generallie reuerenced (for to no other Church they wear granted: nor no other can enioye the^, yf the king so please.)
But to return, to the suppression. The The surrendors. king, to maik his title, either to be, or to

appear stronger, (to which he had no title of hym self, but by parliement; and hovv farr that powre is extended to geue awaye the lands of a third parson, not being hard, nor convicted orderlie for some offences, is an other quaestion) he procured an act, 31. H. 8. vvhearby it is expressed, that sinc the former act of 27. H. 8. the religious howses, voluntarilie, and of ther own good wills, and withowt constraint, by course of law, and vvritings of record, vnder ther Couentseals: haue giuen and confirmed to the king, ther lands, howses, and right: haue forsaken, and left them all to the king. And to this statut they ar sayd to consent, as to an act at ther own suite. Whearupon yow shall fynd, emong the records of the augmentation court, a great Chest full of particular surrendors, by the Abbots, and Couents vnder ther hands and seales: the which yf yow ded see, yow will admire the art of the lo. Cromvvel, and the obedienc and simplitie of these poor oppressed men.
And is not this a likelie tale? that owt of ther bowntie, voluntarilie, they would renounce ther liuings, and turn beggars? in dead to so gracious a Prince it was no maruel. I ded once my self vpon Salesburie playne, deliuer my purse, when I could not keape it: and commanded ther humanitie,

tho I could not prai^e ther honestie.
Now yf yow please to examin and consider Examples of sacriledg. vnpartiallie: yow will fynd, that this great Conquest, this augmentation of reuennue and Threasor: both by law and religion, was a Robberie and pillage of the Church, and a sacrilege inexcusable. and it vvas not for nothing that Luther sayd, inducunt animum ideo Deum dedisse nobis Euangelium, eosque ex carcere Pontificio expediuisse; vt possint ipsi auaritiae suae litare. (The which might fitliest be applied to king H. and from the which, manie and fearfull examples might haue dissvvaded hym, and discooraged his agents and instruments; yf God had not hardned ther harts, and sealed vp ther eyes: and so as few of them prospered, to see tertium haeredem, beatum.)
Marcus Crassus robbed the temple of Hierusalem: and note his end and disiaster. Ioseph lib. 18. c. 8. Herod opened king Dauids sepulcher, and took the spoyle therof: and vvhat miserie afterward ded he fall into? Iosephus lib. 16. c. 11.
Vrraca, went to robb the chappel of S. Isodore in Spayne; to defraye the expenc and charge of his vvarres; and his guttes burst owt of his bellie in the Churche porche. Histoire general of Spayn, part. 4.
Leo the 4. Emperor, took a most pretious

crown owt of the Church of S. Sophia in Constantinople, which was dedicated to it: and he dyed of a carbuncle. Sigonius l. 1. de regno Ital. Gondericus king of the Vandals, when he took Siuil, took also the spoyles of the Churches, and seazed vpon the riches thereof: and to requite hym, the Deuel Seazed and posseded hym. Tarap^a in Honorio. VVhat nead I seak moe examples of terror, king Hentie is dead? they come to late; but not to admonishe others. What punishment, had Iulian the Apostata, emong his other sinnes, for his Church-robbing at Antioche? Tripartite lib. 6. cap. ^1 what misetie fell vpon Heliodorus for the like? 2. Macchab. c. 3. To conclude, read the historie of Nicephorus Phocas (a parallel to Match. H. 8.) He resumed all Donations granted to Monasteries and Churches; and see what afflictions and furies haunted hym euer after. and therfor his successor Basilius, abrogated that law of Phocas for the suppressing of Monasteries, as the roote of all the calamities, that happened in that tyme.
He is desperate, that is not mooued to fear (by such examples of terror) to tempt God, with the like attemps. I will not applie these to k. H. 8. tho I might trewlie affirme, that wrastling (as it vveare)

with God and his Church: not vnlike Herod, he liued iealious of his wiues, and not confident of his frends: his lusts wear mayd his torments; and after his diuorce from his first and lawfull wyfe, as in reueng of his lasciuiousnes (the original of all Englands calamitie:) no vvyfe could please hym long: few of them could get a protection for ther heads: and none of them liued secure and ioyefull.
And which is most to be noted, as yf God would show his indignation, and with his hand write vpon the wall, Mane, Thekel, Phares, as his iudgment against hym: all his hopefull and glorious stemm and brainches wear quicklie cutt of, withowtanie issevv, and that pittiefullie, and lamentablie: and the crown and scepter vvas translated, to an other name and nation, quite contrarie to his intention, and the proiects both of his vvill and statute.
And for his actions, God suffred hym as a bling man to err in his ends, and vvander in his course: all this great purchase vvas neither employed to the honor of the realme, nor to ease the subiects, nor to encrease learning, nor to mantaine soldiers and men decayed, nor to releaue the poor: all vvas vvaisted in tiltings, triumphs, enriching and pleasing his mistrises, and

the sollicitors of his lusts: Boolein, and prodigalitie consumed all; and to maik an end, he can bragg of no other monument he haith left to record his memorie, but the same which he left, vvho boasted of burning Dianas temple.
And touching his agents Wolsie, and Cromvvel, the maister, and the seruant: the instruments, and moouers of this greate vvheale: vvhen they had acted ther parts; they vvhear both by hym self cast of the stage vvith contempt and disgrace, and not vvithovvt a brand left vpon ther names and families.
What course vvould the Lutherans in Cermanie, the Consistoriand of France, or the Puritans of Scotland, haue taken: yf they had bean plunged into such miseries? remember ther actions, and ther violenc: and iudg of the tree by the fruite; and then c^mparatiuelie look vpon the Image of the trevv Catholick Church, and mark the differenc of ther visages, and vertues.
Though these Abbies, vvear almost the third part of the realme: men of vnderstanding and povver: the renennues great: ther tennants, manie and rich: greatlie fauoured of the people for ther hospitalitie and howsekeaping; and highlie esteamed both of the nobilitie and gentrie. And though

also the knights of S Iohns of Hierusalem, wear in the same predicament, and by ther fraternities might haue procured great trowbles and tumults, and the rather by the Popes assistanc, and the Emperor: yet to show to the world, what they wear in ther own likenes and proper coolors, and to testifie the patienc of trevv Israelites, the obedienc of trevv subiects, and the real imitation of ther maister, (who was apter to shedd his own blood, then to reuenge his wrongs:) they resolued to endure Gods punishment, and the kings iniustice and rigor, and armed them selfs into the feald vvith teares and prayers, and took vp no other weapons, nor mayd no insurrections: not counterfeiting, as Beza in vvords preached patienc, but in actions showed, furie, violence, and reueng. I vvill add this, and so end. that by ther suppression, to manie wear enriched and the gentrie was encreased; yet the rents of lands vveare enhauced, enclosures set a foot, depopulation generallie mayd, the price of all things raised and the Yeomanrie decayed infinitelie vvhich heartofore vvas the honor, and strenth of the kingdome: and so consequentlie it vvas the trevv reason, vvhy all things haue continued so dear in this land, (vvhearin maister Stubs ded err nota litl.)


TITVLVS SECVNDVS.
HItherto Schisme raigned; but the second plague, was the ruine and wrach K. Evv. 6. of the Church for the authoritie and name of king Edward was vsed, to break down, and forciblie subuert the vvhole Church of England. but see how craftie a statesman the Deuel is: though the way to Anarchie and confusion was layd leuel by king Henrie, (who was onelie fitt for such a work, in regard of his greatenes, and crewell imperiousnes:) yet he lett religion stand a while longer, knowing well that all could not be effected at once; but as he seduceth Sowles, so states by degrees: and being also confident, that the forts of pietie and religion being razed, and the Church being brought vnder a laye supreme head; he might by a second hand easilie ouerthrow religion it self.
King Henrie at his Deathe, appointed by his will sixtean Executors, who during the minoritie of his sonne, should be his aydors and counsellors, for the better gouerning the realme. Emong whome One, and who mayd hym self the Principal, was the lord Edvvard Seamor Earl of Hartford

(who took vpon hym, being the kings vncle, to be protector:) and that was as good as a dispensation (as he took it) for his executor ship, and lifted hym too manie degrees higher then his fellowes, which king Henrie neuer intended, that he might ouer-rule the rest, by his title, and supereminencie. One of the first things of importance, he contriued and compassed, vvas innouation, and the establishing of a new religion: not so much for deuotion, as bycaus he knew that nothing could quench his thirst so vvel as a chainge, and bring the game he hunted after into the toyles. and hearof Cranmor, was a principal worker, (tho he was but a few moneths before, of king Henries religion, and a patrone of the six articles.) The better, both to perswade the people, and geue harting and strenth to ther sect: Peter Martyr, and Bucer vvear sent for ovvt of Germanie, (vpon whose fame, and learning, as vpon tvvo great Arches, they might build and raise ther Churche (tho) bothe wear Apostates.
By Cranmor, Ridlie, Lattimor, and these two Rabbins, was the new Liturgie framed, and the old banished; these wear the authors of the first Alteration of religion, (which so manie hundred yeares,

had bean heare professed and continued vvith all dew reuerence.) So povvrefull was the Protector, (by vsing the king name, a child then but of 9. years old) but he was well seconded, by the Duke of Northumberland, the Admirall, and the Marques of Nortampton (all affected, or seaming affected, to the chaing of religion:) who over-ruled all, that mayd anie show of opposition, or dislike of ther proceadings. Which was verrie strainge considering, there wear so manie vvise and eminent men, who had aequal authoritie with them both, as Counsellors and executors: and vvear most different in religion from them, as the lord Priuie seale, the lord Saint Iohn of Basing, Bushop Tonstal, Syr Antonie Brovvn, and (thewise sectetarie,) Syr W. Paget: and speciallie that noble Chancelour, (the lord Writheoslie, a man of experienc, knowledg, and prudenc, and a director and pattern to his posteritie, to be preferred before anie new guides.) but to content and please hym, he vvas created Earl of Sowth-Hampton; yet neither wonn so, nor contented, nor safe.
All things afterward grew to confusion, ther remained no face, and skarse the name of Catholick Church in England. and tho ther wear great multitudes of men well

affected to the ould religion, and discontented, that the Church was driuen into the wildernes, and forced to lurk in corners: yet ded they show loyaltie, humilitie, and peace, and ded not taik armes and disobey that shadow of the king.
But what mooued the realme, how wear men inchanted to embrace this religion, and applawd the authors of it? Noueltie euer pleaseth daintie stomachs, and auarice is no small temptation. at Syracusa, Dyonisius the tyrant comming into the temple of Apollo, (full of sumptuous and goodlie ornaments:) and seing Aesculapius appareled with clothe of hould, and full of Iewels, hauing a long whyte siluer beard: and Apollo (the father,) carued, with a floorishing yowthful gould beard, and a playne cote of siluer* he gaue order, to shaue both Apollo and Aesculapius. for it was indecorum, that the sonn should haue a graye, and his father a read beard; and also vndecent, that a Phisicion should wear so rich a cote: so he ded not like that Apollo, should be drawen so gawdilie, and like a Barbarossa: and a grauer gown (he sayd) would become a God better, (for gould and Iewels wear fitter for Princes then gods, fitter for pomp then perfection.
The Duke of Sommerset ded rightlie

imitate Dionisius. for seing the Church rich, remembring the exampl of his old maister, and hauinng taisted at Aumesburie hovv svveat a Morsell a Priorie is: he thought it not decorum, to see the Cleargie so rich, there wealth was not suitable to ther calling: ther lands vvear giuen to noorish deuotion, not to choke it: to stirr men vp to prayer, not to ease and luxurie; and therfor he would shaue and share with them.
Tvvo Bushops hovvses he took in the Strand, which serued hym vvel to build Sommerset hovvse for Quene Ann.
He procured an act, whearby all Colledges, Chantries, free Chappels, Hospitals and fraternities, wear suppressed, and giuen to the king. and how greadilie he intruded into the Bushop of bathe and wells his hovvses and mannors: that Churche can never forget. (and yet Bushop Bourn by his industrie recouered some again; but nothing to the Spoyles. a poor releaf, rather to fead then to fatt a Bushop.)
Yet was he not satisfied. for shortlie af ther, contrarie to all law, against king Henries vvill, and against his own couenants (when he was mayd protector) he committed to the tovvr, the Lord Chancelor: he deposed Busbop Tonstal both from the Counsel, and his bushoprick (as too statelie

a Seigniorie for a man of religion, and too daintie a bitt to be swallowed by the Churche:) therfor he dissolued yt and brought it within the survey of the excheckor, and he never prospered after. It was directlie against the law. 1. Edvv. 3. cap. 2. that the lands of Bushops should be seazed into the kings hands: and that his father by the aduise of euel counsellors commanded them to be seazed withowt cawse, but hearafter it should not be so.
Yet hear he set not downe his staff. he committed Gardiner the Bushop of Winchester: and after depriued hym. He dissolued Stoke Colledg: fleaced all Cathedrall Churches, and committed infinite sacriledge (vvherto the Nonage of the king gaue opportunitie.) Neither ded he hunt after his praye, onelie emong the Churche liuing: for yf yovv look in the Parliamant rolls, of that tyme, yovv shall fynd that (with a wolfs stomach) he ded seak to deuowre, that most ancient and honorable Earldome of Oxford.
In all this glorie; he was cut of for his sinnes; and arraigned and executed for acting so grosslie, the part of a Protector. And though he was badd enoug, an other succeaded much worse.
For novv begon the tree of Dudlie, to

spread owt his brainches vvith glorie (vvho could not be, except he vvear great:) novv vvas the tyme for his common vvelth to floorish. and bycause he vvould not seam to doe anie thing, but by Iustice: he begonn 1549. to vvrastl with Sommerset, till he gaue hym a fall.
First he proclamed hym to be a man, that subuerted all lavves; and that he broke the orders of H. 8. appointed for his sonns good: that he keapt a Cabbienet counsell, and litl esteamed the aduise of his fellowes: that he took vpon hym to be protector, expresslie vpon conditions, to doe nothing in the kings affayres withovvt consent of the executors.
And vpon these and such like accusations, God stirred one of these reformers, to vvrack an other. Novv as that shovved his iustice: so to seame religious, he cavvsed the book of common prayer, 1552. to be first published; for that religion he knew vvould best serue his turn, (vvho vvas all readie novv farr engaged in the plat to aduanc his ovvn hovvse, by the ruine of his maisters.) and by that coolor, he discerned that he might best vvinn the Duke of suff. to hym.
And bycaus he supposed, the Lord Threasorer, vvas not vnlike to cross hym:

he took order at the counsel table (vvhear he vsed to leaue his spectacles, yf he vvear soodainlie cald for vp to the king) to maik the same before his return, be so svveatlie anoynted and perfumed, that therby he lost his nose, and skaped nearlie vvith his lyfe, (and yet he liued to requite hym.) and for his better strenth vvhile king Edvvard vvas sick, as yf all had bean fixed in a sphear to mooue vvith hym, he cavvsed at Durham hovvse his sonn to be married to ladie Iane: the Earle of Pembrocks sonn to the ladie Katharin: and the Earl of Huntingtons sonn, to his ovvn daughter. and all vpon one daye, all to serue for one end: and to maik it impossible for anie to bayt the beare, hearafter. Then vvas king Edward mayd away, by his means: and that potticarie who poysond hym, for the horror of the offenc, and disquietnes of his conscienc, drowned hym self. and the landres that washed his shirt, lost the skinn of her fingers. ther be some yet liuing in the court that haue sean weaping eyes for it.
Yet was all so ouer shadowed with the name of religion; that not manie could discern the impietie. yf yow would see the oration, he mayd to the Lords (when he was to depart from the towr to go, towards Cambredg, and proplayme his daugther in

law Quene:) yow shall see how Raignard had gotten on a minister cloke, and mayd that is cawse, which he was furthest from.
Now consider thre things 1. for the men: vvear not they both, fitt instruments to encrease pietie and vertue, and to reforme a Church? vvear not rhey like men, to haue bean chosen by the spirit of God, for so godlie ends? and like to be labourers in the haruest of Christ? wear ther pietie, zeale, and charitie such, as became them vvell, and vvear suitable to reformers, to Iosias, and Ezechias? No, nisi hominus edificauerit ciuitatem; they labor in vayne: he will geue them a fall, whear they purposed to taike ther rising. 2. For ther ends, both of them concurred in chainging religion; both of them lost ther heads; one of them vvas a butcher to an other: and both vnded ther ovvn famililies, and hazarded ther frends. but for Dudlie as he ded ruine the king, so he endaingered the whole realme: and yet his end was a demonstration to the world, that all his ayme vvas ambition, and not religion (for either he dyed a Catholick, or certanly an Atheist.)
And as his ambition, so Sommersets auarice, was not withowt his plagues. for his weakenes was ouer maistered by a wyfe: his eldest sonn, was disinherited: he

executed his own brother: he liued to see the loss of bullen, the crown and the realm ingaged in debts and vvants; confusion and commotions vvithin the realme, (by ther ill government,) and contempt withovvt. 3. Novv consider te patienc of the Preasts and Prelates, vnder these Cormorants: they suffred all withowt resisting, or rebelling: and neuer prouoked the nobilitie to taik armes, hauing bean bredd in the school of vertue, to bear ther crosses with patienc; and to affect rather the glorie of a Martyr, then the svvord and fortune of a conqueror. And so I leaue them, till hearafter.


TITVLVS TERTIVS.
THe last and greatest tempest, vvhich shaked the verrie fovvndations of the The Q. Elizabeth. Church of England, and threatned the vtter ruine and subuersion thereof, vvas raysed by Quene Elizabeth: vvho reuiued the Protectors new religion, and reestablished it.
The vvhich was effected, quicklie and quietlie, sine sanguine and sudore, and as M. Camden noteth well, Christiano orbe mir ante. And surelie, it vvas a strainge alteration.

bycause the Quene (during her sisters lyfe) daylie hard Masse, and ad Romanae religionis Camden. annales. normam, saepius confiteretur. Which is consonant to the report of Syr Frances Englefeald: that the ladie Elizabeth (being examined at Hatfeald, by Q. Maries commissioners,) sayd to one of them, it is not possible that the Quene vvill be persvvaded, Iam a Catholick? and therupon she ded sweare and protest, that she was a Catholick.
And it aggreeth well with the Duke of Feria his letter to king Philip (yet extant to be seane;) vvhearin he certified the king, that Q. Elizabeth ded profess and assure hym, that she beleaued the real presenc, and that she vvas not like to maik anie great alteration for the principall poynts of religion.
I nead not relate, the like speaches vsed by her to Monsieur Lansack; seing manie honorable persons haue affirmed the same: and seing her external profession in publick, and her priuate chappell ded testifie, that either she was then sincearlie in dead, or would be taken then to be a Catholick. And that was the cawse, which mayd the world maruell more, at her great and soodain chainge of religion.
And the rather, bycause at her coronation, she vvas orderlie consecrated, and

anointed at a Masse, by the Bushop of Carlisle: and she took the oath then, to mantain the Church, and vphold the liberties thereof, as her predecessors had doone.
Which, vvithovvt aequiuocation, must neads be intended of that Church then being in esse, and whearin she was consecrated, and took that oathe: and not of the Idea of a new Church (a castle in the Ayre, to be hearafter erected and fownded, by lier authoritie and the Parliement.)
But how euer she was before perswaded; she was now altered, and became too soodainlie Retrograde: and so, as in the opinion of manie prudent and great persons, it a bated much the glorie of her wisedome and heroicall spirit: and gaue the world occasion to suspect that all her former actions wear counterfeit and camposed for her securitie to temporize: and to misdowbt, that she was not innocent and cleare, of these great not capitall crymes layd to her charge (for vvhich, she had stood in no smal dainger.)
Ant to speak frelie and trewlie my opinion, she was a Prince of great Maiestie and magnificens, but fitter for governement, then deuotion: and of more pollicie then religion: and not as her sister vvas, the same in a storme and a calme; a

Quene and a subiect, nor semper eadem.
But how, and by what means, ded she Hovv religion vvas chainged. contriue and work, this admirable mutation of state: I vvill breaflie declare: for tho it be not proper to my quaestion, it is not impertinent, and may be of some vse.
1. First the long sicknes of Q. Marie gaue her great aduantage, and tyme both to deliberate, and draw her plattformes, prepare her instruments in readienes; maik choyce of her means, and resolue of the fittest counsellors to aduance her ends.
2. Secondlie she layd her honor to pawne, and mayd protestation in open parliament, that she would never trovvble the Roman Catholiques, for anie differenc in religion: vvhich ded geue the Cleargie great hope, of some more indifferencie, and tolerable fauors. (the which is related by Hows in prefat. of Q. Elizabeth.) for knowing well, that a king can not create a new religion as D. Bilson sayd trewlie, (meaning that it must be the act and work of a parliement:) therfor to winn the Bushops, either to silenc or patienc, she wiselie vsed that peace of art. The which thing vvas vvell noted by Monsieur de Mauuissier (vvho was long french Embassador in England, and a curious searcher and obseruer of matters of that nature:) saith he (lib. 2. pag. 61.

in Les memoires de Monsieur Mich Castelnau.) Quene Elizabeth purposing to chainge religion, that she might the better vvinn the Bushops, she promised to follow ther aduises in all things, and therby preuayled not a litle. And though manie fyne sleights wear vsed, frownes and fauors, promises and threats: yet notwithstanding by that parliement, both the statuts for the supremacie, and the abrogation of the old religion, wear enacted.
3. Add also, that when the act vvas mayd for supremacie, (vvhich must ever be, as the first great vvheale of motion:) bycause, by king Henries lavv, Bushops and Barons stood in dainger (for Syr Thomas Moor, and Bushop Fisher had giuen them vvarning to look to ther heads.) therfor novv, in this nevv edition of the supremacie, first the vvords of supreme head vvear chainged into supreme gouernor; (vvhich qualification of the vvords being aequiualent, vvas vsed but as a mask and shadovve, to bleare the eyes of the people.) and secondlie the Barons and Lords vvear exempted from the rigour of the Oath, to vvinn them the rather to consent, to the act; and so to leaue the Bushops in the briars, to beare the brunt of the storme ensewing.
4. I knovv yow will admire, and yow

maye, how this chainge could be vvrought in the vpper howse, by most voyces; considering, so manie Bushops, and so manie Lords vvell affected to religion, had ther suffrages there. Remember first, that king Henrie pulling dovvne the Abbies, vveakened the strenth of the Cleargie; taking avvay by that meanes, twentie fiue voyces of Abbots, who satt there as Barons of Parliement. and besides, Sinon (who managed that busienes) showed all his conning therin, and as a maister of his art. For the noble Earl of Aro^del, (abused and fed with a vayne hope) by the ayd of the Duke Northfolk engrossed into his hands the proxies, and voyces of so manie Lords, to be disposed at his pleasure, and to serue and further the Quenes desyre and ends, that the Catholicks wear overswayed and born downe, by the pluralitie of six voyces onelie. And how God rewarded these tvvo great Princes, (the instruments of that seruice:) the world may iudg, by ther afflictions as spirits that haunted them. (tho to expiat that fault, the religious and noble, Earl Philip, suffred the martyrdome of a languishing sowl.) A strainge, and memorable mattet it was, to haue a new religion introduced, and no Bushop nor religion man, to consecrate and aduance it with one voyce. for

the vehement oration of Abbot Fecknam aginst it, is fresh yet in memorie: and how all the Bushops, obstinate refragati sunt, Camden doth witnes. and that noble Lord Montagew (sensible of the scandall thereof) opposed it vvithall his force, (vvho together vvith D. Thurlebie Bushop of Elie, had so latelie bean employed, at Roome abowt it,) and vrged that the vvorld would disgrace fullie censure such a soodain chainge and innouation; proposing also the daingers which weare like to ensew, and so ded by excommunication.
But for ther better assurance, to preuayle in the vpperhowse, and more stronglie to ouer-rule the Bushops, and the Abbots: the Quene created diuers nevv lords, VVilliam lord Parr, Marquis of Northampton (a good speaker, and a wise man:) the Earle of Hartford, the Vicount Bindon, the lord Saint Iohn of Bletso, and the lord Hunsdon, (all Protestants and men fitt to build a new Churche.)
And to be better armed: the Catholick partie was weakened, by discharging from the counsell table, manie of the old counsellors, the lord Chancelor, the lord Priuie seale, Secretarie Boxall, and Syr Frances Englefeald. and in ther roomes, wear placed Syr Nicholas Bacon, the Marques of

Northampton, the Earl of Bedford, Sr A. Caue, Syr Frances Knolls, Rogers, Parrie, and secretarie Cicil, (all fitt men, to beare parts in that Pageant.) And further she deposed manie of the old Iudges: and mayd also new Iustices of peace: and gaue order to vse all vvarienes, in the election of knights and burgesses: that they might likewise maik ther partie good in the lovver hovvse (which yow would wnder to heare, how politicklie it was performed.)
Furthermore, to taik all scrupule owt of the heads, and harts of the people, and that they might conceaue, that the seruice and religion still continued, the same the ould was (but transtated into Englishe onelie for ther better edification, and vnder standing:) they directed, that the alteration should be framed as near to the old, as they might well doe.
And so it was in dead, verrie politiclie handled. For they bothe admitted and continued the title and iurisdiction of Bushops, (vvith some litl grace, and authoritie:) and they permitted the vse of surplises, caeremonies, anthems, Organs, and manie prayers in the forme of the old. Whearby the Quene, vvas the better able to excuse her fact, to forrein princes, for this great chainge, as she ded vse the same for her reason

to Secretarie d' Assonuile, who was sent by king Philip to congratulate her aduancement.
7. And touching the communion book, it vvas composed by certan commissioners appointed for that purpose, Parker, Grindal, Horn, VVhytehead, May, Bill, and Syr Thomas Smith: and it vvas, mayd according to the liturgie of the straingers of Frankfort (1544.) all of them of Bucers stamp, and not much varijng from that in king Edvvards tyme. The which Parr, Russel, Grey of Pytgo, and Cicil approoued: but all those of Geneua vtterlie disliked, (not knowing the Quenes reasons, nor regarding them.)
8. Lastlie, the instrumentall cawses, and cheafe artificers for building this new work, wear choyce men all bothe for experience and pollicie. Syr William Cicill, (mayd second Secretarie in king Eduuards dayes, in an age whearin a man might learne more conning, them vertue.) a wise man for practise, and one that knevv well, how much this alteration would serue his turn, and raise his fortune. and at that tyme he vvas hongrie, hauing onelie the personage of VVimblton, and certan lands abowt Stamford, (as appeared by his letter, to the lord Marques 1560. vvhen Syr Robert

Cicil vvas borne? desiring the lord. Threasorers furtherano, that the Quene would grant hym some means and maintenanc, for these two C. C.) solike to be famous in England herafter.
Syr Nicholas Bacon, was an others; his brother in lawe, a man of Deap iudgment, of more knowledg in the lawes, and a more plausible Orator.
I may not forget the Lord Robert (who solelie to posses the Quenes fauor, by a trick discarded Syr Willia^ Pickering, then a fauorite and a courtlie gentlman.) neither can I omitt Seigneur Nicholas Throgmorton, S. Tho. Smith, and manie others: who wear now in hope to fynd that, which they had long gaped for; such offices and preferments, as they wear like to loose, who held them in Quene Maries tyme.
Better Enginers, and fitter men, could, neither haue bean wished nor fuwnd, then all these wear to vndermine and cast downe, the Cleargie, and the old Church governement. vvho possessing vvholie the eare and grace of the Quene, satt vvith command at the stearne, and as pylots of great estimation, guided the course both of the Church and commonwelth at ther pleasure, (thoughe manie men vvondered how maister secretarie could so soone, forget

his beads, and his breuiarie whearwith he counterfeited a Catholick, and vvonn Cardinal Pool to stand firmelie his frend.) Notwithstanding all this choyce of men, and preparation of meanes: ther courses and cownsells, gaue occasion of more trowbles, continual feares, and greater hazards and daingers to the Quene the realme, in all her tyme: then ever anie architects of innouation committed.
And no maruel, for ludit in humanis diuina potentia, God doth skorn and frustrate the pollicies and shifts of men, that haue nothing els to trust to but shifts: and he vvill euer teach the wisest, to see ther follies; and (a litl to humble them,) those that ar most prouident shall by ther errors learn, that plus est in arte, quam in artifice.
For now the Quene, (by this act of Innouation, left destitute of all her allies and confaederates) vvas driuen to stand vpon her own gard, and lie open to all stormes: hauing France an enemie, and Spayne (a frend skarse contented.) and so was driuen euen at first, to ronne vpon a rock, (forced to assist the rebells in Scotland against ther Soouerain) and to send them ayd to expell the french, employed ther for ther Quenes seruice.
It may de, yow think this a trifle: mark

the rest. To succor the Admirall, and rebells in France: she Inuaded Normandie, and took possession of Nevvhauen and Deape, deliuered to her by the Vidame of Chartres. was this a glorie? the disgrace in loosing and ill defending Newhauen, was a greater bleamish to them: then it was honor to haue them yealded and offred to the Quenes disposing. and speciallie, seing they might therby either haue brought Callice home againe; or haue locked vp the gates of Roan and Paris.
And they ded neither; but bring home the great plague, (as a scourge to the realme for that offence.) furthermore, for the securitie of the realme, and to diuert all warres from home, they wear driuen, (not withowt touch of the Quenes honor) to kindl the fyre, in all other adiacent nations; and then to publish a declaration and reason of ther actions (as yf the world could not read the trew cavvses of actions, vvithovvt the spectacles of those ancient Senators.) Whearupon they ded ayd the Princes of Orenge against king Philip, (vnder pretenc of amitie and league vvith the howse of Burgondie, and the kings of England.) which was a litl to grosse for so excellent vvitts; considering that the amitie vvas contracted with no subiects

nor states, but betwean the kings of E. and the Dukes of Burgondie wheareof the states had the benefit, and wear partakers but not authors: comprehended in the treaties, but not treators. fayre coolors, for fovvle errors.
And why? for so she gaue a president against her self, that forrein Princes might be vvarranted by her example to inuade her ovvn kingdomes, to releaue her subiects yf they should rise for religion, and to learn the waye to Ireland and requite her.
And, the showe of Religion, serued them fitlie for there purpose. But surelie, I haue hard verrie wise men much condemn the course.
Bor though England ded assist there neighbors on all sides, vpon the reason of state which Polibius prescribed, Vicininimium crescentis potentia, mature quacunque ex causa deprimenda, (which is an axiome, that is oft inconuenient, and ofter iniurious, and sometymes pernicious:) Yet the counsell of Thucidides, vvas more proper and safer, Nullus princeps a suis subditis iuste puniendis arcendus est: and qui id facit, parem in se legem statuit, ne suos and ipse puniat delinquentes.
And heare I must commend hym to haue said this vviselie, who saith all things wittielie, The vvisidome of the latter tymes

in princes fayres, is rather in fine deliueries and shifting of damgers, vvhen they ar near: then solid and grovvnded courses to keap them aloaf.
The grownd of all these trowbles, vvas the pretenc of Sinon, Viz. Actum esse de ea, si pontificiam authoritatem, in quacumque re agnosceret, (as Camden saith:) the Quene vvear vndoone yf she acknowledged the Popes authoritie. Mark his reason, duos namque pontifices matrem illegitime nuptam pronunciasse. and by that argument, he suggested, that it was best to alter religion, inuest her self in the sooueraintie, and banish the Popes bulls (from grasing in this kingdome) and all obedienc to that sea.
This was a course neither at home, nor abroad, to keap daingers aloofe. and vndowbtedlie, yf Henrie the 2. or Frances the 2. of France had liued: that error was like to haue wrapped the realme, into ineuitable perills: and might by all probabilitie haue serued as a bridg, to haue let the Quene of Scots passe over into England vnder her own title, and the banner of the Church. solliciting for her better warrant the renewing of the bulls of Clement the 7. and Paulus 4. against her moothers marriage, and her own illegitimation. and the rather this might haue bean doon, by the error of them, that left open the port of aduantage:

hauing not repealed in England the act of her illigitimation, as Quene Maries counsell wiselie had doone before.
But now at lenth, to returne to the matters proper and pertinent, to the quaestion, Iam to handle.
The Quene before her coronation, put all the bushops to silence, and commanded they should not preache. and after the parliement, all those that refused the oath (being called before the Quenes commissioners,) wear depriued from all honors liuings, or employme^t, either in the church or common welth: and wear also committed to prison, and so both lost ther liberties and liuing together* Dignities they could not loose, (as appeared by B. Bonners case, whome they could not degrade from the Dignitie of a Bushop, though he ded loose London.) There vvear in all 14. Bushops, (most vertuous and learned prelates) of England, and 10. of Ireland deposed. 12. Deanes, 15. maisters of Colledges, 6. Abbots, 12. Archdeacons, 160. preasts, together with maister Shellie, Prior of S. Iohns of Hierusalem.
Now touching, ther Demeanor, and the course of ther proceading before ther Depriuation. These B^shops sitting in Parliement at Quene Maries Deathe, acknowledged

by diuers proclamations, Quene Elizabeths title, and right to the Crowne. And the Archbushop of york, D. Heath, then Chancellor of England, calling together the nobilitie and commons assembled, in both howses: by a graue oration exhorted them, to accept and obey Quene Elizabeth: and by the best course he could, endeauoured to dispose and setl the harts of subiects to loue and serue her.
And all the Bushops ioyntlie, ded ther homage and fealtie to her Maiestie in dewtifull manner. And although they vvear not ignoranc of her determination to alter the course of religion: yet ded they neuer practise, neither Scotising nor Geneuating: nor neuer incensed the people and Catholiks against her: nor attempted anie violent resistance: nor sought the support of forrein Princes, (whome they knew at that tyme, readie vpon so fayre pretence to haue ayded them.) but they ded so respect fullie, tender both the Quenes safetie, and the peace of the realme, (more then ther own liues, liberties, or liuings:) that though diuers emong them, mayd a quaestion yf it wear not most conuenient for the good of the Churche, to procead to excommunication against her (to vvhich her case laye verrie open, and subiect:) yet the most

voyces disswaded that course, least yf they should vse the sentenc and censures of the church against her, the people might be induced to taik armes for the protection of religion. and therfor they ded aduise rather to referr it to the popes determination and pleasure, then to talk vpon them to doe yt them selfs, (though they thought they might lavvfullie doe yt, as the case then ded stand.) Ther was also, an other secret frend, that ded much fortifie the state of the Quene. King Philip knowing all the platts of France, and ther secret intentions, and vvat motions they mayd at Roome, and vpon what tearmes they ded stand, to offend England: albeyt he had buried all offences at the treatie of Cambray, yet loath to see France growe so great as to haue footing in England, and as loath that Religion should loose her howld and honor there: though he ded wish the end, he ded not like the meanes: and therfor he employed his ministers in England to doe good offices betwean the Quene and the Cleargie.
But Alas, what became of all these graue prelates? Trewlie nothwithstanding all ther publick disgraces, and priuate sufferings: they ded rather choose a Durate, then an Armate; and euer professed and well performed,

Preces and Lachrimae, arm a nostra.
Obserue how long, and how heauilie ther burden lay vpon them. D. Scott Bushop of Chester dyed at Loouain in exile. Goldvvel of Asaph, at Roome. Pate of vvorcester, subscribed at the counsell of Trent, for the Cleargie of England, and never returned. D. Oglethorp of Carlile, dyed soodainlie and shortlie after his depriuation; and so ded learned and famous Tonstal, die a personner at Lambeth. Bourn of wells, was prisonner to Carie deane of the Chappel: Thirlebie of Elie first vvas committed to the towre, and afterward he and secretarie Boxal vvear sent to Lambeth (vvhear they ended there dayes.) Abbot Fecnam, Bushop Watson, Bushop Bonner dyed prisoners: and Prior shel lie in exile.
This was the Catastrophe of the worthie Prelates of England, a tragedie of the Downefall of the whole Cleargie. a thing incredible to posteritie, and never hard of in former ages: that the third and most reuerend state of the realm, the Cedars of Libanus, (who ever sinc king Etheldred, floorished as the Oaches of a realme) should be all at once cut downe, cast into disgrace, and prisons, or exile, and liue withowt releaf or comfort as men forlorne and abiects: yet neither taynted for vice: nor convinced

for trespas: nor accused for anie treason, but that which they would never subscribe to aknowledg treason, the refusing the oath of supremacie (a poynd of religion to them, and vvhich touched ther sovvles to the quick.) And wear they depriued for that? then surelie had the ministers of Geneua great luck to escape the high Commission, for yow shall hear ther opinions: and see the differenc of ther spirits.
1. Gilbee in admonitione ad Anglos, calls king Henry the 8. libidinosum monstrum, and monstrosum aprum, qui Christi locum inuasit, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae caput dicivoluit, cum tamen omnis religionis expers esset. This monstruons bore, must neads be called Head of the Church, vnder payn of Treason, displacing Christ our onelie head, who alone onght to haue the title. why ded he call hym bore? Partlie for his qualities, partlie for Ann Boolens sake, who was that Helena, cuius causa peribat Ilium, (as both Melancthon in his Chron. and G. Bellay in his Comment. declare.)
2. And that yovv may knovv, vvhat an haeresie and flatterie of kings the school of Geneua, censureth the Oath of supremacie to be: I pray yovv heare the Oracle. in cap. 1. Osee and in cap. 9. Amos; Et hodie (in quit) quam multi sunt in papatu, qui regibus

accumulant, quicquid possunt iuris and potestatis (of this poynt I dare avowe Geneua is not guiltie:) ita vt ne qua fiat disputatio, sed potestas haec sit penes regem vnum, vt statuat pro suo arbitrio, quicquid voluerit, and sine controuersia hoc firmum maneat. Qui initio tantopere extulerunt Henricum regem Angliae, certe fuerunt inconsiderati homines, dederunt illi summam rerum omnium potestatem, and hoc me semper grauiter vulner auit: erant enim blasphemi, cum vocaru^t illum summum caput Ecclesiae sub Christo. Ded Syr Thomas Moor, or Bushop Fisher say more? nay, not so much, against the matter: nor in so rude and violent manner. such vvas the violenc of king He^rie that he pressed them to speact, and yf they ded speak they wear in dainger of law? yf they ded not speak, in danger of his wrathe. o miserable tyme, vbi tacere non licet, quid cuiquam licet?
3. To this opinion Luther subscribeth; and (which is rare) they both C. and L. accord against the supremacie of Princes, in cawses Ecclesiastical. for tom. 2. fol. 259. saith Luther, quid ad not mandatum Principis Electoris Saxoniae? Princeps, secularis est mogistratus quem gladium, non munus predicandi, curae habere debet. as yf a secular magistrate, had nothing to doe, vvith Cleargie busienes.

And tom. 1. Latin, he expownds hym self fol. 540. Non est regnum aut principum, etiam veram doctrinam confirmare, sed ei subijci* and seruire. Which is quite contrarie to the acts of parliement, either of H. 8. of E. 6. or Quene Elizabeth.
4. It may be yow will Imagin that though Luther was so singuler, yet the Lutherans arr not: but yow ar deceaued, and that yow shall fynd, by ther greatest and most learned Champion.
M. Chemnicius, epist. ad elector. Brandenburg, first he shouweth, that it is not conuenient, vt punitionis officium contra Caluinistas, interea temporis penitus quiescat, (which is to be noted, as a thing, he much regarded.) and shortlie after, of the religion, and the Quene of England, he giueth this sentence; that 1. no good thing is further to be expected of her: 2. that she vsed the Protestants of Germanie hardly: 3. that she noorisheth a new sect risen in her realm of Puritans: 4. and lastlie, he maiks it a ^east that she being a woeman, haith taken vpon her, to be maker of Ecclesiasticall Lavves, and quod femineo and a seculis inaudito fastu, se Papissam, and caput Ecclesiae fecit, these ar his words, and surelie none of our Bushops depriued, could saye more, tho more manerlie. for the statut, consisting of two brainches,

the one they defend stowtlie, that the king ought not to haue the supremacie: in the other they disagree emong them selfs.
5. Cartvvright, haith vvritten manie chapters in his last book against this supremacie: who yet was neuer conuented in the starchamber, nor arraigned for yt: neither was forced to recant his writings. The Puritans ar as earnest, as the Catholicks, that it ought not to rest in the king, but differenc is in whome the power should rest: whether by a monarchie, in the Pope; or in an oligarchie of the elders. The English Puritans of Amsterdam in ther Confessio fidei, 1607. pag. 50. art. 2. ded resolue that vnicuique Ecclesiae particulari, est par as plenum ius ac potestas exercendi, fruendi, and exequendi, institutaomnia, quaecunque Christus Ecclesiae suae dedit obseruandae in perpetuum. So then euerie parish-preast, is a Pope in his parish, and haith par and plenum ius: and whether this aduancement of the Consistories be not more preiudicial to princes, then the Conclaue: more subiect to mutinies, more open to confusion and anarchie, I referr my self to learned Hooker.
6. I will conclude with D. whiracre, and that vvith some admiration (he Doth so boldlie affirm a matter, so notoriousle vntrew

pag. 4. against M. W. Raignolds in his preface.) The title saith he of supreme head of the Church, haith bean misliked, by diuers godlie learned men and of right it belongeth to the sonne of god: and therfor neuer ded our Church, geue that title in such vvords, vnto the Prince; neither ded the prince euer challeng it. I vnderstand not vvhat this meaneth: for yf he meane plainlie and withowt aequiuocating, then certanlie, he abuseth his reader with a fable. yf I obiect the statut of 26. H. 8. c. 1. or 35. H. 8. c. 3. I knovv he vvill say, it vvas not our Church that gaue that title. But Syr, that will not serue yow, for 1. E. 6. cap. 12. yf anie person, after the 5. of March next, shall affirm, that the king his heyrs or successors, kings of this realme, is not or ought not to be supream head, in earth of the Church of England and Ireland, immediatlie vnder God: it shall be treason, for the third affirmation. so hear is the act of your own Church; for vvhich Gardiner was sent to the towr: and these godlie men sc. Gilbie, Caluin, Knox, Luther who so much misliked it in king Henrie: had not cawse to like it better 1. Eliz. when it was chainged into supream gouernor, for the one had as much powre as the other.
And surelie D. Whit. rather shifteth of

the obiection, then answereth it. for these godlie he meaneth, wear Caluin, Gilbie, the Lutherans, and his ancient frend maister Cartwight (who all condemned the vse of that title of supreme head.) and think yow that he ded hym self like it? I imagin, that he vvould not othervvis haue mayd so she an euasion. for his co^mendation of the men that denied it: his own reason, deriued from ther vvords, (that it belonged onelie ond properlie, to the sonne of God:) his fable, that neuer ded the Prince Challeng that title,) show fullie the Doctors mynd, that he would not subscribe voluntarilie to that opinion and taik the oath, and desyred to euade.
But vvhat euer his opinion vvas of the matter; he commended those that most impugned it. Novv to return to the Bushops, seing the supremacie and the oath, vvas the main and the mean, obiected to depriue them (vvhich vvas as much impugned by ther ovvn half brethren, Lutherans and Caluinists, as by the Bushops) seing Cartvvright, pvas tolerated, licensed to preache, not restrained nor punished for his opinions: and seing so manie, and so eminent men, concurred vvith the Bushops in that opinion? (as I haue shovved:) ther vvas and is some reason, to haue

expected, yf not a more merciefull sentenc, yet a more fauourable execution of the sentenc and seing they fovvnd so litl fauor and releaf: it doth vvitnes to all posteritie, ther exceading patienc, to taik vp ther cross and follovv ther maister.
For not vvithstanding all this aduersitie, disgrace, vvants, and loss of libertie, the magistrates never had cavvse to complayne of anie inuectiues or libells. No Reueilematin, no homelies of sedition wear dispersed: no VVyat, no Oldcastel appeared in the feald: the soldiers and knights of the Rhodes vvear not detected of anie conspiracie: the Realme was not disquieted nor embroyled.
A miraculous patienc, by a supernatural grace: they ded rather choose to suffer them selfs, then the realm should. which was a great happienes to England, and the like not hard of, (vpon so great a mutation of state:) and which was neither to be ascribed to the pollicie and prouidenc, of the Chancelor or Secretarie; nor anie feare of punishment, vvhich might be inflicted vpon the Bushops (for they could fall no lower, being all readie cast down to the grownd: and they, that could hope for nothing, nead not feare anie thing:) but reallie and trewlie, it was to be imputed to the

nature, patienc, humilitie, and obedienc, innated in religious and vertuous men who ar trewlie Catholique.
These vertues, and this there patience, showeth well the nature of the English patients that suffer, and beare there crosses, either within, or vvithowt the realme. withowt the realme, wear and arr the Seminaries of Preasts, religious men, and students. within the realme, ar the Recusants, vvho daylie, taist of affliction, and haue not a light or small burden to beare. vvho all suffer for ther conscienc; and secundum magis, vel minus, participate of the miseries, incident hear to Catholicks.
Touching the Seminaries: when the ould Cleargie, and preasts wear some Languishing The Seminaries. in prison, some in exile, manie dead, and all in disfauor: the Secretarie and some politcik protestants, both hoped and promised that preasts and preasthood, would be shortilie worne ovvt, and extinguished (and in dead, abovvt the yeare 1576. there wear not aboue 30. of the old preasts, remaining in the realme.) whearupon D. Allen, (a man born to doe God seruice) and others of the Cleargie: owt of ther prouidence, and Charitie, begonn the Seminaries at Douay. 1569. and why? To preuent the decaye of religious

professors; to setl a continuanc and encrease of preasts (for the better propagation of religion:) to preserue a visible and Catholick Church in England: and for the instruction and trayning vp of yong schollers, in a setled course of studie, conference, and exercise: and so to bread in that nurcerie yong plants, continuallie fitt to be drawen owt, for employments in England: to vvinn sowles, to instruct them in cases of conscienc, and so spreade abroad ther knowledg and vertues into all ports of the land.
And that Seminarie vvas not erected against lawe; for the statute was mayd long after, when they had taken deap roote: and then was it too late, either to transplant them home, or by threats and terror to prohibit ther proceadings.
But these ar sayd to be, schooles and harbours to noorish such men, as ar 1. base and fugitiues: 2. such as corrupt the land with false doctrine: 3. and such as ar ministers of practises, to disturb the kingdome, to stirr vp rebellion; and to with draw the subiects from ther obedienc. And ther for the proclamation 1580. and other statutes wear iustlie mayd against them.
But how doe they answer it? In dead it is trew, that great Pronotharie and clark

of the execution of Iustice, obiected so For ther basenes at Douay and S. Omers. much against them. but for ther basenes; I haue obserued well, and am assured, that at Douay, ther be gentleman both in the Colledg and monasterie, of as good families, as well bred, and as learned schollers, as I haue knowen in the vniuersities of England (whearin I was no strainger.) I will not compare them, (for so I might maik them odious:) nor yet will I detract from the milk of my own nurces; but I may trewlie ovowe, that they ar so orderlie gouerned, as maikes ther demeanor ciuil, and supra aetatem religious and deuowt. and how can it be otherwise? for they spend there tyme most in studie, in exercises of learning, and in matters of deuotion. Neither ar they in such dainger of Debauchment, or the infections of disorder; for they be strictlie keapt to ther task, and rather vvonn then forced to yt: and tho they be brideled with a hard bitt, it is carried with a gentl hand. and greater care is had, bycause manie of them ar of eminent families, and noble parentage: who though they can not dravv ther pettigrees from Lewlin Prince of Wales, as the Pronotarie doth: yet can they show a discent both ancient, and honorable, neither yeomen of the wardrobe, nor yeomen of the gard.

And touching ther being fugitiues; they answer well for them selfs, that they deserue not properlie such a title. for they liue not ther as owt lawes, but for conscienc sake and to auoyd the rigour of the new lawes, opposite to the doctrine of the Churche.
Secondlie, they liue not there, for faction 2. Fugitiues. or vndewtiefull affection, to his maiestie; but compelled by extreme necessitie: the Catholiks hauing in England no Churches, no Catholick seruice, no dew administration of the sacraments nor vse of the sacrafice of the alter. and so they saye, they should liue in England, as bodies withowt sowles, or sowles withowt food; and so either be starued for want thereof, or become Apostates from ther religion, or liue as Atheists, withowt religion. Thirdlie yf yovv put vpon them, the disgrace full name of fugitiues, onelie bycause they doe not accommodate them selfs to your Canons, and the iniunctions of the present tyme, and therfor depart owt of the realme. To let pass, Bartie, Knolls, Hales and others, yow must not forget, that your great Doctors, Iewel, Horn, Cox, Pilkinton, Poynet, and manie others, ded taik the like cours in Quene Maries tyme. And yf these men wear not fugitiues, and deserued in your iudgment no disgrace, for

remaining at Frankfort, Strasburgh, and speciallie Geneua (noted for the Seminarie of all Conspiracies in France:) how comes it to pass, that those at Douay and S. Omers (being in the same case) ar so hatefullie censured to be fugitiues? And yf they wear fugitiues,) as the lawe also then ded iudg them,) yow ded so welcome them home, with the titles of Lords, and Bushops: that I perceaue, to be a fugitiue of your making, is but a verball obiection, and not a reall scandall.
Besides, they answer trewlie, and reasonablie. As they can not remain in England, withowt dainger and offenc of lawe: so when they come over hither, they committ treason: and yf they returne, a promoter or a purseuant vvill shovv them the waye to Nevvgate, (except they renounc, ther religion, vvhich yovv esteame peraduenture but a Peccadilio.) and that is euident, by the statut 25. Elizab. c. 2. (wherby yong men that returne not from the Seminaries, and abiure not ther religion, ar mayd guiltie of treason.) and they, vvho send them releaf and exhibition, fall into the dainger of a Premunire. what remedie can yow teache vs, against this Dilemma? Yf they might fynd grace, and haue the happienes to be freed from the dainger

of these Lawes, and (vvhich they humblie craue) toleration of ther consciences and religion: neither Doway, nor S. Omers, could hould them: they would quicklie show ther dewtiefull affection to ther Prince, ther naturall loue to ther contrie; and for ther parents and kindred, (from whome they ar separated to ther great discomfort) they should playnlie fynd, that kyndenes would not creape, when it may safelie go. 3. They corrupt no^ the Land.
Now touching the next poynt, (whear with they ar charged,) for corrupting the land with false doctrine. First, in this accusation, as yovv presuppose Caluinism and your religion to be an infallible veritie; so the preasts and religious heare, ar as confident, that it is impietie. On both sydes, ther ar learned, and vertuous men: and one will not vayle bonnet to the other. how then should the quarrel be decided? or shall it remain perpetuall, and a skourge to the world? The Bushops in the first parliement of the Quene, ded vrge and offer to defend the principles of ther religion by disputation: vvhich the protestants would not accept, Camden. nisi Baconus in theologicis parum versatus, tanquam iudex praesideret. and he being a professor of the common lawes, vvhy he should be chosen moderator of

such a Diuinitie disputation; Cambredg can neither geue reason, nor president; nay rather yf yow ask ther opinion, they will answer, Spectatum admisi, etc. for it is a tidiculous Solaecism. Since, Father Parsons, and diuers others haue mayd the same challeng, desirous to bring I ruthe to the Tryal and touchstone, in solemn and publick manner. And let no man obiect, the colloquies at Poissy, Ratisbon, Wormes, Altenburg, Murbrun, etc. which wear fruitles, bycause formeles: they ded not produce the effects expected, bycause they erred in ther course of proceading; and I confess I vnder stand not, the misterie vvhy the protestants in England now draw bach, seing Ievvel in the beginning was so forward, and mayd so liberal offerts: which yf anie would now defend, it would quicklie appear, which religion weare counterfeit, and which currant: whether doctrine wear solide, and vvhether not. speciallie hauing a moderator, who could discouer evasions, guid the disputers; and iudiciouslie determin, to whome the prize should be giuen.
And yf perhaps some would except, and alledg the conferenc betwean M. Hart and D. Reignolds: betwean Gode and Campion, which wear honored and diuulged as

triumphes: and that these ought to stand as sufficient proofes, co convinc the Catholicks, yf the truthe so well sifted by disputation, may satisfie them, and preuayle. I answer, it is iniquissima conditio, for a man armed, to sett vpon a prisoner, to insult vpon a man weakned with fetters; and destitute of books; withowt preparation and vvarning: and (which is worst) in the face of a rack and torments, whear Campion had bean posed with crewel quaestions before: and in a place of no indifferencie, whear they may sett down what they list, and frame a combate at ther pleasure, as Roynolds ded.
And whear as perhaps for politick cavvses, the king and the Lords may dislike anie publick disputation, vpon the grownds of religion: yet this may well be granted, (and the french kings president, may induce it.)
The preasts and fathers, offer to prooue that Iewel (the mainster Carpenter of that Apologie of the Churche of England:) that Luther, Caluin, Melancthon, and the later Doctors (Colonells of the new plantation,) haue overcrowed and born down the Catholicks (for opinion of truthe, sinceritie, and learning) onely by false quotations, corruptions, falsifications, misrecitalls: and that

both of scriptures and fathers, both of the text and the gloss. And this they humblie pray and hope, that his Maiestie in his own tyme vvould be pleased to grant; bycause these be heynous offences; and the temple of veritie can not be builded vpon error and false grownds: and bycause illusions and forgeries, be stratagemata satanae: that at least he would permitt the triall of that iust accusation; and so afthervvard esteam of ther integritie, as they shall acquite them selfs.
Concerning the third poynt, that the 3. Preasts ar no practisers. Seminaries bread such preasts, as ar ministers of practises, and stirr the people to rebellion: as they ar charged both by the book of execution of iustice, and by the proclamation 1580. whearin particularly they ar accused to haue bean priuie and accessarie, to the counsells and proiects of the king of Spayne, the Pope, and others, who intended and combined at that tyme, to invade England, to depose the Quene, and subdevv the realme.
I must freelie answer, that iealousie is trewlie described to be full of eyes, and yet all pur-blind: fearefull of her own shadowe, euer in motu trepidationis, and contrarie to the motions, of other starres.
And tho they vvear great statesmen, ye

with all ther Opticks they could not foresee the great daingers like to fall vpon them, till they wear at ther doors. And hauing by error drawen and prouoked them; yet took they the course, rather to continew the flame, then quench the fyre: to encreas the mallice then preuent the mischeaf.
For first yf anie such confaederation had bean, (which never yet could be discouered, nor was recorded in anie historie was it probable, that so great and so wise Princes, would acquaint the poor speculatiue preasts at Reams or Douay, or the fathers of the societie, with ther plats and intentions? is it credible that they would manage matters of state so vveakelie? yea, but these Princes purposed by the meanes of the preasts and religious, to prepare a partie assistant in England; how? by reconciling the people to the Pope, that they might ioyne, vvith hym and the king of Spaynes armie. One error begets an other: for preast doe not reconcile men to the Pope, but to God and his Churche.
1. And yet surelie it was a miracle, that emong so manie preasts, and in so long tyme, and when Spies and intelligencers wear employed and rewarded; neither anie such preast could be nominated, (who was then

or after, so corrupted or induced by these great Princes:) nor anie was afterward apprehended or discouered, for anie such trespasse. and which is most to be marked, not anie subiect was called in quaestion, or accused for entertaining anie preasts to that end. then how phantastical was this feare? what an imagination of Chimeraes and terrors? most iniurious, to touch the reputation of all the English preasts in generall, and by statuts and proclamations, to call ther names and ther liues in quaestion: and to haue no su sufficient vvitnesses to accuse them. no euidenc against them, nothing but presumptions and probabilities to attaint them of treason. the lyfe and honor of subiects, wear wont to be esteamed more pretious: and the function of preasts, more reuerenced.
2. I may also add this: that when the king of Spaynes armado, was vnder sayle towards England, not a preast nor Seminarie man was fownd in it. And though in the proclamation, they wear traduced to be men suborned for preparation and making the way leuel for ther better landing: yet hovv vvell they prepared it, appeareth by this, that neither preast nor Catholick, vvear apprehended and attainted for anie such offenc, as is afore sayd.

3. Besides hovv litl affianc the king of Spayn had in the English preasts and Catholicks of that tyme, was demonstrated by this; that all the religious English at Valladolid and Burgos 1589. wear fettered and committed close prisoners, when the armie of England assaulted Lisbone, and invaded Portingal.
Furthermore in all the actuall treasons and conspiracies, supposed to be mayd against Q. Elizabeth: ther was never preast, or monk, or friar touched or taynted for anie of them. For certanlie the holie altars of God will not suffer nor indure so vngodlie machinations: and cloysters, bread better humors, eleuate ther sowles from the world. they think not of Princes but in ther prayers; and venite ad iudiciu^ sownding ever in ther eares, requires a continual preparate in ther harts (which is an antidote against treason.) And that I think the cawse, vvhy in the 45. yeares of the Quenes raigne as I haue hard, ther vvear onelie 2. secular preasts convinced and attainted for actual Treason, Ballard (for knowing and concealing the attempts of A. Babington:) and ovvld parson Plometree (for saying Mass at the rising in the Northe, for I never hard of anie other treason he committed.) yet it is straing to see, vvhat a malicious

extension of offences they make, vvhat inuectiues vvear published against them and ther vocation: what sermons, proclamations, lawes wear mayd in thunder and ^e^^or against these poor soldiers of the Churche militant vnder the banner of Christ? and what crosses and sufferings haue they not endured? the onelie Colledg of Rheams and Douay besides all other religious orders, can best testifie the rigor, who smarted most by it; sending into the Haruest of the Lord aboue 100 labourers, who all suffred for res mere spirituales, for being preasts, and doeing the office, and for no other treasons, (as hearafter shall be explained.)
5. But, fullie to cleare and purge them, from all iust scandall and calumniation, I will confirme and iustifie ther innocentie, and ther loyall harts to Quene Elizabeth, obsignatis tabulis.
Anno 27. Elizab it vvas mayd fellonie to receaue and harbour a preast, and treason to be a preast. and the act ded look back verrie crevvellie to 1. Elizab. that who vvear mayd preasts since, should be branded with that mark.
The which lawes vvear mayd, in regard of Parries treason, of Frances Throgmorton, of Babington and his complices, and

of Fa. Campion, and the peasts vvith hym arraigned: vpon the conceipt and opinion had, of there practises and combinations, for restoring religion, and for deliueranc of the Quene of Scotts: all vvhich vvear then fresh in memorie.
Whearupon the preasts then being in England, framed a supplication by common consent, and deliuered the same to the Quene at Gren vvich by the hands of maister Shellie (for the vvhich secretarie Walsingham committed hym to the marshalsie, vvhear he dyed: bycause the counsell vvear not mayd first acquainted vvith yt.) In that petition, first they renounced and condemned Parrie his practises; then they declared ther opinion in these vvords.
1. We for our parts vtterlie denie, that either the Pope or the Cardinalls, haue povver or authoritie, to command or licens anie man to consent to mortall sinn, or to committ or intend anie fact, contra ius diuinum.
2. Who soeuer he be spirituall or temporall, that deliuereth or mantaineth so apparent sacriledg; we renounc hym and his opinion as deuelish.
3. For our trew purgation we protest before God, that all preasts who ever conversed with vs, haue acknowledged your

Maiestie ther lavvfull Quene, tam de iure, quam defacto, and pray for yow, and exhort your subiects to obey yow.
4. They preciselie admonish vs, that it is haeresie for anie subiect, to lift vp his hand against Gods annoynted.
And so by this supplication, they answered all the six articles, which wear vsuallie tendered and obiected to all preasts. Then how doe these men deserue, to be charged for defending propositions of treason? or corrupting the subiects, or attempting against the sacred person of Gods anointed? ded those ther opinions, geue anie cawse to maik such seuear lavves against them? or to continew them? But I will maik ther loyaltie yet appeare more plainlie. after the Gunpowder Treason, (the name and memorie wheareof, doth yet greaue the harts of all good Catholicks.) first the Archpreast, ded vtterlie condemne it, by writing, as a most detestable and irreligious deuise.
And the preast them self, aswel for ther own purgation, and to clear ther vocation and societie from an imputation so odious; as also to testifie and approoue ther obedienc, and loyaltie: they exhibited thre petitions. One to his Maiestie: an other to the Parliament (by the hand of Seigneur

Frances Hastings, and Syr Richard Kinghtlie:) and an other to the Earl of Salisburie (protestations of there innocentie, and testimonies of ther fidelitie and dewtiefullnes.) What could they doe more, or what could be desyred more of them? therfor his Maiestie, in his proclamation 7. Nou. graciouslie declared his good opinion and assurance of the Catholicks in these words. VVear, sayd he, by good experienc, so vvel persvvaded of the loyaltie of diuers subiects, of the Roman religion, that they doe, as much abhorr this detestable conspiracie, as vve our selfs. and good reason, for therby all should haue perished togeter, of both religions.
Which induced father Garnet, (who was there confessor) to protest his dislike allwaies of it, and to repent his fault sorrowfullie, (which vvas onelie in concealing it; and vvhich he conceaued, that he ought not to reueal; knovving it onelie by ther confessions.) and vvhich also mooued Syr Euerard Digbie, to lament his ill fortune, that he should leaue behind hym the memorie of such a loath some stayne: tho he was not mayd priuie to ther drift and purpose.
What nead I say more? how farr Preasts and Catholiques ever detested sedition and treason, appeareth by the treatise of that

learned Bushop, D. Christopherson against rebellion. and vvould yovv knovv hovv much those of Rheames condemned treason and disobedienc: Read pag. 301. ther notes vpon the testament latelie printed: Subiects vvear bovvnd in temporall things, to obey the heathen being lavvfull kings, and to be subiect to them euen for conscienc, to keap ther temporall lavves, to pay them tribut, to pray for them, and to doe all other natur all devvties. And yet Doctor Kellison goeth further, for in his learned Suruey, he giueth a good reason for it. Bycaus (saith he) faith is not necessarily required to iurisdiction, neither is authoritie lost by loss of faith. which opinion Waldensis ded long since defend with great iudgment against that monstruous opinion of Wiclef. Nay further, they teach obedienc for conscienc sake, not for onelie feare of punishment, and penalties of the law (for lawes ar never so vvel obserued, as when they ar enacted in the conscienc of the people:) he that obeyeth for pollicie onelie, may disobey for pollicie, which varieth vpon occasions, and so doth his obedienc with it.
7. But yf yow desyre yet to be better assured and satisfied: I will show yow the opinion of the Bushops, and prelates of Quene Maries tyme. The new deuised six articles (composed by D. Hammon) vvear

proposed to all preasts, as the touchstone to trie ther loyaltie. 1. whether the bull of Pivs V. wear a sentenc to be obeyed? 2. whether Q. Eliz. wear a lawfull. Quene, not withstanding the bull. 3. whether the Po^e had power to geue authoritie, to her subiects, to rebell and depose her, etc. Vpon these quaestions, Bushop Watson, Abbot Fecknam, D. Iohn Harpesfeald, D. Nicholas Harpesfeald and others, wear curiouslie examined. Some of them answered they never see the bull: but all of them professed ther obedienc notwithstanding the bull, et vt verae reginae obediendum. And fullie Nichol. Harpesfeld resolued them, ego regalem eius authoritatem in omnibus rebus causisque ciuilibus and temporalibus agnosco. the which Goldastus (tom. 3. de Monarchia S. Imperi^ Rom.) doth report.
8. But to conclude, with a demonstratiue argument: against vvhich I know no iust exception or opposition yow would know, how Princes can be assured of Catholicks, and hovv farr they may repose confidenc in them! and vvhether ther religion tyeth so ther consciences to devv obedienc, that merciefull and good Princes may rest secured, they will neither reuolt from ther allegianc, nor attempt against ther persons, nor mooue the people to seditious practises.

S. Thomas lib. de regimine princip. cap. 6.  negat posse tirannum a quoquam priuata authoritate interfici. (quite contrarie, to the rules of Parreus and knox.) and so doth D. Gerson,  (the learned Chancelor of Paris) determin and define. And touching the  Canon lavv. Decret. 2. part. caus. 23. q. 8. de Episcop. it doth decree, de Episcopis vero, vel quibus licet Clericis: quod nec sua authoritate, nec authoritate Romani pontificis, arma accipere valeant, facile probatur.
And yet bycause there maye be Cauils and obiections drawen vpon some words of the Canons, to maike dowbt of the truthe and certantie of this opinion: the Canon lawes of England doe explain it fullie.  for in the Prouincial constitutions, in the Councel at Oxford holden by Stephen of Canturbury. 1228. anno 8. H. 3. an excommunication is decreed against all those, qui pacem and tranquillitatem Domini regis and regni perturbant.
And to voyd all quaestions, the generall Councel of Constance, sess. 15. concluded, that is an error in faith, to hould that subiects maye kill ther Princ being a tyrant. the words ar these. Nuper accepit sancta Synodus quod nonnullae assertiones erroneae dogmatizataesunt, reipublicae statum euertere cupientes, etc. scil. vt quilibet tyrannus, potest and debet

licite and meritorie occidi, per quemcunque vasallum suum and subiectum, etiam per clanculares insidi^s, non obstante quocunque iuramento, nec expectata sententia and mandato indicis, etc. And therupon, the councel decreed, eam esse doctrinam erroneam in fide and moribus: and then condemneth it, and enacteth, Quicunque pertinaciter doctrinam hanc perniciosissimam asserentes; sunt haeretici; and tanquam tales iuxta Canonum sanctiones sunt puniendi. The which act, after the parricide of Henry the III. the parliement of Paris published, both to condemn such infernall practises, and to shovv hovv sacred the Church holdeth the persons of Princes. So novv yow haue sean (as in a glass) the face, and integritie of the Catholiks, and how they ar tyed, to obedienc of magistrates: yovv see the dogmaticall principles of ther religion, touching ther loyaltie. yf yovv vvill iudg of them, by ther doctrine, yovv see the basis vpon which they build: yf by ther proceadings, ther petitions, ther protestations, and publick profession acquite them: yf by ther course of lyfe, ther frequent confessions, and continuall prayers, show ther innocentie. and to speak confidentlie all Princes, ar more secure, and haue a more and better tye and obligation of Catholiks; then of anie Caluinists or Lutherans vvhat

soever. And yf he vvho writ that Pamphlet of Romish doctrine, in case of Conspiracie and rebellion, and marked vpon euerie leaf, Romish positions and practises of rebellion: vvill read this plain rec^mination, and relation (mayd to recompenc his trauel:) he shall fynd, hovv false and scandalous these Chimaeraes, and fictions vveare: and hovv iniurious to all preasts and religious, to call ther names and reputation therby in quaestion, vbi de capite fiunt comitia.
But Coolors vvill best appeare, vvhen they ar compared therfor examin yf anie sectaries overmatch this fidelitie? and geue so good assuranc to Princes, to leane and relie vpon ther loyaltie. Philip Mela^cthon, in his epitome of Moral philosophie, saith, Violare leges ciuiles, seu edicta magistratuum ciuilium est peccatum mortale* (thus farr he agreeth with the Churche, vvhich taught hym that lesson:) and therfor he addeth, sciamus conscientiam fieri ream, si non obt^mperemus, and consider a quantum est hoc vinculum obedientiae, and publicae tranquillitatis? in dead ther can be required, no greater or stronger a tie, and so simplie ar all Catholicks tyed. but hauing mayd vp this hedg, to keap owt disorder: he leaues a gap open, to bread nevv trovvbles, and break all bonds. for saith he, debet autem haec sententia de magistratuum

edictis prudenter intelligi, scilicet de ijs edictis quae non iubent facere, contra mandatum Dei. For then all is, naught, as before he showed ex libro consil. Euangel. that inferior magistrates may alter religion, and ouerthrouu Idolatrie. and so hear is neither left anie tye; nor yet anie instruction, how to be able to iudg whether and when the Prince doth idolatrize or doe contramandatum Dei. But yf the iustices of peace, and Constables be perswaded, in ther conscienc, that the Prince erreth in his then at they authorised by Melancthon, both to iudg and geue lavv to the Prince and not to obey hym.
2. Luther, prescribeth that men should obey municipal lawes, (as I haue cited, tom. 3. Witteb before in the first title:) but yf yow obiect to hym, ne excitetur tumulius contra Episcopos: then he falleth into Melancthons gap, an ideo negligetur verbum Dei, and peribit populus?
3. And this, his backed with a generall consent of the more precise protestants, that subiects may by armes mantain ther religion. what to resist and defend onelie: yea and to offend also, as appeareth by Danaeus l. 6. polit. c. 3. and by P. Martyr in cap. 11. Iudic. and in locis com. and Althusius polit. c. 35. pag. 37. maketh thre iust cawses

of warr, 1. iustitiae denegatio, 2. purae religioni^ defensio. 3. repetitio rerum ablatarum.
4. It may be thought I choose owt, the worst of ther opinions, and misreport them: therfor I will cleare my self, sufficientlie. Doctor Swinglius, teacheth, dum flagitiosi loco non mouentur, totus populus a Deo punitur. So he warrants them to depose Princes.
The famous minister Sureau (called Rosieres, who was after emprisoned at Paris) writ a book to prooue, that it was lawfull, to kill Charles the 9. and the Quene moother, yf they would not obey the gospell, (id est Caluinisme) so witnesseth Belforest l. 6. c. 103.
In the confession of the french Church art. 39. they saie, affirmamus parendum esse legibus, soluendatributa, subiectionis iugum tolerandum, etiamsi infideles fuerint magistratus. but what fellowes? that which corrupts all, dummodo, Dei summum imperium integrum maneat. Now, bycause in this dummodo, maye lurk an aequiuocation: it is explained in the Synod of Bearn, 1572. Dei imperium dicitur manere illibatum, cum rea exterminata Catholica religione, solam veram and puram extollit. God is trewlie worshipped, obeyed, and serued, when the Catholick religion is banished, and onelie the truth is professed (which is in effect all one, as tho say when

Caluinism is established:) for they concluded all men enemies that ar not of that profession, as Poplonnier restifieth l. 34.
This is the doctrine of ther Synodes: and in ther publick Apologies the same lesson is read. in Com^^ent. de statu relig. part. 2. l. 12 c. 1* the warr, which subiects maike against there Prince, is defended. and fol. 349. yf the kaing mantain his ovvn religion against them, what then? Rex a populo potest exauthorari, per ordinum in regem authoritatem and again, nec omnes regni partes in solidum committuntur regi, sed tantum superior regni dignitas: cuius tamen suo modo and certis conditionibus, inferiores magistratus, sunt participes, maxime officiarij coronae. all states and members of the realm, ar not committed to the king, but the cheaf and prime dignitie of state: wheareof, in some measure, and condition, inferior magistrates doe participate, speciallie the officer of the crown. but this is a gross paradox, not worth the skanning. yet that vvhich followeth is not better. In populi iuramento, tacita aut expressa est conditio semper, se obtemperaturum regibus, quamdiu iusto imperio rem gererent. They haue one evasion or an other, shifts to cussen the law. obiect, that subiects ar bownd dy ther oath, to obey ther Prince: he answers it with a quamdiu. So

long as the king serues God, we will serue hym, then that must be a clawse in the oath of allegianc, yf a Caluinist taik it. and I will satisfie yow, why I say so. The Prince of Condie, 1577. gaue this as a rule: Promissum In his protestation contra conuent ^lesensem. illud Euangelicorum, de armis contra regem non ferendis, and de abiurata religione, factum est, contra Deum, and bonos mores, etc. and tale promisium seruare non tenentur. the Gospellers of France, ar not tyed to performe ther oath and promise (scilicet not to beare armes against ther king, or to abiure religion:) for it was, both against God, and good manners. Poplonnier l. 41.
And this he learned of Caluin, l. 4. c. 13. @ 21. Institut. Quibuscunque huius Euangelij lux affu^get, etc. ab omnibus laqueis and iuramentis absoluitur. That man who is so happie, as to see the sonn shyne of the Geneus gospel (huius Euangelij*) he is absolued and discharged from the dainger of all oaths, and snares to enthrall the conscience. A maruellous priuiledg; and such a priuiledg the Prince of Oreng had, as appeareth by his aduises to Monsieur, in his letters intercepted and published, as Surius declareth anno 1581. And doe yow imagin, that these beams of the sonn, ded never shine in England? maister Dudlie Fenner, who iumpeth right with the Apostles of Geneua,

lib. 5. cap. 13. of an euel Prince, he giueth this fearfull sentence. Hunc tollant vel pacifice, vel cum bello: vel regnt Ephort, vel omnium ordinum connentus.
So, tollant, is decreed, the king must be pull dovvn: but by whome? by Regni Ephort. who ar they; bycause it concerneth the crowne, ask the kings atturnie, or the Clark of the Crowne, whether they acknowledg anie such officer: and I am perswaded, they will read hym a lecture, against scientia inflat, which will teach hym discreation. but, go on.
When maister William Raynolds, obiected the tumults, and sedition of the gospellars in France D. Whitacre, in his preface, answereth hym thus. As though it vvear sufficient for ther condemnation, that they resisted: so then, he thinketh that not sufficient, or bycause he speaks not categorice, taik it onelie as the doubt of a Doctor.) And ded not admitt vvhat violenc vvas offred to Gods truthe, or them selfs: contrarie to oath, promise, edicts, or lavv: (vvhearby they vvear vvarranted to doe vvhat they ded.) Then the Huguenots of France, in D. Whitacres opinion, vvear warranted, to resist the king, to assault his tovvnes, to fight with his officers, and to doe all acts of rebellion. examin the vvarrant; the law was against them, the edicts of

the king wear against them (for the admiral was proclaimed traytor) and the court parliement ded verifie the edicts. But he addeth, they wear cleared from the crime of rebellion, by iust defenc of ther doeing, and by edict, of Princes. hear be tvvo bucklers, ther Apologies ar the first: the kings proclamation the second. Doe not yovv imagin that he is much driuen to his shifts, that fights with so weak vveapons. yf an apologie vvear sufficient to clear a man who would be condemned? Scotland had a Bucchanan; France an Hottoman; Holland, Oreng, (who generallie, sought to excuse hym self, and the contrie, and lay all the burden on the kings back.) yet an apologie, serued not. And for edicts, they wear proclamations of the kings mercie, edicts of pacification: not to vvarrant that which the Huguenots ded, but to pardon them. and so that Doctor so esteamed for his diuinitie; erreth much in matters of humanitie and defenc of his brethren. and speciallie yf he lead them to Melancthons gapp, to resist, to oppugne princes, or to defend ther opinions with the sword (which S. Peter ded not teach, 1. Epist. c. 2. v. 19. c. 4. v. 15. 16. c. 5. v. 9.)
But hear, I must maik a stand: for seing An obiection that preasts. and Iesuits teach murdering of Princes. I haue so much touched, and so personalie,

the opinions of the Lutheran, french, and puritan Churches: I see a tempest of toungs rising against me, to pay home and requite my obiections (for it will not be easie to answer them.) And first I will encounter, the Picture-maker, Ormer.
Who accuseth D. Allen, for teaching 1. D. Allen. men to murder princes; and that in his Apologie of the Seminaries, he citeth. 25. of Numeri, that subiects may taik ther soouerains and hang them vp. (a thing so impious, that it never cam into a religious hart.) For they ar much deceaued that think it a propertie of Catholicks; (as this man and P. white doe,) but that it is not proprium quarto modo, omni, soli, and semper, it is all readie plainelie and demonstratiuelie prooued. but I will show, maister Orm. the picture of a minister of Geneua of the first edition, that whotelie defends the same, yow accuse D. Allen for.
Goodman l. de obedientia, saith he, factum illud, quod memoratur, Num. 25. perpetuum est exemplum in omnem aeternitatem, and certa denunciatio populi, vt in simili defectione a cultu Dei, rectores suos qui a Deo ipso abducunt, ad furcas abripient and suspendant. Et quanquam posset videri haec magna confusio, vt populus sibi tantum assumat: tamen cum magistratus officio suo fungi desinit, populus it a considerandus est,

ac si careret omni magistratu, and tum Deus ipse gl^dium in populi manus tradit: and Deus ipse, eff^c^tur imme^iate eorum caput.
As now, yow imputed to D. Allen, the citing of that text in Num. to be a position and principl of Papists, to depose and murder Princes: I shovv a Caluinist, that affirmes the same, and overmatcheth hym. Iam sumus ergo pares. but yet is ther odds: for D. Allens words, and scope differ from Goodmans.
Goodman warrants the peopl to execut ther Princ; geues them reasons, shovves the vvay, and to confirm them maiks it Gods act. D. Allen, complayning against the rigour and seueritie of the lawes of E. showes, they ar not to obey and perform them, but stirrs not vp the peopl to rebell: he showes what resistanc may be warranted, but incites not to resist. I vvill cite his own vvords. cap. 5. ^ro Catholica religione certaere, praeclarum: sed modo* and tempore. Vt conscientiae lex sacra, supremi pastoris sententia dirigant. So then he recites Deuter. 13. and Num. 25. and infers. Illud autem in omnibus ijs exemplis notandum, populum, non sua voluntate and impetu ad has Caedes, sed a prophetis and Sacerdotibus commonefacti: id quod omni posteritati sequutur examplo est, ne alias priuato odio, superbia, etc. in errores ruamus, and imbrobitatem

nostram religionis velo, tegamus. So hear is more discreation, and more dewtie, then ad furcas abripere: more order and governement, then suspendere, (as in furie:) more religion, then to teach that God ded authorise the peopl to so desperate actions. Doctor Sutclif, in his book called Turcopapismus 2. F. Parsons. obiected, this against Fa. Parsons. Lopez a personio Iesuita, and Hispanis quibusdam, ad reginam interficiendam magna pecunia conductus, nisi vigilantia Essexij scelus deprehensum. I will tell the Doctor, such an other tale, to maik hym amends. Peter Pannie a Cooper, was reported to haue bean hyred by Mauaraeus rector of Douay, prouincial of the Iesuits, to kill Count Morrice: and vpon examination of the matter it was found a fable, as this is, which the Doctor deliuereth so confidentlie. for in that action of Lopez, ther was no man accused, but Portingals and Spanyeards: and in the examinations which I haue sean and read (whearin all the circumstances ar declared) all the aydors, moouers, and actors ar nominated: there is not one word of Fa. Parson. And vvhen maister Egerton, ded in the Guildhall, most largelie and eloquentlie vrg all he could, against Lopez; not a word was spoken of F. Parsons (which he would not haue omitted, yf

ther had bean cawse.) and all men knevv, that knew hym, that he was not a like man, to venture his reputation, in a forrein bottom, subiect to so manie leaks, and so much dainger as that was. and therfor this was a scandalous fiction.
But the Threason of Parrie, is low dlie 3. Parrie. sownded in all mens eares, as a reproach and stayne of Catholick religion: bycause the Pope by his letters, had prouoked hym to kill the Quene. hear is some probabilitie. yet this is no stayne at all; for Parrie confesseth, that maister Wats a seminarie preast, (with whome he had conference) disliked both his motion, and attempt: and tould hym, that it vvas an vnlawfull practise. and that diuers other preasts ded the like.
Besides at Lyons, when he cam to Fa. Creighton (a Iesuit) after his confession, he opened to hym his intentions, (belike perswading hym self, that the good father would byte, at such a bate. But Fa. Creighton vertuoushe resolued hym, quod omnino non liceret, it was against Gods lawe: and by diuers reasons disswaded hym. and thus much he hym self confessed to the Quene: Hollinshead in his chron. wituesseth it; and few men that ar of experienc abowt London but know and acknowledg it. So ther

is a discharg both, to the fathers, and preasts, for Parries treason. Now touching the Popes letter; yow must vnderstand, that this counterfeit, had bean long vsed in Italie, as a spie. and fynding vpon his return, so litl encooragement at Lyons, by the fathers: he trauelled to Paris. whear he sought to insinuate hym felf into D. Allen and Fa. Parsons, (who wear there with the Lord Paget:) But not fynding such entertainment at ther hands, as he expected; he was brought by means to the Nuncio, to whome he deliuereth a letter, written by hym self in Italian and directed to the Pope. 1. Whearin first he confessed the wrongs, he had doone to Catholicks. 2. That he was going into England, to maik some satisfaction by his seruices; and 3. desiring his bsnediction and approbation (vvithovvt specifi^ng anie particularitie, he meant to performe there.) which letter is yet extant, at Room, vpon record. and to this letter, Card. Como answered: and vpon this is all the triumph.
The letter of C. Como. is common: examin it, and see yf either ther be anie particuler seruices intimated, or anie seditious directions giuen from the Pope, more then an encooragement in genere, to an offer in genere. What then can yovv reasonablie

infer vpon this to disgrace Catholicks: yow may inferr, that the Popeshowed a fatherlie affection to England, that would vouchsafe to write to Parrie, (promising to doe some good seruice.) but by that letter, yovv can not infer that he exhorted, or encooraged Parry to anie treasonabl act; speciallie considering, that such actions be notoriouslie condemned by the sea Apostolick, Councels, fathers, and schoolmen.
But it vvas Parries deuise, to procure that letter to serue his turn in England, and to vse the Popes name, both to abuse the Catholicks, and deceaue the Quene. vvhen he departed secretlie from Paris, vvithovvt an Adieu to F. Parsons, (vvith vvhome he vvas not vvel pleased, for being ill regarded) he vvrit to the Lord Burlie, for a passport, that he might come over, and impart to the Quene great matters. he vvas admitted; the Quene hard hym: and he informed, that the Iesuits mooued hym to kill her. yet in the Parliement hovvse, he defended boldlie Catholicks, and religion, (for vvhich the hovvse, committed hym to the tovvre: not knovving that the Quene vvas priue to his purposes, and that her intention vvas therby to geue hym reputation, and credit vvith the Preasts and

fathers. for now he had continuall accesss to the Quene, he hoped to be maister of S. Katharins) vvas in great fauour vvith the lo. Threasorer; and was employed to discouer the plats and intentions of forreiners: and at home to betray the Catholicks: and particulerly the Lord Lattimor, (whome the Threasorer, studied to haue caught in Parries nett.) But he that was trew to no man, prooued false to hym self, and vvas taken in his own snare: (hauing met vvith witts overreaching his:) and perished so worthilie, as I may trevvlie conclude, quis paena eius mouebitur, qui id commiserit, pro quo, nemo misereri, misericors potest?
Yet this was, generallie iudged the more 4. Fa. VValpool, and Squire. probable, that the Pope and the papists ded employe Parrie: bycause Fa. Richard Walpool, was accused to haue encooraged Squire, to the like attempt. and surelie vpon examination, it vvill haue the like success. This Squire, and one Rolls 1596. wear taken prisoners (in a pinnace of Syr Franc. Drakes, by Don Pedro Tellio) and brought to Siuil; whear Fa. Parsons procured for them, both libertie and apparrel, (though they professed them selfs to be protestants:) and so they wear sent away, when they cam to S. Lucars, by indiscreation, they fell into the inquisition, (an

argument sufficient to vvitnes ther religion,) and so they wear brought back to Siuil: whear Fa. Walpool ded them much fauor, set them at libertie, engaged his credit for ther foorth comming, and placed Rolls in the Iesuits Coll. and Squire in a monasterie. 1597. til they both secretlie fled avvay, and left father VValpool in the briars, to answer for them.
And afterward, they sent letters, to excuse there soodain departure to Fa. Walpol, (which letter he ded showe for his discharg. Now then weigh well, all circumstances: and examin the enditement. Squire is accused that Fa. Walpool, prouoked, and instructed hym to poyson the Quene: and preached to hym at his departur, to perswade and confirme hym. Is not this probable? 1. they fled secretlie awaye, withowt his knowledg, (and that was generallie knowen to be trew) Squire was a man, who ever professed hym self a protestant, and so dyed. 3. a man, that at his arrainment and death, denied it. (And tho being vpon the rack 5. tymes, the torture compelled hym, to accuse hym self; yet an argument from the rack, is not a sufficient euidenc, being after denied.) 4. a man, that had wyfe and children in England: and not like withowt some great and

present temptation, to be dravven into suca a plat: and Fa. VValpool, was as vnlike and vnfitt, either to promise or perform anie recompenc of valevv. 5. then what should be the motiue? his religion, would not perswade hym; for he regarded no merite. Rewards hear weare none, and vvithovvt some end, he vvould not cast avvay hym self. 6. Besides Fa. VValpool as he was not like, to trust a protestant, with a matter of that weight, and secrecie: so neither was he of that credit, nor authoritie, that he durst doe it withowt the licenc of his superiors (Fa. Parsons. and Fa. Creswel, being his ancients. 6. Besides examin, how it was proued. by his ovvn confession? it was extorted, and by the same breath denied. by Stallenge his testimonie? he had it but by hearsay. a vveak proof. and how was this to be performed? by poison deliuered to hym in Spayne. a straing secret, which his fellow Rolls never knevv of vvho returned vvith hym. and how was it to be doon? the sadl vpon the hors back vvas to be poisond.
Hear was art. how could the Quene be poisoned with it so, and he scape that is sayd to hauesqueased it vpon the sadl? or yf it wear squeazed (as they tearmed it) how could part be reserued, to poison the Earl

of Essex? and speciallie hovv could it be doone, that the groomes of the stable, and the querries (vvho ordinarily attend the horse for the Quene) could not discern it? but to conclude, was euer anie man hard of that took hurt by that poyson? or was sick of it? no, no, then surelie seing he denied it, seing ther was no probabilitie, and speciallie seing ther was no witnesses to prooue it, I can not esteame it, as a stayn, to be iustly imputed to the Iesuits.
But all these, and such like deuises, passed as currant, in England (vpon a false supposition) that Mariana a Iesuite, and the fathers ded mantain that vngodlie position, of murdering and deposing Princes for religion.
1. Touching Mariana: it was a personall 5. The Iesuits. fault, Marianas proper opinion; yet was he not resolut in that opinion, but handled it problematice; he inclineth to the worst part, but absolutelie affirms it not. his words ar, falli possum vt humanus, siquis meliora attulerit gratias agam.
2. Secondlie his quaestion was not, for killing of kings, but for killing tyrants (which is to be noted as a great differenc.)
3. Againe, his whole order disauows his position, and categorice determin the contrarie. Card. Tolet in his summa. l. 5. cap. 6.

decreeth that it is not lavvfull, to attempt against the lyfe of a Prince, tho he abuse his povver: and that it is haeresie to mantain the contrarie. So also holdeth. Greg. de Valentia part. 2. q. 64. and of the same opinion is Card. Bellarmin. cap. 13. of his Apologie. and Salmeron, tom. expovvnding the 13. C. Rom. (vvheare he referreth the fact of Aod, against king Aeglon, to Gods expresse commandement.) I may alledg, the authoritie of learned Lessius, de iustitia and iure, l. 2. c. 9. dub. 4. Serrarius in c. 13. Iud. Azor in his Institut. Becanus in his ansvver to the 9. Aphorism. Gretser in his Vespertilio, Haeretico politicus, vvho confuteth Marianaes grounds. and so doth L. Richeome in his Apologie.
4. What nead I say more? yet to put all ovvt of dowbt, this opinion of Martiana, was condemned both by a prouincial congregation of the same societie holden at Paris. 1606. and the condemnation vvas ratified, by Claudius Aquauiua, general of the order.
5. And bycause, no man shall dovvbt vvhether it be a droctrin so generall receaued in the Church: anno 1413. by the declaration of the Doctors of Sorbonna the same is averred; as also renevved, 1606 that it is an vnlawfull and vngodlie position.

6. And lastlie, the doctrine of Mariana, was iustlie condemned by the court Parliament of Paris, the seame year.
And that yow may not stumble at Simancas words: yow must know he was a lawyer no deuine: and yf yow read Heisius ad Aphorismos, yovv shall perceaue that both he and Becanus, ar not guiltie of this error. see pag. 85. and 91. And all this standeth and concordeth, with the agreement of Gods ancient Church. for Ireneus l. 5. c. 14. setteth it down emong heresies, to think that kings ar giuen to men casuallie; and not by prouidenc, and appointement of God: quia omnis petestas a Deo. And S. Ambrose contra Auxentium. ait, lachrymae meae, arma mea, aliter nec debeo, nec possum resistere. Nauar, Cunerus, and all that I haue sean (and I haue curiouslie searched for it) agree in one sentenc. and the reason I am so curious in this; was not onelie to satisfie my own conscience; but diuers good and vertuous protestants in England my frends, who wear much offended that a Thesis so scandolous, should be protected by the learned fathers, of the societie, as was giuen owt.
Ther remaineth yet certan staines in the 6. C. Mayne. Cote of Preasts, and fathers, which ar honestlie to be taken owt. I haue hard it much

vrged, that the greatest argument for the rigour against preasts; vvas necessitie to free the state from dainger, bycause they vvear the likest men, to bread it. and that vvas speciallie discerned as they sayd by the comming in of C. Mayne, (who corrupted maister Tregion, and diuers others, and with drew them from ther obedienc.)
Bycause it is a matter (which concerneth all preasts:) it is necessarie to examin it with deliberation. Cuthbert Mayn was indited at Launston 1577. that he had, and obtained from Roome, a bull, and instrument for absolution, and that maister Tregion, knowing hym to haue obtained the same 20. April, after ded ayd and mantaine hym, and was reconciled These wear the accusations, and iudg of them.
1. First for his reconciling, Mayn answered, that they wear deceaued, preasts ded vse to reconcile men onelie to God: neither by reconciliation, was euer anie man withdrawen from his remporal obedienc, by anie consequenc, but rather had a greater obligation.
2. And touching his being at Room, and procuring this bull of the Pope: he sayd he vvas never at Room* nor sought to obtain from thenc, anie Bull at all for absoluing anie man.

3. Moreover, that it was copie of a bull printed which he bought at Douay, onelie to pe^ule and see the manner of it.
4. But that, which is most to be noted, is: that it was printed at Douay; and by the enditement, he was accused that 1. Octob. 1597. he ded obtain from Room the afore sayd instrument. for the law intended, that the trespassor should obtain immediatlie from, the Pope, not a copie, but the instrument it self. and that it should contain some matter preiudiciall to the Quenes person, or the quiet and good of the state, or to seduce and corrupt the subiects (for it is not to be imagined, that the parliement would maik that treason, by which no hurt nor dainger can ensew to the state.)
5. But what bull was this? that maketh the matter cleare. it was a bull, concerning the Iubilie, which by the Pope is granted of course, and not at the suit of anie priuate person, and for all contries not for anie one, and once in 25. yeares. and that bull ded continue in force, butone yeare: which yeare was ended 1575. (and so the date of the instrument was expyred, before he bought it: much more, 1. Octob. 1597. when he was endited. so yow see par^u^ iunt montes Yet bycause he had the bull, tefused to come to the Church, and obey the

Quenes proceadings, iudg Manhood tould the iurie, whear manifest proofs can not be had, persumptions must be allowed; and therupon the iurie fovvnd hym guiltie. (though the enditement contained altogether matter insufficient, and impossible, and neither answearable, to the words, nor senc of the statut.)
For in this bull, ther wear neither words nor matter, to withdraw or seduce anie subiect from dew obedienc: neither vvas ther anie thing preiudicial to the Q. to be executed. Notwithstanding maister Tregion lay long in prison, emong fellons, in a dongeon noysom for smells, toads, etc. fed with bread and water: and was afterward condemned in the premunire, and his lands seazed by writ from the excheckor: and the date of the vvrit vhas before the iudgment giuen, (as yf they knew it should be so.) he was prisoner 16. yeares; an ancient gentlmen, and honorablie allied: and his lands 1000. pownds of old rent.) and tho it was entayled: yet the knight marshall fownd means to avoyd it who had begged his lands of the Quene. And all this vvas, but for religion: and vpon false accusation of one Twigs a parish Clack, who affirmed that he had speach with Mayn at Christenmas 1575. and at that tyme was Mayn at

Douay. But to go forward ex pede Herculem by this iudg of the rest. (which is so much obiected.)
Touching the rising in the North, and 7. The Bull of Pius V. the attempts of Babington and his complices: they wear mixt actions, not for religion onelie, or state onelie, but for bothe: and not procured by the suite and sollicitation of religious men, but owt of ther ownzeal, and compassion of the Quene of Scotland, whome the Earles accoumpted, nearest allied to the crovvne.) And such actions, ar not comprehended vvithin the compass of the Question I am to cleare and discusse.
1. But concerning the bull of PIVS V. Preasts vvear not to ask the reason of the Popes doeings. yet yovv may fynd some of the reasons specified in the bull.) diuers haue ascribed it, partlie to the soodain reuolt of England from the Church; partlie to the prouocations mayd by the ministers there, (who in euerie pulpit vvhotelie and slanderouslie proclaymed the Pope Antichrist, and the man of perdition:) and some haue attributed it, to minsinformation of the Quenes case, and the Catholicks. But I am sure, manie graue men vvear sorie, that it vvas either procured, or defended.
2. And C. Allen vvitnesseth, multos illud factum agre tulisse, (as before, yovv see, Bushop

Watson, and the rest ded) and he wished, that it had bean Dei iudicio reseruatum.
3. And Fa. Parsons, and Campion, sollicited the mitigation thereof, (as appeared at his arrainment) that it might not bynd the consciences of subiects, to disobey the Quene. Whearupon Gregorie the 13. declared (withowt anie limitation or restraint) that subiects ought to performe all dewties to Quene Elizabeth, notvvithstanding the censure.
4. Lastlie, yow may probablie coniecture, that the Popes ar not lightlie induced to vse so extream courses: seing they neither sought, by such censures, to disturb the peace of k. Ed. 6. of the kings of Scotland, Denmark, Svveden; the Duke of Saxonie, or Marques of Brandenburg.
Neither doth it at all, touch the Catholicks, nor the present state (for actio moritur cum persona:) which is the thing most concerning vs.
The greatest blott is: that ther vvear 8. The preasts. more treasons by the preasts committed in Q. Eliz. tyme, then euer wear in anie age, by protestants. and that is no quaestion disputable, bycaus it is manifeste verum; near 200. preasts and religious haue bean executed for that offenc. In dead Norton, D. Hammo^, and Topclif affirm that it is trew:

but bycaus Catholicks denieit, let vs examin, whether it be a trew Thesis, no preasts wear executed for religion but for Treason.
1. And to, determin that the better: enquire what be the acts for which they ar condemned, to be a preast, to come ouer into England, to refuse the vath, to say mass. 10 absolue and ^econcile, to preach, and minister Sacraments, and to bebred vp in the Seminaries Ar these matters of State, and not of conscience? temporall and not spiritual? crimes of treason, and not religion. Ther must then be a new lexicon de verborum significationibus: for els in forrein contries, they will exclayme, bycause it toucheth them all (by participation) both in conscienc and c^edit, who ar preasts, and fynd ther function and profession so tainted.
2. Th^n consider and defyne what is treason. The best definition thereof is the statut 25. Ed 3. (which was mayd according to the common lawes of England.) how know yow that? maister Ploydons opinion directeth me.
In that act, the Question vvas, what was treason by the common law: now saith he. it is a principle in the exposition of a statut, that yf the preambl showeth anie dowbt to be before, either in common law, or some statut, and afterward doth enact, that thus

it shall be: in that case it must be taken, that the lavve doubted of, vvas so before For ab expositors of dowbts, they would not ordaine it otherwise, then the law was.
Now it appeareth, by that statute, scilicet, by the common lawes of England, and by I. Stanford, in the pleas of the crown. 1. that Treason must ever be an action, not an opinion, nor a profession (for a man can not properlie be called Traytor, till he committ an act, that geues hym iusthe that denomination.) For Oldcastel vvas condemned a Traytor for his act in one court: an heretick for his opinion, in an other court; and so wear Cranmor and Ridlie for ther actions. 2. yt must be the act of a subiect, against his soouerain. Now what hurt, had euer king H. 7. or his progenitors, by anie subiect, who was a preast, sayd mass etc. or can yovv show, that anie real treason by preasts was committed* or intended against the late Quene? ded they euer procure sedition, or stirr rebellion actuallie? 3. and that was neadful to be prooued; for Treason must be for offences in the highest degree: bycause the punishment extends it self, to all his posteritie (that offends so,) to the ruine of his familie, and to terrifie others.
3. So then by the common lawes, it is not

treason. But D. H. elench was, quatenus he is a preast, he is not a traytor: but quatenus, he doth the office of a preast, in England. Subtilissima subtilitas: and yet bycaus false, it preuails not. For the function it self is mayd treason: and therfor the act looketh back to 1. Eliz. (to maik all preasts traytors, that had ther orders sinc that tyme.)
4. Besides by the prouiso of the act 25. and 27. Eliz. yf anie preasts (committed) shall submitt them selfs to the Quenes lawes, and taik the oath; they shall be freed from the penaltie of this act: and so they shall not be iudged traytors, yf they renounc ther religion. as Bell, Io. Nicholls and others ded. wherby it is playn they ar not traytors simpliciter but secundum quid: not for fact but opinion, and to be enlarged vpon condition. and seing it is in ther powre to maik them self in instanti no traytors; It appeareth, ther offenc is not properlie treason: for yf it vvear so by 25. E. 3. ther acknowledgment onelie and conformitie, and repentanc, neither could not would haue discharged them from the Iustice of the law.
5. Exampls wil maik the case playner. Wilm Anderson, a Seminarie Preast vvas executed, (45. Eliz.) for being in England contrarie to the statut. so was M.

Barckvvorth. anno 1600. that vvas ther treason.
Tho. Pormort. 35. Eliz. was attainded, for being a preast residing in England, and reconciling: and Barvvis vvas executed for being reconciled. that vvas ther treason: both spiritual matters. yovv may as vvell call Mithridate, poyson; black, whyte: vertue vice, as to call religion treason. but the lavv haith so called it. A nevv name alters not the operation of an old vertue: the cavvs of the death, maiks the martyrdome, not the name. And surelie this act of generall diffidenc, encreased more discontent.
But vvhat ded force the state to vse such violent and extraordinarie remedies vvhat ded bread such intricate trovvbles? the extraordinary chaing of religion ded cast them into this laborinth, bred these discontents, procured all these enemies; and forced the counsellors, so to punish preasts. 2. (as Camden noteth) the opinion of the Quenes illegitimation, abroad. 3. the iealouslie had, of the Quene of Scots; (whome they dowbted most for her religion, allianc in France, fauor of the Pope, and her proximitie and near kynred to the crown: 4. the bull of PIVS V.

And 5. the dowbt of the howse of Guise, in the behalf of ther neace. and 6. lastlie the offenc of the k. of Spayn, for ayding Oreng, and intercepting his moonie. these wear the cawses, that induced the State, to prepare, arme, and vse means to preuent all mallice and mischeafe. And knowing, how strong a wall England haith for her protection: and yet vvith in them selfs, what a partie, religion had both in E. and Ireland: and no men wear so like, as preasts, to stirr vp all the humors in the bodie of the realmes: therfor to keap then owt, to expell them, and to curb them yf they came in tey wear driuen to vse this pollicie, to maik yt treason, to be a preast, or to mantain a preast. And as this was mayd law, by that glorious Prince (who neaded such a deuise:) so it may be abrogated, by hym that neadeth it not.
It remaineth, that I shovv yovv, vvhat Recusants. men these Recusants arr, vvho suffer in England, and hovv they haue bean put to the triall of ther vertue.
The Recusants ar such, as by the nevv lawes, ar men marked owt, that refuse for ther conscience, to frequent the ordinarie prayers, sermons, and communion, appointed by the Church of England. this is all ther offenc; and the sole trevv cawse, they

the lavv doth take notice of them, and that fault, bycause it showeth onelie that they ar not conformable to the Quenes iniunctions, and the Canons of that Church: and doth not conuinc them of anie disloyall affection to the Quene, and the state: ther for they ar subiect to a pecuniarie mulct, vvhich the Scots men name verrie properlie and significantlie (Saule moonie.)
They haue allvvaies bean, and yet arr, persons of good qualitie, manie of noble parentage; most of vnder standing: fevv of the meaner sort: and all, men of vertue and pietie, vvho haue learned, vvhat accoumpt is to be mayd of conscience. And of this sort of subiects, diuers haue bean euer since the first alteration. It vvas an information of more mallice, then truth (by that profownd Casuist and Reporter of the lavves:) that from 1o Elizab. No person ded refuse to come to the Church (to publick and vsuall prayers) till the bull of Pius 5. vvas published.
As yf that bull had bean the sole meane, to induce recusants, to disobey the Quenes lavves; and so to maik disloyaltie and disobedience, the Original of recusancie. I knovv, he could not be ignorant, that all puritans, refused to come to Church, or to communicate: and wear best content to

walk in the Church, till sermon begonn; so much they ded dislike the liturgie of England.) Besides he forgot, hovv manie Bushops, and preasts, wear then knowen and professed recusants: and how manie noble men, and gentlmen of accoumpt, ded forbeare to show them selfs members of that Church. I maruel hovv he could conceaue, that onelie Leuites and Prelates, wear left to pray and serue God; for a people, who showed no religion nor constancie, to wards Gods worship in tenn yeares? No Sr England had manie worthie men at that tyme, vvho never bowed ther knee, to Nabugodonosors statua; as Lanhearn, Grafton, Dinglie, Ashbie, and manie other places can witnes. and the author of the execution of Iustice, giueth better testimonie thereof; and vseth it as an argument of the Quenes rare clemencie, and her confidence of ther loyaltie. further more, yf yow look curiouslie and iudiciouslie into it, that bull ded not concern ther going to the Church and seruing God: but touching the Quenes being lawfull Quene, and seruing her, (after the excommunications.)
Now How these noble gentlmen, and others succeading, wear vsed and oppressed: to what reproaches they wear subiect, by the basest skoome of men: it is a lamentable

storie, and would mooue a hart of flint.
It was not affliction enough, to authorise purseuants to search ther howses: and Promoters to informe against them: but they must also haue a Felton, surue yor of ther lands, and estates: What losses ded they sustain, by the leases of the third part of ther lands? what loss of goods, by rapine? what spoyle of woods? what bribes wear they forced to geue, gratiam emendicando? I nead not repeat them: I haue sean some part of the proceading.
For ther committing to W^sbich, Banhurie, Elie, the Fleat, York, or Ludlovv: though they ded suffer ther restraint patientlie: yet I must neads pittie them, bycause ther they lost ther libertie, hazarded health, wear forced to neglect ther state: vvear detained from ther wiues and children: and mayd subiect to the contempt of the world.
And touching ther being Disarmed: yt was more disgrace then loss: it prooued they wear distrusted, which was a course rather to prouoke, then reclayme them. But for ther twentie povvnds a month, payd into the excheckor: that ded lie heauie, and mayd the meaner sort grone (though I know by the lo B. the rigor and extremitie, was a litl qualified.) Compare these with

the Puritans recusants (who will beare no such burdens:) yow shall fynd in the Catholicks, more vertue, and less insolencie: more humilitie and less dainger to the state. Compare them, with the recusants of France: and yow will think our ge^tlmen preasts, and ther ministers Capitains: our Catholicks vnwilling to offend, theyrs vnwilling to obeye: they defend ther faith with ther swords, and resist the magistrate; ours endure, and s^io, cui credidi, is ther comfort; and bycause they haue no Bezaes, no Knoxes, no Synodes, no boutefeus, they can not shovv yow a Mountauban, or a Mountpellier, nor anie other place of assuranc and retrayt, but the Fleat, or the Gatehows.
And yet neither in these plotts and treasons, supposed to haue bean against her person in Quene Elizabeths tyme; nor in that inuinc^bl armado 1588. nor in that inuisible armie (the skarcrowe of London) 1599. nor in the vvarrs of Ireland (whearin the Quene, required ayd of her subiects:) no men, ded shovv them selfs more forward, to doe her maiestie seruice: nor performed more readilie and franklie what was imposed vpon them: nor behaued them selfs, vvith more devvtie, and less dainger. The reason is playne; they that refuse to go to Protestant Churches, in respect of ther

conscienc: vvill far more refuse for conscience sake, to committ treason (a sinn of so highe degree:) and surelie they that regard so litl ther own bodies, for safetie and saluation of ther sowles; will never attempt or consent to anie desperate act, against the kings person, or the state of ther contrie: and by such greauous and crijng sinnes, hazard the destruction of both bodie and sowle.
Now yf yow will compare the greauances The Inquisition. of Recusants, Preasts and Catholicks in England, vvith the Inquisition of Flanders (one of the long cawses of that warr.) yow shall fynd heare, moe burdens, and theirs not heauier. It is a rule taught commonlie, but learned of fevv, quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris. The protestants of E. condemned the name of Inquisition in Flanders, bycause ther brethren groned vnder that burden: and yet a more greauous load being imposed vpon ther contriemen, frends, and kinsmen at home, they taik no remorse, no compassion. ther for I will set before yow a glass, which shall trewlie represent vnto yow, the face, form, and differenc of ther punishments.
Charles the 5. at Worms 1521. decreed against Luther, onelie Exile, and Fyre for his books. Anno 1526. at Machlin, he set

dovvn this penaltie against Hereticks, or those that disputed of controuerses of religion, or that keapt books prohibited: for the first offenc 40. shillings: for the second 4. povvnds: and for the third 8. povvnds, and perpetual banishment (as a proper remedie to remooue them from infecting others.)
Anno 1529. yf at a tyme limited, they ded not repent ther errors, nor disclayme then, he adiudged Viris ignem, mulieribus fossam (as the Canons ancientlie prescribed, and as Calum hym self vsed Seruetus.)
Anno 1531. he confirmed the former acts, adding that these who keapt such books, and defaced and puld downe images (male animo,) should loose ther goods. and yet he vsed some limitation. and for heresie, yf he vvear worth 6. l. and be conuicted of it, the delinquent should pay. 3.
And to avoyd all quaestions, 1555. he interpreted and explayned hym self, for the penaltie of thes lawes, with the aduise of Viglius. to taik avvay all occasions that might hinder traffick: he limited that the penaltie against those that vvear receauors or abettors of such men; should not extende to inkeapers, victuallers, marchants or mariners. and yf the accusors ded slander anie iniuriouslie, they should be punished

for example sake. this though it wear generallie enacted, yet it was both intended, and accordinglie more seuearly executed against Anabaptists and Libertines (the greatest plages of a state.) After ward king Philip 1555. set down instructions, rules, and orders, direct (this court properlie erected for heresie, and to preuent secret conuenticles the moothers of sedition:) and these regia mandata exquisitorum, I refer yow to see in the storie of Vander Hare. Whearin the king addeth no new amerciements, nor deuiseth anie new seueritie: for as he answered Montigny, he purposed not to bring in the Inquisition of Spayne, but to reuiue his fathers lawes: nor to create anie new offences, but such as wear of old censured for offences both in the Churche and state. And yet this proceading ded work ill effects: bred in the Catholicks a commiseration of ther contriemen, and a greater obstinacie in the protestants.
Now look vpon E. match and compare The lavves of England against Catholicks. them together: and yow will fynd the penalties far moe, and more seuear.
To acknowledg the Popes suprematie in spiritualibus, is Treason. To be reconciled, is Treason.
To refuse the oath of supremacie, is for the first offenc premunire, for the second,

Treason. For preasts to come over into E. is Treason. (1585. or yf they stay in E. 40. dayes after the parliement: or yf they wear mayd preasts sinc 1. Elizab. To harbour a preasts is fellonie.
Yf yong students continue beyond the seas, and return not, and abiure ther religion, and show them selfs conformable: it is Treason. To bring in an agnus Dei, beads, or crosses, is premanire. To bring a bull from Roome; or anie sentenc of excommunication, which toucheth the Quene; is Treason.
To absolue or reconcile anie man, is Treason. He that commeth not to Churche vpon each sonday, was to pay 12. d. and be further censured: but afterward he that refused to hear ther prayers, and communicate, (27. Eliz.) is to pay for euerie month 20. povvnds: and he that can not pay it, his bodie shall fyne for it in prison. To depart owt of the realm withowt the Quenes licens, and not to return within 6. months after the proclamation, is an offenc so great; that the offendor shall forfeit his goods, and his lands during his lyfe.
To hear mass* is an offenc fyned at a 100. marks. Yf a man suffer his sonn or his seruants (being not a merchant) to go beyond seas: he shall forfeit 100. l. Ther

ar manie mo: but these ar too manie. now, whether of these, ar whipped with the greatest scourge? vvhether of these lavves ar most seuear, and haue most nead of mitigation? the name onelie of Treason, is terrible, and overgoeth far the rigor of the most rigourous and capitall lavves of the Inquisition: and when I haue named that, I sleightlie pass ouer the loss of goods, emprisonment, reproaches, chaynes and fetters, exile, aggrauation of offences, (which vvould haue appeased the vvrathe of Minos or Rhadamanthus.)
But the rigour of the execution of these lavves, is most to be noted. The tovvre, vvas full of such patients; and nevv prisons erected to entertain them: and hovv they vvear at that tyme vsed; yovv may best knovv by the exampl of dealing vvith maister Tregion at Lanson, of maister Rigby; of maister Christophor watson, vvho perished at york, vvith the infection of the prison, as 18. other prisoners for religion ded, 1581.
Add to this, the strict examination of Iustices; the proceading of the high commissioners (the inquisitors in E.) the Harpies, at visitations; the promoters in temporall courts informing against them: purseuants searching the hovvses of men but

suspected: and how much they wear noted, that affoorded anie charitie or almes to such persons. And surelie it is a thing I maruelat, that so great and wise counsellors would not remember that note of Tacitus as a stayne of gouernment; that ^o^ esse delatores in republica, vvas a certan sumptome of a diseased state.
I can not forget, tho I would Racks and torments, (the examino^s of Fa Campion, and Fa. Sowthwel, and manie others:) but satius est pertransire calamitat^m publi^am.
Therfor I may iustlie affirme, that the Catholicks in England, ded endure greater torture by the lawes of the realm: then the Geuses ded by the Inqu^sition, and had therfor nead of more commiseration, (speciallie vvhen pu^itans, Anabaptists, Arrians, nor Atheists wear so curiously searched for, nor so terriblie afflicted.
But the great cross Crosslet, is this, exceading all punishment, that they generallie gaue owt in proclamations 1591. and in the book of execution of iustice: that no man was punished for religion, no mans conscienc was examined for his faith.
A politick deuise, to blind the world with show of humanitie, and to preserue the opinion of the Quenes mercie vnstayned vvith anie aspersion of creweltie: so

they abuse the credulitie of forrein states, to aggrauate the offences of preasts and prisoners.
But was no man punished for religion in Q Eliz. tyme? 1. ther vvas a general pardon 1581. whearin, a strict caution and prouiso was. that the benefit thereof should not be extended to anie person in prison, or recusant, for matter of religion (and yet all malefactors, had ther part in the pardon.) and was this no punishment, nor partialitie? 2. the Recusants pay 20. li. povvnds a month, in regard of ther religion: is this no punishment? is not this properly called Sawl moonie? The Turk layeth not such a tribut, vpon the conscienc of Christians, nor Christians vpon the Iewes. 3. the old prelates and Cleargie all dyed in prison, or in exile, for ther religion: and yet no man is punished, either in goods, or bodie, or libertie. What contradictions ar these? and how palpable.
The Ladie Morlie La. Brown, and La. Guildeford. 1575. Hollinshead recordeth, as a matter to be noted, that thresuch ho. persons, wear committed to prison onelie for hearing Mass. and was this no punishment? leases wear mayd of two parts of diuers of ther lands: and was that no punishment?

But to conclude, the loyaltie of these Recusants might appeare to the king plainlie, by ther petition to his maiestie 1604. and manie tymes after: and euer by ther obedienc. and in Q. Eliz. tyme, by ther protestation 1588. mayd at Ely whear they wear keapt prisoners: by the offers they mayd to the Lord North (Liuetennant there) by the iustification of them by the letters of the Lords of the counsel, (and by ther submission sent to the Lords not withstanding all excommunications.) and so the Irish Recusants ioyning ther forces vvith the Quenes. 1600. at Kinsal, showed them selfs subiects absolute and not ex conditione.
Now it is tyme to draw to a conclusion, An ansvver to the questions proposed in the beginning. and deliuer vp an accoumpt and somme of all. and decide those quaestions, proposed in the beginning of this discourse, that Princes may know, how farr, and how safelie, they may repose them selfs, ther persons, and states, vpon the loyaltie of Catholick subiects. First therfor, touching the last quaestion, vvhether to be a protestant and a loyal subiect, be not more in compatible, and more improbable; then to be a Catholick and loyal? It is in this discourse, largelie demonstrated, both by ther first generation in Germanie and Geneua: by ther progresse in France, by ther proceading in

Holland, and by ther sedition in Scotland. The scope and end of them all was, to sett vp the doctrine of Luther and Caluin, to ruine the Church, and aduanc the desseins of ambition (oft intermingled with these fayre showes of Reformation.) Novv as yow can never plant anie new sect withowt, faction, conuenticles, associations: so to faction and schisme, sedition is an accident inseparable; for therupon all magistrates and lavves ar resisted, and that vvith violenc (for no vvar is so passionate, as the vvars of conscienc.)
Remember the natiuitie of Lutheranisme, the Huguenots, and Geuses: and how vvell they vvear mantained by the svvord, euen from ther Cradle: so as they grevv to that height of presumption, that either they vvould vnking ther soouerains, and create them selfs Lords, as in Holland: or by tyring and terrifijng ther Princes vvith armes and tumults, force them to pacification, as in France: or absolutelie depose ther Princes, (vvhen they became maisters and commanders of the state) as Scotland can vvel remember, and haith cavvse.
So likevvise on the contrarie part, consider exactlie; vvhether it be so impossible (as some by ther books haue misinformed

the vvorld, for a Preast or a Roman Catholick to be a good subiect, vvhich question concerneth vs most.
Yf yow look back to former ages yow shall fynd that from the Saxons, to king E. 6. To be a Catholick, vvas never taken as a barr to loyaltie; neither vvas ther euer anie opposition fovvnd in the essenc and nature of loyaltie, and the grownds of the Catholick faithe, And good reason; for that religion, which most aymeth at mortification of the bodie, and best armeth hym to combate vvith sinn: and disposeth best the consciences of men, to peace and devv obedienc; and is aprooued by experienc of all ages, least to embroyle and endainger a state vvith practises, and treasons: must neads (of all indifferent men) be esteamed more consonant and agreable, to allegianc and fidelitie, then that vvild and popular doctrine of the consistorians; vvhich (owt of presumption and licensiousnes) vvill be confined into no circle of order; but euer contemning lavve, will dominer and rule as transcendents, and taik vpon them the iurisdiction both of preasts and kings in a kingdome.
2. Secondlie no man can denie, but that Spayne, Italie, France, he Empyre, and Poland, acco^pt hym the best affected subiect,

and least daingerous to the state, who is most deuoted to Catholick religion. And then yf to be a Catholick ded bread and ingender anie ill blood in the bodie, or secret infection of disloyaltie, and so vvear in regard of the state, malum in se, and naturallie; then vpon the generall tryall of nations, in so manie ages, it vvould haue bean discouered and detected, for that imperfection. vvhich it never haith bean charged withall, neither in all these forren contries; nor heartofore at anie tyme in England.
Therfor, seing it is not malum in se and simpliciter, (as T. M. and parson Whyte, haue in ther books scandalouslie slandered that religion, and the Preasts and professors thereof:) seing, it can not be verified (...), neither genarallie of the profession (as Calyinism may iustlie, yf the Lutherans say trewlie;) nor particularlie of the persons professing it: nor originallie and ordinarilie in precedent ages, neither for doctrin or exampl, they can be taxed: I may iustlie infer, they ar acquited.
And surelie it was an error both vnciuil and vndiscreat, to maik ther proposition so general, and therby to maik the whole Churche so odious to the people, and so much suspected to the king: for we acknowledg, that there ar of ther sect, verrie

manie calm, and moral men, boni viri, boni ciues, of sociable nature, and not apt to blow the coles of sedition, of persecution.
And so also the autho of the execution of Iustice, ded geue a good testimonie, of the loue and loyaltie of diuers worthie and noble Catholicks to Q Elizab. (euen when they had greatest cawse to the contrarie, when oppressions and contempt might haue prouoked flesh and blood to mutinies.) and though each man wisheth the propagation, and aduancement of his own religion: yet in the means to procure it, and in the course to seak, and in the manner and order of proceading to fynd it, this treatise heith prooued, that ther is great oddes and differenc betwean them. as the confession and supplication of the preasts; the patienc, and obedienc of recusants; the pietie and doctrine of the Seminaries haue sufficientlie prooued.
3. Now let vs compare, and parallel them (to maik it more playne.) The Catholicks generallie both in France, Germanie, and England, ar the patients, the Protestants ar the agents.
1. The one stand as defendors, the other as inuadors.
2. Preasts songht to keap that de iure they had, Ministers to get that they had not, for

haeresie being a separation from the bodie, could not enioye the liberties, or benefit of the Church, til it vvas mayd no heresie.)
3. The Preasts vvear possessors: the ministers disseisors, and iniurious.
4. The Catholicks obey ex conscientia, and absolute: the protestants conditionaliter and with a quatenus, and onelie for pollicie and gouernement.
5. Preasts ar punished, not for anie iniustice inhaerent, but by imputation onelie, and not for trespasses, but for opinions. not for that which is, defacto, but to preuent fiendum (yf Priscian vvill pardon me.) But Caluinists, ar guiltie both of action, vsurpation, and treasons reallie, as this last year Lescun (president of the assemblies at Rochel,) Haute-Fontain, Chaumier (preacher of Saumur suffred in France. and P. Gombault, (all for real treasons.) And Bischarcy in Polland, for attempting to kill the king, whome he wounted greauouslie (as he went to the Church.)
6. And there practises, and ther spirites differ as much: foras.
7. They obiect, the positions of some priuate and disauowed persons, and words onelie: the Catholicks obiect ther rebellions in dead, ther battels, ther real conspiracies, at Amboys, and in the wayle of

Charmentras near Meaux, to surprize the king.
8 They reforme per populum and tumults: the Catholicks by order, law and superiors.
9. They charg the Catholiks, with treasons newlie enacted, strayned, and vpon suspicion: contrarilie they ar condemned by ancient lawes, currant in all Ghristendom by consent, and by all ciuil and municipal lawes.
10. The Catholicks seak not to hinder succession of kings that ar protestants: as knox holdeth null is Pa^ista in regno utherano aut Calumiano, in regis principis aut aliam quam cunque dignitatem euehi potest.
11. The Catholicks prefer a Monarchie: Caluin, Wolfius and Swinglius, an Aristocracie.
12. Yet the Catholicks, and our English protestants agree in this (as in manie other weightie matters) that princes ar not to be deposed: but the Caluinists hold the contrarie. and therfor maister T. M. by ^. sovvnd propositions; condemneth, both the practise of the Hollanders, Bohemians, Sweuelanders, Parraeus, etc. and that iudiciously. 1. in his 6. reason. they vvho suggest a doctrine, of forcible deposing Princes, ar manifestly rebellious. 2. in cap. 4. they that vpon anie pretenc, denie the

right of election or succession of Princes, ar seditious (for tho he saith is of protestant princes, I taik it he meaneth a^l, and generallie, or els h^s gap it to vvyde and partiall.) 3. when the king is established in his throne, who seduceth the harts of subiects, and withdrawes ther obedienc, ar traytors. applie these well, and commend maister T. M. for his playne dealing with Holland, and ther fellowes.
But I perceaue they will obiect that the state of England, euer since. 13. Eliz. vpon iealousie and distrust had of Catholicks: armed ther magistrates with seuear lavves, against them (as the most capitall enemies of the crown:) and therfor haue branded the Preasts, with the bleamish of treason, (as a character inseparable, and a stayn never to be taken owt.) From whenc proceadeth it, that to be a preast, should be reputed as a poyson to corrupt obedienc? surelie vpon certan new lawes, mayd in the tyme of Q. Elizabeth: whearby that is made malum prohibitum, which before was neuer iudged in England, to be malum in s^: and that vocation vvas mayd Treason; which was wont to sit in the chayre of gouernement, and by whose oracles and decrees, the people was directed, bothe in Chancerie, Rolls, and all Ecclesiasticall courts. I haue before

reuealed ther reasons: and puld of all visards, which hyde the face of truth. After the supremacie was enacted, and the Oath commanded: the next care was; to compell men to the exercise of the religion then established. but the seminaries being erected, the societie of Iesus encreasing, and preasts being often sent ouer into England; then begonn fyre and sword to rage: the acts of 13. of 25. of 27. the proclamations of 1580. and 1591. wear published against the preasts and fathers. and no man is so blynd, but may discern, the occasion of this rigour, was for religion (being for hearing mass, and confessions, which ar the foundation and pillers of religion: and yet I confess the iealousies, fears, and suspicious of the tyme set for ward these seuear courses. for thes prouident Counsellors, ded think it necessarie by the horror of lawes, to maik the seminaries of no vse by barring owt of the realme the Seadsmen. for tho they ded obserue hovv far the zeal of the Church, had transported the preasts, that they preferred the Triumph of Truth before ther liues: yet by all wordlie coniectures they probablie conceaued, that the name of Treason (as a Medusaes head) would haue amazed and terrified them: 1. bycause it stayned them all with a most reproachfull

blott: 2. and speciallie, bycause they tought it depriued and robbed them of the crown and glorie of martyrdome, the trophees of religion. 3. besides they supposed, that the loss of ther liues (in so infamous manner) the bleamish and hazard of ther frends, and the punishment of ther partakers and abettors, would haue vtterlie discooraged them, from resorting anie more to England.
But this deuise ded not prosper, it prooued quite contrarie; ex cineribus Phoenix, religion encreased by persecution owt of the ashes of martyrs: so these politick lawes wrought not the effect, they wear enacted for, and yet wear verrie offensiue to all forrein princes, as leges Draconis, and phalarismus, (for these ar euer held to be most godlie lawes, that ar least sanguinarie, and yet mantain.
Now forasmuch, as vpon worldlie respects, A petition and reasons for mitigation. manie acts haue of passedin parliement, to trie what operation and cure they would works in the state: and yf they prooued fruitles medecins, or as empirical purgations (too violent, fitter to kill then to cure,) then to be repealed. and bycause these prouisions and lawes against religious persons, ar prooued to be such: so they likewise ex gratia speciali, and ovvt of his

maiesties gracious compassion, may be wel abrogated. for as they wear mayd for the fears, and suspicions of that tyme: so by the grace and mercie of this tyme (when they ar both neadles and causeles) they may with honor be cancelled (yf his maiestie shall please,) and the execution therof suspended: to vvhose royall consideration, I most humblie offer. these few lines, as petitions rather then reasons, not for iustice but mercie.
1. It was euer held against the wisedome and pollicie of this realme, to fetter them selfs with too manie shacles of treason and dainger. and therfor as 25. Edw. 3. at the petitions of the subiects, the king ded declare and determin, what should be taken and iudged for a case of treason, by the common lawes of the realme. so 1. Henry the 4. c. 10. it was confirmed and established, that nothing hearafter should be deamed treason, otherwise then was expressed by E. 3. And albeyt diuers actions wear strayned, vp to be treason for a tyme (vvhich vvear not within the list of 25. E. 3.) as H. 6. the taking and surprising of persons and goods in Wales, (so to stand for the space of 7. yeares onelie.) and 8. H. 6. burning of howses: and 22. H. 8. poysoning, etc. which of ther own nature, and simplie wear

not treason, (and therfor had a limitation of tyme annexed to them. yet prudently all such former acts vvear repealed and mayd voyd 1. E. 6. for a more indifferent and merciefull proceading vvith subiects; that the remedie might not be more daingerous then the disease; and that the Lillies and roses of the crown, might not be dyed with innocent blood. For both in the tyme of Ciuil vvarrs, and now (while this great controuersie of religion dependeth in England vndecided) such statutes open the gate, to let in ruine, desolation, and confiscation bothe into the prisons of preasts, and into the castles of the nobilitie and gentrie: as appeared by the exampls, and daingers of Arondel, Northumberland, Arden, Sommerfeld, and diuers others: ane what ded happen to them, maye endainger all.
2. It vvill be a thing incredible to posteritie, that so vvise a nation vvould maik that to be treason, by parliement: vvhich so generallie, so perpetuallie, ane so ancientlie haith bean honoured end approoued, by all lavves. vvas not preasthood vsed and exercised by the patriachs, vnder the lavv of nature? established by Moyses, and the lavv of God? continued yet in Christ, and his Churches, and never repealed by anie

nevv decree, vnder grace and the gospel? and yf vvhich is impossible,) the Church erreth in that poynt of preasthood, all ages, all fathers: all counsels, all nations, haue liued (as blindmen) in darknes and a chaos, till Luther dispersed the mist: is it not likelie?
Religion and preasthood, wear like Hippocrates twins, born and bred, laughing and weaping beginning and ending together. for in Moyses law, the preast, wear the inquisitors, inspectores omnium, iudices controuersiarum, punitores damnatorum: as Iosephus l. 2. contra Appion, sets Down. yf anie difficultie arise, venies ad Socerdotes, 17. Deuter. and in c. 44. Ezech. Sacerdotes populum meum docebunt, quid intersit inter Sanctum and prophanum, and so Philo. l. 3. de vita Moysis, Iosaphat 2. paral. and the Sanhedrim it self doth witnes it. the reason of these remaineth yet in the tyme of the gospel, and ther for by the lawes of England, such reuerenc vvas euer showed to religious men: that yf a bond man ded enter into a cloyster, the law held it more reasonable, that the king should loose his interest in the bodie, then to be taken ovvt of his order. the like vvas iudged: yf the kings wards should enter into religion: besides an alien can hold no lands in E. yet yf he be a preast

he may be a bushop hear, and enioy his temporalties, as Lanfranc, and Anselm wear (vvho wear never dennisons.) Besides the state reposed so great trust in them, that they wear, maisters of the Rolls, Six Clarks, nay oft, Chancellors and Threasorers of the realm. And therfor it was a course of Summum ius, by new lawes, to punish men for an ancient vocation, and so generallie receaued (speciallie vvhen the storme is overblowen.)
3. Besides, in Germanie, Charles V. punished Luther by Exile: and in Scotland by Baratre, banishment they punish haeresie. so they ded vviselie distinguish Haeresie and Treason, as seuerall offences, by seuerall punishments.
4. Add also, that yf yow preiudice it so farr, to be a preast or religious man, as to think it opposite to religion: then both ther fault and ther punishment had bean more properlie marshalled in the rank of Heresies, then of treasons. So ded Caluin deal with Seruetus at Geneua: so ded the Bushop of London latelie with Leggat the Arrian. for Haeresie, is most properlie to be iudged by the Church, as appeareth in the preface of the statut, 24. H. 8. C. 11. that by the lawes and customes of this realme, and by the goodnes of the Princes, the knowledg

of Testaments, matrimonie etc. of ould appartained to the spiritual iurisdiction. and all Canons for heresie wear mayd and iudged by the Cleargie, as by 25. H. 8. C. 19. and by Linvvoods constitutions appeared; and by the act 32. H. 8. whearby preasts wear mayd iudges to enquire of the 6. articles. and the tvvo iurisdiction be distinct as D. Ridlie prooueth; and no prohibition can lie in the courts at vvestminster for matters of heresie. Therfor these great and politick men, to avoyd infinite disputs for religion; and to insinuate to the Q. there rare, prouidenc, and preseruation of her, and the preuenting of manie daingers, (to vphold ther credit dailie with her, and show hovv much she neaded them) they ded think it best, to accuse them for treason.
And yet ther was an other cawse also, for ther vvas no Canon in esse, to maik them haeretikes.
For yf yovv vvil maik papists, to be a sect: it is so old a sect, as it vvill trovvble the best Doctor, to fynd directly anie other beginning, them from S. Peter: (of vvhose sect and fowld all the fathers desired to be.)
5. Lastlie and principallie, seing that as Sayles so Lavves, ar to be turned; and as occasion tyme, circumstanc, and reason of state shall direct, either to be altered, or

reuoked. and seing also, as the case, so the caws of Quene Elizabeth, and his maiestie ar farr different (for the king haith no Competitor; no reason for such iealousies and fears as Q. Eliz. was subiect to: he holdeth amitie and good correspondenc, with these forren princes the Q. dowbted; the roses grow not vp now emong thornes, as heartofore.) and Therfor his Maiestie may be pleased, to grant that owt of grace to his subiects, which other Princes haue permitted to ther subiects, for occasions of state. and to stopp and stay a litl the passionate humors of those that ar aduersaries to that grace: I humhlie offer these few considerations, to qualifie and cool the heat of vndiscreat zeal, and a supposition of incompatibilitie.
For I dowbte noting on his maiesties behalf, who haith bean euer constantly disposed to mercie, (if ther had bean no crooked instruments to hinder it.) he who at first, tould vs, My m^nd vvas euer free from persecution, or thralling my subiects, in matters of conscienc. he, who in writing told the world, Fate or me non libenter suspendere Presbyterum, pro sola religione, aut celebratione Missae. he, who iudged that it can no way becom a man, to pronounc lightlie, sentenc in so ould controuersie: what preast or religious

man could appeal to a better iudg? or expect a iudgment of more compassion. he that sent to Franc to mediate for the peace of straingers: who can dowbte, but he will as gracioustie deal with his ovvn: for charitie beginus with it self, and tho they differ in religion, they agree in obedienc: ther bodies ar at the kings command, and sowles he vvil lean to God: put them to be tryed on all actions, and seruices, he vvill fynd cawse to trust them. who would not them burie a quaestion or 2. in silenc, to saue the liues of subiects, and to be assured of loyaltie? for the greatest offenc is verbal, but the hart is reallie loyal.
If the rules of ciuil societie, and moral conversation, may beare anie swaye: then I dowbt not, but mercie, and grace will ever sit in the highest place of the throne, and becom it best.
1. For is maiestie owt of his wisedome Reason for the toleration of Cathol. in E. haith long obserued, that too seuear persecution, maketh men desperate, non coercet, sed prouocat violentia. and too heanie a hand vpon those, that the law casteth down: showet a will rather to oppresse the offendor, then cure the offence. It is the greatest honor to a king that his mercie is more then his iustice; and that his benches and courts can witnes compassion. for he that

setts open the prison doors, (in so wise, and gracious manner:) meaneth not to conquer the harts and consciences of his subiects by torments, but winn them, by mercie and vertue.
2. If yow respect the ancient Aphorisms of state: It haith bean ever in such cases the wisedom of the greatest princes, punire raro. It was ascribed, as a title of honor, to Aug. Caesar, nunquam ciuilem sanguinem fudisse. And great reason, for clemencie is a vertue royal, sometymes of as great pollicie as pietie: bycause yt begets loue, and loue breads loyaltie: commands the verrie sowl, and layetha the bodie at his feat. A kings mercie kindleth fyre and zeal in the harts of subiects; pittie and toleration, as they maik the obligation of the offendors greater; so it maiks them repent to haue offended hym, who haith so obliged them. the reason is infallible in all noble spirits, fidelem si putaueris, facies: vvho eueraccoumpt, that the greatest disgrace, is to be distrusted.
3. It haith bean a common rule, and seldome fayles, being so trew, malus custos diuturnitatis metus. and therfor Tacitus, could not describe the tyrannie of Tiberius, but he must declare the morks, and properties thereof, vbi delatorum authoritas magna, lesoe

maiestatis crimen frequens obijcitur, ac boni cuiusque viri inuadendi, vel tollendi pretextus est, and he addeth frequens accusatio, and in quouis crimine adiuncta, de laesa maiestate principis. Nothing showeth more euidentlie, that authoritie inclineth to tirannte; then the multitud of promoters, continual informations, and the name of treason mayd as a liuerie to put vpon all offences: and it fitteth well both the case of preasts, and of ther entertainors. Seneca (who liued vnder a Tyrant) fownd by experience, that frequens vindicta paucorum odium reprimit, omnium irritat. and is not that an error? but it is a greater error to punish, all crimes, with the penaltie of treason. Vltima supplicia supplicijs vltimis ponat; vt nemo pereat, nisi quem perire etiam pereuntis intersit. The speach of Abnar, to Ioab. 2. regum. c. 2. may not be forgotten, Num vsque ad inter necionem huius mucro deseuiet? an ignoras quod periculosa est desperatio? vsque quo non dicis populo, vt omittat, persequi fratres suos? it is both good counsell, and good exampl. Germanicus is noted to haue vveapt, vvhen he see the slanghter of the soldiers of the legions, that mutined; non medicinam illud, sed cladem appellans. And doe yow think that pittie dyed with Germanicus, or that there wear not manie, and great persons, mooued with

the butcherie in England of some preasts? it is the propertie of commiseration, to be touched rather vvith the calamitie it seeth, then to examin the cavvse, it seeth not.
4. I must plead this, as an argument, (by exampl of a pagan Prince) for compassion. Marcus Aurelius, (tho the law was strict at Room, Deos perigrinos ne colunto:) yet he permitted toleration to Christians, as Tertullian in Apol. c. 5. Theodosius and Gratian, (the most Christian Emperors) wear content, to tolerate the Arrians, (enemies reallie of Christ.) and Iosephus noteth of Onias Megalita, the same permission, to continew brother hood for the peace of the state l. 14. c. 13. Antiq. The Venetians suffer the Iewes to liue emong them, as the king of Spayn ded the Moores, (till necessitie forced hym to expell them.) Hovv much more reasonable is it to tollerate Catholick religion, the moother of the nevv religion: and the law maker and iudg heartofore of all religions.
5. It is a fals proposition, and proceaded from gall and Splean, that Catholicks ar vnsociable: that they can not liue vvith protestants in one common welth; withowt iarrs and tumults: and lasthe (vvhich is giuen owt, onelie to bread an exulceration

in the harts of the people) it is not tolerable in a Christian and wel gouerned common welth, to grant toleration to papists.
Touching the first poynt, the better and more charitable sort of protestants, vvill not endure to hear so gross a paradox, which day lie is before ther eyes prooued false. for the Recusants in E. liue emong yow, both peaceablie and neighborlie, and withowt scandall. yow buy and sell with them: they performe all the offices of neighborhood, they denie no temporall dewties, neither tithes to ministers (tho for sacraments.) nor devvtie to magistrates, nor societie euen with puritans. and it is a fals Surmise, that Catholicks hold Protestants, as haeretiques and excommunicate (a skarcrowe, to keap them a sonder, and noorish diuision, as yf ther vvear a natural antipathia betwean them) But these Doctors, (who playe therin the Boutefeus,) remember not, that the Catholicks, deseru more respect, and fauor, by the law of Senioritie (as the right heyrs of the Church, disinherited of ther patrimonie.) The old Church ded leaue them ther priuiledges, and honor: she erected ther Cathedral Churches for our preasts, she endowed ther colledges for our professors, she builded ther alters for our sacrifices. Most of ther ancients haue

ther baptism from her the Bibles, Cread, and ceremonies: and surelie it requireth some better respect, for yf they had not left them, yovv could not haue fovvnd them, and they hope, they shall not fynd charitie buried in England: the contention is not general, and personal, but for opinions: so yf yow force them not to be insociabl by scandals and prouocations, yow can not fynd them vnsociable; tho they meat not at Church, they may meat at market. Hitherto they haue liued emong yow, and withowt iust complaint, and should they be vvorse respected, yf the king be pleased to show them mercie? remember, that chacun a son tour; forget not, that sinc k. H. 8. religion haith had his chainges; and what God pleaseth to determin, man must obey: they that ar now in Gloria Patri, may be hearafter Sicut erat in principio. The Pure Caluinists will not endure Bushops, therfor further not oppression, least yow fynd suppression when yow look not for it. Continew amitie; and forget not, that the bonds of religious vnitie ar so to be strenthned, as the bonds of humain societie be not dissolued.
I dowbt to mutiners, yf the king please: for reaso^ of state is a kings priuiledg, which may dispenc with ciuil ordinarie courses,

for his own safetie, and preseruation of the realm. and he deserues not to be respected as a subiect, that vvill seak to bynd the hands of his Princ, and bar his beneuolenc.
6. And touching the last poynt, that religion will not permittanie such toleration. I know and acknowledg, ther ar manie reuerend, learned, and good men (protesta^ts in E.) who ar verrie charitable, nor enemies to ther persons, tho to ther profession: with whome frendlie and safelie they may conuerse, withowt offenc: for how can ther be offenc, where ther is discreation? But heartofore most, of the ancient protestants ded defend, and desyre this toleration (whearat now mallice doth so snarle. Vrbanus Regius, locis Theol. Deus non docet comburere errantes ouiculas, sed sanare infirmas, pascere macilentas. The same is Luthers opinion and assertion art. 33. de non comburendis haereticis. The same Musculus teaceth loc. com. de haeres. and Osiander, Epitom. Centur. 7. the same Acontius mantaineth lib. Stratagem. Satanae. Dominus, non permittit haereticorum supplicia, (and definite declarauit magistratus non esse idoneos iudices dogmatum, and interdixit illis talis iurisdiction is vsum.) And to omitt Castalio, Chytraeus in his Chron. Anno 1593. showeth how much the Protestants of Swecia desyred toleration. And

D. Fulk l. de successione Ecclesiae. reprooues the king of Spayn for too much austeritie and seueritie in that poynt. Hispaniarum Rex vnicus est, tam alienus a nobis, vt nec foueat, nec palam coire Ecclesias permittat in ditionibus suis. Caluin ded once hold the same opinion. and yow your selfs, generallie and continuallie obiect, the Creweltie of Quene Maries bonefyres: and yf yow so dislike it then, why doe yow like it novv? but it is now against the law: and vvas it not so then, prohibited by law? but yet we clayme nothing by law, but appeal to grace. It is trew, that rigour to Catholicks, is the way to bread Atheists, when they ar barred from all exercise of ther own religion they ar not easilie drawen to an other, and so they cast away all religion. and that vvas the reason, why (these wise protestants,) M. Lanoue, in his discourses, perswaded princes to grant toleration: vvhy Cassander, Sturmius, held that opinion: why Belloy, in his Apol. and Melancthon consented to the like: why at first, the Geuses in the lovv contries ded so vrgentlie sollicit the Religions Vried, and by so manie books: and vvhy Erasmus, libro de sarcienda amabili concordia Eccl^siae, donec Synodus, laboured to prooue the necessitie of it.
7. I will geue yow examples; for matters

of fact, mooue more, and ar subiect to less dispute. At Hieusalem, in the tyme of our Sauior Christ, ther wear two sects much differing in religion, and yet ded liue sociablie together, and withowt offenc either to the Church or the state. The Pharisei, and Sadducei. and they vvear not men, of one religion, and differing onelie in rites, and orders: but they vvear of opposite religions. No man will dowbt, but that the Sadduces vvear haereticks, for they denied the resurrection, and the immortalitie of the sowle (an articl of our beleafe, and the foundation, both of faith and hope.) that ther vvas opposition betvvean them and the Pharisees, it is euident, by cap. 5. Acts, exsurgens Pontifex and omnes sadducei qui cum eo errant, etc. and c. 23. Sciens Paulus, quod vna pars esset sadduceorum, altera phariseorum, exclamauit, etc. yovv may then conclude, they vvear opposites, and ded contradict one an other. The Sadduces mantained the templ of Garisim, and agreed vvith the Samaritans, and sacrifised there (contrarie to the lavv, and to the preiudice of the templ at Hierusalem.) The people fellovved the Pharises, the scribes and Elders applauded the Sadducees: and both vvear heresies (as Sigonius de repub. Hebrea p, 538. and

Epiphanius l. 5. c. 11. doe testifie:) and all the cittie vvas deuided into these two sects, in the tyme of Herodes Antipas, (as Iosephus saith, lib. 18. antiquit.) and yet ded they liue, quietlie vvithowt discord, riots, or tumults.
8. To come home to these tymes: in Swizzerland, (tho Swinglius was violent, owtragious, seditious, and by armes sought to compell, the fiue pages to the religion of Barn and Zurich;) yet by agreement, all is pacified; they hould ther priuate Churches in ther particular tovvnes, and yet mantain the liberties, the Common-welth of the Cantons, all contributions, confaederations, traffick and societie.
To pass ouer Svvecia: that famous kingdom of Poland, and the Empyre of Mosko, haue thought it neadfull, to suffer the Religions Vried, in ther dominions: both to taik away all domestical quarrels, and by a general vnitie (as a brasen vvall) to fortifie them selfs against the Turk. and shall England degenerate so farr from ther ancient glorie and vertue, as to show more barbarism then Mosko or more vnnaturalnes then Poland? (vvho reserue the blood of ther neighborts to be shed vvith honor in the feald against the common

enemie, rather then by tyrannie to weaken the bodie.)
Germanie also may be an exampl that toleration is expedient, and that it is both possible and faisibl, that two different religious may liue together in peace. call to mynd, hovv quietlie the Catolicks haue suffred and conuersed with Lutherans, these 100. yeares, and withowt anie tumults. And surelie Charles the V. and Ferdinand, as they wear great and wise Princes, so wear they prouident and merciefull: ther grownd was the same, the kings Maiestie stands vpon, Salus populi suprema lex esto. And therfor they ordered that caueret vtraque pars ne in suis dominijs, quenquam ad suae religionis professionem cogat, aut reuocet, aut depellat, contra ipsius consc^entiam, a religione quam profitetur. So saith Dresserus; and afterward, confidentlie (against those, that ar so preciselie scrupulous) nec hic metuo eorum reprehensionem, qui putant, non nisi vnam religionem tolerandam. For conscienc can not be compelled, it may be perswaded.
9. How oft and hovv merciefullie ded the french kings, grant ther edicts of pacification. And to vvhat conditions, vvear they content to discend, onelie to preserue lyfe, and avoyd bloodshed of ther people.

Look vpon the ould articles of peace, gra^ted for the libertie of co^scienc, set down by Laual. l. 3. fol. 141. and by Pig. l. 6. c. 7. Poplonnier l. 18. a general freedom, to preach in all parts of Franc: to reuoke the condemnation of the admiral: to licens them, to hold ther forts, as pledges for ther assuranc: and that the king should pay the Germans, ther wages, who cam to ayd the protestants, etc. The present king Levves, in Oct. last. 1622. vvas content to let Maiestie discend, to article with his subiects; onelie for pax publica, and bonum publicum. He granted, 1. that the edict of Nantes should continevv, as yt ded in his fathers tyme 2. that the exercise of Catholick religion, should be reestablished in all places, vvhear it had bean interrupted: and the like was agreed for these of the reformed religion, (except onelie Nerac.) 3. the Caluinists to be discharged of all iudgments against them for matters of religion, no iudges nor the kings counsel to proceade or pursew them, but to grant them an vlterius non vult prosequi. 4. all prisoners to be set at libertie. Rochel and Montauban to stand as townes of suretie: with manie other articles; vvheareof the Catholicks of England, vvould be glad, yf they ded but participat a share

of such grace. to ther is some differene: for in E. they pray for it, in France they vvrested it: princes intercede for vs, arms for them.
10. Now to conclude all, seing the Turk permitteth Christians to liue freelie in his dominions; seing the President and exampl of the greatest Princes, in Europe, doth set yt forvvard: the Preasts and recusants hope they shall not fare worse, bycause of ther patienc and obedienc, (vvhich deserueth more.) Ther ambition is to be accoumpted good subiects to the king, and seruants to God: all ther platts and vvarrs ar against sinn, and the vvorld: and ther onely suite is hanc animam concede mihi, ^ua caetera sunto. And to vvhome shall his maiestie doe this grace? to men that grone vnder the cross of Christ: to men that euer prayed, as by his great grandfather he vvas right heyre to the roses vnited, so he might liue to inherite the kingdomes vnited. to which title no man better knoweth then hym self, vvho haue bean the greatest hinderers, and vvho the most assured frends (not onelie in his vertuous moothers tyme) but euer sinc. He knovveth vvho employed Beal in forrein vniuersities, to aduanc the howse of Sussolk: how Hales ded sweat by lavv and litl art to set

forward that title: what a volum S. N. B. ded write to maik a royal nest for the Phaenix: he knoweth likewise, who vvear the trevv Champions of his clayme, Sr A. Brown, the wise and nobl author of the book against the E. of Leicester: and that Aiax (whome no man euer durst encounter therin) maister Ploydon. all Catholicks, all welwillers.
Who now hope, that ther ancient, and tryed fidelitie shall so mooue the king, that he will refresh and eas them (as he may with his breath;) that they may fynd the vvarmenes and comfort of the sonn shyne at last, in England: and that he will grant ther humbl supplication, subscribed with the seruices of so manie worthie man, presented by men of Pietie, religion and obedienc: and signed with the blood of his royal moother.
So as he cam to the crown with peace and applause: he shall end the catastrophe of his dayes, with the general plaudite of the whole world. and this vvil follovv (as the fruit end effect:) peace vvithin, and honor vvithovvt: loue at home, respect abroad: and so maik a concord of discords, an vnion of diuisions, and a religious contention an both sydes; for deuotion and good lyfe, for peacable conuersation,

obedience to magistrates, excellencie of learning: vvho shall doe most good in the state, and deserue the prize.
And such an Vtropia, onelie can he make England; who shall deserue the Oliue brainches for mercie and peace, and the laurel for wisedome, gouernment, and constancie (the crowne of all.)

FINIS.



THE III. PART. THE TOVCHESTONE, APOTHEOSIS LVTHERI.
HEAR I purposed, to haue An excuse or Apologie of Luther, and Caluin. ended. but I discouer an ambush layd to surprise me, and to beat all my forces owt of the feald. for I perceaue it will be obiected, that the heate and vehemencie of Luther, Swinglius, and Caluin (which I haue named Sedition) was to be honored, and not worthie of reproofe: bycause the zeal of gods glorie and the truthe, ded kindl ^hat fyre, and those heauenlie sparks in them And touching Luther, they obiect, that he was the Elias foretould to come in the latter age, illuminated by the spirit, and raised vp by extraordinarie vocation, for the reformation of error and corruptions, renouation of vertue and good lyfe, and the detection

of Antichrist, (who had captiuated, and seduced the vvhole world, in manie ages:) and therfor such a prophet, was not to be teddered within the compasse and rules of ordinarie professors. Yf therupon, he neglected the sway of authoritie, the titles of lawes, the glorie and maiestie of Princes, the peace of common welths: yow can not obiect and lay it more to his charg, then Achab ded to Elias, Tune is es, qui conturbas Israel? The whole world was possessed with a Litargie and Frenesie, (two extream diseases,) which could not be cured with Manna, and gentl remedies: a violent disease requireth strong purgations, and he is the trew Hippotrates, that can applie the proper cures to the world so infected. gods power is not abated, he can raise vp at his pleasure extraordinarie men, to deliuer his people, from Aegipt and Babel, sinn and ignorance. And yf that be granted, vndowbtedlie then was Luther the Angel of the west Churche, and the messinger of God, to set vp the golden Candlsticks, and geue light to his people.
Stay ther and pawse a litl. how can yow maik me know, and beleaue, that Luther was gods purseuant, and not the harrold of Antichrist? They vvill hear produce, the Colloquie of Altenburgh, wherin pag. 80.

and 587. they tearm Luther Angelus Dei, Elias, and tuba nonissima, he that reuealed Antichrist, multo illustrius quam vnquam antea. they will cite Aretius, that Luther was sent immediately vocatione Dei, cum totum mundum impijs opinionibus fascinatum esse constat. they produce Caluin, who calls hym a singular Apostl of Christ, from vvhose Church they had there gospel, Cum densis tenebris suffocata esset Dei veritas. they vse Ievvels authoritie in his Apollogie, that he vvas a man sent from God to lighten the vvorld, veritas tum inaudita, cum Lutherus and Svvinglius primo accessissent. I pass ouer Fox (in Apocal.) vvho prooues hym the Elias: and Iohn Amsterdam lo. de prophet. Lutheri. But what neads more? for it is euident that at the sownd of that tromper, Svvinglius a Chanon of Constanc, Bucer a Dominican, P. Martyr a Chanon regular, Pellican a Minorite, Oecolampadius a monk of S. Brigits order, and infinit other like to the locusts, (9. Apocal.) who broke owt of all orders, ded sting the verrie sovvles of men, and fought the battel vnder that A, bad-don, ther Capitain; and to them vvas powre giuen, to hurt those men, vvho had not the sign of God in ther fore heads. So I dowbt not but Luther vvas the first that broke vnitie, as a M. Wutton calls hym trewlie,

a scholler withovvt a maister, and a sonn vvithovvt a father, (and so he must be either a bastard Church man, or a miracle.)
But these wear all protestants, the Mirmidons of that Achilles of Saxonie: and he hym self, haith taught me, not to beleaue anie matter of faith, except Sic dicit Dominus, be my warrant. and therfor bycause it is a daingerous poynt, and subiect to manie deceptions and tro^peries: prooue vnto me, that Luther was the Elias foretovvld, and that he had his vocation extraordinarilie and immediatlie from God: otherwise yow labour in vayne. for I remember, hovv Mahomet abused the vvorld, with the name of the angel Gabriel: how Theudas blinded the Ievves: and hovv Barcosba drevv them to ther distruction, and preuayled so powrfullie and generallie with them; that Akyba one of the cheaf scribes and eldors, reuerenced hym, as the trew Messias, and applied, all the prophecies (proper to Christ) to the honor of that Impostor. And Galatinus (l. 4. c. 21.) notes yt as ther error, that these wise men ded not demand signes and miracles to approoue his diuinitie. neither ded they, (till it was to late, that Titus cam to beseach Hierusalem) and then the peopl seing they had bean seduced, and that he could not work anie miracles, to geue

them hope and comfort for ther deliuerie they put hym to deathe.
So ded Nuncer possess the Bowers of Germanie, as a man to whome God had co^mitted the Sword of Gedeon: so (abowt Luthers beginning, the age for new worlds, and nevv chainges) Thekel, persuaded Ismael of Persia, that God in the top of the Anti-Taurus, had appeared and reuealed to hym the reason he vsed to reforme ther religion. And Bycause, it is no daintie practise of Satan, and that Dauid Georg, Hacket, H. Nichols. and others, haue bean of late so seduced: I am induced to stand vpon my gard, in a case that concerns my sowl so nearlie: till I can sift owt the truthe, vvhether Luther wear called in dead, as an Elias, and an apostl, or he ded intrude hym self? and yf he wear sent, onelie and not called, vvhether it vvas to reform the Church, or to powr owt the vial of wrathe, and scourg the vvorld? And vvhy I maik this dowbt, I learned my lesson of Beza, p. 86. l. vindicia cont. Tyran, Bycause (saith he) God doth not novv speak hym self, nor send his prophets extraordinarilie, vve ought to keap watch of our sowles, for yf anie man think he is inspyred by the holie ghost, and taiks vpon hym that authoritie, (as called of God:) I desire hym to sownd

hym self well, and see yf he be not inspired with pryde, and maik hym self an idol to hym self, and conceaue such an opinion of his own head. Let the vvorld taik head, least thinking they warr vnder the banner of Christ, they fight vnder the Deuels Flagg. etc. wel then how shall we know, when God doth raise vp, and send such men? Beza answereth, pag. 80. By hauing a spirit voyd of 1. all Ambition, 2. 2 trevv and perfect zeal, 3. right knovvledg and conscienc, 4. and not vvorshypyng Idols, or our selfs rather then God. Then these ar the marks by which (as Beza appointeth) I must examin Luther. and not withowt reason for they agree vvith that 2. Ep. S. Pet. c. 3. v. 3. in the last dayes shal come mockers, walking after ther lusts. and Bushops must be chast 1. Tim. 3. v. 3. modest. not puffed vp in pride. v. 6. a Christian, must be no raylor, fornicator, etc. 1. Cor 5. v. 11. patient in persecution, and deputed to death c. 4. v. 9. 11. 12. not contentious and authors of diuision 1. Cor. 1. v. 11. 13. (for Christ is not deuided:) louing the charitie of brotherhood. Rom. 12. v. 10. patienc, etc. (whear all the vertues of a trevv religious man ar set dovvne.) vpon so good grovvnds I vvill first examin Luthers vocation, his lyfe and pietie, his doctrine,

and his charitie (the badg of Christianitie) and vvhat fruit, the vvorld haith reaped for the sanctification of sovvles by hym. and as yovv and I fynd cavvse, so let vs follow and fauor hym.
First therfor touching his Vocation. Beza 1. His vocation. at Poissy affirmed that he and his fellowes wear called by extraordinarie vocation: then must neads Luther haue the like honor, (vvhome they all ack novvledged, ther lantern and ther guide.) but ask hym self his title? and he will tell yovv, Ego Domini nostri Iesu Christi indignus euangelista.
In his book to king Henry, Certus sum dogmata mea, habere me de caelo. I am an euangelist (vnwortilie in dead) and I haue my doctrine from heauen. I vvas the first, that brought light to the world. Com. in 1. Cor. 1. Euangelium tam copiose nunc predicatum, vt tam clarum non fuit temporibus Apostolorum. Ser. de destruc. Hierusal. the gospel vvas not preached so clearlie and plentifullie in the Apostles tyme, as it is now.
In l. de falso statu. Ego Lutherus sum, alter Elias, and currus Israel. Now to show yow the greatnes of this prophet, in l. contra Regem Angliae. Christum spiritum mihi suppeditabat insignem. Christ bestowed vpon me a great spirit. In vvhat kynd, and hovv excellent? Tanta est dignit as mea; quod ad doctrinam

and ministerium mihi diuinitus datum attinet, and quatenus vita ac mores cum illo congruunt, vt nemo vnquam (precipue tiranns) nec patientiam nec submissionem etc expectaturus est. Debent me sanctum Deiorganum agnoscere. Trewlie that tanta est dignitas, would maik a man think it had bean the prologue of Miles gloriosus. I vvill novv therfor examin, what opinion the world haith, of so famous an Organ.
1. Caluin in vlt. admonit. saith thus. Volunt de Luthere intelligi hoc vaticmium, de ^lia venturo: qua falsitate non minus faedarunt ^utheri nomen, quam Egipty Hieremiae corpus and sepulchrum adorando. and in an other place, Atque vt Eliae nomen I uthero concedatur, Sacrilegae tamen temeritatis est, asserere vltimum Eliam, ac si precisaesset Deo manus, ne quem vel praestantiorem, vel parem postea emittat. yovv see Caluin dislikes that title, as yf he would leaue his successors no credit, nor place, to erect the pillars of ther glorie; but vvould vsurp all hym self.
2. Conradus Regius, deales more plainlie, in admonitione C. 6. scimus isto^ magnos Theologos, magnis clamoribus regerere I utherum e^^ Prophetam, quia and ipse immediate, and extra ordinem a Deo excitatus ad officium propheticum sc. repurgationem Ecclesiae, etc. Ideoque sine exceptione tanquam Prophetam audienu^, qui errare

non potuerit, etc. Manifestum est illos, pessime de tota Christi Ecclesia mereri: qui Lutherum in catalogum Prophetaru^ referunt, tertium Eliam faciunt, examini and censurae Ecclesiarum eximunt, libros ipsius regulam iudicandi ^^uunt, etc. So hear ar two, great Doctors of the pretended reformation, who geue ther opinions of his vocation; and how farr ar they from gening hym the honor of Elias, and exempting hym from the censure, and examination of other Churches? and from esteaming his writings, as the rule of faith, (as at Altenburgh they ded?)
Now touching his vacation; his ordinarie calling could not authorise hym with so extraordinarie a powre, as to reforme the church, and preach new doctrine never hard of before. (and whether there Apostasie, haeresie, excummunication, haue not depriued them of all vocation; learned D. Champnie, in his book of that argument can best satisfie yow.) And concerning his extraordinarie calling, to be an Apostle, an Euangelist, Elias, how can he maiks it appear to the world and satisfie ther co^scienc that dowbthe of it, whether God haith geuen hym such commission, and created hym so in dead. For his own vvords, want weight: and this must sowndlie be prooued, and the rather bycause Beza affirmed the like extraordinarie

vocation at Poissy; and his opinion vvas impugned ther by Cl. de Saincts and others, and in England by D. Sarauia etc. They that ar so called, must prooue it by externall signes and miracles, as Moyses and Elias ded: and yf he be an apostl, I may vrg hym with that of Tertullian de prescript, c. 30. probent se esse Apostolos. He who called them to so high an office, could also geue them powre to approoue ther vocation, and induce the vvorld to accept, honor, and reuerenc them, by ther extraordinarie vvorks, and the testimonies of ther supernaturall vertues. But Luther had no such calling, for that vvas euer inseparablie accompanied with miracles (as was manifested by Moyses and Elias.) besides it vvas not in vse since the apostles tyme. yf I can prooue that, I shall hitt the byrd in the eye: and to prooue that, I pray yow let Luther Iudg hym self. for he affirmeth the same proposition tom. 5. VVitteb. in c. 1. ad Galat. p. 376. and in loc. com. class. 4. ca. 20. and so doth Musculus locis com. p. 304. so doth Sarauia against Beza: so doth Piscator vol. Theo. Thes. 1. loc. 23.
But to come home nearer to the purpose, yf Luther be Elias, it must onelie be spiritu and virtute: then let vs parallel these two, and see hov well they ar matched for pietie,

and vertue. Elias (3. Reg. c. 17.) at mount Oreb. would sequester hym self, in his caue from the noyce of the vvorld, from the sight of vanitie, that he might eleuate his sowle from mudd and earth, and maik yt more capable of deuine inspirations, and pray with more feruor of spirite, and break that wild coult (the lusts of the flesh) with fasting and prayer. and so ded S. lo. Baptist. Esdras, so ded. compare them, and ther actions with Luthers, and see yf they be suitable.
I must now therfor of force, paynt hym owt in his coolors, and dravv his picture vvith his ovvn pensile: his ovvn mouth shall iudg hym. For Elias his retyrednes, Luther and he wear not matches: for Luthers mott was, solitatienes is an enemie of pleasure. he vvas as daintie as Caluin, he thought it an error to contristate the spirit; he reprooued and reiected S. Hierome for such inhumanitie. lib. de seruo arbitrio. Hierom inepte scribit. quid magis sacrilegum, quam id quod scribit, virginit as c^lum, coniugium terra replet. Virginitie fills heauen, marriage peopleth the earth. and therfor, in colloq. conuiual* Nullum scio, cui aque infes^us sum ac ei, tantum scribit de ieiunio, virginitate, etc. Ther is no man I condemne more then Hierom, he doth so magnifie fasting, virginitie,

etc. he ought not to be accoumpted emong the Doctors of the Church, for he was an heretick.
Yow see this holie Euangelist, would not imitate Esdras to fast and pray so long: nor choose to liue in the wildernes, and depriue hym self of all wordlie pleasure. Therfor, tom. 6. germ. Witteb. pag. 252. lib. ad dominos ordm. Tenton he doth inueigh against vowes of Chastitie, quomodo fieri potest, vt tale voium non sit peius quam vllum adulterium? a good lesson to teach katharin Bowr. But he maiks it better yet. ponamus, quod aliquis voueat condere nouas stellas, an non iure vocares amentiam? his reason he setteth down tom. 6. vviteb. germ. p. 171. haec res non est arbitraria seu cons^lij: sed neces^aria, vt omnis vir mulierem hab. at, and omnis mulier virum. Estque hoc plusquam preceptum, magisque necessarium, quam comedere, bibere, dormire, vigilare. It is a matter of necessitie, that euerie man should ^^ap a vvoeman, and euerie woeman entertain a man: it is more then a commandement, and more neadfull then to eat or drink. nay hear hym still, be not wearie of so religious counsells. In mea potestate non est vt vir non sim: tam parum in mea potestate est, vt sine muliere sim. As it lyeth not in my power, to maik my self no man: so litl also is it in my power to liue withowt

a wench. tom. 7. lat. Wit. p. 505. Caste viuere tam non est in manu nostra, quam omnia reliqua miracula Dei, qui celebs manere vult, ille nomen hominis a se deponat. It is a miracl to liue chaiste: and against the nature and humanitie of man, imposs^bilia tentat, he would work wonders. I could with ease repeate manie such lectures of that heauenlie apostl; of whome his brethren of Zurich gaue this worthie testimonie, in the confess. Tigurin, Germ. anno 1545. Nullum vnquam mortalium, I uthero vel faedius, vel inciuilius praeter omnes modestiae Christianae terminos, in negotijs illibatae religionis nostrae, scripsisse luce clarius constat. And yet ther own Sainct, V. Svvinglius in Parainesi ad com. Helu. ciuit. fol. 115. showeth the same lasciuiousnes: and confesseth hym self, aestu libidinis, and carnis cupiditate sic fuisse incensum, vt carnis libidinosae studia animo suo versauit, in ijs solis, omnes cogitationes insumpsit. Was it not high tyme, to grant that ministers should haue vviues, when these two great patriachs vvear so entangled: and ded execut ther lusts with pleasure, as naturall motions, rather then striue to mortifie and supress them. for neither of them, liked, or practised the fashion of Elias.
And his counsel to others vvas as vvanton, and sportfull. read his book de vita

coniugali fol. 147. Si cui mulieriimaritus frigidus: posse eam a marito (tam nullius pretij homine) cum ipsius fratre, aut agnato proximo, concubendi licentiam posiulare, ad eamque permittendam, cornigerum and semimarem maritum lege teneri. And the like sermon he preacheth fol. 152. part. 2. and in c. 16. Genes. fol. 95. aboue all his lectors, ther is one for which the ladies in England vvill persequut hym. Non prohibi^um est, qum vir plures vxores habeat: neque ego id hodie pro^ibere possem, suadere tamen nollem. It is not prohibited by the law, but that a man may haue manie wiues. Quae^unque Patriarchas veteris testaments, exterius fecisse l^gimus, integra ac libera esse, nec prohiberi debeant. Is this a spiritual or a carnal lesson: be these reformers of lyfe, or patrons of vanitie?
Now obserue what excellent remedies, what vertuous counsells, he geues against sinn tom. 1. lat. Epist. ad Philip. fol. 345. Si veragratia est, verum non ficium peccatum ferto, Deus non fac^^ sal^os fic^os peccatores: esto peccator, and peccafort^^er (sinn with a coorage,) sed fortius fide and gaude in Christo. Ab hoc enim non auelut nos peccatum, etiam si millies millies vno die fornicemur aut occidamus: sinn can not diuorce vs from Christ, though we committ adulterie or murder a thousand tymes in a daye. For as ther is no sinn

but incredulitie: so is ther no iustice but faith. and therfor in 1. Pet. 1. fol 442. Ait quia f^de renati sumus filij atque h^redes Dei, pares sumus in honore ac dignitate D. Petro, Paulo, S. Deiparae Virgini, etc. By faith vve ar mayd aequall in honor and dignitie, to S. Peter and Paul and the Virgin Marie, habemus enim eundem thesaurum a Deo, bonaque omnia tam largiter quam ipsi, vve haue all graces and gifts as largelie as they. And for the fathers, his insolencie is incredibl, so vndiscreatlie to condemn them all. No vvise and vertuous man, vvould vse such vvords, papistam and asinum, vnum and idem esse: and in an other place, I vvill taik asses that can speak, iudg yow that ar Sophisters of Paris. But to tax, skorn, and reiect all fathers, is a note of intollerabl presumption. I vvill omitt all other places (vvhich would fill a volume) in conuiual. serm. cap. de patribus. Of Hierom he saith, de fide and vera religione, ne verbum in ipsius scriptis extat. Originem iamdudum diris deuoui. Chrisostomum nullo loco habeo, nam est loquaculus. Basilius nihil valet, totus est monachus, ne pilo quidem eum redimerem. Apologia Philippi omnes Ecclesiae Doctores exisperat. Tertullianus inter Ecclesi^ Doctores merus est Carlstadius. Ciprianus martyr infirmus est theologus. Augustinus nihil singulare habet de fide. Ambrosius ^e^^ne in Genesim scripsit. Bernardus

vincit omnes concionando, sed cum disputat, nimium tribuit libero ar^ ^^rio, etc. It was no maruel, yf he professed and bragged, nemo prorsus a me patientiam expec^e^ vel humilitatem: for in that yow (...), he is maister of his vvord. I pass ouer his gifts and rare excellencie in Rayling, (whearin he is ^ans pear.) and in lying: (hauing collected owt of hym and Caluin 50. places of moment, and material, whearin they slander the Catholick religion.) as de capt. babylon. c. de p^nitent. Babilonia adeo sdem exim^^t, vt im pudente fronte desiniret haer^sim esse, si quis fidem necessariam esse assereret. which was as perfect a lie as Caluin mayd l. 4. c. 7. that in the Popes diuinitie primum ca^ut est, nullum esse Deum: doctrinam de resurrectione, fabulas esse: quae de Christo scribuntur* esse imposturas. Now examin the worth and valew, of this Prophet, by the fruits and benefit, which the world haith receaued by his doctrine, and examp. Ex fructibus corum cognoscetis eos: Erasmus, in spongia aduersus Hu^t. saith he, Lutheranos video mulcos, Euangelicos nullos aut paucos. Circumspice mihi populumisium euangelicum, and obserua num minus ill^^ indulgeatur lux^i, libidini, and pecuniae, qu^m facium illi, quos detestamins, profer mihi, quem is^ud Euangelium, ex comessatore sobrium, ex impudi^o reddiderunt verecundum? Ego tibi ostcndam, qui facti sunt seipsis

deteriores. Quis vnquam vidit in eorum concionibus, quemquam fundentem lachrimas, aut ingemiscentem? And Luther in self confesseth as much in postil. Super 1. Dominic. Aduentus pag. 623. Mundus fit quotidie deterior, sunt nunc homines magis vindictae cupidi, magis auari magis immodesti and mdicisplinati, multoque deteriores, quam suerunt in papatu. Aurifaber pronounceth from Luthers mouth, that post reuelatum Euangelium, virtus est occisa, deuotio pulsa, etc. And Caluin complayneth, that omnes fere ad corruptelas degenerant. and Smidelin saith, vt totus mund^s agnoscat eos non esse papistas, nec bonis o^eribus ^u^^quam sidere, illorum operum nullum exercent penitus. I will conclude with Bucers testimonie, l. 1. c. 4. de regno Christi. Maxima corum pars visa est, id tatum ex Euangelto Christipet^^sse, vt iugum qualiscunque disciplinae, penitentiae and religionis quae in papatu reliqua fuit abijcere^t, proque carnis suae arbitrio ac libidme instuuere^t omnia. Nec pauci eorum qualem cunque euangel ^predicatione^ eo tantum receperu^t, vt in opes muadere^t Ecclesiasti^as. Yf yow desyre to know the most probable cawse, of this confusion, sinn, and impietie? Luther hym self, hauing set open the port of libertie, and broken down the hedges of order and discipline: could not so easilie shut it again, nor geue lawes to them, that come in.

When a multitud haith learned the way of pleasur, yow can hardlie restrain them: yow bet them from confession to preasts, from pennance, from fasting; and aduanced the reputation of sola fid^s, as a medecin for all diseases.) by so manie nevv quaestions of faith, they haue buried charitie: and by ther disputes of religion they haue frozen vp all deuotion, and reuerenc of pietie.
So, hauing showed yow, how well and 2. His reformation and de^ection of Antichrist. effectuallic Elias haith restored and reformed all things, let vs examin hovv vvel he haith detected Antichrist, and hovv like a Prophet? or whether he haith not mistaken hym self, like a head trowbled vvith vertigo, and giddienes.
First consider well, how wear to knovv Antichrist, and what characters and marks, the holie ghost haith set dovvn, that the Church might not err in so vveightie a matter. 1. his title is the man of sinn, and sonn of perdition: 2. an aduersarie to Christ, 3. extolled aboue all that is called God, or vvorshipped as God: so that he sitteth in templo Dei, as yf he wear God. 5. his comming is in all povver, lijng signes and vvonders. 6. he must be reuealed before the reuolt. 2. Thessal. c. 2. 7. and S. Iohn, 1. Ep. c. 2. v. 22. addeth this. he is a lyer that denieth

Iesus is not Christ: this is Antichrist, vvhich denieth the father and the sonn. 8. and as Daniel described hym, so Apocal. c. 13. @. 1. he must haue vpon his dead the names of blasphemie. and @. 7. a powr to maik batl vvith the Saincts; he must haue horns like the lamb, but the mouth of the dragon. and c. 19. the beast (and vvith hym the fals prophet) vvho seduced them that took the character of the beast: these two, vvear cast aliue into the pit of fyre and brinstone.
Novv examin, vvho doth bear these badges, and to vvhome ar they most proper. The infallibl and certan mark is; to be opposite fullie to Christ, ex diametro, (...), most contrarie (more then a diuersitie or difference.) king of a kingdom, opposite to Christs: a prophet and lavv maker opposite to Christs: an enemie both to his preasthood, to his testament, to his royaltie, to his name Iesus, and to the sonn of the liuing of God. And one that striueth vvith Christ both vter esset, and vter imperaret, and so persequutes his saincts, and servants. It is not vice, not superstition, not a false vvorship of God: nor errors of opinion, that must reare vp the vvalls of this Babilon; it must be, kingdom against kingdom, and crown against crown. and

contain and express the full povver, pride, and mallice of satan. Whether then can this be trewlie and properlie applied to the Pope? No in dead, and I will show my reason.
1. Luther contra Anabaptistas. Ego dico sub Papatu esse verum Cristianismum, imo nucleum Christianismi, and multos pios. Fatemur apud Papistas Ecclesiam, quia habet baptismum, absolutionem, textum Euangelij, etc. in 1. Galat. ibi verum concionandi munus, verus Catechismus, vt sunt oratio dominica, dece^ paaecepta, fidei artic. And whitacre saith, haec ad nos ab illis deuenerunt. Iunius confesseth, in fundamento essentiali conuenimus, controuers. l. 3. c. 19. Inuito satana, tenuit Ecclesia illa precipua fidei fu^dame^ta saith Zanchius. Sarauia, de gradibus minist. p. 30. saith Ecclesia Romana, Ecclesia est, ipsa est mater nostram qua and per quam Deus nos regenerauit. And manet ibi ordinatio, vocatio, ministerium verbi. And ther is reason for to acknowledg it, bycaus otherwise the ministers haue no calling, nor can prooue it. and yf she be the moother Church, and filia deuorabit matrem? no ther is in that Church yet remaining, verus baptismus, verum Sacramentum, verae claues ad remissionem peccatorum. The Bushop of Elie, cals it membrum, sed non sanum: and Caluin acknowledgeth as much, but cals it Ecclesiam semirutam,

deformen and yet Ecclesias Christi, Resp. ad Sadoletum. And l. 4. c. 2. @. 11. Instit. foedus Dei apud eos inuiolabile permansit. And vvhitacre saith, est apud illos quoddam ministerium, and aliqua verbi praedicatio, quae valet nonnullis ad salutem sine dubio. Lay these together: and put them into the ballance.
The Church of Room, by the confession of ther cheaf aduersaries: holdeth entirelie baptisme, the Lords prayer, the ten commandements, absolution, foedus Dei (the ark of couenant) both the testaments, the thre Creads, the fovvr first general counsels, the fowndations of faith, ordination, vocation, and the preaching of the word. Nay I will add one, no small piller: they teach and mantain the trew doctrine of the blessed Trinitie, which no protestant Church doth hould inuiolatelie (but onelie the Church of England.) then vnder whose banner doe they fight? vnder whome is the Pope Vicarius? at vvhose alter, and to whome, doe they offer sacrifice? yf to God, to Christ his sonn and ther redeamor; then surelie, vve must look for an other Antichrist, he is not heart to be fownd. wresting of words, and straining of some texts of the Apocalips vvill not serue your turn. Luther at first denied the Apocalips to be Canonicall scripture, as appeared by

his preface vpon that book, (which is now suppressed.) And to fownd a new doctrin onelie vpon arguments dravven from prophecies, and the Apocahps (so obscure and hard to be vnderstood) whether it be of sufficient force, I leaue it to the learned to resolu. Onelie this I must say, S. Iohn receaued the Apocalips, from the Angel of God: and vvhen Brightman (the Puritan) can prooue, that immediatlie from God or infallibly the trew sence thereof was reuealed to hym: then will I subscribe to his bable Apocalypsis Apocalypseos.
2. But to come nearer to the matter, and omit trifles. Melancthon (the Pronotharie of the confession of Auspurg) in his common places, Basil. 1562. confirmeth me in my opinion p. 164. saith he, in monarchijs caeteris, gubernatio precipue spectabat, ad ciuil^s and h^nestae societatis defensionem, ettamsi erat ignota religio: 1. sed in regno Antichristi, leges perpetuae and precipuae regno, sunt de nouo cultu contumelioso in Christum, etc. 2. (saith he) finis principalis eius regni, est delere nomen Christi: and hoc N^^. ipso pretextu, conditum est regnum, quasi glortae Dei intersit, ex^irparinomen, and doctrmam Christi. Tale est regnum Mahometis. So hear is law against lavv: a fals God, against a trew god: the Alchoran aduanced aboue the Gospel hear they at ex diametro opppsita:

and all for the glorie of the God Maozim. but go on a litl further, and Melancthon. vvill make it plainer. 3. Lex ip a Mahometis est manifesta contumelia erga Christum. 4. Deinde est mandatum de latrocmio: quia iubet interfici cos, qui credunt Christum esse filium Dei: precipit ergo propagari suos errores gladio. And all these things he saith wear foretould by Daniel c. 7. of the litl horn. and so he concludeth, in eo regno neclex est a Deo, sed diaboliciu furor: and his end is not ciuil gouernment, but the propagation of his Alchoran. And therfor, this being so plainlie and distinctlie set down, Slusselberg saith, that Melancthon in manie things fel into error after Luthers death, and seamed to dowbt whether the Pope was Antichrist.
But I will show yovv as learned a piller to leane vpon; and a protestant of same, (for it is vain to alledg fathers, as I learned by D. Sanders.) Zanchius, in his answer to the Arrians 2. tom. 7. p. 875. alledgeth in defenc of the Pope, constat, ex doctrina de Deo, Christo, forma baptismi retenta, Ecclesiam illam non penitus a Christo Apostafiam fecisse. Agnoscit adhuc Christum, pro filio Dei, rege suo, and saluatore: eius legibus se subiectam profitetur: adhuc publica sui regis insignia (licet conspurcata) baptismum nimirum and caenam retinet, and veneratur. But the Pope haith added images,

etc. and withowt Gods warrant, haith deuised a new worship, ex quodam erga eum honoris studio. To that obiection he answers, he is to be reprehended for it, but he is no Apostata: for all that melius competit in Turcam, qui est ex diametro, in duello contra Christum, and an Antagonist. and his reason is strong for (saith he) Mahomet, veram and plenam apostasiam, cum suo populo fecit: abrogans qu^cunque Christus instituit, praedicationem Euangelis, baptismum, caenam, inuocationem in suo nomine: and contra, reuocans quae abrogata erant a Christo, doctrinam legis, circumcisionem: negat eum filium Dei, and verum Deum esse, and risit Trinitatem. And therfor, he making hym selfs aboue all Cods, sets Christ an inferior Prophet vnder hym. But Mahomet sits not in templo Dei. That ded a littel shake Zanchius, yet he answers, that all the fathers confessed, by the name of the temple, the temple of Ierusalem to be vnderstood, and not impertinentlie (for ther Mahomet haith long bean worhipped.) And at this day, ther is a Moschee called, Temple de la Roche, builded by Homar, Mahomets nephew, in the verrie place of Salomons templ: ther Maozim is worhipped; and all pilgrims, that go or come from Mecha. taik that in ther waye, as a holie place. And admitt, it wear to be vnderstood, sedet in

templum Dei, id est Eccles^am Dei: it may also stand with Good co^gruitie. For Mahomet penes se solum dicit esse Ecclesiam, and se illius esse caput, a quo regatur. He is the Princ of the Damned Empyre, and by his power, all the Candlsticks of the Churches of Iurie, Alexandria, Antioch, Asia, Grece, Corinthus ar remooued, and the lights quite extinguished by hym: and therin is set vp the abomination of desolation in loco sancto, and yet he sits also in Ecclesia Dei, and whear Christ is worhipped. For in the Church of the Saepulchre, at Hierusalem the Christian Marronites Georgians, Aethiopians, Graecians, Latins, haue ther alters and offer ther sacrifices, to God (the which the Turks forther profit, as the Soldans and Saracens before the^, haue fuffred and permitted.) So as in that cittie bothe God haith his church and the Deuel haith his chappel (and soouerainlie commanded for manie hundred years which is all they sta^d vpon. And contrarily for manie ages, no ma^ haith showed a more fatherlie care, to resist his tyrannie: no man haith more sollicited the princes of Europe with vnited forces to expel and repress that Nimrod, then the pope. As appeared by the warres in the Holie land, by the support of Malta, by the ayd of Hongarie, by Tunis and Algieres, and by that

memorable battel of Lepanto. And for the encrease and prapagation of Christs glorie, he haith also erected seminaries for Grecians, Asians, and Iewes: that the world may discouer who is the Antichrist.
3. My third and last reason is. that they who ar so desirous, to create the Pope Antichrist: can not agree emong them selfs when he fell so fowl, as to deserue the name of Antichrist. They can not name the person who was stella cadens de caelo: nor the age and tyme: nor the errors he ded fall into, wherby he was so iudged: nor produce anie accusers, testes fide digni, to iustifie the same. ask Caluin when the defection was, he answers multis abhinc seculis. S. Francus saith presentlie after the Apostles. Napper, saith Antichrist ded beginn his raing abowt 313. in the tyme of Pope Siluester. Melancthon, that in Sosimus tyme, the defection appeared 420. Beza assigneth Leo the Pope 440. Fulk nameth Boniface (and so doe willet, and downam anno 607.) Bullinger nameth Hildebrand (Gregor. 7.) anno 763. Whitaket, that Gregorie the Great, was the last pious, and trew Bushop. Parkins, abowt 900. yeares sinc. Hospinian ab annis 1200. Lanaeus, abowt 574.
So then, the vncertantie maiks ther iudgment erroneous: for all can not say

trew: and who saith trewest they can not define. We ar not bownd saith D Whitacre, to answer in what age superstition crept into the Church, by whome, nor at what tyme: and yet, in his answer to D. Sanders, p. 799. he swears, by hym that liueth, that the Pope is Antichrist.
4. But I wonder that they mean to maik the Pope Antichrist: and the trew Church to be in Papatu, and yet Papatus not to be in Ecclesia. Aridl; my dull wit can not apprehend. but seing I am sure of this, that owt of that Church all haeretikes ded go: that exire, teacheth me that the sanctuarie: owt of which they fled, was the Ark of Noah, the Church of God.
5. One thing, yet mooueth me much c. 19. the beast: and with hym the fals Prophet shall be cast into the pit of Hel. hear at two, distinct persons (and so named by the scriptur, and the one subordinate to aduanc the other) and distinct calling, yf the Pope be the beast, then who is the false propher? and contra yf he be the false prophet, who is the beast, (whose character the fals prophet shall seduce the world to taik, and to adore his image^) ther can not be two Antichrists, at once: and whether the Pope, or Mahomet should be he, the Marks and notes will best testifie and yf

yow compare 39. Ezech. vvith the 19. of Apocalips, it will geue yow good direction; (so yow fall not vpon Sergeant Finch his rock.) but vndowbtedlie, his description there, will show yow an Antiochus, an Antichtist (...), and such a one, as vvill maik a conquest with his sword, of fowles and consciences; and onely Vorstius against Bellarmin, acknowledged yt was neither a matter improbabl, nor impossible.
But how can yow prooue, or assure me, and with what vvarrant of scripture, that no such Antichrist shal come. De futuris contingentibus, I think D. Whitacre, doth aduentur farr, to engage his sowl, by such an oath. But the Euangelist hauing set down his name, (the name of a particular man 666.) he that can maik Apocalypsis Apocalypseos: vvhy doth he not, or can he not detect that Pope, and reueal to whome that name was dew?
3. As by the first argument, yovv may The vocation of Luther by the deuel. discouer his vanitie; and hovv greatlie he differed from Elias: and by the second, his calumniation prooueth hym an Impostor: so this, vvill vnmask, and vncase hym, he shall appear in his proper Coolors. His vocation they call extraordinarie: and so it is in dead. For it vvas by conferenc vvith the Deuel, (as he confesseth hym self l. de Missa

priuat. contigit me sub mediam noctem subito expergefieri: ibi satan mecum cepit huiusmodi disceptationem. So the deuel and he disputed. D. Fulk, and Chark, interpret it, to haue bean a spiritual combate in mynd, and such a contemplation as good men ar subiect to, (as Christ had, S. Paul, and others:) and no bodilie conflict and conferenc: 1. vvhether these reasons cam from the deuel, by bodilie conferenc or inward suggestion, all is one, so it cam from the deuel. 2. but hearby Luther maiks it playne, vvhen he describes, the deuels voyce to haue bean, a great base voyce, and so fearfull that yt mayd hym sweat, as he confessed (by haec illo dicente) 3. besides he calls hym (Doctor Perdocte:) which yf it wear a dreame onelie (as Doctor Sutclif imagined) it shovved that he vvas subiect to Philautia, and arrogancie, to conceaue such a title and saluation* but is rather argues a personal conferenc, bycause he confesseth ther, that Oecolompadius and Empser wear slain by the like encounters (and surelie neither of them dyed, by spiritual temptations nor by dreames.) yf yow read Luthers own words owt of the old and first edition of Iene: they will confirm yow much, for so Hospinian in historia Sacrament. recited them.

But Luther hym self, calls it disceptationem, and neither a drean nor a temptation. And yf it wear a spiritual temptation; that excuseth not Luther, for he yealded to the Deuel, so ded never holie Iob, not anie sanctified vassel.
Balduinus a Lutheran, writes of purpose a book of that disputation 1605 and he confesseth it vvas a real truthe, and not a dream (as D. S. dreamed:) and that it vvas not spoken hyperbolice but historice. But he excuseth it, witst a shift and euasion. Luther (saith he) had before abandoned the masse? and this diologue the deuel, mayd, to call to Luthers remembranc his old errors, and that he had sayd Masse fiftene years, and so to driue hym to desperation for so great an offenc. and that therfor he ded speak alwaies in preterito not presenti. These ar but Skarcrowes and conceipts: 1. for in the text and words of Luther, ther is no mention of dispayre, nor passage of anie words to induce hym to despayr 2. the deuel reproueth Luther and the papists for thinking Christ vnmercieful, and therfar seaking Saints for ther mediators. this is far wyde from Baldwins mark. It rather prooueth that the conferenc vvas before Luthers fall; for othervvise it had bean a dart cast at rouers, and an idl temptation,

yf Luthers had bean bean all readie so perswaded (as after his fall he was.) Besides, yf it wear after that Luther abrogated the Masse, (as Bald. saith) then his sola sides, was a sufficient buckler, to ward anie blow the deuel could geue hym, ther was no imagining of driuing hym to dispayr, vvho had professed that neither sinns, nor defects, nor I dolatrie past, could be cavvses of his damnation, but onelie incredulitie. and as fals is it, that the deuel spoke alwaies de preterito, and not presenti, for he saith, vanior est haec vinctio tua, quam baptisatio saxi, and so persvvades hym to contemne his vnction, which is spoken de presenti, and nothing touching desperation. read the words, and weigh them, and all the deuels arguments against the Mass: and yow will then fynd your own error.
I vvil maik it more playne that it vvas not a spiritual, but a personal combate. Io. Manlius a Lutheran loc. com. I uthero saepius spectra apparuerunt: and that vsuallie after such apparitions in the night, his head aked: and at one tyme, he vvas almost, in a trauns after yt. And Luther, against the Swenfeldians, (who bragged of ther reuelations:) he vvitnesseth of hym self, vidi spiritus and forte plus quam ipsi videbunt, intra annum; so it appeareth, these

personall conferences betvvean satan and Luther wear neither so rare, nor so incredibl. Ioh. Regius l. Apologet. obiecteth vnde constat tibi malum fuisse spi^itum? qui Luthero hoc dixerit: and posito, licet malus genius fuisset, non sequitur statim eum menti^um fuisse. Hear it a Champion, that fights with an other weapon, and bycause he dowbts, whether he vvas malus genius: let hym hear his half-brother, Hospinian, in historia Sacrament. Lutherus (saith he) narrat se a diabolo edoctum esse, quod Missa priuata res sit mala, and rationibus diaboli conuic^um, aboleuisse eam. And Luther confessed, that he vvas haunted and affrighted by satan personallie. Epist. ad patrem tom. 2. VVitteb fol. 269. and Melancthon saith as much, in his preface to that 2. tom. and surelie Regius ded never read, that God vsed to reform the vvorld by the oracles and seruice of deuels, to reform sinn by the instruments of vice, or to teach the truthe by impostors. the Deuel was suffred to trie the vertue and patienc of Iob, and the Saints: But vvas never sent to catechise them. Neither ded euer such spirits appear to Daniel, Esdras, and the old prophets. And vvhy may vve not think that Luther vvas taught by such a schoolmaister; for he obiecteth that Carolostad had his exposition of Hoc est corpus meum, from the deuel.

and in loc. com. classe 5. puto non vno diabolo obsessum fuisse illum miserabilem hominem Carolostadium. He had bean in the ouen, hym self, and so knew what it meant: and therfor Alberus sayd the deuel posseded corporallie that Carlestad: and Chemnitius witnesseth l. de Caena, p. 214. that Carolostad was wont to boast, that head his exposition by reuelation.
Hear rests yet one wound to cure B. Murton in his Apol. l. 2. part. 1. dothe not answer it, but euadeth by retorting a report of Delrius (l. 4. de magia c. 1.) that the deuel appeared to an abbot, and perswaded hym to say mass. So hear is quid pro quo. bycaus we obiect, that Luther was taught by the deuel to oppugn the Mass: he showeth, likewise whear the deuel perswaded one to say Mass.
But the case is not a like; he erred, it vvas not an Abbot, but a monk. 2. the sayd Simeon vvas not yet preast, and so it vvas against the Canons for hym to say Mass, and a sinn: and therfor the deuel tempted hym to it (and this he leaueth ovvt, as not for his turn to be remembred.) 3. Neither is ther hear anie disputation, to approoue or disprooue the Masse. 4. Neither ded the partie assent to the deuel. 5. Neither ded the Masse, beginn then first. And

so he both mistaketh, and fayleth of his purpose.
But to shovv the error of Fulk, and D. Sutclef: Luthers ovvn vvords fullie clear all. Contigit me sub mediam noctem, subito, expergefieri: so ther is the tyme (at Midnigth:) and thar it was not a dream, (expergefieri) prooues it: and the manner (subito.) And he mayd that book, 1521. afther his reuolt from the Church. Besides he yealded not at first, nor was not of the deuels opinion and gaue his reasons for it, sum vnctus Sacerdos, etc. and the deuel stronglie opposed hym with the verrie arguments vsed by the confession of Auspurg. And to show that it was neither a dreame, nor a spiritual conflict, saith he (when he was overcomed,) at hic ridebunt sancti patres, etc. an ignoras diabolum esse mendacem. And then he shovveth, that his lies ar not simplicis artificij, sed instructiora ad fallendum. Si vobis sustinendi essent ictus diaboli, yow could not sing the song of the Church. And his manner he reueals, sic adoritur vt apprehendat aliquam and solidam veritatem. So it is certan it vvas a personal conflict. And yf it had bean a dream what is the differenc, whether the deuel seduced hym, sleaping or avvaked? the ministers of Zurich, insinuate so much. tract. 3. confess. Lutheri. Say they

how maruellouslie, hear doth Luther bewray hym self with his deuels, quam impuris vtitur verbis, quot daemonibus crepat? and in an other place, of the same book, Edidit L. librum, in quo condemnat Svvinglium and Oecolampadium, liber plenus est demonijs, impudicis dicterijs, etc. So by the opinion of the Swinglians, (the Tigurines;) it was not thought as a dreame, or a concept, that Luther had conferenc vvith deuels. And Schusselburg in Theol. Caluanist. proaemio, recompenceth the Tigurines with the like charitie: diabolum ipsissimum, Svvinglio per sumnium, suam haeresim Sacramentariam inspirasse: and Luthers obiects the like tom. 7. Witteberg. fol. 386. against the Phase, reuealed to Svvinglius. So on both sydes, hear ar deuels in the playe; and ther familiaritie with hym, induceth me, to distrust, yf not to condemn them both.
And surelie, yf ther wear no other argument, 4. The diuisions sects, tumults, r^is^d by Luther. to prooue that the Deuel had schooled, and taught Luther his diuinitie; the sects, tumults, discord, begotten by hym, and that issewed owt of his brain, doe approoue it. Documenta damus, qua simus origine nati. As yf his sectaries, had bean like Cadmus his issew, homines ^lipe^ti, growen owt of the earth, whear the vype^s (...) wear sowen. and Luther the the Cadmus, and

cawse of all, for in temporall matters, origo damni, est causa peccati. And this discord and diuision, was emong his disciples euen from the beginning, from the cradl.
D. Whitacre, in his preface to W. Raynolds, excuseth yt thus. pag. 8. greater differenc shall he not fynd, emong the trew professors of the gospel, and Churches reformed, then may be emong the children of God. Abowt the passeouer in the east and west Churches, ther was bitter dissensio^, yet they ceased not to be Churches of Christ. Perfect concord is not to be hoped for, etc. S. Peter and Paul, Augustin and Hierom disagreed. And aftervvard. yet by Gods grace, all Churches reformed agree sowndlie in matters of faith, substancial, and necessarie to saluation. So 1. he denieth that ther is anie such discord 2. that all Churches reformed agree sovvndlie in matters of faith. 3. by exampls he extenuates ther diuisions.
And Gualter professeth in prefat. Ep. ad Rom. that there is good agreement for all articles emong them, sola Sacramentaria velitatione excepta. I wonder of this confidence, and bold asseueration, in a matter so cleare. It is trew, the varianc betwean the two Apostles, and betwean these two Doctors of the Church, was great: but as it ded

neither break ther vnion, nor hinder ther communion, nor mayd anie sects: so also, it was managed with such Christian modestie, and temper, as ded not stain ther profession. and when that is prooued, D. Wh. haith his answer. and to prooue yt, look vpon the disorder and discord, betwean the Lutherans and Sacramentaries, hovv vvhote fyres haue bean kindled emong them, and hovv long? vvhat care was taken, at Swabach, at Marpurg, at Smalcald, and at Montpelgart, to haue reconciled the^: and they parted euer with so litl charitie, that the world had no cawse to hope for anie vnitie. And for ther harmonie how sowndlie they agree in matters of faith; as D. Whitacre affirmeth, yow shall best fynd by Schlusselberg his works, whearby it is mayd manifest that they varie, in these poynts, de omnipotentia Christi, of predestination, of the force of Baptism, of the Eucharist and reall presenc, whether Christ dyed for all men, of original sinn, in ther discipline, in ther liturgies, touching images, etc. and ar all these trifles? The Palatinate Churches, in ther act. (as I haue showed before) would not permit the Lutherans, and for bad ther books: totus Lutheranismus e medio tollatur, generallie and preciselie; and yet doe they agree sowndlie? Philip Nicholai, rector

of Tubing, a famous Lutheran, accuseth the Caluinists of Arrianism: Henricus Petri prooueth at large Nestorianismum Caluini. A great learned man in E. affirmed, that those Lutherans ded obiect it in spirit of opposition: and whether they iudged right or no, is an other quaestion. an other ansvvered, they wear but ther priuate opinions, and not to be regarded. So then yovv confess ther spirit of opposition, there contrarieties and warrs, which is that I desyre and labour to prooue, (whether rightlie or wrongfullie, is not pertinent to my quaestio^.) yet neither is it onely ther priuate opinion, but the publick doctrin of all ther congregations. Albert Gravver rector of Magdeburg, mantaineth as much as I affirm, libro Called. Bellum Iohannis Caluini and Christi. Aegid. Hunnius, describeth hovv Caluin doth Iudaize; and that learnedlie, and with applause. And Luthers own warrant, maik it no priuate quarrel. Se his confess. se his Theses contra art. Louan. thes. 27. haereticos serio censemus, and alienos ab Ecclesia Dei Svvinglium, and sacramentariosomnes, And in an other place, Beatus vi^, qui non abijt in consilio Sacramentariorum, etc. lib. de c^na Domini Fatcor me Svvinglium non amplius in Christianorum numerum referre posse, etc. And on the contrarie syde, the Tigurint

tract. 3. contra Luth. confess. ar as vehement. let Luther look (say they) he doe not declare hym self an archehaeretick, seing he will not haue societie vvith the professors of Christ. Caluin, notes hym, for a man distemperet: and minus excusabilis inconsiderati zeli feruor, vt pollet eximijs virtutibus, it a magnis vitijs laborat. Daniel Tosianus, accuseth hym, maligni spiritus instinctu, to patronise his followers, against the Sacramentaries. Bucer contra Melancth. accusatur Lutherus ab omnibus imperiosae dicacitatis. Campanus saith that diabolicus mendax est Lutherus. Svvinglius tells Luther, demonstrabo te, Euangelij splendorem, nunquam adhuc plene cognouisse. Oecolompad. resp. ad Luth. confess. priorem illum librum a daemone auspicatur, hunc vero eiusdem auspicijs absoluit. Is this vnitie, ar both these in Noash ark? is Christ deuided? Bonum semper malo contrarium est, malum nunc bono nunc malo: so they incline to the malum for they ar violent in ther ciuil warres, and yet as furious against the Catholicks. I will now conclude for Luther, that he was far from the vertues, spirit, and wisedome of an immediat vocation from God. For* yf yow comment Moyses he saith, nihil ad nos pertinet. Vide vt sis prudens, and Moysem cum lege sua longissime amoliri, and Serm. de Moyse and ad Galat. in malam rem abire iubeas: neque quicquam

illius terrore and minis mouearis. non mihi sed Iudaeis Mosem tuum predica. Yf yow magnifie Admonit. ad Argentin tom. 3. the lyse of Christ, he tells yow non esse hominibus opera Christi inculcanda, and exempla eius. Christi enim opera minimam and vilissimam particulam in Christo, eaque in re Christum caeteris sanctis parem esse. And in an other place. Non multum mihi opera Christi prosunt: sed verba eius. Touching the Trinitie, he likes it not, vocula haec nusquam in scripturis repetitur. It is Mans inuention, and frigide sonat, and therfor he put it ovvt of the Letanie. and bycause he vvill stop your mouth from alledging the councel of Nice, he saith, Nullum vidi concilium in quo Serm. de nat. Mariae. Spiritus sanctus reperiatur. Yf yow praise our ladie, he saith, sumus pares matri Christi, and aeque sancti ac illa. But aboue all other things this is to be noted, that God ded not reueal vnto hym, his secrets, and inspire hym with perfection at first, as he ded S. Paul, and the prophets and Apostls. For Luther confesseth of hym self, at first, fouebat me aura popularis: and, per imprudentiam in istam causam lapsus. and l. de seruo arbit. ego vltra decennium motus eram authoritate Ecclesiae tam confidens and certus non fui. This dopocagione assureth me, he vvas not called immediatlie of God, nor can be no other then an impostor for challenging it. I will conclude

with the relation of his own vertues; for of hym self he geues this euidenc. in Coll. Francof. f. 445. Nihil singulare in vita mea eminet, possum to cari, potare, sum facetus conuiuator, saepiusque bene bonum baustum cereuisiae facio in Dei gloriam. scilicet. He professeth hym self a good companyon, and that he doth oft carrous and drink largelie a health to the glorie of God. And yf yow read all the Ecclesiastical storie, yow shall not fynd such a ruffianlie phrase, and passage of vanitie: and so, I leaue hym to Clebitius his prophecie. who haith foretold the ruine of the Pope of Saxonie.
FINIS.

