


THE FIRST INCOVNTER,
ABOVT THE
BLESSINGES AND BENEDICTIONS,
vvhich Sir Francis affirmeth to haue come to England by the
change of Catholique Religion.
WITTIE was the answer of him who
being demaunded,Antigo. of flatterie. what enimy was to
be holden for most perilous and pernitious;
sayd, that of domestical enemies,
the flatterer; for that his wound is receiued
commonlie with delectation, and
by couering the truth, and praysing the
vices and imperfections of the party flattered,
he doth lead him pleasantly and
without resistance, to perdition.
And as this is true in particuler men (as all the world doth experie^ce
daily) so much more hath it his effect in great communities and common
wealthes; where the greater part being lightly of the simpler and
more imperfect sort, they are easily caried away with the poysoned
melody of these Sirens songes of adulatio^, and so he that will read ouer
the stories of the beginninges, proceedinges, fall and ouerthrow of
realmes and countries, shal find the principall root of their ruine or
changes; to haue bin the eare and credit giuen to flatterers, before the
sincere cou^cell of them that spake more plainlie, though les pleasantlie.
Let the onl^e example of the people of Israell serue for this tyme,
who being often told by holie men, and prophets of God, of their
dangerous estate, would neuer beleeue them, but harkened rather vnto
flatterers that smoothed all, and told them of blessinges; in so much as
God himself resolued one daie to saie plainlie vnto them (though it
profited little) P^pule meus qui te beatum dicunt, ipsi te decipiunt,Esa. 3. and viam
gressuum tuoru^ dissipant: My people, they who say thou art happie,
they are those that deceiue thee, and doe mar the way, where thou art
to passe, therby to ouerthrow thee.

He that will consider with iudgeme^t and indifferencie, the present
estate of matters in England and round about it (and this especially by
reason of change made in religion) and shal read together the flearing
tale,The present state of English blessings. which Sir Francis Hastinges telleth vs in the first lynes of his
booke, of the i^finit and innumerable blessinges receiued (as he saith)
by the sayd change: he will either say, that the man lacked witte and
discourse to see the deformitie and contradiction of his owne talke, or
els modestie and shame fastnesse in vttering it.
For notwithstanding the rare partes, and good intentions, of her
Maiestie in this her gouernement (which no man denieth, nor yet
conioyneth with the euil successe of this alteration of religion, as
well knowen not to haue proceeded of her owne inclination at the
beginning) who is there so simple that discouereth not, or so euil affected
that rueth not from his harte, the difficulties alredy growen
and growing daily by this most vnfortunate and fatall alteration of
religion? which this man calleth, The fountaine and wellspring whence all
the rest of this our little Ilandes benefites and blessinges doe issue and flow. Nay
doth not the seely fellow himself in all this furious, and scornefull
libell of his, indeuour to lay before vs a thowsand feares and frightes
of imminent perilles, which he saieth hang ouer vs by the diuision
of hartes, of handes, of iudgementes, of affections, of partes and
partial^ties, and factions within the realme? Or is his whole argument
any thing els in effect, but a timerous abodement of infinite
ruines, that doe beset the realme, at this day? And are not his owne
wordes these, after a long discourse of perilles? I doubt not (deare countriemen)
but that you are men of wisdome, and can easilye conceyue, what dangers
we stand in, by that which hath bin set downe before. And a little after: The
life of Religion, of Queen, and Countrie, is at the stake, etc. And how then doth
he pype vnto vs this feigned note of melancholie musike, amiddest
so many dreadfull cares and sorrowes? hath he not redde that: Musica
in luctu importuna narratio,^^cles 22. it is importun chaunting, when other men
are weeping? but let vs heare his manner of speache.
If I should take vpon me (sayth he) to enter into the enumeration of all the
benefites, and blessinges, that from the almigh^i haue bin powred vpon this little
Island of England, etc.
Here Sir Knight, seing you mention our little Island, you must take
in Scotland also, or els you erre in Cosmographie, and then your
meaning must be, that Scotland in like manner as well as we, hath
tasted of the same benedictio^s, by change of religion, as no doubt but
it hath, with all other regions and countryes neere about vs, who

being quiet before and setled in one vniuersall and generall religion,
did by Englandes alteration, receyue the like impression and motion
in themselues; yet more then the rest (by their neerenesse) Scotland,
Ireland, Flanders, and Fraunce. Into the enumeration of all which
countryes miseries, tumultes, calamities, and desolations, happened
by that chaunge, if I should enter with Sir Frau^cis to recount them,
I should finde a far more ample subiect to inlarge my self vpon,
then he in recyting his blessinges, though he descended vnto verie
poore ones.
For to begin with Scotland,Scotland. and to say nothing of the Battailes,
Murders, destruction of Countries, Prouinces, Townes, Citties,
Howses, and particuler Men, which we haue seen in that Realme
within thes fourtie yeares, that the change of religion hath bin attempted;
no man can deny but that three Princes, two Queenes, and one
King, the Mother, Daughter, and Husband, haue bin all brought
to their bane, by this occasion; besides the ouerthrow and change of
so many Noble Howses and Linages, as Scotish-men can recount,
mong their Hamiltons, Dougleses, Stewardes, and others; as also
the Irish will tell of their Noble Desmondes, and other Peeres destroied.
But Flaunders and FraunceIreland^ Flaunders^ Fraunce. haue no end at all in these coumptes,
when they begin, they are so many. And all this, as they say (and is
euident) by the Lamentable consequence of our change of Religion
in Engla^d, which drew them after vs, or at least-wyse gaue example,
hart, and help, to their change and euersion also.
But not to steppe fro^ EnglandEngland. it self, wher principally this blessing
bringer doth vaunt that his blessings are powred out in abundance,
let vs examine the matter indifferentlie among our selues: we are
English-men, and we talke to men of the same language and nation,
that know the countrie and condition therof: and many haue seen
the change, and knew the stare of thinges therein before the alteration,
or at least-wyse haue heard thereof since: by their fatheres
and grandfathers, This is not a contention about Terra Virginea, where
only we must beleeue Sir VValter Rawleighes Relations, or Sir Humfrey
Gilbertes about Terra Florida. Let euery man then looke about him,
and say what he findeth or feeleth of these blessings, or maledictions
in himself or others.
I for my part shal onely for better direction of mens iudgments,
geue this aduertisement, that all blessings of a common-wealth may
seeme to be reduced to two heades or braunches, the one spirituall,
belonging to the soule and conscience; the other temporall, that concerneth

the body and weale-publique. Let the consideration of the
spirituall, goe before, for that they are the worthier and most important
for true Christians to be considered and esteemed.
There was in England before the alteration,Spiritual effectes by change of religion. one God worshipped
and adored after one and the self same manner, not onely thoroughout
this little Iland of England, and Scotland, but also of the
whole body of Christendome, one fayth, one beleefe, one forme of
seruice, one number of sacramentes, one tonge in celebration, one
sacryfice, one head of the Church, one obedience, one iudgement in
all,Ioan. 17. Act. 4. Eph. 4. Gal. 3. 2. Thes. 5. 1. Cor. 4. with other lyke poyntes and circumstances of vnion and vnitie,
which made a generall vniformitie also in the peace of mens myndes,
and is a benedictio^ so highlie esteemed and commended by the Apostles
and Christ himself as nothing more in Christian doctrine.
This was in England before the change, but now in these poyntes,
we English of the new profession, are not onelie different and deuided
from the generall body of Catholiques in Christendom (with whome
we were vnited before) but also among our selues and with other
new sectaries sprong vp with vs or after vs, we haue implacable
warres and are deuided in opinions, as from Lutherans in Germanie
and Denmarke, from Zwinglians in Swizer-land, from Caluinistes
in Geneua, Fraunce, Holland, and Scotland; and at whome what
combates our Bishoppes, Counsellors, and moderate sorte of Protestantes,
haue to defend their Parlament Religion and Q. proceedings
as they call it, against Puritanes, Brownistes, and other lyke good
fellowes, that by shew of Scriptures doe impugne it: All Englishmen
knowe and see by their bookes daylie, so as this first and greatest spirituall
blessing of vnity and vniformitie, we haue lost and not gained
by out change of Religion.
But here our Knight perhappes will say, that the blessing consisteth
in that by this change, they who follow the Parlament Religion
allowed by the state of Engla^d, (I doe say Perhappes, for that I know
not but rather doe doubt much, whether Sir Fra^cis doth followe it
or no) haue the onlie true Religion among all others, that doe erre,
or at least-wyse his puritan Religion, and thereby that they only haue
this blessing by the change.
And, no doubt, but he saied much if he could proue it of the one
or of the other,About certayntie in religion. but this seemeth impossible (I meane) that he should
either proue it to me, or knowe it himself, but onlie by his owne particuler
ghesse, which maketh not faith, but opinion and fansie; for I
would aske Sir Francis, or any such man as he is, that determineth

so resolutely, that his onlie Religion among so many others (as are
extant at this day) is true, and all others false; whereon doth he grou^d
his certaintie?
Two only meanes can Sir Francis haue to guide himself in this case,
first, that he hath receyued his doctryne of such or such persons, preachers,
Ministers, or Doctors, whose learning and knowledge in this
^ehalf he trusteth absolutely: and then is his whole fayth builded vpon
the credit of man, as is euident, and consequently is nothing worth,
nor no fayth at all. The other waie is, that he beleeueth it, for that it 
^s founded in scripture; but this waie to Sir Francis must needes be
as vncertayne as the other, if not more; for that to be sure that it is
^oundly grounded vpon scripture, he must first reade himself his
whole beleef expresly in scriptures, which is much for a man of Sir
Francis occupation to do, and then he must be able to iudge of manie
other poyntes, belonging to the same, as namely, that the booke is
surely scripture, that he readeth. And then that the translation which
he vseth is trulie made, out of the learned tongues of Hebrue, Greek,
and Latin: And lastelie he must be sure of the true sense and exposition,
which also are hard matters, for a man of Sir Francis learning,
and much more for others that knowe lesse then he.
Yea and when all is done, if he had all these helpes needfull for
such a matter (as he hath not) yet were it but a priuate mans opinion,
and consequentlie his faith should be grounded but vpon his owne
particuler iudgement, which maketh no faith at all, but opinion only
as ofte^ hath byn saied, for that faith must haue Gods expresse authoritie
for her foundation.
So that to conclude, the first blessing which Sir Francis in particuler
thinketh to haue rec^yued by this change of his religion, is in
effect, that, wheras before, when he beleeued the Catholique and vniuersal
fayth of Christendome, deliuered vnto him by the vniuersal
churche, as founded on scripture (which churche Christe and his
Apostles, gaue him expresse comission to credit) his beleef was properly
fayth and founded vpon a rocke, that could not fayl: now,
hauing left that fortresse, and cast himself into the waues of new
opinions, he hath nothing certayne at all, but so much as he list to
chuse of himself, or of other mens opinions; which choise is properly
called heresy, for that the woord heresie in Greek (as all learned
men know) signifyeth nothing els, but a certayne election and
choise in matters of religion, to witt, when a man leauing the common
consent of the generall Churche, chuseth only to follow that

which his owne priuate iudgement induceth him vnto.
And to make this more playne,A playne demonitiation agaynst Sir Francis. how all these people haue no other
rule of beleef but only what their owne fa^sie leadeth them vnto, I
aske Sir Francis (not of any Catholyque Doctor, nor of anie auncient
father, as S. Augustin, S. Ierom, or the rest, whome easely he would
contemne) but rather, of his owne Doctors, Martin Luther, Iohn
Caluyn, Theodore Beza, and such others, whome he supposeth to
haue bin seruantes of God, and indued with his holie spirit: and all
the world knoweth that they were more learned then Sir Francis; yet
why should he beleeue his owne iudgme^t more then theirs in poyntes
of faith? wherin they differ from him, as Luther about the real
presence, and the number and forme of Sacraments, and many other
pointes; Caluyn in matter of the Q Supremacie, which he denieth.
Beza in the whole gouernement of their churche. Or why should I
beleeue Sir Francis or his new maisters of England, rather then these
that were more learned then hee or his? or what reason, rule, or foundation,
haue any of these men, to beleeue their owne opinion, more
then others, but only self will and fansie?
This then is the first and greatest spiritual benediction (or malediction
rather) that I fynd to haue happened to our realme and nation
by this wofull alteration of religion, that whereas before we had ^
direct rule, squyre and pole-starre to follow, which was the vniuersal
churche; now, euery man being set at libertie, holdeth, beleeueth, and
teacheth what he listeth. Nor is there any waie or meane lefte to restrayne
him, for streight way he appealeth boldly and confidently
to the scriptures, and there he wilbe both maister and pilot, and boteswayne
himself, to gouerne the barke at his pleasure, for he admitte^^
no iudge, no interpreter, no authoritie, no antiquitie, nor anie other
manner of triall; which is the greatest madnes and malediction that
euer could happen amonge men of reason.
And I haue byn the longer in this first blessing, for that it is the
head and welspring of all other spirituall miseries, insued by this alteration
vpon vs, which now in haste I will runne ouer as men are
wont to drinck a medicine with as litle stay or reflexion as may
for the euil sauour.
After assurance, stabilitie, and vnion in beleef, the next greatest
spiritual benedictions that can be expected of any doctryn,VVhat effectes of vertue nevv religion hath vvrought. are the
good effects of vertue which it woorketh in mens myndes and manners,
as it was foretold by Esay the prophet, that Christes doctrine,
should so alter mens conditions and natures, that such as were most

fearce, sauadge, and wicked before, should by this doctryn become
most humble,Esa. 11. kinde and gentle. The wolfe (sayth he) shall dwell with
^he lambe, and the parde shall lye with the goat; the calfe, lyon, and sheep
shall abyde together: and a litle childe shalbe able to gouerne them all.
VVell then: hath the protestantes doctryn wrought these effects
of peace, meekenesse, mansuetude and agreement? I haue touched before
the bloody tragedies raysed in Fraunce, Flaunders, Scotland, and
other places, vpon the first rysing therof, I might adde Swizerland,
and Germanie, where their owne stories do testifie, that aboue a hundreth
thowsand people were slayne within one yeare, by the rebellion
and warres of the countrie-men agaynst their Lordes,Sledan. for the controuersie
of religion, such humilitie obedience, and meeknes of hart im^rinted
presently this new doctryn when it came.
But let vs see other effects, Christes doctrine exhorteth to Pe^ance,
to Mortification of the flesh,Math. 3. 8. 4. Luc. 3. Act. 2. 2. Corinth. 7. and 2. Rom. 8. Coll. 3. Math. 19. 17 1. Cor. 7. Luc. 11. and 14. to Continencie, Virginitie, Fa^ting,
Praying, Almes, voluntarie Pouertie, renouncing of the
world, and the lyke. Are there more of these effects now adayes in
England or before? Or are there more in Sir Francis and his men,
then in ours? doth he and his ghospellers pay their debtes better then
Catholiques doe, or keepe better Howses, or more Hospitalitie, or
^rayse their Rentes lesse, or take lesse Fines, or vse their Tenantes
^etter, or lend their Neighboures more money, without vsurie? Or
doe they helpe to Marrye more Poore mens daughters, and other
such like good VVoorkes of Charitie? Is Pryde in apparayle, Glut^onie,
Dronkennesse, Lecherie, Swearing, and For swearing, Coue^ousnesse,
Crueltie, Falsehood, Deceipte, Theeuerie, Lack of Con^cience,
Oppressing of poore men, more of lesse noweadayes in vre
or before, when yet this change was not made? Let Sir Francis an^were
me to this and not he only but the whole countrie rou^d about
him, and then let him tell me with wittnesses, whether they be Spirituall
blessinges or curses that haue insued vpon this change of Religion
so much commended by him, and so I sh^l passe to weigh his
temporall benedictions, which perhappes he esteemeth farre more
then these spirituall.
For better vnderstanding whereof,Temporal effectes by change of religion. men are wont to bring into
consideration two poyntes. First, what was likely to haue bin, or
^allen out, if the the change of Religio^ had not bin made in her Ma^esties
tyme, and then what hath insued vpon the change made.
To the first they saie, that if as her Maiestie entered most happily
and ioy fullie into the Crowne of England, by generall consent of all,

and promoted especiallie by the peculier forces of Catholiques,
that were at that day moste potent without comparison; and that,
as her Maiestie entered Catholiquely, that is to say, shewing her^self
in all poyntes of religion and behaueour a Catholique, according
as she had done also before in her sister Q. Maries r^^gne
and was now crowned and anoynted Catholiquely by a Catholique
bishop, at a Catholique masse, and other like circumstances; i^
she had continued that course still, and not yeelded to the persuasion^
of some new counsellors, agaynst the iudgement of all her olde (a^
in deed she was hardly brought to yeelde therunto at the beginning,
for that she foresawe by her wisdome, diuers of the inconueniences,
that sythence haue insued) then say these men, if this had byn^
so, both her Maiestie and the realme had byn moste happie at this
day. And in particuler they alleadge these benefytes following, which
of all probabilitie would haue fallen vpon vs.
 First, her Maiestie at this day had had a moste florishing kingdome
vnited both to her,Strength and felicitic by vnion. and among themselues, in Religion, iudgment,
affection, fidelitie, and frendshippe, as other realmes Catholique
of the worlde are seen to be, and as ours for aboue a thowsand
yeares together with much honour and felicitie, is knowne to haue
remayned.
 Here of had insued that none of these feares and terrors of Conquestes,
Inuasions,Securitie. Assaultes, Treasons, Conspiracies, and the like,
which this Wach-man indeuoreth to lay before vs, had euer come in
consideration. For that England vnited in it self, hath euer since i^
was a Monarchie, made other Kingdomes and Prouinces rown^
about it to feare her forces (as by matters happened in Fra^ce, Ireland
and Scotland, for many ages is euident) and she neuer greatlie feared
any.
 Thirdly, England had had her Maiestie at this day by all likelihood
a ioyfull mother of many fayre and princely children,Issue of her Maiestie. for tha^
the principall cause of her graces not marying is to be presumed
to haue proceeded of the different Religion of forrayne Princes,
who desired the same on the on side: and on the other, the inequaliti^
of blood in her owne subiectes, for such aduaunceme^t. For to attribute
this great resolution of her Maiestie, to the onlie loue of sole
lyfe and Mayden head, I doubt how it can be ius^ifiable, seing that
among Catholiques where such professio^ is more praised and practised,
they vse sometymes to draw out euen vowed Nunnes from their
Cloisters to mariadge, for so weightie a cause, as is the sauing of succession

in so great a crown as England is known to be. And among
protestants virginitie is not of that necessitie or merit, as for it to incurr
so great inconueniences, notwithstanding the base and seruile flatterie
of this crowching Knight, who casteth in now and then the
memorie of a Mayden Queen, without respecting the deadly wound
which his countrie receiueth thereby.
Fourthly,Establishment of suecession. of this had followed the sure establishment of the succession 
of this Imperiall crown in the blood and race of the vnited
Royall Howses of York and Lancaster, and of the lyne of the Noble
King Henry the seuenth, which lyne being now to end with her Maiestie,
in the direct discent, is lyke to bring great dangers to the realme.
For albeit there want not of collateral branches, yet their causes are
otherwise so implicated for diuerse respects, but espetiallie by difference
of religion (which had neuer happened if the change had not
byn made) as no man can tell what wilbe the end, and most men do
^eare extreme calamities therby.
Fifthly, if religion in England had not byn changed, we had had 
no breach with Rome,Vnion vvith Rome and see Apostolique. nor consequently had the excommunication
followed, whereof so great noise hath byn made in the world abroad,
and so great trouble at home. And what the vnion and frendshipp
of the Bishop of Rome may importe, euen as a temporall Prince, the
effects shewed of late in Fraunce, where espetiallie by his indeuour
and authoritie matters haue byn compounded that seemed verie
hard and desperate before, not only between that King and his owne
subiectes, but also between that crown and Spayn and the states of
Flaunders, which without such an arbiter and vmpyre would verie
hardly, haue euer byn accommodated.
Sixthly, England had continued in her old ancient amitie and leagues 
moste honorable with Spayn and Burg^ndie,Ancient leagues. and with their dependents,
and consequently had auoyded all these long and costly
warres, which by that breach we haue byn inforced to manteyne with
losse of so many worthie men, and expence of so great treasure, as
easelie maie be imagined, and the quarell not yet ended.
Seuenthly, so great and bloody warres and tumultes in Christian 
kingdomes round about vs,VVarres abroad. had neuer happened, as before in part
hath byn declared; and all the world doth impute the principal causes
and motions therof, vnto the diuersitie of religion in England.
And lastly, most dolefull alterations in our own countrie had byn 
auoyded,Damages receaued at home. as the depriuation in one day of all the sacred order of Bishops
in England, with their perpetual imprisonment, for that they

would not subscribe to this infortunate change of religion, wroong out
in Parlame^t, as all men know, by the oddes only of one or two voices
of lay men. The disgrace and abasing of so many noble houses, with
ouerthrow of others, wherof let Norfolk, Arundel, Northumberland,
Oxford, VVestmerland and Dacres giue testimonie. For of the rest
I will not make mention, seing perhaps themselues would be loth I
should, all which had passed otherwise by probabilitie, if religion had
not byn altered. The continual and intollerable affliction also of so
many honorable and worshipfull Gentlemen, had neuer happened,
for perseuering in their fathers fayth, wherto our country was first
conuerted from infidelitie, without any other offence obiected or to
be proued agaynste them, but only refusing to accommodate themselues
to this change.Recusantes. The torturing, hanging, and quartering, of aboue
a hundreth Preestes for the same cause; the moste of them good Gentlemen,
and youthes of rare witt, learning, and other partes, which
other Common wealthes would highly haue esteemed, and so would
ours too in tymes past, and will agayne in tyme to come, when these
blastes shall once be ouerblown.
All these inconueniences and calamities had bin auoyded, or the
moste of them, if change of Religion in England had not byn
made; so that the innumerable benedictions, which this poore man
would needs threap vpon vs, by the change, do come to be in effect
these that follow.
First,The so^me of all that hath byn saide. in Spiritual affayrs to haue no certaynty of Religion at all, as
hath bin proued; no stay, no foundation, no rule, but only euery mans
own priuate iudgment, and fansie, wrangling and iangling without
end, and without iudge or meanes to make an end: Nouelties without
number, and liberty of lyf without feare or force of Ecclesiasticall
disciplyne to restrayn it. And the^ in temporall matters the blessings are
such as haue bin discouered; our Realme deuided and shiuered in a
thowsand peeces; our Princess olde, without children, or hope of any,
our Crown without Succession, our olde frends and allyes made our
enemies, our new frends vncertayn, our own flesh and countrymen
most pitifully deuided within their own bowels, and most miserably
tossed and turmoyled both abroad and at home: abroad and in
other countries, with Prisons, Yrons, Chaynes, Gallyes, and other
Afflictions, euen to Death it self; for being Protestants, Pirats, Spies,
Practisers, or other such imputations incident to enemyes. At home
afflicted with no less persecutions of our own Magistrates for being
Catholiques, or deemed to be such. So as I would fayn know, who

are they in our litle Iland that feel these innumerable benifits and blessings
by change of Religion, which this gentleman talketh of, seeing there are
very few either of one Religion or other, that taste not of the miseries
wherof I haue spoken, either in themselues, their frends, children,
seruants, kinsefolks, goodes, honours, or otherwise, and most of all
the Realm and Commonwealth it self.
It may be Sir Francis sitteth easier then other men, hauing gotten
som fat morsel to feed on, by this change, yet ought he to haue some
sens and feeling also of other mens greefs, or at least-wise so much wit
as not to put himself to sing in publique, when so many thowsands of
other men do weep and complayn. And so much of his blessings.


THE SECOND INCOVNTER,
ABOVT CERTAIN ABSVRD GROWNDS
and principles, forged by this Knight to be in
Catholique Religion.
WE haue taken a scantling in the former incounter
of this our knightes folly and flatterie, now followeth
a fuller view of his cogging and lying;
for these two vertues co^monly go together,Senec^. qui adulator,
idem and mendax, sayth one; the flatterer is a lyar
in lyke manner. For neither truth can stretch herself
to flatter: nor flattery can be manteyned without
lying. This man then, after he hath flattered the state of England
so grosly and fondly as you haue heard, by telling them of the innumerable
benedictions powred out vpon the whol Iland by the change of religion, now
he will needes take vpon him to set before our eyes the spiritual miseries
and maledictions that Catholiques were in before this change,
to witt in Queen Maries dayes, and in former raignes of ancient Catholique
Princes, by reason of certayne absurd and false principles,
which (as he sayth) were then receyued for truthes in matters of
Religion.
But before he come to set down those principles, he maketh for his
preface acertain poetical description of the dark, clowdy, and mistie
state of thinges in Queen Maries tyme, in these woords.
It is not vnknown (sayth he) to many yet liuing,Deuised da^^^enes. nether can it be altogether
^idden from the yonger sorte that liued with them, what a dark mistie clowd of

ignorance (which brought in popish idolatrie and all manner of superstition) did
ouershadow the whole Land, etc. (and againe after.) In these dark and clowdy
daies, least the sun-shine of knowledge should dispearce the mists of ignorance and
giue light to the dimm of sight, etc.
Doth it not seeme that this graue gentleman describeth the lake of
Auernus in Italy, or some foggy marsh in England, or some smoaky
kitchin or wood-howse of his own without a window, when he
speaketh of our famous Country in former tymes? Aboue a thowsand
years the state of England and the Princes, People, Nobility, and
Learned men thereof had continued in that Egiptian or rather Cimmerian
darknes which he describeth vnder, clowds, mists, and shadows,
vntil his new Sun-shyne doctors came in to inlighten the same. And
it was accounted then as w^se, learned, valiant, noble, and florishing
a Kingdom, as France, Italy, Spayn, and other Catholique
kingdo^s be at this day; where if one of these our inlightened, and Sunborne,
English ministers should appeer, he would not dare to ope^ his mouth
in schooles or matters of learning, among the great number of most
excellent learned men, which there are found, as we haue well experienced
by such of our protestant people as now and then do go
abroad to forrayn Vniuersities, and are quikly brought to confess, their
inequalitie in this kynd, for that they skarse vnderstand the very
ordinary tearms of the learned sciences which the other do possess.
And as for Q. Maries reign in England,Learning in Q. Maries reigne. it is euident to all those that
haue iudgment to discern what learning and wisedom meaneth (and
indifferency to confess it) that there was not a more learned Clergy in
many ages before. And in respect of these poore creaturs that occupy
now their prebends, and sitt in the Sun-shine of their New-pretended-gospel
with their wiues and children round about them, they wer great Rabbins
and Patriarchs. One Tonstale of Duresme, one Watson of Lincoln,
one Christoferson of Chichester, for learning: one Fecknam of
VVestminster, one Gardener and on VVhyte both Bishops of VVinchester,
for wisdom and learning together, were able to hold at school
all your Sun-shine Clergie at this day, for terme of life and after, as by
their woorks and wrytings yet extant doth well appeer.
But let vs see how the knight goeth forward in his tale; after he
hath tolde vs of these clowds, mists and darknes, that then raygned, he
addeth these woords: whereunto (sayth he) was added, and wherwith was
mixed, all bloody and sauadg cruelty agaynst those that desired knowledge and
were any way inlightened by Gods grace,Manifeste vntruthes. with a glimering or smale insight into
true religion. For though it were but only a desire to read vpo^ the holy booke of God;

ether the olde or new testament, then heretique was his title, heresy was his fault;
^^d for this was he called before the Romish Cleargy to receyue their censure, and
^^ch neuer departed from their clowtches till they had brandeled them to the
^aughter.
This is his narration. VVherin first we must separate open and ma^ifest
lying, from fond and rude ignorance: for that the former is less
^ufferable (in a Knight that holdeth accompt of honor) then the seco^d,
^specially in matters of Diuinity. And truly I am sory that the writer
of this booke calleth himself knight, to whom in law of Chiualry a
^^a^ should not giue the lye, but with obligatio^ to defe^d it in the field,
^ut for that I do presume when he resolued to write and publish this
booke, and to diuulge so fals, fowl, and slau^derous a libel, and to iniure
^o many mens honors therin, as he hath donn, and the honor of God
and of his Saintes especially, which is less to be tolerated, he made accompt
to renounce all priuiledge of Knighthood, Gentry, and Nobi^ity.
For this cause I am moued to make less scruple in that behalf
when necessity is offered.
And heere I must begin in this very place to tell him, that two manifest
vntruthes, properly called lyes (for that they are wilfull) are set
downe by him in the woords alleadged, and known to be such to very
children and nouices in the Catholique Religion.
The first, that it is holden for heresy, or euer was, to read vpon the 
Bible or booke of God (as he calleth it) in what language soeuer,Vntruth. for
euen in vulgar tongues it is permitted to infinite lay people in all Catholique
countryes, by lycence of the ordinary, as all men know, and
it can not be denied.
The otherly is, that for this fault only men were called before the Romish 
Cleargie in England,Vntruth. and brandeled to the slaughter.
These I say are apparent fictions; let the Knight defend his honor
in auowing them. It remaineth only to me to lay downe what the
Catholique Church did ordayne in this behalf, and what reasons she
might haue to restrayne some of this mans dim and glimmering people
from reading at their pleasure, vpon vulgar B^bles without lycence,
or without the spectacles of competent learning and vnderstanding
requisit for to profitt thereby; and how far this prohibitio^ of the Church
streched, and whether this may iustly be accompted bloody and sauage
proceedings or rather prudent and prouident circumspection for simple
mens safty.
First then, most certayn it is, that no man or woman, was euer
forbiddenHovv reading of Scriptures vvas forbidden and vvhie. to read any parte of the holy Scriptures in any of the three

learned languages, wherin they were written, to witt Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin. And secondly, the restraynt that was made of vulgar translations,
as French, Duch, English and the lyke, was only that no
such translation, should be admitted or vsed, except it were first examined
by learned me^ by order of the Bishop, and Ordinary to see whether
it were well and truly translated or no. And then such men and
women of the laity were permitted to vse the sayd translation approued,
as should haue lycence of the sayd Ordinary, and be thought fit
and able to profit, and not to take hurt or hinderance therby; others
had the same in effect and substans deliuered vnto them by sermons,
bookes, and other means.
This was the order; let indifferent men iudge and determine what
cruelty or mercy, impiety or piety, might be herein. For first, no man
will deny but if the translator did not put downe truly and sincerely
the wordes of Scriptures in his vulgar translation, then the simple reader
that cannot discerne, should take mans word for Gods word,
which were great inconuenience, and for this cause only (if none other
were) most necessary was it, that some order should be set downe for
examining of translations, whereby might be distinguished whe^ God
and when man speaketh in the Scriptures. And seco^dly though it were
certayn that the words of Scripture were ^et downe truly in vulgar
translations, yet if the same reader by ignorance did take out of the
true woords a fals sence; then sucked he poyson in steed of wholesom
doctrine.Comparason. If then in a fayr and pleasant garden, there should be this
danger, not only that one hearb taken for another might indaunger
a mans lyf, but the self same heard gathered and dressed in different
sorte, might be eigher poyson or treacle, who would condemn the
maister of the garden, if he suffered not euery one indifferently to gather
hearbs there, but such as either had skill of the^selues to discerne,
or were directed by others how to gather and vse those hearbs to their
help and health, and not to their hurt and distruction: and to the very
same end was the prohibition that ignorant people should not read
Scriptures, but with leaue and direction.
Who can deny but that S. Paule talking of the Scriptures as they
were in the Learned tongues (especially of the olde testament) sayth
of them;^. Cor. 3. liter a occidit, Spiritus autem viuificat. the letter or literall ^ound
doth ofte^ tymes murder the reader, and the only spirit that is the internall
true and spirituall meaning of the Scriptures, doth giue lyf. And
albeit S. Augustin in his learned booke de Spiritu and litera,Ad Marcellinum. doth extend
these woords of the Apostle to a farther meaning also, yet he teacheth

this too, and so do the rest of the ancient fathers, namely S. Hierom
^d Nepotianum, handeling the story of king Dauid 3. Reg. 1. where the
^ong virgin Abisag was sought out to heat him in his olde adge: S.
Hierom sayth, that if we should follow literam occidentem, the mur^hering
letter, it seemeth a iest and fable, but if we fly to the hidden
spirituall sence and meaning, it is most holy.
But now let vs aske of you Sir Knight, how wil your vnlearned
^eaders those who^e you cal dim and glimering people, discerne these things
without a guyd, such as the Catholique Church doth appoynt for
^xpounding the Scriptures to simple people, by Catechisms, Sermo^s,
Homelies, teaching of pastors, and the lyke, without deliuering the
whole Bible into their handes, to be vsed or abused to their destruction.
Furthermore you cannot deny, but that the vnderstanding of
Scriptures is a particuler gift of God,Vnderstanding of Scriptures a peculier gift. Apoc. ^. reserued especially vnto Christe,
who had the key to open the booke sealed with seuen seales, as S.
Iohn testifieth, and to the same effect is it recorded in S. Lukes Gospel
for a singuler grace, bestowed by our Saueour vpon the Church, tun^
^peruit illis sensum, vt inteligerint Scripturas.Luc. 24. Then after his resurrection
did he open to them the sence, wherby they might vnderstand Scriptures
of the^selues. For euer before he had interpreted the same lightly
vnto them, as in the Gospel apeareth.Act. ^. He sent also S. Phillip the Apo^tle
by commaundement of his Angell, to goe and interpret a certain
place of the Prophet Esay, vnto the great Eunuch and Tresurer of the Q
of AEthiopia, when he would conuert him. And it is to be obserued,
that albeit Christe might haue opened the sence of the Scripture to
himself immediatly, yet would he send him a guide. Yea though the
sayd Eunuch were learned (as may appeer by that being an AEthiopianred
the Prophet in Hebrue) and though he were also instructed
in the Iews religion (as it is proued by that the storie recordeth that
^he came to adoie in Hierusalem) yetall this notwithstanding, was he
so far from the pryde of our peeuish prowd protestant people now a dayes,
which make no bones at any difficultie of Scriptures, as when he was
asked by S. Phillip, Putasneintellig^s, quae legis?Ibidem. thinkest thou that thou
vuderstandest the Scripture which thou readest? he answered, how
can I vnderstand it, except some body do expound the same vnto me?
which answere I beleeue many a good wife in London, that goeth vp
and downe with her Bible vnder her arme, would be ashamed to giue
if she were asked whether she vnderstand the whole Bible or no.
These then (Sir Knight) are the reasons why some of those your

glimmering and inlightened people, were restrayned by Catholique discipline
to read vpon (Gods booke as you call it) vulgar translations; no^
to bar them from light as you malitiously calumniate, but rather leas^
they being but half blynde should become whole blynde, that is t^^
say madd and obstinate blynde of ignorance, and vnlearned blynde;
for such effects doe insew some times of the rash reading of this booke
of God, when therof is ingendred falshood and Heresye^, that is, the
doctrine of the diuel, for proofe wherof, let vs consider whether in a^
thowsand years together in England, France, Germany and other
places of Christendome, while this prudent restraint of Catholiqu^
church lasted, of not permitting all ignorant people to read Scriptures
at their pleasures,Experience of hurtes come by permitting the reading of scriptures to the ignora^t. in vulgar languages, without an interpreter, there
arose so many Sects, Heresyes, and alterations about Religion, as there
haue risen in fifty or threescore years, since this reading was left open
to all; there is no comparison. And if we consider only England, the^
matter is euide^t, that more sects haue sprong vp of late by many degrees.
Yea though we leaue all other sects that are permitted, or wi^ked
at in England, and respect such only as haue bin punished openly
by the magistrate, namely such perso^s as haue bin whipped or burned
in London, Norfolk, and other places for Heretiques, in the tyme o^
her Maiestyes raign that now is, for denying Christe himself or other^
poyntes of the blessed Trinity, being altogether vnlearned people, as
our Chronicles testifie, of whome I ask, had they euer fallen into such
errors and obstinacie, but only by reading Sciptures in the vulgar
language? had euer william Hacket dreamed himself to be Christe,
or william Geffrey before him, but by this way? we see then the
inconuenience.
In King Henries tyme when Tindal had translated and printed
the new Testament in English at Colen, and began to seck meanes to
haue them dispersed in England, the laws and kings commandment
being then against it; there was a certayn foul fusteluggs, dishonest
of her body with base fellows, as was openly reported, whose name
was Ioan knell alias Burcher,Ioan^ Burcher burned. if I forget not, who beginning to be a
great reader of Scriptures her self became a principall instrument also
in that tyme to deuulge such Bibles as were sent, especially in the
courte, where she became known to certayn women in authority;
and to conuey the bookes more safty, she vsed to bynde them in strings
vnder her aparrell, and so to pass them into the courte: but her neerest
fre^dship was with An Askew, who^e king he^ry afterwards caused to
be burned for denying the reall prese^ce in the Sacrame^t of the Aulter.

But this other scripturian profited so wel, as in the fifth yeare of
king Edwards reygn she was burned also by the protestants of that
time, for denying Christe to haue taken flesh of the Virgin Marie.
Who when she was codemned to dye, spake very scornfully to the
Iudges, and saied: It is a goodly matt^er to consider your ignorance; it is not
long agoe since you burned Ann Askew for a peece of bread, and yet came your
selues soone after to beleeue and professe the same doctryne, for which you burned
her: and now (for sooth) you wil needs burne me for a peece of fleshe, and in the end you
will come to beleeue this also, when you haue red the scriptures and vnderstand
them, and when she came to dye in Smithfield and D. Story endeuored
to conuert her she skoffed at him, saying, he lyed like, etc. and bad
him god read Scriptures.
And thus much may serue for the repelling those clowds, mists, and
darknesse which this wach-woord-giuer wil needs imagin to be amo^g vs,
for that all coblers do not clowt Scriptures in our commonwealth.
But let vs see now what positions and principles he sayth we haue for
our direction amiddest this darknesse.
In these darke and clowdy dayes (sayth he) least the sun-shine of knowledge
should dispers the mists of ignorance, and giue light to the dimm of sight, this position
was set down for their maxime or rule in fallible;The first forged position. that ignorance is the mother
of deuotion, and that the sacred woord of God, which was giuen to be a lantern to
all our feet, and a light to our steps, was forbidden to the lay sorte (for so they called
them) as matter vnfit for them to looke into, etc.
How manifest a falshood it is that reading of Scriptures is forbidden
to all laie men, is sufficiently shewed by that which goeth before;
for in any of the three learned tongues, any laie man or woman may
read them at their pleasure, and in vulgar tra^slations also such as haue
lycence. And I think Sir Frauncis will not deny, that many of the laitie
vnderstand latin; how then, and with what face complaineth he
so piteouslie or rather hipocritically, that the sacred worde of God which
was giuen to be a lantern to our feet, etc. was forbidden to the laye sorte?
Again what malepart ignorance is it in him to scoff (as he doth) at
the worde laye sorte, with this parenthesis (for so they called them) as
though the Catholiques of late dayes had made this distinction between
laytie and clergie-men;Distinction of laytie and cleargie. wheras from the very Apostles tyme
in all Fathers and general Counsels the wordes and distinction is
ordinarie? As in the first Counsell of Nice neere thirteen hundred year
agone almost in euery canon, namely in the 1. 3. 8. 17. 18. 19. the matter
is handeled expresly. And before that again,Origen. hom. 7. in Herem. Origen proued the
same distinction out of the wordes of Scriptures themselues; and

S. Epiphanius, S. Hierom and other Fathers, haue donn the same since.
Heer then is much malice,Epiph. Episc. ad loan. Episcopum Hierosol. Hieron. Co^. in cap. 12. Hierem. ioyned with grosse ignorance, in our
Knight of the woord. But let vs see his forged positio^, wherin we affirm
ignorance to be the mother of deuotion.
If Catholiques did hold that ignorance were the mother of deuotion,
then might they hope to see Sir Francis Hastings a deuout knight in
time, for that he is ignorant as euer lightly tooke pen in hand to
write. But we deny this maxime or infallible rule to be ours (Sir Francis)
and do say that it is your calumniation only, and that among vs it
is nether maxime nor minime.Maxime. And for you to proue it a maxime you
must shew that all Catholiques or the most parte do hold it. And to
proue it a minimeMinime. at least you must shew that some one doth hold
it: neither of which you can euer doe, and so you remaine disgraced.
It may be you haue heard it obiected by some idle or ignorant minister
there, that inuented it for sporte, and knew neither what science,
or ignorance or deuotion meaneth. And it seeming a pretie ies^
vnto you, you thought best to put it in your note booke, against this
occasion of writing your wach-worde; wherby you awaken men to
discouer your owne folly and ignorance, and the malitious peeuishnesse
of your sect, that hath nothing to found it self on, but vpon faigned
calumniations against Catholique doctrine.
And this were sufficient to refute you with shame, and to put you
to the proof, seeing you haue written and printed, that we hold this
position. But I will goe further with you, and deale more liberally,
and send you to one who will tell you perspicuously what all Catholiques
do hold in this behalf about deuotion, and her mother and^
daughter also, that is both of her cause and effect. And this is the famous
vniuersall Doctor,D. Thom. 2. 2. quaest. 82. ^r. 20. S. Thomas of Aquin, who aboue three
hundred years agone set down the Catholique doctrine in this point.
And what he holdeth we all hold; which were a hard thing to finde
amongst you, that all agreed in one for a far shorter space of time.
And if you will haue also a more auncient author, read S. Augustin
lib. de Spiritu and anima, ca. 50.
But let vs see what S. Thomas sayth, first he sheweth how deuotio^
is a spetiall act of religion,VVhat deuotion is, and vvhence it proceedeth. importing nothing els, but a deuowing of
a mannes hart to the pro^pt seruice of almightie God. And secondly he
sheweth that the intrinsecal immediate cause of deuotion in vs, is
contemplation and meditation of Gods benefits, and of our owne
defects, according to the saying of the Prophet,Psal. 38. in meditatione mea exardescet
ignis. the fier of deuotion waxeth hot in me by meditation.

And thirdly he declareth by diuers arguments that the proper effect of
deuotion is gladnes and hilaritie of mynde. So that heer ignorance
entereth neither for mother, nor daughter, nor grandmother, nor sister
of deuotion but rather the contrarie, deuotion proceedeth of knowledge
gotten by meditation, both of Gods perfections and of our imperfections,
as hath bin sayd: and S Augustin in the place before alleaged,
saieth in confirmation of this, Meditatio parit scientiam, scientia
compunctionem, compunctio deu^tionem, deuotio perficit orationem. Meditation
bringeth foorth knowledge, knowledge compunction, compunction
deuotion, deuotion maketh perfect our praier^ where is heer then
mother ignorance alleadged by Sir Francis?
And further to make more euident the wilfull malice of these good
fellow^s, that deuise matter to play vpon, S. Thomas maketh this obiection
to himself.VVhy the best learned are not alvvayes most deuout^ If contemplation which breedeth knowledge be
the cause and mother of deuotion, how hapneth it, that the greatest
wits, and moste learned men, and moste apt to high contemplations,
be not euer the moste deuout, but often times the simpler sort, as
women and the lyke, do f^el more deuotion then they? To which he
answereth, that those contemplations only serue to bring foorth deuotion,
that are fit to engender in vs the loue of God, and compunction
of our sinnes, as S. Augustin also noteth. In which cogitations
simpler people doe exercise themselues often tymes with more dilligence
and affection then the greater learned men, who are distracted
with other speculations, apperteyning rather to speculation then motion
of mynde, and in this sence saied moste truly S. Paul,1. Cor. ^. scientia inflat,
charit as edificat, knowledge doth puff vp with pryde oftentimes, but
the loue of God and our neighbour, is that which maketh vp the
building, and deuout Iohn Gerson, mallem sentire in me compunctionem,
quam scire eius definitionem. I had rather feel in my self compunction for
my sinnes, then know his definition.
Thus the^ you see, Sir Fra^cis, that we hold not ignora^ce for mother,
nor daughter, nor kinswoman of deuotion; but rather to the contrary,
we hold that deuotion is founded and proceedeth of knowledge,
wherof Catholiques haue bin euer and in all ages,The Catholiques more authors of knowledge then Protestants. more studious and
greater enimyes to ignorance, then protestants can with any reason
presume, for demonstration wherof, I would aske you Sir Francis (if
you be a man of any discours) who haue left more monuments of
science or knowledge to the christian worlde, your men or ours? who
haue builded our schooles and vniuersities in England? who haue
founded our colledges? who haue instituted the degrees of Doctors,

Licenciates, Maisters, and Bachelers, and apointed preferments for
them, you or we? And to speake of positiue Diuinitie only and Scriptures,
wherof you will seeme to bragg, who haue conserued and published
the Bible in the learned tongues of Hebrue, Greek, and Latin,
euen in our dayes? Were not the Biblia Complutensia, in all three tongues
printed and set foorth by the expences of a fransiscan frier Cardinall
Ximenes Arch-bishop of Toledo, within these three or fourscore
yeares? And were not the last Biblia Regia set foorth in foure or fiue
tongues by Catholique men, by the authority and charges of his Catholique
Maiestie of Spayn? And are not the Comentaries written
vpon the Scriptures by Catholique men euen at this day, aboue twenty
for one, more then those of Protestants? why then do heretiques,
lyke apes bragg, and prate in presence of lions, that in euery kinde o^
learning do bear them downe? But now to the second position.
VVhen they had thus setled this blinde cours (saieth our knight) to keepe the
people from knowledge, etc. Then they offer an other position,The second faigned position. that it was not for
lay men to medle with matters of religion, that belonged only and wholy as (...)
priueledge to Priests; thereby making them secure and careless of God and a^
godlinesse.
In setting downe of this forged position, there is some subtlety ioined
with impudencie. For first in the former parte, where he sayth
we hold, that it is not for lay men to medle with religion, he subtely leaueth
doubtful this worde (medle) either to signifie that lay men must not determine
or defyne matters of religion, or els not to medle or care for
them at all. In the former sence we graunt, that in Synods and Counsels,
where co^trouersies of fayth are to be treated, Priests and Clergy-men
haue only authority to define and determine:Act. 20. for that S. Paule
sayth that they are apointed by the holy Ghoste to gouern the church,
though before they come to determine, they do help themselues also
by the learning of lay men, and take their iudgement when they may
giue light, as in all Counsels is seen. But in the second sence it is moste
impude^t that he inferreth, that hereby we would make lay me^ secure and carele^
of God, and all godlinesse. For how doth it follow? The Queen of Engla^d
doth refer, the determinatio^ of all good lawes, orders, and vertuous proceedings
within the realm, vnto the voices of her priuie counsell, or of
the parlament, ergo heerby she maketh free, secure and careles, all the
rest of her realm, from obseruation of good orders, law, and honest behaueour.
Or in the self same matter of religion, I may argue thus, the
determination of matters of fayth is remitted only at this day in England,
to Bishops and ministers, and not to their wiues; ergo heerby those

^ood wiues are made secure and careles of God and all godlinesse: there
(...) no difference in the consequence at all.
VVherfore as malice here lost her eyes, so doth she also her wits in
^hat which followeth; for presently he leapeth to raile vpon the
^aints of heauen, and namely vpon S. Thomas of Canterbury (though
^mpertinent to his purpose) for he was treating of lay men as you
^aue hearde, whome he sayth we make careles of God and all godlinesse,
^or that we refer the determination of controuersies in religion, not
^nto them, but vnto Priests only, and now let euery one consider how
^his consequence holdeth (which enseweth) and it is enough (sayth he)
^f one of these fellowes come diligently and deuoutly to hear masse, and goe to confes^ion
once a year, to be as religious a man (secundum vsum Sarum) as could be wi^hed;
and though he were to be tainted and to be taxed with the grossest sinnes,
^et Rome by the authority from their vicar generall, had at rik to hale them into the
^able of their Saints, and so to canonize them; as we haue example of Thomas Becket
in Henry the thirds tyme, whose treasons to the prince were apparent and manifest,
etc.
But before I answere in the cause of S. Thomas,About S. Thomas of Canterbury. I will aduise this
^alumniator, first that his skoff of a religious man, secundum vsum Sa^um,
is ridiculous on his side, if we compare him to his holy ministers
that follow the vse of the tauern at chaering crosse, and do neither heare
masse nor go to confessio^ once in seuen yeares, nor meane to amend or
^^ake satisfaction; and then it is a great lye, that we require nothing els
^ut going once a year, and a far greater that men of the grossest sinnes
^re made Saints among vs: and finally nothing els is heer but iests and
lyes.
Secondly I put Sir knight in mynde, that talking of lay men, S.
Thomas example (that was a Priest and head of Priests) was not to his
purpose. Thirdly moste grosly and ignorantly he erreth in the tymes;
for that S. Thomas his death and canonization was in King Henry
the second and not the thirds, as fondly he affirmeth: but aboue thirty
years before king Henry the third was borne. Fourthly that this poore
man maketh an vnequal match to fight with Saints, and will rest in
the end with a broken head.
And finally that he sayth S. Thomas his treasons to his prince were
apparent and manifest, is a manifest slaunder. For there is nothing in all
the whole discourse of his controuersie with King Henrie the second,
that sauoureth of treason, or that impugned any one law of the realm
then in vre. For that the recourse he made to Rome, was lawfull at
that day, as it is now in any other Catholique country. The controuersie

was only about the liberty of the English Church, which the
king sought to abridge, and the other as primate to defend Nor did
the king or his officers chardge him with treasons, nor could they by
any shew of Iustice. For if in euery contention or dissention that a
spiritual subiect, or Ecclesiastical Prelate may haue with his temporall
prince, the subiect shalbe condemned of treason (according to
this seruile censure of Protestantes, that to flatter princes make them
absolute lordes both of body and sowl) then Iohn Baptist also must
be accompted a traytour, that dealt so peremptorily with his king
Herod, that was his liege Lorde in temporal affayres. Or if you will
haue examples of Christian princes, S. Ambrose must be a traytor,
first for resisting openly his Lord and king Valentinian the yonger, and
then for handling so hardly the elder Theodosius Emperour,Theodor. lib. 4. c 6. and lib. 5. c. 17. and deinceps. in Millan,
as he shut him out of the church, and made him goe home agayne
with shame and do penance. S. Hilarius also, and S Athanasius shalbe
traitors,Zozom. lib. 8 fere per totum. for their contentions with Constantius their lawull Emperour
and temporall Lord, who b^nished them from their Bishoprikes.
And the former of the two wrote two vehement bookes and
inuectiues, agaynst the sayd Emperour, and yet no man euer accompted
him a traytor for the same, but rather a great Saint, for his Christian
libertie and constancie. S. Chrysostome in lyke manner shalbe
condemned for a great traytor,Socrat. lib. 6. c. 16. who had greater contentions with his
temporal Lordes,Zozom. lib. 8. c. 17. Arcadius, and Honorius, Christian Emperours, and
with their wyues, Theodosia, and Eudoxia, then euer S. Thomas had
with king Henry the second.Niceph. l. 14 c. 43. For he pr^ached agaynst them publiquely,
with great vehemencie, and thundred out excomunication
agaynst them, and was twyce banished and driuen out of his Bishoprike
by their disfauor, and died in exile. And yet was he neuer called
or accompted a traytor, but a singuler holy man; and Theodosius the
yonger son of Arcadius, brought his body, with great solemnitie,
honour, and reuerence, into Constantinople, and wept most bitterly
for the sinnes of his pare^tes in persecuting so blessed a man. And as the
story sayth,Math. Paris. made prayer to him now dead for pardon of his fathers sinnes. As
did also often our king Henry the sonne, for the offence of his father
in being some cause of the death of this iust man, his pastor and spiritual
father.
Wel then to conclude this matter, treason there was none, nor
could be in this contention of S. Thomas agaynst king Henry; for it
was donn with all due respect of the Archbil hopes parte, and according
to the lawes ecclesiastical, both of churche and realm. And as for

the mannes behaueour and actions in the rest of his lyf, if we beleeue
three or foure historiographers together,Vide apud Lippoman, and Surium Mense Decemb. of greate credit and sanctitie,
that liued at the same tyme and conuersed with him, they were admirable
in all kynd of vertue. His death was by wilfull murder,
without iustice or commaundment of king or any magistrate, as all
the world knoweth. His canonization was presently vpon his death
by diligent inquiry of all factes and circumstances, and by vniuersal
applause of all christendom. King Henry the second excused himself
of the murder, admitted his canonization, builded his shryne and
sepulcher, adorned the same with greate giftes, came thither in person,
and not only denyed (as I haue sayed) that his intention euer extended
to his murder, but also tooke seuere punishement and penna^ce
of himself for the vniust wrath that by incitation of others he had
conceyued agaynst so holy a man:Edoard in vita D. Thom^, cap. 26. K. H. his voluntarie penance. of which penance of the kings, one
that liued at the same tyme and saw it, wryteth that he opened his
naked shoulders at the sepulcher, and receyued first fyue ierkes at
fyue Bishops handes, and fourescore and three at so many monks
^andes, and after lay on the bare ground, and other such circu^stances,
as in the author you may read.
All those that had byn enemies to the blessed man, or had had
parte in his death, came after to greate miserie by Gods iust iudgmentes.
And fynally, all the Christian world for these foure hundred
yeares haue holden him for a glorious martir, and builded many a
churche to God in his memorie, in other countries: many great mo^arches
haue come to England of purpose to visit his sepulcher, and
others haue sent great presentes and donaries. Many miracles haue
^yn recorded by graue authors and publique testimony of the whole
^ land, to haue byn wrought by God at his sepulcher, in witnes of his
^anctitie. All these testimonies then being extant in the world for so
many hundred yeares together, let any man iudge whether they ought
^ot to be of more weight with a wyse and pious Christian, then this
^raynles calumniation of a mad hasty hoat spurr, that knoweth
^ot what he sayth, and much lesse careth or indeuoureth how to
^roue it.
But let vs see now his third position that he feigneth to be among
^s, as a grou^d of religio^. These two irreligious and prophane grou^des (saith he)
^eing layd, though you haue seen that the knight hath layd them as fi^ions
of his own and grownds of ours, they proceed to a third,The third feigned position. and set it down
^r a Popish ground also, that it was a dangerous and deadly sinne for any man
(...) disobey the Pope and his cleargie, in any of their orders inioyned and commanded:

in such reuerence and regard must he and his cleargie be had, that the meanest^
masse Priest comming with authority from him,Impudent calumniation. must be obeyed vnder payn of damnation,
though he commaund that which is blasphemous before God in Christians,
and disloyal to men in subiects.
This is his narration, from which if ye separate a manifest lye o^
two with some fond exagerations (for without this kynde of leui^
the poore knight can make no batch) as for example, that the Pope an^
his Cleargie must be obeyed though they commaund blasphemies against God, and
disloyalty against princes, which is a shameles slander, and that the
disobedience (if he speake of omission) in any one order inioyned by
Pope and Cleargie is a deadly sinn, and the lyke: if you separat^
(I say) these ouer lauishings of the hastie knight; all the rest he obiecteth
is rather commendation of Catholique religion, then any reproche
at all, for in that he saith wee obey the meanest preest as the
highest, if he come with authoritie of the highest, he sheweth therby
that we haue among vs true obedience and subordination, and tha^
for conscience sake. Not respecting so much the person that commandeth,
as him for whome, and in whose name and authoritie h^
commandeth; and therin we fulfill, the precept of S. Paule. Obedite pra^positis
vestris and subiacete eis,Heb. 13. ipsi enim peruigilant, quasi rationem pro animabu^
restris reddituri. Obey your Prelates and humble your selues vnto them
(he distinguisheth not betwene high and lowe) for they keep diligent
watche ouer your soules, as men that must render account thero^
to God. And in other places he sayth, that this obedience must b^
with such reuerence, humilitie, and inward affection, as vnto Chry^^
himself,Ephes. 6. whose substitutes our spiritual superiours be, though neuer so
mean or contemptible in mannes sight.
And again, S. Paul sayth, this obedience must be, non solum propte^
iram, sed etiam propter conscientiam,Rom. 13. not only for feare of punishment, but
also for conscience, that is vnder pain of deadly sinne, or of damnation,
though this wise knight do iest at the phrase, which yet is the proper
phrase of S. Paul himself in the same place, saying, qui autem resistu^
damnationem sibi acquirunt, those that resist to obey, procure damnation
to themselues. And this is answere sufficient for so ydle an obiection^
that we obey the meanest masse Priest co^ming with authority of the
highest, in which matter I could teach Sir Francis a spirituall poin^
of doctrine, if he were capable of it, and most true, to witt, that the
meaner the substitute is, that is obeyed in the name and place of any
potent prince or superior, the greater honor is donn to the sayd prince
or superior, and the greater vertue is argued therby to be in him that

obeyeth, for that he is not induced by any talent or commendation of
the sayd substitute to obey him, but only for loue, respect, and reuerence,
of the partie whose authoritie he hath and in whose name he
cometh, and by this way a catholique man that obeyeth a mean Priest
comming in the Popes authoritie, or a mean qualified Pope comming
with the authoritie of Christe, leeseth nothing, whatsoeuer
the pride of heretiques do prattle to the contrary, and so much of this.
There remaineth then only the fourth grownd or positionThe fourth faigned position. to be examined
(for he would needs haue a whole mess of the^) and this he setteth
down in these wordes following.
And hauing thus made an open passage without stop to the mark and matter
they aimed at, and so he^med men in, as they could not see which way to escape da^ger,
but by them that layed the snare for them, they propound vnto them a mean of deliuerie
from all dangers (euen when they sinned immeditly against God) which is a
pardon from his holiness,Shameles lyinge. and absolution from his holy Priests. But if the decrees or
ordinances of their Romish sinagogue were transgressed, hardly any mercy was to
be had.
Thus writeh our knight if you will beleeue him, but hauing taken
him trip, in so many falshoods, forgeries, and calumniations before,
I presume that the discree^ reader will giue credit to him and his assertions
heerafter, by weight and measure, looking to his fingers as well
as to his lips, as men vse to do when they deal with egyptians. Now
then let vs examin what truth there is in this tale of his.
First and formost, who seeth not, how egregious a cauil it is, to say,Many cauiles and falshoodes.
that Catholiques by teaching men to obey their superiors simply and
^or conscience sake, and vnder paine of sinne as you heard also S. Paul
to teach, that thereby they do bring men into snares,Rom. 13. or hem them in
as this mannes phrase is. By which argume^t he may prooue also, that
God himself when he gaue the law to the Iewes, did hem them in to
^nares of sinne; which yet the Apostle so vehemently confuteth in the
^. and 8. chapters of his epistle to the Romans. Secondly, it is a noto^ious
vntruth to say, that the means we prescribe of deliuery from
^ll dangers of sinne, is the Popes pardon: and a far greater and more
^mpudent lye it is, when he addeth by a parenthesis (euen when they sinn
^mmediatly against God) for that the Catholique doctrine is cleer in this
^oint, that the Popes and Churches indulgences,Vide quest. 26 and 27. addit. 6. auayle not to re^oue
mortal sinnes,Tho. ad 3. p. and caet. tract. 9. opustul. de indulgentijs. but only are giuen where all such sinne, is already
^ardoned, by contrition and confession, and vertue of the Sacrament,
^nd that there remaineth only some temporall punishment in this or
^he next life to be remitted. Neither can the Pope pardon the guilt of

sinne it self by any other way then by the means of the Sacrament of
confession, and absolution (which Sacrament hath his force of the
blood of Christe) as euerie ordinarie Priest authorised to heare confessions,
may do the like.
And so thirdly, it is great ignorance in our knight if not malice, to
ioine tog^ther (as he doth) the Popes pardon and the absolution of his
holy Priests, which haue great difference in this matter; for that the
pardon stretcheth not to remit sinne it self (as hath bin said) but only
the temporal paines depending of sinne, after it is remitted: but priests
absolution in the Sacrament of confession is sufficient to remitt any
sinne,Ioan. 20. if the penitent be contrite, according to comission giuen by
Christe, quorum remiseritis peccata remittuntur eis, and quorum retinueritis retenta
sunt, whose sinnes ye forgiue shalbe forgiuen, and whose sinnes
you shall retaine shalbe reteined. So then absolution is a different
matter from indulgence and pardon.
Fourthly, that the transgressions against the decrees and ordinance^
of the Catholique church (which wickedly he nameth the Romish
Synagogue) be more hardly forgiuen among vs, then greater sinnes
and those namely that be immediatly comitted against God himself
is a shameles slaunder, and neuer taught by any Catholique man i^
the world, and so vnworthy to be further refuted.
Now then he hauing set down these four absurd grounds of religion
in our name, feigned by himself, and accompanied with so many o^ther
lies and falshoods, as you haue heard: you shall see how he maketh
his conclusion,A fonde co^clusion. and triumpheth as though he had donn somwhat
of importance: these are his woords.
Thus haue you the blind cours they sought to hreed vs in, by debarring vs the
cleer light of the holy writte^ woord of God; and the carelesnes they sought to settle in
vs of all religion, by making it a thing impertinent to vs, as though we had no soule^
to care for, etc.
This conclusion to him that hath red the former foolish positions
with their confutations, may serue for some disporte^ and recreation
to behold how his seelie knight bestirreth himself vpon castles builded
in the aire by himself, fals imaginations, and sotish apprehensio^s o^
his owne, especially in a long ridiculous discours that he maketh immediately
vpon these woords in his booke; where imagining that al^
goeth by pardons with vs, and that pardons may be had for mony, he
inferreth that all rich men may easily be saued in our religion, without
any difficulty: and yet sayth he, Christe taught vs, that it was a^^asy
for a camel to pas thorogh a needles eye, as for a rich man to go^

to heauen: and so he marueileth how these thinges can stand together.
To which I might answer, that it seemeth as easy to teach a beare to
play vpon a taber, as to learn Sir Francis to be a good deuine, and that
I would more easily take vpon me to make a camel to goe thorough
any needles eye (in the sence that Christe spake it) or any rich
man in the world to enter into heuen (if he would follow my counsel)
then to frame Sir Francis old head to vnderstand the depth of Catholique
doctrine. And therefore amiddest his doubts, I leaue him to his
ministers, except he will resolue to be a catholique and goe to confession,
for then his ghostly father, by the penance he may chaunce to en^oine
vnto him, will let him see and feele that all goeth not by pardons,
nor yet by money among vs. And that there is another more
streight needles eye for him to enter (seeing he is rich) then the buying
of pardons, if he will goe to heauen after the catholique manner; to
witt, by contrition, confession, and satisfaction, which God graunt
him to do, for otherwise he will neuer come there, seeing that the open
and easie cart way of only fayth, is far different from the needles
eye and narow path that Christe speaketh of.


THE THIRD INCOVNTER,
ABOVT GREAT PERILS SVPPOSED TO
be vvrought to her Maiestie by Catholiques, both in
the tyme of Queen Marie and since. VVith the
cleering of diuers particuler men that
are slandered therin.
AS the principal marke that parasites do comonly shoot
at with great Princes, is not only to handle pleasant
and delightfull matter, to gain grace to themselues, but
to mingle also biting stuff now and then, wherby to
pinch and draw blood of their neighbours: so this gentle
knight, hauing heaped many things together by
^atterie and forging, in the beginning of his booke, to claw thereby
^he present state and prince, as in the former two conferences you haue
^een: he entereth now vpon a more odious argument, to exasperate
^oth the one and the other against Catholiques,The malignitie of Sir Francis. whome he would gladly
^aue destroied, if the strength of his hornes, were according to the
measure of his hatred. But he being but a barking beagle among the
^owndes of Huntington, though neuer so cruel and bloody mouthed

I hope so to rebate his choller before I make an end, or at least-wise
his force, as albeit he barke still yet shall he not much byte, nor doe
any other effect of moment, then discouer the worme of heresie, that
lyeth vnder his poisoned tongue, inciting him to furie and woodnes
against Catholiques.
First then touching perils past by her Maiestie, during the reign of
Qu. Marie, this gentleman writeth thus in recital of the same.
I hasten to put you in minde of our most blessed and happie delliuerance out of this
spirituall pit and thraldom of popery and superstition, by ladie Queen Elizabeth, as
the instrument: whose perill and danger before she came to that abilitie to performe
this holy woorke among vs, I may not pass ouer; for by Gods goodnesse only and wholy
she was preserued, her life being malitiously and with great cunning shot at, by
the Romish clergie, then in place of credit. For Gardener that most prowd and bloody
monster, left no corner of his wit vnsought (being wise enough to woorke mischief)
but set all his skil and cunning awoorke to shorten her dayes, and to preuent
her by bloody slaughter of her sacred person, from euer being our Queen: and no
reach of man can yeeld me a reason of her doliuerance, but the mighty God of power,
etc.
In which woords you may see how our poet to make the succes
of his feigned comedy more wonderfull and plausible, frameth strange
mister^es and miracles of mil-wheeles, deuising mtghtie dangers and
mayn perils auoyded without any means humane at all; neither is
there any reason able to be rendred to him of his riddle as himself affirmeth,
but I shall indeuoure to solue both the one and the other
and that without any miracle, by humane reason only if Sir Francis
can vnderstand it, and now I begin.
That the state of lady Elizabeth now our Souereign Queen,The estate of Lady Elizabeth in Q. Maries tyme. was
subiect to diuers suspitions and dangers during the reign of her sister
Queen Marie, no man of discretion in matter of state will deny, or can
greatly merueil at; for she being the next heir to the crown, and her
sister hauing no issue, nor any great probability euer to haue: and furthermore
being presumed by many, to be inclined to a different religio^,
though she shewed it not, and that all the disconte^ted of that state
depended of her, and made their recours vnto her as to their rising sun
and future hope; no marueil though she was bad in ielousie, especially
seeing the often and perilous attemptes of VVyate, Courtney, the
Carews, Cobham, Throgmorton and the like, did seem to leane also
that way (for I will enter no further to discus those affaires) and so did
hold both the Queen and state in suspence and care. VVhich circumstances
what daungers they are wont to bring to future pretenders,

diuers examples vnder our former kings, and lastly that of the
Queen of Scots in our days, may easily teach vs.
But that the life and blood of her grace at that day, should be so earnestly
and malitiously sought after, by so many and so pote^t men and means,
as this knight heer and in other places of his booke, doth affirm,
and would haue beleeued, to witt, by Bishop Gardener then Chancelor,
by B. Bonner, D. Story, and al the Catholique clergy by name:
and furthermore by the King of Spayne himself and by all Spanyards;
by the Queen also then in gouernment, and consequently by her counsel
and nobility with her, and by all catholiques together, who had
power at that day to doe as they thought best, and no impediment either
at home or from abroad (that I know) to let them in their
^^esignments, and yet all this notwithstanding, that nothing in this affaire
so much desired should be effectuated; this passeth indeed (if it
were true) all rule of reason, and might set Cicero to schoole again,
who teacheth in his thetoriques, for an euident for me of argument,
that, qui potuit facere and voluit, fecit. he that both would and could doe
a thing must needs be presumed to haue donn it. VVhich yet, in this
our case holdeth not, as it seemeth, for that our knight affirming that
the parties aforenamed would haue made away the Lady Elizabeth,
and I assuring that they could; yet is it euident that she was not, and
^herefore either I am deceiued in their power, or he in their willes, or
some other secret cause must be sought out, which he will needs haue
to be miracle, but I think it not necessary, and so shall indeuour to re^ell
the mistery by way of reason if it may be.
First then, I doe not deny, but that the preseruation of Lady Elizabeths
life in Queen Maries time, may be referred to the prouidence of
^lmightie God, as the first and principal cause, who aboue our reach
^or reasons to himself best knowne, doth dispose of all matters, but
^specialy of princes liues and states: yet deny I that no secondary or
^mmediate humane causes can be found to haue concurred also with
^his prouidence of God, as this our miracle-maker affirmeth: for I can
^ecount him diuers causes and those pregnant also, and potent, which
^id concur in those days to the preseruation of her grace, which being
most euident and true,Causes of securitie to Lady Elizabeth in Q. Maries tyme. doe deliuer the case from all such necessity of
miracle as this poore knight would perswade vnto vs.
And first of all was the age and yong years, bewty, felicity, meek^es,
and other good graces and talents of the princesse her self, which
^rought much with all sortes of men, but especially with the Span^ardes,
and other strangers, and aboue all with the yong king himself,

as often his neerest about him at that day haue reported since. And
namely the Duke of Feria while he was aliue, who being then but
Count and sent Embassador from the king (then lying in Flanders)
to visit Queen Marie, had such earnest and spetiall charge
to visit and comfort the L. Princesse Elizabeth immediatly after his
Embassage to the Queen, that all of the court of England merueiled
at it and some perhaps did not greatly like of it, and in very deed the
yong lady was so extraordinarily fauored, and affected by his Catholique
Maiestie, and all his nobility present with him in England, as it
is most base and barberous ingratitude in this sicophant to deny it now,
and monstrous inciuility to accuse them of cruelty in this behalf, their
affections being so notoriously known to the co^trary in those times,
and this was one cause and perhaps not the least of her graces
safety.
 Secondly, was the generall hope that moste men had of her graces
being a Catholique, as then she bore herself both in woorde and deed,
hearing two Masses among other things euery day, one for the quick,
and the other for the dead, and receiuing no seruant lightly into her
hows or seruice, nor retaining any towards her, but with this expres^
condition, and many other signes and arguments that way.
 Thirdly, was there a great reason of state, that stood mightely also
for her graces safety at that tyme, in that if she had fayled, the next
pote^t prete^der seemed the Queen of Scots, the^ maried to the Dolphin
and heir of France; who by this means might haue come to be king
of France, England, and Scotland together, which thing many English-men
but more Spanish, could not abyde to hear of.
Now then, let our miracle-maker tel me, whether these be no reasons,
and whether no reach of man can yeeld him any reason of her graces deliuerance.
If his reach and insight in matters of state be no greater then this, it is
no merueil though he be not of her Maiesties counsell, though he
flatter neuer so deeply for it, and thus much may be said of her graces
dangers in Queen Maries tyme. Let vs see now what hath happened
since. This notable calumniator beginneth thus.
But when this our Soueraigne Lady Q. Elizabeth was fully possessed of this her
princelie place,VVicked calumniatio^s. and had the roiall diadem and crown, with the applause and liking
of all true harted English-men, both nobles, clergie, and comons, as a due by right
belonging vnto her; then began Satan to rage, and his ministers to fret and chafe.
I would aske of this Sir knight, by whome was Queen Elizabeth
put in possessio^ of this her princely place, and by whose hands and helps
receiued she this royal diade^? was it by ha^ds of protesta^ts onely or

principally, or of Catholiques? he cannot say of protestants, for he nameth
also heer the clergie; whereof none of the principall (that is
of the Bishops that had hand in this worke) was then a protestant;
and very few of the nobility, and far the less parte of the co^monalty:
now then could these men that were Catholiques, fret and chafe so
soone, to see her Maiesty placed in the crown, wherin themselues had
willingly and freely placed her, aduaunced her, crowned her, and a^ointed
her, taken her othe of preseruing the lawes and priuileges, of
^he realm, and sworne fidelity to her agayn? These calumniations
of this carping knight are but tales of a tub, to intertain fools and igora^t
^eople, that know not how matters passed at that day. But let vs ex^mine
notwithstanding, some particulers of the hostilities which he
^lleageth: aduising first the reader by the way that if it be honorable
^o her Maiesty now (as it is) to be named sacred and anoynted, as the
^anderer himself seemeth also to take it, for that often he vseth the
^ermes, this also she hath only and wholy from the Catholiques, for
^hat protestants do not vse but rather do iest at the ceremony, calling
^t greazing,Leu. 4. and ^. Num. 35. 1. Reg. 19. 15. 16. 17. espetially in Priests, to whome yet first of al and principal^y
this sacring and anointing by Gods ordenance was vsed, and afterwards
to kings and princes by imitation only of Priestly dignity in
^his behalf: and these are the benifits her Maiestie hath receiued of Ca^holiques;
now to the hurts and perils obiected by this calumniator.
In the first place he bringeth in D. Story,About Doctor Storie. whome he titleth by the
^ame of a blood-sucker, as he called before B^ Gardener, bloody monster (for
^ou must note as he is light witted so is he foule mouthed also) and he
^lleageth against D. Story, that he should say in the first parlament
when he saw how matters were like to go in religion) that if his counsell
^ad bin followed in Queen Maries tyme, they had stricken at the roote meaning
^ereby (sayth this man) the bereauing of our deer Souereign of her life: a bloody
^each of a bloody traitor, who afterward was brought by a good chance from be^nd
the seas, indited, araigned, found guiltie, and condemned of treason, and recea^ed
his iudgment at the seat of iustice, and was executed accordingly, as he was
^ell worthy at Tiburn: and so may all speed that wish to Queen El^zabeth as he
^d. Thus far the accuser.
In which narration, three things may be considered: first Doctor
^ories woords; then the interpretation therof by this accuser; and
^irdly the punishment which he suffered for them. And in all three
^u shall see more passion then truthe, and more rigor then reason,
^ I be not deceaued, wherof let the reader be iudge with in^fferency.
 For the woords the^selues, they had neuer yet any other proof th^
they were spoken, to my knowledge, but only that his enimies affirmed
them (to make him therby more odious) when they had him in
their power, and desired his destruction For I neuer heard that him^self
confessed them, either in liberty, captiuitie, at the bar, or at his
death, and that he should not speak them (though he had though^
them) when Queen Elizabeth was now setled in her crown, as this K^
affirmeth (he being knowen to be wise and no fool) all reason may induce
vs to think and beleeue, seeing they could not serue to any purpose
but to his own ruine.
 But let vs suppose secondly, that he should speak them and say, th^
he was sory they had not stricke^ at the roote of heresie it self in Queen
Maries dayes; why is it necessarie we should admit the bloody commentarie
and heauy exposition only of his enemies? and namely o^
this his malignant accuser, who will needs haue him mean by those
woords the bereauing of our dear Souereigns life? was lady Elizabeth
(I pray you) taken to be this roote of heresie in Queen Maries time
being holde^ by most Catholiques to be no protestant at all, as befor^
I haue shewed? why might not D. Storie meane rather (if he had
spoken those woords) of some Bacon, some Cecill, some Cook, som^
Knoles, some Throgmorto^, some Russel, and many other like, that were
knowen protestants in Q. Maries time, supporters of others, and p^^ctitioners
against the present state, and yet suffered, yea borne out by
knowen Catholiques, whyle other poor coblers, clothiers, cariers, ^
such like were punished? at which ma^ner of dealing I do co^fesse, tha^
D. Storie being a man of zeal in his religion,Doctor Stories z^le and complaynt. misliked exceedingly a^^
stormed also publiquely one day, before the Bishops and priuie Councell,
in a publique consistory (for that Councellors also for honours
sake, and to protect their frends and kinred, would needs be inquisitors
in that gouernme^t) complaining grieuously of this abuse, in somuch
as he would needs haue giuen ouer publiquely his office (...)
Commission in presence of all the rest of the inquisitors and Councellors
together, for that some of the sayd Councell had opposed
themselues against him about the apprehension of a certain gentleman
heretique, which he took very vnkindly, and then indeed he^
foretold them freely what would insew of this their partial manne^
of proceeding. Wherby also it is much more probable that his
complaint of the root of heresie remaining and not touched, was
meant rather of the infected nobility and gentry, within the land (in
which number perhaps your brother the Earle and your self also

^id enter) then of lady Elizabeth at that day, for that in deed she was
not the root then, nor did the change of religion spring of her principally
afterwards, but of those other inferior roots which I haue men^ioned.
But yet let vs graunt further, for arguments sake, that he did speak 
those woords as a Counseller, in those dayes, and that they might be
wrested by probability also against the lady Elizabeth in Queen Maries
time,A Counselour may speake freely. yet do I aske why should they be made treason or punished
for such, in this Queens raign? was not her Maiestie as subiect then, and
the D. as a Counseller, and therby bound to speak freely that which
^he thought surest for his prince, and realme at that day? it might argue
perhaps some lack of tender affection to the lady (and yet perhaps
not that neither, seing the father in such a case, doth speak often times
against his only sonne or daughter) but treason in no rigor right or
reason can it make no more then for a Counsellor in this Gouerment
of her Maiestie that now is, to speak what he thinketh freely, about
any person that may pretent to the crowne heerafter. Wherefore,
though all this were true which this man aleadgeth (as many arguments
proue them to be fals) yet D. Storie leauing afterward his coun^rie,
and going ouer the seas either with licence or without (when there
was no statute to the contrary) and being brought home again by force
^nd trechery of a shipman, that alured him into his ship, and so caried
him away; all this I say maketh neither treason, nor any other trespas
of moment, in the sight of indiferent men, and consequently neither
his hasty araignment, condemnation and execution vpon his return
^wherof this cruel harted knight triumpheth) doth so much proue that
he was guilty of great crymes, as that he had potent and passionate enemies
(as Christe had before Pilate, that by shoots and clamors sought
his blood by any means whatsoeuer) for that he had bin a more zelous
catholique then some other of his coat and degree, in Queen Maries
^aign, fo^ which catholique men think, that he is to receiue a great
^rown of glory and fame also eternall vpon earth. And so the trial of
this matter lyeth stil in the darke to be examined by that great iudge
when he cometh to look ouer the iudgments of mortall men and re^eal
that which is amiss. And so much for this matter.
Next after D. stories affair,About the Bul. of Pius Quintus. commeth in the roaring Bull of Pius
Quintus, with the excomunication of her Maiesty, which serueth for a
^ommon bugg against all catholiques euery where, as well at barres
benches, and places of iustice, where other particuler and personal
accusations do want, as also in pulpits, schooles, sermons, books, and

declamations, for making vp the complet furniture of those places; and
still it is so vrged, as though all english catholiques must needs be guilty
of this fact of the Pope, and so be participant also of the offence giuen
therby against her Maiestie, if any way they beleeue or admit his Ecclesiastical
Iurisdiction and authoritie; which consequence notwithsta^ding
is so apparently fals and cauillous in it self (for that all catholiques
were not priuie to Pius Quintus his reasons and informations in that
behalf) and it hath bin so euidently refuted heretofore, by diuers most
cleer and manifest reasons and treatises, that I mean not to stand at this
present vpon that point, especially with so silly a concurrent as this
gentleman is, in matter of dispute: whose ridiculous proposition in this
place, that no mortall child of man hath power to dispose of kingdoms, or to depose
princes, or to dispence with subiects for not obeying etc.A ridiculous proposition. semeth to proceed
not only of deep ignorance both in reason and storie, but of so base a
brest also and seruile a cogitation, as if temporal kingdoms were matters
of Godhead and immortality.
And no doubt, but if such a knight had liued in Nero or Caligula
his time (that would needs be Gods) he had bin a fit fellow to fal down
and adore them; and tell the people most religiously, with both hand^
held vp to heauen (as he doth heer) that no mortal childe of man had power
to iudge of their doings (being great and high princes) or to deny them obedience
in any matter hauing once sworne obedience in temporal affairs,
for this is our case heer, whether a prince once admitted and established,
may be towched afterwards or disobeied in any matter, or
for any cause either of religion or otherwise, and that by any mortall
childe of man, and our tender conscienced knight resolueth the case that
he cannot, and consequently that the romanes did euill in disobeying
such Emperors as would be Gods, and other mortal children of men
for displacing of their princes once receiued, for what cause soeuer, for
all this enseweth of his fond and heathenish position.
But let this Prince-idolater that professth to be a great Bible-clark, read
ouer the four books of kinges, and he shal see how many kingdoms
were disposed of and princes deposed by mortal children of men, and the
same alowed also by God himself. And in our kingdom of England
since it was a monarchie, both before and since the conquest, he(...) ha^
finde very many examples of mutations in like manner made by mortal
children of men (seing they are now dead that made them) which
yet he must approue for good and lawful, except he will impugne the
succession of her Maiestie that now is, which is not likely, seeing the
poore man flattreth so seriously with all the arte and power he can.

And therfore leauing this matter as ouer long an argument for me to
^andle in this place, I shall only consider briefly of three points vpon
this his speach, that may yeeld sufficient light to the matter in ha^d.
The first is,Three things considerable in this knights accusation. that wheras this accuser affirmeth the Catholiques of
England to haue begun to fret and chafe against her Maiestie, as soon as she
was in full possession of her crown, and consequently to practis treasons by
the Pope of Rome, let it be noted out of our own chronicles, what
year this Bull of Pius Qinutus came foorth,Anno Domini 1570. regni 13. and therby they shall see,
how many years (which were a dozen at the least) passed after her Ma^esties
coronation, befo^e any such thing was attempted by any of the
Popes of Rome, so as this was not like to proceed of their maligning
her Maiesties state and diadem, as this parasite pratleth, but vpon
^ome other cause giuen rather from England, as himself after page 57.
of his libel confesseth in these woords: The king of Spain and Popes malice
(saith he) to the Queen, is not for that she is daughter to king Henry the eight,
and sister to Queen Marie, but because she hath banished the Pope that Antechriste
of Rome; etc. ergo the Q. began with the Pope, and the Pope not with
her.
But secondly let it be considered, in what maner this banishment of
the Pope was contriued,Incitation of Popes by the English Protestantes. and that in this time of peace between Rome 
and England, after the Queens entrance, what was donn at home by
vs against the Pope, to stir him to this act of hostilitie. First, not only
the whole body of religion was changed, that had indured aboue a
thowsand years and this contrarie to expectation and promes, but diuers
peculier statutes were made also, against the Bishop of Rome by
^ame, with the most spiteful and opprobrius woords and termes, that
any malice of man could deuise: all the whole Catholique body of
England enforced to sweare against him, and his authoritie by name,
or els to incur most greeuous and capital damages: the like detestable
othe was offered and repeated again and again to all such and as often
as they were to take any degree of preferment within the land. All
the clergie was deposed and depriued of liuings and libertie, only for adhering
to the Popes religio^, and the Bishops and other principal prelates
of our land, committed to prisons, holds, and restraints, for the same
cause, and there continued vnto their dying day, for that they refused
to subscribe to so violent a statute. Then such as would leaue the realme
or fle were inhibited, those that staied at home were inforced to
participate, not only of these other, but also eating new deuised Sacrament
b^ead against their consciences, condemned also and anathemazed
by the luthera^s, first founders of this new religio^ The Pope euery

where was cried out of and reuiled, made a matter of scorne and infamy,
not only in all sermons pulpits and conuenticles, but also in comedies
pl^ies and interludes, by euery base and contemptible companion.
In the schooles of vniuersities most ridiculous propositions were
set vp as paradoxes,Contemptuous proceeding. to be defended, that the Pope (forsooth) was Antechriste,
the man of sinne talked of by S. Paule, and other like toyes.
And that which moued perhaps more then all the rest, was that these
things were not only practised and alowed of in England and Ireland
subiect to her Maiestie; but were begun to be introduced also by ou^
meanes, that is, by the turbulent attempts and practises of protestants
(her Maiestie perhaps knowing litle therof) in all the realmes and regions
round about vs; and namely in France, Flanders, and Scotland,
where the warres, tumults, rebellions, deuisions, sects, heresies, and other
outrages came to be so many and excessiue great, as the lawful^
and naturall princes of those contries, seeing themselues so far indomaged
and highly endaungered therby, were inforced, first of all to
complain vnto the Pope, as chief pastor and common father of all
to vse such spirituall redresse, as he might for his party, in respect o^
his ecclesiasticall souereigntie, whilest they prepared also to defend^
themselues, and their troobled countries by force of armes.
Not malignitie then of the Pope and his adherents agaynst he^
Maiesties crown and diadem (wherunto willingly they had concur^^
and assisted) moued this first breach and bickering as this malignan^
barking-whelp would beat into mens eares, but necessities of great^^
violence inforced the same. And if perhaps we in England after the
change made in religion, had taken that course which Protestants did
in Germany, to follow our new opinions without gawling of others
none of these open hostilities had euer insued. And let this stand fo^
the second notandum, wherby is ouerthrown all this slanderous ca^lumniation
of the kinght.
 The third note may be to consider with indifferency what this ac^
of the Popes excomunication is in it self, or how far it may in reason
and iustice (without malice and calumniation) be streched against th^
Catholique subiects of England.
In it self it was an act of iurisdiction between two superiours,The excomunication agaynst the Queene. th^
one Ecclesiastical, the other temporal, wherin the subiects sentenc^
or consent was neuer asked nor admitted.
Secondly, it was no new thing, for that we see and read that th^
like hath happened often and vpon many occasions, between th^
Bishops of Rome and diuers other great princes, common-wealthes

Emperours, Kings, and monarchs, and sometymes also with kings of
England, and of late with the king of France, as all the world knoweth.
And yet the subiect is neither afflicted nor accused for it, nor
^nforced to change their old receaued beleef about the Popes autho^itie
in such matters, though in that particuler fact for reuerence of
^heir naturall Prince, and dew respect in lyke manner to the other,
^hey will not medle, nor yet discuss the question whether the Pope
^ad iust reason or sufficient information whervpon to proceed, but
with dutifull loue and honour to the one, and to the other, they chuse
^ather to commend the matter to almightie God, which is the only
^hing that resteth for a pious and dutiful subiect to perform in such
^ases, when two superiours shall disagree, vntill God by his goodnes
^hall determine the controuersy and bring all to some happie end, as
^e hath donn of late in France, where after the foresaied excomuni^ation
by the see Apostolique, the same king hath receyued exceeding
great fauours and benefytes from the same sea; and Bishop, which almightie
God graunt we may once see also in our countrie, to the con^entment
of all parties, and therby all such hastie hoate-spurres as this
^s, who still would kindle more fier, and bring all to desperation may
^e reiected and put to silence.
And with this I might end the matter of her Maiesties perils,Other hostile actions obiected. were
(...) not that this playntiffe proceedeth on with a long rehersal of other
^ostile actions, committed (as he sayth) by English Catholiques also
^gaynst her Maiestie. As the rising of the two earles in the north,
^orthumberland and VVestmerland; the rebellion of diuers of the
^obilitie in Irland; Doctor Sanders going thither, Mayster Francis
^hrogmortons practises in England, M. Charles Pagets going
^orth of the land, the other two earles, of Arundell, and Northumber^ands
commitment, and the like. All which are ouer long to examine
more in particuler, and all put together do weigh so litle in the matter
we haue in hand, as by that which followeth shal appeare.
None of all these actions brake out to any hostilitie, sauing only
^he two earles rysing, and gathering their tenantes together in the
^orth, where yet there followed neither battayle nor bloodshed, and
^hey were no sooner almost together nor heard of at the courte,
^ut they were seuered agayn and retyred into Scotland and Flanders.
And this is all the actual rysing, that hath byn among Catholiques
within England during the raigne of fourtie yeares; notwithstanding
^ll the pressures, vexations, dishonours, rapines, slaughters, impri^onments,
and deaths which they haue suffered in this space, at the

hands of Protestantes, Puritans, and Atheists for their religion.
VVhich afflictions layd together haue byn more then euer subiecte^
since England was a monarchie, suffered at home in this kynde.
Now then mark that which followeth. If we looke one our own
chronicles,Of the patience of Catholiques. we shall scars finde any one Princes raigne (though o^
far fewer yeares then this) euen when the people were all of one reli^gion,
and none of these afflictions and pressures layd vpon them, bu^
that many more commotions, troobles, and rebellions happened, then
in this long tyme, and among so infinite exasperations haue insued.
And if we looke vpon the short raignes of king Edward and Queen
Mary, and the parte of king Henryes tyme after alteration in religion,
there is no comparison. And whence cometh all this (trow^
you) but of the singuler vertue and vnspeakeable patience of the Catholique
subiectes of our tyme vnder her Maiestie, that haue liued
and suffered all this with gronning only, and secret teares, without
further breach to defend themselues, or reuenge ther iniuries.
And truly when forayn nations do both see and read the bloody
list of lawes made against Catholiques and Catholique religion in England,
within these forrtie yeares; and do heare of the rigorous execution
of thesame, together with the incredible molestations that therby
are layed vpon so great and potent numbers of people, that lack no^^corage
also to aduenture euen to death it self in fauor of their said religion,
they rest astonished, and do wonder how either the countri^^
can remayn voyd of continual tumults, or the prince free from infinit^
dayly perils; seing that desperation in such matters is the next dore to
all extremities, especially the persecution beinge so rigorous and violent,
so vniuersal and exorbitant, as infinite people are interessed and
touched therby, either inmediatly by themselues, or in their children,
seruantes, kinsfolkes, or frendes, whereupon fynallie they do greatly
admire (as I haue said) the modestie, patience, and longanimitie of the
English Catholiques. And so much the more, for that the Protestant
when he is vnder and dis^auored, hath no patience at all, but breaketh
out continually to most violent tumultes and rebellions.
If we do consider the deportement of the protestantes in Queen
Maries tyme,The patie^ce of Protesta^tes. and how euery moneth almost they had either rebellious
or new turbule^t practises against the state and Queen (not being
ashamed at length also by publique bookes to make all weomen incapable
of royal gouernement) a man would think this fellow very
shameles,Goodmans booke. not to blush to make this discourse agaynst Catholiques, so
soon after those broiles of his owne people. And yet these differe^ces are

to be noted in the cause, first that Q. Maryes gouernement dured but
^tle more then foure yeares, and this of her Maiestie hath donne fourty:
^en were the principal protestantes not touched nor pressed, but now
^o Catholiques at all is spared: they were restreyned only, from brining
in of nouelties, these are forced to renounce their old religio^, that
^om the first co^uersion of the land they and their fathers haue profes^ed,
and vowed to keep: they had few or no forrayn princes of their
^eligion round, about to geue them courage or assist^nce, these haue
^e most and strongest in Christendome, and yet are quiet: and this for
England.
But if we passe our eye beyonde this litle Iland also, and consider
^hat reuel these frends of Sir Francis, though not of Saynt Francis,The reuels of forayne heretiques.
^aue made in other countries, since the beginning of their innoua^ions
to witt in Germanie, France, Flandres, Poland, Swethland,
Demnarke and Scotland, agaynst their true and lawful princes; what
^rmies, campes, battayles, and insurrections, what desolation of coun^ries,
cities, townes, and linages, they haue caused; and what slaughter
^nd hauok of Christian blood they haue procured; more impudent and
^idiculous will this clamor and exaggeratio^ of our crowching knight
^eem to be, about two earles only,Northumb. VVestmerl. that vpon feare of force gathered
^heir seruants, neighbours, and tenants together, and presently fled,
^nd of two or three other gentlemen, wherof the one was put to death
^or hauing a description of certaynes portes and hauens only found in
^is chamber,Fr. Throg. Char. Pag. and for that he had some intelligence with the Queene
of Scottes and with Don Bernardin de Mendoza Embassador for the
King of Spayne resident in England (though nothings els could be
^roued against him) the other went beyond the feas for that he could
^ot lyue with his conscience at home, and neuer hurted them since.
And of two earles more committed, the one vpon suspition, and nothing
proued against him, that was known before his piteous death,
which God only knoweth how he came vnto: the other for flying first
for his conscience,Northumb. Arundel. out of the realme (he beeing taken on the sea and
brought back again) and after diuers yeares of imprisonment without
any further matter layd to his charge was after condemned, principally
if not onely for a Masse heard or caused to be said in the tower
of Lo^don, which was such a treason as all his noble ancestors would
haue byn glad to haue ben co^de^ned for, and his posteritie may glori that
he was: for that neuer Earle in England synce it was Christian was
euer brought to the bar for such and so glorious and so holy a treason.
And to conclude all these accusations in deed layd together against

English Catholiques are but very tryfles and triuial things, that dayly
happen in moste quiet and peaceable commonwealthes, where no man
is afflicted by the state at all. But that infinite greater and more haynous
stirres and breaches haue not bin raysed within the space of fourtie
yeares, where so deadly differences in religion, and so continual
persecution against so great a body haue bin in vre; this I say (as I
sayd before) that to men of iudgement and indifferencie, and of experience
in gouernment, is a maruelous wonder, and a moste famous
canonization of the patience, magnanimitie, and fidelity of
English Catholiques; and her Maiestie and the realme are happy
that they haue such subiects. And if they will not beleue me, let
them but turn the leaf a litle against protestants, puritans, and other
new sectaries, and restrain them from their desires, and pinch them
with persecution, but a quarter of that they haue donn to Catholiques,
and they shall se and feele by experience which kynde of people
is more apte to obey, or to woork turmoiles and perils to their
weal-publique and gouernours. And therby also will appear the
vanitie and malice of this impertinent and spitefull slanderer, who
endeth his inuectiue with these woords.
There is no end (saith he) with this people, their practises are pestilent, their
perswasions perilous, their platforms traiterous, and to serue their turn they want
not cunning to execute all: so violent they are in their vilanies and treasons, and so
shameles they are in their falshoods and dissimulations. And again: by this taste
you shal see the brutish vilanyes of our bastard countrimen, and vnderstand what
iust cause there is to detest both the traitors and their treasons, etc.
To all which I answere, that a railing tongue vntied, is a wilde
beast without a bridle, and to ruun after him with a cudgell, though
at certain turnings many blowes and bastinadoes may be giuen him
(as in parte there hath bin I suppose to this man, by conuincing his
falshoods, raylings and calnmniations) yet is it a wearisom exercise
euen to the giuer himself, and therefore I will let him runn, vntil
wearied by his own furye, he become more calme, and enter into som
more temperate cogitations, if not of truth and charity yet of christia^
honor and honestie, and with this I end our third incounter.



HASTINGES VVACH-VVORDE.
THE FOVRTH INCOVNTER,
ABOVT BISHOP GARDENER AND
Cardinall Allen, by name, and of their vnvvort^ie
and slanderous vsage by this vvachvvoord-geuer.
THough against all Catholique people that come in his
way, the to^gue of this knight be very lauish and approbrious
(which neither proceedeth of chiualry nor yet
of nobility) yet two principal persons aboue others
he seeketh chiefly to disgrace and wound in his discours,
which are D. Gardener Bishop of winchester,
and high Chauncellor of England in Queen Maries dayes, and Doctor
Allen late Cardenall of Rome. Two such eminent subiects for Ecclesiasticall
men, as setting a side the onlie difference of religion which
made the^ vngrateful to the present state, our land hath not had lightly
^heir equales in many ages before. Both of them of high wits,The Comparison betvveen Bishop Gardener, and Cardinall Allen. exqui^ite
learning, and singuler good natures, both of rare vertues, the one
^ chief Counseller to two great princes of our realme, the father and
^aughter, and the other fit to be Counsellor to any prince liuing, and
was of councel to the highest consistorie in Christendom, Bishop
Gardener was caried through great varietie of prosperous and aduerse
^ortune, and euer shewed himself superiour to them both, except once
^nly in his youth and prosperitie, when he went a litle astray by feare,
^ut sore repented it soon after. Cardinal Allen that neuer was in properitie
at home, but trayned vp for the most parte of his dayes in ba^ishment,
and in the disgrace and frowning countenance of his coun^rie,
for religions sake, bare the same with incredible constancy and
^lacritie, and towards the end of his life was highly aduanced to ho^or
for his vertue by forain potentates, as the world knoweth. B.
Gardener was a maister and common tutor to English yong nobility
^n his dayes, and his hows a famous schoole of great mennes children
^n England. C. Allen was a publique father to all sortes of that age^nd
to all degrees that left their country for religion, and he procured
^hem both howses and schooles in forain nations. The Bishop was
^beral and had much to giue of his owne while he was suffered to
^ossesse it; the Cardinall though meaner in temporal wealth yet mu^ificent
of mynd, and so much respected and credited by others that
were richer then himself, that he gaue more perhaps in his dayes then

the other was able of his own, according to that of the Apostle, qua^
egentes, multos autem locupletantes,2. Cor. 6. as poore, and yet inriching many others.
And to be short, a peerlesse payre of prelates they were whyl^
they liued, and full vnworthie to be thus bayted by the wyld tongu^
of this slanderous backbyter, but let vs hear in particular what he^
sayth of them.
Of Bishop Gardener you haue heard before his encomion or commendation,Of Bishop Gardener.
where he saied. Gardener that most prowd and bloody monster
left no corner of his witt vnsought, to shorten her Maiesties dayes, and preuent he^
by the bloody slaughter of her sacred person, from being our Queen. And afterward
agayn making his inuectiue against the Catholiques, that fo^
conscience refuse to go to Church, he sayth thus.
The recusants of our age cannot professe nor make greater shew of loyalty and
loue to our dread Souereign, neither can serue her outwardly with greater apparence
of faithfulnes, nor can protest more deeply by woords and othes, their true and
good meaning to her, then did Gardener, Bonner, and Tonstal, to her noble father
and brother, which they did confirm by printed bookes. For Gardener did writ^
his booke de vera obedientia, and Bonner added his epistle to it. And Tonst^
published a flat treatise against the Pope. But when these two noble Princes wer^
called to their last and euerlasting home and kingdom in heauen, and Queen Marie
possessed the gouernment of this kingdom vpon earth, then Gardener did tear o^
his glorious visour, and shewed himself in his right colours and shape; for he an^
his complices neuer rested till they had brought in the Spainard, and had matche^
him in mariage with the Queen, by which they betrayed God, her, and the whol^
realm.
This bloody intention by this linck thus strengthened, then cometh Gardener ou^
publiquely in pulpit with this sentence,Rom. 13. hora est iam nos de somno surgere
peruerting the sacred scripture most prophanely and blasphemously to his bl^ody
purpose, etc. this far goeth the accusation.
And first here you see there is nothing but blood and bloodines,
when he talketh of Bishop Gardener; wherof I could greatly marueyl
if this poor man followed either ryme or reason in any discourse
that he maketh, for verely I beleeue, that if a ma^ should aske any good
natured Protestant that liued in Queen Maries tyme, and hath both
wit to iudge, and indifferency to speake the truth without passion,
he wil confesse that no one great man in that gouernment, was further
of from blood and bloodines, or from crueltie and reuenge, then Bishop
Gardener,Bishop Gardener his gentle nature. who was known to be a most ^e^der-harted and myld
man in that behalf; in so much that it was some tymes, and by some
great personages obiected to him for no smale fault, to be euerfull o^

^^^^^^on in the office and charge that he then bare: yea to him especially it
^as imputed, that none of the greatest and most knowen Protestan^s
in Queen Maries raigne (and some of their names I haue men^^oned
before) were euer called to accompt, or put to trooble for
^ligion: which also was noted in diuers criminal great causes, and
^amely that of the lady Smith burned for killing her husband, the
^rd Sturton executed about Harguile, and the Duke of Nor^umberland
beheaded for publique rebellion. All which three (to
^aue others) it is knowen that Bishop Gardener laboured earnestly
^r to saue their lyues, and this only vpon compassion, and he passed
^ far in this behalf as he wauted not some rebuke for the same, espe^ally
about the last, to wit the Duke, for whome he sued importun^,
notwithstanding he had byn extremely misused and iniured by
^he sayd Duke in K. Edwards tyme (or at least permitted by him to be
^iured by others) as namely to be depriued of his dignitie and Bishop^ke,
and held in the tower all the tyme of that gouernme^t, wherin the
^uke ruled all, but yet the duke being conde^ned to death, and knowing
^e gentle nature of the Bishop, and that he was nothing vindicatiue, he
^esolued to rely vpo^ him of all other men, and so made petitio^ (after sen^ce
of death geue^ agaynst him) that he might speake only with the Bi^hop
before his death, as well about matters concerning his soule
^nd conscience, as also for disposing of his other affaires. VVhich pe^tion
being graunted, though somewhat hardly, by the Queen and
^ouncel, for that it had byn hindred by the Dukes aduersaries that
^new and feared in this case the Bishops tendernes of hart; at last he
^as sent to the tower in the company of an other Councelor to be
^resent at their talke, who afterward recounted (and I haue heard it
^om his own mouth) the hartie teares that the said Bishop shed at
^e sight and conference with the Duke, who after much speech said
^o the Bishop towards the end with great affliction of mynd: My
^ood lord B. And is there no hope at all for me to liue,The Dukes speaches to Bishop Gardener. and to do
^ome pennance in the rest of my dayes for my sinnes past? alas let me
^ue a litle longer, though it were but in a mous-hole. To which the
Bishop answered, o my lord, I would God that any thing could haue
^ontented your grace but a kingdom, when you were at libertie and
^n prosperitier: and now also, I would it lay in my power to geue you
^his mous-hole, for I would allow you the best pallace I haue in the
world to be your mous-hole, and I do offer to do for you what I can
^o^sibly. But yet for that your offence is great, and sentence is past a^aynst
you, and your aduersaries are many, it shalbe best for you to

prouyde for the woorst, and especialie that you stand well with God
in matters of conscience and religion, for to speake playnlie, it is mos^
lykely that you must dye.
To that the Duke answered, that he would dispose him self, and
desired he might haue a learned preest sent him for his confession,The Duke of North. religion. and
spiritual co^fort. And as for religion (sayd he) you know (my Lord B.)
that I can be of no other but of yours, which is the Catholique: for ^
neuer was of any other in deed, nor euer so foolish as to beleeue any
of that which we haue set vp in King Edwardes dayes, but only to
vse the same to my owne purpose of ambition, for which God forgeue
me, and so I meane to testifie publiquely at my death, for it is
the truth, and so he did, and his co^fession was put forth in print, as the
world knoweth, and at this day much of it extant in Stowes chronicle^
B. Gardener went away with an afflicted hart for the Duke, and
shed many a teare for him on the way as he returned,Stovv. ^n. 1. Reg. Man^e. and presently
went to the Queen and intreated so earnestly for him as he had ha^
gayned her consent for his lyf, which so much terrified the Dukes aduersaries,
as presently they got the Emperour Charles (that was i^
Flanders) to wryte to the Queen a verie resolute and ernest letter
that it was not safe for her nor the state, to pardon his lyf, and with
that he was executed.
All which story I haue byn inforced to repeate a litle the more larger,
therby to check the malignant speech of this our sicophan^
knight, against so worthie a man, whome he will needes make ^
bloody and cruel monster, and to haue sought malitiously the death
of her Maiestie when she was Lady Elizabeth. VVhich was so fa^
of from his condition and nature (espetially she being at that tyme
an obiect rather of loue and compassion then of enuy and hatred) a^
I dare say he doth him apparent and wilful wrong. Yet it may
be, that he hath heard somewhat about the discouery of a certayn^
bracelet, imputed to the Chancelor in examination of Sir Thomas
Wiattes affayres and his complices. In which bracelet it was said
that all the secretie of that conspiracie lay hidden,A mysterious bracelet. and that the Chancelor
did pearse the matter further then others, which may be als^
true, that point belonging then to his office and obligation, but
that he euer vsed or vrged the knowledge gotten therof to the ladies
peril, this Hastinges neither in hast nor by leasure will euer be able to
proue. And so much of this poynt touching her Maiesties person.
Let vs examine the rest that he writeth of B. Gardener, some ^
the woords were repeated before, but heer they are necessary again^^

by reason of the commixion with that which followeth.
The recusants (sayth he) cannot professe more loyalty and loue to the Queen
that now is, then did Gardener to her father and brother, writing a booke de vera
obedientia, etc. But when these two noble princes were dead, and Queen Marie
in the kingdom, then he did tear of his glorious vizard, for he and his compli^ces,
neuer rested vntil they had brought in the Spanyard, aud matched him
with Queen Marie, by which they betrayed God, her, and the whole realme.
It seemeth that this poore seely man is either very ignorant in matters
of our own realm,Of Bishop Gardeners fall. or very badly bent to tel manifest vntruthes.
For who knoweth not, that albeit Bishop Gardener at the beginning
of king Henryes defection from the church of Rome, being
born away with the stream of the tyme, and with some feare of the
kings violent proceeding, and not very full instructed perhaps in that
controuersie of the Supremacie (for that it was at the very first entrance
to his Bishoprik after the fall of Cardinal VVolsey) shaken
also with the frailty of humane infirmity, he shronk with S. Peter,
and stepped somwhat asyde in that booke of his, de vera obedientia, etc.
But yet how soon he did recall himself agayn, and condemned his
owne doing therin, and how much also he preuailed in secret with
the king himself in that poynt of doctrine, you shall hear afterward
by his own testimony. And as for king Edwards raigne, it is a flat
fable and fiction which our knight telleth vs, of Bishop Gardeners
following the sway also of that time: for it is well knowen, that he
being one of the cheifest among those sixteen counsellors that were
apoynted by king Henries testament, and earnest charge of mouth
at his last hower, to gouern his sonne and realme, during the minoritie
of the yong king, with expresse commaundement also of the
dead king, that neither protector should be chosen, nor yet any
poynt of Luthers, Zwinglius, or Caluins religion brought in, Bishop
Gardener as a faithful counsellor striued what he could at the very
first entrance, to haue both these orders of king Henry obserued. But
ambitio^ ouerbearing all, first a Protector within 40. howers after the
kings death, and then soone after an innouation also of religion, was
thrust vpon the realme, by violence of some that packed together for
their gaines, more then for deuotion: which Bishop Gardener seeing
and not able to resist, he spake his minde plainly touching religion, in
a sermon before the yong king and councell vpon Saint Peters day
(which was but fiue moneths after king Edwards raign) for which
sermon, he was sent to the tower the morning after, and lay there
prisoner all king Edwards time, and came not out, vntill Queen Marie

at her first entrance into the tower of london whe^ she was Queen,
deliuered him and other catholique prisoners together,Sto anno 1. ^d 6. and how then
doth our steel-brow-knight, write, that Bishop Gardener Hattered
both father and sonne, and neuer shewed himself in religion vntil
both of them were called to their last home, and Queen Marie entred
the crown: let some frend blush for him if he haue not shame to do
it himself.
Againe, it is as great an vntruth and as grosse ignorance besydes, to
say,About bringing in the Spaniard in Q. Maries dayes. as this man doth, that Bishop Gardener and his complices brought in
the Spaniard, and mached him in mariage with Queen Marie. For that euery
childe acquaynted with that state knoweth or may learne, that
Bishop Gardener was of the contrarie part or faction that fauored
yong Edward Courtney the Earle of deuonshire, and would haue
had him to Marie the Queen, whome Bishop Gardener had held
for his spiritual childe in the tower all king Edwardes tyme. And now
the matter was so far forward as the mariage was held for certayne,
but that the contrarie syde and especially the Lord Paget, partly by
the acquaintance and credit he had gotten with Charles the Emperor
in Flanders during king Edwards tyme, and partely for the ielosie he
had (perhappes) of B. Gardeners great affection to the Duke of Northumberland,
his greatest enemie, who in king Edwards reigne had indeuored
vtterly to disgrace him, they procured (I say) the said
Emperors most earnest and effectual letters to the Queen, about
her mariage with the Prince of Spayne, which they did so vrge to the
sayd Queen, and with so many argumentes against Courtney (espetially
that he was neither sound in body nor religion) as they got her
consent, and subscription to the sayd letters of the Emperor. And
then there was no further dealing to the contrary; for that Queen
Mary bore such exceeding loue and reuerence to the Emperor
Charles her Cosin, as she would not fayl in her word geuen to him
for all the world. VVherby we may imagin what a mortification
Bishop Gardener and all the rest of his side that fauored Courtney
did receaue by this change of the Queens will and purpose, and
therby also perceyue the folly and temerite of this rashe accuser, who
layeth to there charge the bringing in the Spaniard, which yet if they
had donne, or had byn cause of that greatest and most honorable mariage,
that for many ages hath byn in Christendom, and of greatest
consequence, if issue had followed therof; if this (I saie) bad byn so
(as it was not) why did they betray therin both God, the Queen, and
there countrie as this wise Censurer affirmeth, what grownds, what

reason may there be aleaged of this triple treason? God receiued by
this mariage the strengthening of his true religon, the Queen got the
greatest noblest, and richest husband that was extant in Europe, our
countrie got many a thowsaud of Spanish treasure, without losse of
any as heerafter shal be shewed. And wherin then stood this great
offence?
But let vs passe ouer these follies of our knight in matters of state
for that perhaps his prayse and skyll is only in armes; yet one point
more must I examine, wherin he condemneth B. Gardener, and this is
for his sermon made at S. Paules crosse, vpo^ the wordes of the Apostle
to the Romanes, h^ra est iam nos de somno surgere. It is now high tyme
for vs to ryse out of sleep,Rom. 13. the night hath gone before, the day is come,
etc. and the rest that followeth there. All which sacred scripture
this learned religious knight sayth very peremptorily, that it
was most prophanely and blasphemously peruerted by the said
Bishop, and that to bloody purposes, which we shal now a litle
discusse.
This famous sermon was preached, as I sayd before, at Paules
crosse,The Sermo^ of Bishop Gardener at Pauls Crosse. after the mariage was celebrated between the King and the
Queen, who both were present at this speech of the Bishop nowe also
hygh Chancelor, and there prsent in like maner both Cardinal
Poole legate of the sea Apostolique, as also the Embassadors of the
Emperor, french King, and other Princes, and a marueylous great
learned and noble auditorie besydes, as euer perhaps was at any sermon
in England before or after. The Chancelors discourse was, how
long they had runne astray, and byn in darknes of diuision and stryfe
among themselues, since first king Henry lefte the old troden path
of his ancestors, kinges and Queenes of England in matters of religion,
and brake from the vnion of the church of Rome, and of other
catholique kingdomes round about him, and that now it was time
to arise out of this sleep, and to looke about them.
And in this discours and sermon, the Chancellor vttered two principal
thinges among other, that greatly moued the whole auditory.
The first was the hartie and humble accusation of himself for his
^all, and consenting to King Henryes will in that booke de vera obedien^tia,
which he did vtter with so great vehemencie of spirit and abundance
of teares, as he could not goe forward, and was forced diuers
tymes to make some pawses; which in such an audience (especially of
strangers, also he being the cheefest person of the realme after the
prince, we may imagin what a temporal shame and confusion it was

vnto him, and how greatly it would moue the hearers and lookers on
to see him make such an accusation of himself willingly, of his owne
accord, without compulsion and with such earnestnes as he did. And
that there was no fiction or dissimulation in this act of his, the end
declared; for when he fell sick afterward, and drew neer vnto his
death, he desired that the passion of our Sauiour might be redde vnto
him; and when they came to the denial of Saynt Peter, and how
after Christe had looked back vpon him, he went out and wepte bitterly;
the Bishop cried out and bid them stay there,Bishop Gardener his repeutance at his death. and see whether
his sweet Sauiour wold vouchsafe also to looke back vpon him, and
geue him some part of Saynt Peters teares, for (sayth he) negaui cum
Petro, extui cum Petro sed nondum fleui amare cum Petro, I haue denied
Christe with Peter (meaning that subscription to the supremacie of
king Henrie, I haue gone out with Peter (meaning the participatio^ of
that schisme, but yet I haue not wepte bitterly with Peter; so bitterly
as I should do, and by often repetition of those woordes, and asking
God sorgeuenes with cryes and syghes he intertayned himself vntill
great floodes of teares came downe vpon him, and so gaue vp the
ghost.
The second notable poynt which the Bishop vttered in this sermon,
was concerning king Henrie the eight his lord and mayster,
which moued the auditorie no lesse then the other. And this was
that the sayd king a litle before his death, had dealt with him verie
secretly and seriously,K. Henrie the 8. inclination to reconcile himselfe. to haue sent him to a certayne dyat in Germanie,
vnder pretence to treat other matters, but in deed the cheef
poynt should be, to seeke out some honorable way and meanes (as
from himself, and not from the king) either by the Emperor, legat,
popes Nuntio, or other fit instrument, to reconcyle him agayne to
the church of Rome. And this the Bishop affirmed to be most true
vpon his oath and fidelitie to God and the world, and to the memorie
of the sayd king his master dead, whome he shewed to loue so
tenderly and dearly, as he wepte most bitterly also in that place, for
that this holie motion had not taken the effect he desired, attributing
the let therof to Gods seuere iudgmentes, and to the great difficulties
which the sayd king found of making that reco^ciliatio^ with
his honour and reputation, which temporal honour he lamented
much that it was more regarded by the king and some that counselled
him, then in so weightie a woork of eternall saluation ought
to haue bin.
Thus then was the substance, and these were the circumstances of

that sermon. Let vs now co^sider whether the theam he tooke, iam, hora
est nos de somno surgere, were fit and to his purpose or no: or whether it
were prophanely and blasphemously peruerted, as this wise gentleman
affirmeth, who taketh vpon him to censure the matter.
First let it be considered, that if euer any man of our realm might
take vpon him to talk of a sleep or dream in matters of our co^mon-wealth,
as a Counsellor, and of his own knowledge, Bishop Gardener
might do it, which had seen such alterations both of religion
and temporalityes within our land, such chopping and chaunging,
such pulling down and setting vp, as he might fitly call the tyme a
time of sleep or dream. For as in a sleep things are represented to a
man confusedly, and out of hand they passe away, and contrarie representations
come in their place, so had Bishop Gardener seen in
the publique affaires of the realme, no lesse alterations of comicall
and tragical acts, after he came to be a councellor.
For first he had seen his own king and maister, king Henry the
eight, so earnest in the defence of the catholique faith,The sleepe and dreame noted by B. Gardener in England. and of the sea of
Rome in perticuler, as he wrote a booke in defence therof, though
he were disswaded by some of his counsell to do it, for reason of state.
And after that again being to send this very man, Gardener (then his
secretarie) to Rome for his Embassador, about soliciting of the diuorce
between himself and Queen Catherine, he commanded him
to tel the Pope and Colledge of Cardinales, that whatsoeuer they
determined in that matter, he would accept it with all indifferencie,
and euer be a most obedient childe of the Romane churche. And this
commission he gaue him in the presence of Cardinal VVolsey, and
yet soone after he saw the same king so chaunged, for the affection he
bare to an other partie, as he brake with the Pope and churche of
Rome, and pulled down the sayd Cardinal, and put to death two of
the men that he esteemed most for vertue and learning of all his realme,
or of any other forrain kingdome of Christendom, and whom
he had loued before exceedingly, to wit, Doctor Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, and Sir Thomas More Chancelor.
Again, Gardener had seen the same king wax weary soone after of
the party, for whose loue he had first begun to make all those stirres,
and to put her to death openly, and yet to continew his former breaches,
and to run from one difficulty to an other, and from one inconuenience
to an other, and neuer to stop the fountain from whence
all this vnquietnes came. He had seen him also passe from on wife to
another, to the number of six, dismissing some and putting others to

death, according to the affection or disaffection which he bare to
each of them for the time. He had seen him make diuers and different
actes of parlament,Seem. He^r. 25. cap. 22. and an^. 28. cap. 7. and 17. in preiudice or preferment of his own children,
now for their legitimation and inheritance, now for the contrarie,
as by the statutes themselues yet extant in print, is euident to the
world. And from the liking or disliking of his said wiues, he passed
also to the liking or suspition of his own kinred, subiects, and familier
fr^nds: of which he pulled downe so many, as by the stories may
be seen. And Bishop Gardener was wont to say of him (that knew
him ful well) that after he once left to loue that person, which by
Gods law and mannes he was bound to loue aboue all others (to wit,
his first wife and Queen) he neuer loued any person har^ely and constantly
afterwards.
Moreouer, he had seen the poore king so combered, and troobled
about matters of religion,K. Henries perplexitie about religion. as was pitiful to behold. For that on the
one side the point of his spiritual Supremacy taken vp in his chole^
against the Pope, seemed to touch his honor so neare, as he might not
shew to yeeld any one iote therin: and consequently he was fain to
put to death all such Catholiques as denyed the same, though otherwise
he both loued and highly esteemed them^ and on the other side,
his iudgement and conscience in matters of the Catholique truthe against
the protestants and all new sectaries, conuinced his conscience
and vnderstanding, as he cleerly vttered in the statute of six articles
which iudgement also enforced him to burne as many of that fide ^
were conuicted.
And finally being wearied towards his later end, with these combats
of conscience and honor, iudgement and passion, he conferre^
with Bishop Gardener as you haue heard, about the mayn remedy and
only sure redresse of all, which was his returning to the vnion of the
Romane churche, and the rest of Christendome.
And besides all this, Bishop Gardener had seen the same afflicted
king, brought to such streights and doubts in his later howers of life,
about the weightiest affaires that he had in this world, as he could
not tell what to determine ordayne or establish, for the securitie of
his owne children, espe^ially of his only sonne prince Edward, tha^
had but nyne yeares yet of age and for that cause was the father^
hart more pe^siue about him. For first he was afeard to leaue any
protector vnto him, remembring the eue^t of king Edward the four^^
his children vnder their vncle protector the Duke of Glocester. And
secondly, he was as greatly afeard and afflicted also to think, least

after his death the perilous waues and fluddes of heresies should enter
vpon him, by the very same gate that hymself had opened.
VVhetfore both these poyntes he forbad expresly, and appoynted
for execution therof sixteen gouernours, as I haue sayd, with equal
authoritie, all in his opinion (or the far greater parte) very catholique.
But he was no sooner dead, but all these orders of his were
ouerthrowen, and a protector made, the third day after the kinges
death, and sone after religion changed, and the law of six articles abrogated,
and as litle regard had to king Henries will and ordinances,
as if he had neuer byn king of this realme, or mayster to the breakers.
And among other these changes, was displaced Gardener himself,
one of the cheef of those sixteen appoynted for gouernours by
king Henry, and not only thrust from all authoritie, but sent also to
the tower of London prisoner, as before I haue shewed; and other
Catholique Lordes remoued in lyke manner from the Councel, for
lyke endes and purposes.
Then began a new world of making new Lordes,The stirres in king Edvvardes dayes. new Earles, new
Marqueses, and new Dukes, and in deuiding great states offices and dignites
in good felowship amonge themselues, and all in the name of the childe
king (though he were not yet crowned, nor three weekes past
synce his fathers death) New men also were called out of Germany,
to wit (Peter Martir and Martin Bucer two apostated friars with
their wenches) that had been Nunnes who must come to teache a
new religion in England; but with expresse condition to be indiffere^t
to reache that sect and opinion, either of Luther, Swinglius, or Caluin,
or other that should be determined and agreed vpon by the
Parlament then in gathering together; and so they were contented,
and with that condition they were sent the one to Oxford, and the
other to Cambrige. Then was the new English forme of seruice
drawen out in hast by certayne of the Protectors chaplayns in Somerset
place in London, not fully agreeing to any of the Captaynes
doctrine aforesaid, but somewhat mingled of them all and much also
of the Catholique ryte and forme, all which was approued soone
after for apostolical and established by the lay part of the Parlament,
(for the cleargie reclaymed) and all men inforced to sweate vnto it,
and so for the old religion receaued by the vniuersal church, and continued
in England for aboue a thousand years, and confirmed by so
many miracles at the beginning, as S. Bede and other ancient authors
do affirme, and allowed by the consent of all our learned English for
so many ages, now was there a new religion deuised in corners and set

vp by certayne obscure and hungrie fellowes in hast, within the space
of two monethes, and authorized by a parlament of vnlearned lay
men to be the rule of our saluation.
But in the meane space the Duke of Somerset now head of this
church (for that the childe king was at play and could think nothing
of it) attended principally to his temporall aduancement and to purchase
good old land, and caused his seruantes to set forward the new
religion, without troobling him therin, saying that all should be examined
and approued afterward by the authoritie of the yong king,
as trew head of the Church, and so it was.
Then followed great tumultes and rebellious in the realme, as also
iarring and falling out of the great protestant Councellors among
themselues. The protector first cut of the head of his brother the
Admiral, and then the Earle of VVarwicke cut of the head of the Protector,
and diuers of his frendes, and made himself duke of Northumberland,
and then plotted with the duke of Suffolke to cut of all king
Henries children, and to bring in Suffolkes daughter and Northumberlandes
sonne, as they did. For which soone after both their
heades were cut of also by Queen Marie, and Catholique religion
was restored agayne to the state wherin first it was, when king Henry
her father began this tragedie, and first put all out of ioynt.
Thus passed the matter briefly, and all this Bishop Gardener had
seen and passed through, and had plaied his parte in diuers actes, and
pageantes, to wit, as an actor in the beginnyng and as a patient
after, as hath byn shewed. And being now restored to his old estate
agayne, and more ouer made Chancelour of the realme, and looking
back vpo^ the dream past, had he not (trow you) iust cause to preache,
hora iam est nos de somno surgere, it is tyme to aryse from sleep, wherin
we haue slumbered these twe^ty yeares and more, in suche varietie of
tossinges, and to walk with more light and stead fastenes for the tyme
to come? let it be left I say to the iudgment of euerie discreet reader,
whether this theame and parable were fitly chosen and wel applied by
B. Gardener or no, or rather blasphemously peruerted, as our Hunting
deuyne Sir Francis wil needs haue it, and so much for this tyme of
Bishop Gardener.
About C. Allen,Of Cardinal Allen. for that I haue byn ouer large in B. Gardeners affaires,
I meane to be verie breef, and so much the breefer for that the matters
obiected agaynst him by this accuser are very cauils, if we consider the
substa^ce of the thing it self; for he sayth, that this English traytor, though he
were a Cardinal at Rome and sworn to the Popes pa^table hath sent fro^ thence many

slanderous and seditious pamphlets, and in one (which was the treatise against
the English execution of iustice) he seemeth to wish that doctor Sanders and doctor
Bristow, had spared to speak so much in defence of Pius Quintus Bul, agaynst
her Maiestie, and yet he doubteth not to affirme, that these two learned men
of ^reat zele and excellencie, had their special reasons to do so; which he will neither
desend nor reproue, etc.
And further he proceedeth (sayth this ma^) to excuse all the preestes and studentes
beyond the seas, and all such as haue come ouer, and saith, that all of them
^ince that censure of his holinesse (to vse (sayth he) his owne wordes) did vse all
^euerence and respect to her Maiestie, vttering in no preaching, speach, or booke,
^o not at the houre of their death and martyrdome, nor euer before in any their
confessions to the magistrate, any disloyal word agaynst her Maiestie.
These woordes recyteth Hastinges out of the discourse against their
English iustice, as wordes of moderation, or rather blushing as he
^ermeth them, for that which was done before, and yet he sayth that
^n an other treatise of defence of Sir VVilliam Stanlies act in geuing
^uer Deuentrie to the king of Spayne, the Cardinal cometh to
^tter himself as far as either Sanders or Bristow, or any other, in approbation
of the sayd excomunication; which thing albeit this kinght
^o greatly condemne, yet cannot I any thing marueyle thereat; considering
that the Cardinals opinion (being as he was) could be no other
in substance touching matters of controuersie, then was that of
doctor Sanders, doctor Bristow, and the rest. And though for peace,
^^oderation, and edification, he liked wel in others, and specially
^n the yonger sorte of preestes, that they should auoyd all occasion of
^ateful speach in this odious controuersie, yet might he speake his
mynd playnly (being in the place and dignitie he was) when occasion
should be offered, which I shall indeuour to expresse more cleerly
^y the example following.
In a great and noble house, where there are many children of the
^elf same parentes,VVhy Doct. Allen. D Sa^de^s and other lyke might vtten their myndes more playnly. if those parentes do come to breach and to fall out
^etween them selues, what can the children do but besorowfull and
^ent, and sigh at such contentions, without taking willingly any
^arte, for that they loue, feare, and reuerence both the parties that
^^e fallen at debate for which respect also they dare not so much as to
^terpose ther iugdmentes and censures in the controuersie except they
^^e forced, and especially they onger sorte of children, who be fitter to
^eepe and morne such contentions, then to determine them with
^heir verdict: yet it is not so altogether with the elder brethren, that
^eing come to mannes estate, learned and wise, and seing the breach to

grow greater daylie between their sayd parentes and superious, haue
authoritie and right to speake more freely then the rest. And not only
to intreat for peace, but to interpose also their iudgmentes (though
euer with due reuerence to both partes) as wel in the question de iure
as de facto; that is to saie, not only to iudge and discerne where the
greater authoritie or higher preeminence of commanding lyeth by
right, either in the one parent or other, in the father or in the mother,
but also in the particular fact about which they fell out, to wit,
who had more reason then the other, or who was most in fault: which
second point is much more hard and hatefull, and subiect to offence, then
the first, and yet may discreet and louing childre^ say their opinion also in
that behalf, whe^ need requireth, without breach of dew respect and dutie.
Euen so then standeth the case in this our controuersie. Her Maiestie
being our Queene is therby also a mother,Hovv the Q is ou^ mother, and he Pope our father. and norisheth vs her
subiectes as a carefull parent: the Bishop of Rome to al catholique
men of the world is their spiritual father, that hath principal care of
their soules by Gods commission; and for such hath he euer byn taken,
and is at this day in all the catholique states and kingdomes of Spayne^
France^ Italy^ Germanie, Pooland and other prouinces, that hold the ancient
beleef of Christendome. And so hath he byn held also by all our
ancesters, kinges and Queenes, cleargie and temporaltie of England,
for aboue a thousand yeares together But now our sayd two parente^
are fallen at debate, for which all their Catholique subiectes, who are
children to them both, are hartelie sorie, and do lament the case: all
sortes of people commonly both lay men and preestes within England,
do hold their peace and sobbe at the matter as yonger children, and
do only attend to praie to God for their good attonement, and so do
the rest also that are abroad in other nations. But yet if doctor Sanders,
doctor Bristow, doctor Stapleton, doctor Allen, and such lyke, that are
men of greater learning, antiquitie, and iudgment, and elder brethre^
among the rest, if these men (I say) do put in their iudgmentes concerning
this controuersie of their parentes, as wel de iure, as de facto^
that is, do tell first what authoritie and iurisdicton either temporal o^
spiritual each one of these two parentes and superiors haue, and wherin
they are or ought to be subordinate the one to the other: and secondly
de facto ipso if the falling out it selfe do insinuate where and by
whome the cause of this breach and discord was first or principally
offered, and which parte hath most fault in this contention and disagreement;
if they do this (I saie) as any subiect may do in any other
Catholique kingdome of the world, without offence in lyke controuersies,

between his prince and the Pope, why should this acte be
made so haynous a cryme by this our skolding knight, as to call so
worthy a man (as our late Cardinal was) an archtraytor, a tugling compagnion,
a shameles dissembling lyer, that villanously stuffeth his booke with blasphemous
slanders, diuelish persuati ns, and impudent lyes agaynst her Maiestie?
Let all men iudge of this mannes immodestie.


THE FIFTH INCOVNTER,
ABOVT IESVITES AND FATHER
Persons in particuler, vvhether they seeke
the Queens blood, as Sir Francis
affirmeth.
FOR the grownd and foundation of all that is to be
examined and discussed in this conference and incounter,
I shal first set down the accusation of Sir Francis,
in his own woords, which are these that insew.
I do not heare (sayth he) that the Popes holinesse is so purged
from ambition, or so reconciled to religion, as he meaneth
not to continew his clayme for the Supremacie, or will cease to setle the dre^ges
of his poyson and superstitious doctrine among vs. I cannot perceiue that the thirst
of Parsons, and his pew fellowes, is yet quenched, for seeking the blood of our deare
Souereigne, and in her the destruction of vs all, the cause remayning still for which
heertofore they haue sought it, etc.
This is the knightes narration or rather calumniation, fraught (as
you see) with his ordinarie tearmes of dregges, poyson, and bloodshed,
with which his accustomed knightly speach is wont to be ^awfed.
Wherin so much as concerneth the Popes holinsse, sbalbe considered
of more amply afterward, in a perticuler conference that we are to
haue about his holinesse actions, authority, and iurisdiction.
Now only is to be noted the fond and ridiculous manner of Sir
Francis fantastical writing,Sir Francis ridiculous. telling vs very grauely that he doth not
yet hear (for belyke the poore man doth much hearken after it) that
the Popes holinesse is so purged yet of ambition, or so reconciled to
protestants religion, as he meaneth to leaue of his old clayme of spiritual
Supremacie ouer England, or his indeuoring to setle Romish
doctrine among vs (for I omit willingly the tearmes of dregges and
poyson, as more fit and proper to Sir Francis dish, who feedeth vpon
so many old heresies, condemned for poysoned dregges, by Gods

Catholique churche for so many ages past) and this tale of Sir Francis,
is no lesse ridicul^^^ and childish, then if he should say to any
temporal prince, or to the Queen of England her self, that he seeth
not her Maiestie so purged yet from ambition, as to leaue of her claym
of commaundry ouer all her tealm, or of setling iustice in her name
throughout her dominions, for that no lesse proper and essential to the
Popes office and state, is Ecclesiastical Supremacie ouer all christian
nations in Ecclesiastical matters (as after more particulerly shalbe
proued) then to her Maiestie the commaundrie ouer England, in
temporal affaires. And as to her Maiestie by vertue of her royal authoritie
it apperteineth and incumbeth, to setle and mainteyn iustice
throughout her realmes, so to the Popes pastoral and Apostolical authoritie
is annexed the obligation of preaching, and setling his doctrine
(by himself or others) throughout all Christian states and kingdomes
or that may be christian, which obligation groweth by that
great and high commission giuen to Saynt Peter, in special manner
aboue all other Apostles (as after shalbe demonstred) by Christe him
self ouer all christian soules, in these wordes thryce repeated: pasce oues
meas, pasce agnos meos,Ioan. v^t. feed my sheep, and feed my lambes. VVhich feeding
he could not performe, nor can his s^ccessors, but by doctrine to
all, and gouerment ouer all.
And therefore whensoeuer Sir Francis (sitting in his wache) shall discouer
or heare, that the Popes holines leaueth of this clayme of Ecclesiastical
Supremacie, or is so purged as he becommeth a Protestant
(which none euer yet was, nor wilbe by all liklyhood) let Sir
Francis know, that he leaueth also to be Pope; and whensoeuer he
ceaseth to indeuor the establishing of his Roman, vniuersal, and catholique
doctrine in England, or any other countrie els, where sheep or
lambes of Christ are, or may be had, there he ceaseth also to performe
the dutie, for which the Popedome or principal See was ordayned
by our Saueour. And consequently a very impertinent and childish
discourse was this of Sir Francis, about his holines purgation, and reconciliation
to Protestantes religion. Let vs see (if you please) the rest
concerning father Persons and his pewfellowes (as he scornfully calleth
them) whome albeit he slandereth falsly in the imputations layd
agaynst them, about seeking the Queens blood, yet doth he much honour
them all, in ioyning them in slander and calumniation with
the Pope himself.
First of all then, for that it seemeth that by father persons pewfellowes,
this pleasant gentlema^ vndersta^deth those of his order and societie,

knowen commonly by the name of Iesuites I shall first treate somewhat
of them,About Iesuites in general and their co^tradictors. and their estate and doinges in general, and afterward
descend to father Persons more in particuler, though moderatly of
them both, in regard of the frendship that for many yeares I haue
held with them, and least any man should attribute the thinges I am
to say, rather to affection, then iudgement in this behalf.
Notorious it is to them that haue experience in the affayres of our
dayes, and much more that trauayle through diuers countries, and
do weigh with iudgement what passeth in the world, that these kynd
of men (I meane the Iesuites) as they are greatly loued and esteemed
by most catholiques, so haue they many aduersaries and maligners
also, and those not only such as in matters of fayth and opinion do dissent
fro^ them, both Heathen, Turke, Heretique, Atheist, Infidel, and
other lyke (that all ioyntely do band agaynst them) but diuers others
also of catholique profession, for other causes; so as it seemeth, that
to them may be applied not vnfitly, that saying of the Roman Iewes
to Saynt Paule, when they spake of Christian religion newly begun
de secta hac notum est nobis quia vbique ei contradicitur.Act. 28. This only we know
of this new sect of Christians, that euerie where there is contradiction
made agaynst it, to wit, by Iewes, gentils, philosophers, astronomers,
necromantes, heretiques, vitious and deuyded Christians, and other
the lyke, and to say the truth, it was no euil signe (though vttered
by enemies) of the excellencie of the thing it self, for so do diuers
ancient fathers gather in their apologie for the Christian cause, agaynst
the heathens, that obiected this matter; they gather, I say (and
namely Saynt Iustine Martyr,Iustin. apol. 2. ad Anton. Pium. Tert. apol. aduersus ge^tes. and Tertullian) the great perfection of
true Christian and catholique doctrine, by this general contradiction
made of all handes agaynst it, and this partly for that truthe is one,
and errors many, and that excellent thinges haue euer many difficulties,
and that Christe foretold this, and finally, for that the trial of gold
by many and strong fyers, sheweth it to be pure, if it abyde and
beare them all; in which sence the holie ghost sayd of the iust man
Certamen forte dedit ille Deus, vt vinceret,Sap. 10. God hath geuen him a strong
battell, to the end he might win, and therby his victorie to be the
greater. And king Dauid speaking in the same sence of himself, and
other seruantes of God,Psalm. 79. 7. complayneth sweetly: Posuisti nos in contradictionem
vicinis nostris, thou hast put vs in contradiction euen to our
owne neighbours, that is, to them that make the same profession also
of thy seruice with vs: and finally of Christ himself it was foretold:
Eccepositus est in signum cui contradicetur,Luc. ^. Isai. 8. behold he is put for a signe agaynst

the which great contradiction shall be made; which in his
passio^ was cheefly seen, whereof Saynt Paule speaking to the Hebrue
Christians,Heb. 12. sayd: Thinke of him which did suffer with patience so greate a contradiction
of sinners agaynst himself, and he not wearie, nor faynt harted in lyke
occasions.Causes of tribulations to Gods seruantes. This then perhaps may be some cause of so manyfold contradictions,
by sondry sortes of men at this day, agaynst the Iesuits,
if as they beare the name so also they draw neare to the lyfe and steppes
of Iesus their mayster, whose particuler badge and liuery seemeth to
haue byn euer that his nearest followers and dearest frendes should
haue most contradiction in this lyfe, for so the lyfe of all his Sayntes
do testifie, which is nothing els, but a rehersal of their contradictions
and difficulties, and himself discusseth the matter very largely in
Saynt Iohns Gospel, where hauing shewed extreme loue to his Apostles
and disciples, and sayd, that now they were no more seruantes
to him, but rather frendes, for that he had imparted with them all
his secrets, he telleth them this secret also for the vpshot of all, about
contradiction and opposition of the world:Ioan. 18. If the world hate you
(sayth he) know ye that it hated me before you, if you were of the world, the
world would loue that which is his owne, but for that you are not of the world,
and I haue chosen you out of the world, therfore the world hateth you, remember
the saying which I was wont to vse vnto you, that the seruant is not greater then
his mayster. Thus Christ in familiar and confident speech to his best
beloued: in which sence also he sayd after his resurrection to Ananias,
about Saynt Paule, when he had chosen him to be his fauoryte: vas
electionis est mihi,Act. 9. etc. ego ille ostendam, quanta oporteat eum pati, pro nomine meo.
He is a chosen vessel vnto me, and I will shew him how great
matters he must suffer for my name, and so he did afterward, laying
so many contradictions and tribulations vpon him, from all handes,
as the poore man could not tell which way to turne him: vt taederet
etiam viuere,2. Cor. 1. that he was wearie euen of his lyf: for that on one syde
the Iew, of another the Gentill pursued him, of an other false brethren
betrayed him, of an other heretiques made diuisions, of an other
seditious Christians raysed factions agaynst him, and added pressures
to his chaynes, of an other syde wordly Christians waxed wearie
and forsook him as himself complayneth.
And for that our age also wanteth not of the same qualitie of men
for exercise of such as professe the same occupation of seeking soules
that S. Paule did,Dyuers sortes of contradictors of Iesuits. it is no maruayle though the Iesuites do fynde the
same effects; for albeit Iewes and Gentils do not trouble them so
much now as they did S. Paule (though also they want not their

contradictions and persecutions also in diuers places of the world
where they bestow their labours) yet all the rest of the good fellowes
before mentioned our age hath them in aboundance, for as for those
that make diuision, saying:1. Cor. 1. Ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego Cephae. I am of
Luther, I am of Calu^,1. Timoth. 1^ as also others qui circa fidem naufragau^runt (as
S. Paule sayth) that haue made shipwrak in matters of their fayth,
we haue greater store and varietie of them and much more cunning,
diligent, and spitefull they are, agaynst such earnest Catholiques as Iesuites
be, then were those heretiques of S. Paules tyme, though they
were troublesome enough.
Furthermore for falsi fratres false brethren wherof he complayned,2. Cor. 11.
to wit, false harted catholiques which either of cowardnes, coldnes,
lak of zeale, of constancie or confidence, do betray the cause, and the
best frends therof, the store is also great. Moreouer there want not
many a Diotrephes,1. Ioan. 2. qui principatum in Ecclesia amantes, verbis malignis
garriunt, as Saint Iohn complayneth, such, as to be of more authority
themselues, they talke malignantly of others. Many also of that
generation who of malice endeuour,Philip. 1. suscitare pressuram fratrum vinculis,
to stir vp pressure and more acerbitie to the tribulation of their
owne brethren,1. Timoth. 1. sondry like Hymenaeus and Alexander repellentes bonam
conscientiam, that cast of all care of a good and godly conscience, falling
to vice, wickednes and dissolution of life, and these also presently
become enemyes of Iesuites, as the other were of Saint Paule, for
that their manner of life is contrary. Many a Demas in like manner
is found,2. Timoth. 4. qui diligunt saeculum, who loue the world, and for this loue,
not only do break from good men, as Demas did from Saynt Paule, but
also do slaunder, calumniate, and speak euil of them, least it might
seem that without iust cause they broke from them, and left their
frendship. And finally many causes there be, which do procure
hatred and emulation at this day vnto Iesuites, which may be vnderstood
in part by this which hath bin said, but yet for more perspecuity
I will reduce all to three general heads, which are, their rule and profession,
their learning and doctrine, their life and conuersation.
The first,Profession of Iesuites. touching their rule, institute, and profession, is the same
in substance which all other religions haue, to wit, three essential
vowes, leading to perfection, by obedience, chastitie, and voluntarie pouertie,
against our three sworne enemyes, the flesh, the world, and the
deuil,1. Ioan. ^. and against their three squadrons mentioned by Saint Iohn,
the concupicence of the flesh, the concupicence of the eyes, and pryde of life. Some
particularities also are added for more restraint, and for the necessities

of these times, by their first founder Ignatius, as that they vow particulerly
to go to all partes and places of the world in missions, for
gayning of soules, where they shalbe sent: that they can neither seek
nor accept of any wordly preferments, or dignities whatsoeuer, vnles
it be layd vpon them by such a superior as may force them to take it
vnder payn of mortall sinne, which is only the Pope: that they must
teach and preach freely, without taking any reward or recompence
at all, that they may accept the charge of schooles, vniuersities, and
colleges for the aduauncement of learning and pietie, of which
poyntes, some may breed them emulation (as you see) of our own
people, as the other, much hatred, feare, and contradiction of heretiques,
besides a certayn malignant spirit that some haue naturally
against religious life (though otherwise catholiques in opinion) thinking
that cours and habit to condemn theirs of imperfection, wherof
you may see more for auncient times, in those three books that
Saint Chrisostom wrote in his dayes,Chrysost. Tom. 5. and hom. 2. de vit. monach. Basil. serm. de institut. monachi. Nazianz. ^rat. 1. in Iulian. Apostat. aduersus vitae monasticae vituperatores,
against the reprehenders of monastical life: and Saint Basil
and Saint Nazianzen, do often treat the same argument. And for
later ages you may discouer the same spirit against the most excellent
and holy religious orders of Saint Dominik and Saint Francis,
when they first began, as is set down by Saynt Thomas of Aquin,
in his treatise contra impugnantes religionem, against the impugners of religion,
and by Saint Bonauenture of the same age, in his apologia pauperum,
the apologie for poore men. And this very spirit dureth also
in our dayes, in such as either haue not their passions sufficiently
mortified (whereby they are not greatly deuoted to pietie) or otherwise
do suffer themselues to be deceiued by heretiques or other
enemyes.
The second poynt,Iesuits doctrine. concerning the learning and doctrine of Iesuit^
(which is knowen to be much and very catholique) bringeth in also
the lyke effects agaynst them, for that by the first, they incur easely
emutation of their frendes, and by the second open hostilitie of
their enemies, so as by experience they fynde the saying of the wiseman
to be true,Eccles. 1. qui addit scientiam, addit laborem, he that multiplieth
knowledge, multiplieth paynes, but yet these mennes rule and profession
bynding them to this kynde of holy trade and exercyse, to instruct
men to their saluation, they must not be wearied with any difficulties
or contradictions, but rather hold out, and expect the reward
set downe by God himself in the prophet Daniel:Dan. 12. Fulgebunt qua^^
stella in perpetuas aternitates, qui erudiunt ad iustitia^ multos: they shal shyn^

as starres for euerlasting eternities, etc. that instruct many to iustice.
There resteth the third thing, which is the lyfe and conuersation
of Iesuites,The name lisfe and co^uersation of Iesuits. called into question in this place by Sir Francis, and by
many other in other places, vpon preiudice only (as it seemeth) of
their name made odious by their enemies, without particuler offences
alleaged agaynst them, so as it is enough with these men to saye
he is a Iesuit, to discredit him, though personal crime ther be none
agaynst him, and the reason of this seemeth to be, for that heretiques
and diuers other weake and passionate Christians (or scandalous catholiques)
ioyning together in these out dayes, haue made a certayne
league and conspiracie agaynst this name of Iesuites, as Saynt Iustine
the martyr sayd to the enemies of the Christian name in his tyme:Iustin. apol. 2. ad Imp. Anton. In
nobis (sayth he) nomen accipitis pro crimine, you punish in vs our name for
trespasse, which iniurious dealing Tertullian refuteth very amply
soone after Saynt Iustine, in the three first chapters of his apologetious:Tert. apol.
si nominis odium est (sayth he) quis nominum reatus, quae accusatio vocabulorum,
nisi aut barbarum quid sonent, aut infaustum, aut maledicum, aut
impudicum? If the hatred be agaynst the name, what guilt can be in
woordes, what accusation agaynst names, except they sound some
barbarous thing, or signifie some vnlucky slau^derous, or filthie matter?
which these wordes do not, but rather the contrarie.
Toplif the preest-tyrant of famous memorie in putting them to
death,Top liffe the preestqueller. is accustomed diligently to put vp in his slaunders when he
bringeth them to the gallowes (to do it with the more sole^nitie, such a
one traytor Iesuit, as though the fiction only of this name Iesu^it were a
sufficient condemnation of the partie, and cleering of the quest that
condemned him, though often tymes it falleth out that neither is he
Iesuit, nor euer was.
In France a yong man that sometymes had studied in the Iesuites
schooles of Paris,Ihon Chattel in France an. 1594. offred to kil the king. was found afterward to offer violence to the kinges
person that now is, he was examined vpon the torture, whether any
Iesuit liuing, had geuen him councel, courage, or instruction in that
acte, or was priuie to his intention, which constantly he denyed;
the lyke did his father who also was put to torture, and the same did
Ioannes Garetius his mayster, vpon lyke torture, and so was deliuered,
and by publique testimonie of the magistrate declared to be innocent.
Yet another reader of the same order called Iohannes Ghineardus was
put to death for that in his studdy was found the question discussed
on both partes without resolution,Ioanes Ghineardus martyred. vtrum liceat aliquo in casu occidere tyrannum,
whether in any case it be lawful to kil a tyrant, which question

notwithstanding euerie where handled by all diuines in printed
bookes, allowed by all learned men both heretiques and Catholiques,
and red publiquely in all famous schooles, and Cicero in his booke
of offices handled it,Cic. lib. 2. off. D. Tho. 2. sent. dist. 44. art. 2. and de Regim. principum cap. 6 Caet. in D. Thom. 2. secundae q. 64. art. 3. Sot. de iust. lib. 5. q. 1. art. 4. before Christian religion was begonne, and
synce him among Christians Saynt Thomas, Caietan, Sorus, and all
other scholastical deuines all which this innocent man said truly at
his death might as iustely be pulled out of their graues and burned for
the doctrin as he hanged for hauing the question handled in his studie,
and yet was he made a way, and vpon this preiudice synce that tyme
conceaued agaynst the name of Iesuites made odious by heretiques, and
by such as adhere vnto them (as though all were malefactors) haue
there diuers general decrees of persecution byn set downe against the
whole order in that kingdome, without any other proof of particularitie
agaynst them at all then I haue heere rehearsed, which manner
of proceeding if Tertullian did so much mislyke in heathens, how
much more would he condemne it in Christians agaynst Christians if
now he were alyue agayne.
But to proceede in this matter of Iesuites lyues I might aske and
vrge as the same Tertullian doth in lyke accusations, who accuseth?
what alleageth he?Diuers enemies of Iesuites. what hath ener byn found agaynst them? let it be vttered and
layed open to the world; hostes eorum (sayth he) tum extranei, tum domestici,
their enemies be both forayne and domestical, they are wached, they are
pried on, they are besette; error, malice, enuy, hatred, emulation vice synne,
dissolution of lyfe are soldiiars agaynst them and spies waching must diligently at
their dores, what haue they found? what haue they brought out? if same only be
persecuted agaynst them, fama mendax (saith he) quae ne tunc quoque cum
aliquid veri affert sine mendacij vitio est detrahens, adijciens, demutans
de veritate,Tertul. Apolog. cap. 8. fame of her nature is geuen to lying, and euen then when it
telleth some truthe, it ^ seth not to passe without some parte of lying, detracting,
adding and changing somewhat of the synceritie of truthe it self. O quanta illius
praesidis gloria esset, qui aliquem eruret, q^i centum iam infantes
comedisset.Cap. 2. O what a glory would it be to any president or iudge that should
bring forth a Christian that had eaten a hundreth iufantes, in his dayes for that
Christians were commonly charged to eate infantes flesh in their
meetinges and co^munio^s, which yet of Caluins bare bread would neuer
haue byn suspected: And as Tertulian said this of the callumniations
agaynst Christians so may we of no lesse false and malitious agaynst
Iesuites, but yet let vs see a litle further in this affaire.
Among all other aduersaries that Iesuites haue, one is so domestical,
as they haue bin of their own body, for diuers yeares, I mean of

their order and profession and for their defects are dismissed by a special
priueledge which these religious men haue for their conseruation
aboue other orders, and these men often times become the greatest
opposites of all others, quia ex illis exierunt, and ex illis non erant,Apostatical Iesuites. Ioan. 3. they
went from them and were not of them, nor had their true spirit and
vnction, and some of them also goe so far as by litle and litle they become
playn heritiques and apostataes, or dissolute of life, and of these
also their want not perhaps some at this day among you, and of yours
(Sir Francis, for of such ragges you make the pillers of your new
churche) let them be examined what they can say in this behalfe, of
life and manners against lesuites, what they haue seen, what they
haue proued, what they haue felt,Deut. 32. and fiant enimici iudices, let their enemies
be iudges.
The holy martir of Christe Saint Iustine, that liued before Tertullian,
euen in the first feruor of persecution against good Christians,
vseth an argument for their defence in life and manners (notwithstanding
their many slaunders raised against them) which seemeth to
me may be vsed also fitly in this defence of Iesuites: his words be
these.
VVhen I was a scholer (sayth he) in Plato his schoole,Iustinus Apolog. prima. and delighted with
that doctrine, and heard that Christians were accused euerie where of euil lyfe, and
yet saw otherwise that they went to dye willingly and liued poorly, aud feared not
those thinges which to other men are most horrible; I began to think with my
self, that is was impossible for those men to be vitious and geuen to pleasures of
the world, for then would they be loth to dye, and to be depriued of their saied
pleasures.
Thus argued he, and we may do the lyke of Iesuites now adayes,
of whome we haue seen before, how they professe voluntarie pouertie,
contempte of the world, incapacitie of earthlie promotions, great
labors of studies and other such painful exercises, we read also in
their peculier rules that their chastitie must imitate the puritie of Angels,Part. 6. Constant. cap. 1.
both in mynde and body, and as for wordly comodities, that they must abhor
(those are the very woords of their rule and institute) altogether and
not in parte from all these thinges which the world doth loue and esteeme (as honours,Exam. admitt. cap. 4.
promotions, riches, pleasures and the lyke) and embrace and desyre with
all their forces the thinges which Iesus their mayster esteemed and loued for our
examples, as contempt, pouertie, persecution and affliction, shewing by this
liuerye of his that they are his true seruantes and followers. And furthermore
we heare for confirmation of this, and partly also do see their voluntarie
sufferinges tortures and martirdomes in the Indies, in Ethiopia, in

Iapone, in Engla^d, Frace and other places for setting forward the seruice
of their mayster, wherfore by Saynt Iustines reason, it is not lyke that
these men are dilighted with vitious lyfe, which make so litle accompt
of lyfe, and do handle so roughlie their lyfe in this world.
An other obiection also was accustomed to be brought against religious
men in old time,Iesuites labors and indeuours for the publique. as also against all Christians generally of
the primitiue churche, as Tertullian affirmeth, to wit, that they were
vnprofitable men to the common-wealth, ydle, retired, siluestres, and
filuicolae,Tertul. Apol. ^^p. 42. that is fitter for woods and wildernesse, then for the societie
of man, this obiection (I say) is easily answered in the behalf of Iesuites,
seeing their manifold labors extant in the world, to the help of all
sortes of christian people, they begin with children as soone as they
are able to speak, teaching them christian doctrine, and elements of
other learing, afterward they read to them artes, tongues, sciences,
and higher professions; they frame their manners and affections as
well as their iudgmentes and vnderstanding to al Christian knowledge
and pietie, if they be poore and needie they labour to prouide
for them also temporally what they can; they doe set them forward
and aduance them in learning and pietie, they preache to all, administer
sacraments to all, they write bookes, they make peace between
enemies, they visit prisons and hospitales for comfort of the poore
and sick, they procure them fauor, get them almes, help them to dye
in Gods fear that either by sicknes or Iustice are called thervnto, and
finally taking a childe from his christian cradle, they carry him along
and accompanie him with continual assistance, comfort, and help, in
all fortunes, states, and conditions of life and death, vntill they deliuer
him vp agayne into his creators handes, that sent him into the world;
and this without earthly reward or recompence, and often tymes with
ingratitude and enmitie of the parties so benefited, and this is the lyfe
vse and exercise of these men.
B^t (say their aduersaries) they are ambitious notwithstanding,Obiections against lesuites ansvvered.
they are prowd, they will haue no equals, they will haue all passe by
their owne handes, they wil be maysters, formen of the quest, singular
in all respectes; to which I might answer that albeit these speeches
do sauour rankely of enuie, which followeth euer at the footsteeps of
vertue, and that they might in like manner be obiected against the
Apostles themselues in respect of others, whome they exceeded in
holines of life, yet will I examin them somwhat in this place. I ask
therefore,Ambition. wherin consisteth this ambition, this singularitie obiected
against Iesuites? in seeking (perhaps) promotions or preferments, but

we haue seen before that they can haue none, that they do voluntarily
renounce and forsweare them all. In getting gouernment perchance,
or iurisdiction ouer others? but we see by experience and by
their rule that they haue none at all, nor wil haue: wherin then
consisteth this ambition, doth it consist in labouring, toyling, contending
more then others in the cause and course they haue in hand?
a happie and holy ambition,1. Cor. 1^. wherof Saynt Paule him self gloried
muche when he saied, abundantius illis omnibus laboraui, I haue laboured
more abounda^tly then all the rest of my fellow Apostles. This obiection
then is vayne, or worse then vayne, as proceeding not only
of a deceyued iudgement, but of maligne interpretation also; in that
which is knowen to be excellent in it selfe, and worthie of all prayse,
loue, and admiration.
There followeth the second obiection of professed enemies (for
the former wil seem in outward shew to be frendes) that Iesuites are
troublers of common wealthes,VVhether Iesuites be seditions and trooblers of common vvalthes. Act. 24. seditious perturbers of states, peruerters
of kingdomes, dangerous to princes, such as Saynt Paule was
accused to be by Tertullus the orator, inuenimus hunc hominem pestiferum,
and concitantem seditiones omnibus Iud^is, we haue found this man to be
pestiferous, and to stirre vp sedition among all the Iewes, and agaynst
Saynt Paules lord and maister Christ him selfe, the same accusation
was layd and vrged with all asseueration, by many principal and
graue men together:Luc. 23. Hunc inuenimus subuertentem gentem nostram, and prohibentem
tributa dari Caesari, we haue found this man (marke you how
they speake of their owne knowlege, troblesome and to peruert
our people, perswading them not to pay tribute to Caesar. And this
is a very plausible accusation in the eares of worldly princes, espetially,
suche as haue not leasure, nor meanes, nor will perhaps to examine
matters in particuler, but alienated and caried away with the first apprehe^sions
and impressions of such odious calumniations, leaue no place
afterward for the accused to defend ^he^selues or shew their innoce^cie.
Yet one kynde of sedition I do easely discouer in very truth to be
in Iesuites,A holy kynde of seditio^. which is that, wherin their mayster confessed also himself
to be seditious, to wit, in separating fathers from children daughters from mothers,
kinred from kinred, and in setting them of one and the self same houshould
at contention and hatred and warre among themselues in Gods cause, and
in matter of ther saluation, of which holy sedition Christ himself professeth
(as I haue sayd) to be the author: do not thinke (sayth he) that I
came to bring peace into the world,Luc. 12. for I came not to plant peace but the
swoord, and to diuide a man agaynst his owne father^ and the daughter

agaynst her mother, aud the daughter in law agaynst her mother in
law, and to make emnitie betwixte them that are domestical. And in an
other speech, Ignem veni mittere in terram, and quid volo nisi vt accendatur?
I came to bring fyre vpon earth, and what will I but that it be
kindled?S. Bonauent. stim. diuini ^^noris. O faelices incendiarij (sayth one seruant of God) o happie fierbrandes,
or setters a fier of other mens houses wherby gold is seuered from earth
and pure corne tryed from chaffe, and all dregges of wickednes are burnt and consumed,
this is a holy, this is a happie sedition, and this is that in deed which
is layd agaynst Iesuites at this day, for that by their zeale and industrie
many a separation is made between good and bad, many a heat
enkindled in Christian hartes, where deadly cold occupied the place
before, many a batterie geuen to fortes possessed by Satan, many an
heathen and heretique made Christian, many a frostie catholique
made a hoat recusant, many a vitious lyuer made obseruant, many a
a careles and earthly mynd stirred vp to apprehend and think of eternitie,
many a groueling soule plucked from the ground and quickened
with the warmth of true Christian spirit, and finally to many
a worldling,Eccles. 41. pacem habenti in substantijs suis, whose dammable peace
lay before in his earthly substance, to wit in his riches, ease, and
commodities of this lyf, warre is made by meanes of Iesuites, and
sedition is put into his house before he was aware; his reason falleth
out with his sense, and his conscience with his ease, and with all the
residue of his former trade of lyf, and heer by both him self and all
the countrie round about him is put in comotion, and Iesuites are
accused of this offence for putting of fyre in this house, hew and cry
is made after them, many complayne, others curse, that are either trobled
or endamaged by this warre, and this is the true state of Iesuites
at this day, and these are the causes for which they are made odious
and termed seditous.
For as for the odde and ydle callumniation of the heretiques of
our tyme,VVhether Iesuites do seeke the deathes of princes. Ioan. 12. wherunto Sir Francis also as a deuoted child of theirs,
doth set his hand in this place, that they do practise the deathes of
princes, and procure their destruction (except only he meane that
practise wherin they ioyne with their mayster, vt princeps huius mundi
^ijciatur foras, that the prince of this world may be cast forth) and that
in particuler they haue sought the blood of our Soueraigne of England,
with such thirst as this man auoucheth, and that generally
they be princequellers, king-killers, and the lyke, is an accusation no
l^sse found, then false and malitious, and as easie to proue, as that
Sir Francis is by occupation a iugler, for what men are Iesuites to attend

to such attemptes? or what profit or emolument can arise to
them, more then to other men, by such murdering of princes albeit
you would faign them to be so voyd of conscience, as you insinuate,
or where, or when, or by whome was euer any such enterprise proued
against them? you will alleage perhaps the case of France, mentioned
before to be attempted by Iohn Chattel, a youth of nineteen
years of age,The fact of Iohn Chattel in france the 27. of Dece^b. 1594. that had once bin their scholler (for he was not actually,
when he attempted that fact) and if he had bin, who seeth not
the vanitie of this accusation, that the offence of one particuler
scholer, should be atributed to all his maisters, or be punished vpon
them, who had aboue a thowsand scholers more in that place, at
that time, and diuers thowsands in other places of France, at which
the diuel enuyed not a little. Furthermore, the acquitall and free
deliuery of father Iohn Gueretius, particuler maister that had bin, of
the sayd Chattel, by the publique magistrate, without any punishment
at all, and after he had bin held in prison and tortured, and most
rigorous trial made vpon him, doth euidently shew as wel his innocencie,
as that of all his fellowes; for that so rann the humors of their
conspiring enimies against them at that day in Paris (where the tryal
was made) that if any least shew of probable offence, could haue
bin found and fastened on them, they had all smarted for it, as since
hath appeared. This fact then of France is their ful clearing, and no
way their condemnation.
Their followeth another attempt of later time in Holland, set
foorth by the kinges rebelles of those prouinces,An other deuyse against Iesuites in Holland. since Sir Francis
wrote his booke, for if it had bin published first, he would haue taken
(no dout) a large argument therof, to haue discoursed theron,
and rayled more at randome, the fact is set out in print, vnder the
name of a sentence of death giuen by the magistrates of Leyden, the two and
twentith day of Iune last past of this yeare 98. agaynst one Peter Panne natiue of
Ypers in Flanders, for that he tooke, vpon him, at the persuation of the
Prouincial of the Iesuites, together with the Rector and prefect of
studdies of their college of Doway, to kill (as they say) Co^te Mauris,
Gouernour of Holland, and in the end of their narration (which
they auow to be Peter Panne his owne confession) they do adde, that
this iustice is done vpon him to terrifie men from fauoring the bloodie and
murderous sect of Iesuites, which (as is notoriously knowen to the world) do in^ent
daylie, a thowsand most execrable practises and trayterous entrepryses, and
do seeke to put them in execution, for killing and murdering kinges, princes,
and principal personages, especially such, as will not admit them, nor approue

their papistical superstition, called by them, the catholique Roman Religion, etc.
These are the wordes of those magistrates, in their printed sente^ce,
whereby is manifestly seen, the end that moued them to publish so
lying a pamphlet, as also to faigne the whole narration, for defaming
of Iesuites, and making them odious (if all were faigned) or
at least to induce Peter Panne to confesse it, or to accept and publish
so manifest false a confession, without further examination of
the truth and circunstances therof.
For that since, vpon further tryal of the matter, before other magistrates
of other places,Refutal of the fable. to wit, of Ypers itself, where the partie dwelt,
and of Doway, wbere the couenant was forged to be treated and
concluded, and of other places in Flanders, it is found that all was a
mere fiction, so far forth as it toucheth the Iesuites, and so is it testified
by an answere printed by authoritie of the saied magistrates, the
fyue and twentith of August, next insuing of the same yeare 98. and
by diuers other bookes and declarations afterward set abrode, for iustifying
of the truth, and in one of them, there are obserued aboue
threescore manifest lyes, layd downe agaynst the Iesuites in that
shameful confession: as for example, among other poyntes it is shewed
and verefied, that Peter Panne was no catholique at all, nor euer
had doing with the Iesuites; that he was a vagrant cooper giuen to
drunkenes and running vp and downe the country lyke a mad
man, for which faultes, and for his debtes, he was often put into
prison, and sometymes being deliuered, he put in himself agayne of
madnes; that his fre^des wold haue bound him in chaynes in his owne
house, that he was extremely well affected to Counte Mauris, and
consequently no fit man for Iesuites to deale withal to kill him, if
they had had any such intention, as their was no cause why they
should haue, seing they were to gayne nothing by his death.
Moreouer that Peter Panne neuer prouyded the Iesuites college in
Doway of butter in his lyfe, as is affirmed in the sentence, nor euer
was seen in that college by any, nor that there was euer any such seruant
of the college named Melchior de val, feigned to haue byn the
messenger to sollicit this matter with Peter Panne, neither was euer
there any treatie with Peter Pannes wyfe in Ypers, to this effect, or
other, as is affirmed in the confession, nor had she euer any acquayntance
or dealing in her lyfe with Iesuites, as in the faigned narration
is set downe, that all the tale of Peter Pannes coming to Doway in
the rogation weeke last past, and his dyning and treating with the
Prouincial, Rector, and Prefect after dinner, and their exhorting him

to the enterpryse, with making him many offers temporal, and assuring
him for his soule, that if he died in the enterpryse, he should
go to heauen presently, both in body and soule, and many other
such circumstances set dow^e in the printed narration, all I say, are
shewed manifestly to be false and forged, vpon examination and attestation
of catholique magistrates of the places aforenamed, and of
the persons themselues, mentioned in the fable, and among other
poyntes it is proued by many witnesses, that the Prouincial of the
Iesuites in the rogation weeke, which they do name, was in Bruxeles,
to wit, aboue threscore myles of, and had departed from Doway
in the moneth of Ianuarie before, and of Peter Panne also it is
proued, that he was not in Doway at that tyme, nor could be, for
that he was working in his maysters shop at Ypers.
So as by these and many other most euident demonstrations,
there to be seen, it is made cleer, that this is but an heretical fiction
to defame Iesuites, for their zeal in Gods true religion, in which respect,
as they are more dear to almighty God, so ought they to be also
to all good men, that behold these diuelish deuises of Sathan and
his instruments agaynst them.
But let vs returne to England,VVhether Iesuites seeke her maiest. blood. where Sir Francis beateth also vpon
the same nayl, as you haue heard, at the beginning of this incounter,
saying, that he cannot perceiue the thirst that Persons aud his pew-fellowes
haue of seeking her Maiesties blood, to be yet quenched: but how doth the
poore man proue, that they haue had that thirst? no way. how
doth he proue that it is not yet quenched? for that he perceiueth it
not, nor yet how it may be, the causes still remayning, why they
sought it before; o sillie disputer, how he flieth still from the point
he should proue? I requier that he should proue that Iesuites haue
sought the Queenes Maiesties blood, and he giueth a reason why
they haue not left to seek it; and what is this reason? for that the same
causes of seeking it, do remayn stil, that were before. What are
these causes? he nameth them not, but it seemeth they can be no
other, then the difference of religion, and the persecution made vpon
them for the same. VVel then, all the substance of this argument
is brought to this issue, that for so much, as Sir Faancis old
head cannot perceiue, how Iesuites persecuted for religion by the
Queen, can loue her or pray for her, or cease to hate her, and not
seek her blood, therfore it is so, and must be thought so.
But to this argument answereth Saint Paule,1. Cor. 2. when he saith,
animalis homo non percipit ea quae spiritus Dei sunt, a fleshly and sensual

man perceyueth not the thinges that are of Gods spirit, such for example)
as are the louing of a mannes enemies, and praying for them,
and rendring good for euil, which yet spiritual men (such as Iesuites
are taken to be) may perhaps both perceyue and practise, and so I
perswade myself they do, and I haue heard in particular by such as
come from English Seminaries beyond the seas, where Iesuites and
especially father persons here accused, hath a hand, that there is a
custome and precept, not only for all in general, to remember her
Maiestie in their ordinarie praiers, but also in the particular deuotions
assigned to euerie particuler person, at the beginning of euerie
moneth. The Queen of England hath her particuler place of recommendation
among other princes, and before them also, in the number
of them that are assigned to pray for her, so as this practise of
praying for persecutors, so much praysed by Christ though it enter
not into Sir Francis worldly spirit, and fleshly vnderstanding, yet
may it, and doth it (as it seemeth) into Iesuites.
And this might serue now as well for defence of all Iesuites in general,
as of father Persons in particuler, seeing no seueral matter is
layd agaynst either of them; but yet I may not let passe by law of
common frendship, to adde some few lynes also in the fathers case
by name, seing that by name he is accused of so odious a cryme, as is
to haue a thirst of shedding the blood of our Soueraigne lady and
Queen.Defence of F. persons in particuler. About which accusation I would aske this accuser, how
this appeareth? and how it cometh to passe, that in so many yeares,
so many others hauing byn suspected, some apprehended, other indicted,
condemned, and executed, for imputation of lyke heynous
crymes, none euer (that is knowen) accused father Persons by name,
to haue induced or perswaded them to the lyke enterpryse? though
if they had, it had byn no condemnation, but much lesse probabilitie,
when not so much as an accusation is extant. Let the examinations
and arraynementes of Parry, Sauage, Ballard, Babington
with all his fellowes, that were condemned with him, Polewheel
also, Daniel, Hesket, and such others be vewed ouer, and see whether
any of them do accuse father Persons to haue byn partaker o^
priuie to their councels, actions, or attemptes, in this behalf, let the
recordes be sought out of all the preestes declarations that haue byn
put to death, within these twentie yeares (which are more then a
hundreth) and consider whether any haue confessed fathers Person^
euer to haue proposed any such matter vnto them, and yet the most
part of them were acquaynted with him, and many also sent into England

by his direction, and if he had felt such a deadly thirst of blood,
and of her Maiesties blood, as this accuser sayth, the readiest way
for quenching therof, had byn to persuade some of these men (that
come of purpose to aduenture their lyues for religion, and feare not
the leesing of any thing in this world) to haue taken the enterpryse
vpon them, for the common good, and for setting the vse of their religion
at libertie ther by.
But there is no such matter, and these are but fictions and deuyses
of enemies,An euident demonstration. to make men odious; no preest hitherto nor Iesuite (that
I haue hearde of) hath euer confessed of himself, or others of that
vocation, any such attempt or meaning at all. It seemeth they are
gouerned by an other spirit and rule, to wit, by that of holy Dauid,
who made this vow,1. Reg. 2^. touching his enemie and persecutor Saul: Viuit
Dominus, quia nisi Dominus percusserit eum, aut dies eius venerit, vt moriatur,
aut in praelium descendens perierit, propitius sit mihi Dominus, ne extendam
manum meam in Christum Domini. As the Lord liueth (sayth he) except
God stryk him, or that his day come of natural death, or that
he going into the field to fight, do perish there, God be merciful
vnto me, that I lay not my handes vpon his anoynted.
So then father Parsons protesteth (as I am credibly informed)
that he was neuer consenting, witting, willing, inducing, yeelding,
nor priuie to any such personal attempt against her Maiestie in his
life. Moreouer he auoucheth, that he hath dissuaded, hindered, and
diuerted some that might perhaps haue had such inclination, and
namely one Gentleman, some yeares past beyond the seas (he sayeth
not of what nation he was) that hauing resolued vpon the only
zeale of religion, and for deliuering of catholique people from persecution
to leese his own life, or to take away that of her Maiestie;
he was entered some hundreth miles and more into his iorney toward
England, for that purpose, hauing made himself ready to dye, by
discharging his minde of all worldly cares and cogitatons, neither
had he doubt of the effect, for that he pretended not to escape aliue: all
which notwithstanding, vpon father Parsons earnest dissuasion, that
met him on the way, he was content at length to retyre, and giue ouer
the enterprise, principally vpon this reason (for others he persuaded
himself to haue examined sufficiently before) that English catholiques
themselues desired not to be deliuered from their miseries by
any such attempt; and this to be most true, he affirmeth vpon his
conscience.
By this then it may seem to appeer, that this father is not so thirstie

of her Maiesties death and des^r^ction, nor of so bloody a disposition,
as Sir Francis would make him, which I haue heard also confirmed
by many protestants themselues, who meeting with him in catholique
kingdomes, where he might haue donn them hurt, hath alway
donn them good, and I could name some, if I thought it would be
no hurt or disgrace vnto them, let those fourscore and fifteen, whom
at one time he deliuered out of the chaynes of galleys of Spayn, in
the year 90. (whereof diuers are gentlemen now dwelling in Engla^d,
and those thirtie and fower which this present year of 98. he deliuered
from like miserie in the galleys of Naples, and many other
particuler men benifited by him besides, speak for him in this case,
for that these woorkes are of more weight with wise men, then Sir
Francis bare woordes to the contrarie. And so with this I end also
this encounter.


THE SIXTH INCOVNTER,
ABOVT THE CATHOLIQVE RECVsantes
that refuse for conscience sake, to goe to the Protestantes
churches, and to be present at their seruice
in England.
AS in many other poyntes this hastie hotespur playeth
the Herodian, shewing himself without conscience
at all, and ready to pawne his soule for pleasing the
prince and state where he liueth, so in no one thing doth
he more discouer this diuelish and detestable disposition,
then in his cruel and malitious calumniation agaynst
the better and more religious sorte of English Catholiques;
who refusing to dissemble, do vtter their consciences plainly in
matter of religion. And according to their obligation in this behalf
do abstain from going to the churches, preachings, and seruices of
them that be of a different religion. And albeit he cannot but confesse,
that many of them do geue good example of lyf in their behaueour,
or (to vse his owne wordes) do shew a good outward ciuil cariage in ciuil
matters (which I dout whether all his neighbours will testifie the
lyke of him, and of those of his profession) yet (sayth he) let not that
possesse you with too great a regard of them, and to deliuer you from the danger of
such deceytfull baytes, I must assure you, that this is a true position, that without
the true feare of God, there can be no true religion. And vnlesse the religion be

found, the face and shew of ciuil honestie (seem it neuer so glorious in the eies
of flesh and blood) is but a deceitfull visour vpon a crabtree face, couering the
most vyle and cankred partes, of a deceitfull hart, and so I come to shew their
dissimulation.
Thus far Sir Francis; to whome I will not answer by examining
faces and visours, whether that of his be crabtree, plumtree, peartree,
or figtree, let other men iudge that know it. Neither yet by
discussing how many sortes of cankers there be, where with Sir Francis
himself may be touched,2. Timot. 2. especially if heresie be one, as Saynt
Paule doth signifie, and all holie fathers haue held after him. But
to the matter it self I answer, that wheras Sir Francis maketh so light
of good lyf in Catholiques,About good lyf. calling it a deceytfull bayte, Christe teacheth
vs to make a far different collection, when in his first sermon on the
mountayne, he gaue this aduertisement: Beware of false Prophetes, etc.
by their frutes you shall know them, for as men do not gather grapes of thornes,
nor figges of brambles,Math. 7. so doth euerie good tree bringe foorth good frutes,
and euerie euil tree bringeth forth euil frutes,? Neither can a good tree bringe
foorth euil frutes, nor euil tree, good. Saynt Iames sayd in lyke case,
thou hast fayth and I haue workes, shew thou to me thy fayth without workes,
and I will shew thee my fayth by my workes.Iacob. 2. If then here be workes and
good lyf in these Catholiques, it must be presumed to come of good
fayth according to Saynt Iames. And if there be figges, and grapes,
and such other good frutes found in their behaueour, then must the
tree be iudged good also, if Christes rule be not false. And for that
our Sauiour gaue this rule to discerne true and false prophetes by,
it is not euil that Sir Francis and his men do fly from it so openly in
the playne feeld, leauinge good workes to Catholiques, and reseruinge
only threed-bare fayth to themselues, for therby they discocouer
what prophetes they be.
And of all this I do not greatly marueyle in Sir Francis, for he seeth
(poore man) how bare a haruest he hath in hand, when he talketh
of workes amonge those of his sect, and how the hare goeth clearly
away on our syde, if he hunt after good life in his new prophetes.
But much I marueyle of his lack of shame, that talking agaynst these
recusant Catholiques, he maketh mention so often of deceyt and dissimulation;
seing that of all other people of the realme, these men
dissemble least, but rather do publish themselues, euen to the face
and vewe of the magistrate, yea they are punished expresly for that
they will not dissemble, as many others do, and go to your churches
with a repyning and repugnant conscience; for if they would do so,

then were they no more recusants, and consequently f^ee from al
your clawes, penalties and vexations though neuer the more yours
therby in mynde, then now they be.
But to the end this matter ma^e be better discussed, let vs heare Sir
Francis triple accusation agaynst them, his wordes are these.
I do note (sayth he) three thinges in this kynde of people, worthie to be knowen
and obscrued, first the hurt thy continually do, secondly ihe hurt they would do,
and thirdly their deep dissimulation. Here are three heades you see of a
greeuous accusation set downe, let vs see the particulers.
For the first (sayth he) it would aske a long discourse to discouer all the
hurtes done by them,The first charge agaynst Catholiques. they are so many, and manifould. This is nothing but
wordes and rhetorical exageration hitherto, let vs see some substance.
My owne experience telleth me (sayth he) that when the gentleman and man of wealth refuseth to come to the churche, and is in any sort borne with all, there the meaner sort receyue infection, and draw backe from obedience also, for
Aboue maiori discit arare minor.
Of the elder oxe, the yonger steer doth learne.
This is Sir Francis first charge, which as it is graue and weightie
in it self, so is it as substantially proued, with a poetical verse taken
from his plow and stawle of oxen and from his steeres. Let vs see
what this iustice of peace hath more to saye of his owne experience,
for be-lyke he speaketh of his practise in that office agaynst Recusantes
it followeth then in his booke.
If the man come to thurche and the wyf refuse (which is a cunnning trick
much practised of late yeares) then is the houshold both seruantes and children
in danger wholly to be corrupted. And sure it is, that the wyues of the meaner
sorte are infected greatly by them, and the nightcrowes persuation preuayleth
much, and in myn owne knowledge, within these three yeares, many of the meaner
sort are fallen away, and do fall away daylie, for that, impunitatis spes
magna peccantium in illecebra, the hope of impunitie is a greate bayte to offend.
Heer is all now that our knight can alleage in particuler concerning
the hurts (so many and so manyfold) which before he sayd the
recusantes do woork in England, which in effect cometh to be no
more (as you see) but that if the goodman refuse to go to churche
(though the good wife go) then those of the meaner sorte begin to
refuse also; and if the goodwife refuse (though the goodman go)
then are the seruantes and children in danger to do the like. And
then generally he setteh downe this doctrinal assertion, that the
night crowes perswasion preuayleth much, and this knoweth he of
his owne knowledge partely (perhaps) by experience of his own night

crow, and partely by tampering in these affaires: who (as is probable)
hath bin some principal actor in the long persecutions vpon Catholiques,
either by playing the parte of Iudas to betray and take them,
or of Caiphas or Pilate, to condemne and afflict them. And so by
this experience he hath found out (as he saith) that many goodwiues
of the meaner sorte are fallen of late, and many other by their
example do fall away dayly: a grieuous accusation, and fit for a carpet
knight.
But Sir, you that are such an enemie of night-crowes, and haue
such knowledge of the afayres of all the goodwiues of your countrie,
tel me, whereunto do these wiues, or children, or seruantes, or
tenants, or husbands fall, when you say they fall away? is it perhaps,
to any enormitie of sinne or to wickednes of life? no, but
to haue a scruple to go to the protestants churches. And why? for
that they are of a different religion. They are Catholiques, and do
think your religion and seruice naught. Wel then, religion and
conscience is cause of this refusal, and not euil wil or rebellion,
as you malitiously interprete and consequently the way of true remedy
is, not to beat, and bynde, and driue them to your churches by
force and punishment, as you do perswade the Magistrate to do
(Sir consciencelesse knight) but first you must make them of your
religion, that they may go of deuotion and conscience: for if they
go otherwise it is a dooble sinne, both to them that go, and to you
that make them go, albeit the act otherwise in it self were neuer so
good and lawful: as all men of learning and conscience do wel know,
that an erronious conscience also bindeth: though your ignorance
be so grosse in all christian learning, as you seme to be both ignorant
and careles of so manifest a truthe.
I say, it is a manifest truthe, that a mannes conscienceAn erroneconscience also byndeth. is to be followed,
though it did erre, and much more when it erreth not, and
the reason of the former is, that forasmuch as our conscie^ce is nothing
els but the voice and determination of our reason and iudgement, about
matters to be donn or not to be donne, it followeth that we are
bound to obey that direction (be it right or wrong) so long as we
haue no other light to guyde vs. For that according to this we shalbe
iudged at the last day, to wit, according as each mannes conscie^ce
(sa^th Saynt Paule) shal accuse or defend him:Rom. 2. and not according
to the nature or qualitie of the thing it self that he doth: which
point, schoolemen (if I be not deceiued) do expresse in these wordes,
that the goodnesse or malice of a mannes will, is to be measured by

the obiect that moueth the will, and not by the thing it self that is
donne. As for example, if I apprehend a thing to be euil and yet do
it, I do sinne, albeit the thinge in it self that I do, were not euil: for
that in my apprehension and iudgment it was euil: and so I did it vnder
the conceit and formality of euil, and consequently my wil
and intention was naught, in doing it, though the thing in it self were
lawfull. As for example, if in the night time seeing a beast in a bush
and thinking it to be myn enemy I should kill it, though the thing it
self be no sinne, yet should I commit manslaughter therin before
God, for that, my apprehension was of myn enemy, and consequently,
myn action should be iudged according to the obiect I conceiued,
and not according to the thing in it self.
This very case determineth S. Paule himself particulerly,Idolothita. through
out the whole foureteenth chapter of his epistle to the Romanes,
about eating the meates that had bin offered vp to Idols. And the
same matter he handeleth again throughout the eight chapter of his
first epistle to the Corinthians. And in both places he determineth
that to him that either eateth simply without enquiring whether it
were offered to Idols or not, or hath so much true christian knowledge
as he vnderstandeth thereby that an Idol is nothing, and that all
creatures are lawful to be eaten by a christian man (so it be donn without
scandal of others, and with other due circumstances) albeit I say
to such a man it be lawful to eat of those meates that had bin offered
to Idols, yet to him that had a contrarie conscience and iudgement
it should be a greiuous sinne to eate thereof, for that he did it against
his own iudgement and beleefe, though it were erroneous.
I do know and trust iu Iesus Christe (Saith Saint Paule) that no meat is vnclean
or vnlawful now, but onely to such as think it vnlawful. So as onely to
think it vnlawful, maketh it vnlawful, according to Saint Paules
rule. And again the same Apostle, qui discernit, si manducauerit, damnatus
est, quia non ex fide, he that discerneth or iudgeth, the said meat to haue
bin offered to Idols,Roman. 14. and that it is therby made vnfit to be eate^ and yet
eateth the same, he is co^de^ned: for that he doth not according to his
own iudgment and beleef. And after all, he concludeth his speach
with this general proposition omne autem quod non est ex fide, peccatum est,
all that is not according to a mannes beleef and conscience, is sinne,
for so expound this sentence, Origen, Saint Ambros, Saint Chrisostom,
and other fathers, and not to signifie, that all the woorkes
of Infidels, donne without faith, should be sinne, though Saint
Augustin apply it also to that sense sometimes:Aug. lib. 4. but the other sense is

the literal and most true, as appeareth manifestly by the whole discours
of Saint Paule.contra Iuda cap. 3. Of all which insueth that no man may do against
his conscience though it were awry.An erroneous conscience doth euer excuse. Not for that a wrong
conscience excuseth in all cases (for that is a different question) but
for that a wrong conscience, byndeth euermore, and some tymes excuseth
also, when it proceedeth of inuincible ignorance. But howsoeuer
it cometh by right or wrong information, no man may go
agaynst it without sin so long as he cannot perswade it to change,
and if this be so, how much more are the recusant Catholiques of
England bound to follow their consciences in the poynt they stand
in, for not going to churche, being founded vpon so sure and euident
growndes as any demonstration in the world can lay downe, for
proof of any manifest truth what so euer, as for example, first, that
the religion they professe is true, and the only truth that among
Christians is to be found, and secondly that they being of that religion,
maie not dissemble or seem to professe any other, by going to
their seruice sermons, or churches, and hereby also appeareth how
great impietie and folly it is for any man to inforce them thereunto,
as our barbarous knight would haue the English magistrate to do:
I saie it is impietie to inforce any Christian to do an acte agaynst his
conscience and beleef, for that it is to inforce him to his damnation,
as Saynt Paul before hath taught vs,Roman. 1^. I saie also it is folly, for that
by drawing mens bodies to church by violence (their myndes being
repugnant) nothing is gayned at all, but more internal hatred and
rancor rather enkindled, and the infotcers are made pertakers of the
others sinnes and damnation.
And further the Protestantes do greatly hereby discredit their
owne doctrin which they were wont to teach,Protestantes discredit. that no man should
be forced in matters of his conscience. And more ouer they do shew
hereby vnto the world that they seeke not the inward man, but the
vtter shew and body, with what great repugna^ce soeuer it be of the
soule, which is quyt contratie to all pietie, and a most base manner
of proceeding in respect of the Catholique vsage, which albeit it punisheth
such as do wilfully and obstinatly leaue the vniuersal ancie^t
faith of Christendome, which once they haue receyued and sworne
vnto, yet as long as they are euill perswaded of the same, they are
not only not forced to Catholique churches; or to hearing of masses
participation of Sacramentes or to other lyke exercyses of contrarie
religion, but are barred also though they would come, if they be supposed
to come with repugnance, or that there be any least suspition

that they go f^ynedly or agaynst their willes, for that their soule and
mynde is sought in Catholique religion and not the body only.
And this maie be sufficient for repelling Sir Francis first charge
against English recusantes concerning the present hurt (he saieth)
they do in England, by geuing others example to follow their consciences
and not to dissemble. And by giuing, them example of good
life of modest behaueor, of patience in aduersitie, of corage in Gods
cause, of contempe of earthly prosperitie, of care of their saluatio^ of
feare of Gods iudgementes, of fidelitie in following the direction of
their consciences, of magnanimitie in not yelding to betraye their
owne cause and beleefe: all which is conteyned in the most excellent
and heroical act of the refusing to go to churches and seruice of a different
Religion. In which poynt of refusal also the Puritanes
were wont to concurre with Catholiques for defence of their profession,
but it may be they haue thought it best now to alter that
course, for that as they haue no other grownd of their religion but
their owne iudgment, so it byndeth them no further then they list,
and that it standeth with their comoditie, and it may be, that in this
poynt now they haue thought it best to follow those whome Christ
sayth,Matti. 13. temporales sunt, and in tempore tentationis recedunt, they are according
as the tyme serueth,Marc. 14. Luc. 8. and do retyre in tyme of tryal or persecutio^.
I come then to the second charge, which our knight geueth vpon
our recusantes about the hurtesAbout the hurtes that recusantes vvould do. that he will needes haue men beleeue
they would do if they could, of which he writeth thus.
Touching the hurt they would do, who doubteth but they would haue vp their
masse agayne, and bannish the syncere worship of God, their whole Catholique
gouernment and religion I am sure they long for. And yet to pronounce these
men to carye holow hartes to Queen Elizabeth is thought to be an vncharitable
sentence.
Do you see how wyse a charge this is, and how learnedly proued?
Yf a ma^ should reason thus agaynst him, and his brother the Earle, that
died not longe agone in Yorke, you both are puritanes in religion,
as you are taken, and consequently no man can dout but that you
would haue vp your geneuian disciplinarie for me of gouernment,
whereby all the Bishops in England must be pulled downe, and other
Ecclesiastical dignities discomposed, the Queenes Supremacie also
must be taken away, and other like pointes of the English churche
ouerthrowen, whereby a man may pronounce that you cary but holow
hartes to the present state, and to the Queen Elizabeth, notwithstanding
all your flatterie.

And this is an argument (Sir Francis) which logicians call,Argumentum ad hominem. ad
hominem, in which kinde I could vrge you yet further, and make you
scratche your head, towching wishes and bearing hollow hartes towardes
Queen Elizabeth and her gouernment, if I would follow
presumptions, as you do against recusantes, for that besides your religion,
if a man consider whence you descend, and what pretences be
or may be about succession, it is not hard to ghesse what your wishes
may be to haue Queen Elizabeth, or some other person to sit in her
place, and yet to pronounce you to carry a hollow harte to Queen
Elizabeth, as you say in iest, that it is thought to be an vncharitable
sentence, and I say it in earnest quia charitas non cogitat malum,1. Cor. 14. sayth
Saint Paule, charity iudgeth not the worst of things, and so I wil not
iudge what wishes you haue or may haue: only I wil tel you that if
you haue any in this later kinde, they are more perilous and preiudicial
to Queen Elizabeth, then those which you presume catholiques
to haue, for that the thinges, which you imagin catholiques do wish
(as restoring of masse and catholique gouernment and the like) may
stand with her Maiesties life, raigne, securitie, and prosperitie (if it
would please almightie God to inspire her to admit them) euen as
they haue stood with the honor and prosperitie, of all her noble
ancestors, Kings and Queenes of our realme before her: but your wishes
cannot preuaile but with her ruine, if they be such as may be
presumed.
But as I sayd, I wil not vrge you in this behalf what you would
wish, nor is there any well gouerned common wealth in the world,
in my opinion, that vrgeth men vpo^ suche vayne poyntes of inward
wishes and secret cogitations or desyres.No subiectes to be vrged vpon invvard desyres. The Turke doth it not vpon
the Christians that are vnder him, nor Christian Princes vpon Iewes
that dwell in their states, nor the king of Spayne vpon the Moriscos
that liue in his kingdomes, nor the Emperour, king of France,
king of Polonia, or other Catholique monarches vpon the Lutherans,
Swinglians, Caluinistes or other sectes, that are tolerated in
their states. Only this barbarous knight of ours, contrarie to all
reason and humanitie, would haue it vrged vpon catholiques in England,
what they wish and what they desire: where notwitstanding
if the same should be inforced against all persons, that any way
be discontented in court or countrie, and in their hartes would wish
perhaps some alteration, who seeth not, but that as in other common-wealthes,
so especially and aboue others in ours, where so many
diuisions and dissentions do raigne, as wel by reason of religion as

otherwise, many thowsand ^nward sores and vlcers would be discouered,
that now lye hidden, and is expedient that so they should
remayn, notwithstanding the ridiculous folly, or rather furie of this
frantik man in persuading contrarie.
Let vs see now his third chardge against recusantes,The third charge against recusantes.touching their
dissimulation as he calleth it, his woords are these in most odious
manner set down, These ciuil honest men (sayth he) that vnder pretence of
conscience rebel agaynst God in religion, and refuse to yeeld a loyal obedience to
their liege Lady and Soueraigne, seem to carry a most lamentable resolution lurking
in their bosomes, against Queen, countrie, and vs all: when they wil seek
the life of their and our Queen, the thraldom of their and our countrie, and the
ruine of vs all that professe the ghospell, to haue their popish Priesthood, and
Massing sacrifice vp again. And if this be conscience, I know not what conscience
meaneth, and yet this conscience they fetch from Rome. etc.
To answere first to that which is heer last, if we should graunt this
great absurditie,Sir Francis Hastinges conscience. that Sir Francis Hastinges knoweth not what conscience
meaneth, either in nature and definiton, or in practise and
feeling, what great inconuenience would follow therof trow you,
for as for the definition of conscience it were easie (I suppose) to pose
Sir Francis, seeing that his bringing vp hath bin rather in court and
hawking, then in schooles and studying. And for practise or feeling
of conscience, how little sence he hath, there needeth no other argument
but onely this slanderous libel, stuffed with such monstrous lyes
and calumniations, as no man of any conscience would euer haue set
downe, were he neuer so different in matters of religion. Nay
truly it may be doubted; whether easily there might haue bin found
any so careles or conscienceles an atheist about London, that so resolutely
for any bribe would haue accused so many worshipfull honest
ciuil men, as himself confesseth the recusant catholiques of England
to be (which is so much as any ciuill common-wealth can requier of
their citizens) as this man doth, and that of most hainous crimes, of
trecherous falshood, disloyal dealing, and wicked treasons to their
prince, and of lame^table lurking resolutio^s in their bosomes, agaynst
Queen and countrie, and of seeking the life of the one, and thraldom
of the other: and all this vpon so vayn and light suppositions as
you haue hearde, before which yet he would haue so constantly
to be beleeued of all men, as that the said recusantes (notwithstanding
his owne former testimonie of their ciuil good life)
must be condemned for the catalines of the land, and out castes
of the comon-wealth, for to Cataline and his compagnions, he

compareth them in the end of his inuectiue, in these wordes.
VVe maie well say of them as Tullie sayd of Cataline the conspiratour in one
of his orations,Notorious rayling and calumniatio^ agaynst recusaut Catholiques. that in all or most of these happie yeares of her Maiesties
most prosperous and peacable gouernment, there hath byn no trayterous practise
agaynst her person or our countrie, but it came alwaies from them, and by them:
whome neither shame of their villanies, nor feare of punishement, nor any
sound reason out of Gods booke, nor yet the rule of true Christian policie, could
withold from pursuing their trayterous purposes and pract^ses. And to see or
heare that the royal person of our Souerayne lady was in danger was pleasing
to them. As contrarywise the newes of her happie escape was irk some. So
that, where there is only the bare sense of a true English ha^t, these popish recusantes
cannot bewitche or deceyue with their hypocritical holinesse, or ciuil
honestie, and so I leaue them.
Though you wil leaue them (Sir hoatespur) in this your choler, yet
mean I not to leaue either them or you, vntil this matter be better
examined. And first in this inuectiue, if we take away railing speach
without proof, there is nothing added to that you haue scolded before,
against the recusantes. And if in the rest we consider how you
stammer stil at the good opinion of Catholiques, fained holinesse, and
ciuil honest lyf (a hard bone as it seemeth for you to disgest) there is
much to their praise and commendation in this your accusation.
But yet to shift off this matter, and to bring in contempt the persuasion
of their good life, and to induce men not to make account thereof,
and much lesse to be bewitched (as your phrase is) by the same,
you require the sense only of a true bare English hart to resist this witchcraft
of perswading by good woorkes,A bare English hart vvhat it is. and what you mean by a bare english
hart to serue you in this conflict, I know not, except it be som
hard heathenish hart, as strong as flint, to resist the knockes of all
Gods motions, and as bare of all piety, remorse, and conscience, as
yours seemeth to be, to which also if you do adde the English cutte
(as hartes go there for the most parte among protestantes at this day)
and furthermore if it be so truely and barely English, as it hath seen
no other countries,, nor knowen other paradice then English earth,
nor thought of other blisse then with you is comonly treated, and
that it be as seruilly tyed to oxen, and steeres, and other temporal base
comodities, as your soule sheweth it self to be. And that for a further
perfection, it be seasoned also with a dram or two of your English
sole faith and bare beleef, to the contempt and hatred of all good
woorkes: this hart (I say) and the onely bare sence thereof, which
you repuire, is sufficient not onely to resist the bewitching of recusants

good life, but of all other Saintes besides, and of Christe himself:
and to condemn their scrupulous standing in defence of their
consciences, for folly or hipocrisie, as heer you do the scrupulosity of
English recusantes, for refusing to go to churche, but we do measure
the matter by an other ballance, then by the sense of so bare an English
hart, and so no merueil though we agree not in the weight and
poyz of that which is weighed.
And thus I might leaue (Sir Francis) now with some disaduantage
perhaps of his side, as he before in haste would leaue the recusantes,
were it not that I desire to see some proofe also of his skil and learning,
as we haue seen ouer much of his lauishing tongue, and rayling.
Let vs examin then how substantially he doth prooue, that
Catholique recusautes ought to make no more bones at the matter,
but go to the Protestantes churches without staggering or scruple.
I hold it (saith he) for a sound ground and not to be controlled, that euery
christian ought to striue to keep these three thinges sound within his brest: his
conscience before God, his loyaltie to his prince, and his loue to his countrie. All
which three (for my parte) I account so nearly conioyned each to other, as they
cannot iustly be seuered.
Heer I will pose Sir Francis in this his position and grownd, which
he saith is so vniuersally true, as it may not be controlled, and therby
you shal see both the knightes diuinity and conscience together.
Can a mannes conscience to God neuer be iustly seuered from the
external obedience of his prince,An absurd position of Sir Francis. and naturall loue of his country?Gen. 12. and 19.
How then was Abraham commanded by God to abandon his country,
and Lot the same? How were the ten tribes of Israel incited by
God (as himself testifyeth after) to leaue their obedience to their
lawful and natural king Roboam, and the loue they had to their
ancient common-wealth,3. Reg. 12. and to set vp Ieroboam, a stranger, against
the one and the other?4. Reg. 3. How did Elizeus the Prophet send one of his
disciples to persuade Iehu a subiect, to rise and rebel against his
lawful and natural king and maister Ioram, and to slay both him
and his mother the Queen together, as he did, and turned vpside
down that whole common-wealth? How did the Prophet Ieremie
perswade the inhabitantes of Hierusalem to deliuer vp that cittie
and common-wealth,Hier. 38. 39. 40. etc. agaynst the kinges will, into the handes of
the enemie Nabuchodonasor and his captaynes, which seemed
great treason both to king and countrie; and yet was allowed or rather
commanded by God himself.
And to come neer home to Christian Princes, how did that famous

holy Athanasius so often abandon his countrie of Egipt and
Alexandria, and resist the commandmentes of diuers Emperours his
temporal liege lordes (though infected with heresie. How did Eusebius
Vercellensis,Ruff. lib. 1. cap. 18. Hilarius of france, and others, do the same, resisting
both Prince and countrie for religions sake, as most notoriously
is knowen?Zozom. lib. 3. cap. 12. And can there no cause then fall out which
maie iustly seuer a mans conscience from the temporal obeying of
his Princes wil and commandement,Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 4. or the lawes of his countrie?
VVhat A^heist would euer say so? or what fond man would euer
put a position for absolute and vncontrolable, that may be checked
with so many instances to the contrarie? for except he wil say a
prince cannot erre, nor command a thing dissonant to Gods law, or
to right, reason, or good conscience, or that a mannes countrie cannot
go wrong, or runn astray, or that we are bound to conforme our
consciences to whatsoeuer the prince or countrie apointeth, be it
right or wrong in matters of religion, there is no way to defend this
fond principle and heathenish position.
The wisdom of God saieth to a deuout soule,Psal. 44. Au^i filia and vide etc.
Hearken daughter and consider, and bend thy eare, and forget thy
owne people, and thy fathers house etc. Christe also alloweth greatly
of them that dispise father and mother, and countrie, and kinred,
yea they are willed to hate them,Math. 17. Luc. 12. and to make war against them, for
his sake, and consequently also the like is willed against princes in
the same cause, for that the obligation to obey fathers is greater then
to princes, and so we see that there may happen occasions, wherin
conscience to God may be iustly seuered from obedience to princes,
and from worldly loue to our earthly countrie.
But for that this animalis homo (as before hath bin noted) doth not
perceiue,1. Cor. 2. nor feel the things that be of the spirit of God, I wil reason
no further in spiritual conceiptes with him, but wil pose him with
more palpable argumentes about his own protestantes. Let him tel
me then, what did the protestantes that fled to Geneua in Queen
Maries time,Domestical examples. or rebelled at home? those that rose in Scotland against
their true lawful Queenes, the mother and daughter? Those that
haue made warres so many yeares in Flanders and France, against
their natural true kinges, went all those three thinges together in
them, to wit, conscience to God, obedience to their princes, and loue
to the present state of their countries? Speak heer Sir knight, and defend
your sound ground and vncontrollable position: you see how
vayne and false a proposition it is; but yet the refuge of this peoples

defence in all their fancies and follies, is, their shew of some wordes
of Scripture to proue the same, wherin also our knight will needes
proue himself a Rabbyne. Let vs examin briefly how substantially
he performeth the matter.
Our conscience (saith he) cannot but tell vs, that all obedience is dew to the
soueraigne Magistrate, for we are taught it out of the booke of conscience, the
holie scriptures, which teach vs that we must subiect our selues to all manner of
ordinance of man for the Lords sake,1. Pet. 2. whether it be vnto the king, as vnto the superior,
etc.
Thus far Sir Francis. And heerby you shal discern, how wholesome
a thing Scripture is,About obedience to te^poral Princes. in the hand of an ignorant or sensual mynded
man, euen as pretious stones before hogges, as Scripture it self
doth affirm. For in these few wordes, as Sir Francis alleageth them,
may be founded the perfect sect of the Herodians, that made Herods
pleasure, the rule and platforme of their conscience and actions.
Our conscience (sayth he) must needes tel vs that all obedience is due to the soueraigne
Magistrate. Yea, all obedience? what conscience the knight teleth
vs, of the conscience of an atheist, or of a seruile minde, proiected
to the beck and pleasure of earthly princes? Sure I am, that the conscience
of Saint Peter and his fellow Apostles, taught them not so,
when they answered the lawfull magistrates of Hierusalem, that
commanded them to speak no more of the afaires of Christe, ^at
they would rather obey God then their commandement,Acts. ^. ergo, these mennes
consciences, had not yet told them, that all obedience without exception,
was due to the ciuil Magistrate. S. Paules conscience also
told him not so, when he refused to obey the commandement of Nero,
and died for the same, and so did many other Martyrs, for resisting
both him and other princes and lawful magistrates, in Gods cause.
And it is a special praise giuen to Martyrs by the churche in their
feasts, contempserunt iussa principum, they contemned the commandementes
of princes, for Christes sake. How then saith this Herodian
knight that all obedience must be yeelded to them in all matters without
exception? let vs see how he proueth it.
VVe are taught it (saith he) out of the booke of conscience; by the wordes now
alleaged of Saint Peter,False taanslation. Submit your selues to all manner of ordinance of man.
But first I would aske him with what conscience, doth he corrupt
and falsly alleage this booke of conscience, for the wordes of Saint
Peter are,1. Pet. 2. Subiecti estote omni humanae creaturae propter Deum, siue Regi quasi
praecellenti, siue ducibus ab eo missis. Be subiect to euery humane creature
for Gods sake (meaning thereby the ciuil magistrate elected by the

comon-wealth) whether it be to the king, as more eminent then the
rest, or vnto captaines and vnder magistrates sent from him: why
doth Sir Francis translate omni humanae craturae (which is the very same
also in Greek) all manner of ordinance of man? but that it serued
more to his purpose, and they can make their booke of conscience
to say what they will haue sayd without scruple of conscience: why
doth Sir Francis translate, siue Regi quasi praecellenti, whether it be to
the king as superior etc. and why doth he cunningly leaue out the
wordes that follow immediatly, or to the Captaynes (or vnder Magistrates)
sent by him, etc. but that he would make Saynt Peter to
say, that the king is absolute superior, and that all obedience is due
vnto him, as to the Soueraigne magistrate as this sely man hath taken
vpon him to teach vs, though Saynt Peter doth name also the inferior
magistrates in lyke manner, and sayth only, that the king is to be
obeyed as the more eminent among them, but yet putteth him not
for absolute, or that all obedience is due to him, as our man would
haue men now beleeue, for that it maketh to his purpose, and therby
euacuateth the precept of Saynt Paule, who appoynteth to Christians
an other obedience also, far different from that of kinges and
temporal Princes in matters, belonging to their soules, when he
sayth,Hebrae. 13. Obedite praepositis vestris and subiacete eis, ipse enim peruigilant, quasi rationem
pro animabus vestris reddituri. Obey your Prelates, and ly vnder
them, for that they do keep diligent wach ouer you, as men that
must render account of your soules.
And who those Prelates be,Spiritual go uernours. the same Apostle expoundeth in an
other place, when he speaking to them selues, sayth, Attend to your
selues and the whole flocke,Acts. 20. ouer which the holie Ghost hath placed you for Bishops
to gouern the churche of God, which he hath purchased with his owne blood.
VVhich wordes of tender loue and prerogatiue (to be placed in their
dignities by the hand of the holie ghost himself, ouer the chosen people
that God had bought with his owne pretious blood) we shal neuer
read to haue bin spoken to temporal kings and princes, and consequently
all obedience is not so absolutely due to them, as this prophane
diuine holdeth, but much is also to be reserued for the others,
and in matters of highest moment.
First then we see, most manifest falshood and trecherie vsed heer,
by this our Bible-clerk-knight in corrupting and translating wrongfully
for his purpose this litle peece of Scripture alleaged by him, what
would he do think you if he had to alleage many places, seing he
handleth so pittifully this one only? Secondly, we may see the egregious

absurditie and impietie of the sense which he would pick out
thereof, to wit, that all obedience absolutely, and in all matters and causes,
is to be yeilded to the soueraygn temporal magistrate without restraint:
and consequently also,Most absurd doctrine. that all manner of their ordinances and
lawes are to be obeyed without exception. VVhich doctrine if it
be true, then were the Apostles bound to go to the Infidels temples
and sacrifiise also, when they were commanded: for that no man wil
deny, but that this precept of obedience set downe heer by Saint
Peter, was ment expresly and particulerly for obeying the seculer magistrates
and princes of that time: all which were Infidels commonly,
and Idolaters. So as if there were no exception of causes, then did
Saint Peter himself (that giueth the precept) verie euil, in not obeying
the magistrates of Iurie first, and after in refusing to obey Nero the
Emperor, when he willed him to consorme himself in matters of
religion.
And if there be any exception of causes or matters, wherin by
Gods law, princes may be disobeyed, then impiously and fondly is it
set downe heer by Sir Francis so resolutely, as out of Scripture, that
all obedience is due to the soueraygne magistrate, and that also (as his words
be) in all manner of ordinances without exception, which heath enis^h doctrin
includeth a thowsand denyals of God himself. And further I
say, that the same is fondly affirmed, for that the Protestantes
greatest contention hath byn hitherto agaynst Catholiques, to the
end, that they should not obey the preceptes of men, though they were
set downe by the whole Churche, and now cometh in this guylt
spurre-Doctor with a quy^e contrarie ground, that we must submit our
selues to all manner of ordinance of man. VVhich is as far to the other extreme
of base seruilitie, as the former was to the contrarie, of pryde,
to obey no ordinance of man at all, they prouing the same then by
that text of our Sauiour,Mat. 15. 1. Pet. 2. In vayne do they worship me teaching the doctrine
and preceptes of men. And now the contrarie by Saint Peter, that we
must obey all manner of mennes ordinance, which yet Saint Peter sayeth
not, but Sir Francis falsly alleageth him.
And by this you see how these poor people do range vp and downe
without rule, limit, or certayne ground at all but only their own
will and present fancie. Moreouer I saie that this text of Saynt Peter
of obeying ciuil magistrates (though it were so as he alleageth it)
yet is it verie impertinently alleaged agaynst Catholiques in our
controuersie about their not going to protestantes churches, for that
they do offer all due obedience in temporal and ciuil actions vnto

their temporal magistrate.Hovv recusantes do obey, and hovv they may not. And do stand only in matters of religion,
that concerne their soules and consciences, and consequently this text
is nothing to the purpose agaynst them in that behalf. And with this
I will leaue also Sir Francis as simple a soule as I founde him, but yet
somewhat more shufled out of his cloutes, and discouered for a conscienceles
corrupter of his booke of conscience.
To Catholique recusantes whome he impugneth I can say no
more, but that they are happie men to haue such an aduersarie,A speech to catholique recusantes. and
that the course which they haue hitherto held is most honorable and
pious before God and man, I meane in shewing first their dutie towardes
God, by standing constantly and suffering for their conscience:
and secondly in offering all loyal obedience in temporal causes to
their liege prince. And lastly in edifying their neighbours by their
good lyfe and behaueour. VVhich is the exhortation of Saynt Peter
in this verie place alleaged. Hauing your conuersation good (sayth he) among
these people, in such sorte, as they considering your good woorkes,1. Pet. 2. in that
they go about to slander you as wicked men, God may be glorified therby in the
day of his visitation. And agayne, the will of God is, that you by your good
lyf, do stop the mouthes of foolish and ignorant men, that talke agaynst you, etc.
And yet further, this is a great grace if any man suffer sorow for his conscience
towardes God, being afflicted vniustly, for if you suffer for sinne (^or euil lyf) it
is no glorie but if while you liue well, you do suffer patiently, it is a great grace
with God ^for in this is your vocation, and to this you are called, for that Christ
suffered so for vs, and left you example to follow his steppes, etc.
And as for obedience, you are to yeeld it simply (my deare brethren)
and playnly (as I haue sayed) with a true loyal harte and
good will, as vnto Christe himself, vnto all kynde of magistrates
whatsoeuer, temporal or spiritual, though yet with that distinction
which Christe him self appoynted, quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari, quae sunt
Dei Deo, geuing vnto Caesar, those thinges that are Caesars, and reseruing
to God those thinges that are Gods.Math. 22. VVhich distinction Saynt
Paul to the Romans expoundeth more particularly,Marc. 12. when hauing
commanded all superior powers to be obeyed euen for conscience
sake, as the ministers of God, though they were Gentils,
he setteth downe this conclusion Geue therefore to all sortes of men those
thinges that are due vnto them,Rom. 13. tribute, to whome tribute, tole, to whome
^^le, feare, to whome feare honor to whome honor belongeth.
Vnto our temporal prince and head of our earthly co^mon-wealth,Temporal. Magistrate.
whereof we are citize^s, we owe all temporal obedience in ciuil matters,
according to the law of God, nature, and nations, and according

to the particular ordinances of the countrie wherin we
dwel; and so we are to serue him with our bodies, goodes,
life, and whatsoeuer other earthly meanes or comoditie we
haue besides,1. Pet. 2. Rom. 13. in all iust causes. And this with all honor, fidelitie,
redines, alacritie, and promptnes of minde, as to the minister of God,
ordayned (as both the forenamed Apostles say) for punishing of the
wicked, and comforting the good. And this obedience was due also
vnto heathen magistrates in Christes time:Note this point. for in this temporal go^ernment,
Christ altered nothing at all, but left it as he found it.
And for that some Christians after Christes ascention, partly by the
comon opinion of the Iewes, who held that the Messias should
make them free from all temporal subiection, and partly vpon those
woordes of Christe himself in Saint Iohns Ghospel,Ioan. 8. si ergo vos filias liberauerit,
vere liberi eritis, if the sonne of God once deliuer you, you
shal be truely free (which was meant of spirituall freedom) yet
for that some Christians imagined that they were now free from
obedience also of temporal magistrates, the foresayd two chief Apostles,
Saint Peter and Saint Paule,Rom. 13. 1. Pet. 2. took vpon them most earnestly to
remoue this error, in the places alleaged, and to persuade all due
temporal obedience also, in all ciuil afaires, to the ciuil magistrate,
of what life or religion soeuer he were.
I say in temporal and ciuil afaires, for as for matters of religion
and the soule, no man of sence or iudgment, will imagin that the
said Apostles would bynd christians to obey those ciuil magistrates,
that were not yet christians in the Apostles dayes, nor euer ment to
be, but rather persecutors.
And heerof also insueth, that their must needes be some other distinct
superioritie and gouernment for matters of the soule,Spiritual magistrate. whereof
I shewed the commandement before out of Saint Paule, and it is
that which we commonly call Ecclesiasticall or Spiritual gouernment,
concerning afaires of religion and conscience. And this gouernment
ouer soules, Christe himself came properly downe from heauen
to found and erect vpon earth, and to make himself head thereof:
being a gouernment far different from the other, whereof he would
take no parte at all, and so he fled when the people would haue made
him a king: and to Pilate he denyed that his kingdom was of this
world:Ioan. 6. and being called vpon to deuide the inheritance between two
brethren (which was an act aperteining to the te^porall magistrate) he
answered,Luc. 12. who hath apointed me a Iudge or a deuider ouer you?
But yet when he talked of the o^her superioritie that aperteineth to

teaching, instructing, and gouerning of soules, be acknowleged his
authoritie.Ioan. 13. You call me maister and Lord (sayth he in one place to his
disciples) and you say wel for I am so.Math. 23. And again in an other place your
only maister is Christe, etc.
This superioritie therfore and tribunal ouer soules, for instructing,
directing, chastising, bynding and loosing of sinnes, and the lyke,
Christ did peculierly erect and setle at his being here, making himself
the head, and leauing his Apostles and their successours for his
substitutes, to guyd the same vnder him vnto the worldes end. Neither
did Christe at his departure commit this authoritie, or any parte
therof, vnto Caesar, or vnto any other temporal prince, but to his
Apostles, geuing them that supreme dignitie in ioynt commission
with his owne person, when he saied, who heareth you, heareth me, and
who contemneth you, contemneth me.Luc. 10. Nor did Saynt Paule when he talked
of matters of the soule, subiect Christians vnto Caesar, or vnto temporal
princes as he did in temporal affaires, but vnto their prelates,
as before hath byn alleaged,Heb. 13. and addeth this reason, for that they wach
for vs and are to yeild account of our soules to almightie God, as a matter of
their peculiar charge.
And to the end it should appeare how distinct and different these
two gouernments and iurisdictions are,Temporal and spiritual iurisdiction. Christ prouided that this
spiritual gouernment of his Churche should stand in the world for
three hundred yeares together; without any temporal gouernment at
all in the hand of Christian Princes, to wit, vntil the tyme of Constantyne
the greate, and then and after, when any temporal kinges
and princes were conuerted and made Christians (as our Ethelbertus
king of kent, king Clodoueus of France, and others) all entered
and submitted them selues vnder this spiritual gouernment of the
Christian Churche and prelates therof, as subiectes and not as superiours,
as sheep and not as pastors, and as children vnder their fathers
and prelates, and not as commanders in that behalf. And so
they continued still for many ages together, contented with their
princely authoritie in ciuil matters, and with their subiection in Ecclesiastical,
vntill certayn libertyne heretiques of our tyme, to put
themselues out of the burthen of obedience to their Ecclesiastical
superiours, haue sought to trooble and confound this holy distinction,
appoynted by our Sauiour, and to cast both gouernmentes
and iurisdictions into the handes of the temporal magistrate, therby
to make a confusion,Occham to the Emperour. and to be free themselues from correction,
due vnto their wickednes and dissolution, and crying to temporal

princes (as one did in the lyke case) defend you vs with the sword, and we shall
honor and defend you with the word. And this is the true state of matters in
this behalf: whereby the godly proceeding of our English recusantes
is most cleerly iustified, and the prophane flaterie of their aduersaries
discouered And with this I end the sixth incounter with S. Francis.


THE SEVENTH INCOVNTER,
ABOVT FORRAYNE PRINCFS AND NAtions:
And first concerning the Pope
of Rome.
IF the immodestie of Sir Francis railing speeches
and calumniations, had conteined it self within the
compas of home-born subiects, and had not ouerlauis
hed also to the open iniurie and slander of forrain
pote^tates and nations; the matter might more easily
haue bin passed ouer and dissembled; for that he sitting
at home, vnder the fauour of the state and present time, hath
more libertie therby to raile at his pleasure, and to tiranize with his
tongue ouer such as are their kept downe, and dare not answere him
or reply. But when with the same audacitie (or impudencie rather)
he will presume to vse the like approbrious speaches against the sacred
honors of anointed princes, and the greatest monarches of Christendome,
contrarie to the law both of nature and nations; he is to be
restrained and checked euen for the very honor of England it self, and
our nation, and so I mean to do in this seuenth incounter.
And to begin with his raging at the Bishop of Rome, calling him
the proud Priest and arche-prelate of Rome, bloody monster, Antechriste, the man
of sinne,Opprobtiousspeaches the sonne of perdition, and other like vnseemly tearmes, and
wicked maledictions: the answere were quickly made, if I would
be as cholerique and immodest as he, and say, that these are but rauings
of a lunatique brain, and belkings of a burthened stomake,
with the surfet of heresie: and other such like tearmes, but I wil not
incounter in this kinde with him, but rather will endeuour to ouerrule
him by reason, and conuince him by argument, if he be capable
of the one or the other.
First then, that the Popes of Rome be Antechristes or the man
of sinne,VVhether the Popes of Rome be Antichris^^^ whereof Daniel, our Sauiour Christe, and his Apostles do
speake, and that Rome is Babilon (in the sense that these goodfellowes

do mean, that is, Rome Christened) it is a meer iest; and inuented
by a scoffing Apostata fryar or two, and mayntained by men
of like humor and qualities And in deed the iest is fitter to entertain
some pleasant crew at a tauern or alebench, then to moue any learned
auditory or discreet reader, though it be frequent matter in English
pulpits at this day, for that as the true Christe was one singuler man,
so shall the true Antechriste be a particuler man also,Antich. one man. and not any
succession of men, one after another, as the Popes of Rome are;
and this is euidently gathered by the ancient fathers, out of the
wordes of diuers holy Scriptures, as namely Daniel. 7. and 11. Ioan. 5.
2. Thess. 2. 1. Ioan. 2. Apoc. 13. and, 17.
Moreouer the Iewes shal receiue the true Antechriste for their
Messias, as they refused to receiue Christe, and so Christe sayeth 
plainly Ioan. 5. vers. 43. I came in the name of my father,Antichrist declared by the levves. and you receiue me
not, if an other come in his own name him you shall receiue etc. but it is not
likely that the Iewes wil receiue the Pope of Rome for their Messias,
and much lesse so many Popes as are already dead.
The Gospel and doctrine of Christe must be first preached to all 
nations before the true Antechriste come,Antichrist vvhen. Math. 24. and, 2. Thess. 2. and so
the consent of old Doctors vpon these places do agree, which thing
is not yet fulfilled, as Saint Augustin in his time did largely declare,
Epist. 80. and we may also shew in ours much more, by the vaste infidel
countries daily discouered.
The proper Antechriste by all reason and likelyhood, must be a
Iew borne, and circumsized, and will professe (at least for a whyle) to 
keep the Iewes Saboth, and the other ceremonies of the old law,Antichrist a Ievv. to
draw them after him. And they shal accept of him for their Messias,
as before hath bin shewed out of Christes owne woords,
which they would neuer do, except he were a Iew both by generation
and profession. Of which two things neither can be verified of
the Popes of Rome, to wit, that they are either Iewes by birth, or do
professe the Iewish doctrine, and therefore they can not be Antichriste.
Antechriste when he cometh shal pitch his kingdome in the citie 
of Hierusalem,Antichrist in Hierusalem. and go about to restore the temple of Salomon, as is
plainly gathered out of Saint Iohns woords in the Apoc. cap. 11. where
he saith, that the bodies of Hen^ch and Helias that shalbe slain by him, shal
lye vnburied in the streetes of that great Citie, where their lord was crucified.
And the same is deduced out of the same booke. cap. 17. and out of
Saint Paules woords 2. Thess. 2. and by many ancient writers. And

how then can the Popes of Rome be sayd to be Antechriste?
 Three principal heades of Antechristes diuelish doctrine when he
cometh,Antichrists doctrine. are gathered plainly out of holy Scriptures. The first, that
he shal deny Iesus to be christe, 1. Ioan. 2. vers. 22. and consequently
shal deny Baptisme, and all other Sacraments and doctrine brought
in by Christe. The second that he shal teach, himself to be true
Christe, and the Iewes shall beleeue him. Ioan. 5. The third, that
he shall affirm himself to be God, and so requier to be adored
for God, 2. Thess 2. v. 4. but the Popes of Rome do not teach these
pointes of doctrine hitherto and therfore cannot be Antechriste.
Agayne scriptures do teach vs, that Antichriste when he commeth
 shal woorke many wonderful miracles in the sight of men,Antichrists miracles. Math. 24.
and 2. Thess. 2. and some of those miracles are specified Apoc. 13. to wit
that he shall make fyer descend from heauen, and the image of a beast
to speake, and fayne himself to dye and rise agayne, but these miracles
no Popes hitherto haue wrought, or do woorke, ergo etc.
 Anthichrist shall raigne but three yeares and a half, when he
commeth,Antichrists tyme of raigne. as is gathered by ancient wryters, out of the Prophet
Daniel, chapter 7. and 12. and out of the 12. chapter of the Apocalips
where it is sayd that he shall reigne a tyme, and tymes, and half a tyme, for so
S. Iohn himself interpreteth the matter c. 11. and 13. saying it shalbe for
42. monethes, which make iust three yeares and a half, but the Popes
of Rome haue raigned for more ages then these are yeares, and consequently
cannot be Antichrist.
Beside this, the Scripture teacheth vs plainly, that before Antechrist
 come,Henoch and Helias. Henoch and Helias shall returne againe, to oppose themselues
against him, and in the end shall conuert the Iewes, Malach. 4. Ecclesi.
48. Math. 17. Apoc. 11. but we see not yet this poynt fulfilled, to proue
the Pope to be Antechriste, ergo, etc.
Lastly, (for I will be no longer in this matter) streight after the end
 of Antechristes kingdome (which shall endure but three years and
a half,Day of iugdment. as before hath bin shewed) shal ensew the day of iudgment
and consummation of the world, as the Prophet Daniel foretelleth cap.
7. and Saint Iohn in the Apoc. cap. 20. and the same is gathered out of
Christes own wordes also, Math. 24. and the foresaid Prophet Daniel
speaking againe of this matter in the 12. chapter, saith, that the kingdome
of Antechriste shall endure a thowsand, two hundreth, and
ninetie dayes, which maketh the former number of three years and a
half. And then he addeth these woordes, happy is he that expecteth and
ariueth vnto a thowsand three hundreth and thirtie and fiue dayes (which is

fourtie and fiue dayes after the death of Antechriste) for that then Christe
co^ming to iudgme^t, shall bring the crownes of iustice for those that are victors etc.
And seeing that the Popes of Rome haue endured now so long, and yet
the end of world hath not ensued, it is manifest as wel by this reason,
as by all the other before alleaged, that these Popes cannot be properly
Antechriste, as our new malignant raylers do affirm.
But it may be some wil say (seeing the absurditie of the former
false position) that the Pope of Rome is not properly,Hovv there are many Antichristes that Antechriste
which is foretold by the scriptures, but only a forerunner of
his, and such as disposeth the way to his comming, at the end of the
world, in which sense Saint Iohn hauing sayd, Children this is the last
houre,1. Loan. 2. and as you haue heard Antechriste commeth, or is to come (for so the
greek verb signifieth plainly, being of the present tense, and not of
the time past,(...) venit. where the latin is doubtful, and may be taken both
wayes) Saint Iohn (I say) hauing foretold in his epistle that Antechrist
was to come in this last houre or age of the world after the appearing
of the true Christe, he addeth immediatly these wordes. And euen
now many Antechristes are made, and therby we know that this is the last houre
etc. VVhich is, as if he had sayd, that forasmuch as we do see many
become Antechristes (that is to say do become opposite to Christe
both in spirit and operatio^) and doo begin to worke the misterie of
iniq^itie (as Saint paule calleth it) agaynst true Antechristes comming,
heerby we know that this is the laste age from Christe to Antechriste,2. Thessal. 2.
and so to the worldes end, which immediatly is to ensew after Antechristes
ariual.
If I say our knight and his compagnions will confesse this, that
the Pope of Rome is not that proper Antechriste foretold heer by
Saint Iohn, to come in the end of the world but only that he is one
of those other forerunning Antechristes, already made and appearing
in S. Iohns dayes to prepare the way (which yet no heretique
nor Sir Francis himself though neuer so shameles, will da^e to auow
of the Bishops of Rome of the primitiue churche, when Saint Iohn
wrote those wordes, that they were Antechristes, they being known
to be Saintes and holy martirs for some ages together) if this I say
be graunted; then it followeth, that all these mennes ianglings in
bookes and pulpits, against the Popes of Rome to proue them Antechristes,
faleth to the ground, and is made ridiculous, for that in this
sense all euil men whatsoeuer, may be called Antechristes (that is
contrarie to Christe) who do woorke iniquitie and cooperate to the
kingdome of sinne, which Christe came to ouerthrow; and so all

Turkes, Moores, Tyrants, Persecutors and other wicked people are
Antechristes in this sense, as forerunners of true Antechriste and
contrarie to Christe, neither is there any thing peculier to the Popes
of Rome, though we should confesse them to be neuer so wicked
in life, but the very truthe is, that principally and aboue others in
this sense the name of Antechriste is proper to heretiques and sectaries
who vnder the name of Christe, do impugne Christe, and leauing the
common receiued vnion of fayth, do finde out contrarie pathes by
themselues. And against such men did Saint Iohn especially speake
those wordes, that many Antechristes were already made, to wit, the Ebionites,
Cer^^thians, and Nicholaites then newly sprong vp. And for
this cause also doth he say, Antichristi facti sunt, they are made Antichristes,
and not borne so, for that by their owne malice they made
themselues such, in departing from vnion. And now whether Popes
or the Protestants do participate more of this qualitie of heretical
Antichriste, by breaking vnion in faith and religion from the whole
bodie of Christendome, I leaue to the discreet reader to ponder.
And thus much may serue about calling the Pope Antichriste.
As for Rome,Hovv Rome is Babylon. whether it be Babilon or no, litle importeth it to
the matter we haue in hand, so we agree in the sense: for not only
Saint Iohn in his Apocalips, but Saint Peeter also in his epistle, doth
call Rome Babilon, and we deny it not, for it was in respect of the
great confusion of iniquitie, Idolatrie, and persecution, that the infidel
Emperours vsed, and were to vse against Gods Saints. But that
either Saint Iohn, or Saint Peeter, did call is Babilon in respect of the
Christians that were in it at that tyme, I think Sir Francis himself
will blush to say, and consequently the name of Babilon giuen to
Rome when it was impious and pagan, aperteineth nothing to Rome
now after it is Christian; nor hath this fond obiection need of any
further answere.
For the rest of the rayling and contumelious speach, wherby the
Pope is termed the proud Priest and Archeprelat of Rome, touching the words
Priest and Prelat, they are names of his dignitie, as they were in Christe
and the Apostles themselues,About the Popes external honor. who were both Priests and Prelates,
and Arche-prelates also, in that they were more principal then others.
As for prowd, that dependeth of the Popes inward disposition,
which our knight ought to haue knowen in all law of good christianitie,
how it standeth, before he auowch it outwardly. For if he
iudge only by the external shew, and outward honor of his estate, he
may as wel condemn of pride, all other princes and great men in the

world, for admitting honor according to their degrees, and among
others, our present Bishops of England may be called in question
(as they are by the puritanes) for being termed lords, and for the
lord-lyk honor donn vnto them in outward demeanure. To the
Lords also of her Maiesties counsel may be obiected the like, for causing
men to kneel vnto them at the counsel table, and such other like
external honor admitted.
As for bloody monster, it is a monstrous slander, and a great monstruositie
of inciuilitie in a gentlemans mouth, so to speake: for it is wel
knowen that the Bishop of Rome that now is, and many of his predecessors
in our dayes and eyes, haue vsed and do vse dayly, great curtesies
to infinite protestantes, that passe through their states. And as for
blood, I think verely, that there hath bin more shed in onely London
for religion in one year, within these last twenty that haue passed,
then in all the whole twentie, within all the townes, citties, and
states of the Bishop of Rome, and this is easie to be verefied.
VVell then (Sir knight) you rayl at randon, and litle do you seem
to think or consider what peril of Godes iustice may hang ouer you
for the same.The peril of Sir Francis rayling. Exod. 22. Leuit. 20. You may remember it is written, principi populi tui non
maledices: and agayne, qui patri suo maledixerit, morte moriatur. The
Bishop of Rome hath euer byn held for our spiritual prince and parent
in England, vntill with in these few yeares, and so is he still
holden by all Catholique kingdomes round about vs, and in ours also
by such as follow the old vniuersal fayth, which if it be true, then
are you in danger of damnation by this your fury. And you remember
that Saynt Paule was so respectiue of this danger, that hauing
spoken a hastie worde agaynst Ananias, calling him whyted walle,
for an open iniurie donn vnto him in publique iudgement agaynst the
law,Act. 23. yet when he vnderstood he was high priest (notwithstanding
S Paule wel knew thar his priesthood now was nothing worth, the
old law being abrogated by the death of Christe, he did openly recall
his word agayne, and shewed to be sorowfull for hauing spoken it
agaynst one that bore that tytle. But Sir Francis hath no such feeling
or remorse of conscience in him, for that he is not gouerned by the
same spirit of humilitie and pietie that Saynt Paule was, wherunto
notwithstanding I would gladly persuade him if I might, and for
that respect do mean to alleage vnto him the considerations insuing,
about the Bishop of Rome.
First, himself in the 31. page of this his libel hath these wordes,
The Lord from heauen commandeth to all men vpon earth,Rom. 13. that euery soule should

be subiect to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, and euerie
power is ordayned of God.Hovv povver is to be respected. VVhich wordes if they be true, then must
the Popes power also be of God, seing it hath byn an acknowledged
power by all Christendome for so many yeares and ages, and not only
for a lawful power but also for a holy and supreme spiritual power,
and then let men iudge in what cause Sir Francis standeth that not
only resisteth, but reuileth also this sacred power, notwithstanding
that the illation which Saynt Paule inferreth immediatly after the
former wordes, is this, wherfore he that resisteth power, resisteth Gods ordination,
and those that resist Gods ordinatio^, do purchase damnation vnto themselues.
More ouer, that saying of Christ vnto the Apostles, he that heareth
you,Luc. 10. heareth me, was not spoken only for them selues, but for all their
successors also, that by succession should gouern the churche vnto
the worlds end, as all men wil co^fesse. And co^seqe^tly the other parte
also of the same sentence, he that contemneth you, contemneth me, must
needes in like manner belong vnto the same man. And that the Bishops
of Rome be successors in the Apostle Saint Peeters seat, is no
lesse manifest to all men of vnderstanding and learning. And albeit
Sir Francis will say presently, that they follow not Saint Peeters steps
(and wil proue it at leisure) yet if that were true, the princes authority
is not taken away hy his euil life or deportement, for then should
we haue few true princes in the world. But aboue all others it pleased
Christe himself to take away this obiection touching Popes and
Ecclesiasticall princes, when he sayd, that vpon the chaire of Moyses should
sit both Scribes and Pharisees,Math. 23. and that we should notwithstanding obserue and do
whatsoeuer they sayd, but not according to their woorkes. So as stil there remaineth
the obligation to obey them, though their liues and hehaueour
were not correspondent, but much more the obligation not to
slander, contemn, and reuile them, as our harebrain and headlong
knight doth.
I say it is harebrain and headlong dealing,Harebrayne and hed longe dealings of Sir Francis. to runne so furiously in
so da^gerous a path as this is. For besides that maledicus, a railing tongued
man, is placed by Saint Paule among them, that shall neuer attaine
the kingdome of heaue^: it is much more grieuous sinne to vse this vice
agaynst Magistrates,1. Cor. 5. and 6. that represent the power of almightie God, and
far yet greater agaynst spiritual magistrates, that haue this authoritie
in a far higher degree then temporal magistrates, but most of all agaynst
him that representeth immediately the person of Christe Iesus
vpon earth, which is the Bishop of Rome as presently more particulerly
shalbe shewed.

Furthermore if all the holy and learned men of Christe^dom haue
not bin deceiued for so many ages together, as they haue confessed
this general doctrine, of the Pope of Rome his prerogatiue, without
doubt or contradiction: then is Sir Francis out of his way, then is he
in the open path of perdition, then is he furious, frantik and besides
himself, in rayling as he doth. And that this only vniform consent
of such and so many holy learned men gon before vs, were a sufficient
argument to make any man (that were discreet and fearing God)
to enter into doubt (at least of his doing in this behalf) cannot in
reason be denied: and so without doubt would Sir Francis also do, if
his temporal life lay on the bargain as his eternal doth.
For let me aske Sir Francis, if an herb should be presented to him
to eat,A demonstration agaynst Sir Francis madnes. that all learned phisitians for a thowsand yeares together haue
held for strong poyson, and onely som one or two of later yeares
haue begonne to teache the contrarie without actual experience
whether it be so or no, but only by discourse and new argumentes of
their owne, would he abstayne to eat it (think you) or no? Or if an
action should be offered him in England, which by all old lawyers
iudgment of former tymes hath byn taken for high treason ipso facto,
and losse of lyfe and landes though some ^iewer lawyers were of contrarie
opinion that now it is not, I persuade my self S. Francis would
looke twyce er he lept once in committing that action, for the loue
he beareth to his temporally f^nd state: but in this other case though
all ancient diuynes and doctors for aboue a thowsand yeares together
haue taught that it is blasphemie to rayle at the Bishop of Rome
appoynted by Christ to gouerne in his place, and damnation not to
acknowledge his authoritie, and only Martin Luther a loose Apostata
fryer, and Sir Iohn Caluin a sear-backt priest for sodomie,Luther. Caluin. haue
begonne in our dayes to teache the contrarie for feare to be punished
by him for their wickednes, yet Sir Fra^cis rusheth on and casteth at
all, and will hazarde hell and all eternitie of tormentes theron depending,
rather then not to satisfie his passion in this poynt and
please the state, wherin he liueth, by shewing himself a forward
man. And who will deny, this to be headlong and hare brayne
dealing.
And yet further though this vniuersall consent of Christendome,
agaynst two or three so contemptible authors of nouelties be more
then sufficient to induce any man of reason to looke about him, and
to consider what he doth, and whether he may adventure his soule
vpon such inequalitie of testimonies as this is, between two or three

nouellants and twentie millions of holy and graue ancients (which
difference of witnesses I suppose would preuayle in VVestminsterhall,
with any equal and discreet iudge or iurie) yet for further light
to such as wilfullie will not shut their eares and eyes, I will set
downe heer some other considerations also to the same effect, besides
the prescription of tyme and antiquitie before mentioned, and besides
the weight and number of so many holy and learned mennes
iudgmentes of former ages, whom yet in reason we cannot presume
to be inferior to ours, if we be not ouer fond and passionate in our
owne cause.
 First then, it cannot be imagined,Diuers reasons for the Bishop of of R^ome his preheminence. but that Christe our Sauiour
instituted a churche to continew, and to be gouerned, not only for
that first age after himself, but euen vntil the worlds end, and so himself
sheweth Math. vltimo.
This gouernment was to be vnder Bishops and Prelates, ordained
 by the holy Ghost, by imposition of handes of the Apostles, whose
successors they were, as Saint Paule she weth playnly act. 20. 1. Tim.
3. 3. Tit. 1. And this succession was to endure to the worlds end also,
by continual new ordination and imposition of hands, so as none
could enter by stealth or violence into this rank, but such as lawfully
should be admitted.
 That among these Prelates and spiritual gouernours of his churche
and kyngdome Christe would haue some subordination of the one
to other for auoyding strife, schisme, and confusion, and one ouer all
the rest is verie lykely and probable euen by reason it self, if no other
proof were.Plato in polit. Arist. lib. 3. polit. cap. 5. For so he forshewed by light of nature to all Philosophers,
who held without controuersie that the monarchie or gouernment
of one head in highest degree was the best among all other
manner of regimentes, and consequently it is lyke that Christe tooke
not the wurst for the regiment of his churche and spiritual common
wealth.
God practised this kynd of gouernment in the creation of Angels,
 geuing them one vniuersal superior vnder himself which was Lucifer
before his fall, as is gathered out of Iob. 40. and Isay 14. by ancient fathers
that expound those places.Agust. lib. 11. ciuit. Dei. cap. 15. And afterward when Lucifer fell
he remayned still head of the wicked spitites, and Michael of the
good, as is signified playnlie Apoc. 12.
 God practised the same kynd of monarchial gouernment for spiritual
affayres in erecting the churche and common wealth of the Iewes
that was to be the figure of our churche to come,1. Cor. 10. geuing them one

high preest to gouerne direct and hold in vnion and obedience all the
other preestes, which were almost infinite in all their synagogues
throughout the world.
He practised the same in lyke manner in al other thinges lightly of 
this world, appoynting subordination and reducing all to one, as all
the vnder heauens to the gouernment of one supreme, the branches
of different brookes and riuers to one fountayne, the infinite armes
and branches of one tree to one body and roote. And all creatures
fynally to the subordination of himself. But yet more spetially was
this needfull in the erection of his churche vpon earth as hath byn
sayd, for preseruation of conformitie and auoyding of diuision and
confusion.
For if there were many gouernours therof ioyntly vnder himself,
^^^h equal authoritie, and they disagreed, who should attone them? If
any of the^ would be obstinate or wilfull, who should correct them?
And fynally, this churche is compared to an armye that needs
must haue some knowen general, and not only to an armie simply 
but to,Cant. 4. acies castrorum ordinata, a wel ordered armie, that hath all other
officers also in good order vnder the Captayne general. And it is
compared in lyke manner to a house, to a sheepfold, to a ship, to
the Arke of Noe, and the lyke, all which thinges haue one head gouernour,
as the world knoweth.
And that his priuilege was geuen by our Sauiour to Saynt, Peter among
all the Apostles, if no play ne commission were extant (as the re 
Saynt Peter cheefe of the church vnder Christ is) yet Christes proceeding with him far different from any of therest
of the Apostles sufficiently declareth his intention in this matter.
That he reuey led vnto him first of all the rest the hidden mysterie
of his incarnation and of the blessed Trimitie, Math. 16. That he
sayd only to him, rogaui pro te ne deficiat fides tua, I haue asked for thee
that thy fayth shall neuer fayle (hauing sayd first that the diuel was
to sift them all) Luc. 22. That he promised only to him that the gates
of hell should neuer preuayle agaynst his seat, Math. 16. That he
paied tribute only for Peter and for himself, Math. 17. That he changed
his name from Simon to Cephas or Peter that signifieth a rock or
stone, Ioan 11. (which is the name of Christ himself attributed to him
by the prophets as is to be seen, Isa. 8. and 28. Daniel 2. Psal. 117. That
Christ called only Peter to walk with him vpon the water, Math. 14.
That he preached and wrought two such notable miracles in the only
^hip of Peter as appeareth, Luc. 5. and Ioan. 21. That he foretold only to
Peter the kynde of death he should dye (allotting him the same that

himself was to suffer vpon the crosse) Ioan 21. And that he being to
go toward the same death he washed Peters feet before all the rest,Ioan. 3. and August in hunc locum. Luc. 24.
And that after his resurrection he appeared first of all the Apostles to
Saynt Peter, and besydes this that his angel willed the woman to tell
Peter by name of Christes resurrection,Marc. 16. etc.
All these things (I saie) and manie other do shewe the preheminence
of this holie Apostle aboue his fellowes, by Christes owne declaration,
which were overlong to set downe how many ancient
fathers do deduce and inlarge vpon these places of scriptures and
factes of our Sauiour alredie rehearsed.
And agayne after the ascension of Christ to heauen that Saynt
Peter first of all called the Councel of Apostles together,Act. 1. and caused
Saint Mathias to be chosen in place of Iudas. That he first of all
the rest did publish and promulgate the ghospel after the coming
of the holie ghost, and conuerted fyue thousand at one se^mon. That
Act. 2. he wrought the first miracle in healing the lame man at the temple
gate called,Act. 3. Speciosa: That he first of all as high iudge gaue sentence
and condemned to death Ananias and Saphira for their hypocrisie:
That he first of al presumed to preache the ghospel of Christ to
Gentils as he had don before to the Iewes.Act. 5. That to him alone was
Act. 10. shewed the vision wherby Christ declared that the tyme was now
come to admit Gentils to Christianitie.Ibidem. That of him only is written,
dum transiret vniuersos,Act. 9. Chrysost. Ibidem. Gal. 1. Chrysost. homil. 87. in Ioan. (that is as S. Chrisostome sayth) whyles he as
a general of an armie walketh vp and down to see what is in order
and what is not. That of him only among all the Apostles S. Paule
writeth, after three yeares I went vp to Hierusalem to see Peter, the reason
wherof Saynt Chrysostome affirmeth to be, quia os erat, and princeps
Apostolorum, for that he was the mouth and prince of the Apostles.
And fynally that by Christes particulir order (as is to be supposed)
he left the bishoprike of Antioche, and went and tooke vpon him
that of Rome, that was head ci^tie of the world.
All these thinges put together do wel argue that Saint Peter well
knew the dignitie and prerogatiue he had aboue the rest, both for
himself and for his successours: wherunto if we ad the playne
commission geuen by Christ in two distinct places of scripture that
are recorded, besides other perhaps that are not written, the matter
wilbe more euident.
The first is,Commissio^ of Saynt Peter. where after that glorious co^fession made by S Peter of
the God head of Christ recorded in S. Mathew his ghospel our Saueour
sayth to him agayne,Math. 16. Thou arte Peter or a rock (for to this end Christe

before had geue^ him that name that signifieth a rock) and vpon this rock
will I build my churche, and I will geue to thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen,
etc. By which wordes is promised to Peter the principalitie in
gouernment of the churche, as the wordes themselues do shew, and
the consent of ancient fathers both Greek and Latin do expound.
The second place is in Saynt Ihons ghospel, where Christe after
his resurrection gaue to Saynt Peter that preheminence which before
he had promised,Ioan. 21. for being in the companie of diuers other principal
Apostles he asked Peter alone, three seueral tymes whether he
loued him more then the rest or no (which holy fathers say was
don in respect of the three tymes that Peter had denied him before)
and the other answering that he loued, etc. Christ three tymes
sayth to him, pasce agnos meos pasce oues meas, feed my lambes and
feed my sheep, making him pastor general of all his flock, and
committing the whole churche to his pastoral charge, by those
wordes, as both the wordes themselues do import (being vttered
to Peter alone and with particuler emphasie for him to feed Christes
flock aboue the rest of the Apostles, as he had thryce byn asked,
whether he loued more then they) and as all antiquitie with one consent
haue euer taken the sense to be, quia solus profitetur ex omnibus, omnibus
antefertur, sayth Saynt Ambrose,Ambrose in cap. vltim^^ Luc. for that Saynt Peter only did
professe to loue so extraordinarily aboue the rest, he was preferred
in charge before all the rest. And Saynt Augustine vpon this
place oues ipsas pascendas, id est, docendas regendasquod committit.August. in Ioan. 21. Chrisost in Ioan 21. Christ
committed here his sheep to be fed by Saynt Peter, that is to say,
to be taught and gouerned: And Saint Chrisostome vpon the same
wordes, alijs omissis Petrum duntaxat affatur, and fratrum ei curam committit.
Christ leauing the other Apostles there present, speaketh only
to Saynt Peter, and committeth the charge of his brethren to
him. And a litle after agayne, Cum magna dominus Petro communicasset,
and orbis terrarum curam demandasset, when our lord had imparted
great matters to Peter and had geuen him the charge of the whole
world, etc. And Saynt Epiphanius, Hic est qui audiuit pasce oues meas,
cui concreditum est ouile,Epiphan^ in ancor. This is he to whome it was sayd, feed my sheep,
to whome the whole flock of Christ was geuen in charge, etc.
I haue thought good to ad this litle taste of ancient fathers
interpretation,Hovv Saint Peters charge is imparted also to others. leaving out infinite others to the same sense, to
preuent heretical shiftes in this behalf, who first would make this
commission of pasce oues meas, to be onely to feed by preaching, and
not to gouern with superioritie: and secondly to be a common and

indifferent commission giuen to all the Apostles equally, and not
to Saynt Peeter aboue the rest, which is aparently false. For albeit
we gra^nt that this commission pasce oues meas, in a general sense
may be and is vnderstood and spoken not only to Saint Peter but also
to all the rest of the Apostles, and not only to them but to all other
inferior pastors besides: yet in preheminence and highest degree of
special authoritie oueral, it is spoken in this place to S. Peter alone,
as hath bin shewed, and consequently also to his successors: and by
the same consequence it followeth in lyke manner, that if Sir Francis
Hastinges and his people be either lambes or sheep of Christe, or do
any way apertain to his flock and fold, they apertain also to the
gouernment and iurisdiction of this vniuersal pastor Saint Peters
successor; agaynst whome he rayleth and rageth so pitifully as in
his booke appeareth.
And for that all the Christian world hath made euer this most
certayne and infallible deduction,Saint Peters successors Popes of Rome. that Christ gaue not to Saint Peter
these eminent prerogatiues of authoritie and superioritie for himself
alone, but for his posteritie and successours also that should ensue
him in his seate and charge ouer the church of Christ vnto the
worldes end, for this cause they haue reuerenced and respected so
much the Bishops of Rome, as by all general Councels, fathers,
and Ecclesiastical stories doth appeare: and only certayn broken
heretiques both in old tymes and ours, as guiltie people fearing
their iudges, haue set themselues agaynst them, but euer to ther owne
perdition: among which rable not withstanding if Sir francis Hastinges
will needs be one still (hauing red what here hath byn alleaged)
I can say no more, but leaue him to Gods iudgementes; and cum
apparuerit princeps pastorum,1 Pet. 5. when Christ the prince of pastors shall
appeare, to take account of the obedience or rebellion vsed to his
vnder pastors, then will these reckoninges be cleered, and euerie man
shall receyue according to his merits.
And if all Christian nations haue and ought to bear such reuerence
and respect to the sea of Rome,The Particuler obligation of English tovvardes the Bishop of Rome. then much more our litle Iland of
England (as this man calleth it) for that it hath receiued more singuler
benifits from thence then any one nation in the world besides, to wit,
it hath bin twice conuerted from paganisme to Christian religion, by
the especial diligence, labour, and industrie of the same sea; once in
the time of the Britans, about a hundreth and ninetie years after
Christe: at what time Elutherius that holy Pope and Martyr conuerted
king Lucius and his subiects by the preaching of Saint Damianus

and his fellowes, sent from Rome to that effect: and the second time,
about fiue hundreth years after, when our predecessors the English
Saxons were conuerted, by Saint Augustine and his fellow preachers,
sent by Saint Gregorye the great, then Bishop of Rome, to the same
end. And if it be most certayn, and cannot be denyed, that these
two benifits rightly considered are the greatest that vnder heauen our
land could receiue from any mortal men, and that the obligation of
this dooble spiritual birth of ours is so much greater then the band we
owe to our carnal parents, by how much more weightie and important
is our eternal saluation then our temporal life: let all men consider
the barbarous ingratitude of this ma^, that barketh with such spite
against the sea of Rome, the mother of our Christianitie: and against
her Bishops, the woorkers of so high a blessing vnto vs. And with
this co^sideration I leaue the modest and discreet readers, to iudge of the
matter as reason and religion shal induce them, and with this cease
to passe any further in this matter.


THE EIGHTH INCOVNTER,
TOVCHING SPANIARDES, ASvvell
the vvhole nation, as their present
King.
HAuing made the warde which you haue seen, in the
former incounter, both to Rome and her Bishoppes,
agaynst the peeuish wranglinges, and spitefull calumniations,
of this wach-worde-geuer, there remayneth
yet an other bickering about the Spanish king
and nation, which I haue reserued to this last place,
as the subiect wherein our cockish knight presumeth principally to
crowe and triumph without modestie, and to lauish out lies without
number or measure, imagining that all is both lawfull and
gratefull which he sayth in that kynde, and that no man will
aduenture to check him therin, in respect of the present warres
and hostilitie that are betwixt our realme and them. But he is
deceaued, for that the wiser sorte of our nation, haue learned euen
by the lawes of moral ciuilitie, that a man must speake moderatly also
of his enemy, and the more religious sort do know by the principles
of Christianitie, that not only of our temporal aduersarie
(which may be afterward our frend) we must notly or fayne reproches,

but neither of the Deuil himself, though he be our spiritual
and immortal enemy, and Gods also: so detestable are lying lips and calumnious
tongues in the sight both of God and man, where either
reason or religion beareth rule, as neither of them seemeth to do,
with the enraged and distracted spirit of Sir francis Hastinges.
VVhich poynt that we may better consider of,Raging agaynst the Spanish nation. I shall first beginne
with that which he vttereth in diuers partes of his libel, agaynst
the whole nation of Spaniards in general, terming them by the
names of proud, ambitions, bloody, tyrannical, rauening Spaniards, a nation
cursed by God, for that the Pope that cursed man of sinne hath blessed them,
etc. And in one place he descrybeth them in these wordes: I must remember
vnto you, that it is recorded of the Spaniard, that in dissimulation he
surpasseth all nations, till he haue attayned to his purpose, and when he can
once preuayle, he goeth beyond them all in oppression and tyrannie: also that
he disdayneth all other nations, and that in pryde and carnal voluptuosnes, no
nation cometh neer him, and these be his qualities.
This our gentlemans censure, gathered out of recordes (as he sayth)
but I would gladly he had cited the author where he found this record,
as he ought to haue donne for discharging his fayth and honestie
in so greeuous an accusation as this is, and that toucheth so
many, if he had regard or respect therof. And hardly do I beleeue
that he hath euer found, or shall fynd, any writer of credit be he
of what nation soeuer) that will shew himself so fond and passionate,
as to set downe by wryting so preiudicial a censure, and so
general a reproche as this is agaynst any nation:VVhy Spaniards are maligned. notwithstanding
I know, that the Spaniardes at this day, haue many emulators and
aduersaries, partely for hatred of Catholique religion (which is their
greatest glorie) and partely by reason of their large dominions, which
is not strange, for so had the Romanes also before them, and the
Graecia^s, and Assyria^s before them agayne, when their Monarchies were
potent, quia virtutis comes inuidia, as the common prouerb sayth, enuy
followeth vertue and valour: and in this sense our English prouerb
is also most true, it is better to be enuied then pitied. And when the
Roman monarchie was fallen, and the french also, that was set vp
by Charls the great, our English nation had the greatest of any
one of Christendome, for some ages together, when we possessed our
ample olde states and dominions in france, during which tyme, he
that will see the inuectiues made agaynst our English manners,Speeches of English, vvhen they vvere pote^t. and
agaynst our proud and tyrannical kynde of proceeding (as then it
was termed) let him but reade ouer the recordes of the french chronicles,

extant at this day: and yet no reason that these recordes should
condemn or disgrace our whole nation now, nor then neither, when
they were written, being set downe by our aduersaries and emulators,
and by those that were either vnder vs, or feared vs, and consequently
were nothing equally affected vnto vs, as many are not at
this day agaynst Spaniards.
Moreouer if some Spaniardes should be found in deed to haue
some of those vices or defectes which here by their calumniator Sir
francis are named, (as among other nations no man can deny, but
the lyke are also to be found) what reason or equitie is there (to omit
conscience and christianitie, with which this man seemeth to haue
litle to do) what reason is there (I say) that these defectes should
be attributed vniuersally to the whole Spanish nation, wherin
there are to be found thowsandes that haue no part nor fault, as on
the other syde, if some English-men as they passe ouer other
countries, by sea and land at this daye should behaue themselues
scandalously, by gluttonie and drunkennes, (as diuers haue byn
sayd to do) is it a lawfull consequence to say or think, that all English
are such at home, and that these are the qualities of the English
nation, as Sir Francis sayth here of the Spaniardes? or to take a
comparison from himself, if one English knight of a noble familie,
haue byn so madheaded, as to make a fantastical booke, stuffed with
ignorances, lyes, and calumniations, is it reason that foraine nations
should iudge hereby, thar all our knightes and nobilitie of England
are so fond and frantik, and haue so litle respect to their honours and
credit as he? I trow no.
VVherfore as concerning the Spanish nation in general,Of the spanish nation no such
preiudice or slanderous rule can be geuen, as this malignant spirit
setteth downe, for that they are in this poynt as other nations be,
where all sortes of people may be found, some bad and many good:
and if comparisons may be made without offence (for that comparisons
are odious in such affayres between nations) no nation in Europe
hath more cause to glorie, and geue God thankes for his giftes,
abundantly powred vpon them, both natural, moral, and Diuyne,
temporal and spiritual, for tymes past and present, then the Spanish,1. Mach. 8.
who haue a countrie both rich, ample, fertile, and potent, and praysed
in scripture it self, a people able and apt in respect both of wit
and body to attayne to any thing they take in hand, as in old tymes
appeared by the most excellent Emperours,Rare Spaniards. Traian, Theodosius the
great and some other of that nation that surpassed all the rest, as also

by their famous learned men, in ancient tymes Seneca, Lucan,
Martial, and others, when they were yet heathens; Osius, Damasus,
Leander, Isidorus, Orotius and such lyke old renowmed
Christians, both for learning and sanctitie: by their most famous martyrs
in lyke manner, Saynt Laurence, Saynt Vincent, and many others:
and in our age, he that will consider after their valiant deliuering
of themselues out of the handes and captiuitie of the mores,
that inuaded and oppressed their countrie what Christian Zelous
Princes, Kinges, Emperours, Captaynes, Knightes, and famous soldiers
they haue yeelded to the world, and do yeeld daylie, and what
store of singular learned writers do appeare from thence from tyme
to tyme, what countries they haue conquered by the sword, and
how many millions of soules they haue gayned to Christ by preaching
his word in diuers and most remote partes of the world: all
these thinges (I say) put together do make ridiculous and contemptible
this malignant description set downe by Sir Francis, whose
spetial hatred agaynst them is founded in that which of all other commendations
is their greatest, to wit, their constancie and zeale in
defence of the catholique religion, for which probablie God hath so
greatly exalted them alredy, aboue other nations of Europe, and will
do more daylie, if they continue that feruour in defending his cause,
notwithstanding any other humane infirmitie or defect in lyfe that as
to men (of what nation soeuer) may happen, which our merciful
lord in regard and recompence of the other rare vertues of zeale iustice
constancie and feruor in his cause, will pardon (no doubt) and geue
grace of true amendement and rising agayne, whyle the prating heretique
that scornfully sitteth downe to score vp other mens synnes,
shall walk for his owne to his eternal habitation, prepared in hel, for
that his one malitious and obstinate sinne of heresie (if it may be
called one) prepondereth with Gods iustice more greeuously then
all other infirmities and sinnes put to gither which catholique men do
or may commit of humane frayltie.
And thus much of this poynt,Particular obligations of Spaniards may suffice, for if I should ad
to this the ancient loue and amitie of the Spanish nation towardes
vs in tymes past, the large leagues that England hath held with them
heretofore, the great wealth and gaynes we vsed to gather and
reape by their trafique, the noble and bountefull Queens of that
linage maried into England, which aboue all others taken from forayne
countries haue byn most gratefull and beneficial to our land
and people; the exceeding charitie of the present king and of his

whole nation shewed to our English catholiques abrode, in this
long tyme of bitter banishment, and persecution for their faith; these
thinges (I say) if I should repeat or set out at large, would perhaps
help nothing to the argume^t we haue in ha^d but rather geue offence
(tymes standing as they do) and therfore I recount them not
in particular, but leaue them to be considered with pietie and gratitude
by such as are indifferent in these dayes, and to be recorded in the
honorable monumentes of our posteritie.
And so hauing answered thus much about the iniurie offered to
the Spanish nation (by Sir Francis) in general,The defence of the King of Spayne in particuler I will passe to the
approbrious speaches vsed personally agaynst their present famous
and noble king (once also ours) with such indignitie of vnciuil
and most reprochfull termes as is not sufferable. And if any of the
sayd kinges subiectes were to answere our knight in this demand,
he would cast him his gauntlet, and geue him the lye, and chalenge
him to the defence of so notorious calumniations, and therby proue
him either a lying or cowardly knight, or both.
His ordinarie termes of the most excellent and most Catholique
king Philip are these, the ambytious king of Spayne, the vsurping
tyrant, the proud popish champion, trecherous, cursed, cruel, and the lyke,
all which vyces the world knoweth (^nny herself being witnes)
that his Catholique Maiestie is most free of, and is indewed abundantly
with the opposite vertues, wherof no nation hath had better
proof then England, by the experience we had of his sweet nature
and co^dition, both in princely behaueour and pious gouernment, during
the few yeares he liued amongst vs and ruled ouer vs, which tyme
notwithsta^ding of his being in Engla^d this malitious sycophant will
needes calumniate, and draw into suspition of great mysteries of iniquitie
meant by him (as he sayth) agaynst Engla^d and English people
by meanes of that ioyfull mariage and gouernme^t which there he had.
If you will geue me leaue (sayth he) to call to your remembrance the manner
and meaning of his coming into England, when he came not as an inuader
to conquer but as a frend to fasten a strong league of amitie by a mariage,
I doubt not but to discouer the trecherous crueltie of his hart. This is Sir Francis
promisse and you shall see after you haue gyuen him leaue, how
wisely he will performe the same, and how substantially, he will declare
vnto vs the kinges intention, or at least his own inuention.
But before I set downe his discouerie vnder his owne hand, I
shall declare a litle the state of thinges whyles the Spaniards were
in Queen Maries dayes in England, and how the king did actually

beare himself, by testimonie of all those that knew him, conuersed
with him, or lyued vnder him. And then shall Sir Francis tell his tale
of that he imagineth or faigneth the king would haue don in
tyme, and before we both haue ended, I beleeue that in steed of this
discouerie promised of the trecherous crueltie of the kinges hart, we
shall discouer both trecherous cogging and shameles forgerie in
the hart and hand of this counterfayt knight. Thus then I begin
the declaration.
The conditions of that most famous and royal mariage between
the two greatest Monarches of Christe^dome,The condition of the mariage vvith the Spanish King. king Philip and Queen
Marie, and the conuentions agreed vpon between both nations, and
between the princes themselues, Quee^ Marie, the Emperour Charles,
(then resyding in Flanders) and king Philip, and eche of their Councels
and Parlaments, are yet extant, and for the most part in print:
wherby it may be seen that all those poyntes that this sely fellow
cometh in withall now after the market ended, about the succession
of our realme, the priuie Councel, of what nation they should
be, the condition of our nobilitie, the Parlament, the lawes of the
realme, the portes, castles and garrisons, the officers of the courte and
household, and other lyke circumstances were particulerly treated,
agreed vpon and prouyded for before hand, by all partes. Neither
was there euer any complaynt that the king or his nation brake any
one of them whyle they were among vs, but added rather diuers
benefytes and courtesies of their owne accord aboue that which they
had promised and were bound vnto.
As for the expences, and for the furniture of the mariage (so much
I meane as came from abrode) as also for the two Spanish and English
nauies that accompanied the king when he came into England
were at his cost and charges vntill they arryued at Portesmouth,
and the whole trayne from thence to winchester, where he met
with the Queen, and the mariage was celebrated, at the charges of
the same King of Spayne.
All the Spanish nobles and gentlemen that came with the king,
came so furnished with all necessaries and brought such store of money
with them, as within two or three monethes after their arryual,
all England was full of Spanish coyne.King Philips vsage to made the English. The priuie councel of England
was wholie and intirely as it was before, neither was any
Spaniard euer put into it, the officers of the Queens household were
altogether English, the king for his owne affayres, and his other
kingdomes, had a particuler Councel, which interrupted not ours,

the nobilitie of our land was exceedingly honoured by him, and many
of them had particuler great pensions also yearly from him,
the captaynes and soldiers that he vsed of our nation as namely at
the warre of Saynt Quintins, he honoured highly, and made them
equall in all poyntes of seruice and honor with Spaniardes, and
payd them himself without further charges to England saue only
geuing them their vpper cassockes with the crosse, according to the
custome. The marchantes commonly he made free to enioy and vse
all priuileges and preferments throughout all his kingdomes, countries
and prouinces: and in England he had such care to yeeld our
nation contentment, as he gaue expresse order that if any English
man and a Spaniard fell out, the English should be fauored and the
Spaniard punished, which he caused to be executed with such rigor
as it cost diuers Spaniardes their lyues, when the English were much
more in fault: and I haue heard it spoken by some of the Councel at
that tyme, that Queen Marie was so afflicted diuers tymes with this
partialitie of the kinges towardes the English agaynst his owne nation;
as it cost her many a bitter teare for verie compassion and shame.
And so much the more was she moued therewith for that she
saw many English, partly vpon this indulgence of the kinges,The vsage of English tovvards Span. in Q. Mariestyme and
partly for that being secretly heretiques, they had auersion and hatred
to the Spanish nation, to abuse themselues intollerably in offering
most inhumane and barbarous iniuries vnto them: No Spaniard
could walke by night (nor scars by day alone) but he should
be eyther wounded, or thrust between two or three swashbucklers,
that attended particulerly to those exercyses, and so put in danger
of his lyf. Villanous wordes were ordinarie salutations to
them in the streetes, as also often tymes in churches, but no remedy
was to be had, nor would any man beare Witnes lightly in behalf of
the Spaniard agaynst the English though the iniurie were neuer so
manifest. If any thing were to be bought in the market, the Spaniard
must paie dooble for it, and for that most Spaniardes drunk
water, they must buy it also dearly in many places, if they
would drink it, and often could not haue it for mony, and diuers
wells were sayd to be poysoned of malice therby to destroy the Spaniardes.
Many deuises were vsed to draw Spaniardes into priuate
houses, and familiaritie was offered them to that end, and if any
entred to talke with the wyf, daughter or seruant (as they were thought
prope^se in that kynde) then rushed forth the husba^d father brother
or master, that lay in wayte with other catchpoles of thesame conspiracie

to apprehend them, and to threaten death or imprisonment
except they redeemed themselues with good store of money. And I
haue heard from the mouth of a greate noble man a Spaniard that was
in England at that tyme and now is a Vyceroy vnder the king that
some English would send their wyues and daughters of purpose into
the fieldes where Spaniards walked, to allure them to talke with
them, and therby to intrap them and get money from them.
I omit to name more violent meanes of taking purses and playne
roberies and other lyke artes to get the Spaniards money from them
by force, which yet were many and some most barbarous and shamefull
to our nation, and the mention and memorie therof maketh
vs blush when in other countries we are told of them, as namely
this that followeth which my self haue heard recounted from a nobleman
himself that is yet alyue, to wit,The Count of fre^tsalida robbed pretily in England. the old Count de Fuensalida
cheef steward at this day of the kinges houshold, who being
in England with the king made a great supper one night to diuers
noble men of his nation, and to some others, and being at the
table mery and fearing nothing (as in a peaceable and ciuil commonwealth,
it seemed he had no cause) there came rushing in, some
twentie or thirtie maskared good fellowes with their swordes drawen,
and commanded that no man should stirre vnder payne of
death, and so kept them all at the table, and their seruantes shut
vp into diuers houses of offices where they were found, vntill the
theeues had ransaked the whole house, and packed vp the siluer
plate that was in store, and so departed.
And these are the heroical actes and honorable histories which
these noblemen and other strangers do recount of the ciuilitie
and courtesie of our countriemen towardes Spaniards in those
dayes which being obiected vnto vs in all forayne nations where
we trauayle (the french also recounting as bad or worse donne to
them, to whome at that tyme we were open enemies) it cannot
but make modest Englishmen ashamed, and their eares to burne
in respect of the dishonour of our countrie, as also to consider what
fyne frutes,First frutes of nevv ghospellers. our new ghospel then freshly planted, and yet in the
bud began to bring forth: for that all this hatred and barbarous
vsage towardes Spaniards and other Catholique forayners, rose principally
vpon the difference of religion lately begonne within our
realme, and these lads as the first professed proselites therof vpon
heate and zeale committed these holy actions, as the first frutes of
so heauenly a seed. But since that tyme we haue had much larger

experience therof, and I presume that most mennes myndes in England
are sufficiently cleared in this case, and if not, let them behold
the behaueour of Sir Francis in this libel, who is an ancient branche
of that plantation.
And so hauing seen the state of matters how they stood at that
tyme, and in particuler what king Philip had promised to do, and
what he was bound to do, and then what in deed he performed really
whyle he was among vs (which was more in deed then either he
promised or had obligation to performe, as hath byn shewed) let vs
heare now what Sir Francis sayth he would haue donne if he could,
or if his abode had byn longer in England. The tale shall go in his
owne wordes for better declaring his spirit. Thus then he writeth.
This mariage was sought for and intended also in shew only to strengthen the
hand of the Queen of England,A discourse of Sir Francis, of King Philip secret meaning. to bring in the Romish religion and gouernment
into this land, and to establish it with continuance, with purpose and meaning
to ad strength to all the corners of Christendome to continue Poperie where it
was, and to bring it in, where it was not, that so the Arche-prelate of Rome
might hold the scepters and power of all princes and potentates of Christendome
in his hand, to dispose a^ his pleasure: but the plottes and practises layd and pursued
by the Spanish king, had made a wofull proof to England of a further
mark shot at (which was discouered in a letter to some of our nobles, from
a true harted English-man in Spayne) had not God almightie in his rich mercy
preuented their purposes, and defeated them in their determinations, as it shall
appeare hereafter, etc.
This is the preface and entrance which Sir Francis maketh to the
discouerie he promiseth of great hydden mysteries, about plottes
and practises not only layd, but also pursued by king Philip whyle
he was in England, which neuer came to light vntill this day,
though at that tyme they were discouered (as he sayth) in a letter to
some of our nobles, from a true harted English-man in Spayne. But
for the credyt of so new and weightie, and incredible a secret, it had
byn good he had named the parties and particularities therof, as wel
who wrote as also who receyued that letter. For first the English-man
in Spayne though he were true harted to the faction of S. Francis
syde (to wit, to the Protestantes) yet might he perhaps not be
so true handed or true tongued at that tyme, or so truly informed
of thinges, or of that authoritie, that this his letter or report may
beare credyt in so great a busines agaynst so great men, it being taken
vp perhaps at tauerns or porte townes and market places by
some merchantes seruant or factor, or other lyke wandring compaignon,

as well tipled with Spanish seck as with English heresie,
who might wryt these news from Spayne of K. Philip as Iohn Nicols
the minister brought and printed from Rome, and Italy, in our
dayes, of the Pope and Cardinals.
And that this discouery (if any such were, and that the tale be
not wholly forged by Sir Fra^cis himself) could haue no better ground
then that I haue sayd,The letter out of Spayn discredited. to wit, the reporte of some vulgar people, or
the coniecture of some particuler discoursiue head, as is euident in it
self, for that this being a most secret designement and drift of the
king himself, and of his priuie Councel, who were all at that day
remayning in England, and had this proiect within their owne
brestes only; how could it be discouered by an English-man from
Spaynerthink you.
Agayne the nobles in England to whome he sayth the letter was
written, might be such, as probably it may be iudged to haue byn
written of purpose to feed their humors, or to comfort them in
those dayes, or that themselues did procure it to be written and sent
for their credit, or that themselues deuysed it in England, to make
therby the Spaniards more odious and their doinges more suspected;L. Courtenayand to draw by this meanes more English after themselues
to impugne the present state and gouernment: as when the lord
Courtenay Earle of Deuonshyre for missing the mariage of Queen
Marie, beganne to practise, and to think of leauing the land vpon
discontentment, and when the Carewes and other of that crew
fled the realme for conspiracies, to the same effect,The Carevves. such a letter was
much to their purpose. But I shall not need to call in reasons
and circumstances for shewing the vanitie of this letter, for that the
manifest and shameles falshoodes which it relateth, will easely
discouer the forgerie, as also the forge it self, from which it proceedeth:
I will follow then the continuation of Sir Francis narration,
in his own wordes.
Now to proceed (sayth he) to lay open the right mark that in deed this
king shot at,A malitious forgerie agaynst King Phil. though when he made way to ioyne in mariage with Queen
Marie, he made semblance of great conscience to Catholique religion, and
great care to bring the whole land into the obedience therof, and seemed to
glorie much when it was brought to passe, as his letter to his holy father
at Rome written out of England doth make shew, wherin he expresseth what
a worthie woorke he had donne, when he had drawen the nobles and commons
of the land to submit themselues to his holinesse as their cheef (those are his
wordes) yet litle did the nobles and commons know what was intended towardes

them by this catholique childe of Rome, for vnder this colorable name of
catholique religion, was hidden the ambitious humor of a most proud vsurping tyrant,
whose resolution was vpon mature deliberation and consultation with his
machiuilian counsellors to seek by al the possible kinde means he could, to win the
principal of our Nobles to affect him, and in their affection to possesse him of the
crown, and so to establish him in an absolute power ouer poor England, and to
bring this to passe, he decreed to spare neither cost nor kindenes, etc.
Hetherto is the asseueration of Sir Francis concerning king Philips
intention to gain our crowne, but neuer a syllable more of proofe
then you haue heard before, to wit, his owne woord and bare assertion:
which he taking to be sufficient, passeth ouer presently to explicate
and exaggerate the dangerous effectes that would haue ensued
vpon vs when the king should haue gotten his pretence.
But I must pul him by the sleeue and request him to stay, and prooue
a litle better, that the king had this intention to get the kingdome
as he sayth, for if it were a mature deliberation and consulted also
with his counsel in England (as this discouerer sayth) then some act
and monument belike is extant to testifie the same, or at leastwise
some witnes, or other firm argument fit to proue it, or if not, how
could the true harted English-man know it in Spayn, and write it to
the Nobles of England? Or with what face can our rash and falstongued
English knight professe to know it now, and to wryte it so
confidently? Shall so great, so greeuous, so haynous a slander, against
so mightie, so munificent, so bountiful a Monarch, passe out to the
world, vpon a bare assertion and malignant interpretation of one
English hastie-hote-spurre, that sheweth malice in euery syllable, and
turneth euen the kings loue and fauours to our nation, and his expences
and benifits towards our people, vnto a deceitful meaning? And vpon
that, without other act of hostilitie on his parte appearing, shall
he be called ambitious and proud vsurping tyrant? VVho seeth no^
that this fellow in steed of discouering the kings malice bewrayeth
his owne, and in place of prouing the king an vsurping tyrant, doth
shew himself a shameles sicophant.
But let vs see what effects he sayth, had like to haue ensued, vpon
this deuised designment of the king.
If once (sayth he) this king had obtayned the crown, then as in the letter of
discouerie is layd open) the council table must be filled with his Councelors,Faigned effects of an imagined vsurpation. the
hauen townes must be possessed with gouernours of his appointing, fortifications
must be made by his direction, soldiars of his owne must be placed in garrison at 
places most fit to strength him self, then must the common lawes of this land be 

 altered, by which iustice is truly taught to all sortes, his vnholy and bloody inquisition
 would be not haue fayled also to bring in, with all other his Spaynish
 lawes and ordinances, sutable to the same, their intolerable taxes we must haue
 byn pestered withall, a taste wherof I will here geue you, etc.
 These are the seuen deadly sinnes which Sir Francis inforceth out
of his Spanish letter as certayne to haue insued, if the king had gotten
the crowne, which yet whyles he had the crowne did not insue,
as the world knoweth, for that they were prouyded for before hand
by the councel, nobilitie, and parlement of England, and by all lykelihood
would haue byn foreseen and prouided for also by the same
prouidence of the realme, if euer motion or cogitation had bin among
them to passe the crowne to the king of Spayn, seing Sir
Francis confesseth that this matter was ment to be wrought not by
force but by sweet meanes and benifites, and by allurement of the
nobilitie by his Maiestie. Most fond therfore or forged is this letter
from the true harted man in Spain, who suggested feares already preuented:
but much more ridiculous is he in setting down certain
monstrous bugges of taxes to be imposed vpon the English nation,
which yet by all probability were neuer though vpon, nor past by
mannes imagination, though most childishly he avowcheth, that
they are payed also in Spain. For thus he writeth.
A taste wherof (of these intolerable taxes) I will giue you (sayth Sir
Francis) as that for every chimney and other place to make, fier in, as ouens, fornaces,
Smiths forges, and such others, a frinch crown was yearly paid to him.
He had also powling pence for all manner of corn, bread, beef, mutton, capons,
pigges, geese, hennes, ducks, chicken, butter, cheese, egges, aples, peares, nuttes,
beere, wine, and all other things whatsoeuer he feed^th vpon: yea no farmer, yeo-man,
or husband-man durst eat a capon in his house if his frend came to him, for
if he did it must cost him six shillinges eight pence, though the capon was not
worth twelue pence; and so toties quoties: and these be the benifits and blessings
that this catholique king sought to bring in hether by his absolute authoritie sought
for.
If a man did not see these things written and printed with Sir
Francis Hastinges name vnto them, he would neuer imagin a man of
his name,About taxes paied to the King of Spayne. howse, and calling, would publish such childish toyes
and manifest vntruthes to the world. For who is there that hath trauailed
Spain (as many English-men haue donne in these our dayes)
which knoweth it not to be an open shameles lye, that for euery
place to make fyer in, as ouen, fornace, and the like, a french crown
is to be payed? In the kingdoms of Castil and Andaluzia there is no

such paiments at all, in Aragon and Catalonia, there is some like tribute
instituted by old kinges, before these states were vnited to the
crowne of Castile: but neither is it so much as this wise man setteth
downe, nor do they pay for euery place of making fyer, but one
onely fyer is accounted to one howshold, though the people haue
twenty fyers within it.
Touching his powling pence vpon thinges that are solde, there is
in the foresayd kingdomes of Castile an old rent of the crowne, instituted
by ancient kinges called Alcaualla,The tribu^ of Alcaualla. conteyning a certayne tribute
vpon thinges that are solde and bought, but this tribute is not
payd in all Spaine, and namely not in Biscay, Nauar, Portugal, Aragon,
Catalonia, nor in the kingdom of Valencia: and much lesse in
forayne kingdomes and states vnder the Spaniardes, as Naples, Sicilia,
Sardinia or M^llan. Nor in Castillia it self is it exacted with the
rigor that this fellow forgeth, but euerie towne and cittie agreeth in
great for this tribute by the yeare, nor doth it descend to such minute
thinges as he recounteth vp, and much lesse to beere wherof
there is litle vse in Spayne, and the simple fellow would needes faine
his account after the English manner, but among other toyes the
lye of six shillinges eight pence forfeyture for eating a capon toties
quoties, is so notorious, as it may winne the whetstone: and the verie
phrase it self discouereth the forgerie, for that the Spaniardes haue no
coyne answering to our noble or six shillinges eight pence, consequently
it is not probable that they would appoynt such a penaltie
as they can hardly in whole money make vp, the account. But let
vs see somewhat more of this kynde of cosinage.
My author (sayth he) doth further vnfold this kinges trecherous purpose towardes
this land,A shamles tale. by discouering vpon his owne knowledge and hearing, his intention
to be, by litle and litle to roote out the nobilitie, and to keep the commons
in beggerie, and not to suffer one to lyue here, that was borne in twentie yeares
before, but either to destroy them, or to make them slaues among the Moores,
the colour wherof was because they were borne out of the Catholique churche of
Rome. And to make vp the measure of all impietie, and the faster to set his crowne
vpon his head from remouing (if he had gotten it) he layd his plot to destroy our
deare Soueraigne ladie Queen Elizabeth, hauing decreed with himself, that
neither she nor any of that cursed nation (so he termed it and yet the Popes holines
had absolued it) should gouern England any more. But blessed be God who
hath blessed vs with the lyfe and raigne of our blessed Queen, who I trust shall liue
to geue him such a deadly blow as neither his cursed self nor any of his cursed nation
(iustly so to be called, because the Pope that cursed man of sinne hath blessed

them (shall euer see the day to rule in England.
And thus you see that vnder the colour of this mariage saluation of soules
seemed to be sought for, but in deed destruction both of our bodies and soules was
pursued, etc. for without regard of sex, age, or degree, all were destined to slauerie
and bondage at the least, howsoeuer they escaped with lyfe.
This is your sottish and impudent narration Sir Francis, for what
can be more sottish then to say that your wyse author before named,
discouereth vpon his owne knowledge and hearing, that the kinges
intention was to roote out the nobilitie,The improbabilitie of the calumniation. to oppresse the commonaltie,
to slea or send to Barbarie for slaues all that were born within
twentie yeares before? If your author knew this of his owne knowledge,
how say you also by hearing? and if he heard it of others,
how could he know it of his owne knowledge? But whatsoeuer
you say, how could he in Spayne discouer so great a secret that lay in
the kinges brest in England? Besydes this, how incredible are the
thinges in themselues that he recounteth? namely that dreame or
old wyues tale of making all slaues within twenty yeares old? of
which number and within which age he had taken diuers already
into his se^uice in England and vsed singular curtesie vnto them and
one of his Grandes in Spayne, (to wit, the Count after Duke of
Feria) had maried an English ladie,Duchesse of Feria. that as I ghesse was within the
compasse of that age, or not much a^boue it at that day, and should
all these haue byn sent think you to Barbarie together? Impudencie
then it is in this fond knight to alleage such improbable and palpable
lyes out of an author without name, and much more lack of shame
is it to auouch them himself for truthes, and to adde other fables
that are yet more monstrous, as of the kinges destining to slauerie and
bondage not only those before mentioned that were borne within
the space of twentie yeares, but of all other English also (as this
man sayth) without regard of sex, age, or degree, and that he vsed
to call our nation cursed, euen then when the Popes holines had absolued
it, who will geue eare or credit to such absurd inuentions?
And further,King Phil. sought not Queen (...) destruction. to fill vp (sayth he) the full measure of his impietie, he had
layd his plot to destroy and make away the lady Elizabeth now Queen, wheras
all the world notwithstanding knoweth the king to haue byn at that
day her cheefest stay and defence, as before I haue shewed at large
in the third incounter, as also that verie litle plotting of the kinges
behalf would haue serued at that tyme to haue wrought his will, if
he had wished her destruction, for the manifold reasons that there
I haue alleaged, he fynding her in disgrace and in prison at VVoodstock

when he came into England, and hardly pressed about wyats
insurrection, from the peril wherof and other lyke assaultes he espetially
deluiered her, and procured her return to the courte agayne:
and consequently I sayd there, and heer I repeat it agayne, that it
is most barbarous ingratitude in this vnciuil knight to pay the carefull
protection of her person, which his Maiestie yealded to her grace
in those dayes of her distresse, with these intolerable slanders, and
outragious false criminations now, and that no modest man can cease
to wonder how so infamous a libel could be suffered by supreme authoritie
to passe to the print, espetially conteyning diuers other personal,
reprochefull, contempteous, and villanous calumniations agaynst
so great and potent a prince, as the king catholique of
Spayne is.
And namely that where this good fellow hauing told a story how
one Fabritius the Roman Captayne refusing the poysoning of his
enemie Pirrhus) that was offered to him for money, by his physitian,
he sent the sayd physitian bound to Pirrhus himself, and then he addeth
this illation.
But the king of Spain delt not so with the Queen our mistris when her poysonable
portugall phisitian Lopus would haue poysoned her, for from such hopes he
taketh hart, etc.
By which wordes he would haue men to imagin that his catholique
Maiestie had either hired Lopus to do that fact (if any such matter
was indeed intended) or at least that he was priuie and consenting
to it,About lopus the Physitia^ for how otherwise could he haue warned the Q. of the danger
intended? and yet it is manifest that no such matter was euer or could
probably be knowe^ to the king of Spain. Neither did euer Lopus giue
any such signification or suspition, at his death, or before, of the king
of Spaines priuitie: nor was he a man to haue correspondence in
Spayn, being knowen to be a Iew in religion and fled from those parts,
and was enimy to the king in all respects as wel touching religion as
the afaires of Portugal, and onely England is the receptacle of such
people at this day: nor had his catholique Maiestie any Embassador
or other agent or correspondence in England, to plot such treaties:
nor euer was it heard, that he would hearken to such base wayes of
reuenge vpon his enimyes. And therefore all this put together doth
make it more then Turkish impietie to put in print such infamous
stuffe agaynst the Maiestie of so high a prince by name, without any
proof at all, as though there were no God, no conscience, no iudgement,
to make account vnto: nor any respect in earth to be held to

such as are in lawful authoritie, which yet our dreaming knight himself
alitle before will needes proue out of S^ Peeter and S. Paul, to
be due to such princes as he liketh to assigne it,In the 6. Encounter. euen in spiritual and
ecclesiastical matters belonging to the soule, and consequently also
to an other tribunal, so vnconstant and mutable are these good fellowes,
not only in their sayinges and doctrines, but also in their actions,
as led wholy by passion and interest, and referring all to times,
persons, and occasions, seruing their turnes and commodities.
And thus much haue I thought conuenient to be answered to the
malitious calumniations of this sla^derous wach-word-giuer, against the
noble and renowned nation of Spanyardes, and their most Catholique,
pious, wise, and potent king, whose excellent vertues are
greater then by my pen can be expressed, and his loue and fauors to
our nation such and so many (especially in this extreme affliction
and banishment of catholiques) as no gratitude of ours can equal,
nor make due recompence, in the state we stand in, and therefore
must leaue it to our posteritie.
And albeit for the present there be warres and hostilitie between
our nation and our prince and theirs,The conclusio^. and that especially in respect of
religio^, yet our trust is, and our prayers are co^tinually to our euerlasting
God of peace that he will once finish well that controuersie, to all
our comfortes and benefites.
And in the mean space I do presume so much of the good natures
and ciuilitie of most protestants in England, that they alow not of
such bitter and barbarous proceeding, as Sir Francis Hastinges hath
vsed to his owne discredit, and dishonor of our nation in these malignant
calumniations against so modest a prince. In which respect
also, I haue bin somwhat the bolder to giue him his check, with more
freedom and feruor. I pray God it may do him the good I wish, or
at least keep others from being deceiued by him.



THE REMISSION OF THE
VVHOLE ANSVVER TO THE IVDGEMENT
and arbitrement of the Lords of her Maiesties most honorable
Councel, vvith the ansvverers opinion and petition for the
ending of these dissentions and controuersies.
ANd now (right honorable) hauing brought to an end
so much as I thought expedient to be answered at this
tyme to Sir Francis Hastinges iniurious libel, none
occurred more fit vnto me to haue the first sight, and
view and iudgement of the whole, then your Lordshippes:
who though in the controuersie it self between
him and his and vs and ours, I cannot expect to haue you equall
iudges nor indifferent arbiters (you professing the religion you
do) yet in the manner of prosecution thereof, I presume so much
of the good partes that God hath indued your Lordshippes withall,
as I dare remit the arbitrement to your selues, to whome if this rayling
wachword had byn first presented before it was punished (as
in right it ought to haue byn, you being by office the wachme^ of that
commonwealth, and not Sir Francis who intrudeth himself) I think
verely that either it had byn wholy stopped and repressed, or at
least wise so moderated, as it should not haue geuen the offence that
it hath and will do, for vnto graue men such troblesome sticklers as
these are euer commonly (and ought to be) vngratefull and suspected,
and vnto wise Councelours and honorable persons such rayling
and slanderous tongues, are contemptible and odious, and to all good
natures and ciuill conditioned men (be they of what estate or profession
soeuer) such base detractions and contumelious fictions (as
heer you haue heard) are insufferable, and rather seuerely to be punished,
then any way to be permitted.
But yet so much the more in this case of ours, where the iniurie
is not offered only to your owne home-born subiects (whome yet in
all rightful quarrel your place requireth that you protect and defend)
but also to great and potent anoynted princes, with whome you haue
had, and may haue again most honorable freindship heerafter, and

negotiation in important and weightie afaires, and whose honors you
ought not to permit iniuriously to be violated, by the passion and
rage of any particuler man, which cannot after make recompence,
with any humane abilitie that he hath (though his life also should
go therin) for the hurt ensewing therof.
Diuers authors do note that the cheef flame of that furious hatred
which grew to be implacable afterwardes betwixt Marius and Sylla,Effectes of yuel tongues.
Pompey and Caesar in the Roman commonwealth was inkindled
first by certayne opprobrious speaches vttered by some followers of
those Princes, which yet the parties iniured, interpreted to come
from their patrons that bare them out, and therof followed such
warres, murthers, and other lamentable tragedies, as all the world
can wel remember. And our English chronicles do also make
mention that some reprochfull wordes cast out by King Harold agaynst
Duke VVilliam of Normandy and his daughter (whome
he had promised to take to wyf) stirred him cheefly to make that
fatal armie, by which he conquered England, and brought all the
English nation in to his subiection. As also an other scof vttered by
king Phillip of France against the same VVilliam now king, touching
his fat belly, cost France full dear, and many thowsand men
their lyues of both sides: so impacient are princes comonly of contumelyes,
and do easier remit and forget any other kinde of iniurie
then reprocheful speaches.
VVherfore my first petition to your Lordships wisedome and moderation
should be, to restraine such turbulent spirits as those are,
which more of a mad and malitious kinde of wantonnes, then of
wit, do loose their tongues with ouer much libertie against the honors
of mightie Catholique princes abrode: and thereby do put in aduenture
to trooble the waters of common-wealthes more deeply, then
either themselues or others can easily calm again afterwards.
My next desire and humble supplication should be in the same
matter,A supplication to the Councel for moderatio^. but of far more moment, that your Lordships by this occasion,
and by some fit concurrance of times and busines which at this
present, may seeme to offer themselues, would voutsafe to enter more
seriously into the consideration of matters depending between your
Lordships and the Catholique parte of her Maiesties subiects, who
for many yeares haue had a hard conceyt and heauie hand born ouer
them, and are brought to tearmes of extreme affliction: and that your
Lordships as fathers of your common-wealth, would resolue at
length to be mediators vnto her Maiestie (contemning the dangerous

and seditious eggings of vnquiet spirits to further extremitie) for
some more gentle, milde, and merciful course to be taken with them.
Vnto which resolution me thinketh, that many circumstances might
iustly moue your Lordships wisdomes, which though by the same
wisdome you wil better consider of then I, yet for that it may be I
desire it more then you, and consequently haue more thought thereon
(albeit more for your good also and the publique, then for any
particuler interest of myn owne) I shal with your good leaue represent
some before you in this place.
And first of all, the time it self doth seeme to inuite greatly to som
such cogitation,Reasons for moderation when great princes and monarchies round about vs,
that had greater differences and difficulties then these are, haue not
only treated but concluded also a most honorable peace and frendship:
and the great most Christian King of France, shewing himself
worthie of that name, hath remedied the very roote of al calamities
springing to his noble realme before, by returning to the
vnion of the Apostolique sea of Rome, which sea (as commonly it
falleth out) hath byn the principal meanes of this so great and general
a good to all those nations that are included within that peace
and league, which are many and great as by the articles thereof doth
appeer. And no lesse curteously and honorably is her Maiestie inuited
also to the same, and all that desire the true good both of her person,
state, and crowne, do wish and hope that it may take effect.
And truly neuer could this weightie afaire be treated (as it seemeth)
with more honor or facilitie then at this present instant, times and
matters standing as they do: and so fit a meanes and mediator, as is
the mightie king of France occurring for the purpose, potent and
grateful with all the extremes. For with England and her Maiestie,
he cannot but be so, in respect of matters and frendships past: with
Spain he is also to be presumed now, by meanes and vertue of this
new peace and great league concluded, with his holinesse of Rome,
all christendome knoweth him to be, as well in respect of his being
a catholique, as also for many particuler and extraordinary tokens of
loue, which his holinesse hath shewed towards his person.
The persons also and qualities of the parties with whome this
atonement is or were to be treated,Qualities of the princes to be dealt vvithall. are such as do greatly facilitate
the enterprise, and confirme the hope, that all men haue of good
successe.
For if for many ages God haue placed in the seat of Saynt Peeter,Pope Clement viij.
a meek, milde, sweet, and holy man, this Pope Clement the eight

is one, knowen to be a man without gawle, enmitie wrath or reuenge,
of singuler pietie and zele in Gods cause, and most tender harted
towards them that are out of the way, especially in heresy, of
whome he suffereth diuers with his owne particuler licence to come
to Rome, and to his owne presence, and vseth them with all manner
of curtesie and fatherly tendernes, dismissing them again with much
kindenes, and diuers benefits, as by experience we haue seene.
As for the king Catholique of Spain, who knoweth him not to be
Salomon pacificus,K. Phillip. that peaceable and wise Salomon of this our age?
who not only hath bin peaceable in himself during the time of his
so long a gouernment, offering molestation and warre to none (except
prouoked in his owne defence) but also hath kept diuers other
states round about him in peace likewise, as by those of Italy hath
bin manifestly seen vpon diuers occasions: and as for his facility to
make peace, where any reasonable conditions are offered, it hath bin
sufficiently seen in this, lastly made with France, with restoring of so
many important townes and states which he possessed of that crown
and for his constancie in keeping peace once made, all former times of
his raigne haue giuen testimony, and so will this (I doubt not) and
the future time also in preseruing inuiolably this peace now knit vp
with the king most christian, and his alyes and dependants.
So as with neither of these princes is there any cause of dout either
of great difficultie, or of fraud or of breache, if this treatie might be
concluded: and much lesse of the dutifull behaueour of English Catholiques
both at home and abrode, if it please her Maiestie and your
Lordships to come to some moderation and peaceable manner of
proceding with them.The Catholiques of England their cheef desyre In which poynt their first and highest desire
should be, that almightie God would inspire her Maiestie and your
Lordships to think vpon the honorable, godly, and prudent course
which the most Christian king of France hath taken of late; to wit,
by re^^iting himself and his kingdome agayne with the sea Apostolique
of Rome, mother of all true vnion among Christians, for that
by this act only all difficulties and ielousies, both domestical and
forrayn depending of religion were ended and taken away. But if for
our sinnes this cannot be, or not so soone as is desired, then their
humble petition will be that at least they may haue the same libertie
and fauour in England for their consciences, as Protestantes haue in
France and in other states of the Empire at this day vnder catholique
kinges and Emperours; which petition seemeth so reasonable, so
easie, and so profitable to the realme it self, and so honorable to

her Maiestie, and to your Lordships (who are desired to be mediators
therin) as they verely trust, that by this good occasion you
will not deny to lend them your helping hands, for so publique
and pretious a benefyte in all respectes.
And though I do not doubt but that diuers of S. Francis Hastings
hote humor will step vp agaynst this proposition,The furie of purita^ical spirits. and cry rather fyre
and sword and blood agaynst Catholiques, then any toleration or relaxation;
yet other mennes hope is, that your Lordships and others
of the wiser and grauer sort of the realme will consider and suggest
to her Maiestie what reason and humanitie requireth, and not what
the furious passion of those men demandeth; who cease not to exclame
with the mercilesse Iewes, Crucifige, Crucifige, and further also
would be content for satisfying their malice, so they might obtayne
lyke sentence of iniustice agaynst Catholiques, as the Iewes did
agaynst our Saueour (espetially if they found a fit Pilate to grant it)
to cry with them, Sanguis eorum super nos, and super Filios nostros, let their
blood fall vpon vs and our children; and so it fell in most heauy measure
vpon them, and the lyke will do vpon these when tyme of payment
commeth appoynted by almightie God, if they change not
their affection.
But your Lordships I presume be of a far different mynde and
condition; and that you will rather leaue peace, loue, and good will
of all men to your children and posteritie, then the inheritance of
these enmities, exasperations, and deadly feudes, for that blood
enough (and ouer much if Gods will were) hath there byn spent already
in our realme, within these twenty yeares last past about this
controuersie of religion: and by this long experience your wisdomes
haue seen what hath byn the euent, and what is lyke to be, if lyke
proceeding be continued still.
Saynt Cyprians sentence hath byn manifestly verefied,Cyprian ^p. 93. sanguis martyrum
Ecclesiae semen,The effects of dying for religion in England. by the blood of martirs the church increaseth.
Aboue a hundreth and thirtie English priestes of the only seminaries
beyond the seas (as most men accounte) haue lost their lyues in this
quarrel within the foresayd tyme; all men of peace, patient, and
humble, learned, vertuous and meeke; yong in age for the most
part, but old in godlines, and in sapientia sanctorum, in the wisdome of
Sayntes for the lyf to come: a great parte of them verie worshipfully
borne, and tenderly brought vp by their parentes, and might haue
liued many yeares in great delightes and pleasures of this world, if
the loue of eternitie had not made this vale of vanitie contemptible

vnto them. And albeit their death was reprehensible in the sight
of some vulgar or passionate people, that consider nothing but the
present spectacle and popular voyce, that they died for treasons; yet
to themselues who remembred the false accusations made agaynst
their mayster for troobling the people,Math. 21. and for dehorting the payment
of tribute vnto Caesar, and other such calumniations; and that
his innocency could not deliuer him, but that at last he was preferred
to dy in the midle of two theeues vpon a crosse; to them (I say)
that remembred and did meditate these thinges, to them this circumstance
of treason in their araygnments was sweet and comfortable,
their consciences clearing them before their sayd mayster, from
all such act, meaning or intention of treasons, as falsly was layd
agaynst them; and so much the more willingly they went to the
ladder: and their example with the same reasons and meditations
haue put the same desyre in foure tymes as many, of their owne
coate, as they were: and in thowsa^des of others within the land, which
would neuer haue thought of this perfection of dying for religion,
if God had not taught it the^ by this persecutio^ and exa^ple of others.
A^d Sir Francis himself co^playneth also (as before you haue heard)
that within these three yeares vpon his knowledge many haue fallen
away and do fall away daylie, from his religion to ours, by example
the one of the other, for that (as he saith)
Of the elder oxe the yonger steere doth learne.
So as by this may be gathered what will be the successe of this pursuite
on the catholique syde, if the rigor be continued. But on the
other hand, what it may come vnto, God only forseeth, whose
cause if the catholiques do defend, and if his spirit be with them (as
to most men it is euident) then must they winne in the end, and his
wrath will appeare at length agaynst the other parte that iniustly afflicteth
them, howsoeuer it be delayed and borne of for a tyme. Nor
is the argument good that some do vse to make, we haue indured thus
long and prospered, etc. For the holy ghost himself answereth, Ne dixeris:
p^ccaui, and quid mihi accidit triste?Eccles. ^. altissimus enim est patiens redditor. Say
not: I haue donne amisse, and no hurt hath happened vnto me, for
that God is a patient paymayster, and in the end payeth for all.
The wise Solon told rich Craesus in his prosperitie that the measure
of his felicitie could not be taken but at the end of his
lyfe,Iustin. lib. 3. which in deed fell out to be most miserable: and in England
king Henry the sixth concluded a long raigne of fortie yeares with a
troblesome and pittiful perturbation of the same. And yet was there

no such violent vexation of subiectes in those dayes as now is, and
hath byn for many yeares, wherin truly if we set asyde all respect
of religion and of Gods intermedling in the case, and consider only
reason itself, and the opinion of wise wordly men and Philosophers,
no man is ignorant but that they agree all, that: nullum violentum est
durabile. And agayne, that: malus di^turnitatis custos,Cicero off. lib. 2. est metus. And
Christe our Sauiour much more fully:Luc. 11. Omne regnum in se diuisum desolabitur.
All which groundes and principles, cannot, but lay before your
Lordships wisdomes the importance of some mitigation and mollification
of matters for preuenting further inconueniences,The dangers after her Maisties death. if not for
the present, yet at least for the tyme to come, espetially if God in
his iustice and anger should take from vs her maiestie, all men may
forsee in what termes we shalbe quickly; when to the differences of
religion shalbe added the other also about the succession, intangled
perhaps principally by these respects of religion. And then when
exasperated myndes shall come to haue more commoditie of working
their willes, and wreaking their wrathes, great extremities
may be feared, except the way be made before hand by some temperature
of mitigation: for that English natures are vehement (as all
men know) in whatsoeuer they take in hand, but espetially in these
kynde of differences, as former tymes haue made lamentable experience,
and the future I feare will declare the same much more, if
preuention be not made; seing that neuer in tymes past concurred so
many circumstances of sharp contention both from at home and abrode,
as now are lyke to be: no forayn prince being neer about vs
but wilbe desirous to haue an oare in the guyding of this bark if once
it be aflote, either for their owne pretenses or for their frend, or agaynst
their opposite: besydes the different reasons of state that may
moue diuers parties at that day, as Fra^ce, Fla^dres, and De^mark, that our
future king be not ouerstro^g, Spayne, Fra^ce, and Fla^ders, that he co^cur
with them in religio^: Engla^d generally that he subiect vs not to an
other crowne; Engla^d in part that he be homeborne; and England
in three partes to the fauor or disfauour of three distinct religions,
Protestant, Puritan, and Catholique, euery parte for his owne.
And as these things are manifest in themselues, so is it also no lesse
euident, that the only or principal meane to preuent these dangers,
were to mittigate somwhat these acerbities now, to the end that men
of different religions dealing more freindly together, might in time
either come to be all of one opinion, or at leastwise to agree in some
good temperature for this publique afaire of the common-wealth,

which is impossible to do while matters of religion are pursued with
such hostilitie, as for many years they haue bin.
To which consideration there commeth also an other of no lesse
moment in myn opinion, which is, that her Maiestie hauing raigned
now a goodly number of years (being neer the one and fourtie of her
scepter) as she followeth fast on the rate of Octauianus Augustus
yeares of Empire,The example of Aug. and other kings. so would she imitate his sweetnes and felicitie
also in disposing his later yeares (euen from the number of fourtie
that her Maiestie is now at) to the exhilerating of all her people generally
as he did, and therby came to be so deare, and so intirely beloued
of all, as the publique teares of all did testifie at his death, all crying
and wishing, that either he had neuer bin borne, or neuer dyed, neuer
bin their Emperor, or neuer left to be, referring the former parte of
their wish vnto the beginning of his gouernme^t, which had bin preiudicial
to their common wealth, and the second to his latter end,
which was most grateful to all.
And this particuler point of Augustus his proceeding,Kings of England. diuers noble,
kings also of her Maiesties progenitors haue indeuored to imitate by
special dissignement, and namely the two famous Henryes the fourth
and seuenth, and Edward also the fourth, who albeit they entered
by dint of sword, and had many sharp bickerings for diuers yeares,
with their oposite factions, yet all three of them so disposed themselues
to clemencie towards their later dayes, as they were most dear
euen to them that had bin their enimies, and oposit at their first entra^ce
to the crown.
VVhich circumstance notwithstanding of difficultie, doth not occur
to her Maiestie in the matter proposed for fauour of the Catholiques,
for that she neither entered the crowne by force of armes,
nor had she the catholiques of her realme against her therin,In the 6. incounter. but rather
they were the people that principally and with most harty affectio^
assisted her Maiestie to the quiet and peaceable possession of the
same, as in another place more at large hath bin declared. And euer
since they haue liued with that dutifull obedience to her Maiestie in
all te^poral matters, which to any of her catholique ancestors hath
^uer bin exhibited by their dearest people.
VVherfore seeing there is no difficultie nor demerit on the behalf
of the catholiques why this benifit should not be granted to the^, who
were in possession of it at the entrance of her Maiestie to the crown,
and had expresse promises to haue it continued stil: and on the other
side, there be many and most weightie reasons to moue her Maiestie

to haue compassion of them, and to aleuiate their grieuous pressures
and vexations after so many years of sufferance, your Lordships
haue the most honorable, iust, and pious cause in the world, wherin
to be mediators to her Maiestie for so principal a parte of your common-wealth,
as your catholiques be.
And for so much as this cause hath not only these three partes specified
of pietie, iustice, and honor, to moue your Lordships withall
(which yet I presume would to such men be sufficient) but also includeth
so many other like perswasiue motiues, as either prudence or
christian reason of state can comprehend (as namely security, continuance,
strength, vnion, peace, defence, vtilitie, comfort, ease, ornament,
alacritie, facility, and the like) great hope is conceiued that
your Lordships wil not refuse to imbrace the same.
And surely (my lordes) the same reasons and many more might
iustly moue her Maiestie and your Lordships also to take in hand the
perfection of that greatest woorke,The example of King Henrie the eight, and the King of France. so earnesty thought vpon by
her Maiesties noble father King Henry the eight in his later dayes, as
before you haue heard, by the publique protestation and other of
Bishop Gardener, his neerest and dearest Councelor in those dayes.
And you haue in the same matter the present example and president
of the great king and kingdome of France,In the 3. incounter. which most wisely and
happely hath followed the same resolution, and hath found infinite
ease, honour, and benefyte therby, both before God and man: and
it is and wilbe of great consequence in Christianitie, and ought no
doubt to moue her Maiestie and your Lordships much. Yet for that
the hartes of Princes are in the handes of God to be moued, when
to his diuine wisdome, mercy, and iustice shalbe thought best, and
for that the sinnes of our cou^trie are great and manifold, which haue
brought forth so greeuous afflictio^s vpo^ our selues by our selues: if
the multitude of these our demerits be such as do hinder so great and vniuersal
a blessing as would be for vs to see her Maiestie and the realme
re^nited agayne to that spiritual fountayne of the sea^ Apostolique
by which all perfect vnion^ must insue, yet in a secondarie degree
of comfort is desired, that at least the persecution for religion
may cease agaynst Catholiques, and they be suffered to lyue in the religion
wherin her Maiesties noble ancestors, and your Lordships
forefathers liued and dyed most christianly, and honorably, from the
first conuersion of our land from paganisme to christan religion euen
vnto these our dayes.An important co^sideration. The memory of which your progenitors now
dead, and of their soules yet liuing and what sense and feeling they

haue of these things, and what they would say to you and do in this
behalf, if they were heer again to see men afflicted and pursued for
that faith and religion which they so much esteemed and sought to
aduance, and by which we cannot but piously presume and hope,
that they be now saued and made partakers of Christes euerlasting
glory, with whome we can neuer haue parte nor fellowship again,
if we follow not their steps in the same religion, this cogitation (I
say ought greatly to moue your Lordships to do somwhat in this so
weightie and important sute of the afflicted catholiques.
And further I appeale to your Lordships wise consideration
what a comfort it might be to her Maiestie, now in her elder age,
and later part of her gouernment, and to your Lordships also to see
once all sortes of people merry, contented, louing, and confident
within the realme,A ioyful state. al to laugh and sing together, all to pray to God
most hartely for her Maiesties health, wealth, and prosperous long
continuance; al to be vnited in defence of the realme; all made frends
and familiar together, as in Germanie and other places men be,
notwithstanding the differences of religion, which more easely perhaps
would be taken away and vnion brought in; when freely and
confidently men might confer, and eche man shew his reason without
feare, and heare another mans argument without suspition of
fraud or violence to be vsed.
This was the first proposition that Protestantes made vnto the
world at their first appearance, which they accompanied with many
scriptures and reasons both diuine and humane that fayth ought not
to be forced.The first proposition of Protestantes in the vvorld. They haue obtayned in sundrye countries their petition,
and therfore cannot in reason and honor be agaynst the same
petition now made by Catholiques to her Maiestie and to your lordships
in England: and that with so much more equitie and iustice, by
how much longer Catholiques haue byn in possession of their Religion,
then Protestantes of theirs, especially within England.
Your Lordships haue had many yeares experience now of the present
maner of proceeding by affliction of Catholiques, where one
part of the land hath wept, whyle the other hath laughed; the
one sort sighed, whyle the other singed, the one triumphed, whyle
many others haue mourned, complayned, and exclaymed: let some
proof be made of the other way also, wherby contentme^t is geuen
to all, let it be tried once in her Maiesties dayes how matters will
go when all emnitie and hostillitie is taken out of the bowels of our
commonwealth, when the catholique man and woman in England

may deale with their neighbour in loue and confidence; when our
noble and worshipful gentlemen abrode may returne home, and shew
their loyal duties to their Soueraigne without offence or peril, or
force offred to their conscience for matters of religion; when our English
merchantes may traffique freely throughout the world without
peril of piracie or confiscations, when our home gentlemen may
trauel with lyke libertie where it seemeth them best for increase of
their experience to serue their country, when our English students
may visit forrayne vniuersityes without restraint, and strangers come
to ours and speake, confer, dispute, and reason with modestie
without danger of intrapping.
Let this (my good Lords) be proued for a time, and let your honors
as principal members of this afflicted body of our deuided
realme, be suters vnto her Maiestie, as to the head, for this sweet and
holesome medicine by peace and composition within it self.
VVhereby there is no doubt but much honor and m^^it wil grow vnto
your Lordships, much comfort, ease, and securitie, to her Maiestie,
much ioy and vtilitie vnto all her subiects, much edification vnto our
neighbours about vs, much care and solicitude be taken away from
all sortes of English, much trooble and charges of warres excused,
much strength added to the common-wealth, many perils diuerted,
both for the present, and the time to come, many benefits and
benedictions insew euery way, if I be not deceiued: which
yet I leaue to the high and most holy inscrutable
prouidence of almightie God, to determine at
his pleasure, and to your Lordships wisdomes
to consider with due
maturitie.
And so most humbly I take my leaue.
This first of September
1598.

