



THE
PATHVVAIE TO
Perfection.
The Text.

But one thing, I forget that
which is behinde, and endeuour
my selfe to that which
is before, and followe hard, towarde
the marke, for the
prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Iesus.
Philip. 3.
14.

RIght Honourable, right Worshipfull,
and most Christian
and blessed brethren; perfection
is all in all. The onely thing
in euery thing. But that which is vnperfect,
is like eyther the vntimely
birth of a woman, or else the vntimely
fruire of a tree. The one dying
before it be borne, the other rotting

before it be ripe. Therefore it is sayd
of the lawe,He. 7. v. 19 That it made nothing
perfect: but of the Gospell,Ih* 19. 13. that it
is most perfect in it selfe. And of the
tower of Babell,Lu. 14. 30. these men began
well to build, yet could not perfect it:
but of the frame of the world,Ge. 1. v. 1. thus
the heauen and the earth were perfectly
finished, yea so perfectly, that
euery thing since which hath had any
little resemblance of this perfection,
is sayd to be as perfect as God made
the world. Now of all things in the
world, man especially is borne, not
to dye, as an vntimely birth, but to
liue: and man liueth, not to rotte away
as vntimely fruite, but to flourish
for euer. Therefore we that doe
not dye vnder the law, but liue vnder
grace,Rom. 9. 14 must not be lyke the law, but
like the Gospell: and we which shall
not rotte away as the Tower of Babel,
but flourish for euer, as the building
of God,1. Cor. 3. 9 must not be lyke the tower
of Babell, but lyke the frame of the
world; labouring continually to be
perfect, as our heauenly Father is

perfect.Mar. 5. 48. Labour, I say, we must:
for as nothing is excellent, and easie
both together; in lyke sort perfection,
though it be so excellent a thing,
that it ought to be much desired, yet
it is not so easie a thing, that it can be
soone attayned. Therefore sayes the
Apostle in the former verse, I do not
thinke that I haue yet attayned to it.
For, sayes Bernard:Quomodo proficis si, i^ tibi su^^icis? Howe canst
thou possibly be a proficient, if thou
thinke thy selfe already sufficient?
The arke of the couenant was but a
Cubit and a halfe high.Exo. 25. 10. i1. Ki. 7. 32 So likewise
the wheeles of the Cauldron were
but a Cubit and a halfe high. Nowe
we know that a Cubite and a halfe is
an vnperfect measure, which shewes
that none in this life are perfectly perfect.
The verie highest are, as the
Arke in Moyses tabernacle, or as the
wheeles in Salomons temple, but a
Cubite and a halfe high:(...). perfectly
vnperfect when they begin: vnperfectly
perfect when they end. Benaiah
was honourable among thirtie,
but he attained not to the first three:

1. Sa. 3, 23. And so some one man may bee as
perfect as thirtie, yea, as a thousand
other men, and yet not attayne to
the perfection of the blessed Trinitie,
which is the first three. Nay
when we haue done the best we can,
we are but vnprofitable SeruantsLu. 17. 10..
All our righteousnesse is as a stayned
clothEsa* 64. 5. Our greatest strength is
confirmed in weakenesse2. Cor. 12. 9.. VVe
knowe but in part, not as wee are
knowne1. Cor. 13, 12., VVee walke by fayth,
not by sight2, Cor. 5. 7.. VVee behold as in
a Glasse darkely, not face to face1. Col. 13. 12..
So that the most perfect perfection
wee can attayne to in this lyfe, is an
humble acknowledging of that imperfection
which wee haueEst quaeda^ imperfecta perfectio, vt sciat homo se non esse perfectum in hac vita. Primaesius in Col. c. 1. in fine., and
an earnest labouring for that perfection
which wee haue not (...). Nyssenus (...). in fine. VVee
liue heere in that wee hope for lyfe
Spes vitae immortali^ est vita vitae mortalis. Au. in p. ^03.: and we are perfect heere in that
wee labour for perfection (...). Oecume. in H^. c. 6.. Wherfore
as Salomon went vp sixe steps
to come to hys great throne of Iuory
Reg. 10. 19., so must wee ascend sixe degrees
to come to this high toppe of perfection.

The first (Not manie thinges)
But one thing. The second (I doe not
remember, but I Forget that which is
behinde. The third (I stand not still,
but) I endeuour my selfe to that which
is before. The fourth (I runne not
amisse, but) I followe hard, The fift
(Not beside the marke, but) Toward
the marke. The sixt, (Not for anie
other prize, but) For the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Iesus.
Touching the first, hee sayes (Not
manie things) But one thing. Gregorie
hath thys sentenceCum animus diuiditur ad multa fit minor ad singulae. The minde
of man is lyke the stone Tirrhenus.
That stone, so long as it is whole
swimmeth, but beeing once broken
sinketh. And so the heart of man
beeing once broken, it soone sinketh,
and beeing diuersly distracted, it is
easilie ou^rwhelmed. Z^dikiasIere. 39. 5. did
well enough so long as hee stayed in
Ierusalem, ^ignifying the vision of
peace which is one thing* but when
hee was carried to Riblah, signifying
a multitude which is manie thinges,
then were his eyes put out. VVhat

so neare one as two? And yet wee
must not goe so farre from one as
two, seeing it is a verie hard matter
and almost vnpossible, that one mind
should well heede two diuers things:
Vt res opposstas mens ferat vna duas. Cor. Gallus. Hercules himselfe could not cope
with two aduersaries at once. So that
Peter was vnwise to ware two swords
at once.Lu. 22. 3^ Alexander sayed, the
whole world could not holde two
Sunnes at once. So that Issacar was
an Asse to beare two burthens at
once.Gen. 49 14. No man sitteth vpon two
seates together. No man hunteth
two games together. No man iustleth
with two Speares together. Hee that
hath two harts, if he haue a true hart
of the one, hee will haue a false hart
of the other. Therefore sayes Saint
Iames:Iam. 1, 8. A double hearted man is
vnconstant in all his wayes. He that
hath two tongues, if hee tell trueth
with the one, hee will lye with the other.
Therefore sayes Saint Paule:
1. Ti. 3, 8 Deacons must not be double tongued.
Hee that serues two Maisters,
if he please the one, he will displease

the other: therefore sayes our Sauiour:
Lu. 10, 13 No man can serue two Maysters.
Hee that walketh two wayes,
if hee goe well in the one, hee will
stumble in the other. Therfore saies
Ecclesiasticus:Eccl. 2, 13 Woe be to the sinner
which walketh two manner of
wayes. VVherefore we must not be
lyke the Philistines which had two
harts,1, Sa. 5. 2. one hart that cleaued to God,
another that cleaued to Dagon. Wee
must not bee lyke the Iewes which
had two tongues,Soph. 2, 1. one tongue that
sweared by the Lorde, another that
sweared by Malcham. VVee must
not bee lyke the Israelites which serued
two Maysters,1, Kin. 18. 12. they halted betwixt
two opynions seruing sometimes
God, sometimes Baal. VVee
must not be like Salomon which walked
two waies,1, Ki, 11, 5 his hart was not perfect
with God, but somtimes he walked
the way of the Lord, sometimes
the way of Ashteroth. We must not
doo so, I say; wee must not followe
God and Dagon; God and Malcham:
God and Baal: God and Ashteroth.

If wee would bee perfect indeede,
wee must followe (Not many things,
no not so much as two thinges) But
one thing.
For this One thing, is the very band
of PerfectionCollo. 3. 4 (...). Theodor^^ grae, Affect. eur. 2.. Heere-vpon Christ
speaking to his Spouse, sayth thusCantica. 4, 9.,
Thou hast wounded my heart with
one of thine eyes, and with one chaine
of thy necke. The Church, I graunt,
hath manie eyes. But because as the
eyes of a mayden looke vnto the hand
of her mistressePsa. 123. 2.: so all these eyes
wayte onelie on the Lord, looke onelie
one way, and so (in a sort) make
onely one eye, therefore hee sayes,
with One of thine eyes. So likewise
the Church hath many chaynes. But
because these chaynes are so linked
and intorteled together, that they all
make (in a manner) but one golden
chayne of Christian vertues, which
is the band of Perfection, and bindeth
the Church to Christ, as the necke
ioyneth the bodie to the head, therefore
hee sayes, with One chayne of
the necke. This one eye it is, this one

chayne it is, which makes Christ in
loue with his Church, which ouercomes
him, and woundes his heart.
Thou hast wounded my heart, sayes
hee, with one of thine eyes, and with
one chayne of thy neck. The Spouse
of Christ must haue but One chayne
about her necke. The Disciple of
Christ must haue but One coate vppon
his backe.Luk. 9. 3. Hee must not be a
turne-coate, much lesse a change-coate.
Seeing indeed that which Cyprian
speakes of Christes coate, may
be as truly sayde of euery Christians
coate, That eyther it must be Vnica,
or else it cannot be Tunica, eyther it
must be One or none. For as Rebeccaes
two Twins did strugle and wrestle
before they were borne, for hatred
and malice, but Elizabeths one
childe did spring and skip before hee
was borne, for ioy and gladnes; so
hee that busies himselfe about more
thinges then one, shall neuer prooue
singular in anie thing,(...). Plat^ de. rep. l. 3. nay hee
shall finde that strife and resistance in
his head, which Rebecca did in her

wombe, but hee that labours and trauailes
onely about One thing, shall
bring it to good perfection, and be
as well deliuered of it, as Elizabeth
was of Iohn Baptist. Hence it is that
wee are exhorted, for our heart,Act. 4, 32. to
haue One heart and one soule, for our
tongue,1, Cor. 1, 10. to speake One and the selfe
same thing, for our Master,Mat. 13, 8. to serue
One Maister in heauen, for our way,
Phil. 3, 16 to walke after One and the selfe
same rule. According to that most
wise and worthy wordCor vnu^, via vna. My L. Treasurer his word. One heart,
One way. VVhich is also agreeable
to the word of God, who sayeth, I
will giue them one hart, and one way,
that they may feare me for euer, for
the wealth of them and of their children
after them,Ie. 32, 39 Wherefore let
vs not haue many mindes, or trouble
our selues about many thinges, but
with Mary,He. 10, 41 mind onely One thing
which is necessarie: let vs not haue
many tongues, or desire many things,
but euery one of vs say with Dauid,
Psal. 1^, 1 One thing onely haue I desired of
the Lord: let vs not serue many Maisters,

or be many Maisters our selues,
but as Sophony speaketh,Soph. 3, 9. with One
shoulder serue the Lorde our God,
and onely worship him: let vs not
walk many waies, or kick against many
pricks,Act. 9, 5. or shoote at rouers (as I
may say) but with Saint Paule in this
place, ayme onely at one marke, and
follow But one thing. This is the first
degree to perfection.
TOuching the second hee sayth, (I
doo not remember, but) I forget
that which is behind. Truth it is, we
may remember, both that wee haue
done ill, to amend it, and also that we
haue done well, to co^tinue it. For the
first Chrisostom saith,(...). Nothing doeth
so well help vs forward in a good
course, as the often remembrance of
our sins. Whereas in the bitternes of
our soules wee call to remembrance
the dais of old, which we haue passed
away in sin. Wherupon the Psalmist
particularly intituleth the eight and
thirtith Psal. a Memorandum, or a Remembrance,

because he made it, whe^
hee called to remembrance his sinnes,
which hee had in former time committedC^^^ commissa olim a se delicta memoriae repeteret. Euthymius. ibidem,
And generally Baruch sayeth
to vs in this sort. Remember well
what you haue done, and as it came
into your hearts to turne away from
God, so now striue with your selues
ten times more to turne agayne vnto
him n. Thus did Paule, remembring
he had once beene a persecutor,(...). Bar. 4, 28. 1. Tim. 1. 13 he
did repent him of it, and made amends
for it, and was afterward tenne times
more zealous to saue the wicked, then
before hee had beene to destroy the
godly. For the second, an other sayeth,
Quam immensa est laetitia de recordatione tran^o^^^ vir tu^is, etc. Ber. in se^t^ omniu^ saenc. ser. 2. o what heauenly comfort doe
they inwardly feele, which are delighted,
with the remembrance of vertue
past, with the fruition of ioy pesent:
with the expectation of felicitie to
come? This three-fold cord of comfort,
as it can neuer be broken, so it
must always be drawn forth at length,
that he which is iust may be stil more
iust, that hee which is strong may be
still more strongRe. 22, 11 Thus did Dauid,

1. Sa. 17, 36. remembring hee had once slaine a
Beare, he did not repent him of it, but
gathered strength and courage by it,
and was afterward more bold to combat
with a mighty Gyant, than before
he had beene to deale with an eluish
Beare, Therefore as they which leap,
the further they goe backward to
fetch their run, the further they leap
forward, when they haue runne: so
heere we may looke back a little, and
remember both that we haue done ill,
to amend it, and also that wee haue
done well to continue it. Otherwise
the remembrance eyther of vices or
vertues, is so far from putting vs any
whit forward, that it casteth vs quite
backward. For as Marke the Eremite
witnesseth, The remembrance of former
sins is inough to cast him downe
altogether,(...). who otherwise might
haue had some good hope. Our sinnes
and Elies Sonnes are alike. Ely hearing
his Sonnes were slaine, whom he himselfe
had not chastised and corrected
as he ought, fell down backward and
brake his necke1. Sa. 4, 17. And so all they

that remember and hearken after their
former sins, which they should haue
mortified and kild, fall downe backward,
and turne away from God. For
this is the difference betweene the
godly and the wicked. Both fall: But
the godly fall forward vpon their faces,
as Abraham did wh^n he talked
with God: the wicked fall backward
vppon the ground, as the Iewes did
when they apprehended Christ. He
that remembers his sinnes, to be sorie
for them, as Abraham did, falls forward
vppon his face: but hee that remembers
his sins, to reioyce in them,
as the Iewes did, fals backward vpon
the ground. VVherefore if thou be
vppon a mountaine, looke not backward
again vnto Sodom, as Lots wife
did:Gen. 19, 27. if thou be within the Arke,
flie not out againe into the world, as
Noahs Crow did:Gen. 8, 7 if thou be well
washed, returne not agayne to thy
mire as the Hog doth:2, Pet. 2, 22. if thou be
cleane purged, run not againe to thy
filth, as the Dog doth:Pr. 16. 11 If thou be
going towards the Land of Canaan,

thinke not on the flesh pots of Eg^pt:
Ex. 16, 3 If thou be marching agaynst the
hoast of Madian, drinke not of the
waters of Harod:Iud. 7, 6 If thou be vppon
the house top, come not downe:
Mark, 13. 11. If thou haue set thy hand to the
plough, looke not behind thee;Lu. 9. 62
remember not those vices which are
behind thee: no, nor those vertues neither.
For as Gregory writeth,Memoria virtutis forma mentis. De arcae pastorali. par. 4, ca. 1. The
remembrance of former vertues doth
many times so besot and inueigle a
man, that it makes him lyke a blinde
Asse fall downe into a ditch. When
Orpheus went to fetch his wife Euridice
out of hell, he had her granted to
him vpon condition, that hee should
not turne backe his eyes to looke vppon
her, till he had brought her into
heauen. Yet hauing brought her forward
a great way, at length his loue
was so excessiue, that hee could not
contain any longer, but would needs
haue a sight of her. VVhereupon
forthwith hee lost both her sight and
her selfe, shee sodainly againe vanishing
away from him.Flexit aman^ oculos, et protinus illa relapsae est. Ouid. Met. l. 1o. Fab. 1, Memin^t et Virgilius Geor. l. 4, in fin. This is a poeticall

fiction. Neuertheles it serueth very
fitly to this purpose. To admonish
vs, that if we haue anie vertue, which
is to be loued as a man is to loue hys
wife, yet we must not be so blind in
affection, as to doate too much vpon
it, or to fall in admiration of our selues
for it, or to be alwaies gazing and wondering
at it, lest by too much looking
vpon it, and by too well liking of it,
and by too often remembring it, wee
loose it. Because indeede he that remembers
his vertues, hath no vertues
to remember. Seeing he wants humility
which is the mother-vertue of all
vertues. For this is the difference between
the godly and the wicked. Both
remember vertues. But the godly remember
other mens vertues: the wicked
remember theyr owne vertues.
They remembring other mens vertues,
make the^ ensamples to imitate:
these remembring theyr owne vertues,
make them miracles to wonder
at. Therefore the godly remembring
they haue some one or other little
vice in them, are humble, though

they haue very manie great vertues:
but the wicked remembring they
haue some one or other little vertue
in them are proud, though they haue
ve^^e manie great vices. Wherefore
though thou haue conquered Kingdomes
yet cracke not of it, as Zenacharib
didEsa. 37. 13.: though thou hast built
Babel, yet bragge not of it, as Nabuchodonozer
didDa. 4, 27: though thou
haue a great people, yet number (...)
not; as Diuid did2, Sa. 24, 2.: though thou
haue rich treasures, yet shewe them
not, as Ezechias did2, Reg. 20, 13.: though thou
haue slain a thousand Philistines, yet
glory not in it, as Sampson didIud. 15, 16.:
though thou hast built seauen, altars,
yet vaunt not of it, as Balack didNum. 23, 1.:
though thou giue almes, yet blow not
a trumpetMat. 6, 2.: though thou fast twise
a weeke, yet make no words of itLuk. 18 12.,
(remember it not but) Forget that
which is behind.
If thou wilt be Perfect,Mat. 19. 22 sell all that
thou hast, and follow mee, sayth our
Sauiour, S^ll all that thou hast. Or if
no man will buy it, giue it. Or if no

man will take it, Forget it. Themistocles
said, he had rather learne the Art
of forgetfulnes, then of memory. That
is, as I vnderstand it, rather diuinity,
then philosophy. For philosophy is an
Art of memory, but diuinity is an Art
of forgetfulnes. Therfore the first lesson
that Socrates taught his Scholler
was, RememberReminiscere.. For he thought that
knowledge is nothing els but a calling
of those things to remembrance
which the mind knew, before it knew
the body. But the first lesson that
Christ teacheth his Scholler is, ForgetObliuiscere..
Harken o daughter (saies he) and
see. Forget thine owne Country and
thy fathers house. So that faith is that
faire Hellena, which drinketh to vs in
a cup of Nepenthes, and saithReu. 21, 4., Be of
good cheere, there shall be no more
sorrow, neither crying, neither death,
neither paine, for the first things are
past. And the water of the word of
God is, that fountaine Lethe, which
when we come to drinke of it, speaks
to vs (as it were) in this sortEsa. 43, 18., Remember
not the former thinges, neyther

regard the things of olde. For as they
which die cloth, doe not immediatly
change one contrarie into an other,
but first turne a white into an azure,
and then make a puke of it: so wee
can neuer holde colour, as a good
puke, except first our white be turned
into an azure, that is, as Lirine^sis
saithD^nec dediscimus bene quod didicimus non bene cap. 25., except first we do well to Forget,
that which wee did ill to get, except
first we do happily vnlearn, that
which we did vnhappily learne. And
like as they which work in wax, cannot
frame any new impression in it,
till the olde bee defaced(...). Bas. E. 1. p, 28.: so the Image
of Caesar the Prince of thys
world, the deuil must first be defaced,
before the image of Christ can be formed
in vs. For this image of Christ,
(as Clemens testifieth)(...) Prot. p. 5. is seene only
in them, which Forget the hil of Helicon,
and dwell in mount Sion. Wherfore
though thou haue had a bloody
issue twelue yeeeres, yet thine issue being
now stopt, Forget all bloodines:
Mar. ^, 25., though thou haue had a crooked
bodie eyghteene yeares, yet thy body

beeing nowe straightned, Forget all
crookednesLuk. 13, 11.: thogh thou haue had
blind eyes, yet thine eyes beeing now
cleared, Forget all blindnes in seeing
the truth,Mar. 10, 5. though thou haue had
deafe eares, yet thine eares being now
opened, Forget all deafnes in hearing
the wordMar. 7, 34.: though thou haue had
a dry hand* yet thy hand beeing now
restored, Forget all drinesse and nigardlines
with menMat. 12, 10.: though thou
haue had a lame foote, yet thy foote
being now recured, Forget all limping
and halting with GodAct. 14. 8: though
thou haue beene dead and buried in
the graue foure dayes, as Lazarus
was, yet being now reuiued, Forget all
deadnes in sinIh. 11, 39: though thou haue
ben possessed and tormented with seauen
deuils, as Mary Magdalen was,
yet beeing now deliuered, renounce
the deuill and all his works,Lu. 8, 2. and
Forget all thy wicked workes which
are behind thee(...). Uide na 2. (...). Vide Nat. (...). Yea, and all thy
good works also. For if thou Forget
them, then will God remember them.
The patriark Abraham was content

for Gods pleasure to sacrifice his Son
Isaac.Ge. 21, 16.. But as soone as he had done,
he Forgets it. Therfore God remembers
it, and sets downe euery seuerall
circumstance of it. By mine owne selfe
haue I sworn (saith the Lord) because
thou hast don this thing. There is the
general. But what thing? The particuler
followes. And hast not spared;
yea not thy seruant, but thy Son; nay,
not onely thy Sonne, but thine onely
Sonne, And hast not spared thine only
Sonne, therefore I will surely blesse
thee. That good womanLu. 7, 7, 42 gaue Christ
louing and frindly intertainment. But
as soone as she had don she Forgets it.
Therfore Christ remembers it, and
amplifies it from point to point. He
turned to the woman and said to Simon,
Seest thou this woman? when I
came to thy house, thou gauest me no
water for my feet: but she hath washed
my feet with the teares of her eies,
and wiped the^ with the haires of her
head. Thou gauest me no kisse: but
she since the time I came in hath not
ceased to kisse me feet. My head with



oyle thou didest not anoynt, but she
hath anointed my feet with ointment.
Lo yee how true it is which I said before,
that if wee remember our good
workes, then God will forget them;
but if we Forget them, then God will
remember them; yea and he wil reward
them when we haue forgotten them.
If we wage warre with GodLu. 14, 31, and think
to ouercome him with ten thousand
of our good deeds, then will he like a
puisant Prince, bring forth into the
field a huge army of our sins, twentie
thousand of our sins against vs, and
with twenty thousand of our sins will
easily ouerthrow ten thousand of our
good deedes, and so finally confound
vs. But if one the other side wee can
bee content to Forget all our good
workes; and to strowe our best garments,
and our most florishing branches
at Christs feeteMat. 21, 8; and to cast
downe our verie crownes before the
throane of the LambeReu. 4, 10, then he will
be a right Lambe indeed, hee will not
fight with vs, but hee will crowne vs
with honour and glory. Almighty God

appoynted his people not to sheare
the first borne of the sheepeDe. 15. 16. The
first borne of the sheepe are the best
of our good works. These we must
not sheare, nor lay naked and open to
the view and knowledge of all men,
but Forget them, and hide them vnder
the fleece of silence, and keepe
them secret to our selues. So Ioseph,
whom God did lead as a sheepePsa. 80, 2,
hauing a first borne, did not sheare
this first borne of the sheepe, but called
him Manasses, that is, Forgetfulnes
of those thinges which were behind,
when God had now answered
the desires of his hartEcl. 5, 19. The faithful
speaking to Christ say thus, wee will
make for thee borders of golde guilt
with siluerMurenulas ^ureas vermiculatas ar^ento. Can 1 10.. This is quite contrary to
the fashion of the world. The fashion
of the world is to guild siluer with
gold, and to put the best side outward.
But the faithfull guild gold with siluer,
and put the best side inward. So
Moses hauing a glorius countenance,
did not set it out to the shew, but did
Forget it, and couered it with a vaileEx 34, 33.

Now, a glorious countenance couered
with a vaile, what is it else, but a
border of gold, guilt with siluer? But
we, we alas, for the most part, haue
such base mindes, that wee are scarce
worth the ground we goe vpon* We
doe not guild our borders of golde
with siluer; but wee sheare the first
borne of our sheepe. We do not cast
down our garments and our branches
and our crownes-before the throane
of the lamb, but we war against God
with tenne thousand of our good
works. Or rather indeed, which of vs
all can muster together so many good
works to fight for him? Nay, if wee
haue done one thing well, or one time
well, we think all is well* we need do
no more, we haue done good inough,
and oft inough. Yea, if others do not
commend vs also, we do so wonderfully
please our selues in it, that wee
are ready presently to prayse our
selues for it. But heere we may all of
vp learne true humilityHumilitas animi sublimitas christiani* Leo., which is
true magnanimity of S. Paul. Paul had
a most noble and most stately hart,

higher than the very poles of heauen
it selfe. All that euer he had done hetherto,
or could doo, he thinkes too
little, nay, he counts it nothing. He
was not a whit inferiour to the very
chiefest Apostles2, Cor. 12, 11., yet he Forgets
it. Hee laboured more than they all.
1, Cor. 15, 10. yet he
Forgets it. He spake with
tongues more than they all1 Cor. 14, 18., yet he
Forgets it. Hee had care of the churches
2, Cor. 11, 28., yet he Forgets it. He fought
with beasts at Ephesus1, Cor. 15, 32., yet he Forgets
it. He troad fathan, that vile beast
vnder his feeteRo. 16, 30., yet he Forgets it.
Hee spake wisedome among them
that are perfect1. Cor. 2, 6., yet he Forgets it.
Hee was rapt vp to paradise into the
third heauen, where he first learned
that among the Angels, which afterwards
hee taught amongst men1, Cor. 12, 4.,
yet he Forgets it, All this is nothing
with him.Quae retro sunt obliuisci et ad ea quae ^nte sunt Apostolum seq^i. Ep. 15. All this he Forgets, and saith,
I Forget that which is behind. This is
the second degree to perfection.
TOuching the third, hee sayes, (I
stand not still) but I Endeuour

my selfe to that which is before. Saint
Bernard writing to one Haimericus
Chancelor of Rome, in his very first
salutation, wisheth him to forget
those things which are behind, and to
follow the Apostle to those thinges
which are before. Which no man can
doo, that either stands still, or is idle.
Wherefore Hermes saith generally,
Nothing in the whole world is altogether
idle(...) Dial. 11.. The wise man hath allowed
a time for euery thing else, but
for idlenes he hath allowed no time.
Moses Arke had rings; and barres
within the ringsEx. 24, 14., to signifie that it
was not made to stand still, but to be
remoued from place to place. Iacobs
ladder had slauesGe. 28, 12, vpon which hee
saw none standing still, but all either
ascending or else descending by it.
Ascend you likewise to the top of the
ladder, to heauen, and there you shal
heare one say, My Father doth now
worke, and I work also. Whereupon
Basil noteth, that king Dauid hauing
first said, Lord who shall dwell in thy
tabernacle, addes thenPsal. 15, 2. (...)., Not he that

hath wrought righteousnes heeretofore,
but hee that doth now worke righteousnes,
euen as Christ sais, My father
doth now worke, and I worke also.
Descend you likewise to the foote of
the ladder to the earth, and there you
shall heare that figge tree accursed,
which did beare leaues and no fruite.
VVhereupon Theophylact noteth,
that Iohn Baptist hauing first sayde,
The axe is layde to the roote of the
tree, adds thenMat. 3, 11. (...)., Not euery tree that
hath not brought forth good fruite
heretofore: but euery tree that doth not
now bring forth good fruite shall be cut
downe, euen as that fruitlesse fig tree
was cut downe, and cast into the fire.
Therefore we must so walke, as God
seeing our continuall fruitfulnes may
say of vs, I see men walking like trees
Mar. 8, 24. Men walke like trees, when as men
are neuer idle, but alwaies abounding
in the worke of the Lord1. Cor. 15. 58.. As the
tree of lyfe euerie moneth bringeth
forth twelue maner of fruitsReu. 22, 2. For
so Christ said to him whom he healed
Mar. 2, 10, Take vp thy bed, and walk. He sais

not, Take vp thy bed and stand still,
like a stone, but take vp thy bed, and
walke, like a tree. Otherwise to them
whom he found standing still, he said
in his wrath and in his sore displeasure,
why stand yee still all the day
idle? why are ye like Moab setled vpon
your leesIe. 48, 11., and not poured from
vessell to vessell? we must make account
to giue account for euery idle
word, wee speakeMat. 12, 36.. And much
more then for euery idle houre wee
spende. Hee hath called the time against
me, sayes IerusalemLam. 1, 15. So that
for the very time which we haue contemned,
we shall be condemned: and
for euery day which wee haue spent
idlely, wee shall be shent seuerelie.
The Istaelites were commaunded,
not once in a weeke, or once in a moneth,
but euery day to gather Manna,
except onely the Sabaoth dayEx. 16, 26.. To
teach them, and all vs, that till wee
come to the saboth of our euerlasting
rest in heauen, wee must neuer stand
still, but euery day bee doing somewhat.
Wherfore Apelles posey was

this, Let no day passe without a lineNulla dies sine line^..
Be sure euery day thou do some good
then draw one line at the least. According
to thatEsa 28, 10, Line vpon line, line vpon
line. And Pithagoras posey was
thisCha^nici ne insideas., Sit not still vpon the measure of
corne. Do not looke to eate, except
thou sweat for it. According to that
2, Thes. 3, 10. Hee which will not worke, let him
not eate. In my Fathers house, sayes
Christ, are many mansionsIoh. 14, 3., So that
no man may sing his soule a sweete
Requiem, saying with that cor^orant
in the Gospell, Soule take thy rest.
For in heanen onely, which is in our
father^ house, there are many mansions
to rest in. In this world, which is
out of our fathers house, there are not
many mansions, no not any mansions
to rest in* but onely (...) to
worke in. We are come, sayes the author
to the HebrewsHe. 12, 23, to the spirits of
iust and perfect then in heauen* So that
no man may ^ue out for hymselfe a
Quietus est, saying with the church of
Laodicea, I am rich and haue inough.
For in heauen onely, are the spirits of

iust and perfect men, which are rich
and haue inough. In this world wee
must neuer think we are rich, but we
must alwaies be poore in spirit: wee
must neuer thinke we haue inough,
but we must alwayes hunger and thirst
after righteousnes. Wherfore if thou
haue a talentLu. 19, 20., put it not into a napkin,
but into the banke: if thou light
a candle,Mar. 4, 21 set it not vnder a bushell*
but vpon a candlestick: if thou build
a CittyMat. 5, 14., place it not vnder a dale, but
vpon a hil* if thou seek ChristCant. 3, 1., seeke
him not in thy bed, but in the garden.
Lie not stil: Sit not stil: (stand not stil)
but Endeuour thy selfe to that which
is before.
Walke before mee, and be perfect
sayth God to AbrahamGen. 17, 1. As if hee
should say, if thou wilt bee perfect,
then walke before me, and Endeuour
thy selfe to that which is before thee.
For the Apostle in the other part,
speaking of those thinges which are
behind, saith that he doth not onely
not beare them in body, But not so
much as beare them in mind. Heere

contrariwise, speaking of those things
which are before, hee sayth, that hee
doth not onely intende hys minde to
them, but also extend his very body
towards them. So that as they which
runne in a race, bend forward they^
breasts, and stretch out their armes,
to shew that they haue a desire to run
faster then possibly theyr feete can
follow them: after the same sort wee
which runne in this course of Christianity*
must cast away euery thing that
presseth down, and sin which cleaueth
so fastHeb. 12, 1, that wee may Endeuour our
selues, or (as the Greeke word(...). here
signifies) stretch our selues, to those
things which are before. And like as
Aeolus left all the other winds, which
might haue beene a trouble to hym
with his friend Vlisses, to be packt vp
in a male, and kept onely the westerne
wind for his owne vse, to bring him
home into his country: so we must reiect
all other things, which may be as
contrary windes to driue vs from the
shoare of saluation, and retaine onely
that westerne winde of the spyrit of

God, whereby we may Endeuour our
^elues to that which is before, and
stretch out our sailes, and so come safelie
to the hauen of heauen. Euerie
thing, as Austine testifieth, is either a
hinderance, or a furtheranceAut vin^^ulum aut ^vehiculum De ciu^. Dei. l. 9, c. 5.: if it be
a hinderance, cast it away: If it be a
furtherance, then keepe it. For euen
as the silke worme keepes her body
spare and empty, and vses to fast two
or three dayes together, that she may
stretch out her selfe the better, and
spin her threed the finer: so we must
Endeuour to bring vnder our bodies
2, Cor. 9 ^, 27., and (as I may say) diet them for the
nonce, that wee may not any longer
weaue the spiders webEsa, 59, 5., but with
the silk worme spin a new thrid. The
spiders webb is vinculum, the silke
wormes thrid vehiculum. And like as
the viper perceauing her olde skin to
bee so stiffe that shee cannot easilie
stretch out her self in it, strips it quite
off: after the same sort we which are
by nature a generation of vipers,
must strip off our old skinColo. 3, 9., and perceauing
we cannot well do our Endeuour

and stirre our selues in the armor
of Saul, wee must with Dauid put it
of, and put on the armour of light.
When long warre had bin betweene
the two houses of Saul and Dauid, at
length the house of Saul waxed weaker
and weaker, and the house of Dauid
waxed stronger and stronger2. Sa. 3. 1.. In like
manner the spirit must alwaies Endeuour
it selfe to that which is before, and
neuer leaue fighting with the flesh,
till the house of Saul, who was a lim
of the deuill, that is, the flesh, waxe
weaker and weaker, and the house of
Dauid, who was a figure of Christ,
that is the spirit, waxe stronger and
stronger. Thus the Baptist being but
a child waxed stronger and stronger
in spirit. And yet speaking of Christ
and himselfe, he sayes thusIoh. 3. 30., He must
increase, I must decrease. But the
Baptist was borne of olde Elizabeth:
Christ vvas borne of young Marie.
Whereby wee see, that that which is
borne of the olde man, which is the
flesh, must daily decrease in vs, and
grow downeward: but that which is

borne of the new man, which is the
spirit, must daylie increase in vs, and
grow vpward. For so indeede Christ
in the beginning of the new world increased,
in wisdome for his mind, and
stature for his bodieLuk. 2, 52. To teach vs
that if wee be liuely members of the
same body, then we must in like sort
Endeuour our selues to that which is
before, and increase and multiplyCrescite et multiplicamini. Non solum ad corpus sed etiam ad animum refer^ur, (...).
and grow vp into him who is the head,
till we all come to the measure of the
age of the fulnes of Christ. The holy
ghost also in the beginning of the
old world, was moued vpon the watersGen. 1, 2.
To teach vs that if we be inspired
and moued by the same spirit, then
we must in like sort be moued vpon
the waters, and passe apase ouer the
red sea of this world, that wee may
quickly come to the celestial Canaan,
which is the kingdome of God. We
pray indeede that the kingdome
of God may come. But the kingdome of
God commeth not by obseruation,
Lu. 17 20 if wee stand still gazing and
gaping for itAct. 1. 11 Non dormientibus, prouenit regnu^ coelorum, nec otio disidiaque torpentibus beatitudo aeternitatis ingeritur. Leo de epiph. ser. 5.. Therefore as Abraham

dyd runne from the doore of his
Tent, to meete the AngellsGen. 18. 2: So
must we Endeuour to runne forward,
not onely looking for, but also hasting
vnto, the comming of the day
of God2, Pe. 3. 2. (...), that wee may (if it bee
possible) meete the Lorde in the ayre
1. Thes. 4. 17., with all his holie Angells, if
wee would haue his kingdome come.
VVee pray also that the will of God
may bee done in earth as it is in heauen.(...).
But the will of GOD will be
not done if wee will doo nothing.
Therefore as the Cherubins spread
out their winges on high, and couer
the mercy seateExo. 37. 9: So must we spread
out our wings, and stretch out, or Endeuour
our selues, and bee alwayes
prest and ready to flye, as it were, to
do the will of GodEz. 1. 11 No^ solum aquila, sed et bos, et leo, et homo volant., if wee would
haue his will done in the earth, as it
is in heauen. VVhen God at the
first had made a paradise vpon earth,
hee tooke the man, and put him into
it, to dresse it and keepe itGen. 2, 15 vt operatu^ et custodiret illu^. vulgata.. Adam
was not enioyned to bestow any bodily
labour in dressing it at that time.

For this was a part of his punishment
afterward. Neither yet had he neede
to keepe it from wild beasts. For all
these were then subiect and obedient
vnto him. So that he dressed and
kept it, by keping those graces which
God hath giuen him, yea and Endeuouring
hymselfe to encrease them
continuallyQuamuis paradisus operib. ruralibus no^ egeret tamen quia primus homo lex posteritatis futurus erat, legitimi etiam in paradiso spetiem suscepit laboris. Ambro. de Parad. c. 4.. Therfore the Apostle
beseecheth vs also, that wee receaue
not the grace of God in vaine, but
that in all thinges wee approue our
selues, as the seruants of God, in much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities,
in distresses, and so forth2. Cor, 6. 1 See yee,
how many posts and props he putteth
vnder vs, that we may be stayed vp
and confirmed in the grace of God.
How many tooles, as it were, and implements
he giueth vs, that we may not
receaue the graces of God in vaine,
but that as they are receaued and kept
in vs, so they may be daylie dressed
and bettered by vs. For, as Saint Peter
witnesseth2. Pet. 1. ^., if these things be and
abound, we shall neither be idle nor
vnfruitfull in the knowledg of Christ.

Wherevpon O^cumenius obserueth,
that the graces of God, as the flowers
of a garden, must not onely be kept,
but also bee dressed, that they may
haue, not onely a beeing, but also an
abounding(...).. Because a man may haue
great good things being in him, and
yet be himselfe like a garden that is
kept indeed, but not dressed, altogether
idle and vnfruitfull. But if they
be both being and abounding in him,
if hee Endeuour himselfe to goe on
further euery day then other, then
surely he is neither idle nor vnfruitful
in the knowledge of Christ. Hereupon
Charls the fift gaue this Emblem,
Vlterius. Sta^d not stil but go on further. Vlterius,
as God sais to his guest, SuperiusLuk, 14, 10
Sit not still, but fit vp higher. So the
water riseth vp higher and higher
which Ezechiel speaks ofEze. 47. 4.. First to
the ankles: then to the knees: the^ to
the loines: lastly to the head. So the
wheat grows vp riper and riper, which
Christ speakes ofMar, 4. 28.. First there is the
blade: the^ the eare: the^ the full corne:
lastly cometh the haruest. So must

we with the water, rise vp higher and
higher, till wee come to the head,
which is the sonne of God: and with
the wheate grow vp riper and riper,
till wee come to the haruest, which is
the ende of the world. Alwayes Endeuouring
our selues to that which is
before, and continually singing one
of the Songs of Sion, that is, one of
the Psalmes of degrees,Nomine graduum significatur ascensio, qua profici^ntes quique a tenporalibus ad ^eterna, a terrenis ad coelestia prouebunter. Prosper. in ti tulump. 120 till wee
beholde the Lorde in Sion, till wee
see the head, in the haruest, the sonne
of GOD in the ende of the worlde.
Euen as hee did, who sayes heere,
I endeuour my selfe to that which is before.
Thus much co^cerning this part,
beeing the thirde degree to perfection.
TOuching the fourth, hee sayth,
(I runne not amisse, but I followe
hard. A man may runne amisse, otherwise
then he shoulde, by running
eyther too slowly or too fast.
Nowe for ouer-much slownesse,
Rusticus Diaconus sayethTurpe est contra ardenter peruersa asserentes, nos pro veritate frigidiores inueniri. li. aduersus Acephalos., It is a

starke shame for vs to bee colde in
maintayning a truth, seeing our aduersaries
are so hot in defending a
falshoode. VVhen the aduersarie
had sowne tares among the good
corne, the Mayster sayde to his Seruaunts,
Let both growe together.
Hee sayeth not, Let the tares growe,
and the good corne not growe, but,
Let both growe together. If the
tares growe so fast for the fire, then
let the good corne growe as fast for
the barne. If the wicked runne so
fast to damnation, then let the godlie
runne as fast to saluation. Yet
the Prophets haue euer complayned,
that the children of thys worlde
are much more forwarde in theyr
kinde, then the Children of light.
Dauid speaking of the Children of
thys worlde, sayth, They encourage
them-selues in an ill purpose. But
Esay speaking of the Children of
light, saythEsa. 59, 4., No man calleth for
iustice, no man contendeth for the
truth. VVhen the time drew neere
that our Sauiour should bee taken

and carried away to be crucified, onely
Iudas that vile traytor was vigilant
and watchfull to bring his mischieuous
purpose to passe, but all the other
disciples were fast a sleepe. Therfore
as Ierusalem sayde of her eyeLa. 3. 51..
Mine eye hath spoiled my soule: So
might these drousy disciples haue said
of their eye, Our eie hath spoiled our
soule. And as the Centurion said of
his seruantMat. 8. 6., My serua^t lieth at home
sick of the palsey and is ill troubled:
So might Christ haue said of these his
sleepie disciples, My disciples lye at
home sicke of the palsey, and are ill
troubled. Wel said, ill troubled. For
he that is diligent to discharge his duty,
and takes paines in his calling as
he ought, is well troubledBene torquetur.. But he
that hath the palsey and is dissolute
and negligent, and lies at home sicke
of the lazie disease, is ill troubledMale torquetur.. Ill
troubled, with an euill spyrite, with
the spirit of slumber, which, as Iob
testifiesIob. 40. 16. lyeth in the couert of the
reedes. They that are lazie and lither
fellowes, and haue nothing in them,

are heere called reedes, in whom the
deuill himselfe lyeth and sleepeth securely.
But though he be well quieted
in them, yet (as I said before) they
are ill troubled with him. Ill troubled
with him, as those seauenty Kings
were ill troubled with Adonibezec,
when hee did cut off the thumbs of
their hands and feet. For he that hath
the thumbs of his hands cut off, may
perhaps do something, but hee is so
long about a little that he were better
sit still and do nothing, then be so long
pidling about nothing. So hee that
hath the thumbs of his feete cut off,
may peraduenture goe forwarde, but
it isTestudineus gradus. Plaut. such a snayles pace which hee
goes, that he were better stand still and
not go at all forward, then go so slowlie
forward. Wherefore we must not
goe so slowly forward, as though the
thumbs of our hands and feete were
cut off, but rather we must runne as
fast as it is to be supposed that mightie
man could2. Sam. 21. 20., vvhich had vppon
euery hand sixe fingers, and vppon
euerie foote sixe toes. But yet sayes

BernardEt feruor discretionem erigat, et discretio feruorem dirigat., As zeale must erect our
discretion, that we runne not too slowly,
so discretion must direct our zeale,
that we runne not too fast. That wise
woman, by whome is meant the
Church of Christ, laboureth with
the counsell of her handesConsilio manuum. Pr. 31, 13.. Her
handes are full of eyesOculatae manus. Plautus.. Shee hath
more fore-sight and wisedome euen
in her little finger, then many a man
hath in his whole head. Shee laboureth
with her handes. There is zeale.
Shee laboureth with the counsell of
her hands. There is discretion as well
as zeale. In Leuiticus they are forbidden
to bring anie blinde offering
to GODLe. 22. 22.. All zeale without
discretion, is an offering without an
eye. All blind zeale, is a blind offering.
Which God wil neuer accept. So
that as Minerua is saide to put a golden
bridle vppon Pegasus, that hee
should not flye too fast: in lyke sort
our Minerua, that is our Christian
discretion, must put a golden bridle
vppon Pegasus, that is our earnest
zealeIames. 3. 3, least if our zeale bee vnbrideled,

it make vs followe too fast.
Therefore Octauian the Emperour
did beare in his Eschocheon, a Crabfish
and a Butterflie, with this mot,
Festina lente. Softe pace, goes farre. A Crabfish
creepes. Thats softe pace. A Butterflie
flies. That goes farre. A Crabfish,
a Butterflie, Softe pace, goes
farre. And Vespasian the Emperour
did stampe in his coyne a Dolphin
and an anchor, with this impresaSat cito, si sat bene.,
Soone inough, if well inough.
A Dolphin out-strips the ship. Thats
soone inough. An anchor stayes the
shippe. Thats well inough. A Dolphin,
an Anchor, Soone inough,
if well inough. For as if the lower
spheares in the heauen should not
bee stayed with the contrarie course
of the highest spheare in the firmament,
they would soone sette the
whole world on a light fire: So the
inferiour affections of the minde, if
they be not staied with the contrary
course of reason, and with the milde
motion of the spirit of God, they will
soone ouer-heat thee, and ouerthrow

all thou goest about. Therfore Chilo
giueth vs this precept, not to ouer-heat
Iacobs sheepe by driuing them
too fastGe. 33. 13., not to make ouer much hast
in the way. According to that in the
Prophet Esay, where it is saidQui crediderit non festinabit. c. 28 v. 16., Hee
which beleeueth shall not make hast.
The string of an Instrument may be
as wel too high as too low. If it be too
lowe it iarres, if it bee too high it
breaks. So the mind of man may be as
wel too intent, as too remisse. If it be
too remis, it runs too slowly: if it be
too intent, it runs too fast. Wherfore
Clemens giueth vs this precept, that
we should not be strained and wrested
too high, but set and tuned arightNon (...), sed (...). Paedag, lib, 1 cap. 12..
According to that in the second
to the CorinthsNon (...), sed (...). 2, Co. 10 14, where it is
said, that we must not outstretch our
selues, but stretch out our selues; not
run amisse (either too slowly or too
fast) but Follow hard.
For the way of the righteousPro. 4, 18., it
glittereth as the light, which shyneth
more and more vnto the perfect day.
It glittereth as the Sun, which commeth

forth as a bridegroome out of
his chamber, and reioyceth as a giant,
to run his course. Indeed the wicked
are like a wheele. O my God make
them like a wheele, sayes DauidPsa. 82. 13. A
wheele tilts vp behind, and shootes
downe before. So the wicked are forward
to all badnes, and backward to
all goodnes. But the godly are like a
Panther. A Panther hath foure claws
and no more, on each hind foot, but
fiue clawes, and no lesse on each fore
foote. So the godly, though they bee
weake to the worldward, yet they are
strong to Godward. And setting the
better foote before (as wee say) they
Follow hard and run with might and
maine most violently to lay holde on
that hope which is set before them(...). Cursum corripiunt. Beza Hebr. 6. 18..
For there are two sortes of violent
men. Of the first sorte the Apostle
sayes, b. No extortioners or violeent
men shal inherit the kingdom of heauen.
Of the second sort our sauior saies
Ma. 11. 12, The kingdome of heauen suffereth
violence and violent men lay hold on
it. Both are violent men: but both are

not violent to men. For they offer
violence to men: these offer violence
to God. Therefore they doe not enter:
but these do enter into the kingdome
of heauen. For though God
be not content that wee should offer
violence to men, yet he is well content
that wee should offer violence
to himselfeBona violentia qua acquiritur regnum Dei. Vis intrare in regnum celorum? Esto violentus et improbus Em Dominica. 3. Aduent. (...).. And that we should
Followe hard, and as Pyrats or theeues
set vpon him (if it be lawfull for
me so to speake) and by the force of
faith spoile him* and rob him of al his
eternal treasuresMore latronum suis eum spol^are nitimur, cupimus illi auferre regnum thesauros and vitam. Am. Par. se. 15.. Therfore calling
his church he saythCan. 2, 13., Arise my loue,
my faire one, make hast and come away.
He that doth make account to
come to GOD, must make hast to
come to God. He must vse violence,
and Follow harde, and come downe
quickly with Zacheus, and for speedines
he must be like a Doe or a Roe
vpon the mountaines of Bether. Euen
as those beastes in EzechielEzec. 1. 14 did run
and returne as lightning: So must euery
one who is enlightned with the spirit
of God Followe as swiftlie as lightning,

which doth no soner flash down
from heauen to the earth, the^ he must
in affection mount vp from the earth
to heauen. And like as the Isralites
were commanded to eate the passe ouer
in hastEx. 12. 11.: Semblably all we which
are true Isralites must girde vp the
loines of our minds, and Follow hard,
and run a pace, and redeeme the time,
that both the wrath of God may pas
ouer vs, and also the mercy of God
may abide with vs. For God among
other arguments of his mercy sayes
thusIob. 39. 16, Who hath giuen wings to the
Ostridg? The Ostridg neuer flies with
his wings but onely a little lifts vp his
body with them when he runs. And in
ye pinion of each wing he hath a sharp
spur, wherewith he pricketh his own
self, that he may run the faster. So that
God hath giue^ wings vnto ye Ostridg
not for the Ostridge, but for vs. That
we might thereby learne, howe wee
ought by all good meanes to quicken
our dull disposition, that wee may
Followe harde, euen as wee see the
Ostridge eggeth his owne selfe forward

with the flapping of his wings.
For they that wayte vpopn the Lord
shall change their strength, they shall
lift vp their winges, (not onely as the
Ostridge, but also) as the Eagle: they
shall (I say) lift vp their wings as the
EagleEsa. 40, 31, they shal run and not be faint,
they shall walke and not bee weary.
Euen as Pindarus writeth that King
Therons coursers were such as wold
neuer be wery of going l: so shal these
Follow still, and neuer be weary of
well doing. But the most especiall
thing to be considered heere is this,
that the Prophet sayes, They which
waight vpon the Lord, shall change
their strengthMutabunt fortitudinem. Hee sayes not, they
shall loose their strength, that whereas
before they were strong, now they
shall be weake: but they shall change
their strength (namelie, the vse of
their strength) that whereas before
they were strong, and did follow hard,
to serue sinne, nowe they shall be as
strong, and shall Follow as hard, to serue
God.Ro. 6. 19. For God only it is which can
melt brasse out of a stoneIob. 28. 2.. I wot wel

there is a stone called Almacrasia,
which being molten becometh brasse.
But these words haue a far more hidden
meaning. To wit, that God doth
melt brasse out of a stone, when he
taketh the hart of a sinner which is as
hard as a stone, and melting it with
the holy Ghost, and with fire, dooth
afterward make it as tough as brasse.
This was seene in the conuersion of
Paul. For when Paul was made an
Apostle, the^ a stone was made brasse.
He was as hard as any stone, before
his conuersion, when he stoned StephenAct. 7, 58.
Hee was as tough as any
brasse after his conuersion, when he
did Follow so hard, that no affliction
could seperate him from the loue of
ChristRo. 8, 35. Which thing was prophecied
of long beforeGe. 49, 27. When the Patriarch
Iacob sayd, Beniamin shall be
as a rauening Wolfe; in the morning
he shall deuoure the pray: in the euening
he shall deuide the spoile. Paul
was this Beniamin, because he was of
the tribe of BeniaminPhil. 3. 5.. Paul was
this rauening wolfe, because he breathed

out threatning and slaughter against
the Disciples, and was euen
mad vpon them as a rauening WolfeActs 9, 5..
Paule in the morning deuoured
the pray, because in the beginning
of his dayes he wasted and deuoured
the Church of God as a prayGal. 1, 13. Paul
in the euening deuided the spoile, because
in the latter ende of his dayes,
he did Follow his calling hard, and deuided
the word of God aright2, Tim. 2, 15., of
which the Psalmist saies, I reioyce in
thy word, more then they which
haue found a great spoile. So that this
is no losse of strength, but onely a
change of strength. O blessed Beniamin!
O holy Apostle! Thou hast
now changed thy strength. Yea by
changing it thou hast much increased
it. For thou wert nothing so strong
before, as thou art now. Nothing so
strong before, being a ston, as thou art
now, being brasse. Nothing so strong
before, being a rauening wolf, as thou
art now, beeing a meeke lambe. Nothing
so strong before, in the morning,
as thou art now, in the euening.

Nothing so strong before, when thou
diddest deuoure the pray, as thou art
nowe, when thou doest deuide the
spoyle* When no impediments, no
stumbling-blocks can stay thee, but
thou wilt needes Follow hard, and
runne ouer the whole world, to deuide
the spoyle among all Nations,
to preach the Gospell vnto all people.
So likewise Baruch was inflamed,
as the Hebrew word signifieth
Hekeriah. Nehemi. 3, 20., hee was (I say) inflamed, to fortifie
the wall of Ierusalem. In mans bodie
the arteries running along the
veines, and beating vpon them, stir
vp the blood, and keepe it warme,
least otherwise by standing still, it
should congeale and waxe coldeVide Theodor. (...) lib. 1..
After the same manner in Baruch his
heart, there were liuely and quicke
motions of the holy Ghost, which
did blowe coales, and stirre vp the
gift of GOD in him2, Tim. 1, 6., which did
warme hys blood, and make hym
Followe the matter harde, beeing
wholly inflamed with a burning desire,
to see the Cittie of GOD

restored againe to her former glory.
So Abraham when the Angels came
to himGen. 18, 7., made hast to runne to his
tent: and his wife made hast to kneade
three measures of fine meale; and his
boy made hast to kill and dresse a good
and tender calfe. Loe yee how all are
imployed in a godly mans house. Abraham
and his wife, man and woman;
Abraham and his boy, old and yong;
all make hast, and Follow hard. So
Dauid did runne the way of Gods
commaundements. Nay, no ordinary
pace would serue him, but hee must
needs daunce before the Arke. Yea,
his feete could not hold him, but hee
must needs haue wings as a Doue. O
that I had wings as a Doue (sayes he)
then would I flye and be at restPs. 55, 6.
Hee wisheth for winges, not that he
might first be at rest, and afterward
flye, but that he might first flye, and
afterward be at rest. That he might
first Follow hard, and flye vp with the
wings of faith, into the heauenly paradice,
and afterward be at rest, and
settle there, in the tree of eternall life.

O that I had wings, that I had wings,
as a Doue (saies he) then would I flie,
would I flie, and be at rest. And so
must we after the example of Dauid,
of Abraham, of Baruch, of Paul, fight
for the faith which we haue receaued
Iude, 1, 3: and striue to enter in at the straight
gateLu. 13, 24.: and labour for the meate
which perisheth notIh. 6, 27.: and study
to enter into restHe. 4. 11. We must* I say,
studie: and labour; and striue; and
fight; and Followe hard. This is the
fourth degree to perfection.
TOuching the fift he sayes (not beside
the marke, but) Toward the
marke. Austine holdeth, that a man
were better run, either too slowly, or
too fast in the way, then follow hard
out of the way. For the harder thou
followest out of the way, the further
thou runnest from the Marke. Herevpon
the Apostle, after following
hard, addeth immediatly* Toward the
Marke. Insinuating thereby, that to
follow is nothing, but the Marke is
the matter. And consequently that

he which is not a skilfull Mark-man,
can neuer bee a faythfull follower.
Therfore we must marke well, what
this Marke is. In one word it is the
crosse of Christ(...). Laert, in Diogene. Quod ille ioco, id nos seris dicamus.. For Christ hath
set vp his crosse, as a spellHinc dicitur Gospell quasi Gods spel., or as a
Marke for vs to ayme at, as a patterne
of all perfection, as an euerlasting
signe, which shall not be taken away
Esa, 55, 13.. Hence it is that speaking of one,
who should be his Disciple, he sayes
Mar. 8, 54.* He that would come after me, let
him take vp his crosse, and follow mee.
Let him take vp his crosse, that he may
come the neerer to my crosse; and
followe me, that he may be directed all
the way by me. For thou canst neuer
erre, or goe beside the Marke, so long
as thou walkest in this way(...). Basil. de spiritu. S. c. 8.. Therfore
Maximus saith, If thou wouldest
finde the way which bringeth
vnto lyfe, then seeke it in that way
which saith, I am the way: the truth:
and the life(...). Centu. 2., The way, to them that
begin; the truth, to them that proceed;
the life, to them that are perfectVia est incip^e^tibus. veritas proficientibus: and vita perfectis Tho..
Now the way of this way is the word.

Which S. Peter confirmeth sayingCampis in seliloquio animae. c. 12. z. 1, Pe. I, 25,
The word of the Lord endureth for
euer, and this is the word which is
preached among you. He auoucheth
that the eternall word, is the preached
word, meaning thereby that the only
way, to the begotten word, is the
written word. According to that of
the PsalmistPs. 119, 1, Blessed are they
which are vpright in the way, and
walk in the law of the Lord. So that if
thou wouldest be vpright in the way,
which is the word Christ, then thou
must walke in the lawe of the Lord,
which is the word of Christ. For the
holy scripture is giuen by the inspiration
of God, to be a lanterne vnto our
steps, and a light vnto our paths, that
the man of God may be absolute, being
made perfect vnto all good works
2* Tim. 3, 17.. Wherefore (to define this whole
matter in few words), we shal in mine
opinion folow hard toward the mark,
if we labour earnestly in our seuerall
vocations to expresse the vertuss of
Christ our good Lord(...) Basil. pag. 554., wc he shewed
forth in al the course of his life, and especially

in his death vpon the crosse for vs to
imitate and follow, by walking faithfully
in the way of his commaundements,
and squaring all our actions,
speeches, and thoughts, according to
the rule of his word. Euen as on the
contrary part, it is very euident, that
all they run beside the marke, which
doe not propound to themselues to
follow the ensample of Christ, but either
in their doctrine, or in their life,
either in their opinions, or in their actions,
continually swarue from him.
Such are, all Atheists: Temporizers:
Newters: and Humorists. For Athiests
runne beside the marke by going too
much on the left hand. They doe not
make Christ a marke to ayme at that
they may follow him, but a signe to
shoore at that they may blaspheme
himLuk. 2, 34.. They bend their tongues as
bowes, and shoote out their arrowes
euen bitter wordsPsal. 64, 3.. They corrupt others,
and speake of wicked blasphemy,
their talking is against the most
highPsal. 73, 8.. They say vnto God, Depart
from vs, for we desire not the knowledge

of thy waiesIob. 21, 13 Excede pietas si modo in nostra domo v^^quam fuisti. Atreus apud Senecam in Thyeste Actu. 2.. And no meruaile
that they speake so impiously which
liue so vngodly. Running altogether
vpon the left hand in the broad way
of the world, of the flesh, of the deuill.
For the world hath a kind of course(...). Eph. 2, ve. 2,
which Atheists follow being past feeling,
and euen starke dead in their
trespasses and sinnes. The flesh also
hath a by-path(...). Heb. 3, 3., whereby they are
seduced and deceaued. Lastly the deuill
hath a method(...). Eph 6, v. 11. Parte sinistra Centifidum confundit iter. Prud con. Sim. li. 2 which is without
any methode, and an order which is
contrary to all good order, and a left
handed direction which bringeth
them to finall confusion. Now Temporizers
also run beside the marke by
going about in a circle. They goe about
many things, but bring about
nothingThes. 3, 11. They do all things for the
time, but nothing for the truethOmnia protempore, nihil pro veritate Optatus. lib. 1..
They make many a period, but neuer
a full poynt(...). Chryso. They are alwaies learning
but neuer come to knowledgeTim. 3, 7..
The hedgehog hath two holes in his
siege, one toward the South, an other
toward the North. Now whe^ the southren

wind blowes, he stops vp that
hole, and turnes him Northward.
When the Northren wind blowes, he
stops vp that hole likewise, and turnes
him againe Southward. Such vrchins,
are all temporizers. They beleeue for
a time, as long as the warme Sunne
shines vpon them. But as soone as any
storme of persecution ariseth, by
and by they haue a starting hole to
hide themselues in, they change their
religion, and turne about with the
time. For as the harts of such men
are as a cart-wheele, and their thoughts
are like a rowling axeltreeEccl. 33, 5. Or as a
top which alwaies runs round, and neuer
goes forward, vnlesse it be whipt
(...). Hesy. verbo (...).. Or like a mill-horse which making
many steps, turnes about, and is continually
found in the same place(...). Bas. pag. 563.
Or as dore which riding vpon his hinges
all the day long, is neuer a whit
nearer at nightPro. 26, 14. So likewise Newters
runne beside the marke by going
forward and backward in a maze.
These doe not aske of their Father an
egge, but a Scorpion. For an egge

would teach them to goe onely forward,
but a Scorpion doth teach them
to goe both forward and backwardAugustin. Ep. 121 cap. 5. and Basil. in Psal. 32. mitio..
Like the Barnacles, which are both
flesh and fishAuibus ist is tanquam non carneis viri religios^ ieiuniorum tempore vescisolent. Giral. Cam. App. c. 8.. Or the Israelites,
which speake both Ashdod and HebrewNe. I3, 24.
Or Ianus, which sees both before
and behindIanus bifrons exprimitur, quod in medio constitutus annuinciqientem pariter et excedente^ spec^are videatur Cypri. l. de Idol. vani.: Or Balaam which
doth both blesse and curseNu 23, 25. Such a
Newter among the Romaines was
Tully, who could not resolue, whether
he should take Caesars or Pompeis
partQue^ fugiam sci^, qmem sequar nescio.. Among the Grecians was
Tytides, who could not determine,
whether he shold ioyne himselfe with
Achilles or Hector(...). Homer. Iliad. 5.. Among the
Iews was the tribe of Ephraim, which
was as cake vpon the harth not turnedOse, 7, 8.,
bakt on the one side, and raw
on the other side. Among the Gentiles
was the Church of Laodicea,
which was neither hot, nor coldeReu. 3, I5.,
neither hot, because it was raw on the
one side, nor colde, because it was
bakt on the other side. So it is with all
Newters. Theyr cake is dowe, as we
say, and they hold of both sides: and

as ambidexters with EhudIu. 3, 15., they
play with both handsMalefaciunt ambabus manibus henefaciendo Micheas 7, 3: and as the
sunne in Ezekias time they goe both
forward, and backwardEsa. 38, 8. Running
vp, and downe; in, and out; and yet
indeede are neyther aboue, nor beneath,
neither within, nor without(...). Irenae. l. 1, c 9.
Panarches ridle was this, How a man
and no man, can with a stone, and no
stone, kill a bird, and no bird, sitting
vpon a tree, and no tree? Athenaeus
makes the answere(...). Conuiuaelium l. 10., That an Eunuche
is the man: a Pumeise is the
stone: a Bat is the bird: Fennell is the
tree. After the same sort a Newter is
a very hard riddle. You can not tell
what to make of him. For going forward
and backward, he is a Christian
and no Christian. Like an Eunuche,
which is a man, and no man; or a
Pumeise, which is a stone, and no
stone; or a Bat, which is a bird, and
no bird; or Fennell, which is a tree,
and no tree. Now Humorists also run
beside the marke, by going too much
on the right hand. Therefore Dauid
could wish his vttter enemy no geater

harme, then that sathan might stand
at his right handPsal. 109. 6. Sathan stands at a
mans left hand, when he draweth him
by the arme into the old way of Atheisme.
At a mans right hand, when
he pulleth him by the elbow, into the
new-found way of Puri^anisme. For
so blessed Cramner sayes,Initio prologi sui ante magna Bibliae. Some lose
their game by short-shooting, some
by ouer-shooting: some walke too
much on the left hand, some too much
on the right hand. The first which
shoot short, and walk too much on the
left hand, are Atheists: these latter
which ouer-shoote themselues and
walk too much on the right hand, are
Humorists. Of both which S. Austine
writeth thusCauenda pernitias, vel Zizaniorum, vel praecisoru^ de vite domini sarmentorum. Epist. 203. we must in any case beware
and take heed, sayes he, of the
mischieuous infection, not onely of
tares (which are Atheists) but also of
those branches that haue cut themselues
from the Lords Vine (which
are Humorists.) For as Atalanta ranging
out on the right hand to gather
vp those gold apples which Hippomanes
for the nonce threw forth before

her, did lose the wager she ran
for(...). Arauibus apud Notalem Comitem Myth. li. 7. cap. 8.: no otherwise they which are
not thankfull to God for the glorious
peace and prosperity of his Church,
but runne after euery strange-deuised
discipline, and take vp all pritty nouelties
as golden apples, which euery
man le^s fall, shall without question
misse the marke, and lose the garland
of glory. VVherefore we must
runne, not too much on the left hand,
as Atheists do: not round about in a
circle as Temporizers do: not forward
and backward in a maze as N^wters
doe: not too much on the right
hand as Humorists doe: (not any other
way beside the marke) but toward
the Marke.
Iohn Baptist did goe before Christ
to make ready a perfect people for the
LordParare domino plebem perfectam. Luk. 1, I7.. Now the sum of Iohns preching
was this, Prepare the way of the
Lord, and make his path straight. So
that they which walke in a straight
path directly toward Christ, are a
perfect people for the Lord. Therefore
wee which would runne toward

the Marke, must leaue all Atheisme,
all Gentilisme, all prophanenes, all
lewdnes on the left hand, as Paul did
leaue Cyprus on the left hand, when
he sayled toward S^^iaAct. 33 1. For thus
touching the world, Saint Basil telleth
vs, That wee must for sake all those
worldly affections, which may draw
vs any way beside the Marke of true
godlines(...). Pag. 448.. Touching the flesh, Maximus
telleth vs, That when our
mind is perfectly freed from fleshly
desires, then it goeth on straight without
any declining from the Marke.
Touching the deuill Macarius telleth
vs, That we cannot auoyde that
gaping gulfe wherein the powers of
darknes are ouer-whelmed, except
the spirit of Christ be our pilot, and
guide vs in a straight course toward
the Marke, and in a right line as it
were to the hauen of rest(...), Homil. 44.. For indeed
Hymenius and Alexander wanting
this guide, made shipwrack of
their faith, and were ouerwhelmed
in the gulfe of damnation, being deliuered
to the deuill, that they might

learne not to blaspheme1, Tim. 1, 20.. Wherevpon
Occumenius saith that it asketh
good Art, and is a poynt of great cunning,
for a man to keep the scope of
Christianity, and to goe right toward
the Marke of truth(...). ^ v. 6.. And therfore
as gunners winke with their left eye,
that they may leuell more truly: in
semblable sort we must not behold any
vngodlines or sinister dealing with
our eyes, but we must aime directly
toward Christ, and either, if it be possible
hit the Marke, or at the leastwise
with those left-handed Beniamites
come within a hayres breadth
of itI u. 20, 16. When Diogenes saw a bungling
Archer shoot, he ran as fast as he
could to the Marke. The lookers on
demaunded what he meant in so doing?
He answered, to make sure that
he might not be hit. For this fellowe
(saise he) means neuer to come neere
the Marke. Thus must we doe. Whe^
we see prophane straglers, starting a
side like a broken bow, and rouing a
great way wide on the left hand, wee
must presently runne to the Marke.

That not only we may keepe our selues
safe fro^ the danger of their ill ensample,
but also we may giue aime (as
it were) to others, by our good ensample,
and direct them that they be neyther
wide nor short of the MarkePaulus dicit se insta* s^gitary ad prepositu^ and ad signum iacula dirigere, ne sagitta ad partem declinans altera^, imperitu^ ostendat sagittarium. Hiero. aduer. P. l. 1, initio..
Now for Temporizers, wee know that
Iosephs brethren stood so long dallying
and delaying, and trifling out the
time, that hauing a iourney to buy
corn, they might haue returned twise
before they would goe onceGe. 43, 10. Also
that Elizeus when Elias called him,
went about the bush (as we say) and
would needes goe bid his Father and
his Mother farwell, before he would
follow the Prophet1, Kin. 19, 20.. Paul did not
so. Being called of God, hee did not
stand temporizing, and cirkling, and
consulting with flesh and bloodGal. 1, 16., before
hee would followe toward the
Marke, neither did he fetch a compasse,
as hee was constrained to doe
when he ariued at RhegiumAct. 28. 13, but as
hee came with a straight course to
CousAct. 21, 1., so heere straight wayes hee
came to Christ. There is but one

place in the whole Scripture, which
may seeme to serue them, which serue
the time. And that is, where the Apostle
exhorteth vs, not to be slothfull
in seruice, but feruent in spirit,
seruing the timeRo. 12, 11. (...).. They that by seruing
the time, vnderstand, taking all
oportunities to doe good, expound
it neuerthelesse thus, That wee must
apply our selues to the time, yet so, as
in euery inclination, and turning, we
keepe a straight courseSic tamen, vt in qualibet inclinatione rectum cursum ten^amus, Caluin ibid.. But all the
fathers, Origen onely excepted, doe
reade the place otherwise. Ierome by
name saith most peremptorilyI lli legant, tempori seruientes, nos legamus, Domino seruientes. Epistola ad Marcel., Let
others reade, seruing the time, I for my
part will reade, seruing the Lord. And
this reading in deede is much more agreeable
to the text. So that heere is
nothing sayde in defence of timeseruers.
For they that are such, serue
not the Lord Iesus Christ, they are
not Christ-seruers, but they serue their
owne bellies, and with their glauering
and flattering, they seduce the
harts of the simple, and leade them
beside the MarkeRo* 16, 18. Therfore as fleachers

to make their shatts f^ie stedily,
peece them with sugarchest, or holy,
or such like heauy wood: so we must
adioyne, to that aspe, or seruice tree, or
such other light matter, which we are
all made of, the sweet sugarchest of the
holy ghost, that we may not be vnsteadie
as arrowes of aspe, nor yet slothfull
in seruice, but feruent in spirit,
seruing the Lord. Saint Ambrose reporteth,
that the Bee beeing to flye
home to her hiue, and fearing least if
she should be taken by the way with
the wind, shee might perhaps bee
blowne about in the ayre, counterpeizes
her selfe with a little stone, and
so flies straight homeApis cum aeris motus suspecto* habet laplllis saepe sublatis per inania se librat nubila ne leue alari^ remigiu^ praecipitent flabra ventoru^. De Vir. prop. f. l. 3.. This may
teach vs also what we ought to doe.
We must not be wauering, and carried
about with euery blast of doctrineEph. 4, 14,
like a reed shaken in the windVide Fox um in praefatione ante Pa^dectas locorum communium: but
as the Bee is balaunced with a little
stone, so wee must be built vpon the
chiefe corner stoneEph. 4, 20, and grounded
vpon a rockLu. 6, 24, and established with
graceHe. 13, 9, that howsoeuer the rayne
fall, or the floods arise, or the winds

blowMat. 7, 25. or what times soeuer come,
yet wee may stand fast in the streete
which is called straightAct. 9, 11., alwayes following
Christ directly toward the
Marke. To come nowe to Newters,
they may be compared to a Weauers
shittleIob. 7, 6. which if it goe forward one
way, presently goes backward againe
as much another way. Or to a Weauer
himselfe, such an one as Penelope
was, who would doe, and vndoe,
weauing that in the day time, which
shee did vnweaue in the night. But
contrariwise sayth our Apostle,Gala. 2, 16 If I
build againe the things that I haue
destroyed, I make my selfe a transgressor.
As if he shold say, If I weaue,
and vnweaue, if I build, and destroy, I
make my selfe a Newter, and so consequently
run beside the Marke. For
no man doth more transgresse, then
he that is doubtfull, and vncertaine in
religion, one while putting his foote
forward, another while pulling it
backward againeNihil turpius dubio and incerto, pede^modo refere^te, modo producente. Seneca. Ep^ 96.. God sayth to his
people which come to worship him
in his temple, That he which entreth

in by the way of the North gate, shall
goe out by the way of the South gate,
and he that entreth by the way of the
South gate, shall goe forth by the
way of the North gate, hee shall not
returne by the way of the gate, wherby
he came, but they shall goe forth
ouer against itEz^* 46, 9.. Thus the wise men
which came to worship Christ, returned
not home the same way they
came, but returned home another
wayMat. 2, 12. For it was behoofull that beleeuing
nowe in Christ, they should
not walke any more in the wayes of
their olde conuersation, but that taking
a new course, they should leaue
all their former errors, and goe forward
continually toward the MarkeOpertebat enim vt tam in Christum credentes, non per antiquas co^uer sationis semitas ambularent, sed noua^ ingressi viam a relistu erroribus abstinerent, Leo de epiphania. ser. 3..
Among those sowles, which are counted
abhominable, the Sea-mew, or
the Gull is oneLe. 11, 16. Nowe this is vncleane,
because it liues in both elements,
both in the water, and in the
earth, swimming as a fish, and yet
flying as a birdLarus animal est in vtroque viuens, id est aqua and terra, qui sicut auis quidem volat, vt aquatile aute^ natat. Cui no^ male comparantur hi qui circumcisionem vener^^tur and Baptisma, a^ quos Paulus dicit, si circumcidamini Christus vobis nihil prodest. Isychiu in Le^^. lib. 3. And certainely,
those wise men shold haue been such
fooles, and such gulls, as these are, if

they had worshipped both circumcision,
which is an earthly rudiment,
and also Bap^^sme, which is administred
by water, and by the holy Ghost.
For the holy Ghost sayth, if you be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing. As if hee should say, If you
goe backward againe to the circumcision
of Herod, hauing gone thus
far forward to the baptisme of Christ,
you make your selues Newters, and
shall neuer come to the Marke. The
Iewes were charged not to weare a
garment of diuers sorts, as of linnen
and woollen togetherDeu. 22, 11. Hath God
care of Oxen, and hath he not much
more care of preachers1, Cor. 9 9.? Hath God
care of those garments, wherewith
our bodies are couered, and hath he
not much more care of those vertues
wherewith our mindes are adorned
1, P^. 3. 3 (...). 1, Pet. 5, 5. (...)? Yes verely wee must so vnderstand
it, that by this Iewish lawe we
are all charged, not to runne with old
clouted shooes vpon our feetIudg. 9, 5, when
our feete should be newe shod with
the preparation of the Gospell of

peaceEph. 6, 15., not to sow a peece of new
cloath into an olde garmentMar. 2, 21, when
old things are now past, and al things
are become new1, Cor, 5, 17.. In one word, not
to haue a linsie woolsie religion, or a
parcht moath-eaten conscience, but
to weare such a faire cognisance of
certainty and constancie vpon our
coate, as all men may see, that without
any newtrality or hipocrasie, we
follow hard toward the Marke, and
sincerely serue God. Therefore as
Theseus beeing guided by Ariadnes
threed, which shee tyed at the entrance
into Dedalus labyrinth, escaped
all the danger and error of it: euen
so wee must make Christ the
doore, by which we must enter into
the labyrinth of all our affaires, and
tye Rahabs threedIosu. 2, 14. at this entrance,
and follow it all the way, that so wee
may be safe, and goe in, and out, and
finde pastureIoh. 10, 9.. For to goe in and out
after this sort, is not to goe forward
and backward, but to go only forward.
Seeing, whether we goe in by remembrance
of Christs mercies, or goe

out by consideration of our own miseries,
whether we goe in by faith, or
goe out by good works, whether we
goe in by life, or goe out by death, alwayes
we finde pasture, that is heauenly
comfort in Christ, alwayes we
goe forward, alwayes wee follow toward
the Marke. Now for Humorists,
S. Paul aduiseth vs to put on the armour
of righteousnes, on the right
hand, and on the left2, Cor. 6. 7. Marcus Caelius
was said to haue a good right hand,
but an ill left hand, because he could
plead, against a man better, then for
him. But here it is contrary. For these
are armed well enough on the left
hand, but they lye open to the deuill
on the right hand. Who like a cunning
fencer doth strike a great deal^
more fiercely, at the right hand then
at the left.Ampliori soli citudine vulnerare in nobis dextra^ satagit quan* sinistra^. Ber. qui hab^ ser. 7. Therfore Dauid saith, The
Lord vpo^ the right hand shall wound
euen Kings, in the day of his wrath
Ps. 120, 5. If sathan stand at thy right hand,
he shall wound thee: but if the Lord
stand at thy right hand, thou shalt
wound him; and bruse his head, and

breake the hairy scalp of all the kings,
and princes of darknesEp. 6. 12. Wherefore
euery Christian must say with
the PsalmistPsal. 19, 9, I haue set God alwaies
before me (there is the Marke) for he
is at my right hand, so that I shall not
fall. And againePsa. 73, 23 Thou hast holden
me vp by my right hand, thuo shalt
guide me with thy counsell, (there is
toward the Mark) and after that receause
me to glory. S. Bernard writing
to one Guido a Cardinall of Rome in
his very first salutation, wisheth him
no greater gift of God, then that hee
might haue grace to turne, neither to
the right hand nor to the leftGuidoni Barnardus, non declinar^ ad dextram nec ad ^inistram. Epistola. 192. And
a little after in the same Epistle, he requesteth
him, that he would learne to
know himselfe, and not goe beyond
his owne medio^rity, but be wise vnto
sobrietySeipsu^ cognosceret, nec egrederetur me^suram suam, sed saperet ad sobrietatem ib.. This lesson the wisest
that euer was teacheth vsEccl. 7, 18., Not to be
ouer much iust, neither to make our
selues ouer much wiseQuisquis plus iusto non sapit ille sapit. Martial. li. 14. For that
which is too good, is starke naught:
and he that is too wise, is a stark foole.
Because hee is neuer contented with

the time present, but needes he must
haue a Praeter. And yet no Praeter will
content him neither, not an imperfect,
no not a perfect, but onely that
which is more then perfect. Now he
which will needes be more then perfect,
shall whether hee will or no^ be
lesse then imperfect. He that seeks to
be more wise, then he can be, shall be
found to be lesse wise, then he should
be. And he that thinks himselfe seene
in all things, shal soone shew himself^
ouerseene in most things. Because a
selfe-conceit of surmised wisedome,
will not let him come to a happy increase
of true wisedome(...).. And certaine
it is that God will not reueale
wisdome, but onely to such as walke
continually in the way of peace, and
doe not at any time, like scattered
sheepe, runne too much on the right
hand, out of the way of peace, into the
way of precisenesInvi^^pac ^ tantum ambulantibus reuelab^t, and in nullam praecis^^nem deuiantibus. Aug. l. 2, de Bap. contr^ Don^. c. 8. and citatur a Brun^ de haereticis. l. 4, c. 4 Wherfore thogh
it be thy right eye, yet if it offend
thee, or cause thee to offend the
Church of God by thy running beside
the Marke, plucke it out hardly

and cast it from theeMat. 5, 30. For thou
knowest than he which would needs
forsooth in all the hast call for fire
from heauenLu. 9, 54 had too hot a spirit,
and at that time, went too much on
the right hand, and therfore not with
a right foote to the GospellGal. 2, 14. But he
that did shaue his head in Cenchrea
Act. 18, 18 Paulus Timotheum circumeidit, hostias in te^plo immolauit, cum Aquila and Priscilla caput Corinthi totondit. Wilfridus apud Bedam. Historia lib* 3, cap. 25., and yeelded to many other cerimonies
for peace sake, which otherwise
perhaps he did not greatly alow,
and like of, as he exhotteth others to
doe, so he did himselfe make straight
steps for his feeteHe. 12, 13, and went directlie
toward the Marke. To returne
then now at the length to that which
ere-while I was about to say, It hath
beene thought in former time that
none could be perfect but they which
led a solitary life. Hence it is that so
many writers both old and new haue
so largely discoursed of the perfection
of that lifeVenire ad erenium summa perfectio est. C^e^sar. Arelate^sis. ho. 23, p. 143. Vide praeter alios Laurentium Iustinianum de disciplina, and perfectione monasticae conue^sati^^is pag. 118.. Yea diuers, not
onely inferiours but euen Princes,
and not only of other Countries, but
euen of of this realme of EnglandKymgilsus^* Ceolulsu^: Eadbert^s: Ethelredus: Kenredus* Sigebertus: Offa: Sebbi: Iue.,
haue voluntarilie relinquished, theyr

crowne, their scepter, and all their
royall robes, and cloystered vp themselues
in Monasteries, that they might
liue, as they thought, in a more perfect
state. And certes I will not deny
but that such as can well away with
this kind of life, haue many oportunities
to serue God, which we haue not
Nihil aliud quickquam ^rat olim monach^ professio, qu^ priscae liberaequ^ v^tae meditatio ac pure christianae. Erasmus in praefatione ante Hier. Ep, and haue not many imperfections
of the world which we haueCellae and Caeli habitati^ cog^natae sunt. Ber. de vitaeso.. Yet
this is not the onely perfect state,
which tendeth toward the Mark. But
as diuers haue liued verie badly in
Monasteries: so many haue liued very
blessedly without them. Yea there
is no calling so meane, but if a man
followe Christ in it, hee may well enough,
according to the measure of
grace which it shall please GOD to
giue him, become a perfect man. Let
Ioseph be an example for seruaunts;
Iacob for shepheards; Amos for cottagers;
Mathewe for farmers; Peter
for fishers; Paul for tentmakers; and so
forth in the restVide theodoret. (...). li. 7. in fine. Et Philo. Iudaeum (...). p. 593.. For if a man haue
the right Marke alwayes before his
eyes, he may liue as well in a Citty, as

in a sanctuary(...). Chrysost. ad pop. ancho. 17, as well in a shop, as
in a cell(...). Vbi supr^ hom. 22.. So that no one calling simply
of it selfe, doth make a man perfect,
but the answer of a good conscience
to God1, Pet. 3, 21., that is it which maketh
a man perfect. Briefly the poynt
is this. What lawfull calling, state, or
condition soeuer thou art in, if ouer
and besides the plying of thy worldly
bu^ines, thou haue a conscionable care
euery day to increase spiritually also,
in such a faith as worketh by charity
Gal. 5, 6, I warrant thee, feare nothing, thou
art right enough, and doest goe
straight toward the Marke. The superstitious
pagans thought that an Idoll
which they termed Vibilia, kept
them from erring out of their wayAb erroribus via^^^ dea vibili^ liberat Arnob. aduers. gent. l. 4, initio..
But faith is our Vibilia which vvil not
suffer vs to vvander out of the way, so
long as we do all things according to
that patterne vvhich vvas shewed vs
in the mountExo. 25* 40.. For Christ with his
crosse in mount Caluary hath gone
before vs, and broken the ice already
for vs, and left vs an example, that by
faith vve might follow his steps1, Pet. 2, 21..

Euery one of vs saying vnto him with
holy Iob, My foote hath followed thy
steps, thy way haue I kept, and haue
not declinedIob. 23, 11.. This we shall doe if
we walke in the Kings high way of
charityNum. 21, 22. (...). Nazi^anzen* pa. 19. (...) Basil. pa. 139, and keepe the royall law
of loueIam. 2, 8.. For we that are Christians
goe toward the Marke, not by liuing,
but by louing: not with our feete,
but with our affections. Neyther is
there any thing which maketh a good
or a bad life, but a good or a bad loue
Imus e^im n^ ambulando sed amando. non ped^bus, sed moribus. Nec faciv^t bonos vel malos mores, nisi b^^ vel mali amores. Aug. Epist 52.. Therfore he that would be perfect,
must be rich in good workes, and according
to the rule of Euangelicall
perfection, hee must loue, not onely
his frinds in God, but also his foes for
GodAmi^^s in D^^, and inimicos propter Deum Prosper. in l. sententiarum.. Because as that is the hottest
fire which warmeth the^ that are furthest
off: so that is the most feruent
and perfect loue which forsaketh none,
though they be neuer so farre off, neither
friend nor foe, that may be loued,
but embraceth all in him who neuer
doth forsake vnlesse he be forsaken.
Now this charity of ours ought to be
skarlet twise dyedCoc^us bis tinctus. Exod. 28. 6., I meane extended,

not onely towards men, but
also towards God. VVhich loue of
God must make vs contemne the
world, and loath our owne seluesDuo amores, duas constituunt ciuitates. Amor Dei crescen^ vsque ad contemptum sui, ciuitatem Dei. Amor suivsque ad contemptum Dei, ciuitate^ diaboli. Aug,
and mortifie all our inordinate desires,
and keepe no propriety in any thing
we haue, but renounce, and resigne,
our whole will, and our whole soule,
to the good will, and pleasure of
God. For indeede so many times we
step out of the way, as we desire any
thing which is not finally referred to
the loue of the LordTot gressus extra via^ ponimus, quot peruersis desiderijs a c^lis^is vitae meditatione separamur. Grego. Mag.. And therfore
as a cunning archer will hit, not only
the white. but euen that very blacke,
in the middest of the Mark^, which
is commonly made in the forme of a
hart; semblably a sincere louer of
God, must neuer leaue darting, and
shooting vp to God his most passionate
and piercing desiresIaculatoria desideria Au., till hee
hath hit the Marke(...). Ignat. Epst. 12., and with his
wounded heart hath also wounded
Gods hart, that the Lord may mercifully,
and louingly confesse vnto him
and say, Thou hast wounded my
hart, my sister, my spouseCan. 4, 9. But now

as in our charity to men we must loue,
not only our friends, but also our foes;
so in our charity to God, wee must
loue the Lord, not onely when hee
sheweth sensible signes of familiarity
and fauour toward vs, but also vvhen
he seemeth to frowne as it vvere, and
to be offended vvith vs. Dauid saith
in one PsalmePsal. 119, 143., Trouble and heauines
haue found mee: but in another
PsalmePs. 116, 3., I haue found trouble and
heauines. Betweene these two speeches
there is a great difference. For
trouble and heauines may finde him,
vvhich runneth into a corner, and hideth
himselfe, and vvould not bee
found by affliction. But he finds trouble
and heauines, vvho vvhen it is in
his owne free choyce vvhether hee
vvill bee afflicted or no, vvillingly
vvith Moses chooseth to suffer affliction
Heb. 11, 25., and loueth the Lord most of
all, vvhen hee layeth some fatherly
chastisement, and correction vpon
him. Knovving that, as Christ vvas
consecrated and perfected by afflictions
^^eb. 2, 10. and cap. 5, 9.: so nothing doth more perfect a

Christian, and make him fine gold indeed
(as S. Paul also in the very next verse almost
before my text declareth) the^ the
fellowshippe of his afflictions, and to be
made co^formable vnto his death(...).. For
the sweet lambe of God was in such an
extreame agony, and anguish and distresse,
and desolation of spirit, that his blessed
body was bathed all ouer m^a sweat of
bloud. To teach vs, that thogh we haue
suffered very much already for the loue
of Christ, yet if we be not co^tent to suffer
a thousand times more, and euen to
endure martirdome, and to sweat a bloudie
sweat for his sake, wee are not of his
bodyHaec pugna salu^toris nostri, martyru^ agones, and certamina significabat. Ille sudor san guineus eor^ sanguine^ de toto eius corpore (quod est ecclsia) vtique fundendum manifestabat Emisse. ^eria 4. post Domi* in palmis. p. 116.. But on the other side, that this
is the hiest perfection that can be in this
life, not onely in prosperitie, but also in
the greatest aduersity to blesse God, and
if it please him for our further tryall to
take avvay from vs all comforts, both
outward, and inward, yea and to bring vs
in a manner, to the very poynt of desperation,
yet euen then, then also to shew
an inuinsible faith, and only for the pure,
and perfect loue vvhich vvee beare toward
his Maiestie, to vvrestle with the
whole worlde, and to fight manfully against
the powers of hell it selfe, and to

braue it out, and triumph ouer all tribulations,
each one of vs saying with Iob
Iob. 13, 15., Though he kill me, though he kill
me, yet will I loue him, and put my trust
in him; and with ChristMat. 26, 39., Father, father,
O my louing Father, if it be possible,
let this cup passe from me, neuerthelesse
not my wil, not my will, but thy
will be fulfilled. This is indeed to follow
hard toward the Marke. This is the fift
degree to perfection.
TOuching the sixt he sayes (not for
any other prize, but) For the prize of
the high calling of God in Christ Iesus. A
man were as good to shoot at no marke
(...) Eras. in prouerbio, Nullo scopo iaculari, as at a wrong marke. And a man
were as good venter for no Prize(...). Marcus Ereinita. as
for a wrong Prize. For he that suffreth
martirdome, (which, as I said euen now,
is the highest top of perfection, that any
mortal creature can reach to in this life)
he, I say, that suffereth martirdome, to
this intent, to haue his reliques honored
of all men, or is willing any other way to
haue his blood shed, to this end, to make
himselfe famous in the world, followeth
hard (I graunt) toward the mark, yet he
followeth not for this perfect Prize, but

for popular praiseSi ita martyriu^ fecerimus quo^ nostras ab omnibus velimus honorari reliqui^ and si opinion^ vulgi sectantes intrepide sanguinem fuderimus, huic operi non ^am praemium qua^ poen^ debetur, and perfidiae magis tormenta sunt. quam corona victoriae Amb.. And therefore all
that he suffereth, dooth rather torment
him for his hipocrisie, then crowne him
for his victory. VVherfore it will not be
amisse to consider, what ought to be the
chiefest end of all our actions, and what
is the greatest felicity that man may attayne
by following hard towarde the
marke, which the Apostle here calleth,
The prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Iesus. Varro reporteth, that the
auntient Philosophers haue held and
maintayned, two hundred threescore
and eight seuerall opinions, concerning
felicityLibro de philosophia apud August. de ciuit^. Dei. lib. 19. cap. 1.. No meruaile then though Athens,
and Rome, and all the braue and
gallant wits in the world, could neuer
attaine to the true knowledge of perfect
blessednes. For following so many, they
could neuer finde any, but vanishing away
in their owne smokie conceites,
when they thought themselues wise
men they prooued in the end to be very
foolesRo. 1, 22. Seeing this is the greatest
folly that can be, and a miserie of all miseries,
for a man but once to dreame of
so diuers and so contrary felicities. I will
touch but a few of them at this time.
And that very briefely. Some therefore

define perfect happines, to be an action
of the minde, according to vertue, in a
perfect life. But by this perfect lyfe, they
vnderstand this present life. VVhereas
the Apostle auoucheth, that the Seruants
of God haue their fruit in righteousnes,
and theyr end euerlasting lyfeRo, 6, 22..
Therefore as euerlasting death is the
greatest miserie, so euerlasting life is the
greatest felicity. VVhich iuerlasting life
being the perfect life, is not this present
life, nor in this present life, but the life to
come, and in the life to come. This is, and
then is, euerlasting life. Others esteeme
worldly honour to bee pe^fect happines.
But Hilary co^trariwise affirmethOmnis seculi honor diaboli est neg^tium. Canon^ 3. in Math., That
all the honour of the worlde, is the marchandize
of the deuill, not the prize of
perfection. And Eucherius also sayth,
That the honors of the worlde, are the
waues of the worldHonores mu^di, tumores mundi. Epist. paraene. de contemp. mund., which Christ dyd
teach vs to co^temne, and tread vnder our
feet, when he himselfe did walk vpo^ the
waterMar. 6, 48. For so the very heathenish Romans
did. They had for the difference
of their nobilitie a little ornament in the
forme of a moone, which they did wear
vpon theyr shooesIsidorus calc^os lunatos senatoru^ vocat, ad^^^ que Romul^ calceos patricios reperisse, assuta luna. Sigo. de Iudi lib. cap. 20.. VVhat did they
but think all worldly honor very mutable,

vvhen they did represent it in the
forme of a moone? And what dyd they
but tread it vnder their feete, when they
did weare it vpon their shooes? Nowe
we that are Christians see, and ought to
see our calling better then they. Howe
that not many vvise men according to
the flesh, not many mighty, not manie
noble, are called. But that we must aswel
by dishonour2 Cor. 6. 8, as by honour enter into
eternall glory. Some others imagin that
carnall pleasure is perfect happines. But
what saith the Apostle? Meates for the
belly, and the belly for meats, but God will
destroy both it and them1, Cor, 6, 13.. Meates for the
belly. That is true, we doe eate to lyue.
And the belly for meates. That is false,
VVee doe not lyue, to eate. Therfore
GOD will destroy both it and them. Both
the belly, and the meates of all Epicures.
Because they thinke their belly is made
for meatesMachometus credidit beatitudinem consistere in cibo, potu, and delectationibus corporalibus. Ioh. Galensis Anglus. l. de orig. Mach. cap. 5., whereas indeede onely
meates are made for their belly. Because
they thinke they may liue to eateNihil aliud putant esse vita^ nisi vescendi and potandi lice^tiam. Firmicus in lib. de errore profa. relig.,
vvhereas indeede onely they may eate
to liue. For the prize of our hie calling
is not meate or drinke (or any carnall
pleasure) but righteousnes and peace, and
ioy in the holy Ghost.

Others account transitory riches to be
perfect happines. And certainly, if wee
vse our riches well, as diuers worthy Citizens
of this Citty haue done, to the
maintenance of learning, to the building
of Hospitals, and to such other good purposes,
then riches (I graunt) are a great
helpe to a vertuous mind, and a speciall
furtherance to felicity. Otherwise that
complaint of Saluianus may take place
euen in those our timesTanta est miseria huius temporis, vt nullus habeatur magis faelix quam qui est plurimum diues. De guber. lib. 3.. Our times
are so miserable (sayth hee) that now adaies
no man is thought to be more happie,
then hee that is knowne to be most
wealthie. And that also of Innocentius
^r^h pu^or, secundu^ fortunam aestimatur persona, quum ^otius secunlum persona^ estimandae sit fortuna. Tam ^onus reputa^ur quam di^es, tam malus qua^ pauper, cum potius tam diues sit reputa^dus quam bonus, tam pauper, quam malus De co^tem. mundi. l. 1, c. 16. Fie for shame (saith he) now adayes
a man is esteemed according to
his money, whereas rather the money
should bee esteemed according to the
man. Euery one is reputed worthy if he
be wealthy, and naught if he be needy,
whereas rather euery one should be reputed
wealthy if he be worthy, and needie
if hee be naught. For questionlesse
riches of themselues doe encumber and
entangle the mind, euen as an Ape is tied
and teddered to his clogge. VVe reade
according to the Greek translation, that
Abraham was very rich. But there is a

Latine translation, which saith, that Abraham
was very heauy. And the originall
HebrewGen. 13, 2 Chauedh. indifferentlie beareth
both. VVhich proueth, that riches are a
heauie burthen, and doe many times
hinder them very much, which would
attaine to blessednes. Yea if thou set thy
heart vpon them, they will likewise set
themselues vpon thy hart, and lie so heauily
vpon thy hart, that they will presse,
and way thee downe with thy hart into
hell. Therfore diuers holy men and women
heretofore haue voluntarily abandoned
their wealth, and preferred pouerty
before it, that they might the sooner
and the easier come to perfection. For
as it is hard for a Periwinkle in the sea to
swim, or for a Snayle vpon the land to
creepe, while they beare their houses
vpon their backsDomi^orta.: euen so it ^s hard
for a rich man that trusteth in his riches,
with all his big bunches of wealth vpon
his back, to goe through the needles eye
Mar. 10, 25, and to enter into the kingdom of heauen.
VVherefore we must follow hard
toward the mark (not for any action in
this life, but) for euerlasting life* (not for
any worldly honour, but) for eternall glorie:
(not for any carnall pleasure, but)

for ioy in the holy Ghost: (not for anie
transitory treasure, but) for the kingdom
of heauen: (not for any other prize, but)
For the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Iesus.
This euerlasting life, is the onely perfect
life, because it is the prize: this eternall
glory is the onely high honour, because
it is of the high calling: this ioy in
the holy Ghost is the onely godly pleasure,
because it is of God: this kingdome
of heauen, is the onely Christian treasure,
because it is in Christ Iesus. This (I
say) this euerlasting life, is the onely perfect
life, because it is the prize. VVhich
maketh the Marchant-venturer, that
gets it, most absolutely blessed. As the
Psalmist, saythPsa. 127, 1, speaking of another,
Blessed art thou, that fearest God, and
walkest in his waies. For thou shalt eate
the labour of thy hands. O well art thou,
and happy shalt thou be! O well art thou!
For thou hast feared God, and walked
in his waies, for thou hast followed hard,
toward the marke. And happy shalt thou
be! for thou shalt eate the labour of thy
hands; for thou shalt haue, by the gracious
gift of God, euerlasting life, the
onely perfect life, The prize of the high

calling of GOD in Christ Iesus. As the
Apostle sayth2, Ti. 4. 8. Rom. 6, 22., speaking of himselfe,
I haue finished my course, I haue kept
the fayth. There is hence-forth layde
vp for mee the crowne of righteousnesse.
O well art thou, aud happie shalt
thou bee! O well art thou! For thou
hast finished thy course, and kept the
fayth; for thou hast followed hard,
towarde the marke. And happie shalt
thou bee! for there is hence-forth layde
vp for thee, the crowne of righteousnesse;
for there is hence-forth layde
vp for thee euerlasting life, the onelie
perfect lyfe. The prize of the high calling
of GOD in Christ Iesus. Thys eternall
glorie is the onely high honour, because
it is of the high calling. For all of
the visible Church, haue a calling. Seeing
the Church is nothing else, but the
companie of them which are called(...). Cyril. Hierosoty (...): 18..
Yet all that are called, are not worthie
of this calling. Seeing many make excuses,
and will not come, when they
are calledLu. 14, 8. Therefore Saint Peter
prayeth for the dispiersed Iewesa 1. Pe. 1, 10, That
the God of all grace, which hath called
them to his eternall glory, would make
them perfect, confirme, strengthen,

and establish them therein. And S. Paul
likewise prayeth for the Thessalonians
2. Thes. 1 11., That God would make them worthy
of his calling (to eternull glory) and perfect
al the good pleasure of his goodnes,
and the work of faith in them. VVhereby
wee see that they are the onely worthies
of the world, which are so happy,
as to haue this high honour, and dignity
(...). Dignitatem. Bez^. Io. 1, 12. giuen them, to be called the sonnes
of God. VVhich was prefigured in the
seeling of the temple. VVhere were grauen
palme-trees and chaynes2, Chr. 3, 5. The
palme-tree is high, the chayne is calling.
The palme-tree chayne, the high calling.
For God the Father by his effectuall
calling, as by a strong chayneIoh. 6. 44.,
doth draw his children to Christ. And
then standing before the Lambe, they
hold palmes in their handsReue. 7, 9., which are
the ensignes of their honour. So that being
drawne vp to the high palme-tree
by the calling chayne, they are made
partakers of eternall glory, the only high
honour, The prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Iesus. This ioy in the holie
Ghost is the only godly pleasure, because
it is of God. Indeede sometimes euen in
this life we haue a tastCan. 8, 2* (as it were) of

this ioy. As the Israelites had a tast of the
Grapes and other pleasures of Canaan
before they came thitherNum. 13 14.. But wee
cannot enioy the full fruition of it vntill
we come to the presence of God. Therefore
Dauid saythPsa. 36, 12, In thy presence is
the fulnes of ioy, and at thy right hand
are pleasures for euermore. And againe,
They shall be satisfied with the fatnes
of thy house, and thou shalt giue them
drinke out of the riuer of thy pleasures
Psal. 36, 8. For this fatnes of the house of God is that
meate, and this riuer of the pleasures of
God; is that drinke, which shall perfectly
satisfie; and fill our harts with ioy in
the holy Ghost. VVhen the Lord shall say
to euery one of vs, Enter thou into thy
Lords ioyMat, 25, 23.. Not, ^et thy Lords ioy enter
into thee. For it is so great, that it can
not enter into thee, thy hart cannot hold
itNo^ ergo totum illud gaudium intrabit in gau dentes, sed to (...) gaudentes intrabunt in gaudium domini sui Au. Manua. c. 36. But, Enter thou into the Lords ioy.
For thou shalt euen bathe thy selfe in
blessednes, and swim in the bottomlesse
st of the sweet pleasure of God, as a
little fish taketh his pastime in the huge
Ocean Sea. And looke how hee that
hath once tasted of the fountaine named
Clitoriu^ fons, will neuer afterward drink
any wineClitorio quicunque si tim de fonte leuarit, Vina fugit, gaudetque meris abstemius vndis. Ouid. Meta. 15. In Arcadia ciuitas est non ignota Clitor I, in c^ius agris est spelunca pro^^uens aquae, quam qui biberi^t fiunt abstemij V^tr^^ius lib. 8 cap. 3.: in like sort when thou

hast once tasted this pure christall water
of life, thou shalt neuer any more relish
the wine of the world, but be perfectly
delighted with ioy in the holy Ghost, the
only godly pleasure, The prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Iesus. This kingdome
of heauen in the only Christian treasure,
because it is in Christ Iesus. For all
treasures which are layd vp in earth may
be stollen with theeues, or corrupted
with cankersMat. 6, 19.. But this treasure is an
enduring substanceHeb. 10, 34. hoorded vp in
heauen, where neyther theefe stealeth,
nor cankar corruptethV^ras diuitias illam prorsus immortale^ gl^riam supernoruque bonorum retri buti^^em ess* existimamus Cyril in Genes. lib 5, in fine. Therefore
the kingdome of heauen is likened to a
treasure hidden in the fieldMat. 13, 44.. And
the field is Christ IesusThesaurus in agro absconditus, deus est latens in carne sua Vigilius eon Eutych. lib. 3 cap. 3., in whom are
hidden all the treasures of wisedome and
knowledge(...).. O blessed then, O
blessed is the man that findeth this wisedome,
and the man that getteth this
knowledge.Pro. 3, 13.. Because the marchandize
therof is better then siluer, and the gaine
therof is better then gold(...). Clem^ns in Protrep p. 32. It is more
pretious then pearles, and all thinges
that thou canst desire are not to^ bee
compared vnto it(...).. Yea doubtlesse
(sayes one) I thinke all things but losse
for the excellent knowledge sake of

Christ Iesus my Lord. O wise! O worthy!
O holy! O heauenly Marchant!
Heere is a frank chapman indeed, which
prizeth the kingdom of heauen according
to the right worth and true value of it.
Knowing that this Christian treasure was
bought and purchased for him, not with
corruptible things, as siluer* or gold, or
such like, but with the most deare, and
pretious blood of Christ1, Pe. 1, 18.. For whom
(saies he) I haue counted al things losse,
and doe iudge them to be doung that I
may gayne ChristPhil. 3. 8. For Christ Iesus
onely is the wisedome of his Father; and
by him onely we come to the knowledge
of God. Hee is the wisedome of his Father,
because hee doth giue vs grace in this
life, that we may be wise vnto saluation,
and see the Father by fayth, and receiue
the earnest of our inheritanceEph 1, 14. By
him wee come to the knowledge of God,
because hee will giue vs glorie in the
lyfe to come, that we may know, as we
are knowne, and behold GOD face
to face, and receaue, not onely the earnest-peny,
or the pledge-peny, but also
the prize-peny, or the possession-peny
of perfectionMat. 20, 10. So that Christ Iesus is, the
Alpha, and the Omega, the beginner,

and the ender of our perfectionReu. 1. 8, the
author, and the finisher of our faith; who
for the ioy which was set before him; endured
the crosse, and despised the shame;
and is set at the right hand of the throne of
GodHeb. 12, 2.. He is the authour, and finisher of
of our faith, that is, our fore-runnerHe. 6, 20..
and marke: who, for the ioy which was
set before him; that is, for the kingdome
of heauen, the onely Christian treasure,
The prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Iesus: endured the crosse, and despised
the shame; that's againe, followed
hard, toward the marke: and is set at the
right hand of the throne of God; that's againe,
and is now possessed of the kingdome
of heauen, the onely Christian treasure,
The prize of the high calling of God
in Christ Iesus. Loe ye, loe ye, whether
we are now come. So high that we can
goe no higher. Namely, to the right
hand of the throne of God. VVhich is,
euerlasting life: eternall glory: ioy in the
holy Ghost: the kingdome of heauen; The
prize: of the high calling: of God: in
Christ Iesus. For this rich throne of God,
is that yuory throne of Salomon, wherof
I spake in the beginning. VVhich is the
onely perfect life: the onely high honour:

the only godly pleasure: the only Christian
treasure; The prize: of the high
calling of God in Christ Iesus. This is
the sixt, and last degree to perfection.
NOw then, my deare brethren, let
vs heare, if it please you, pause a
while, and seriously consider how Christ
prayed for his chosen, that they might
be made perfect in oneIoh. 17, 23. That they
might bend the whole forces of all their
actions and affections to this one thing,
namely, to the attayning of perfect blessednes,
or (if you had rather so call it) of
blessed perfection. And therefore forgetting
that which is behind, and leauing
the doctrine of the beginning of Christ
Heb. 6, 1.; let vs Endeuour our selues to that
which is before, and be led on forward
vnto perfection. Yea let vs follow hard,
and runne with patience the race that is
set before vsHeb. 12, 1.; looking vnto Iesu:, who
is our marke, and hath giuen vs an example
Ioh. 13, 15. That euery one of vs might
say vnto him with good Dauid, I haue
applyed my hart ro fulfill thy statutes,Psal. 119, 112. Leghola^ghe chebh. Heb. (...). Septagin^. Propter aeternam retributione^ vulga.,
for the eternall recompence of reward;
for the prize of the high calling of God
in Christ Iesus. Tell me (beloued) I beseech

you, if it wil be no great trouble to
you, as I trust it will not, tell mee, I pray
you, wherfore sayes the same DauidPs. 86, 11 lached leuaui. Cald. Vnicu^ fac cormeum. Hi^^^.,
speaking to God, O knit my hart vnto
thee, that I may feare thy name, but only
to teach vs, that, But one thing, is the
first degree to perfection? For whereas
we vsually reade it, O knit my hart vnto
thee, that I may feare thy name, the
Chaldee paraphrast and S. Ierom translate
it, O make my heart but onely one
hart, that I may feare thy name. So that
a man cannot any way, so much as enter
into the feare of Gods name, which
is the beginning of all perfection, except
first his hart be made one in it selfe, and
one in GOD, that hee may principally
minde but one thing. Almighty God
concerning the East gate of the Temple
sayth thus, This gate shall be shut, and
shall not bee opened, and no man shall
enter by it, because the Lorde God of
Israell hath entred by itEzec. 44, 2. Here-throgh
signifying, that although the heart of a
Christian, which is the temple of the
holy Ghost, may let many things enter
into it at other gates, yet it must keepe
the East gate, the most illuminate and
highest power and part of it, continuallie

shut against all men, yea against all the
world, and opened onely to one thing,
I meane to God, who hath already entred
into it, and enlightened it with his
spirit. That as at the window of Noahs
Arke, there entred in, no mist, no water,
nothing else but one thing onely, which
is lightGen. 6, 16 Fenestra dicitur Zohar, quia non aliud quam me ridia^em lucem recipit. Et Esay 54, 12. Shemashah, quia so lum solem intromittiv.* so at this East gate, no mist
of humaine errors, no water of worldly
cares may enter in; but onely the light
of heauen, and a sanctified desire, to be
fast knit, and perfectly vnited, by faith
and loue to God. Hence it is that Moses,
comming to talke with God vpon
the mountaine, was commaunded to
bring no man with him, but to come vp
himselfe aloneEx. 24, 18.. Nay more-ouer being
vpon the mountaine alone, he was couered
and compassed about with a thick
cloude, which made him feare the name
of the Lord, and hooded him, as I may
say, in such sort, that hee could see nothing,
but one thing, which was God.
And therefore the Psalmist sayth, O
make my heart like Moses heart, when
he was vpon the mountaine: O make
my heart like the windowe of Noahs
Arke, and the East gate of the temple:
O make my heart but onely one heart,

one in it selfe and one in thee: O knit my
heart vnto thee, that I may feare thy
name. Tell me, wherefore sayes Christ
Can. 7, 4, speaking to his spouse, Thy nose is
like the tower of Lebanon, but onley to
teach vs, that I forget that which is behind,
is the second degree to perfection?
For seeing Christ is nowe risen againe,
and ascended vp into heauen, which is
the high tower of Lebanon, therefore
wee which are the Saints of God, must
not bee like the Idols of the heathen,
which haue noses and smell not, but we
must haue noses like the tower of Lebanon
Si verbe rum faciem consideremus quid poterit magis diei ridiculum? E^ go spiritua^^ requirunt intelligentiam Titelm^^^u^ in hunc locu^, which forgetting all earthlie
things and leauing them behind, must
smell and seeke those things which are
aboue. God appoynted Gedeon to
dismisse all those of his army which bowed
downe their knees to drink, and to
retaine onely those which lapped water
out of their hands, as a dogge lappethIudg. 7, 5.
Because hee which drinketh vpon his
knees like an Oxe, cannot possibly goe
forward while hee drinketh. But hee
which with some of the Polonians(...). Clem. Alex and. Stro. lib 1, pag. 110.,
or with that dogge Diogenes(...). Laertius in Dioge., lappeth
water out of his hands, may neuerthelesse
goe forward while he lappeth, as

an Egyptian dogge doth, while he lappeth
the water of NilusAe^ypti canes e Nilo n^nquaem (...) lambitant Solinus Po^yhist. cap 20.. And like as
a lustie hound of a good kind, ordereth
his going so wellP^. 30. 31, that though hee
haue runne ouer very many fields, and
through a thousand thickets alreadie,
yet hee neuer remembreth any labour
which is behind, but forgetteth it; and
if he chance to lap water in some brook
by the wayPs. 110, 7 De torrente in via bibet., yet euen while he lappeth
he lifteth vp his head, and stil goeth
on, and plieth him forward to his gaine:
so must wee doe in this pursuite of perfection.
Seeing Christ hath now sprinkled
all the way betweene heauen and
earth with his blood, and so hath made
it a fresh and a liuing wayHe. 10, 20 (...)., therfore we
which haue noses like the tower of Lebanon,
must as blood-hounds trace him
by the foote, and run after him in the smel
of his oyntmentCan. 1, 4 (...). Septuagint., and hunt hotly vpon
this fresh and liuing way, with a fresh and
liuely faith: and though we haue gone very
far, and done a thousand goods deeds
already, yet we must alwayes forget that
which is behind, till we haue gotte, if not
the childrens bread, yet, at the leastwise,
some little crum of mercy, that fals from
our Maisters table, some little drop of

blood, that falls from our Lordes side,
which shall I assure you be sufficient, to
make vs perfect men in Christ. Tell me,
wherefore was the altar of perfume set
within the SanctuaryExo. 36, 6, but onely to
teach vs, that And endeuour my selfe to
that which is before, is the third degree
to perfection? For euen as that altar of
perfume was placed, not in any common
roome, or in any odde corner of
the tabernacle, but in the Sanctuary it
selfe, somewhat beyond the vaile, close
to the golden censerHeb. 9, 4 very neere the
mercy seate: so a Christian hart which
is a spirituall altar of perfume and of a
sweet sauiour to God2, Cor. 2 15., must daily endeuour
it selfe to that which is before,
and still more and more aspire to heauenly
thingsBeda de tabernaculo. l. 3 c. 1, 11., and alwayes neerer
and neerer aproach vnto the throne of
grace, and continually higher and higher
aduance it selfe to him that is the highest
and holiest of all. Tell me wherfore did
the Israelites, when they had pitched in
Mithkah, remoue their tents fro^ thence
and pitch in CashmonahNu. 33. 29 but onely to
teach vs, that And followe hard is the
fourth degree to perfection? For euen
as they, as soone as they had pitched in

Mithkah, which signifies sweetnes, by
and by remoued their tents fro^ thence,
and pitched in Cashmonah, which signifies
swiftnes: so we must ioyne, Mithkah
and Chashmonah, sweetnes and swiftnes
both togetherHierony. Ep. ad Fal^^lam. Mansione. 26., and as soone as we
haue pitched in Mithkah, as soone as we
haue tasted and seene how sweet the Lord
is, presently wee must remoue our tents
from thence, and pitch in Chashmonah,
presently we must follow hard, and run,
not only sweetly, but also swiftly, in this
way of peace which leadeth vnto life.
Tell me, wherfore saies Christ againeCan. 4, 13,
speaking of the praise of his spouse, Thy
plants are as an Orchard of Pomegranates,
but only to teach vs, that toward
the mark, is the fift degree to perfection?
For a Pomegranate hath many graynes
within him in his case, and a little round
circle or a crown without him vpon his
head. Now these graynes being sweet in
tast and red in colour, are orderly set
one by another, and poynt vp, or as it
were looke vp, altogether to the crown.
To intimate thus much, that wee which
are plants of the Church, as an Orchard
of Pomegranates, must grow on still toward
the mark, not only when we enioy

the sweet tast of pleasant prosperity, but
also when wee beare the red colour of
bloody persecutionMemini^ malogranatorum quod rubore granoru^ oblectent, and suauitate grata sint. Quod ad co^^rem, ad ardentem ecclesiae charitate^ referri potest. Mercerus. Ma^a punic^ sanguineo rubent colore scilicet Martyres Haigrinus in cant. l 7. Idem Beda, and Haim^ ^abent in com. in hunc locum.: and consenting in
a kind of conformity and perfect peace
and vnity one with another, wee must
poynt vp altogether with the finger of
faith to Christ, and looke vp continually
with the eye of loue to our head, who
by being first crossed is now come to be
crowned with honour and glory. In the
arke of the couenant there was; the golden
pot that had Manna; and Aarons
rod that had budded; and the tables of
the testament; and the propitiatory or
couering; and a crowne of gold round
about itHeb. 9. 4. Exo. 25, 11.. O how notably and marueilously
do these things sort and agree together!
The pomegranate and the ark:
the sweete tast, and the pot of Manna:
the red colour, and the rod of Aaron:
the order of the graynes, and the tables
of the testament: the head of the pomegranate,
and the couering of the ark: the
crowne vpon that head, and the crowne
about this couering. To inhinuate thus
much, that we which are like an orchard
of pomegranates, must also be like the
arke of the couenant, being builded and
reared vp still toward the mark, not only

when our Lorde feedeth vs with the
sweete Manna of his mercie, but also
when he afflicteth vs with the sharp rod
of his correction: and alwayes keeping
the tables of the testament, which are
the commandements of perfect loue to
God and to our neighbourGnullemaijc malion piccudhaia ha^erimmo nin Thargum. Iuuenes, tui pleni praeceptis sicut malegranata. Montanus,, that by
faith in Christ, who is the couering and
the propitiation for our sinnes, we may
obtaine the golden crowne of life. King
Darius vpon a time by chance opening
a great pomegranate, and being demanded
of what hee would wish to haue as
manie as there were graynes in that
pomegranate? answered in one word,
of Zopyrusses(...). Plut. ^nitio Apoth. Regum.. Now Zopyrus was a
right noble and a valiant Knight, who
seeing the King his master could hardly
surprize Babylon, where the trayterous
Assirians were entrenched, bethought
himselfe of a wonderful strange practise.
He went home to his owne house, and
caused his sernants to rent his whole bodie
all ouer with scourging him, and to
cut off his nose, his lips, and his earesDomi se verberibus lacerari toto corpore inbe^ nasum and la, bia, and aure^ sibi praecidi* Iustin. li. 1. in fine..
Then straightwaies running to Babilon,
he made the Assyrians beleeue that Darius
had misused him in this s^rt, because
he had spoken in their behalfe, counselling

him to breake vp his siege, and to
remoue his armie from assaulting their
Citty(...). Herodotus. l. 3, Thalia in fine.. They hearing this tale, and
the rather thinking it to be true, because
they saw him so shamefully disfigured
in his bodie, were perswaded to make
him their chiefe Captayne. By which
meanes he betrayed them all, and surrendred
both them, and their City into his
masters hands. O most faithfull and louing
subiect! O most worthy and couragious
hart! One Pomegranate full of
such graynes, yea euen one grayne full
of such valour and vertue, is suffi^ient
for a whole Country, either to recouer
it if it be lost, or to keepe it that it be not
lost. O that I could tell where to finde
such a man! O that I could tel where to
see but one such amongst vs all! I wold,
I assure you, honor the very ground he
goes vpon, and kisse euen the shadow of
his feet. VVell (beloued) I pray God, I
pray God with all my heart, that her sacred
Maiestie, whom the Lord for his
glory sake alwaies shield and defend, that
her sacred Maiesty I say may finde very
many, yea may see vs al, as true to God,
to her, and to our Countrey, as Zopirus
was to his prince. That if any time of triall

should come, vve may haue so much
will, and holy manhoode in vs, as to put
our selues vpon the pykes, and ieopard a
ioynt, yea venter the martyring and
mangling of our whole body, and euen
the losing of our liues, rather the either
forraine enemies, or home-bred rebels
should haue theyr wils of vs. Knowing
that our life is frayle and mortall, and wee
may dye euery moment, but for a man
to do some notable peece of seruice before
he dye, and to sheath his sworde in
the sides of his enemies, and to kill if it
be but one that is a sworne rebell, to his
God, to his Prince, and to his countrie;
this indeede is a most honourable and a
most glorious thing, this is it which shal
be chronicled, and registred, and remembred,
yea and rewarded for euer. But ^o
return to the Marke againe. VVe which
are plants of the Church like an or^hard
of pomegranats, and like the arke of the
couenant, must loue, not only the head
of the pomegranate, and the couering of
the arke; but also the order of the grains
and the tables of the testament* not onely
the sweete taste, and the pot of manna;
but also the red colour, and the rod
of Aaron. It is a myracle, and would amaze

any man to consider, how zealous
the Christians* were in the Primitiue
Church; how vnsatiably they thirsted
after the crowne of martirdome; what
(...) with Zopyrus, what rackings, what
wild beasts, what broylings, they endured.
How in a manner, if I durst say so,
they suffered almost as horrible torme^ts
when they dyed for Christ, as Christ did
when he dyed for them. VVell, well, so
great, and so absolute* and so excellent,
and so admirable perfection, is not now
required at our hands* Yet this by your
good leaue and fauor I wil be bold to say,
That we can neuer be perfect Christians
indeede, and runne toward the marke
^right, except at the loast wise we haue
that in resolution, which they did put in
execution. Except, if need require1, Pe. 1, 6
wee that are faithfull, can finde in our
hearts, to doe that and to suffer that, for
batred of the spirituall Babilon, and for
loue of our heauen by Lord; which Zopi^us
an infidell, did, and suffered, for hatred
of the earthly Babilon, and for loue
of a mortall King* Except wee can be
content, not only to be white (...), by
liuing purely and patiently in those afflictions
and crosses, whereof our miserable

life is full, which is in some sort a
kind of martirdomeEst quaedam sangui^nis effusio, afflictio. Bernard No^ putemus effusionem sanguinis tantum esse Martirium. Semper Martyrium est. Caesarius Arelatensis Hom 21, Sine serro Ma^^tyres esse possumus si patientiam in anim^ veraciter conseruemus. Gregor Omnis pioru^ vita testimonium reddit Deo. Cypria de dup. Martyrio initio. vide locum.: but also to be
red Roses, by dying constantly and ioyfully
for the truth, if the good pleasure
of God should so appoynt it1, Pet. 3 17., and by
making our garments red in the bloud
of GrapesGe. 49, 11., which is the most perfect
martyrdome, and commeth neerest of
all to the marke,Duplex est species Martyrij, vna quando quis pro Christo occiditur: a^la quand^ caro pro deo maceratur. Primo dabitur corona d^rosis, secunde de lilijs. H^e. Erat ante ecclesiaa operi^bus fratrum candida nun^ facta est in Martyrum cruore purpu^rea. (...) ^. 2, Ep. 6, p. 44, that so Christ may
rightly say to his Church here amongst
vs, Thy plants are as an Orchard of
pomegranates: Tell me wherfore sayes
Dauid againe, speaking of the oath of
GodPs. 10^ 10, He appoynted the same vnto Iacob
for a law, and vnto Israell for an euerlasting
testament, but onely to teach
vs, that for the prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Iesus, is the sixt and last degree
to perfection? For Iacob and Israel
are two seuerall names, and yet they signifie
but one singular man. Neuerthelesse
in a diuers respect, Because Iacob
is he that supplanteth or wrastleth: Israell
is he that seeth or beholdeth God(...) Inition. (...).
Now Iacob supplanting or wrastling is
a subiect or a seruant: Israell seeing or
beholding God, is a friend or a sonne.
This is confirmed by Baruch, sayingBaru. 3, 36,
God hath found out the way of knowledge,

and hath giuen it vnto Iacob his
seruaunt, and vnto Israell his beloued. So
that Iacob is only a faithful seruant: but
Israel is a beloued sonne. Therefore there
is appoynted vnto Iacob a law: but vnto
Israel an euerlasting testament. Seeing
a lawLex. Vul., or a statuteKoah. Heb., or a decree
Ghezarah. Caldai. or a precept(...) Septuagint., properly belongs
to Iacob, a subiect or a seruant, but a testament
(...). Septuagint., or a couenantBerith. Heb., or an agreement
Keia^. Ca, or an accordPactum. Vulga^a. properlie
belongs to Israell, a friend or a son. For
as long as Iacob vvrastleth with manie
great imperfections and spiritual aduersaries
in this life, he must as a faithful subiect
or seruant of God, keep the lawe of
wrastling(...). 2. Tim, 2, 5. appointed vnto him; to wit,
that he minde but one thing* and forget
that which is behind, and endeuour himselfe
to that which is before; and followe
hard; toward the marke; but when Israel
hath once ouercome all his worldly
and ghostly enemies, and is become a perfect
man in Christ, and seeth the Lord in
the life to come, then he shall as a beloued
friend or child of God, possesse that
inheritance, vvhich the father hath by
his euerlasting testament written vvith
the bloud of Christ Iesus(...). Heb. 13, 20., appointed

vnto him, to wit, euerlasting life; eternal
glory: ioy in the holy Ghost; the kingdome
of heauen. The prize; of the high calling;
of God; in Christ Iesus. O happy, happy
man art thou, and thrice happy man art
thou, whosoeuer thou art, which vvith
Iacob dost wrastle, and keep the law, as a
faithfull seruaunt, for no other ende, but
only this, that with Israel thou maist see
God, and enioy the euerlasting testame^t,
as a beloued son. For when wee shall see
God, we shal see: and what shal we see?
That which no mortall eye hath seene,
that we shall see. VVe shall see our own
selues sitting and shining at the right hand
of the throne of Maiestie. VVe shal see
all our deere friends which we haue not
seene this many a day, embracing vs, and
welcomming vs into Christs kingdom.
VVee shall see all the noble armie, of
Martyrs, of Apostles, of Prophets, of
Patriarkes, shouting day and night, and
singing out the praises of the lord. VVe
shall see all the inuincible hoast of Angels,
of Archangels, of Principalities, of
Dominations, reuerently attending vpon
the king of glory. VVee shall see the
king himselfe Christ Iesus, disparkling
and displaying those beames of beautie,

which are the heauens vvonder, and all
the Angels blisse. If there were no we amongst
vs one as faire as euer Absolon
was* who would not be glad to beholde
him? But suppose some one were tenne
times as fayre as Absolon, howe then
would men looke and gaze vpon him? I
but if another vvere a hundred times as
faire as Absolon, what a matter of admiration
wold that make? Put the case
then some one should now step forth and
sh^we himselfe a thousande times fayrer
then euer Absolon was, vvhat wondering,
what maruailing would there be amongst
vs? howe would our eyes bee
dazeled, how would our very mindes be
amazed at this sight? VVel, al this is but
a counterfeit, but a shadow, in respect of
the bright-blazing beautie of our spirituall
spouse. For Christ Iesus is ten times
fairer, yea a hundred times fayrer, yea a
thousand times fayrer, yea ten hundred
thousand times fayrer, then all the children
of men. So that if the whole beautie
not onely of all men, but euen of all
this inferiour Globe, were put together
in one, yet it would not be any way co^parable
not onely to Christs glorie, but
not so much as to the least glorified bodie

in heauen. And yet all this is but the
outside of heauen* all thys wee shall see
with our bodily eye. The inside and the
insight is much more glorious. For the
least glorified body seeing innumerable
Saints and Angels more highly exalted
then he is, hath his ioy doubled, and trebled,
and beyond all measure multiplied,
when he co^sidereth, that he is loued vnspeakably
more, by all of them, yea by
euery one of them, then hee can be by
himselfe. And therefore againe seeing
himselfe so deere vnto them, hee for his
parte likewise as a hote burning coale is
set on fire and inflamed with loue, and
the more he seeth any other excell him
in glory, the more doth he reioyce, and
is gladder of his glory, then his owne.
But now when hee lifteth vp his eyes to
the glorious Trinitie, and seeth how the
Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost,
doe eternally and perfectly loue and like
and enioye one another in surpassing
sweetnes and content, then all his affections
are swallowed vp in loue, all his
spirits are rauisht in delight, all his desires
are imparadized in pleasure. In so
much as if on the one side were layd the
loue of Christ as he is man, and of all the

Saints and Angels among themselues,
and on the other side, the loue which the
least glorified body in heauen beholding
the blessed Trinitie breatheth out
to GOD, this loue would without all
comparison excell and exceed that as far,
as light doth darknes, or as heauen doth
the earth. VVherefore for man to see
God; for Iacob to be called Israel; for
him that hath bin a seruant, to becom a
sonne; for him that hath kept the lawe,
to enioy the testament; is the highest
degree to perfection, yea it is the very
perfection of perfection it selfe; The
onely perfect life; the onely hye honor;
the onely godly pleasure; the only christian
treasure. The prize: of the high calling:
of God; in Christ Iesus. Seeing then,
blessed brethren, seeing wee fight not as
they that beate the ayre1, Cor. 9 26., but our rewarde
is so great, so exceeding great in
heauenMat. 5,, therefore as Iacob wrastled
all the night long and neuer gaue ouer,
til about the breaking of the day he was
called IsraelGe. 32, 24 so let vs wrastle all the
night long of this lifeMar. 13. 35., and neuer giue
ouer til the day breake, and the shadowes
flye awayCan. 4. 6. and we come to the maruailous
light and sight of God. And like

as the same Iacob sayde to the Angell,
I will not let thee goe, except thou
blesse meGen. 32, 26.* euen so let euerie true
Israelite say to Christ, I tooke hold of
him, and left him notCan. 3, 4.. O Lord Iesus,
who would leaue thee? or who
would let thee goe? or rather who
would not hold thee fast? which strengthenest
him that holdeth thee fast, and
makest him perseuere, that is strengthened,
and crownest him that perseuereth,
and makest him perfect that is
crowned. Therefore I will hold thee
fast, and will not let thee goe, except
thou blesse me, that is indeede, I will
neuer let thee goe, because thou doest
neuer blesse but onely those that alwayes
hold thee fast. Holde fast then,
and Stand fast, good beloued, once againe
I say. Hold fast that which you
haue, that no man take your crowne
from youReu. 3. 11,. Stand fast in that liberty,
whereby Christ hath made you free,
and be not any more entangled with the
yoke of bondageGala, 5, 1*. But so runne, so
runne, as yee may attayne1, Cor. 9 24.. As yee
may attayne? Howe(...) Nilus in Paraene circamed. is that? Mary
faithfully, patiently, constantly vnto
the ende. A shame it would be, and a

vile shame for vs, if it should be sayd of
vs, not, you doe runne well, but, you did
runne wellGala 5, 7,. ^ye vpon it. Hauing been
hetherto brought vp in skarlet, shall
wee now embrace the dungLam. 4, 5? Shall
we be like those antickes or monsters,
which are halfe men and halfe beasts
(...). Niss^nus, l. (...) Illa actio Chym^ra est quae initium habet a ratione sinem a sensualitate. Cu^ igitur sic agitur hum no capiti ceruicem pictor depingit equ^^nam. Innoce^. Eleemo c 6. Operare igitur perseuerantur ne (vt Horatius ait) Desinat in pisce^ mul. ter formesa superne. Nebrissensis. H^. 2, in fine.? Shall wee be like Nabuchadnezzars
image which had a head of gold
and feete of clayDan. 3, 33? Shall wee begin
in the spirit and ende in the flesh (p)?
God forbid. God for his mercie sake
keepe vs from such fearfull falling from
him. Nay rather let vs remember, that
Ioseph signifieth encreasing, and Arimathea
signifieth getting the reward
(...). Theo in c. 15. in Mar., to teach vs that if wee would bee
like to Ioseph of Arimathea, wee must
alwayes encrease and goe on till we get
the reward. The other Ioseph also had
a coate reaching downe to his feeteAquila interpretatus est (...). id est tunica^ talarem. Hier. in Quaest. Heb. in Genesus. Ioseph typum ecclesiae praetendens, vestis suae habitu perseuera^tia^ certaminie habere nos admonet, cuius longitudo rsque (...) eius peruenit. Tanqa^ diceretur, Antequa^ ite^ perficias, noli in vita latescere. Auobertus in cap. 2 Apocalyp.,
to teach vs that we must not haue skarlet
about our head and dung about our
feete, not gold about our head and clay
about our feete, but that vvhen we put
on the Lord Iesus, we must put on such
a skarlet robe of righteousnesse, such a
golden garment of grace, such a vesture
of a godlie and vertuous lyfe, such a

coate of a holy and heauenly conuersation;
as may reach to the feete, as may
continue to the end: considering our
Sauiour hath sayd, He that perseuereth
vnto the end shall be saued: and againe,
Be faithfull vnto death, and I will giue
thee the crowne of life. This crowne
of lyfe is promised to all those which
make a good beginning, but performed
onely to those which make a good endingNon campo capitur, sedfine corona Pros. Sapientia in exitu canitur. qui^ laudari penitus anteact^ vitae prudentia non mer^bitur, nisi bono fine claudatur. Saluia. ad Eccle. lib. 4..
And they which runne in a
race runne all, yet one onely, that is he
which holdeth out to the end, receiueth
the prize1. Cor. 9.. And none are saued but
such as are marked in theyr foreheads
with the letter Tau, which is the note of
perseuera^ce and perfectionEze, 9, 6, And if
we would be conformable to the crosse
of Christ, the liuely picture of all perfection,
wee must be like vnto it, not
onely in the depth of faith, and in the
height of hope, and in the breadth of
charity, but also in the length of perseueranceEph, 3, 18,
Because all the depth,
height, and breadth of the crosse is nothing
without the length: and so all the
faith, hope, and charity of a Christian,
is to no purpose without continuance
in them euen vnto the end. VVherefore

(my good brethren) yet once againe
I will say, and then I will say no
more, Let vs drawe neere vnto God
with a true heart in assurance of faith
He. 10. 23,: and let vs keepe the profession of
our hope without waueringVerse, 23,: and let
vs consider one another to prouoke vnto
charity and to good workesVerse, 24. and
so much the more, because wee see the
breaking of the day draweth neereVerse, 25,
and the kingdome of heauen is at hand.
There is a Greeke word signifying the
ende of a race, which is deriued of another
Greeke word signifying to spurre
or pricke on forward(...). Hesych. verbo. Nu^ea. Idem habet Pollux. l. 3. c. 30. and Theodoret. de Pro. ui. lib. 9. circa intium, vbi hunc textum recitat. VVhich proueth,
that as they which runne theyr
horses for a wager, spurre hardest at the
races end(...). Chrysost. so seeing our saluation is
neerer now then euer it wasRo. 13. 11, therefore
wee must runne faster now then euer
wee did(...); Laert. in Dio. Especially because the
very horse and mule and diuers other
bruite beasts which haue no vnderstanding,
though they haue beene neuer so
much wearied and tyred before, yet
when they come neere home they will
mend their pacePecoribus sagitatis quoque veloci^r domu^ gradu est Senaca de tranquilli. vitae. lib. 1. cap. 1.. And therefore the
more to blame should we be, if hauing
trauailed thus far already in the way to
perfection, and being come by this time

almost to our iournies end, wee should
now goe no further, when in deed we
ought if it be possible, to run much faster
to our euerlasting home in heauen.
O beloued, all the Saints in heaue^ think
long, yea they think of vs, and they long
for vsErgo quia omnis caelestis curia expectat nos, et desiderat, desideremus iam quanto possumus desiderio. vide quaeso Bernard. medit. cap. 6, and they earnestly desire to
be perfected with vs, because they certainely
knowe they cannot be perfected
without vsHe. 11. 40. The holy Angels also
as they blush, and holde downe theyr
heads, vvhen they see vs stumble, or
trippe neuer so little: so on the other
side, they shoute, and clap their hands
when they see vs runne cheerefully in a
good course, and come away apace to
perfection. Lastly, Christ himselfe doth
stand wayting for vs, and beckning to
vs, and hartning vs on all the way, being
readie to receiue vs, and to imbrace
vs in the armes of his louing mercy, as
soone as euer wee come to the ende of
our race. For euen as a royall King,
when one of his nobles returnes home,
which hath in a forraine Countrey by
chiualry, or feates of armes, or other
like excellent parts atchieued great renowne
to his realme, presently sendeth
for him to the Court, and in open audience

giueth him words of grace, and
aduanceth him to high preferments and
honors: so Christ our most magnificent
King, immediatly vpon our arriuall
into heauen out of the forraine
Countrey of this world, will reach forth
vnto vs his holy hand, conducting vs to
the eternall tabernacles of rest, and as
for all the prayers that wee haue made,
all the teares that we haue shed, all the
almes that we haue giuen, all the other
exercises of a Christian life that we haue
performed, though neuer so secretly in
this pursuite of perfection, he will openly
reward them, and most gloriouslie
crowne them; vvhen as all the hoast of
Angels shall triumph for our coronation,
and the blessed Saints shall thinke
themselues more perfect for our pefe^^ion,
and all the Court of heauen shall
applaude our prayses, and God himselfe
shall saye Amen to our felicities.
VVhich that it may so happily come to
passe, and that euery one of vs, vvhich
nowe vvith Iacob vvrastleth vnto the
breaking of the day, and constantlie
keepeth the law appoynted vnto him,
may in the ende with Israell see God,
and haue the full fruition of his glorie,

and enioy the euerlasting testament,
which is The prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Iesus, graunt vvee beseech
thee, O deare Lord, graunt it to vs I
say, not for our owne deserts or merits,
but for the tender mercies of the same,
our sweete Sauiour Christ Iesus, to
vvhom vvith the Father and the holy
Ghost, be all honour and glory,
power and prayse, dignitie, and
dominion, now a^d
euermore,
Amen.
FINIS.

