
A Discovery of all sorts of Mines and
Minerals.

CHAPTER I.

 Wherein is shewed by a plaine Demonstration the naturall
cause of the generation and production of Mountaines and Mettals; whereby
the Seekers may ohtaine a good competent measure of knowledge to guide them
where to seeke for the other Externall signes.

SALOMON sayth, that Hope deferred breaks the heart; but the
desire obtayned, is a Tree of Life: If Hope onely deferred breake the Heart;
then Hope frustrated must needs breake it a great deale more.
To the end therefore that our Hope
may not bee too frequently frustrated, I will
first declare the places where there is no probability to finde out Mettalls,
and afterwards I will shew where there is strong probability: and then in
the next Chapter I will shew how to goe about the worke, to find out the
strong signes which may rightly guide the seekers to obtaine their
desire.
And first, there is no probability that any Mettalls can bee
generated neare unto the North and South poles of the Globe, for those can by
no meanes have any convenient Matrix for such a generation, being by all
probabilities nothing but two Islands of Ice, for if they were any thing
else, the course of Nature must needs alter, and change, and runne
presently out of order.
For as there is in the burning Zones a continuall exhalation of
Water, and rarifying of the same into Ayre: so there must needes bee in
the North
and South a continuall condensation of Aire into
Water to supply the same againe, else the motion cannot bee perpetually
circular.
Now whereas the North and South parts, by reason of their
coldnesse, cannot suffer the said condensed Meteors to descend in
forme of Water, but in the forme of Snow, Haile, or some substance of
like nature, which there cannot melt in the superficies for want of heate, it
is very probable that the new Accretion this way produced, doth presse
downe still with its weight the said Ilands of Ice towards the Center,
where the centrall heate melteth it off continually, by which meanes the
sphericall forme of both Earth and Water are perpetually preserved.
And if any man bee of a contrary opinion, I will not envie him; but
as for my owne part, I will sell my Interest and hope of Mettalls in
those places
for a Farthing, although I had a device that the
cold there could not prevent my seeking for them.
Also in Vallies and plaine Champion Countries, there is no hope to
prosper in this designe, for the wombe of such earth is not apt for
such a generation, the Reasons whereof will presently follow.
Now that wee have left us no other places to seeke in but the
rocky Mountaines, I will spend the rest of this Chapter in demonstrating
the naturall cause of the generation of Rocks, Mountaines, and Metalls, and
so proceed forward.
And first I will set downe the Opinions of others with their
Confutation, and lastly the confirmation of mine owne Opinion by irrefragable
Demonstration.
Some have thought that the mighty Creator made the vast, deformed,
and craggy Rocks and Mountaines in the beginning, but this appeareth to bee
an Opinion, whereby great dishonour may reflect
upon the Creator, who besides his Omnipotent power, doth continually make
use of his admirable Wisdome, and exquisite Artifice in all his Workes,
and made nothing deformed or unfit for the use for which it was created: Now
the Earth being ordained to beare Fruits for the use of Men, and Rocks are
not fit for that purpose, it plainely appeareth that they came by
accident.
Some others have thought that they came by accident, but yet that
they were produced by accretion in length of time, even as Warts, Tumours,
Wenns, and Excrescences are engendred in the superficies of mens bodies:
and of this Opinion I my selfe was in my minority, till such time as by
practicall experience I found out a more probable opinion.
Now for a plaine demonstration, let this Experiment following bee
tryed, and I make no question, but that it will
satisfie every one that hath an inquisitive
disposition.
Let there bee had a great retort of Glasse, and let the same
be halfe filled with Brimstone, Sea-coale, and as many bituminous and
Sulphurious subterraneall substances as can bee gotten: then fill the
necke thereof halfe full with the most free earth from stones that can be
found, but thrust it not in too hard, then let it bee luted, and set in an
open Furnace to distill with a temperate Fire, which may onely kindle the
said substances, and if you worke exquisitely, you shall finde the
said Earth petrified, and turned into a Stone: you shall also finde
cracks and chinkes in it, filled with the most tenacious, clammy, and
viscous parts of the said vapours, which ascended from the
subterraneall combustible substances.
Whereby it appeareth that the same thing is done by Nature, and
that the Rocks and craggy Mountaines are
caused by the vapours of Bituminous and
Sulphurious substances kindled in the bowells of the Earth, of which there
bee divers so well knowne, that they neede not bee heere mentioned: Also it
appeareth that the veines of Mettalls are engendred in the crackes and crannies
of the said Mountaines, out of the most clammy and glutenous part of the
said vapours there adhering, where the cold gave them leave to bee congealed
and condensed.
Now concerning the exaltation of the Mountaines above the Vallies,
it appeareth to come to passe by the water in former times, whose
property is to weare away by its motion the most loose earth, and to leave
the more firme ground, and rockie places highest: but whether this was done
by Noahs Flood, or by the Sea in former Ages, is doubted. As for my
opinion, I referre the Reader to my Booke formerly mentioned, and if
any man be in doubt of this, let him take the
Stone formerly made by Art, and place it so, that the motion of the water may
worke upon it, and you shall finde it worne most in the loosest places,
and least in the more firme compacted places; thereby shewing the naturall
cause of Mountaines and Valleyes. Also if a River should bee turned out
of its course, and the bottome thereof accurately considered upon, how the
water by his motion hath worne away the Earth most in the loosest Earth,
and least in that which is more firme, it doth evidently demonstrate the
naturall cause of Hills and Vallies, and the unevennesse of the Earth
caused by the motion of the Sea in former Ages.



CHAP. 2.

 Wherein is shewed the signes of Mines and Minerals, with the
manner how to worke to find the same.

WHen we come to the Rocky and Craggy Mountaynes, the first thing
we are to observe, is the barrennesse of them; For the more barren they
are; the greater probability there is that they containerich Mines and
Minerals.
The next worke is to finde out the Springs of Water issuing out
of the said Mountaynes; and those being found, a quantity of the sayd
water is to be boiled in a new cleane pipkin, to the consistency of thinne
Oyle, but not so thicke as a Syrrup, and when it is almost cold, then to
put it into an Vrinall, and to set it in the coldest place that can be
found for 3 daies, then to play the Physitian, and to observe it
exquisitly what residence


it yeeldeth: if nothing settle but a black
earth or mudde, it is a signe of Coales: if some part thereof
shoot into Ice, or a substance like Ice or Vitrioll, then to observe
the colour thereof; if it be greene or blewish, it is an evident signe of
Copper; if whitish, then it may signifie any other Mettall without
exception.
The next worke is to goe to the bare Rocks, and there to finde out
the clifts, cracks, and cranies: this done, to goe to the toppe: or till you
finde some Grasse growing right upon the top of the said Cranies, and
then to observe diligently the kinde of that Grasse, and how it
differeth from other Grasse, ordinarily growing in the same Mountaine;
not onely in forme, but also in colour, which colour sheweth the greatest
difference in the heat of Summer, for the subterraneall Vapours issuing
out of the Orifice of Mines, differ from those which issue out of the
more solide places of the Mountaines,
The next worke is to see if there bee
any marcasites to be found in the
superficies of the said Mountaines: which though they are usually of
divers colours, and seldome good for any thing, yet they are strong
signes of Mineralls within, being themselves the spume and froth of the
better Mettals, breathed forth, even as Drinke breatheth up his Yest or
Froth to the Superficies.
And these if they be put in an ordinary fire, they will turne
blacke, and yeeld a smell of Brimstone, Arsnicke, Antimony, or
some other thing, commonly called or knowne by the name of a middle
Minerall.
The next worke is to trie the operation with the Virgula
divina, as beneath is declared: and where it sheweth the strongest
signes, as is likewise beneath taught: and also the place is most
accompanyed with the other signes formerly mentioned: there by digging or
boaring to try your fortunes.
The operation with the Virgula divina is thus to be
performed: some observe
a set day and houre with certaine words and
Ceremonies at the cutting up of the same, which I have found to bee little to
the purpose: thus I wrought about Midsomer, in a calme morning: I cut up a
rod of Hasell, all of the same springs growth, almost a yard long: then
I tyed it to my staffe, in the middle, with a strong thred, so that it
did hang even, like the Beame of a Ballance: thus I carryed it up and downe the
Mountaines where Lead growed, and before Noone it guided mee to the Orifice of
a Lead mine: which I tryed, having one with me with an hacke of Iron and a
Spade; and within two houres we found a veine of Lead Oare, within lesse
than a foot of the grasse: the signes that it sheweth is to bow down
the root end towards the earth as though it would grow there, neare unto the
Orifice of a Mine* when you see it doe so, you must carry it round
about the place, to see that it turneth in the string still to the place,
on which side soever you stand.

The reason of this attraction I conceived to bee of Kin to the
Load-stone, drawing Iron to it by a secret vertue, inbred by nature, and
not by any coniuration, as some have fondly imagined.
And the Reason of this my opinion was, because that in divers of
my practicall Experiments I have observed an Attraction betwixt severall
things, like that of the Load-stone, and Iron; and if it were to good
purpose, I suppose that I could shew more experience of that kind than
any man in England.
Now in the new Plantations, as New-England, Virginia,
Bermudas, etc. where it is like that few or none have ever tryed, that
had any skill in these affaires, it is very probable that the Orifice of
divers Mynes may be discerned with the eye in the clifts of the Rocks in many
places, as some have beene in England at the first, before that
men grew a little skilfull, and these to be lost and neglected, were a
shame to the Planters; for these Mynes if they prove rich, would yeeld more

gaine in one yeare, than their Tobacco and such
trifles would yeeld in their whole lives.


CHAP. 3.

 Now that wee are come to the melting and refining of Mettalls, I
will begin first with the Oare of Lead, because that is one of the
most common Mettalls found in these Northerne Countries.

THE first worke therefore to bee done, is to have a little grate
of Iron about a foot broad, like such as are used in a Still to make the
fire upon: this is to be placed in your Chimney-corner with loose Bricks,
one thicknesse underneath, and empty in the middle, to give aire to the
fire; then lay more Bricks above foure course high, round about, and if they
be laid without Morter, the fire will burne the better:
then fill it with Char-coales kindled, in the
middest whereof set your melting Pot, with one pound of Lead-oare, and
foure ounces of filings of Iron mingled together, and so blow to it
strongly with a paire of good hand-bellows, till it be well melted downe;
then let the Pot be taken out with a paire of Tongs, and set to coole: when
it is cold, breake it, and knocke off the brittle cinder lying upon the top of
the Mettall with an Hammer, till none be left but the malleable mettall, which
you may assay and refine in this manner following: Take a little Test
made as beneath, and place it in the middle of your Chimney; lay ashes about
it, about sixe inches broad, and as high, or rather higher than your Test:
lay Bricks about the ashes to hold them up one Brick thicknesse, and 2.
Bricks broad, then lay about halfe a peck of Char-coales upon the Test
kindled, and when they are almost consumed, and the Test red-hot, put
them by a little in the middest over the Test, and lay over a
peece of good Oake-wood about five inches
square, and eighteene inches long; lay it so upon two Tyle-sheards, that
it may lye about an inch and an halfe above the Test, then lay on more
ordinary Billets and some Char-coales amongst: make the fire about so
strong as to roast a Pigge, then blow to it a little, till the fire burne
cleare, then put upon the Test two Ounces of your Lead, and blow to it
gently, and in three quarters of an houre, all the Lead will bee consumed,
and the Silver will lye in the middle of the Test like a little Beade or
Pearle, then put aside the fire, and let all bee cold.
Then you may weigh the Silver in a paire of Gold-scales, and so
cast it up how much there is in a Tunne of Lead: I have thus tryed many
Oares, and have found them to differ in goodnesse of all sorts, from
Forty shillings worth of Silver in a Tunne, to Thirty five pounds worth of
Silver in a Tunne, and there is no Lead but it holded some Silver, yet
it is not worth the refining, unlesse it
yeeld eight or tenne pound upon a Tun at the least.
The Test may thus be made: first, let a Smith make a Ring of
Iron about foure inches wide, and two inches deepe, and a quarter of an inch
thick, and as wide above as beneath, and without a bottome.
Then burne Mutton and Beefe-bones in the Fire til they be white,
then beate them smal in a Morter, and scarce them fine like meale: then
with a little beere or water temper a small part thereof like pappe, then put
to so much more of the dry powder by little and little, as will make it so
stiffe that it will not be made into a ball, but remaine clammish, betwixt
powder and paste: then with a Pestle stampe it gently into your Ring till
it be top full, being set upon an even board, then stampe it a little lower
in the middle then at the edges, and smooth it with a slight stone or
some round glasse, so set it in the Chimney Corner
to drye a day or two, and it is ready for your
worke.
If you put a quarter of an ounce of Sandivert, and as much Salt
Peter mingled together with your Powder of Lead, and filings of Iron at your
first melting, it will melt somewhat sooner, and with lesse blowing:
besides that the Sinder will part cleaner from the malleable mettall.
And if you want Char-coales, you may burne Wood in an Oven, and when
it is red, and hath done smoaking, you may set up the Oven stone, and
dampe it.
Or you may doe the like in an open Chimney, and dampe it in an
earthen Pot, or cover it with Ashes, or dampe it in an hole in the ground, by
covering it with a cover, or with Ashes.
Any of these Coales will serve to make your assayes and
tryalls: as for directions for great workes here is no such thing intended
in this little Booke: but onely to be sure whether the worke will quit the
cost: which if it will, then provision
for great workes will easily be brought to
passe.
And if you want pots, you may bee at choise whether you will buy
the same at the Gold-smiths, or Potters in London, which sell
Flanders melting Pots, of make them your selfe by this direction
following.
Take right Flanders Iugges, such as they usually put
Bottle-Beere in, beate them to fine powder, and searce them fine as Meale:
Take of this meale foure pound, of the fine powder of Tobacco pipe
Clay one pound, temper them together with the red fattish water that
issueth out of an Horse Dung-hill, beate it strongly upon a broad
board with a Rowling-pin, till it be stiffe Paste, then fashion your Pots
upon a peece of wood, turned like a Toppe, onely let the sharpe end of the
Toppe be thicker and flatter than an ordinary Toppe; then set them to drye
in your Chimney Corner a day or two: when you use them, set them in the
fire at the first kindling: and so let the Fire steale
upon them till they be red hot: then put in your
Mettle and ingredients, and cover it with a Tile-sheard, or cover of Iron,
and so melt it downe.


Chap. 4.

 Wherein is shewed the Operations for times.

THis Mettall may be melted downe like the Lead, onely omitting the
filings of Iron: but when it is melted it is not malleable, till it be
compounded with certaine proportions of other Mettalls, which I will not
declare, because it is a secret of weight belonging to the Pewterers
Trade.
And as for refining of it, I am sure it cannot be done by any
artifice; for I suppose that I have tryed more experiments about it, than
any 10. men in
England, because that I saw the
Refiners could not doe it: therefore I tooke the more paines and industry to
bring it to passe; which if I could have affected, I doe verily beleeve it
would have proved a rich Mettall: but the more I tryed the worse I sped,
for at the last of all I melted Gold and Silver equall parts with the Tinne,
thinking thereby to bring it downe into the Lead, and to make it to drive
faire, and refine kindly, but all was vaine, for the Tinne poisoned and
consumed some of my rich Mettalls.
Now whereas there is no hope of any royall mettall ever to be gotten
out of this Minerall: to supply the shortnesse of this Chapter, I will
shew a way how every one that hath a minde to meddle with these affaires,
may have good possibility to enrich themselves and their posterity; and
be out of danger to undoe themselves, or to damnifie themselves in any
manner of value that is considerable.

For my meaning is, in the taking in hand of this taske, to doe good
to all, and hurt to none: and that no man from henceforth shall need to bee
at a quarter of the charge, study, or labour, which I my selfe have
undergone.
Therefore seeing that if the most ingenious and exquisite
wayes be taken in the designe that wit can attaine unto: yet it is but an
adventure; for sometimes all the labour may be lost, though not often, if
good heede be taken; and sometimes Mines maybe found, which will not quit
the charges to be wrought upon.
Therefore as wise Merchants will not hazzard all in one Bottome,
so let this never be any mans designe totally: for now there is no such
need but they may doe all that can bee done at such spare times, as any
Gentleman, or man of quality, usually spendeth in Hawking, Hunting,
Gaming, or other pleasures; whereof he neede but set a part of that time
for these purposes; having the most part of
his worke done to his hands in this little
Booke.
If the Refiners shall grudge at me, for disclosing some of
their secrets of their Trade, I will answer them in this manner: First, I
my selfe have spent the time of divers Apprentiships in these affaires,
and therefore claime a priviledge to disclose my experience for the
publicke benefits at my pleasure.
Secondly, I affirme, that there can be no damage to any refiner, by
the divulging of these secrets: but on the contrary, a great probability of
much gaine to that trade: for that, here is nothing, but the skill to make the
assayes disclosed for the Searchers satisfaction, before he take in
hand great workes; which if he find cause so to doe, I advise him to
chuse the best workman that he can get, and one that hath beene long
experienced in these Workes; and in so doing he shall prosper the
better in his designe: And if that every yeare some of the increase of
that Trade shal be entertained in these affaires,
as there is good probability they may; the rest
will have cause to give me thanks for my paines, rather than opprobrious
speeches.


CHAP. 5.

 Wherein is shewed the Operations of Iron.

AS for the melting hereof, seeing that it is no worke to be done
in the Chimney corner, I will turne over the Reader to learne the practise
thereof in every Countrey almost where he shall come.
As for the Refining thereof it may be done in this manner: Take
filings of Iron two parts, Antimony one part, it will melt downe like your Lead
Oare: take the pure mettall, which will be much more brittle than the Lead was,
and melt it with foure times as much Lead as it weigheth, then refine it, as
before is
taught: if you know the goodnesse of your
Lead before, you may know the augmentation out of the Iron, which will not quit
the charges out of any Iron made in these Northerne Countries, nor yet out of
Spanish Iron: but what it may doe out of Iron made in the burning Zone I
know not; but I conceive it may doe well, if any such Iron can be found and
made in that Climate.
It is true, that good gold may be extracted out of any Iron, but
not by any common way, but by a tedious, laborious, and costly way: and when
all is done, there will be no gaine, unlesse it be in conceite, which
satisfieth no man, but those who are of my disposition, which thinketh
experience to bee the greatest gaine that can bee in the world.



CHAP. 6.

 Wherein is shewed the Operations of Copper.

FIrst, take your Oare, and breake it into little peeces, about
the bignesse of Hazell Nuts: then lay a Leere of small Char-coales, an
inch thick in your Chimney Corner: then lay on your peeces of Oare, then lay on
more Char-coales an inch and an halfe thick upon the Oare, then kindle it, and
let the fire burne out of it selfe.
Then beate it into small powder, and mingle it with your Sandiver,
and Salt-Peter, as you did your Lead, without any filings of Iron, and so
melt it downe as you did your Lead Oare: onely this difference must be
used, by reason that it is harder of fusion than the Lead Oare: therefore
you must lay the bricks somewhat wider than you did for the Lead,
that it may hold more Coales: besides that, you
must take the choysest Coales that can be picked out, and no very small
ones amongst them: also you must have two paire of hand-Bellowes, and
two men to blow very strongly, and so melt it downe.
As for the refining it is needlesse to shew the manner; for no
Copper in these Northerne Countries holdeth any royall Mettal, that is
considerable; neither English nor Danske Copper: yet in regard that in
some Mines in Hungarie, there is generated Gold, Silver, and Copper,
all in one masse of Oare: and also in regard that if any Mines of Copper
shal be discovered in Virginia, or other southerne Countries,
there is some good probability that it may containe royall Mettal: therefore
I wil shew the manner how to refine it, and also to part the Gold from the
Silver, if it shal containe both together.
First, melt one ounce of Copper with
foure ounces of such Lead, as you know the
goodnesse of before: then refine it, and by the augmentation, you shall
know the worth of the royall mettall contained in the Copper.
If you will trye whether the Copper contained any gold in it, put
the assay, viz. the little Bead or pearle of silver into good
Aqui-fort is well purified before, and if all dissolve then the Coppcr held
no gold; but if it leave a black powder undissolved, that is gold: for
Lead holdeth no Silver that hath any gold in it at all: therefore it is evident
that the Gold came out of the Copper.
But if it happen, as often it doth in the refining of base
Mettals, especially Tinne, Iron, and Copper, that the little Bead, or Pearle
remaining in the middle of the Test, is not bright and shining, like the
eye of a Bird, or Fish, but rough, blacke, and full of scurfe; then if it
be but a little in quantity, an I that the Test be not cracked not ^^ll of
lifts, then put to it some more of the same Lead, whereof you
know the goodnesse, and drive it off againe
as you did at the first; and re-iterate this worke till the assay be
pure and cleane like a little Pearle, or Bead, as it ought to be.
But if it happen that the Test is very foule, as often it commeth
to passe in the Refining of strange Minerals, as Marcasites,
and especially those which the Minerallists call by the name of
Divells Dirt: Then there is no way but to let all coole; and then to
digge it out, and with more Lead to melt it anew in a Pot, and then to let it
coole, and then to breake the Pot, and to beate off the Cynder with an hammer,
till you come to the malleable Mettall, and you may be assured that no
royall Mettall will stay in the Cinder, but sinke downe into the Lead,
through an attractive vertue betwixt them.



CHAP. 7.

 Wherein is shewed the Operations of Silver.

AS for the melting thereof, when it is found in the Mine of Lead,
the Operation is taught in the Chapter of the Lead: but if it be found by it
selfe, or mixed with Gold without Lead, as many times it commeth to
passe, then it is to be beaten to powder, and mixed with Sandivere, and
Salt-Peter, without any filings of Iron, and so melted downe like the Lead
Oare; only the fire must be somewhat stronger.
Then it is to be melted with foure times as much Lead, whereof you
know the goodnesse: and so to be refined, as before is declared.
But whereas sometimes this Oare is so strongly mixed with
Sparre, and stony substances, that it cannot be separated
therefrom, by any common manner of worke used
by the refiners; then this course is to be taken with it: First, beate it
into small powder; then wash away with water the greatest part of the
terrestreity and filth: then drye the powder, and use it in this
manner.
First, melt foure ounces of Lead, and when it is melted put to it
foure ounces of quick-silver, made hot in another melting pot: but let the
Lead be almost cold before you put to the Quick-silver: but yet it must
be done whilst that the Lead is liquid.
This done, cast it into an Iron Morter, set warme before upon
Embers, and it will be like Pap; then presently with a Pestell, labour in
one ounce of your powder, or two at the most, till it be incorporated; or
so much thereof as will incorporate: for the strong and earthy
substance will not incorporate with the Lead and Quicke-silver by any
Artifice whatsoever: but the silver, if any there be, will forsake the
Earthy and stony substance,
and ioyne it selfe with the Lead and
Quick-silver by an attractive vertue. This done, put it altogether into a
melting Pot* with a little Sandivere, and Salt Peter, and melt it downe
as you did the Lead Oare: onely this must be observed, that the sire
must be more milde at the fitst a great deale, till the Quick-silver be
evapourated, and more strong at the last, that all may slow well
together. Then take out the Pot, and let it coole; then breake it, and with an
hammer beate off all the Cynder and Scurfe, till nothing be left but malleable
mettall.
Then refine it according to the common manner before declared, and
cast up with your Penne the augmentation that is more than the Lead yeelded
of it selfe: and if there be no augmentation, then that Minerall stone
contained neither gold nor silver: for this is the most exquisite way in
the world to reduce gold or silver, which is hard to be reduced to a
mettallicall body, through being strongly mixed with either corrosive
substances, or any other filth which hindreth
his reduction: therefore if this way faile, you may set your heart at rest
for the seeking out of any other devices whatsoever, though the
glistering sparkes contained in the said Minerall doe never so
strongly invite you; and you may conclude with the old saying, that all is
not gold that glisters.
But if it prosper, and yeelds any augmentation that is
considerable: then if you desire to know whether there was any Gold mixed
with the Silver, as oftentimes there is, where silver is sound without
lead, then put the little bead, or pearle of silver, which remained on the
Test into Aqua-fortis, and if all dissolve, then there is no
glold in that Mineral; but if a black powder remaine, then that is gold, and
the quantity may be found by further triall.


CHAP. 8.

 Wherein is shewed the Operations of gold: and reall experiments
whereby any man may presently trye whether any peece of gold bee true or
counterfeit, without defacing or altering the forme thereof.

As for the melting of it: if it be found
mixed with silver Oare, as oftentimes it
commeth to passe, then it is to be melted, refined, and parted from the
silver with Aqua-fortis, as is before declared, and if there bee not
five times as much silver, as there is gold in the composition, then you
must put to so much, or else the Aqua-fortis will not
dissolve it.
But if it be found in graines or powder, as often times it is, then
you must put to it Borax in stead of Sandiver and Salt Peter, and so melt
it downe as you did the other Oares before mentioned.
Now for so much as this mettal is the most rich of all the
rest, and most thirsted after, I wil enlarge my Discourse for the
gaining of means to find it out: also I wil shew the reason why this
royal Mettal is many times found pure of it selfe, with little or no mixture
of other base mettal with it.
And first, whereas it is oftentimes found in the sand in Rivers,
let no man thinke that it could be generated there, but that the swift
motion of the water from the high Mountaines, brought it thither, with earth
and altogether, till such time as the motion of the Water grew more slow:
and so according to its property,
being not able to carry forward stil both the
substances, did still carry the earth with it, and let the heavier body
sinke.
Therefore I would have those that have occasion to deale in the
hot Countries where gold is usually generated, to make triall in all such
Rivers which runne from great Mountains with a swift course in such
places, where the motion of the water beginneth to grow slow.
And for this purpose he may have a little Bucket of Iron that will
not lie in the bottom, but on one side, which side must have a shooe
like a shovell; so that being drawne a little forward, as it lyeth in the
bottome it will fill it selfe with sand: which you may try by grinding it
with Quick-silver whether it containe any gold: for if there be any gold in
the sand, it will mixe with the quick-silver willingly: then you may wash
away all the sand, and streine the quick-silver through a skinne of
leather, and if any gold be gathered into it, there wil remaine a Ball in the
Leather: then you may evapourate the Quick-silver from the Ball in a melting
pot, and so melt downe the gold with a little Borax.

Also sometimes gold is found in Rivers in powder and graines,
farre distant from any mountaines of swift motion of water: this plainly
demonstrateth that the earth therabout containeth gold: a thing usually in
hot Countries, and that the water in that place had a convenient motion to
weare away the earth, and to leave the gold behind, and this is manifestly
seene by experience where they wash whole mountains of earth with water,
thereby to separate the gold from it.
Now whereas I have formerly affirmed that al mettals in general are
generated of the clammy and gluttenous part of the subterrancall vapours,
arising from from Bituminous and Sulphurous
substances, kindled in the bowells of the earth: it behooveth me to shew
how gold, such a sixed substance can be found pure of it selfe; and
not mixed with other base mettals.
And the reason of this can be no other, but because that all
other mettalls whatsoever will putrifie in the earth in length of time, and
turne to earth againe; but gold wil never putrifie by reason of his
excellent composition, being made of a Balsamick
Sulphure, or fatnes, which is incombustible, and distereth from the
Sulphure or fatnes
contained in the other mettalls,
even as naturall Balsome differeth from all other oyles,
fat substances: so that though it be an oyle in shew, yet it
wil sink in water, whereas all other oyles wil swimme upon the top
of the water.
And this is the cause why gold sinketh so eagerly in
water, which may be proved by weighing a 20. shillings
peece of gold against his Brasse weight, and then
letting his scales sink in a Bason of water 3. or 4. inches
deep, the gold wil there over-weigh the brasse about 9.
or 10. grains, by reason that the brasse is more enclined to
swimming through the cumbustible fatnes or
sulphure in its composition; and as for the 20. shillings
peece, so for any other peece of gold whatsoever according to
its several brasse weight you may in like manner try whether
it be true or counterfeit.
Now whereas the substance of gold is not subiect to
putrifie in the earth by any length of time, it is probable enough that other
mettalls might be generated with it at the first, and afterward
putrified and consumed from it in length of time, leaving
the gold pure.
For I have drawne Iron, or a substance much like to filings, or
attoms of Iron out of graine gold that was brought from
Gynnie with a Load-stone, which seemed to bee Iron not
fully putrified, and turned into earth.
And the reason why the hotter the Country is, the richer the
Minerals are, can be no other but the same, that roasted meates are
sweeter than boyled meates, or raw meates: the reason whereof is plaine,
for that the rawish and unsavory part is exhaled by the heate of the fire,
leaving the sweeter part behind.
Even so in hot Countries, all that part of the subterraneall
vapours, which here is condensed into Lead, and other base mettalls, can
there have no leave to congeale, by reason of the heate: but is all or most
part thereof exhaled out of the Mines, leaving behind the royall mettals,
whose property is to coagulate with heat: whereas the property of the base
mettalls is to evapourate with heate and to congeale with cold.
The contrary opinion to this; namely that the substance of the
best metals are convertible into royal mettals by heate and digestion, hath
filled the world with false Books and receipts in Alchimy, and hath
caused many men to spend much money, labour, study, and charges to no
purpose.
For I know by good and long experience,
and by many accurate trialls that Quick-silver
the most friendly mineral to the royall mettalls, can by no
meanes or Artifice whatsoever be fixed and coagulated into either of the
Royal Mettalls: also I have found since that no Author of any credit or
Reputation teacheth any such thing, but contrarily, condemneth all such
operations to be false, vaine and frivilous.
For the matter or substance of the Royal mettals is quite
contrary to that of the base mettals, even as the fixed salt of any
vegetable is different from the volatill or fugitive salt
of the same. Yet I deny not but that by Art there may be drawne
some smal fixed part out of the base mettalls, and may be
converted into Royall Mettall, though with much labour, charges, and
losse.
For as a Tree or other vegetable being burned, doth yeeld a fixed
salt or Ashes: so the base mettalls doe containe in
them some small quantity of matter of the same nature that the royall
mettals are compounded of.
And for the further satisfaction to the Reader, I will shew in
the next Chapter a true receite to make reall and true gold abiding all
tryalls, and having all properties active and
passive which true naturall gold hath: but in
stead of gaine, losse will be ready to follow the worke.


CHAP. 9.

 Wherein is shewed, how true and perfect gold may bee made by
Art with losse to the workman. Thus I wrought.

I Tooke eight ounces of Regulus of Iron and Copper, made
as beneath is declared, and 16. ounces of common Sublimate, bought
at the Apothicaries, and made these ingredients into line powder: first,
severally, and then I ground them well together upon a Marble stone, and
so put them into a a retort of glasse, and drew from them first an
Oile, then a substance like a Butter, and lastly a yellow Sublimate,
tincted with the tincture of Iron and Copper, which yellow Sublimate I
rectified three or foure times, till it was very pure: then I mixed it with
equal parts of an Amalgam of silver, and quick-silver, made as
beneath is taught, and put it into another retort of Glasse, and forced
away all but the silver,
which remained like yellow horn: this yellow
silver I amalgamed againe with new quick-silver, and set it in
gentle heat about a week, then in very strong heat for 6. houres; so that
the quick-silver rose up, and fell downe again upon the silver;
till such time as that it had carryed up all the silver from the bottome of
the glasse into branches like trees: then I melted downe the silver, and
sined it, and parted it with Aqua-fortis, and had divers graines of
pure and good gold abiding all tryalls: but the quantity would not pay for
halfe the charges and labour.
I made the Regulus thus: I took 4. ounces of Iron in stub
nailes, and made them red hot in a crusible: and then I put to it 8. ounces
of crude antimony, and melted it downe, and when it was well and thin
melted, I let it coole in the pot, and so knockt off the regulus
from the lop, or cynder which lay upon the top of it, then I did the like with
4. ounces of Copper in thin plats: and then I mixed equall parts of these
two, and melted them 3. or 4. times, every time casting into the pot halfe an
ounce of salt peter, as it was in melting to purifie it, till it was pure
and bright almost like silver, but yet brittle: so that I could beat it
in a Morter to fine powder.

The yellow silver that was like yellow horn, did Amalgam
with much difficulty, and grinding with salt and vinegar, and some of it
was lost, doe what I could: but the first silver was water silver,
which I bought at the refiners, out of which they had taken all the gold
before: this did Amalgam very easily, then I strained it to a Ball
through a Leather skinne, and so mixed it with the yellow sublimate that
was tincted yellow with the tincture of Iron and Copper.
The proportion of the quick-silver to the silver was 5. or 6.
parts to one.
If any one doubt the truth of Alchimy, he may be
satisfied by this triall; but in stead of gaine he shall pay for his
learning, by going away with losse.
I doe not deny but there are workes of lesse losse and
charge, yet none of them lucrous by reason of the change of times.
For if any one will uphold me as good a lease, or purchase of
land, as I can prove by credible records, hath bin had in former times for an
ounce of gold, I will undertake to make an ounce of gold by Art to pay for it,
and yet have a good bargaine.
But the difference of times hath confounded
this Art, as may appeare more plainly
beneath.
First, in ancient times a mans worke was not worth above a penny a
day, which now is worth two shillings sixe pence a day, as may appeare by
ancient records for buildings, and the like: so that there is thirty to one
losse in the workmanship.
Secondly, then coales, vessels, and other things necessary
for these affaires did cost little, in respect of the charge now.
Thirdly, when the gold was made, it would then have bought thirty or
forty times as much, either lands, leases, victuals, or workmanship as
now.
So that I conclude, that then the owners of this Art might gaine 30.
or 40. for one, and yet now they shall lose extreamly.
The cause that moved me to search so much into these
affaires, was, because I saw by the bookes, that so divers men in divers
ages, and in divers Countries did agree in one tale; wherby I conceived it
unpossible to be a lye, now I conceive it might be true, but that the times
have made an alteration.



CHAP. 10.

 Wherein is shewed the operations for some of the inferiour
Mineralls.

AS for these base Minerals, viz. Cinabar naturall,
Antimony, Sulphur, Auripigment, Arsenick, Talcum, Muscovy glasse,
Emery, and many other things of like nature, because they are of small
value, and not worth the seeking for on set purpose, I will omit further
to discourse of them: if any man shall find them, or any of them, by
accident, let him use his owne pleasure, skill, and industry in the
proceeding of them.
Neverthelesse, because Cinabar naturall may containe
much quick-silver, which is very usefull for many things, and may prove
as beneficial as a good mine of mettal, especially if it shall be
found in great plenty: I wil therfore shew the refining
separating,and purifying of the same in smal proportion:
so that if it shal be found a profitable work, then the finder
thereof may proceed to a greater work. The first thing then to be done, is to
consider of the weight therof: if it be very
ponderous, reddish in colour, and ful of cleare
streakes, shining almost like the streaks of Antimony, then
it is a good signe of a rich Mine.
The first trial to be made thereof is to weigh a peece thereof,
and so put it into a gentle fire for an houre or two, in such sort that
it may onely be red hot; then to let it coole, and to weigh it againe, and
so by the lightnesse thereof, being compared with the former weight, you
may iudge somewhat of the richnesse thereof.
Then take a pound thereof, and beat it into fine powder,and
mingle it well with as much unslect Lime, put it into a retort of glasse,
luted with Potters clay, and some horse dung well beaten and tempered
together; then set it in a little furnace in your Chimny corner, and force
it with fire 12. houres: let it be kept red hot the last 4. houres, and let
the nose of the glasse enter into another glasse, filled almost
full of water, in such manner that the vapours of the Cinabar must
needs enter into the water, for the better condensation thereof into
quick-silver.
This done, separate your quick-silver in the bottom of the
water, and drie it, and weigh it; if you find the quantity considerable, then
you may proceed in this manner.

First, make an hole in the earth with very good tempered clay that
wil hold water, and let it be narrow in the bottome, and wider and wider above
to the toppe to the breadth of 2. or 3. or 4. yards; then fill the Pit with
water, and lay over it barres of iron of sufficient strength and
thicknesse to beare the burden that must lye upon it; and let them lye
so neare together that the stones and wood cannot fal through: then lay
thereupon a leere of drye wood, and a leere of your red stone not broken
small, and so doe againe till it be a yard thick or more, then give fire to
it on the wind side, and goe away out of the danger of the fumes, till you
see a far off that the fire is finished and burned quite out.
Then repaire to your worke, and let out the water through a pipe of
Lead, which should be formerly laid almost at the bottome of the Pit, into
another pit neare to it, made so deepe that it may receive the water, and in
the bottome you shall finde great store of Quick-silver, if the Mine was
good.
The water may be pumped up againe to serve the next day for the
same use; and you need but to take up a few of the bars of Iron every day
to goe downe into the pit, to take out your
Quick-silver, and so lay them downe againe.


CHAP. II.

 Wherein is shewed the waies to find out Pit-coales: also the
naturall cause of the generation of them, by a plaine demonstration.

THough this Minerall be of small value, yet if a good Mine
thereof shall be discovered in some particular places of this land, the
benefit thereof will farre exceed the profit of any mettall Mine usually
found in these Northerne Countries, by reason that wood is so greatly
decayed of late yeares, that were it not for this helpe many people would be in
danger to be starved.
The first thing therefore which I would have to be diligently
observed is; that this Mineral is usually found in ground that is proane to
beare wood and thornes, and not in the very fertile grounds, nor yet in the
extreame barren grounds, but of an indifferent fertility, and in grounds that
are usually flower in their growth in the Spring time, than the fertile
Champion countries by a week or a fortninght.
Also the said grounds are proane to bring forth large Cattell,
and well horned: but not to feed the said Cattell without a long time, nor
yet will they ever be very fat upon the same ground. Also the springs
issuing out of the said grounds, are apt to colour the earth ruddy at
their Orifice, like unto the rust of Iron.
Also the said spring water being boiled as before is taugh,
doth usually yeeld a black residence.
Also if you burie a new bowle of pure white Wood in the said
grounds, from March till Midsummer, with the mouth
downeward, it wil be coloured blackish, with the subterraneal vapours.
Also I had a receipt given me for this purpose by one, that for
his great experience, and excellent skill in naturall causes, seemed to be
one of Natures Darlings: which because I have nor tryed, for want of
opportunity, I will commend it as a very probable signe, and give such
Cautions, that any man may be sure of it, before he trye his fortunes by
digging or boaring, or any chargeable way.

And this was his direction: about the middle of May,
when the subterraneall vapours are strong, which may be discerned by
the Firne, which about that time will suddenly grow out of the earth in a
night or two, almost an handful in length, then take a pure white peece of
Tiffany, and wet it in the dew of the grasse, which is all of that
springs growth, and not soyled with cattell, nor no other thing, then wring
out the dew from it; and do so five or sixe times, and if there be coales
the Tiffany will be alittle blacked, and made foule with the sooty vapours
arising through the Coales, and condensed amongst the dew.
Now to be sure not to be deceived, do thus: first trye it where
there are coales, and if ye find the signes above said, yet trust not to
the experiment, till you have tried where there is no Coales in some other
place, wherein it behoveth you to trye in divers places, till you find a place
where the Tiffiany is not soyled at all: then you may be sure that the
experiment is true and unfailable.
I admonish him that shal trie with the Tiffany upon the
dew, to let his hands be washed before with sope and hot water;
and wiped with a pure white cloth, til they wil not foule the cloth at al;
else if they spend their mony in digging, and find
nothing, they may thank their foule fingers for
that misfortune.
As for the naturall cause of the generation of Coales, this
demonstration following doth make it manifest.
Take a peece of the blacke fat earth, which is usually digged up
in the west Countrey, where there are such a multitude of Firre trees
covered therewith, and which the people use to cut in the forme of Bricks,
and to drye them, and so to burne them in stead of coales; use this
substance as you did the other earth in the beginning of the booke, to
find out the natural cause of rocks, stones, and mettalls, and let it
receive the vapours of the cumbustible substances, and you shall find
this fat earth hardned into a plaine coale; even as you found the other Ieane
earth hardned into a stone.
Whereby it appeareth that nature doth the same thing in the
generation of coales under the ground, by the indurating of a fat earth with
the subterraneal vapours which are apt to work a various effect according to
the substance which they meet withall.
Now wheras some of inquisitive dispositions wil desire to
know the naturall cause of that fat
earth, generated in such
subterraneall Cavernes, let them be pleased to consider that
such places in former times have bin the superficies of the earth, and
afterward have bin covered by the sea with other earth, which may be
demonstrated by two wayes: first, it is evident that the mines of Coales
doe lye in some places higher, and in other places lower, lively resembling
the superficies of the earth, which is never directly equal, but
every where various.
Secondly, every one may see in the west Country, where
such a multitude of Firre trees doe lie covered so deepe in the earth, that
the superficies of the earth was deeper then it is now in former ages, when
those trees were brought thither by the sea: for it is evident that they
never grew there: first, for that there groweth no Firre trees in that
Countrey: secondly, for that they doe lie crosse, and in such uncooth
manner, that no humane strength could ever imitate nor paralell by any device
whatsoever.
Also they may see the power of the sea to alter the
superficies of the earth, by the multitude of earth there laid so many
yards deepe upon the top of the trees.
Also they may see that the sea doth make the
difference of the nature of earthes by its
varirious motion, as well as the unevennesse therof by hills and vallies:
for there they may see that some earth will burne, and some will not
burne, being both sorts brought thither by the Sea, as appeareth evidently by
the former discourses.
Also the sea never resting, but pepetually winning land in one
place, and losing in another, doth shew what may be done in length of
time, by a continuall operation, not subiect unto ceasing, or
intermission.


CHAP. 12.

 Wherein is shewed a perfect way to trye what colour any Berry,
Leafe Flower, Stalke, Root, Fruit, Seed, Barke, or Wood will give: also a
perfect way to make colours fixed, which will not abide the ordinary way.

HEre I must confesse a manifest digression from my
Subiect: yet in regard of the great benefit which this experiment may bring to
the Countrey, out of the new Plantations, and other places, where it is very
probable that many of these things be hidden
and unknowne, I wil crave pardon, for that my
intent was chiefely to prevent the losse of those things which may doe
much good, were it not through ignorance or negligence.
First then take halfe a pint of water, and halfe a pint of float,
made as beneath, 2. penny weight of Allom, 12. graines of
Tartar finely beaten, and put all into a Tinne vessel,
which is better than earth lead, or copper; set it on a
Trivet to dissolve the Allom upon a gentle fire: as soone as it
beginneth to boile, take a peece of white wollen cloth, well scoured with
Sope, fullers earth, or Lee, or altogether, to take out the grease of it,
being wel washed out with faire water, and then dryed in the aire or Sun,
not by the fire: the cloth must weigh but halfe an ounce; then tie a thrid to
the end of the cloth, and when the liquor beginneth to boile, then
put in the cloth, and let it boile an houre; then take out the cloth, let it
coole, wash it in two or three waters; then take any berry leafe, flower,
stalke, root, fruit, seed, barke, or wood, and bruise them wel; put them
in faire water, and boyle them with a gentle fire to extract the tincture; then
put in the cloth formerly prepared, which wil shew what Colour they will
give.


To make the Float.

Boyle an Hogs-head of water, then cast in a Bushell of wheate
Branne, then draw the fire, then let it stand three or foure dayes, till it
grow sowrish.
But for small tryalls a little will serve, observing
proportion betweene the Water and the Branne.
A proportion must be observed in the allowing of all
stuffes before they receive their colours: First, the proportion
of Allom to the water; which is one of Allom to 16. of water, and floate:
Secondly, the proportion of the Tartar to the Allom;
which is one of Tartar to 4. of Allom: Thirdly, the
proportion of Allom to the Cloath, which is one of
Allom to five of the Cloath.
Note that all silkes must be Allomed cold, or else they will
lose their luster.

The way to finde what tincture is hidden in any vegetable or in
any part thereof.

Take the vegetable, being cut green, and stamp and grind the
same, as if it were to make iuice thereof, then presse out the
superfluous moisture; the remainder make up in Balls, and lay them up
together, that they may gather a little heat, but let them not heat too much,
for then
they will turne to dung: these being
sufficiently fermented must be dryed, and afterwards used as Oade is
used.

Another way as Indico is made.

Make a pit with Timber and boards, about a foote deep, and as wide,
and as long as you please, being well clayed in the bottome and sides; then
fill this pit with any vegetable cut greene; then put as much water to it as
wil cover the herbes: let it stand exposed to the Sunne two or three daies:
then with a plugge at the bottome draw out all the water, and cast it away:
then fill the pit againe with fresh water, and when it hath stood the like
time, draw it away as the former: this do so often, till you find that the
herbe will be easily brought into a mussilage; then it must be trod, and
beaten with wodden instruments, like rammers, til it wil come al to a
mussilage: then it must be taken and wrung through haire Sives, like
Cassia Fistula extracted, to keepe the stalkes, and great
Fibres for passing through: afterwards the Mussilage or pappe that
passeth through, must be dryed in the Sunne, and so formed into Cakes
like to Indico.


Another way.

Take the vegetable cut greene, and stampe and grind it: then take
an Hogs-head and fill it with halfe water, and halfe bruised herbes, set it
out of the Sunne, with the bung hole open two or three inches, till it firment
and worke like Wine or Beere: after it hath done working the Herbes will
sinke, which at the first did swimme, and the liquor will grow a little
sowrish; then let it be set abroad in the Sunne, and brought into
vinegar, as wine and Beere is brought into vinegar, and then that colour can
never bee stained with other Vinegar or Vrine, because it is sufficiently
impregnated, and his appetite satisfied with his owne proper Vinegar: when
his substance is thus turned into Vinegar, the cleare Vinegar must be
drawne from it, the remainder must be used as the former Indico, and some
water to that, to bee sure to fetch out all his tartarous mussilage, must
be put to the Vinegar, and dryed away in the Sunne, and so they come like
Indico: In tincturamtartarizatam fixam Ide occulto in
manifestum.
And whereas Barkes, Woods, and Rootes are of a drye composition, and
will not ferment
of themselves with water like greene Herbes, or
vegetables: therefore they must be well ground, or thinne shaven, and there
must bee added in stead of Water, Iuice of Grapes, Peares, Apples, or Wort
made of Malt, or other graine, into which the Wood, Barke, or Rootes must be
put: let them ferment together, and afterwards be turned into Vinegar; then the
cleare Vinegar must be extracted: be residue of the tincture must bee
extracted with fresh water, and both of them must be breathed away in the
Sunne, as before, and so brought in his perfect tincture.
By this which hath beene declared in this Chapter, it may appeare to
every one having an inquisitive disposition, what is the true naturall
cause why some colours are fixed, and wil not staine with vinegar, urine,
nor yet fade with the Aire; which hath in it a certaine acetosity, or
sharpe aiery salt of the nature of vinegar, which those tinctures draw
to them, which have not their appetites fully satisfied before with such
spirituall or aiery salts; and this is further manifest for that all
such tinctures which are most firme and fixed, and are not subiect
to staining or fading, being tasted upon the
tongue, may be felt somewhat sharpish or sowrish.
And the cause of this appetitive and attractive vertue in colours
is no other but the very same which is betwixt the Load-stone and Iron: for
take the Load-stone, and burne it till all his blew vapour be exhaled, and
then he will draw no more Iron: thereby shewing plainely, that it was that
aiery salt, tincted with the venereall, or vegetable greennesse, which
the iron thirsted after, to satisfie his thirsty and drye nature and
constitution, which he got by his calcination and fusion.
And the like attraction may be discerned by the intellectuall
eyes, in anything that is strongly burnt, so that all his spirits are
exhaled: as Lime will draw the aiery substance to him, and thereby quench
himselfe: Also Tartar burned, and laid in the Aire, will draw the sharper
part of the aire to it, and thereby dissolve it selfe; and in summe,
all corporeal substances, the more they have lost their spirituall
parts by naturall, or artificiall operation, the stronger is their
Attractive vertue.

Now in stead of filling the Readers head with Proclamations, I
will conclude my Booke with giving case to his memory, by prescribing what
necessaries he is to provide for the accomplishing of his severall
designes, in his Voyages or Plantations, whither his occasions shall
draw him.

And first for him that will onely trie his fortunes in the
searching for Mineralls.

He will neede nothing but two or three Pipkins, two or three
Vrinalls, an Iron Picke-Axe wel steeled, a Spade, and a Crow of Iron, if he
will be at the charge thereof: but there is no great necessity: also if he
bee not acquainted with the severall Oares of mettalls, it will be convenient
that he take with him a little peece of every sort of Oares: or so many
severall kindes as he can get.

And for him that would proceede further, to trye the value of
them himselfe, he must provide these things following.

A Grate of Iron of a foote broad, some Bricks, two paire of good
hand-bellowes, a paire of Tonges, some Lead, Salt-Peter, Sandiver, Borax,
Flanders melting Pots, a
ring of Iron for the Test, an hatcher, or
handsaw to cut wood: some good Aqua fortis, Weights and Scales: and if any
man be not active handed, he may have a man for a trifle to shew him the
Manuell practice in a day before he goe his voyage.

And for him that will search for Dying stuffes, hee may
see in the last Chapter what things he shall stand in neede of: Also
the other Chapters may be perused, whereby every one may be the better
accommodated for their severall enterprises.

FINIS.


